ASTREA. A ROMANCE, WRITTEN IN FRENCH, BY Messire Honor D'Vrfe; AND TRANSLATED
BY A Person of Quality.

The second Volume.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for H. Mosely, Y. Dring, and H. Herringman: And are
to be sold at their Shops in St Paul's Churchyard, Fleetstreet, and in the
Lower walk in the New Exchange, 1657.

TO THE READER.
HAving in the Epistle to the precedent Volume insisted on the general
advantages accrewing to Mankind by Romances, and particularly by this of Astrea
above any other, some would happily imagine there were no more to be done in
this, than to tell the Reader that this is a second Volume of the same
excellent ASTREA, when he has the Book already in his hands. This were an
imagination flat enough, even though, out of an excess of foresight, they
should further suspect it were the Stationer's design to commend both, by
telling him, that, As good entertainment begets confidence; so the world's kind
reception of the former, had contributed much to the publishing of this Second
Volum. No, these are Cajolleries, and Artifices may happily be excusable before
such Books, as, like pitiful Shows, must needs have a Trumpet or a Jack.
pudding at the Door, that is, such as would surprise people into a credulity,
not a little prejudicial to their Ey^s, their memory, their Understanding,
and their Purses.

Know therefore, that this proceeds not from private Interest, but public
satisfaction; and is not so much the design of the Stationer, in point of
advantage, as (so welcome is this Piece abroad) an effect of the Buyer's
expectation and importunity; and thence he peremptorily affirms, that the
better his Books sell, the greater obligation he puts on the world. This some
may think a Paradox; but to show it is demonstrable, I need only say, that
the more a Book is bought up, the more are people informed, the more
instructed, the more edifi'd; which who looks not on as of much greater
consequence than the price, is a person certainly of no great correspondence
with Letters. If so, how then are we obliged to those who spend their
endeavors and Estates to satisfy our Curiosity, to sharpen our imaginations,
to rectify our judgments, to purify our language, to perfect our morality,
to regulate our deportments, and to heighten and inflame our more generous
inclinations, nay to acquaint us with all that is pleasant, all that is
excellent, all that is extraordinary in human Actions? And these are the true
designs and ends of Works of this nature; These are Academies for the Lover,
Schools of War for the Soldier, and Cabinets for the Statesman; they are the
Correctives of passion, the restoratives of conversation; they are the
entertainments of the sound, and the divertisements of the sick; in a word, the
most delightful accommodations of civil life.

J. D.

ASTREA.
The Third part.
Book I.
AFter it was determined amongst the shepheardesses of Lignon, to go all
together within three days upon a visit unto the disguised Alexis; Love, whose
custom is to torment those most, who are most devoted unto it, began to make
the shepherdess Astrea sensible of such odd panges of strange impatiencies,
that she could not give any good account of reason for them. She found in her
self such a violent desire of seeing Alexis, because every one reported her so
resemblant unto Celadon; that the prejudicated mind of this sage shepherdess,
was fully resolved to love her before yet she ever saw her; or rather, this
forestalled resolution was a forerunner of a most great and impatient love: so
as it may be said, that this new love was implanted in her very Nature, since
it produced in her, all the consequences and effects which love uses in the
soul of a zealous lover: so as three days which were to be expired before they
went this long desired visit, seemed unto her three long and tedious years:
And she would with all her heart have been contented to abate so many years of
her life, upon condition these three days were done, that she might enjoy her
hoped for contentment: But when Alexis understood by her Brother, that Astrea
was to come to see her very shortly, oh how this disguised Dru de started at
the news? she resented two different Passions at once; she was highly joyed,
to think that she was to be blessed with a sight, of her dearly loved
shepherdess, and to talk with her in that disguise: Also she was damped with
a pale fear, when she considered that her Mistress had reason to accuse her
of disobedience, and sinning against her positive commands; a Crime which was
death it self unto her to commit; for having until that time preserved her
affections pure and free from all manner of blame, she would much rather choose
death, then suffer it to be stained with the least blur of infidelity or want
of respect: but, as all true Lovers use, her thoughts harped more upon the
pleasing string of her hopes, then upon that which her fears suggested; so as
she begun to think this term of three days a long while too, and to be angry
with those that took so long a term.

Leonide who knew all the secrets of her heart, and who seemed to be destined
never to enjoy what she desired, but to contribute all her endeavors and
industry toward the contentment of another; had not she, I say, sweetened these
tedious days by her affability and complaisance, doubtless the time had been
most irksome unto her. But see what a bad master love is, and how ill does he
recompense the pains of those that serve him; He did enjoin these two Lovers
with abundance of mutual affection unto one another, but as if he were
unwilling they should arrive at the sum of contentment, he kept them ignorant
of their happiness, and by this ignorance blasted their contentment. For
Celadon being condemned unto perpetual banishment, he laid the fault upon the
change in his shepheardesses affection: And Astrea having seen Celadon throw
himself into the River of Lignon, she thought, that this shepherds love not
being able to endure the cruelty of her command he had chosen death before the
insupportable sentence of her anger; and this consideration cost her abundance
of bitter repentance, many a sad sigh, and a very deluge of Tears. This
impatiently expected day drawing nigh, and being earnestly desired both by this
new Druide, and by the new love of Astrea, both of them not being able to stay
so long as till the Sun was up, they quitted their beds upon the first blush
of Aurora. Celadon, as most vigilant, called the Sun sluggard, and conjured
Aurora to open the windows of Heaven quickly, that thereby this happy and
longed for day might receive a beginning. Whilst this restless shepherd was
in this longing expectation, and condemning the Suns slow motion, day did by
degrees enlighten his Chamber; so as assuming Druids habit, he left the Name of
Celadon, and in lieu of it assumed the Notion of Daughter unto Adamas; happy
had he been, could he have left off his Passion as he did his habit; but
Celadons heart was still the same in any disguise, and nothing could work a
change in it but death.

Being thus clad in the habit of Alexis, as soon as the doors of the house
were open, he walked alone into a little Grove which had the view of the
Plain; and from whence he could see the whole Course of the delightful River
of Lignon: As soon as ever he cast his eye that way, it presently stopped at
the place where Astrea dwelt, and thinking upon the happy days which he had
spent in that place, when in his own habit he was freely allowed to be with his
beloved shepherdess; Oh what abundance of sighs did this thought force from
him? He began to recollect into his memory, all the sweet and kind answers
which ever she had given him, when being forced by the violence of his love, he
begged some assurances of affection from her: Here he reveived the memory of
all the traverses and thwartings which Alcipes and Hipolite used; he did not
forget the averseness of Alces, nor the anger of their Parents, nor his long
travels, nor any subtlety which love had taught him: Also he punctually
remembered Astreas constancy in all difficulties, nor did he forget any
circumstance, which might be any argument of her love once unto him. Then
presently after considering how the case stood now, and how she had banished
him her presence, also looking upon that fatal place where he received that
dismal sentence, Yonder (said he, and pointed to the place with his finger)
yonder is the place destined to Ravish from me all my joys, and to be the
beginning of all my miseries. But (said he after a melancholy pause) is it
possible so great affection should ever become such extreme hatred? Can such
firm Constancy admit of any Change! And can such perfect happiness be ever
turned into such unlook't for disasters. Then standing in a mute posture,
admiring the strange difference between his life past, and this present: Nay,
nay, (said he) never stand wondering at the strangeness of the alteration; but
rather wonder, that such a change should be, and yet Celadon should live, since
he has lost all that can make life sweet.

Astrea in the mean time, who had not closed an eye all the night, no sooner
spied the first blush of Aurora, but she quitted her Bad, dressed her self
with all possible haste, and went with all diligence to find out her
Companions, who being less passionate upon the journey then she, had past away
the night with less inquietude and more rest; And though in her way thither
she espied Silvander in the field of Mercury, lying down under the Pillar, yet
least she should lose time, she would not speak unto him, but hasted away
toward her Companions, whom she imagined to find sleeping, and whom she
intended to hasten. And indeed she did find them all asleep, she awaked them,
called them sluggards, and to prompt them unto more have, pulled the clothes
off their beds, and made them wonder at her forwardness, but the vehemence of
her passion might plead her excuse: Oh Silvander, how much beholding had thou
been unto this shepherdess, had she brought thee along with her to be
witness of this Act, in pulling off the Clothes from them? Judge what effects
such a sight would have caused in thee, since Astrea seeing those beauties in
that posture, was ravished with admiration at them, and with a sigh, said, Ah
Diana, had you been the third in the Temple, certainly Celadon would have
bestowed the Apple upon you. Astrea (said she unto her) You are this morning in
such a mood, as I must needs suspect your judgment: And as for matter of
beauty, I cannot pretend unto it: As I was coming hither (said Astrea) I saw
one who I am sure is of another opinion; and had you seen him as I did in the
field of Mercury, with folded arms, and eyes lifted up to heaven, you would
have better believed what I say. I know (said Diana) that you speak of
Silvander: but sister, I know again that what he does, is but fained, and upon
a wager; Fictions, replied Astrea, do never cause real passions; and call me
the most ignorant person that lives, if Silvander do not most passionately
love you, and if his affection, treat him as you will, do not accompany him to
his Grave; for melancholy persons who are slow and long before they do love,
when once the flame is kindled, it will never be extinguished in them. I must
confess sister (said Diana) that when this wager first began, I had the same
apprehensions. And but because you would needs have it so, I should not have
consented unto it, knowing very well how dangerous these fictions are: but
since the disease of this shepherd proceeds from the permission which you have
obtained for him from me, I am resolved that this shall be the last day he
shall have leave to continue his Courtship; for I will give judgment between
Phillis and him in the presence of Alexis and Leonide; the three months are
determined, and I have deferred it only out of desire that the Nymphs might see
the conclusion of the business, as she has the beginning. Astrea being
unwilling to displease her, was silent; but Phillis began, Good sister, said
she, do you think that when your judgment is given, if he do love you, he
will then cease? I believe (answered Diana) that he will not then talk to me
as he has done; and if he do love me, the trouble of it will be his own. Oh
Diana, replied Phillis; you are mistaken: for now you may put it off by saying,
that what he does is only to make good his wager; but when this excuse is
taken away, you will be then obliged to receive his language as in good
earnest. What you say, replied Diana, is very true; but let me tell you, that
if he give me any language but what is fitting, I shall give him answers as
shall keep him from any replies. Upon this Phillis began to laugh; My dear
Companion, said she, we have seen some put on such resolutions, who have been
forced to alteration: for tell me, I beseech you, suppose he should continue in
his addresses after your charge to the contrary, what then? would you kill him
for his disobedience? I would not kill him, answered Diana, but I will give him
such language as if he did love me, he would fear offending me; and if he did
not love me, let him do what he will, he will be weary of it quickly. Nay on
the contrary, replied Phillis, If he do not love you, he will not care how
much he displeases you; and if he love you, his affection will not let him
obey you in any thing which shall cross his love: for, sister, be assured,
that a violent affection may perhaps be thwarted, but never entirely
eradicated. Perhaps he will for a time obey your severe commands, but ere long
he will cast off all considerations, and like a Torrent which is stopped in its
course, will at last overflow its own banks, and all the fields about it: So I
say, your forbiddance may for a time be a stoppage unto the stream of his
violencies; but his affection will at last break down all before it, and
overflow all your commands that obstruct it, and perhaps with such violence as
every one shall see it. If it should so fall out, as you may very well expect
it will, what can you do more, but still renew your first forbiddances?
Perhaps your language will be more sharp, but alas, words are but words, and
too weak to give a check unto one that really loves, as I believe Silvander
does. Sister (said Diana faintly) I never yet met with any such obstinate
Lovers which you speak of; and when I do, I shall find out a way to be rid
from them: Heaven has not made us so miserable, but though they have denied us
strength, yet have they given us prudence enough to preserve our selves.

Thus these fair shepheardesses discoursed while they were dressing
themselves; and when they were ready, they went toward the field of Mercury,
where they were all to rendezvous; then to go unto the Temple of the good
Goddess, and from thence to Alexis. Silvander was before all the rest, finding
no contentment, but when he saw Diana. When they came there, this shepherd was
singing, and was so rapt up in his own imagination, as though they were very
near him, yet he perceived them not. Diana seeing him in this condition; she
knew very well that Astrea and Phillis had spoken truth, and that he prepared
himself for a great Combat with her; who since the death of Philander, had
never any spark of good will unto any man but this shepherd but not enduring
that Silvander should serve her, being a person altogether unknown she resolved
upon extreme rigor against the affection of this shepherd; and perhaps,
something against her own inclination. Whilst she was in these thoughts,
Phillis who loved Silvander for causing the jealousy of Lycidas to vanish. She
pitied him, and turning toward Diana, whispered thus in her ear; I do
ingeniously confess, Mistress, that this shepherd does love you better then I
do, and I am afraid that if you be judge the cause will go against me. Dianas
mind being directed another way, she did not reply, but as soon as Silvander
had done singing; How now shepherd, said Phillis unto him, do you value this
company so little, that you will not daign them a look? Silvander being roused
out of his deep thoughts, by this voice, as out of a profound sleep, he started
up, and saluted the shepherdesses. I must confess (said he) that Phillis has
obliged me, though perhaps contrary to her intention. Your ingratitude,
answered Phillis, is such toward me, as I shall never advise any to oblige
you, since you do so ill acknowledge it; do you thank me thus for
advertising you of your duty, and for bringing her unto you whom you say you
love? methinkes common civility should prompt you unto a more handsome
acknowledgement then this. Phillis, answered Silvander, you put me in mind of
those Cowes, who when they have filled the Paile with milk, do throw it down
with their foot; for when you had in some sort obliged me, you cancel the
obligation by upbraiding me with it. I must confess that what you have done
does merit acknowledgement, but what acknowledgement is due? the very same that
Diana uses unto her little Dog Driope, when he has done any thing which
pleases her; and if you ask her, what recompense she gives him, she will tell
you, that she only chocks him under the chin, and strokes him half a dozen
times upon the back; and since you have done no more for me, methinkes you
should be content with the same payment. Astrea and Diana could not choose but
laugh at his merry answer. Upon which Silvander stepped toward her, and
offered to stroke her as Diana did her Dog; but she pushed him away, and with
a frowning look, said unto him. If you use to pay your debts with such money, I
believe all your Creditors will cast you off as I do, since your payment is so
bad but, ungrateful person, you cannot deny your Obligation unto me to be
great, for changing your melancholy thoughts into a sight of the fair Diana.
This Obligation, said he, I must needs confess to be very great, if it was
done intentionally; but it was done with a quite contrary design, because all
that proceeds from an enemy may well be suspected. What ill design could I
have in it, replied Phillis? Perhaps you thought, said he, that the severity of
my Mistress would more perplex me then my melancholy thoughts; or because you
know that the more one sees the person loved, the more is love augmented; you
thought there was no speedier way to kill me, then by the sight of this fair
shepheardsse. But Phillis, do not think that I will ever shrink from such a
death, since I am sure I cannot avoid it, and since no life can be more
desirable then such a death is.

This dispute had lasted longer between this shepherd and shepheardesses, had
they not seen a company coming toward them, and very near; all with
intentions of going together as visitants of Alexis. One of the company, to
make the time seem less tedious, did sing, and the substance of his song was
against an unconstant shepherdess: Silvander and Diana listened with silent
attention unto the words of the Song: the finger was presently known to be
Corilas, who being stung with the perfidious tricks of Stella, he could not
hide those resentments of hatred which he had conceived against her. That
shepherdess also, after addresses in hopes of regaining him, finding all her
endeavors to be in vain, she also turned her amity into hatred, which was so
publicly known unto every one, as they were commonly called. The Friends
Enemies. The shepherdess did not at that time return any answer, because
Hylas as she began, did silence her with singing out these lines.

Of loving many.
JF love be good, then it must be confessed
That God communicable is the best;
What crabbed Timon then can me reprove,
Or check me for communicating love?
If love be bad, then certainly none will
Condemn me for avoiding what is ill:
But be it good or bad, to me all is one,
I Will either many love, or else love none.
The Universe does change, and all that is in it,
The life is dull tha'ts tasked to a stint.
Natures delight is in variety,
If all sublunaries do change; faith, why not I?
At these last words this Company was so near Astrea and her Companions, that
they all saluted each other, and left singing to enquire of each others
welfare: Hylas, he applied himself unto Silvander; Oh, my good friend, said he
unto him, I see that here is not one in all the company that knows how to love
but I for if there was you would not thus trifle away your time, but go
presently to the fair Alexis. I believe, answered Phillis, that we shall be
there time enough to employ all your Constancy: No, no, replied Silvander, he
has all the reason in the world to make haste, otherwise there would be some
danger, lest the end of his love should be before the beginning of our journey.
Perhaps you think (said Hylas) that you have given me a notable check, in
saying, that I do never love any long, but I take it as one of the greatest
commendations you can give me. For good Silvander tell me, Is not he that goes
as much ground in an hour, as another does in a whole day, is not he, I say,
the best Footman? and a Mason that builds a House in a month, which another
will not undertake under a whole year, is not he the best Workman? If you will
make your love a Lackey (said Silvander) I shall think the faster it goes, the
better it is; But as for your Mason, let me tell you Hylas, that he who makes
most haste is not the best workman, but he who does his work the best, does
best deserve that name: for most haste makes worse work, and often spoils all.
Hylas would have replied, when all the Company began to set forward toward the
Temple of the good Goddess, where Chrysante expected them at Dinner: for that
venerable Druid understanding their determination, and being desirous to visit
the fair Alexis, she invited them all unto her house, that she might make one
of their company: this request, which was honorable unto them, was not denied,
and therefore Silvander left the inconstant Hylas to wait upon Diana, being
exceedingly glad of this opportunity of being with her when Paris was not. Had
the disguised Alexis looked the right way, she might easily have seen them come
from the field of Mercury; for the Grove where she was, surveyed the place; but
her eyes were so fixed upon the place where Astrea dwelt, that she stood like a
statue expressing no signs that she was alive, but only breathing or rather
sighing.

She had longer stood in this musing posture, if Leonide had not diverted her:
this Nymph not being able to extinguish her flames of affection toward
Celadon, she was so much delighted in the company of Alexis, that she was
absent from him as little as possible she could. The wise Adamas having the
words of Silvia still fresh in his memory, though he knew well enough what
ardent affection that shepherd had unto the fair Astrea, yet did he live in
much perplexity, knowing very well that his Niece was not so disfurnished of
natures gifts, but that she might in time work upon a young heart, and make it
forget all respects of loyalty and duty.

This consideration was so strong in him, that she would never have permitted
this young shepherd to enter his house, under the habit name and motion of his
Daughter Alexis, had not the Oracle made a promise unto him, that when Celadon
did enjoy his contentment, his age should then be happy; so as being interested
in point of happiness, he chose rather to take so much pains to watch the
actions of them both, then to lose that happiness which the Heavens had
promised. Now because he could not have his eye always upon them, in respect
his domestique and public affairs invited him another way; he charged Paris
to be present with them as much as he could.

This morning when he heard they were both gone out of the house, and that
Paris was not with them, he went immediately after them, and followed his Niece
so close, as he was in the Grove almost as soon as she, where Alexis had
been along while entertaining her thoughts: the noise which the Nimphs made as
she came caused Celadon to look that way, and as he turned he spyed the Druide
coming, unto whom she bore so much respective reverence, that though she had
rather have been alone entertaining his thoughts of Astrea: yet seeming
otherwise, she went to meet him, and bid him good morrow with a countenance of
joy more then accustomed; of which Adamas taking notice, after his morning
salute, he told her that her countenance of jollity did presage but a bad
conclusion of the day. If it please, good Father, answered Alexis, you shall
receive contentment by it; for as for me, I have no hopes but in death; and if
you did observe me with a merrier countenance then ordinary, it is because I
think my self every day nearer the end of that torment which Fortune has
ordained for me; imitating in this, those who are in a long and tedious
journey, who when they come to their Inn at night, are pleased to think that
so much of their pains is lessened; the Druide returned this cold answer; My
dear Child, those who do live without hope of comfort in their miseries, do
not only offend against the Providence of great Tautates, but also against the
prudence of them who have the Guardianship of them. In this occasion therefore
I have a double cause of Complaint against you: you have offended both the Gods
and Me, as Druide of the Country, into whose hands the Oracle has committed
you. Father, answered Alexis, I should be extremely sorry, should I offend
either the great Tautates or you; and for an explanation of my words, give me
leave to tell you that my intention was not to doubt either in the Providence
of our great Gods, or in your Prudence; but I do believe it is not the will of
the Gods to give me any contentment as long as I live, and that my misfortune
is so great as it is beyond all humane Prudence to help it. You must know,
replied Adamas; that the slighting of a benefit received, does often withdraw
the hand of the Benefactor, and makes it more slack in conferring then it was
before; take heed you provoke not the Heavens unto the like for you do so ill
accept of what they have begun to do for you, as you have reason to fear,
that in lieu of happiness, they will inflict new punishments. Do you not
consider* that when you had mured up your self in a Salvage Rock, the Gods
sent Silvander with consolation unto you? Then, to make their goodness more
apparent unto you; did not he cause Astrea her self to come unto you? Did you
not see her; nay, almost hear her, and the Lamentations she made for you? what
better beginnings of happiness could you possibly hope for then these: I will
not instance the visits of Leonide and my self, for perhaps they were
troublesome unto you; but I may well mention the goodness of the Gods to you,
in inspiring me to bring you unto my house, under the notion and habit of my
Daughter Alexis, for doubtless it is her whom Astrea comes to see: What more
auspitious beginning can you have then this? Can you imagine, that without the
particular aid and assistance of the Gods, this habit and disguise could
delude the eyes of so many persons? All the people of your own Town, your
friends, your familiars, have seen you, and been deceived; your own Brother
himself is mistaken; but the favors of Tautates rest not here: for he
inspired Astrea to come and see you: what can you desire more for a prosperous
beginning? Yet I see, such is your ingratitude that still you complain, or at
least receive not these benefits with a thankful heart. Take heed Child, you
provoke not a Diety too sarre, least they should withdraw these favors, and
give you a just cause of condolement. Father, answered Alexis, I do most
gratefully acknowledge the goodness of Tautates, and your indulgent care over
me; but still I cannot choose but complain; for I am yet like unto a poor
afflicted man, who has a thousand torments at once upon him; though one or two
of those torments be taken away, yet the rest which remain are enough to move
complaint. The Druide was ready to answer when he saw Paris coming toward
them, who being clad in his shepherds habit, made it manifest that Love
prompted unto the dress. Leonide also flattering her self in an opinion that
her beauty needed not to submit unto the beauty of Astrea, she used all her
art, and trimmed up her self to the best advantage that Alexis seeing her in
that dress, and comparing Astrea with her, the artificial luster of the one,
might dim the natural simplicity of the others beauty. Alexis in her usual
habit seemed to care least for this visit, though she had the most interest,
and because she desired not to be known by any, she added nothing to her
ordinary dress; besides, she knew that her happiness was to be expected from
fortune and not beauty: but however, she appeared so fair in that simple habit
without any artifice, that Leonide could not keep her eyes off her.

After some common discourse, Paris who was passionately in love with Diana, to
make himself more pleasing in her eye, he assumed the habit of a shepherd; and
not being furnished with so much patience as to stay till their coming, he told
Adamas, that if it pleased him, he would go and meet those fair shepherdesses,
who were to visit his Sister, and conduct them to the best and nearest way. The
Druide knowing what affection he had unto Diana, and not disallowing it for
some reasons, which hereafter shall be declared, did commend his design,
hinting unto him that courtesy and civility, of all the virtues did most
attract the hearts of people, and that it was the natural quality of persons
well borne. Paris upon this leave went presently toward Lignon, and going down
the Hill unto the bridge of Boteresse, he followed the River, taking into a
little path upon his right hand, which led him into the Wood, where the empty
tomb of Celadon was erected; and passing on he came unto the Meadow which is
before the Temple of Astrea. He had no sooner set foot in it, but he spyed on
the other side of it two Horsemen, the one of which was armed; he had on his
right hand a Gantlet, and on the other a Buckler, a Plume of black and white,
which waved over the Crupper of his Horse, his Corslet was set with Lions, his
Sword Falchion like, which turned up at the end like to a demicircle, hung by
his side in a rich scarf.

As soon as Paris perceived him, he remembered what happened unto Diana when
Filidas and Filander were slain, and therefore retreated into the Wood, yet
being very desirous to know more of them, he still kept his eye upon them
through the thick Wood. He saw that as soon as they were entered into the
Meadow and spyed the pleasant Fountain, which is at the entrance into the
Temple; the Cavelier lighted from his Horse, and the other whom he judged to be
his Servant, ran to him, held his stirrup, took his Horse, unbridled him, and
without any respect unto the place, let him eat upon the sacred Grass: Mean
while the Cavelier went to the Fountain; drank of the water, and washed his
hands and face. Paris by his deportment did imagine that his intention was not
to offer harm unto any, and this opinion made him so bold as to go nearer him,
yet still concealing himself in the thick Wood; so as he unseen came so near
them, that he could both hear and see all that they said and did: He saw that
the Cavalier was both young and fair, though extreme sorrow appeared in his
face; then looking upon his Arms, he thought him to be a Gaul, and that he
was in love: for he bore upon his silver Shield a Tiger feeding upon a Heart,
with this Motto. Thou gav'st me death, and I maintain thy life.

Perhaps he had observed every thing both longer and better, had he not been
prevented by the sighs of this Caveller, who looking fixedly upon the
Fountain, rowsed himself as out of a deep slumber, and lifting up his eyes
toward Heaven, he taxed his courage with Pusillanimity, for supporting so many
misfortunes; his words were seconded with many a sigh, and sighs seconded with
showers of tears, which trickled down his cheeks into the Fountain:
Presently after, lying along upon the ground, and letting his arms hang loose,
he grew pale, and his complexion changed, so as his servant who kept an eye
upon him, seeing him in this condition, he was afraid least he should swoone;
he ran therefore unto him, cast a little water in his face, and recovered him
before he lost his knowledge or strength* But he, opening his eyes, and
lifting them faintly up to heaven, made such sad Lamentation, that his servant
could not choose but sigh: which he observing; what Halladine (said he) do
thou sigh? Sir, said the Servant, I sigh more to see suchan alteration in you,
then for the distaster of which you complain: for to be deceived by a woman, to
be betrayed by a Rival, that virtue should procure envy, and that fortune
should favor the designs of enemies, is not at all strange, because it is
ordinary: But I must needs wonder to see the courage of Damon, which hitherto I
believed invincible, and which has made him esteemed and feared both of
friends and enemies, should now shrink at a common accident, which inferior
courages are wont to resist. A thought of revenge, if nothing else, methinkes
sir, should move you to preserve your self until you have found out Madonthe,
that you might in herpresence call them to an account, who are the causes of
your displeasure. For Gods sake sir, consider that a Calumny which is not
disproved may well pass for a truth; and consequently Madonthe had reason to
treat you as she did. Paris observed, that at the name of Madonthe, the
Cavelier assumed a little vigor, and that looking upon him, he answered with a
faint voice; Ah Halladin, did thou but know what torments are upon me, thou
would say that I do want courage, since I do endure them any longer and
live. Oh ye Gods, who both see and hear my unjust sorrows, and my just
complaints, either bestow a welcome death upon me, or else take away the memory
of so many displeasures from me. The Gods, said the Servant, do use to favor
those who by their courage and Prudence endeavor to help themselves in their
misfortunes, and to decline those who losing their heart and courage, have
recourse only to prayers and weak tears; why do you think, did they bestow
upon you a soul of a higher generosity then upon others? do you think it was
to make use of it only in prosperity, and not to encounter the gusts of
adversity? Certainly Sir, you ought to show the effects of it upon all
occasions, especially in adversity, to the end that those who ^ee that virtue
in you, may praise the Gods for imparting so much perfection unto man, and
considering it in you, they may come to the knowledge of the great Giver. Will
you offer to abuse the favors and the hopes which every one has in you? I
have heard some say who knew you in your infancy, that you promised a noble
courage even from the very Cradle, and showed so much generosity of soul, as
every one conceived that you would prove an example unto the world of an
invincible spirit: will you not Sir answer all their hopes and expectations?
There are some women who think it a shame to shrink at the blows of Fortune,
though their natures be pusillanimous and timorous; yet being disposed unto
virtuous ends they often change their Natures: you Sir are a man: that very
word commands you to be courageous: you who are a Cavelier, brought up in
Martial ways* and has looked grim death in the face; you who have acquired
great reputation in the greatest dangers: you I say, who are Damon, who never
started at any difficulty, now faint at such an accident as this? Will you
offer to die before you do an act worthy not only of a Cavelier, but of a
common man? Halladine, Halladine, answered the Cavelier, these considerations
are good in another season, or in any other man but my self: alas, what act
can I do, which will do me any good, only dying excepted; for all others are
displeasing unto her for whom only I desire to live. Thou know that Madonthe
is the only aim of all my desires and since all my hopes of her is lost, what
can I desire but death? But Sir, said Halladine, how do you know that all your
hopes of Madonthe are lost? Thou thy self said the Cavelier do know as much:
give me leave to tell you Sir, (replied Halladine) that I do know how the case
stands better then you do: for Sir when you commanded me to carry your letter
and Thersanders Ring unto her, and the Handkerchief full of your blood unto the
hellish Leriana, by chance I met with them both together; and though that
divellish wretch who was the cause of all your misery did stand immovable at
your message, which I declared from you unto them: yet I observed Madonthe
first to grow pale, afterward to tremble, and lastly when she heard of your
death, and saw the blood, she was surprised with so much sorrow, that had she
not been held, she had sunk down, so as had I thought you alive, doubtless
I had brought you very good news from her. Oh my friend Halladine (said the
Cavelier) what a weak conclusion do thou make? Did thou but know the
nature of women thou would confess with me, that such alterations in them
do proceed rather from Compassion then Passion: for certainly all women are
naturally pitiful, and compassion is an ordinary effect of their weak
souls; so as what thou observest in Madonthe proceeded from the pittifulnesse
of her Nature: But, Halladine, it is not pity or compassion, but passion and
love that I do desire from her, and this thou did not discover in her soul.
Alas Sir, said Halladi^e, unto what a miserable condition are you reduced since
you your self are the very worst enemy that you have? I wonder such an
accident should work such an alteration in your judgment. Admit the worst,
that Madonthe does not love you; yet if you desire to overcome her and obtain
her favor, why do you not go where she is, but shun all community with
mankind, or habitable places? Since hatred is the higher, (said the Cavelier)
for seeing the person hated, have I not good reason to shun the sight of
Madenthe, because she hates me? and so being deprived of her whom only I
desire; all things else that I see are displeasing unto me, why then should
thou think it strange, that I should disrellish all others, since I cannot see
Madonthe? Good Sir, said Halladine, what comfort can you expect to find in
Wildernesses, and uncoth savage places? Death, (said the Cavelier) for that is
all the comfort I hope for since it is so, said Hallad^ne, is it not better to
go and die before Madonthes face, that she may see you die for her, then to
languish away your life amongst Rocks and Caves and solitary Woods, where none
knows what you do: Thou say well Halladine answered the Cavelier, but thou
know that Madonthe is fled away with her darling Thersander; and to enjoy
him with more security, keeps close from any finding them: Do thou think
that I would not have had recourse unto some desperate act, if I had not had
such an intention as thou speak of? Upon these words, tears hindered his
speech, and pity moved Halladine unto the same, so as for a while they both
stood speechless. Paris who listened attentively, hearing Madonthe named, could
not at the first imagine it to be her, whom he had seen disguised in the habit
of a shepherdess with Astrea and Diana: But when he heard Thersander named,
he made no doubt but that it was she, and therefore he hearkened more
attentively, when Halladine began to speak thus; For my part, sir, said
Halladine, were your case mine, I would never die for one who changes me for
another, but if the displeasure of it did so far transport me as to resolve
upon death, I would first send death to the man, who is the cause of my loss
before me, and he should die by no hand but my own. For beside the sweet of
revenge, I would let her who changed me for him, see what a bad choice she had
made: I would never suffer him to inherit my happiness after my death.
Therefore I advise you sir, if you be resolved upon death, that first you give
Thersander his death, who is the obstacle of your happiness, and cause of your
death. I must confess (said the Cava^er) that in this thou speak reason;
but Halladine, thou know he conceales himself, he is afraid of such a
design; and to prevent it, He, Madonthe, and her Nurse, keep so close, as none
knows where they are. Whilst he was saying so, and whilst Paris was listening
with an inquisitive ear, the poor distracted shepherd Adrastes came singing
some mad freakes in discomposed meeter, without any order or sense: this
miserable lover, since the judgment of the Nymph Leonide given against him in
favor of Palemon, did so resent his separation from Doris, that being out of
all hopes, his mind was distracted. It Is true, he had some intervalls in which
he would talk pertinently enough, but then presently he would change, and rove
a hundred miles from the matter, so as he moved all that knew him unto pity,
and others to laughter; love being the cause of his distraction, all his
follies harped upon that string; and when his good intervalls were upon him,
his complaint was all upon the obduracy of Doris, the injustice of Leonide, the
good fortune of Palemon, and his own misery. These strangers listened unto him,
but could hardly understand what he said, since not one word was pertinent unto
another: yet he, ravished in his own fancy, not seeing them, came singing
close to them; and had not the Horses neighed, perhaps he had passed on without
a sight of them. The Cavelier hearing him very often intermixe with his roving
language, the words Love, Beauty, and Passion, did know what his disease was,
he desired to know a little more, and rising up, he spoke thus unto him* Good
friend, tell us in what Country we are? and what is the misery which makes you
thus complain? Arastes seeing the Cavelier, and his mind running all upon
love, did answer him: Sir, she is so infinitely fair, that no mortal can
equal her, and Palemon has ravished her from me. The Cavelier replied, who is
that Palemon? Palemon, answered the shepherd, is Palemon; yes, yes, said the
stranger, I know that is his name: but what is he, of what quality? At this
question, Adrastes was a little troubled, and looking wildly upon the Cavelier,
he answered, Palemon is one whom Adrastes does not love. And Adrastes, said the
Cavelier, who is he* Then the shepherd growing more frantique, broke out into
extreme laughter, and in conclusion, began to cry, saying, the Nymph has
wronged me; Doris at the beginning cried, then went away; and though I called
her back, yet she would not so much as look back upon me, was ever any thus
used? The Cavelier was at first amazed at his language, and plainly saw that he
was distracted, and thinking love to be the cause, he pitied him; then turning
toward his servant, see, said he, what will be my fortune, if I do not die:
for certainly this shepherd is run mad for love. Love, replied Adrastes, is as
mad as either. For Palemon if he were not, Doris would either have been here,
or I where she is. Thus he roved into such odd impertinencies, that Halladine
could not forbear laughing, which the Knight perceiving, Thou do laugh at
this poor shepherd, said he unto Halladine, but does not consider that
perhaps thou will have the same occasion to laugh at me. At me said the
shepherd, why, I am Adrastes, and I would know whether Palemon will live a
long time or no. The Cavelier was so troubled with his impertinent speeches,
and so unwilling to be diverted from his thoughts, that he commanded his
servant to bridle their Horses, and getting up, they went into the wood where
Paris was, who was in two or three minds whether or no he should show himself,
and as a stranger, offer him all possible assistance, as by the Laws of
Hospitality he was obliged: but considering that if he engaged himself with
this Cavelier, he should lose an occasion of serving Diana: also thinking it
better to advertise Madonthe and Thersander of him, he still concealed himself
upon these considerations.

Paris was no sooner out of the wood, but looking toward the great Meadow, he
espied the Company which he came to meet: amongst the rest, there was Astrea,
Diana, Phillis, Stella, Doris, Aminthe, Celidea, Floris, Circene, Palanice, and
Laonice; all these rallied together with curiosity, to see the beauty of
Alexis, and the rarities in the house of Adamas: There was also many
shepherds, amongst the rest, Lycidas, Silvander, Hylas, Ti^^is, Thamares,
Calidon, Pal^mon, and Corrilas, all who, to beguile time and length of way,
either sung, or held out some pleasant discourse. Paris was now so near that
Silvander knew him, and because he led Diana by the arm, he thought it would
displease his Mistress, if he did not yield his place unto Paris out of
respect, though not unto any out of love: And to oblige her by the Act, he said
unto her in a low voice, I beseech you mistress command me to let your arm go,
that I may do it out of obedience unto your command, since I cannot do it by
my good will. Shepherd, said she, and smiled, since you think my command will
do you service in the Act, I do command it you. Oh Heavens (said the
shepherd) who would not wholly devote himself to your service, since you are
so obliging even in your disobligings. He durst not say any more lest Paris
should hear, for he was very near, so as Diana advanced to salute him, as all
the company did. Silvander had no sooner quitted his place, but his Rival
possessed it with as much contentment, as the other left it with displeasure.
After some discourse, Paris observed that neither Madonthe nor Thersander were
in the company, and therefore he asked Diana of them: unto whom Laonice
answered, that Madonthe was this morning very ill disposed, and that Thersander
kept her company. I should have been glad (said Paris) to have met them here,
that I might have acquainted them how some enemy of their's is come into the
Country; and that it is best both for Madonthe and Thersander, to look well
unto themselves. Silvander who had always an eye upon Diana, he heard what
Paris said; and because he was a great esteemer of Madonthes virtues, he took
upon him to acquaint them at his return, Laonice who watched for an occasion to
be revenged upon this shepherd, she observed how ready he was to take upon him
this office, to the end she might make use of it in time and place. Diana also,
who began to have some sparks of good will toward this shepherd, did take
notice of it, as hereafter shall be declared, which Leonice did very well
perceive. But in the mean time, lest the reverent Chrysante should stay too
long, all the Company set forward. Diana entreated Phillis to be always near
her, lest being alone, Paris should fall into discourse of his affections:
therefore she kept her self on the other side of that shepherdess, and took
her by the arm. Calidon waited upon Astrea, and Tircis and Silvander kept
together; as for Hylas, he undertook no body, but was sometimes the first, and
sometimes the last of the company, without fixing himself unto any of the
shepheardesses; he took no more regard of Phillis, then if he had never seen
her in his life; at which Tireis admired, and after a little consideration of
it, he could not choose but say aloud unto him; Is it possible Hylas, that you
should be so near Phillis, and take no notice of her? Hylas seeming as if he
had not seen her, turned about as if he looked for her: at last, looking upon
her, I assure you, my time-past Mistress (said he unto her) that my heart was
so much in another place, that my eyes never informed me that you were here;
and perhaps the same occasion has brought us both together; very likely,
answered Phillis; you came with a desire to see the fair Alexis, and I came
with sorrows that I have lost you, especially at the game of the Fairest, as
you say it was. Faith Phillis, answered Hylas, the heavens would have it so:
How Hylas, said Thircis; do you think that the heavens are the cause of your
inconstant humor? as well (answered Hylas) as of those vain tears which you
shed upon the cold ashes of Cleon. Things which do not depend upon our selves
(said Tircis) and whose causes are unknown unto us, we do ordinarily ascribe
unto the puissance and will of the Gods. But such things as the causes whereof
are known, we never use to ascribe them unto the Gods as the Authors,
especially such things as are ill, as inconstancy is, for that were flat
blasphemy; whether inconstancy be good or bad, answered Hylas, is a question
which will admit of dispute; but it must needs be confessed, that it proceeds
from the Gods; for is not beauty the work of great Tautates? and what makes me
change but beauty? were not Alexis fairer then Phillis, I had never changed.

Beauty then is the cause, and if so, why may we not impute it unto the Gods
without any blasphemy, especially since we see by the effects that the change
is good and reasonable, being according to the laws of Nature which obliges
every one to look for wha^ is best. That beauty is the work of great Tautates
(answered Tircis) I do confess and more, that it is the greatest of all which
fall within the compass of our senses: but to affirm that it should be the
cause of inconstancy, is an error, as if one should accuse Light, with the
fault of those who go out of the way, because it shows them several Paths.
And as to your assertion, that inconstancy is according to the Laws of nature,
which commands every one to aim at the best: take heed Hylas that it be not of
a depraved nature, and quite contrary to the Command you mention: For how do
you know, that your change is for the best; for my part I see no advantage you
get by it: but the loss of that time which you employ about it; you take much
unprofitable pains to no end, and make every one scorn your friendship* as
too light to be entertained: if you think these to be advantages, I confess
you have some reason to court them; but if you will credit Judgments which are
not infected with your own disease, you will find them to be the greatest
evils that you can meet withal.

Diana who observed that Tircis spoke in good earnest, and that Hylas perhaps
would grow angry, she would needs interrupt them, so as this discourse might
pass no farther; which to effect she put Phillis upon it, who began thus:
Heretofore, my late Servant (said she unto him) you were wont to complain,
that of all the company Silvander was your only enemy; but now methinkes Tircis
has supplied his place. It is no wonder, my late Mistress (answered Hylas)
for it is very ordinary to see ill opinions take hold upon ignorant persons:
Tircis would have replied, had he not been prevented by poor Adrastes, who
being come into the Wood, they saw talking unto Trees and Flowers, as if they
had been people of his acquaintance: sometimes he fancied that he saw Doris,
and then kneeling down upon the ground he adored her, and as if he were
begging for the favor of a kiss of her hand, he made a long speech: sometimes
again he fancied that he saw Leonide, and then he rayled and wished her all
manner of bad Fortune: but when he fancied Palemon, the expressions of his
jealousy was very pleasant; for though it was very confused, yet it gave good
evidence of the grandeur of his affection. The company passed close by him, and
though the very sight of him moved every one to pity, yet much more when he
spyed Doris, because then he stood immovable like a Pillar; his eyes fixed
upon her, and his arms a cross his breast, without a word, as if he were
ravished. Afterward pointing at her with his finger, when she passed by him,
he said with a deep sigh; see, see where she is; then fixing his eyes upon her,
he never moved them as long as he could see her: but when he began to lose the
sight of her, he began to run until he was before her; then he looked upon
none in the Company but her, and so silently looking upon her, he accompanied
her unto the outgoing of the Wood, for farther he durst not pass: when he lost
the sight of her, he began to cry out: Adieu Palemon, make much of Doris, and
upon this he rushed into the Wood, where he almost always was, because that
was the place where Leonide gave judgment against him. Every one pittyed him
except Hylas, who presently began to laugh, and turning toward Silvander; This
Shepherd, said he unto him, is an effect of that constancy which you commend so
much; which of us two do you think is in most danger to resemble him?
Complexions most perfect (answered Silvander) are most easily altered, but to
choose I had rather be like Adrastes, then like Hylas. The choice of the one,
said Hylas, is in your power; but not of the other: How do you mean it, said
Silvander? The meaning said Hylas is nothing difficult: my meaning is, that if
you will you may become a fool like Adrastes, your humor is inclinable to it,
but you cannot resemble Hylas. In this, you are most deceived, replied
Silvander; For things that depend upon the will may be in choice, but things
that depend upon the will of another are more difficult; and therefore every
one that will, may be either virtuous or vicious* but they cannot be well or
sick when they will: now the condition wherein poor Adrastes is, it is not
voluntary, but forced, as proceeding from a malady, the remedies against which
is not in his hands, but your malady depends wholly upon your will; so as it is
demonstrative by reason, that it is an easier matter to resemble you, then that
miserable Shepherd. Admit it so, (said Hylas) yet is it not better to resemble
me, since if I will, I can deliver my self from my malady as you call it, then
to resemble Adrastes who cannot free himself from his? It Is true, answered
Silvander, but if you do leave off your inconstancy, then you do not resemble
your self: I did say that I had rather resemble Adrastes then Hylas; that is,
Adrastes the mad, than Hylas the inconstant. Truly, (said Phillis, and
interrupted them) you press too hard upon my late Servant; I must needs take
his part and say, that inconstancy is better then madness, since it does not
take away the use of reason, which does only distinguish men from beasts: you
are mistaken Shepherdess (said Silvander) for the disease of Hylas and that of
Adrastes are both of them real maladies; but that of Hylas is the worse,
because all maladies of soul, are worse than those of the body. As for the
reason which you urge, it is not considerable, for if the cause of a malady do
proceed from some defect in the body, yet that body may still be reasonable as
we see those who are intoxicated with Wine; now the malady of Adrastes does
doubtless proceed from the weakness of his brain which is not able to endure
the sentence which Leonide gave against him; but that of Hylas proceeds from an
imperfect judgment, which hinders him from discerning good from bad, but
suffers vices to become habitual. And because it is the reasonable soul which
gives being unto men, and makes them differ from beasts, it is better according
to your own Argu^^t to be unsound in body than in soul; it is better to be a
hansome Horse or a Dog, then to be the bare outside of a man; without a sound
soul, because a Horse is a perfect Animal; but he who has a rotten soul and
unsound intellectuals is infinitely imperfect; and therefore I conclude it is
better to be diseased as Adrastes is, then as Hylas.

All the Company did laugh at this conclusion, and the noise was so high, that
it was long before Hylas could be heard; And when he began, they saw the sage
Chrysante, who spying them afar off, came to meet them with a great Company
of her Virgins^ therefore putting an end to all disputes, they advanced forward
to falute her, and to do her all the honor and reverence which was due unto
her virtue and profession.

The Temple of the good Goddess, where the venerable Chrysante resided, was at
the bottom of a delightful Hill, which was washed by the clear wave^ of
delightful Lignon; and on the other side stood the sacred Grove of the great
Tautates. In this sumptuous Temple which the Romans dedicated unto Vesta, and
to the good Goddess did the vestall Virgins officiate, according to the
custom of the Romans: The venerable Chrysante was the chief Governesse,
though she was a Gallian, and of the Druid^s order.

When the Romans under pretense of helping the Heduois whom they termed their
friends and confederates, did seize upon Gaul, and subjected them unto their
Republique; one principal mark of their victory was to cause their Gods to be
adored in all places of their usurpation; not thinking themselves entire
possessors, if they did not interest their Gods, and oblige them to their
preservation; and yet lest they should show themselves insupportable at the
first, they permitted the Gauls, who adored but one God, under the names of
Tautates, Hesius, Tharames and Bellinus, to use their ancient customs, and
live in their old Religion; knowing very well that nothing is more intolerable
to men, then tyrannically to force their belief. And therefore when they
entered into the Dominions of the Segusians, they would not alter any of their
Customs, Manners, Government or Religion. But when they found in this sacred
Grove an Altar dedicated unto a Virgin who should have a Child, and that
Divinity served by the Daughters of Druids, they had much more respect unto it,
thinking that place was consecrated under another name, either unto the good
Goddess, (in whose service men could not officiate) or unto the Goddess
Vesta, in whose Temple they were wont to place a statute of a Virgin, holding a
Child in her Arms: Having this opinion, not to lessen the honor and service
which they rendered unto these two Goddesses, whom they held in great reverence;
they built a Temple unto them both, with two Altars alike, and to the honor of
the good Goddess, they called it Bonleia, and to the honor of Vesta, they are
called Vestals; and because the People were infinitely Religious toward the
Gods whom they adored, not knowing whether these Goddesses would be worshipped
after the manner of the Romans or the Gauls, and also to content the
Inhabitants of the Country, they left the Virgin Druids to their ancient
Customs and Ceremonies unto whom they gave all authority concerning manners
and oeconomique matters: And thus was the venerable Chrysante absolute
Mistress of the Virgin Druids and Vestals.

This Temple was larger and more spacious then seemed to the eye, being built
in an orbicular some; it was covered with lead: in the midst and highest part
of it, was erected a Statute of a Virgin holding a Child in her Arms; in the
midst of this Temple was placed two Altars, at such equal distance, that the
one was no further from the middle then the other; by the side of either of
them there stood an Arc of white Marble, supported by three Columns in which
was put all the Fruits which were offered; at the door stood a Basin of water
which they called Lustrale, in which the Torch which was at the Altar when
divine Service was celebrated, was first washed, and afterward extinguished.

When all this Company met the venerable Chrysante, it was so early as the
morning sacrifice was not then begun; and therefore she invited all the fair
shepheardesses unto it, telling the shepherds that she was sorry to rob them
of their good company: but she was constrained unto it, by the inviolable
Ordinance of the Goddess, who commanded that all men should be banished those
Altars.

Paris, Calidon, and Silvander who were most concerned, made answer, That they
were sorry for the shallow merits of men, since that was the cause which moved
the Goddess to think them unworthy of that honor, and beseeched her and them
all, that they would not entertain in their hearts the like hatred against
men. To which, the venerable Chrysante answered, That the wise Goddess had not
excluded men their Altars, out of any hatred unto them but upon other respects;
and perhaps to make the Vestalls more attentive in their devotions, and their
minds not drawn another way by the sight of men's perfections. Hylas who had no
devotion unto the Gods of his own Country, and much less unto those who were
strangers unto him, made answer; That if those Goddesses did forbid him to love
fair ones, Hylas would be none of their Votaries: Shepherd, said the
venerable Chrysante, I advise you not to provoke the Gods: Upon this word she
retired into the Temple, because one of the Vestals, according to their
custom, came and cried three times, Hence, all profane ones.

Hylas therefore could not have time to reply as he intended: for as soon she
he was entered, the doors were shut; so as Paris, and all the shepherds, were
forced to go and wait in the sacred Grove, where the Druide was to sacrifice,
when the Vestalls had done

These vestall Virgins were habited in white Robes, and so long behind, that
they could veil their heads therewith, when they went into the Temple to
sacrifice. This day was dedicated unto Vesta, for not to be surcharged with too
many sacrifices; their days were to be divided, one day they sacrificed unto
Vesta, and another unto the good Goddess. This day then being the Vestals, as
soon as the doors of the Temple were shut, and all the vestall Virgins, Druids
and Shepheardesses had taken their places, they all bowed to the ground; as
soon as the chief Vestall stood up, who taking in her hand a branch of Laurel
which a young Vestall presented unto her, and which was dipped in there water,
which was called Lustrale, which she brought with her in a silver Basin; she
sprinkled her self therewith, and afterward did the same unto all the
Congregation, who being all prostrate upon the ground, received this water with
great devotion. Afterward, being risen up, and she returned to her seat,
another young Virgin presented unto her a basket full of flowers; she put one
Pofie of them upon her head, and did the like unto six others, who kneeled down
at her feet, and who were to assist her in the sacrifice; one of them went
presently, and took the Napkin and Basin with which they were wont to
sacrifice. Another took the box of perfumes, which was called Acerta: Another
carried the water which was to be used in the sacrifice, for the Vestals never
used any Wine: And those also of the good Goddesses, never used wine but milk:
The fifth carried the bundle of Vervine; and the sixth, a basket of Flowers and
Fruits.

Being all thus before her, close to the Altar of Vesta, before which she did
prostrate her self upon her knees; she began an Antheme in praise of that
Goddess, and all the Vestals joined with her: and having sung the first verse,
they all rose up, having each of them a Taper in their hands, and walked two
and two. The youngest went first, the elder next, and afterward the six which
carried the Chaplets of Flowers: last of all, the chief Vestall with her
Pastoral staff, and all the rest went about the Altar: Then every one went to
their places again, except the chief Vestall, and those that carried things
necessary for the sacrifice: Then she who carried the bundle of Vervine, laid
it down on the left hand of the Altar, where the fire was kept in day and night
by two Vestals, because if it went out they thought some great disaster would
befall them. If ever the fire did extinguish, the Vestal that kept it was
severely punished: then they kindled it again with the rays of the Sun, which
fire they esteemed Sacred. The other Vestal, who carried the Flowers and the
fruits, did put them into the white Marble Ark, of which we spoke before; and
the other four stayed with the chief Vestal, who then prostrating her self
before the Altar, did with a loud voice confess her sins; then acknowledged
that she durst not approach the sacred Altar of that Goddess, being so defiled
with sins; and that she was very unworthy to offer any thing that was
pleasing unto her, unless it was by her commandment. Afterward approaching
nearer, she strewed the Altar all over with perfumes and incense, which cast a
fragrant smell all over the Temple. Then turning her self toward the East,
she uttered in a distinct voice, some words which a Vestal repeated unto her
word by word, reading them out of a Book, for fear of missing, or bad
pronunciation; for should any mistake fall out in them, they believe that the
sacrifices are not pleasing unto the Goddess.

The words are these, O Most renowned Goddess, Daughter of Great Rhea, and
puissant Saturn, Vesta, whom the Thirrians do call Labith Horchia; Receive we
beseech thee this devout Sacrifice which we offer unto unto thee for the people
and Senate of Rome, for the preservation of the Gauls, and for the Grandeur
and prosperity of Amasis our Sovereign Lady. Let the Sacred Fire which thou
have committed unto our keeping, never extinguish: And let thy request which
after the victory obtained over the Titans, thou made unto Jupiter, to be
still a Virgin, be also obtained for us, and that we being all thine, we may be
esteemed part of thy self.

At the last words of this supplication, all the Virgins answered, Amen.
Afterward every one threw into the fire some Incense and Aromatique drugs;
then the chief Vestall taking some of the sacred water, she sprinkled the
flowers, the fruits, and the fire with it: All these things being done, she
went a little from the Altar, and began a Hymn in praise of the Goddess, and
all the Vestals, as a Chorus joined with her. Lastly, one, who stood opposite
to the chief Vestal, pronounced in a loud voice, That it was permitted them to
depart; and so the sacrifice ended.

Then the venerable Chrysante, who meddled not with the Sacrifices, but only as
an assistant; she went out of the Temple, and all the rest, except the Vestals;
and went into the sacred Grove, where the Prophets and the Shepherds waited
for them: the one sort, to sacrifice; but the other, as much out of devotion to
the shepheardesses, as unto their great Tautates.

Hylas more impatient then any else, out of his zealous desire to see the fair
Alexis, he was constrained to be present at the sacrifice of the Prophets; but
his prayer was, that Tautates would be pleased this once, to be contented with
short Ceremonies, that he might be going his desired visit: and indeed as soon
as the last word of the sacrifice was pronounced, he rose up, and forced all
the company to do the like. He was as hasty also when dinner was done; for
seeing the venerable Chrysante fall into discourse. Madam, said he, and
interrupted her, If you do not give order for our departure, some of the
company intends to leave you, and go unto the fair Alexis. Phillis answering
for the venerable Chrysante; what a scurvie humor are you in Hylas (said she)
to be weary with being in this place? where do you think to find better
company? My late Mistress, answered he, Did I love you as I do Alexis, and you
not here, I should tell you in answer to your question, that the best company
was where you were: but since the case is altered, I must tell you upon the
same reason, that where Alexis is, there is the best company for me. And to
make my words good by my actions, if you do not go just now, you shall have no
more of the company of Hylas, Upon this, making a low reverence, he prepared
himself to be gone, when all the company flocked about him, and would have
stayed him by force. Whilst he was striving to escape their hands, a Messenger
came unto Chrysante from Amasis, who sent word, that she would come and lie at
her house the same night, that she might the next morning sacrifice unto the
Gods, by reason of a strange Dream which she had. This message caused Hylas to
be hotter upon his departure, then before: and seeing that the venerable
Chrysante could not go, his importunity was such, that the fair shepheardesses
were forced to go away sooner then otherwise they would: Astrea indeed was very
desirous of haste in going, though her discretion did hansomely dissemble it,
which Hylas and his free humor could not. Having therefore taken their leave,
they set forward, accompanied with the kind shepherds; and because the Paths
were in some places very narrow, every one did undertake the conduct of her who
was most agreeable to his fancy, except Silvander, who out of respect was
forced to quit Diana unto Paris; and Diana had desired Phillis not to be far
from her, lest Paris should fall into discourse of his affection: Phillis
therefore took Diana by the other arm, and mixed discourse amongst them,
seeming as if without design.

It happened, that being come out of the Wood, and having passed over Lignon,
at the bridge of Botereux, the way was so broad that many might go abrest:
Phillis therefore called Lycidas unto her; and seeing that Silvander was
constrained to entertain Hylas; Silvander, said she, (purposely to interrupt
Paris) pray give me your opinion: which of us two has the better place? I
think answered the Shepherd, that this which I have long had is the best; you
must have very good reasons (said Phillis) if you can make me believe it; and
your affection is very cold, if you think so: yet it is true (said Silvander)
though not believed, so as, whatsoever you think of my place or affection to
Diana, I would not change with you; for as sure as you are Phillis, my place is
better then yours: I have heard said Philis, that the nearer one is to the
party loved, the more is the Lover contented; you have heard the truth, replied
Silvander; You see, said Phillis, that I am near Diana, and you are at a great
distance: For all that, answered he, I am nearer to her then you are; for you
are only by her side, and I am in her heart. I shall no longer be sorry for the
pains you take in walking (said Hylas) for now I see it is Diana that gives
you strength to make long journeys without wearying your thighs. Silvander
smiled at the answer, and replied: I know Hylas that you do not understand
what I say; nor indeed is it to you that I speak, but unto Phillis, who, the
truth is, I find to be ignorant enough in the mysteries of love; but yet she is
willing to learn, so as she does better deserve to hear me than you do. If
Phillis desire to be a Scholar in the School of love (said Hylas) and will
follow my documents, I shall make her an excellent Artist. Every one laughed at
Hylas, and because Silvander observed that Astrea and Diana looked down with
their eyes, he would change discourse, therefore said unto him: I perceive
Hylas, that you are very liberal of your Doctrine, but to return unto what I
spoke unto Phillis; I say again that I am nearer Diana then she is, though she
stand close by her side, because Diana is in my heart: you said, replied
Phillis presently, that you were in her heart. I say it again, answered
Silvander; believe it, said Phillis, there is a great deal of difference; for
if you do love Diana, it may be said that she is in your heart; and if Diana
love you, then it may be said that you are in hers. After the common and
vulgarspeech, said Silvander, it may be so understood; but amongst persons of
understanding, the one may be taken for the other: for to be in any place, is
to be understood two ways: The one, when the body is in a place, and then the
outside is in only there; the other is, when the soul which is all spirit,
does hover in any place, as mine does in the heart of Diana; for a soul lives
more where it loves, then where it breaths,: To live, is an immediate act of
the soul; it follows therefore, that if I love Diana, I am really in her: it
is also a common phrase to say, My heart is there, though my body be here:
This, answered Phillis is a little too obscure for me: but by all this you
only prove that your soul is there, and not Silvander, and therefore my place
is the better: for one part of me at the lest, and that which is most apt for
passion, the body is nearer her then you are. I confess, answered he, that in
body you are nearer then I am, but you cannot conclude by it that your place is
better, because the soul is so much superior to the body, as there is no
comparison betwixt them. I wish withal my heart Shepherd (said Hylas) that we
two were both in love with one Shepherdess: for since you contemn the body,
I would willingly take it for my share, and leave the soul freely to you,
though it were the most learned soul among all our Druids: As for example,
leave the body of Alexis to me, and I will leave the soul of Adamas unto you,
who is a very knowing man. Every one did laugh at this proposition, unto which
Silvander answered thus: If all things be taken according to their true merit,
certainly your choice is not the best: For the body which you only love, is an
object unworthy of the souls love, because love should always add some
perfection unto the Lover; for it is confessed by all, that love is a desire of
something which is wanting. Alas the body is unworthy of the soul's love,
because it is vile and base, and much below it; such Hylas, as love only the
body, are Pigmalion-like, who fell in love with a piece of Marble: Nature it
self is very repugnant to it, and you will confess^ it, Hylas, when I ask you
this Question. If Alexis were dead, would you then love her body? To which
Hylas making no answer; I see you are mute truth has silenced you, or else you
are ashamed of a bad opinion. Neither the one, nor the other (said Hylas) but
what should I answer? Do you think I can divine? I can give you an account of
things past if I can remember them, and of things present when I know them; but
as for things future, good Friend, who do you take me for: Do you think I
had one of the Sibils to my Tutor, or that I was brought up at the school of
Prediction? Good Silvander, if you discourse with me, talk of things within
compass of man's capacity, and let the secrets of the Gods alone: leave things
future unto them, they have reserved them unto themselves. If you ask whether
I do love the body of Alexis: I answer you, that I do; but if you ask me what
I would do if the body had not a soul, I must send you to such as can
foretell things; you may take them along with you, if you will upon an errand
to the Destinies, and when you return, I shall enquire of you what I shall do
then: but in the mean time I will love the body of the fair Alexis, not as
she will be a hundred years hence, but as she is now at this present, the most
perfect workmanship of the gods.

Thus talked Hylas, and Silvander would have replied, when all the Company came
to a narrow planke, where every shepherd was officiously careful to help his
shepherdess over; and when they were all on the other side, Silvander offered
to fall into discourse again, but Diana hindered him, because hearing a
shepherd and a shepherdess singing, she desired him to listen. All the
Company turned their eyes to the place from whence the voice came, and drawing
a little nearer, they saw a shepherdess sitting under a shady Tree, and a
shepherd upon his knees before her, courting her, and she returning him very
disdainful answers. Enough, enough Alcidon (said she) if you will have me to
stay any longer here, either be silent, or talk of something else; and believe
it, that whatsoever you say upon this subject, will only increase my
disaffection to you. If I had not more hope (answered he) in the justice of
love, then in yours, I should long since, not only have ceased talking, but
ceased living. What can your hopes be, said Daphnide? for if the God of whom
you speak were just, he would long since have made you an example unto all
such as are so bold as to offer wrong? Do not offend him (said Alcidon) who
has power to order things according to his will, and of whose power you cannot
be so ignorant, as to think that you ought to scorn me as you do: The
shepherdess would have replied, had not the company been so near, as caused
her to be silent.

Astrea, and the rest of the Company, who heard these strangers, being invited
by the beauty of the shepherdess, and the hansome deportment of the
Shepherd, as well to satisfi their curiosity, as their duty, unto which the
laws of hospitality did oblige them, which were most religiously observed in
that Country; they addressed themselves unto the shepherdess, and after
salutation, offered her and all her company, all manner of assistance; for at
the same time there came unto her two other shepheardesses and a shepherd, who
had strayed from them, and stayed under a shade until the heat of the day was
a little over. Daphnide, seeing this fair Company accoast her with such
courteous expressions, she answered with all possible civility, and told them
all in general that the Heavens had been most gracious unto the Country,
being inhabited by persons so accomplished with all manner of merits. Astrea
made answer thus; There is not any here who is not very much devoted unto your
service, as well in obedience to our Laws which command us to be hospitable
unto Strangers, as out of desire to have the honor of doing service unto
persons of so much merit as you and your companions. Since my first encounter
is so good (said the Stranger) I begin to hope for a happy conclusion in my
voyage: And since your courteous offers do imbolden me to enquire of what is
necessary to be known; I beseech you fair shepherdess tell me, if there be
not a Fountain in this Country, which is called the Fountain of Loves verity,
and where it is? Astrea looked upon Paris and Silvander, and returned no
answer, which cansed Silvander to answer for her. Fair shepherdess (said he)
the Fountain of which you enquire is in this Country; bnt love has so ordered
it that upon the matter it is not here, being guarded by such enchanted
Animals, as there is no access unto it: And where is it, replied Astrea? How,
said the Stranger, are you of this Country, and ignorant of a thing so rare? It
is almost incredible: Those who see your face which is so fair, cannot choose
but love you, and by consequence you cannot but be so curious as to know the
truth of their affections who love you, which as I have heard say; may be seen
in this fountain. I know, said Astrea, and blushed a little, that it is your
Complement which makes you speak so advantagiously of my face, and nothing
else, therefore I will not answer unto that. But as for that curiosity which
you think is in me; first, I have no occasion for it, because I was never so
happy as to be loved in that manner: and secondly, we never use to have
recourse unto the Fountain you speak of, to know the minds of those who
serve us, because we have a better, and more sure way. What is that, I beseech
you, (said the stranger). It is, said Astrea, Time, and the effects of it. I do
conceive, said Daphnide, that this way is very uncertain; and I my self can
say, that I have been often deceived by it.

If that do fail us (replied Diana) then we do use another remedy: What is
that, said the stranger? It is, answered Diana, not to love at all. That
remedy, said Alcidon, is most unjust, for thereby the innocent will be
punished, and not the culpable. For he who deceives any shepherdess, in
faigning to love her, cares not whether she love him or no, and so receives no
punishment for his fault: and he who does really love her, bears all the blame
and punishment. You see, generous shepherd (said Hylas) that our
shepheardesses are as unjust as fair; and yet for all that, we cannot choose but
love them; what then should we do, if their minds were as sweet as their faces?

One of the shepheardesses hearing Hylas speak thus, began to fix her eyes upon
him, thinking that she should know him. And doubtless, but for his habit which
did a little disguise him, she had not stood so long in doubt; but after she
had a little better considered with her self, she addressed her self unto
Thameres, and asked him in a low voice, whether that shepherd who spoke, was
not Hylas, and he answering, yes; she whispered Daphnide in the ear, and said
unto her, Madam, he whom you spoke unto, is Hylas, and you know him not: The
stranger blushed; and holding her hand before her face, as being ashamed to be
seen in that habit, went back a pace or two, crying out, Oh heavens* Hylas, how
your habit alters you, and perhaps mine alters me as much: Then Hylas coming
nearer her, he looked seriously upon her, so as though he had not seen her of a
long time; and though her habit had much changed her, yet he knew her to be
Daphnide, esteemed the fairest Lady in all Arles, or the Roman Provinces; but
he was so much amazed at the sight of her, that he knew not whether he dreamed
or waked. At the last, after a long pause, he went back, looked upon her, and
was not able to speak one word: which the stranger perceiving. Certainly, said
she, This is a Country of wonders; for I find in it shepheardesses more
civilized, than any persons in Cities: Natural beauties, without any artifice;
and the greatest wonder of all is, to see Hylas silent. Hylas turned toward
her, and knew her that spoke unto him, to be Carlis, the other Stiliana, and
Hermanthe, with them: this sight did so amaze him, that not able to speak a
word, he ran to embrace his dear friend Hermanthe; and after a long
embracement, he parted, and embraced again; have I met with my dear Hermanthe?
(said he) Is it possible I should find here the greatest beauties in all the
Province of the Romans? I might have said the whole world, if this Country in
which we are were excepted. What? The so much admired Daphnide; the proud
Stiliana, and Carlis, who first taught me to love? The Gods have been
abundantly favorable to me, in conducting you hither: Madam (said he unto
Daphnide) you, and your company, are come to be witnesses of my Glory and
Felicity. Hylas, answered the stranger, you enjoy no contentment, but I do
participate in it as your friend: but if you wonder to see me in this equipage,
I do no less, to see you thus disguised, and in a place where I had no
thoughts of finding you: however, I do think the encounter most happy, if it
will make me any sharer in the Glory and Felicity which you enjoy. Madam, said
Carlis, he nevers offers any sign of joy for meeting with me, or with
Stiliana. Oh my first Mistress (said he) why do you think so? you know that
ones first love is never forgotten. But you show the contrary (said she) for
love cannot be, when the party loved is forgotten; and you cannot deny, but
that you had forgotten us all. I am compounded of another metal (said he) then
other lovers are; for I never use to forget those whom I ever loved; nor is my
affection to them extinguished. It Is true, my memory will sometimes stumble,
and be covered over with oblivion, as fire will be in the embers, and my
affections will slacken as a bow that has been too long bent; but my memory
will get up again: blow but the ashes from the embers, and the fire will be
in; and the bow after a little unbending, will assume its first strength; even
so will my memory, and my affection, when the ashes of oblivion are blown away,
by the fight or presence of the party loved. I perceive, said Stiliana, that
Hylas is still Hylas I hope (said Daphnide) that we shall have leisure to know
further of your welfare; but in the mean time, lest we should commit some
errors amongst these fair shepheardesses, I pray Hylas tell us who they are,
and whether Astrea and Diana be in the company. Madam, answered Hylas, they are
both there; and then he showed them unto her; then Daphnide saluted them
again; and after she had well looked upon them, Fame I perceive (said she) has
undervalued the truth; for I see your beauty goes beyond all reports. Madam,
answered Astrea, and blushed, those that live as we do, may say, that they are
hardly in the world; for living only in woods and fields, fame can take no
notice of us, and we think our selves very happy in her silence. You may say
what you please, replied Daphnide; but now I have seen you, I am able to say,
and truly, that though fame should speak highly in your advantage, yet she both
is, and would be sarre short of the truth, and do you wrong. Madam, said Diana,
it is only your sweet civility which is pleased to bestow these attributes
upon us: And though we are, as my companion says, almost out of the world: yet
would we gladly be such as you are pleased to say we are; for perfection is
desirable in all. You cannot desire more then you have; replied the stranger;
for if you should, your desires would be above the power of Nature: and I
cannot believe it possible, she should make two different beauties more
perfect, How, Madam, said Hylas, though they be such as you say they are, yet I
was never in love with them, or so little, as it may be termed nothing. All
birds, answered Daphnide, are not pleased with the pure light of the Sun, nor
by consequence, your bad sight with these great beauties. Nay, nay, Madam,
replied he, It is rather because there are greater beauties in this Country
then they are, and you know Hylas was ever a lover of the fairest. I can very
hardly believe what you say, answered the stranger. I shall make you confess
it, said he, if you will go whether all this company are going: Discreet
shepheardesses (continued he, and turned toward Astrea and Diana) know that
you see here in the habit of a shepherdess and shepherd, the fairest Lady,
and most generous Cavalier in all the Province of Galloligures; and I believe
your Country never received a greater favor from heaven, then in receiving
them therefore Noble Paris, I beseech you let them not depart from this
company, until Adamas have seen them at his house. Paris and the shepheardesses
addressing themselves unto Daphnide, did excuse themselves for not rendering
them that honor which was their due; and beseeched them to favor the great
Druid so far, as to visit his house; which they consented unto, as well to
satisfy the request of Paris and the shepheardesses, as out of their desire to
speak with sage Adamas, about some affairs which brought them unto that place,
having heard very much of his wisdom.

Hylas was very glad when they consented; and because Daphnide knew him in the
Isle of Cama^g^es, and in Arles, and was well acquainted with his honor, she
proposed many questions unto him by the way, unto which the shepheardesses
would sometimes answer for him, and sometimes Silvander: And though he was in a
little kind of constraint before Daphnide, Stiliana, and Carlis: yet he could
not choose but break out often in his answers, especially when Silvander spoke:
at which these strangers did so laugh, that addressing himself unto Daphnide:
Madam, said he unto her, I think, that in taking upon you the habit of these
shepheardesses, you have also taken their humor, since this shepheard's talk
does please you so very well: for he never opens his mouth to contradict me,
but presently all fall a laughing. But my good friend Silvander (said he, and
turned toward him) you must know, that it is at you whom this Lady laughs, and
not at me; for thy education being only Rural, thou speak accordingly:
therefore I think thy best discretion is, to talk no longer. Courteous
shepherd, said Daphnide, do not believe Hylas, you do not know him so well as
I do; but I should be very sorry you should have any such opinion of me. Madam,
answered Silvander, Hylas and I have often such contests as these, and never
believe each other. But Hylas, said he, and turned toward him, do not mistake
your self, for I do know before whom I speak, and know this Lady.

I had spent my time very ill amongst the Massilians, and had been both deaf
and blind, if I had not heard of her merit, and seen her beauty: I know, Hylas,
and perhaps better then you do, who the fair Daphnide is, who Alcidon, and who
is the great and renowned King E^rick: perhaps I can give a more particular
relation of the City of the Massilians and of Arles, then many others; and
therefore though I am a shepherd do not think to daunt me with your big
words. Daphnide then interposed; truly, said she, I do believe this shepherd
knows me, and I believe what he says, and also I believe he knows more then
you think he does. But kind shepherd (said she unto Silvander) if it will not
be too much trouble unto you, tell us how you came to know all these things?
Madam, answered Silvander, I was along time in the Massilian schools where your
Name was so cried up by the Bardi, that every one did hear of it. How came you
now to be in the habit of a shepherd (said she) and what cause does retain
you in it? Fortune, said he, brought me into this Country, and Love stays me
in it. And said Hylas, Love brought me into this Country, and Alexis stays me
in it. Who is that happy Alexis, said she, (and smiled) She is one, said Hylas,
who will make you blush for shame, and grow pale with envy: she is so fair,
that she has no equal. Aylas, answered she, you say so much that I must needs
believe you in part, and too much to be believed in all; your own eyes (said
he) will be witnesses presently against your self, and will enforce you to
justify all my words; for I have not spoke one syllable too much in her
Commendations. Alcidon hearing this, thought himself concerned: Hylas (said
he) I will acknowledge your Mistress to be fair, but that she is fairer then
Daphnide, if words will not maintain the contrary, my blood and life shall.
Hylas hearing this, assumed a very serious look; as far as words will go,
said he, I will maintain what I say; but if you come to matter of blood and
life, I will not only quit her unto you, but unto any that shall maintain the
contrary; for my profession is talking not killing: every one began so to laugh
at this answer, that Alcidon could not reply of a long time after.

Doubtless their discourse had continued longer, if they had not been very
near the house of Adamas. In the mean time Alexis in contemplation of that
contentment which she promised unto her self in the sight of Astrea, did stand
leaning against a window which looked toward the Plain, and talked with
Leonide. When she perceived the company coming, and assured her self that
Astrea was amongst them, she started: sometimes she looked upon one, and
sometimes upon another shepherdess; but when she spyed Astrea, oh, into what
an ecstasy she was transported! she fixed her eye upon her, and spoke not a
word, as if she would take her fill of that pleasing Object: At last fetching a
deep sigh, she showed her unto Leonide with her finger; see, see, said she,
the fairest sight in the whole world, being as bad almost in that rapture, as
Adrastes was. Then keeping silence a while, she went a pace or two back from
the window, and folding her arms upon her breast: Oh heavens (said she) how
dare I present my self before her, when she has commanded me the contrary?
What, said Leonide will you relaps into your old error? Were not these
considerations sufficiently debated with Adamas before you came hither? have
you so soon forgotten his prudent reasons? Do not think (said Alexis) that I
have forgotten them, but I am sure Astrea will see me, and I shall see her, she
will speak unto me, and I unto her, and is not this disobedience to her
Command? Go, go, (said she unto me, I shall never forget those cruel words)
go disloyal man, and never come in my sight unless I commmand thee. The
Nymph thinking that if this discourse went on, it would much disquiet Alexis,
she would not answer unto her; only thus, these thoughts Alexis must not now
come into your mind; it is already resolved upon, the time is now come wherein
you must show your self a man, Son to Alcippes, whose courage was so highly
esteemed by every one; you must I say change your Countenance and Garb; you
must receive Astrea without any wonder, and at the first accoast of her, have
so much power over your self, that none may discover you* you know that the
first impressions take deepest root, and upon them the most sure judgment is
built; therefore resolve with your self so to disguise the matter, that those
whom your habit deludes may not be undeceived by your actions. Ah Madam (said
Alexis) how easy a matter it is for those that are well to give counsel unto
the sick? here is a fault committed already replied Leonide; why do you call
me Madam, and not Sister; you know Adamas will needs have me call Paris
Brother, and so he commands me to call you Sister, and if you do not the like
you will be suspected, you know that your face does extremely resemble Celadon,
and therefore you must use abundance of Art to deceive people. Sister, answered
Alexis, since you are pleased I should call you so, I shall endeavor to carry
my self as well as I can; but I assure you never was any, more put to it then
your miserable Sister is upon this occasion, and unles^e some help me out I
know not how I shall delude the eyes of Astrea with whom I never used any
dissimulation or disguisement. Upon such occasions as these, said the Nymph we
must make our wit and courage appear, and as they say make a virtue of
necessity. Assure your self, the Authority of Adamas is so great, and every
one has such an opinion of his Wisdom, that with a little help of your own,
none will question but that you are his daughter.

As they were thus talking, Adamas being advertised of the coming of Astrea, he
came to hearten Alexis, which was no small Prudence; for she was so much out of
her self, that good preparatives were but necessary, least she being surprised
she might give too much knowledge who she was. When they were in the midst of
their discourse, news was brought them that all the Company was come in, to
the first Court of the Castle. Alexis blushed, and her legs trembled so, that
she was constrained to fit down. Leonide who perceived it, the better to hide
all faults, told Adamas that it was good to draw the Curtains of the windows,
and to let in as little light as might be, that the alterations in the face of
Alexis might not be discerned, and that the pretense for it might be to hinder
the Sun from keeping the room too hot. The Druide liking the Counsel,
commanded all the Curtains to be drawn: But as they were busy in preparing
all things on the one side, Astrea was as much perplexed on the other: her
heart did beat extremely, and coming unto Phillis said to her in her ear: Good
Sister find some excuse or other out, which may cause us to stay a little; for
I must confess that my hopes to see the face of Celadon in Alexis, does so
much put me out of my self, as I fear, that if I h^ve not a little time to
recollect my self, I shall give too much knowledge of what I desire to
conceal, especially unto these Strangers. Upon this, Phillis went unto
Daphnide, and said unto her: Are you not weary Madam with walking up the Hill?
If it be your pleasure, I am sure all the company would be very glad to take a
little breath before they go up into the Hall. For my part (said Daphnide) I
like the motion very well, but would not propound it least I should displease.
Hylas who could not endure to be retarded from his contentment in seeing his
dear Alexis; Madam, said he, if you were not in very good company I should not
offer to leave you; but since you are, I beseech you take it not ill, if I go
before, and tell them that you are coming; for I had rather take breath with
Alexis, than here. Then not staying for any, nor for the answer of Daohnide, he
went up the stairs, at the top of which, and at the entrance into the Hall, he
met Adamas, Leonide and Alexis: and because all three of them did think that
the love of Hylas would be an excellent umbrage of what they desired to
conceal, they made him as welcome as they could: The Druid himself, after he
had saluted him, smilingly said, that it was easy to see who of all the
Company was most their friend: Sir, said Hylas, if the haste which I have made
in coming first, move you to think so well of me, my staying the last will be
as good a testimony of my good will, and I wish my company were as welcome unto
you, and your company as it is desired by me. No question but it is, said
Leonide, is it not, Sister? For my part, said Alexis, I am very much contented
in it: Hylas then going nearer her: Fair Alexis, said he, in a low voice, so my
company yield you any contentment, it is enough: Why, (said Leonide, seeming to
be angry) do you so little esteem the rest of the company? I assure you proud
Shepherd, I will be revenged of you, and before the day be done, you shall
repent of your disdaining me thus: she uttered these words with an angry look,
and did very well feign a discontented person. But Hylas, who naturally did not
care for any woman living, unless her he loved I shall be very sorry, said he,
when the fair Alexis repents of what she has said unto me: and till then, you
will but lose your labor, if you seek for any revenge upon me: And when she
does repent of it, you need not seek for any greater revenge, for my sorrows
will be so great, that nothing can make them greater. Servant, answered Alexis,
as long as you do love me, you need not fear any revenge, for your good will
is very dear unto me.

He was ready to reply, when Adamas interrupted and asked him, who were those
shepherds and shepheardesses which were coming. There is, Father, said he,
Astrea, Diana, Phillis, and several others of that neighborhood: There are
also some strangers, as Florice, Cyrcenea, and their Company; but that which
invited me to (...) me before, was to tell you, that we met by the way with
fair Daphnide, a Lady of the highest esteem of any in the Roman Province, and
with the generous Alcidon, who disguised in the habit of shepherds, are come
into this Country to seek for the Fountain of loves verity: Alcidon is the
most beloved Cavalier in all the Province, especially by the great Eurick: And
thus you see I am not the only stranger, who disguiseth my self in the habit
of a shepherd, to live happily in your Country. Adamas answered him; Is it
possible it should be the fair Daphnide, with whom the great Euricke, King of
the Visigots was in love? and Hylas answering him, that she was the same, he
continued; though I never saw her, yet I shall know her, for I have a Picture
which they assure me, does very much resemble her, except her habit do cause an
alteration: yet I will seem to know nothing, and will bid all our shepherdesses
as welcome as I can.

Their discourse had continued longer, had they not been prevented by the
coming of the Company: for Astrea, although she was the cause of their stay,
yet she was not able any longer to stay from the sight of that so much loved
face; therefore she made sign unto Phillis, who understanding her meaning,
addressed her self unto Daphnide and Paris, and said unto them aloud: Now if
it please you, it is full time to follow Hylas; for what will Adamas think,
when he hears by him that we are here? It Is true, said Daphnide; and taking
Astrea and Diana by each hand, they led the way, and the stairs being very
large, they went up all three a breast, and the rest of the company confusedly
followed after. Adamas waited for them in the entry of the great Chamber, where
he received them as kindly as possibly he could: and seeming not to know
Daphnide nor Alcidon, he addressed his speech unto the shepherds of his
acquaintance, and said unto them with a smiling countenance: Fair
shepheardesses, you give me some cause to think that you are proud, because you
seem to slight your Neighbors: has my Daughter been thus long here, and you
not daign one courteous visit? Astrea, who observed, that though he spoke to
all in general, yet he addressed his speech particularly unto her, she made
answer for all. Revere^d Father (said she) things that dod epend upon the will
of many, are oftentimes retarded, though every particular desires to make
haste: This excuse, said Adamas, will hardly hold; for methinkes every one of
you in particular, does owe me as much friendship, as I do owe you all in
general. Then Diana undertook the matter; Father, said she, and smiled, many
had rather give that which they do not owe, then pay their due debts: but as we
have committed this fault, so are we punished for it, in depriving our selves
so long, from that which is so great a happiness unto us: Upon this, Daphnide
addressed her self to salute Leonide, and Astrea the like unto the disguised
Alexis: but oh how she was astonished, when she cast her eye upon his face? and
how amazed was Alexis, when she saw Astrea coming to kiss her? Oh love? into
what a condition did thou put them both, when they kissed each other? The
shepherdess was as red, as if her face were all fire; and Alexis trembled as
if a great fit of an ague had been upon her: Hylas, who observed how zealously
his Mistress saluted this shepherdess, he grew so jealous, that he could not
endure she should hold her any longer in her arms; and this jealousy was a
cause of their parting, so as Diana saluted her the next; after her, Phillis;
and then all the rest of the company.

Adamas, who desired to shadow as much as possibly he could, the alteration in
the face and spirit of his Daughter; after all salutations were done, and that
all the company entered confusedly into the great Chamber, he set Alexis in the
most obscure place; and when they were all ready to sit down, he seemed to take
notice of Daphnide and her company, therefore asked Thameres in a loud voice,
who those fair strangers were? Sir, said he unto him, Hylas can better inform
you of them, then I can, if it please you to ask him; for I can tell you no
more, but that we met them as we came hither, and he told us that they were
Ladies of as high esteem, as any in all the Province of the Gallogures. Then
Paris coming nearer unto Adamas, told him, that it was the fair Daphnide, and
the famous Alcidon, well known for beauty and merit in the Court of the great
Eurick. The Druid seeming as if he knew nothing of them before, seemed also to
be very angry with Paris for telling him no sooner. Then addressing himself
unto her; Madam, (said he) I beseech you pardon my ignorance, and lay the fault
upon your habit, that I have not rendered that honor which is your due Reverend
Father (answered Daphnide) when I disguised my self in this manner, my
intention was not to be known in this Country where I am come, not in the rank
of Daphnide, but only to find that tranquillity which the Gods have promised
unto me: and I do believe, that but for Hylas, I had gone through my voyage, as
unknown as I desired. But since I am prevented, I beseech you Father, let all
those circumstances of honor and respect, which you mention, alone; and help
me to find out those wholesome remedies which the Gods have made me hope to
receive in this Country. Adamas with much honor and submission, answered her;
that he would serve her in all things, within the compass of his capacity; and
that he would not be dispensed with, for doing her that honor which was her
due: then presenting a Chair unto her; another unto Alcidon, and unto all the
rest of the company, every one taking their places, Astrea sat next Alexis, and
Leonide on the other side, which prevented Hylas from being next his new
Mistress: And because he thought her too much taken with Astrea, he often
interrupted her, and contraried her in her speech, so forced her to answer him:
Phillis perceived by Astrea's looks, that he was troublesome to her, and
therefore to give her more opportunity of talking with that Druid, who had such
a resemblance of her beloved shepherd, she entered into discourse with him; My
late servant, said she unto him, is there not one spark of that ancient
affection toward me alive? This new Mistress whom you adore so much, makes no
great account of you: Come, come, return again to me that loves you, and
esteems you as you deserve. Hylas who was passionatly in love with Alexis; Late
Mistress, said he unto Phillis, you consider not unto whom you speak, when you
mention any sparks of old affection; the very word old, is enough to make me
hate it. If therefore you would have me return again to you, talk no more of
any old sparks: for this is my Motto An hour is too long to love?
A Minut's fair; and not above.


Do not think that the esteem which you say you have of me, will any thing
attract me; for one never uses to care for the esteem of those whose
friendship he has quitted, and who are merely indifferent to him; Silvander
then began to answer for Phillis. Reputation, said he, which every one does so
much desire, what is it else but this esteem which you so much contemn? if it
be to be esteemed, even amongst enemies; why, Hylas, should it not be esteemed
from one whom you have so much loved? I perceive, answered Hylas, that
Silvander is not in the place which he desires, no more then I am; and to vent
his choler upon some body, he tells me such tales, as Nurses use to lull their
children asleep withal: But my good friend Silvander, have a good heart, and
take patiently these rubs of fortune: consider that we live in a very bad age,
wherein favors are not dispensed according to merit; let us be patient man,
fortune will one day cease from persecuting us.

Hylas, said this unto Silvander, because Leonide in favor of Paris, had
placed Diana in the midst, so that Silvander could not come near her, but was
forced to sit betwixt Celadon and Florice; which being known unto every one,
was the reason why every one laughed at the answer, especially Phillis, who
said; It must be confessed, Silvander, that now it happens unto you, as unto
one who will undertake to part two who are fighting, and betwixt them is
wounded, though he had no quarrel. If you had not often tried (answered
Silvander) that the weapons of Hylas have neither point nor edge, I should not
wonder you should say so. But, shepherdess, having had so much experience of
them, I wonder you should have that opinion: Never wonder (said the
shepherdesses) for he has changed his weapons, he does not now fight with his
own; those wherewith he has now wounded you, are borrowed of one whose custom
is to vanquish. After that rate, answered he, I shall partly confess as much.
To tell you truly (said Hylas) neither of you can wound me, either with your
own Arms, or any other you can borrow; for be they as good as they will, they
have no force against me: If they were in my hands, said Florice, what would
you say unto them? I would say, answered he, That I do not remember you ever
had any I hope, said Cyrenea, that you will not say so by me. I must confess
(said Hylas) that when I saw you but seldom, I loved you much; and when I saw
you much, I loved you but little. Her sight then, said Palinice, did as the
Scorpion does, which heales the wound it makes; but I am confident you will not
say so of me. Of you (said he, as if he were astonished) for God sake tell me
how they call you, that I may know whether your Name can wound me more then
your Fade? I perceive, said Stiliana, that it is only I who had the power to
Captivate you. The short pittance of time that I was your Prisoner, answered
Hylas, does plainly show how victorious you were. The truth is, replied she,
you did go out of Prison, but it was not without paying your ransom. If I did
pay it (replied he) then I owe you nothing, and if you think to make me your
Prisoner again as easily as you did, you are very much mistaken: I am now a
better Soldier then I was, and therefore I would advise you not to put it to
the hazard; your tears I assure you will not do it. Come, come, said Carlis,
Hylas is only mine, for as I was the first that ever he loved, so he ought to
be the last, is not this true, Hylas? Consider Carlis, said he unto her, that
every thing will most certainly return to its first beginning; and as the first
time that ever I did see you, I did not love you; so shall I not love you, the
last time I see you.

None could forbear laughi^g at the answers of Hylas, which continued so long
that Alexis and Astrea had time enough to talk; but though Alexis might have
employed that time very well, yet she was so long before she could begin, being
hindered by several considerations, that perhaps the opportunity had been lost,
if Astrea had not begun to speak first. For this disguised Druid seeing her
before her eyes who had commanded her never to see her, fearing to be known by
her voice, or some other of her gestures, was so mute, that she durst not open
her mouth, which Astrea attributed unto the little acquaintance that was
betwixt them, or else considering that she had been always conversant with
the Virgin Druids, she knew not how to talk of Country affairs. But the
shepherdess was much mistaken, for the reason was, because she knew too much,
and because that face which did represent that of Celadon, as well in her
memory as before her eyes, it made her extremely desirous to gain the favor
of Alexis, which was already but too much gotten, and therefore she was the
first that broke silence thus. When I do consider the beauty of your face, and
the Graces wherewith the heavens have adorned you above all the Beauties of our
age, I am almost ready to tax them with injustice in depriving this Country so
long of that which it produces most rare, and in hiding you amongst the Druid
Virgins so far from us: But when I call to mind that the whole Universe is
not too good to serve that great God who made it, I must confess that the
choice of you was most just, being the most perfect piece in the World. I wish
(said Alexis) that those perfections which your civility puts upon me were as
truly mine, as yours are in you, that I might in some sort be worthy to serve
the great Tautates: Idoe not blush fair shepherdess to hear you use this
language, which rather puts me in mind of my imperfections, then represents
unto me what I am. I am sorry, replied Astrea that you should have so ill an
opinion of me, as to think that I suppose any imperfections in you: For
though the heavens have made me a shepherdess, and have given me no more wit
then suits with a rural life, yet as the Sun is seen by all upon whom it
shines, by some more, some less according to their Capacities, so may I see
your Perfections, and know them, so far as to admire them, though I must
confess that many others unto whom Tautates has given better judgment, may
discern them better, but cannot admire them more then I do. I shall not
contradict a judgment so favorable, replied Alexis: only I pray God that when
you know me better, you do not revoke it: For though neither my intention nor
profession will let me be long in this place, yet I shall always think my
self exceedingly happy in the favor of all those who resemble you,
particularly your self, whose acquaintance I have so long desired; and I
assure you that this desire will make me leave my Companions with less grief,
when I know that I shall see Astrea: Madam, answered Astrea, this favor is
transcendent: For if you have a will to be with us, our happiness is
immeasurable; or if it be out Complement only to oblige us, yet we are happy
in that you entertain such thoughts in you. But I may most truly say, that the
news of your coming filled the Country both with joy and sorrow; sorrow in
hearing of your sickness, and joy to hear we should be so happy as to see you.
It is so long before you came hither (said Alexis) that if any other but you,
fair shepherdess had told me so, I should not have believed it; but to let
this discourse alone, I beseech you tell me, how you use ordinarily to spend
your time: for I am told that the shepherds and shepherdesses of Forests do
live the happiest of any people in the World. It is certainly (said Astrea)
very happy unto such whom Fortune has not forsaken: and you know Madam, that
those who were once happy, when they lose part of what they enjoyed, are more
miserable then those who always were miserable. It Is true, said Alexis, but I
do not think your rural and solitary life does meet with any rubs of
Fortune. Not so much said Astrea, as those who live in Court, and in the
transactions of the World; but as Lakes though less then the Sea, have their
storms and tempests; so it is with us, we also have our misfortunes and
miseries; and for my part I may well say, that having within the space of one
month lost a Father and a mother, my affliction is so great, that I am not yet
recovered of it: Is it long, said Alexis, since you had this loss? About four
or five months since, (said Astrea) and upon this she fetched a deep sigh: It
is a very sad affliction (said Alexis) to lose such friends, but nothing is
more natural, then for Parents to dye before Children; and this may be your
comfort, that they left you at an age wherein you are able to govern your
self. One thing, said Astrea, does most exceedingly trouble me, which is, that
I am partly a cause of their death: Truly, said Alexis, you bring it into my
memory, that I have heard something concerning it, and I think they told me
that they were drowned, in endeavoring to help you out of a water into which
you were fallen. Pardon me Madam, said Astrea, it is true, that I fell into that
fatal River of Lignon, as I endeavored to help a shepherd who was drowned
there: and the news being carried to Hippolita my Mother, that I was drowned,
she was surprised with such a fright, that she did never recover it, but dyed
presently after: and my Father for grief of her followed her: Thus was I at
once deprived both of father and mother. Astrea could not relate these
accidents without much grief, and Alexis also; seeming as if it were out of
compassion: I pray said she, who was that poor shepherd which was drowned? I
know not, said Astrea, sadly, whether you heard of him, but his name was
Celadon, brother unto Lycidas whom you see there: Was it Celadon (said Alexis)
who was son unto Alcippes and Amarillis? The same, said Astrea; I have often
heard talk of him, said Alexis, truly it was a very sad accident. I assure you
Madam, said Astrea, that all manner of delights has been ever since banished
out Coasts,; For when he was alive, there was nothing but mirth and jollity
amongst us, and now such a dullness reigns, as if it were not the same
Country: And for my part having lost a Father and a Mother, who loved me most
tenderly, and fallen into the hands of an Uncle, my sorrows are double. But
Madam I beseech you pardon me for troubling you with such sad discourse. Oh,
said Alexis, you do infinitely engage me in it, and you will do me an
extreme pleasure if you will give me a relation of every particular which
concerns you; for besides your merit and virtue, which obliges every one to
esteem you, I have a most particular desire to be interested in your love; and
therefore I beseech you continue on Madam, said Astrea, it is an infinite
honor to me, and I protest unto you, that from the very first minute I saw
you, there is something which so devotes me unto you, that nothing can divert
me from your service, but death* Alexis would have replied, and perhaps have
entered farther into discourse if the jealousy of Hylas had not hindered her;
but he not being able to endure this long discourse between these two Lovers,
he did impudently fall upon his knees before Alexis, and taking her hand,
kissed it before she was aware, which she perceiving pulled back, and said
unto him: how now Servant, does the fair shepherdesses of Lignon permit such
familiarities? The Virgin Druids, from whence I came, I assure you would think
this very strange. Mistress, said Hylas, even as I do not use to regulate my
self according to the civility of these shepherdesses, so you ought not to
follow the severity of those Druids: for if you do, neither you nor I shall
receive much contentment by it. I know not what you mean, said Alexis, but I
am sure you must have very strong arguments to divert me from following the
example of those holy Virgins, amongst whom I have been so long conversant. I
do believe what you say, replied Hylas, but you must know, you need no worse
Rhethorique to make me change my Nature. I should be sorry, answered Alexis, to
force you unto any change, for I would have you be as you are; only let the
law be equal between us; and this, as your Mistress, you may very well allow.
It Is true, said Hylas, but how do you mean? I mean said Alexis, that as I
allow you to be as you are, so you must allow me to be as I am; and without any
changing of humors, either in you or me, we may love each other, as we did at
first. I do allow of part of what you say, replied Hylas; but the rest is not
according to my mind: and I fear you have been so cloystered up amongst the
Camutes, that you are half spoiled: Every one began to laugh at the discourse
of Hylas. In the mean time, Adamas entertained Daphnide and Alcidon, after
this manner.

Madam (said he unto her) I make no question but that it was upon a good
occasion you came into this Country: for otherwise you would never have left
the luster and delicacies of the Court, I should not have presumed to ask the
cause, had not your self emboldned me; and knowing thereby that you expect
some service from me, my readiness to do it, prompts me to ask what it is, to
the end I may serve you according to your merit, and my duty. Father, answered
Daphnide* your wisdom, and my need of your assistance, makes me trust you both
with this secret, and the greatest I shall ever have. I shall think my
condition very happy, said the Druid, if I meet with any occasions to employ my
self in your service: and to make it appear how much I esteem your merit, I
beseeth you take so much pains to see a Gallery which is in this house, and
there you shall find your own Picture ranked as it deserves. I did never think,
said Daphnide, that^ a thing so little worthy, of either seeing or preserving,
should be in the possession of the Great Adamas. Yet since you have done so, I
shall think the Gods intend good unto me, by infusing this curiosity unto you,
which argues a willingness to help me in this business, from whence my whole
happiness must proceed. I shall acquaint you Father, before we part, with the
occasion which brought me hither; in the mean time, I beseech you till me, in
what part of this Country is the fountain of loves verity? and how I may see
it? I can verily tell you, Madam, said the Druid, where this Fountain is, for
it is not far from hence: but I think it to be a thing impossible for you to
see it, because it is strangely enchanted, and guarded by Lions and other
fierce Animals, so as no humane force can quell them. If the hazard of a life,
said Alcidon, will conduce unto the contentment of my Lady, she shall quickly
receive what she desires. I do believe* said the Druid, that if courage and
valor could do any thing against enchantments, the fair Daphnide would have
what she desires, by the means of the valiant Alcidon.

But you must know, that the strength of all men in the world united together,
will do no good; for spirits which are superior unto the nature of men, are so
puissant, that even one of them is able to ruin the whole Universe, unless
the great Tautates for the preservation of mankind, did restrain them: so as
the safer way is to have recourse unto Prayers and Supplications, or else stay
until the time prefixed be expired, and the conditions of the enchantment
performed. What are the conditions? said Alcidon: They are, said Adamas, very
strange: For the enchantment must not end but in blood, and by the death of the
most faithful lover, and loved, that ever was in this Country. This, said
Daphnide, is a most strange Fate, and must needs be miserable My self (said
Alcidon) can furnish out the most faithful lover: yes, said Daphnide, and
smiled, if to love in several places at once, be fidelity. If you, replied
Alcidon, could but manifest your fidelity, as I can, Alcidon would presently
hazard his life. I assure you, said Daphnide, I am not so desperate as to die,
to make enchantments cease. But Madam, said Alcidon, It should seem the will of
the Gods so to do, since they commanded us to come hither. I shall obey the
will of the Gods, said Daphnide, as far as possibly I can; but before I take
this course, must have a more clear and absolute command for it. This, replied
Alcidon, argues but a very faint affection: I do confess it, said she; for I
cannot undertake to be a sacrifice for the public: besides, I am not now in
love with any; and therefore why should I hazard my life for any: and if I
were, I would not do it. I should think them out of their wits that would; for
it is not likely any that loves well, would deprive themselves of the sight and
presence of them they love, to put an end to an enchantment.

But Father, said she, and turned toward Adamas, I see that Alcidon
constraines me to discover unto you, the cause of my coming hither: If you
please therefore we will retire, and I shall willingly do it, upon condition
you will give me the best advice you can Madam, said the Druid, I would I were
as able to give you good counsel, as my affection promps me to do you all
manner of service: If you please therefore to leave all this good company
together, you may retire into a Gallery which is close by, and call whom you
please to accompany you. Upon this, rising up, Adamas addressed himself unto
Leonide, Paris, and Alexis, and commanded them to stay with those fair
shepherdesses, and courteous shepherds, whilst he waited upon Daphnide into
the Gallery: and you, Hylas, said he, laying his hand upon his shoulder, I
entreat you to entertain this good company, and as one of our best friends do
my house honor: Faith, said Hylas faintly, I use more to dishonor, then honor
the houses where I am; yet to obey you, I will do my best, provided my Mistress
will do as I bid her: every one did laugh at the answer of Hylas, especially
Alexis, who holding her hand before her face, said unto him very handsomely;
Perhaps Hylas, you will he too severe; No, no, said Hylas, I require but word
for word, if so, said Alexis, and if Adamas permit me, I am contented Then,
fairest Mistress, said he unto her, entreat all this company, especially Hylas,
to keep you company all this day, and a little longer if you will. For why
should so many good friends part so soon? Adamas who was very glad of this
request, answered before Alexis.

I assure you Hylas, said he, that I do desire it with all my heart, and those
who will not condescend unto that desire, do extremely disoblige me. I will
tell you, Father, for them all, said Hylas; that we will all obey you with as
good a will as you can desire it: and though all should go away, yet I would
stay alone, to give a testimony what power you have over me. Believe me, Hylas,
said Daphnide, you have very well improved your self in this Country, and have
learned so much civility, that when you come again into Camargue, you may keep
a School, Madam, said Hylas, If all my Scholars would prove like unto my
Mistress, I shall take some delight in it: otherwise, believe me, I would not
impart my knowledge, unless unto some such a one as your self. You do oblige
me, said she, in equalling me unto Alexis. Pardon me, replied Hylas presently,
I did not well consider with my self when I committed this error; for such is
my affection unto my Mistress, that I cannot judge of any thing but to her
advantage. Daphnide had answered,, if she had heard these words, but she was
gone away too far off, and carried with her Alcidon, Stiliana, Carlis, and
Hermantes, the rest stayed in the Great Chamber, where a Collation was brought
in.

The Gallery into which the wise Adamas conducted Daphnide and Alcidon, was
more considerable for the curiosities which were in it, then for the
magnificence of the Structure; though the Doors, Windows, and Chimneyes, were
all of perfectly polished Marble, very rich and beautiful, though the lights
were at just distances; a regular proportion in the height and wideness,
exactly observed according to the length and rules of Architecture; and
Fretworkes and Gilding was not spared; yet such had been the care of the wise
Druid, to enrich it with all manner of rarities and curiosities, which either
Europe, Asia, or Africa produced; not only of his own time, but of all ages
past, whose memory was not lost, that these did much exceed the richness of
the buildings; and as the one did take the eye with beauty, the other did
strike the mind with admiration beyond all thought.

The Arch which was supported by a large Frice, was painted with the most
ancient History of the Gauls, ever since the great Dis-Samothes unto Francus,
who being absent, and taken up with his other Conquests, lest the Government of
the Dominions unto the Druids and Gaulish Knights. There was not forgotten the
Great Dryus, who by the institution of the Druids, left Religion, and the Laws
of his Fathers, unto his successive Nephews. There also was the portracture of
the Great Hercules, who married the Princess Galathea, who by his eloquence and
Arms, did draw the Gauls unto Civility, and unto Generosity by his example.
There also was Sigovesus, and Bellonessus; the one of which went over the
Alps, conquered, and Callidot, Gaul Cisalpine; and the other passing into the
Forest of Hircinia, did found the Kingdom of the B^yens. To be brief, there
one might see the Gauls under Brennus, triump in Rome over those great
Citizens, there loading themselves with Gold: And passing from thence into
Greece, rifled the Gold and Treasures of the Temple of Apollo, and so returned
into their Country.

Above this, was a second Frice, wrought with several sorts of Fretwork
gilded, which was a great ornament to the Edifice. Betwixt them both, was
placed the statues of the Roman Emperors, from Caesar unto the third
Valentinian. But the greatest curiosity of the place was, that every space
betwixt the Windows, was filled with Maps of all the Provinces of Gaul, so
exactly drawn, that as one walked, one might not only know the distances of
places, but also the situation of places, Towns, their Climates, the courses
of the Rivers, and the propriety of every Province in this little world. No
observable battle, or important siege, but was set in its right place; so as
the great siege of Alexia, and the signal expeditions of Caesar, might be seen
in the plates where they were acted.

About these Maps, might be seen the Pictures of those Princes, who ruled
those Provinces from time to time, so as there might be seen Pharamond,
Clodion, and Merovius; and after him, without any Crown, Childerick his Son,
for he was not yet King, because his Father was alive. In the Map of the
Sequaners and Hednois, one might see Athanarick, and his wife Blisinde, who
though he never passed the Rhine, was yet set there as Father unto the valiant
Gaud selles the first King of the Burgundians, who planted upon the banks of
Arar and Rosne. Next unto this King was his wife the wise and pious
Theudelinda; after them, their son Gunditch, who did first settle the Crown
in Gaul; after that, Gondebert with his three Brothers, Chilperio, Godamar, and
Godegesiles. To be brief, the Druide was so curious, that nothing could be
desired, which was not to be seen there; so as Daphnide, Alcidon, and their
company admired at these rarities, and esteemed them the most excellent pieces
that ever eye beheld, and casting her eye by chance upon the map of Aquitane,
the fair Daphnide saw there all the valiant Visigots who there reigned; As
soon as she perceived them, she could not take off her eye, because she knew
there the names and faces of many: Amongst the rest, of Thorismond of Thierry
his Brother, and of the valiant Eurioke, next whom she saw her own Picture, as
when she was about the age of eighteen or twenty years, she kept her eye long
upon it; and afterward casting them upon the Portraiture of Euricke, she could
not choose but sigh and say: Oh great Euricke, how fatal was the expedition
which ravished thy Scepter from thee, and what great cause have I to grieve,
since it is not permitted me to follow thee? Madam, replied Alcidon, it must
needs be confessed, that the loss of Euricke was a general loss, but it
would have been much greater, if yours had followed; and do you not think
that the Gods in preserving you had a great care of me? Such is their goodness
Madam, that they never reject the prayers of the just. I do wonder at that the
more, said Daphnide, because mine are not received which were made with so much
justice and reason: For, is it not most just and reasonable to accompany in
death, those whom they loved in life? Adamas hearing his discourse was very
desirous to hear more, so as beseeching Daphnide to submit her will to the
great Tautates, he desired her to sit down, and to believe that all things are
so wisely disposed by him, that all humane wisdom was constrained to confess
it self ignorant and blind, in comparison of his omniscient Providence. Then
Daphnide sitting next unto Adamas, and all the rest of the company taking their
places, she began thus.

The History of Daphnide, Euricke, and Alcidon.
I know very well, reverend Father, that the great Tautates does all things for
the best: For loving us, as the workmanship of his own hands; it is not likely
he will withdraw his love from us. But let me tell you, that as Phisique though
for our good is yet very bitter and loathsome; so those afflictions which we
receive from the hands of the Gods, though they be very good for us, yet are
they very heavy upon those that receive them. Those who murmur against his will
are indeed much too blame; but if when they feel the smart they shrink and
bewail it, they do but pay the Tribute^ of their weakness and humanity. I
do confess, that the goods which I have received from his hands are
innumerable, and his favors are above his punishments; but we being all of a
nature more sensible of the bad, than the good, I am forced to say, that the
afflictions which I have received have almost blotted out the memory of the
blessings. And being resolved to retire my self from the storms of the World,
there is nothing which hinders me but the pursuit of this Cavalier, whom I call
troublesome: This being the occasion which brought me into this Country; I
beseech you Father give me leave to let you understand how the case stands
betwixt us; that since the Fountain of loves Verity is shut, we may by your
wise Counsel and advice, find some ease in our troubles.

Know therefore that Thierry the great King of the Visigots dying honorably in
the battle sought in the Cathalaunique fields, he left many children behind
him, successors, not only in his Crown, but also in his courage and valor. He
who first succeeded him was Thorismond his eldest Son, he being received King
and crowned in Toulouse, he made it his principal study, not only to enlarge
the limits of his Kingdom: but also to replenish it with Cavaliers and Ladies:
Heaven was at that time favorable unto his will; for neither Ataulfes nor
Vulalia his Predecessors, nor the great Thierry his Father had near so many
accomplished Gallants nor so many fair and wise Ladies as this great and
generous King had. It was my Fortune at that time to be brought unto the Court
by my mother, when I was about fifteen or sixteen years of age. I must
confess that I did not yield unto any of my age, in the good opinion which I
had of my self, either by reason of the confidence I had in my own beauty,
which the flatteries of men infused into me, or by reason of that love which
every one is apt to have of themselves, which made me think all things more
perfect in me than in others: But so it was, that me thought I did attract the
hearts as well as the eyes of all in the Court. The King himself who was one
of the most accomplished Princes that ever the Visigots had, da^gned to cast a
favorable eye upon me, and to carrasse me; but there being a disparity in our
ages, he did withdraw himself conceiving and considering that such a love was
more fit for one that was younger than himself.

At the same time Alcidon was with the King, and I may without flattery say
before his face, that then he was the very Sun of the Court, the beauty of his
face, his stature, his hansome proportion, his garb, his becomingnesse in
every thing: his sweet disposition, his courtesy, valor, vivacity of spirit
and wit, his generosity, and his other perfections did get him the only
esteem of the time. The King who was infinitely desirous that his Court should
flourish in the bravery of Cavaliers, above all other Courts of Europe; he
observing the merit of Alcidon in his youth, did take a particular care of him,
assuring himself that if this hopeful Plant wat carefully pruned, he would
prove the glory of his Court.

Never blush Alcidon to hear me speak so advantagiously of you in your
presence: I would have you know that my just hatred of you, shall not hinder me
from speaking the truth, and because she paused a little, as if she expected he
should answer; I do admire, said he, that you should see in me such secret
qualities, which perhaps all that know me would contradict, and yet that you
should neither see nor believe my extreme affection, it being so great, as all
that know me cannot be ignorant of it. I have long debated this in my soul,
and can find no other reason for it, unless that perhaps you resemble those
that make their esteem to appear highest when they would be shut of the person
whom they seem to esteem; We shall debate that, said he, another time, then
returning to her discourse, she thus continued.

Thorismond intending to furnish Alcidon with all possible accomplishments and
knowing that the bravest actions and noble designs do spring from love, to
sow the seeds in his soul, he commanded him to love and court me. Alcidon, who
was not so young, (though not above eighteen years of age) but he was
apprehensive of the favor which the King did him, and knowing also that his
advancement depended upon his obedience he undertook his Commands, and applied
himself unto me, as much as any one of hills age possibly could; and to train
up his Youth in all complete exercises, the King caused Bals to be kept very
often, also Riding at the Ring and Tilting: It chanced, that presently after
Alcidon had received this command, the Ball was kept in the presence of
Thorismond and the Queen: it was the custom at those Bals, to dress
themselves with their best art: It happened that day day, as if it were done upon
design, that both he and I were in white. And because he would let the King see
how willing he was to obey his commands, when the Ball began, he took me out;
which the King perceiving, and observing that the youngnesse of both was such
as we had not confidence enough to speak unto each other, he began to laugh,
and say unto those about him. I cannot tell who put that couple together; but
if it was Fortune, it appears in this that she is not blind; for I think they
could not possibly be better ma^cht. They are both as innocent as their habits
speaks them, and I believe they have not so much boldness as to speak one
word: And it happened as the King said; for young Alcidon (whether out of
bashfulnesse, or because some spark of love began to kindle in his soul which
kept him in that respect off me) did pass away all that night and spoke not one
word unto me. And I, having no designs at that time, did study to please the
eyes of all in general, and had no particular aims.

Ever since this day affection increased, and to that height, that as his heart
was inflamed, so his tongue told his disease: And I must confess that his
merits and services gave such eloquence unto his language, that I was persuaded
he did love me, and ere long that he did deserve to be loved. In the mean
time, he advanced himself so high in the favor of his Master, that there was
no office about him so great, unto which he might not aspire; and indeed after
he had given him free access unto his Person, and in all privacies how great
soever, he bestowed upon him the greatest office belonging to his Crown, though
perhaps his minority of age was not so fit for it, as some other. The truth is,
so many amiable qualities, and noble perfections, did so much (...) his youth,
that envy it self did not blame the Kings choice. But oh wise Alamas, them is
nothing in this world durable; Fortune may well be painted with two face, one
for prosperity, another for adversity: For this great King, in the midst of his
own Kingdom and Forces, was most unfortunately killed by a Chyrurgion. This
wicked (...) being to let the King blood, whether by chance or villainy, he so
cut the vein, that he could not stay the bleeding: The King perceiving this
accident, he took a (...) in his left hand, and in anger killed the Chyrurgion;
but that did not help him, for he dyed presently after to the great grief of
all his subjects.

Judge, Father, whether this sudden death was not terrible unto my Mother and
me; It caused us to retire as soon as we could, into the Province of the
Romans, where our estate lay, fearing some (...) in this Kingdom, which was
deprived of so great a King. As for Alcidon, his grief was such, as it was
believed he would not live: He knows how I resented his sorrows, and grieved
for his loss, as our amity commanded me; yet he had so forgotten both me, and
all his promises, as I never heard of him all that time. Unto Thorismond,
succeeded his brother Thierry, who took upon him the Crown of the Vis^gots,
with a desire to augment it. And to that end, hearing that the King of Swedes
would needs extend their limits unto Spain: he sent him word, (though he had
married his sister) that if he would not desist from this enterprise, he would
oppose him: of which Richard making no account, (for so was the King of Swedes
called); Thierry passed over the Pirenian hills, fought him, and was
victorious. Thierry, dying presently after. Eurick his brother succeeded him;
who by his valor, quelled all the (...) or the people; and afterward seeing
that the Romans, who called us their ancient friends and confederates, would
submit unto us as the rest of the Gauls, he turned his Arms against us, I
mean in the Province of the Romans.

I shall not insist upon particular description of these Victories, since they
are not pertinent to our discourse. But I must tell you, that after he had
taken the City of the Massilians, he besieged Arles, because until that time I
never heard of Alcidon: and he had no more memory of me, then if he had never
seen me. But then, as if he was newly waked out of a deep sleep, he bethought
himself, and writ unto me. You may imagine Father, how a young spirit, that
had a very good opinion of herself, could resent this long silence, which I
could not call s^om, because I valued my self at such a rate, as I thought I
could not be scorned. Now thinking very often with my self, that he cared not
for me, I vowed a hundred times not to care for him; and that though he should
return unto me with all imaginable submission, yet would I look upon him only
with an indifferent eye: I will not deny, but this loss was a very great
grief unto my soul; and I must confess; I love him; so as when I received
this Letter from him, the memory of his former merit, made me break open the
seals and I found these words.

Alcidons Letter unto Daphnide
I Cannot tell, Madam, whether you will know my hand, or have yet in memory the
Name of Alcidon, so long has my misfortune separated me from you, and hindered
me from keeping my self in your memory by any good service. If you have yet
any memory of me, and if the loss of two such dear Masters, and if the long
employments in a continual war, will be admitted as good excuses, I beseech
you, Madam, to pardon my long silence, until I may with your permission, let
you know by word of mouth the unfortunate occasions which have all this while
deprived me of my chiefest happiness. If your goodness can surmount my hopes,
and grant me so much favor, I beseech you appoint some place which you shall
think most convenient, where I may receive that happiness, and you shall find
that Alcidon never was more yours, then still he is; and that he has yet still
preserved himself most faithfully for you; and you will now find him more able
to do you service, then in his green years, when you did him the honor, to
admit him your most humble servant:

These are the flatteries, wise Adamas, by which love uses to abuse youth: I
had no sooner read his Letter, but though I did very well know the hand, yet I
could not presently consent to the seeing of him: for mistrusting the ayrie
leightnesse of men, especially young men, and most particularly of Alcidon,
whose unsettlednesse was yet fresh in my memory; I would not, at the first
entreat, show my self so very pliable to his request, but resolved to let him
champ a little upon the bit, purposely to sharpen his desire; knowing very
well, that love aspires always most at that which he thinks is forbidden. And
in this resolution, I took pen and paper, intending to write a disdaining
answer, as his two years silence deserved; but some Demon or other, I know not
whether good or bad, prevented me, representing unto me the merits of Alcidon,
that his youth might plead his excuse; the diverse strange accidents which
happened in that time: so as altering my first design, I resolved to see him,
with an intention to make him pay dear for his fault, if I found him imbarqued
to love me: In this humor, I writ unto him these words.

Daphnides answer unto Alcidon.
IT is not Love, but Curiosity only, which makes me give you leave to see me:
do not therefore take this leave which I give you, as any advantage to you;
but be a better husband of those favors you receive, then you have been of
those which your infancy obtained from me:

Adieu.

The Army was then about Arles, and the Great Eurick having taken the City of
the Massilians; intended to force this, to make himself Master of all the
Province of the Romans; and to Ruin and Ravage all such as would not submit
unto him. In this resolution, he reinforced his Army, and wasted all places
where he had no hopes that his Arms could retain: upon this account, the
Venetians, the Regnois, the Tricastins, Arause, Valence, and many other places,
felt the fury of his sword, whilst he still continued the siege of this strong
City, which as the chief of that Province, gave greatest resistance, as well
by reason of it natural strength, as the great number of Soldiers within it.

As for my Father, when my Mother and I left the Court, after the death of
Thorismond, he retired himself unto a strong place which he had in Aquitaine.
My Mother, who was much afraid of War, thinking to shun it, came unto the
Province of the Romans, and it was there where it proved most hot; But when she
heard that the Army of Great Eurick was coming, she retired unto the farthest
part of the Venetians, along the River of Sorgues, where she had a good house,
and a sister married, not above four or five leagues from thence, unto a
principal Cavalier of the Country.

When I received this Letter from Alcidon, the indisposition of my mother, gave
me liberty to dispose of my self freely; for her disease being only age, and
no other violent disease, unto which Physic was remedy; she gave me the
freedom of diverting my self, sometime in walking along the River side, and
sometimes in visiting my Neighbors, most of whom were my kindred and allies. I
sent therefore by word of mouth unto Alcidon, by him who brought the Letter,
That if he should be at Lers, which is a Castle situated upon the Rosne, the
fourth day of the following month. I would see him, and that I pitched upon
this place, because I knew the Master of it was his friend, and a servant unto
the King Eurick: but that he should come as privately as he could, because if
it was known he was there, he would run a great hazard, by being in an enemies
Country, and I should be talked of as the occasion.

Here Daphnide paused a while, and rubbed her hand upon her forehead, as if she
were considering what she should say: at last turning toward Alcidon, I would
willingly go on, (said she unto him) but methinks it better, that as I have
told what concerns me, so you should tell what concerns you, to the end
Adamas hearing us both speak, he may be more assured of the truth, Alcidon
answered, you may command me any thing, Madam, and I shall most readily obey:
but methinks you much wound the wisdom of this great Druid, by saying he will
sooner believe my words, then yours; for certainly you know better what I did,
then I my self; for my life has been no better then a death, and I would not
live a moment longer, then in obedience to you. Adamas then began to speak:
Sir, said he, Were I as much in love with this Lady as you are, this belief
might well be in me; but since I am not, what you do say of your self, does
more assure me of the truth: and since she gives you authority, you need not
make any difficulty of it. Authority? said Daphnide: Nay more, I command him;
and, if he be as good as his word, he will not disobey, unless he love me more
in word then deed. Alcidon then making an humble reverence; this testimony,
said he, is but weak, to show my desires of obeying you; yet because I must
obey in all, I will in this: Then he began thus,

I will not repeat what this fair Lady has spoken, nor will I offer to excuse
my self of what she does blame me, at this time: for I believe it will come in
more pertinently in some other place, before this discourse be ended, in which
I shall show her my reasons, and let her know the sincerity of my affection; or
else I hope, that when I have ended this relation, she will give me leave to
defend my self; not against her, but only against those bad impressions which
calumny has imprinted in her, in prejudice of my innocence. And so taking the
story where she left it, I shall only say, that when her answer was brought
me, never did man think himself more happy, more contented, nor better
satisfied with this Fortune than I. I read and kissed the Letter a thousand
times, and as often embraced the welcome Messenger; and because he was a man in
whom I had great confidence, and who had often given good testimonies of his
fidelity, therefore I employed him in this business, which so nearly concerned
me; and I asked him a thousand questions, as whether she was as fair as when I
last saw her? whether she expressed any signs of loving me, and above all,
whether he heard she loved any other? And when he answered according to my
mind, I did embrace him with such raptures of joy, as he swore he would tell
me no more, since I was ready to choke him with hugging him in my arms.

When Thierry dyed, he left his Crown, as the fair Daphnide told you, unto
his brother Euricke, a Prince, who by his great and virtuous actions, did with
general applause get the title of Great. This Prince did not only succeed his
brothers in the Crown, but also in their Designs, so as he showed the same
favors unto me, that Thorismond did, an event which happens very rarely in the
change of Princes; the Successor seldom affects those whom the Predecessor
loved; yet more by my good fortune than merit, I had this honor, so as I was
raised by Thorismond and maintained by Thierry, I was also favored by the
great Euricke, not now as a child, but a man able to do him service, as I was
obliged. The favor of this Prince had brought me into such familiarity with
him, as he concealed but few things from me, and his love less^ then any thing
else. And this Prince, though in all things great, yet he excelled all in his
age in courtesy and love. I neither could, nor ought at this present, be
absent from his Army, without his leave, and therefore I took a time when he
was alone in his Closet, where after a smile? Sir, said I unto him, I have a
design in my thoughts, and I beseech you give me leave to put it in execution.
Alcidon, answered he, your courage has often prompted you unto things most
dangerous, and I wish you would have more care of your self, then hitherto you
have had: for Fortune is full of inconstancy; though she smile at one time, she
will frown at another, and no prudent man will tempt or trust her too far;
yet tell me what your enterprise is? And having more experience then you, I
shall know whether it be seasable or no. Sir, replied I, and smiled, were it a
business that depended upon Mars, I should expect from you very good
instructions; but needing no other guide but Love, who is blind, and a Boy, I
think that I shall not need either your prudence or experience. The King then
embraced me and said; Alvidon, my advice in that also will not be unprofitable:
for you know that I am a Soldier as well under the banner of Love, as of Mars;
so taking me by the hand, he would not let me rest, until he got out of me, the
name of Daphnide, and the place where I was to go unto her: He had heard often
of her name, but had never seen her, yet by reports knew that she was very
fair: Upon this, he was so far from obstructing my design, that he did not
only offer me all manner of assistance, but to accompany me himself; and when
he saw I would not give consent unto that, he advised me to go with very few
persons, but upon good Horses, and with men who feared no dangers. That above
all, I should not stay in any Town or House, but only to get Victual, and
then to eat it, and lie in some Wood. If this Lady, said he, have promised you
any good will lose not the opportunity; for there is a critical hour in which
women will grant any thing one will ask, if one can but hit upon it; and on
the contrary, if one let that hour slip, without serving her, she will never,
or very rarely be recovered: after these advices of Love, and many others,
which would be too tedious to rehearse, he gave me leave to depart.

The Castle of Lers which Daphnide made choice of to be the place of our
meeting was situated upon the banks of the great River Rosne; and truly, the
Lady had made this choice with much judgment, because the Master of it was a
Servant and an Officer unto King Euricke, who had served him in his Army in
matters which concerned Engines of War, having the command of Cathapaltes,
Rumes, Slinges, and such like Instruments of Artillery, and moreover he was my
very particular friend. The wife of this Cavalier was in some sort a kin unto
Daphnide, so as it was almost impossible to make choice of a fitter place,
having only this inconvenience, that from our Army one must pass ten or twelve
long leagues, all through the enemies Country; and though the danger was great,
yet it was nothing when Love commanded, who closed my eyes against all dangers,
rather than disobey.

I took with me, him who brought me the answer from this fair Lady, as well
for the confidence I had in him, as for a guide, because he was very well
acquainted with all the ways of that Country: And in obedience to the Kings
command, I took only two other Cavaliers with me. Thus we four taking horse,
we set forward an hour after dinner, unknown to any, for we took other
habits, and began our journey under the favor of Love, which was such, as
after we had traveled all that day, and all the night following, we arrived at
Lers about Sun rising, where the Mistress of the house received me so kindly,
that I thought at first, she was advertised of the design which brought me
thither: but presently after, I perceived she knew nothing, and that all her
courtesy proceeded only from the friendship which she knew was betwixt her
husband and me, and she was extremely inquisitive to discover the cause of my
voyage; And therefore to color it the better, I told her I came upon business
of great importance, which concerned the Kings service, and came by night for
fear of being discovered* I beseeched her to conceal my name, and to keep the
gates of the Castle close shut, and that when night came I would depart, if
possibly I could: She being discreet and very affectionate to the Kings
service, with whom her husband was, she ordered it so as very few in her house
knew that I was Alcidon, and the more easily because at my first entrance, I
changed my Name.

Half of the day was spent, and I heard no news of the fair Daphnide, or at
least if it was not, it seemed so unto me: After much impatient expectance, I
went up into a high Tower, seeming as if I desired to view the Country, though
it was only in hopes to see her coming. There was not a House, nor a Wood, nor
a Hill, of which I did not ask the name, the better to cover my impaciency:
but nothing could divert me, though the Lady of the house did all that possibly
she could to make the time seem less tedious unto me.

At last, after many a long look, and when I began to be cut of all hope, I saw
a Coach coming that way which I knew she was to come, and showing it unto the
Lady, she looked a while upon it: At last, it being come a little nearer, she
turned toward me. If I be not much mistaken, said she unto me, the Coch comes
hither, and if it be, as I think it is, you shall see one of the greatest
beauties in all this Country: Who is it? (said I unto her very coldly) I know
not, said she; whether you have seen her in the Court of King Thorismond with
her Mother; but if you have, I am confident you know her name: For, though she
be my Cosen, yet I must needs, and truly say, that she is very fair, though
she was then but a child: It is, said she, the young Daphnide. At the first I
seemed to have but a little memory of her; but presently after, as if I had
better recollected my self: Yes, yes, said I, I do very well remember her,
she had then a Father and a Mother, with whom she dwelt; for she was none of
the Queens women: She was not, answered she, and perhaps the reason of it was
unknown unto you, because you were then very young; but indeed it was because
the Queen was jealous that Thorismond did look upon her with an over-kind
eye, and yet I assure you, she was then but a very child, as you will judge
when you see her, for she seems to be very young yet. How? Madam, said I unto
her, I see her? I beseech you, No; lest I should be discovered, uand my design
spoiled. For if it should, besides my own ruin, the Kings service would be
spoiled. She answered, that I needed not to fear it: for Daphnide would at her
request be very secret, and her Father was a faithful devoted Servant of the
Kings: I, whose desire was to see her, yet seemed to be persuaded unto it by
her. I am, said I to her so much devoted unto the service of Ladies, as I
cannot believe any of them will do me harm. Upon this, we saw the Coach take
into the way which conducted to the house, which assured us, that it was she:
And the Mistress of the house, very glad of such guests, taking me by the
hand, said unto me: Will it please you, we should go and receive them? I will
put my self into their hands, said I unto her, and smiled: perhaps I shall be
safer that way, than by resistance, for submission works most with generous
souls.

Whilst we were thus talking, the Ladies were come into the base Court of the
Castle, where the Lady of the house went to receive them, and told them in
their ear, what Guest she had in her house, and how she thought fit they
should know it as well as her self. The fair Daphnide had with her two
Sisters, both very fair, but both short of her: As for me, I was retired into a
low Parlour, where I seemed unwilling to come out, for fear of being known*
and it was well I did so; for had I not been alone at their first coming, my
actions would have discovered my passion: For when I saw them first come out of
the Coach, she who came out first was so fair, as I took her for Daphnide,
and seeing the second fairer then she I recanted my first thought, saying to my
self, this was she; but I rested not long in this error, for presently after I
saw this fair one come forth, who did so ravish me, that I knew not what I
did; but their complements and salutations, gave me time to recollect my self
a little: so as when they came into the house, I became so confident, that when
I saluted them, I was able to hid my transport: afterward, addressing my self
unto her, who had the sole dominion of my soul, I said unto her; Madam, since
fortune will have it so, I must confess my self your Prisoner: sir, said she
unto me in a loud voice, we will not refuse the advantange which we have over
you; but we rather wish our merits had gotten it, then our fortune. Your
merits, replied I, may pretend unto far greater; and fortune gave you this as
being much too little for your merits. You have given me the same assurances
heretofore (said she in a lower tone) but in a language which spoke more
sincerity, then that which you now use. At that time, answered I, I might speak
as a child, but now I have more knowledge of my self, I am sure I speak with
more truth; yet if you will have it so, let be attributed unto fortune: but I
pray, said she, and smiled, how do you think to pay the ransom for getting
out of our hands? for you must never hope for liberty but by that means. My
ransom, replied I, be it never so great, will not be half so hard to be
found, as to get my heart consent, that I shall come out of your hands. I
perceive (replied she, and smiled) you remember yet what lessons King
Thorismond taught you, and can talk to Ladies as you were then wont. So I ought
to do with you, answered I, since you have the same eyes, and same beauties,
wherewith you were wont to conquer all those that durst look upon you: I
thought, answered she, that men of arms and blood, such as follow the King
Eurick, had only talked of killing and murdering; but I perceive Alcidon,
wheresoever he is, is still the same Alcidon; that is, all courtesy and
civility; upon this she went into the great Chamber with all the company.

The first Complements being passed, our kind Land-lady causing seats to be
brought, she placed me more out of civility, then design next unto Daphnide, at
a little distance from the rest of the company; so as seeing my self in a
place where I might speak more freely, my affection and my duty, both invited
me to give her thanks for the favor of this meeting: but when I began, she
interrupted me with an angry look, and laying her hand upon my mouth, she said
unto me; You must not think Alcidon, that you are any thing obliged unto me for
this visit, because I would never have consented unto it, but only out of a
design to punish you, knowing that since you did love me, when I was a mere
child, you will now be ready to die for the love of me, seeing me more
improved. This is the true cause which moved me unto this meeting, I mean to
chastise you, and not to gratify you; for having rendered your self so
unworthy of those favors which I conferred upon, I will try whether
chastisements will make you better know your duty both unto me and your self.
Can you think, forgetful lover, that after so many expressions of favor and
love, that my beauty deserves to be forgotten; and that in two long years, no
spark of any memory should appear? Do you think perfidious man, that so long
a silence can be excused by the miseries of the time? Wars, and all impediments
whatsoever, cannot persuade me but that it is some defect in affection, and not
any real excuse. I know that if I would permit it, you will flow with excuses;
but I forbid you to speak; not that I fear your language can persuade me, but
because I am resolved not to believe you; and because I will not let you have
so much content, as to speak any thing before me which shall please you: By
this you may know, that this meeting for which you think your self obliged
unto me, resembles sweet poison, which by sweetness gives death. I offered to
answer, but I no sooner opened my mouth, but she checked me, saying; what
Alcidon, do you care as little for disobliging me in my presence, as in my
absence? No, no, Alcidon, that is not the way to win upon Daphnide What then,
said I unto her, is it your pleasure I should do? To suffer, said she, and be
silent. For it is fit you should expiate your sin of silence, by silence Upon
this, I was mute; yet showing by my looks that my heart was troubled, that I
might not speak in my own defense. She on the contrary, looking with a little
more favorable eye, after a while of silence, began thus:

This Daphnide whom you see before your face, forgetful Alcidon, is the very
same she was, when you first made so many oaths of fidelity unto her; the
very same who believed you; the very same whose hands you so often washed in your
then innocent tears. But to your shame, she is able to say, that she has kept
her faith without the least stain, though she has since had so many occasions
to hate you she has still continued her love to you, and entertaines in her
soul those assurances which you gave unto her: and though she has had many
inducements to cast you quite off, yet her heart would never consent unto it,
being resolved rather to part from her life, then those pledges which you gave
her of your fidelity. These eyes which have been so often idolized by the young
Alcidon, have been witnesses of many a tear shed for your long absence, when I
remembered your young promises, which now I find to be so false: for you never
had the least spark of memory, or thought of her, unto whom you promised
eternal memory. Oh Alcidon; you shall hear how I have lived since the death of
the great King, unto whom both you and I were so much, obliged; and you will
confess, if you be not the most unjust man that ever breathed, that your
silence has made you unworthy of love, but that my affection is still greater
then your offense:

Then she began to repeat all passages, since the beginning of our separation
unto this meeting, not omitting any circumstance that argued my oblivion,
wherewith she accused me: and on the other side, to testify the memory she had
of me, she related all the remarkable actions that I had done: and after a long
repetition of them, at which I was amazed, that she should know so many
particulars: I perceive, said she, that you are amazed I should relate your own
life unto you; but had you been as you ought, I should have come to the
knowledge of them from your self, and not from others, which argues a defect
in your affection, and your silence is a sign of your shameful forgetfulness.

She had continued thus upbraiding me, and in relating both her own life and
mine, very near two hours, and would not suffer me to open my mouth in my own
defense, nor to answer her. At last, this offended beauty finding some proof
of the power which she had over me, she began to change her countenance and
language. Now Alcidon, said she, I permit you to speak, being contented with
two hours silence in my presence, in exchange of two years voluntary silence
in my absence. It argues your abundant goodness, said I unto her, and smiled,
that you will thus change years into hours. Your crime is such, replied she,
that no punishment can equal it: but I will show my self as merciful, as I am
able to punish you if I will.

Madam, said I unto her, I should kiss your fair hands, by way of thanks for
such extraordinary favors, were I not afraid I should be perceived, but I lay
my heart at your feet, in testimony of my gratitude; I do most ingenuously
confess, Madam, the fault wherewith you charge me. But if your goodness would
be pleased to let me tell you the occasion and reason why I was so long silent,
perhaps you would think me as worthy of commendations, as of blame. Since I
have pardoned you, (said she) and given you leave to speak, you may say what
you please; and I wish you may show such reasons as may persuade me, that you
are in no fault. Let me say then, (continued I) that you may well conceive, I
grieved extremely at the death of a Master, who loved me so exceedingly, and
raised me by his favors above the reach of all Court Envy. Now I should have
extremely offended against his memory and the offense would have been thought
high ingratitude, if I should have entertained the least kind of contentment in
my soul: Times of mourning injoynes us unto sad habits, and forbids any thing
of joy or content. Now the poor and disconsolate Alcidon, was forbidden all
manner of happiness, and deprived himself of all that came from you Madam,
who was and is his only joy and felicity. To satisfy then, both my duty and my
affection, I made choice of so bidding my self the honor of hearing from you,
to the end nothing should divert me from my sadness, which was then
seasonable. But Loves knows, and that miserable heart which loves and adores
you, knows, that in the midst of my bitter sorrows, none grieved me so much
as that I was distanced from your presence and memory. Two things principally
may argue the truth of this unto you. First, if I had not truly loved you, my
age would not have permitted me to live so long amongst so many fair Ladies
without love. Secondly, as soon as I had in some sort forgotten my sorrows
for my great loss, my continual thoughts of you, would never let me be in
quietness until I had the honor of seeing you: The danger of the journey,
nor the distance from the great Euricke, whose favors shine upon me as fast as
those did from Thorismond, could not hinder me. Now Madam, I prostrate my self
at your feet, resigning unto you all my affections, all my thoughts, my heart
and soul, beseeching you to receive them, not as any new offering or fresh
acquisition, but as yours from my infancy; my Destiny, my Master and my heart,
did give me unto you. I shall receive your excuse said she unto me, as they use
to receive a debt from a bad play master, though the money be a little too
light: and I will believe what you say, upon condition that none of your future
actions give me any cause of doubt.

When I would have answered, I was hindered by the Lady of the house, who came
to tell us it was Supper time; therefore we referred the rest of our discourse
till after it was done. And it was no sooner ended, but I out of civility
falling into discourse with one of her Sisters, she came unto us, and having
separated me a little from the rest, we fell into talk where we left, with so
much contentment unto me, that I must needs confess my joys were never
greater. Thus we spent part of the night; at last, bed time forcing us to part,
we advised upon a more safe place of meeting; and being constrained to depart
in the morning, it was now long before we could resolve upon the place: At the
last, she said unto me, but in a very doubtful manner: I am loath, Alcidon, to
put you into any danger, but since you are so urgent upon it, I will tell you,
that I have a Sister married within five or six Leagues of this place, where we
might very well meet, were it not that my brother in law is an Enemy unto King
Euricke, yet were there no other difficulty but that, we might find a remedy;
but as ill luck is, he has invited a great Company to the marriage of one of
his Sisters, so as all things seem contrary unto us: I do not think there is
one of any quality in all the Province, which is not an enemy unto the King
your Master. I must confess Father, I found much danger this way, but when I
considered that there was no other way to enjoy the company of my Mistress,
danger was the least of my thoughts, and therefore I answered her: That no
hazard should make me lose the happiness, so she would but command it; only
beseeched her to take such order, that when I was in the house, none should see
me; for I was confident that under her command I should receive no harm.

In this resolution we parted, and the next morning leaving one of her Servants
with me, who was very trusty; she departed, and I had not the honor to see her
purposely to take away all suspicion from the Lady of the house. As for me, I
departed with my guide, some three hours within night: after many thanks unto
my Hostess for her kind usage, I shall not here relate the various encounters
I had by the way: The place unto which I was conducted was one of the most
solitary seats in all the Country, and the fittest for any interprises of love.

Upon the banks of that great River of Rosne, do stand many fair Towns,
which take delight in her waves; one of the best and most peopled is Avignion,
some five or six Leagues from whence toward the east is a Valley, which being
enclosed on three sides by high Hills and great Rocks, was at the first called
Vale close, and afterward by corruption of language, of which the vulgar is
always Master, it was called Vaucluse; at the end of this Valley, under huge
Rocks, and by a wonderful Fountain which gives a beginning to the River of
Sorgues, which a little below parts it self into two Arms, like a little
Island, where this house unto which I was to go did stand, and which standing
between two Rivers, has the name of an Island. The place from whence this
Fountain springs, is truly for its solitude, in some sort venerable; but
something terrible by reason of the Rocks which inviron it, and therefore very
little frequented by people. It was here where my guide brought me to alight
from my horse, and to leave those who came with me, which by my command, though
with sorrow, they did. From this source unto the Isle is about a quarter of a
League, which I was to walk on foot, and in the night, which I did in such
doubts and incertainties, that love made it appear in me, how not only
himself is blind, but he takes sight also from all those who are his subjects.
At the last, about the eighth or ninth hour of the night, we came unto the
Garden door which belonged unto the house, which though it was promised me
should be left open, yet it was shut; judge Adamas, what I thought of the
matter then, and whether I had not reason to expect Mars in lieu of Venus. But
after a long doubtful expectance, I heard the door open, and the first thing
that presented it self unto my eyes, was a fair Lady, decked as Painters use
to do the Goddess Diana. her hair loose, her breast and shoulders naked, her
sleeves turned up as high as the elboe; gilded buskins upon her legs; her,
Quiver by her side* and a Bow of Ivory in her left hand. I was ravished at so
fair a sight, and admired her habit; but I understood since that she was so
disguised like Diana, for Name sake* because she was called Delia, which is one
of Dianas names, purposely to dance that night with her Sisters, and other
young Ladies there, in honor of the great Assembly. As soon as ever she saw
me come in, said she unto me, and took my hand; Come in and attempt this
dangerous adventure under the conduct of Diana, Under the banner of such a
Goddess, answered I, there is nothing which I will not attempt. Some
interprises, said she, do seem easy at the first, which afterward are sound
full of difficulty, and take heed lest this be of that quality: If this were
not of great importance, replied I, I would never have come so far to attempt
it. I am very glad, said she, to find you in that resolution; and know that
both Love and Fortune will assist a courageous soul; and to show how desirous
I am you should bring your enterprise to pass, I will give you safe conduct
from all that are in this enchanted house, unless from the eyes of your
Mistress, and from this Diana who speaks unto you. I do accept of this
assurance, said I unto her: Well, (said she) before you have done with this
adventure, we shall see what your Fortune will be, and what your courage: In
the mean time, valiant Cavalier, enter, but still enter upon such conditions
as those who enter, use. I beseech you, said I unto her, what are those
conditions? You shall know, answered she, when you are entered. Why, said I, are
you afraid to tell them, least they should affright me? If so, fair Diana, you
are mistaken: For I will undertake any conditions, so they do not contrary
that affection which I have vowed unto my Mistress. Upon this, I entered in
alone, she locked the door, and my Guide returned through the Rocks of
Vaucluse. Now was I alone with Delia in the Garden; and I must confess, that
she was so advantaged by this odd fantastical dress, as she might very well
be termed fair, and one that was not prepossessed might well have found a
heart to love her: She seeing me stand so mute, looking upon her, and thinking
it was my impatience because she carried me no sooner unto the fair Daphnide,
she smiled, and said unto me. What Sir, were you bold at your entrance, and now
show so little courage to accomplish your adventure? What fault fair Diana,
said I unto her, do you find in my courage, what must I do? and against whom
must I show my valor? How, said she, and set her Arms upon her sides, have you
not before your eyes an enemy fierce enough to make you put your hand to your
Arms? I must confess fair Goddess, said I, that you are a very dangerous
Enemy unto one that has a heart, but certainly against me your Arms have no
edge, since the fair Daphnide has long since deprived me of my heart. How,
said she, is there no hopes of gaining any thing from you? You may hope,
replied I, to gain any thing that I have, you mean, said she, any thing but
your heart. Well, well Alcidon, you are not yet in a good faith; but before you
escape my hands, I will make you use other language: I have met with some, who
at the first have said as you do, and yet before all was done did submit
themselves as conquered: such as those, answered I, either did but lend their,
heart, or if they did give it, did steal it back again to give it unto you,
but I cannot do so, who have not only given away my heart, but my will, my
soul, and my life also. Had you any courage, as you tax me for having none,
you would not employ your valor and your strength against one that is without
defense, as I am: What honor will it be to vanquish one that is already
vanquished? one that has no heart; this were to strike one that is dying by the
wounds of another. Come, come my heartlesse enemy, said she unto me, I know you
would have me carry you presently unto Daphnide; but do not think Alcidon,
that our emnity is so great, but I would have done it before now, if it had been
time; do you see yonder window which stand out further then the rest? there is
Daphnides Chamber; when it is time for you to go there will be a Candle set in
it to advertise us* but assure your self, that as you think the time long
here, your Mistress thinks it longer where she is, having abundance of
troublesome persons, who swarm about her like so many flies, especially her
brother in law, who thinking to do her a pleasure, never stirs from her: Come,
come, you that are a very finely accomplished Cavalier, methinks you should not
be weary of my company, many have told me that I am pretty hansome, and I am in
an humor to treat you so, that what you will not do by fair means, I will
make you do by force: I mean, I will in spite of you, keep you from being
weary. I must confess once again (said I unto her) that it is impossible for
any one that has a heart, not to love you. For, fair Delia, there are so many
admirable perfections in you, as look which way one will, one shall be sure to
find abundance of invitements to love.

You think still (said she unto me) to escape my hands with this excuse, but
before we part, I will make you find another and therefore what will you say
next Alcidon? I will say, replied I, that you can do miracles, which need not
be thought strange; for your beauty equalling the power of the great Gods, you
may do them as well as they: but will you give me leave to speak freely? with
all my heart, answered she, for you see I do the like: Then fair Diana, said I,
let me tell you, the Moon is the most glorious lamp that now shines in the
heaven (the moon then shining) and if there was no Sun, none could deny, but
that it would be always so: I confess it, said Delia, what do you infer by
that? I infer, replied I, That the fair Diana unto whom now I speak, would be
the fairest in the world, had she not a sister, and there is none but she which
hinders her from the title of the fairest. Could I as easily believe that, said
she, as I am ambitious of that title whereof you speak, I vow Cavalier by these
Arrows and Bow, that if I could not kill her with my own hands, I would poison
that sister who eclipseth my beauty; but I am afraid, that if she were taken
away, it would happen unto me, as unto the Moon, in absence of her brother the
Sun, become obscure and pale. I should have answered, when the so much desired
light appeared in the window, and my affection carrying my eyes almost always
that way, would not let me lose so much time as to answer her when I saw it.
Showing it therefore unto Delia, I beseeched her to accomplish the favor which
she had begun. I will, said she unto me, and took my hand* you know it is the
office of the Moon, whose Name I bear, to clear the Night, and to be a guide
unto those who wander. My life, said I unto her, is obliged unto your service,
though I am afraid that obligation is little worth, since you are carrying me
unto one whose beauty kills all those that look upon her: and being accustomed
to see men languish and die, it is not likely she will have any compassion of
my pain. Those, said she, whom I take unto my protection, are never ill
treated; for if they were, I should not have opened the door unto you: and
believe it, I never carry any to their punishment: And whereas you fear that
her beauty will kill you, never fear that fortune good Cavalier, your Arms are
very good, and tried: for such as will die at sight of beauty, will die at the
sight of me; so as you having past that danger, never fear any beauty living
will kill you.

Thus we went talking in a low voice, until we came to the house, which was the
happy habitation of my Mistress; and finding a door open, we went up a pair
of narrow stairs, unto the Chamber door, with as little noise as possibly we
could: Then Delia caused me to stay, and went in alone to see who was there,
but she found only the fair Daphnide by her self, who faigning to be
troubled with the head-ake, was laid downs upon her bed, purposely to be rid of
the company; and pretending that the light was offensive to her, she caused the
Candle to be set in the window; Delia came presently unto me, and taking my
hand, carried me to her sisters bed side, and said unto her; see Daphnide, what
Diana has taken in her last chase: I must confess, said I unto her, and
smiled, that I am yours, if a heart could be divided into two: but since mine
is in the disposition of my fairest Mistress only, I am come to render it unto
her, vowing never to take it out of so sweet a prison. In this, said Delia, you
show the weakness of your judgment, since you had rather give your self unto
a Nymph as Daphnide is, than unto a Goddess as I am, nay Diana, who is the
Mistress of all the Nymphs, Jupiter, Apollo, and almost all the Gods, said I
unto her, have slighted Goddesses, and courted Nymphs. But never was any so
fair as this, into whose hands I do submit my soul and my life: upon this,
kneeling down, I took her hand and kissed it often, whilst she was so
transported that she gave no answer; which Delia perceiving, sister, said she,
will you let this Cavalier adore you indeed and kneel till his knees ache,
before you give him any answer? Then rowsing her self as out of a deep
slumber, she saluted me, and afterward answered her sister. I hope Delia, this
Cavalier will pardon the fault, and not think it proceeded from any
incivility, but from my fears of that danger which he is in for my cause. I
admire, (said Delia) that you being my sister, should be such a coward, whereas
I am so stout as to take prisoner the bravest Cavalier in all the Army of the
great Eurick; how can you want courage, having (as he says) the heart of the
valiant Alcidon? Ah Delia, answered I, and sighed, it is a bad sign for me, to
see my Mistress so saint, for it shows she has not my heart; for if she had,
she would rather pity my misery which she has caused, then fear any dangers
wherein I am. Could I Alcidon, answered my fair Mistress, remedy the one, as
well as I can the other, you had reason to think so: but consider, that if I
did not love this Cavalier, who complains thus of me, I should neither be in
these fears wherein I am, nor he in the danger wherein he is. I answered her,
If you speak from your heart, Madam, then cure me of the malady which proceeds
from your self; and never doubt that I can receive any harm, as long as I am
in the honor of your favor: Delia then smiled, and said; I perceive that when
you have been together a little, the pain of the one will be changed into
contentment, and the fears into confidence. But lest fortune should hinder
your designs, speak as low as you can, and I will go and sit by the Candle,
seeming to read, that I may put it out, if any chance to come; or else I will
fall in talk with them; and tell them how you do, without bidding enter. But
Cavalier, said she, and addressed her self unto me, Remember the promise which
you made when I opened the door unto you, and admitted you unto this adventure,
which was, to perform the conditions then proposed, and if you be worthy of
the name of a Cavalier, you will keep your word. You have kept your promise so
well with me, answered I, that I were a most unworthy recreant, if I did not
the same with you. Then, said she unto me, you are obliged according to the
conditions established, not to attempt any thing, upon any occasion, nor for
any respect or reward whatsoever, against the honor of the Ladies who are
here; but on the contrary, you ought to be contented with those favors which
they confer upon you, not seeking or desiring any greater. I will sooner
sheathe my sword in my heart, answered I, then entertain a thought against this
ordinance* Every Cavalier of honor, is obliged unto it by his very Name: for
that respect is due, as unto one of the principal statutes of love. I ever
thought, answered Delia, of Alcidons discretion; and I do exceedingly rejoice,
you do thus second my thoughts, since the law had not been established but for
you. How? said I, not established but for me? was it made only to restrain my
indiscretion? Is it thought that I am more impudent than any of the Knight
errantry? That is not the reason, said she unto me; but is it not reason this
constraint should be established for you only in this adventure, which you
term the adventure of perfect love, since you only are permitted to attempt
it? But since, before you have done, you are to deal with a fiercer Champion
then I am, I will leave you together with your enemy, lest you should complain
of disadvantage.

Upon this, not staying for my answer, she went away, and sat down with a book
in her hand, and left my fairest mistress and me together, as she said she
would. At which I being transported with abundance of contentment, after I was
set down upon the bed by her, I took her hand, and kissing it many times, I
said unto her: Madam I am most sensible of my extreme obligations, and my life
is too little a price to be paid for such a happiness. Did you kno^ what
pains I have taken, said she, to give you this testimony of my good will,
doubtless you would set a good value of esteem upon it. For though my sister
does now show her self so stout in the matter; yet believe me, Alcidon, she is
not always so, and it was not weak persuasions which could make her consent
unto it. Oh what artifice and tricks have I used to deceive, not only my
brother in law, but all his kindred and friends, or indeed all the whole
Province. Consider, Alcidon, what a strange resolution I had in putting my
honor and your life into so great a danger: For to permit your coming into
this place is no less. Madam, said I, and kissed her hand, if you consider my
extreme affection unto you, Love, and You were unjust, if you did not answer it
by extraordinary proofs of your good acceptance, and I do confess, that this
is above my merit, though it do not equal my affection. For it is such, that
most certain death cannot make me start from your service. Alcidon, answered
she, if your affection be such as you say, I wish it may continue as long as I
live. But I do much fear the love of a young heart. Madam, said I unto her,
doubts use to enter into the souls of those who are not well grounded in their
Faith; and these in you give me more cause to fear weakness of affection on
your side; for the principal effect of true love is, to remove out of the Lover
all manner of mistrust of the person loved, and it is impossible to love one
whom they mistrust.

By this, replied she, you may know the grandeur of my affection, since having
so many occasions to doubt you, yet is it still stronger then all those
doubtful occasions, and makes me still give you such testimonies of my good
will. Yet Madam, said I unto her, give me leave to say in mine own defense,
that you do wrong my love, in taxing it with youngnesse, for I am twice ten
years of age. Ah Alcidon, said she, before any good assurance can be, you had
need be twice twelve. At this I laughed and said: that Madam were indeed
requisite in those who love common beauties; but for you and I, time is not so
much to be insisted upon; for our ties and obligations are as strong now, as
they will be four years hence. She would have replied, when Delia began to
cough, as an advertisement, that she heard some coming: presently after, her
brother in law came to the door, unto whom she made a sign with her finger,
and went as softly to him as she could, as if she were afraid to wake her
sister; her brother in law asked her how Daphnide did. She complained a long
while, said she unto him, and now she is fallen asleep. What, said he, will you
not come down and dance? to what end did you else dress your self in that
habit? I hope brother, answered she, that my sister will be well after she has
slept a while, and if she be, I will come and finish our design with the rest*
but if she continue ill, we must defer it until another time, and if you will
come up again about half an hour hence, I shall tell you more: upon this her
brother in law went away, and she came unto us to tell us what he had said, and
when I desired her to defer it until to morrow; she answered me, I perceive
Alcidon that you are all for your self, and care not for the interests of
another, so you can enjoy your opportunities as long as you stay, you care not
what becomes of us when you are gone. You do not well, said Daphnide to make
this construction of what this Cavalier said; for I am most confident he has
more care of us then so; but if he love us, as I believe he does, he will not
take it ill, if we leave him a little without company; I conceive it therefore
best, that when my brother in law comes again, you tell him that I am better
then I was, and that if he will come, and dance here, I shall be very glad of
it, so he bring with him as few company, and as little Music as he can; in
the mean time, we will put Alcidon into this Closet which is close by my bed.

This Counsel was approved of as good, and to show me this Closet she took
the Key, and not stirring from off her bed, she opened the door, and causing a
Candle to be brought, showed it unto me, where I found room only for two
Chaires and a Table. The place was fretted and gilded, and very handsomely
furnished; in this place, said she unto me, you may be with safety, and if you
will leave the door a little open, you may see us dance: though you must not
expect to find the magnificence of the great Eurick, yet I am confident this
Ball will not be displeasing unto you, by reason of the various habits and new
inventions. To which I answered, that nothing would be displeasing unto me,
that pleased her.

Whilst we were thus talking, the Brother in law returned, and so softly least
he should wake Daphnide, that he had almost surprised us: But Delia, who first
heard him, did put out the candle, least he should see, and speaking a little
louder, Brother, said she, have but a little patience, and my sister will dance
with us, she is awake, and so well as she will come and see us, will you not,
Sister, said she, and addressed her self to my Mistress. Yes Sister, answered
she, but Brother I beseech you, come hither to dance, and bring as few people,
and little Music as you can; for I am afraid least the noise should cause my
head to ache again. The brother was very glad of this news, and went in all
haste to tell the company: in the mean time I had le^sure to take up my little
habitation, and she to draw the Curtains, and order all things so as none
could see me* and yet I could see almost all that was done in the Chamber.

We had no sooner put all things into order, but a great number of Cavaliers
came into to the Chamber, with many fair Ladies, and amongst the rest Stiliana
and Carlis, who have accompanied my Mistress hither. After some passages of
civility (for it must be confessed that the Cavaliers of the Roman Province are
the most courteous of all Gaul) every one began to talk as the humor took
them: At last they fell into talk of the King Euricke, and his Wars; which
they being all exceedingly sensible of, there was not one in all the company,
who had not some passionate invective against that great King. The best
language any had for him, was to call him Barbarous, Cruel, the Ruiner of
Gaul, and all Europe; and then fell to wishes: One wished that he were his
Prisoner; another to see him dead; a third, that all his Army were routed; and
the best wish was, that he had never been. All this discourse I heard, and
judge what would have been my entertainment had they found me. I believe they
had not so soon left talking of this great King, and their passions had not
been so soon laid, had they not heard the Music, which let them know that
Delia and her Companions were ready to dance. Then every one took their
places, and presently after, those fair ones entered in such an admirable trim,
and with such a delicate new Air, as I must needs confess I never saw any
thing more full of taking delight. I cannot now insist upon any particulars,
more than concerns the story in hand* only let me tell you that though all
was well performed, and full of various delights, yet I could not choose but
think the time long, and wished for an end of this Mask, because I thought it
stole that time from me, which might be better employed, At last, the Ball
ended, and the God of sleep commanded all the company to retire. Delia only
stayed in the Chamber with her Sister; and then the Prisoner of Love came out
of his Prison, chiding Delia for being so long in her dances. Oh what bad
company is this Cavaliere (said she) I am confident not one in the Company is
weary but yourselfe. But sister, since he is so dumpish. I advice you to pack
him hence, for how can you hope to content him alone, since all this company
had much ado to afford it him? Sister, said Daphnide faintly, all things upon
earth cannot afford us contentment, if it do not come of our selves: As all
the drugs in the Universe, cannot cure a body, if that body by its own
disposition be not apt and conducing to it: And so Alcidon, if he will have
contentment, must content himself and not think that a great number of people
can do it. Madam, answered I, If I had my will in my own power, as others
have, I should do as you do say; but since I have put my will into your
hands, my contentment must depend only upon you: Sister, said Delia, and
smiled, do not repent of the time you have kept this Cavaliere caged up by
your bed side, for methinkes he has learned to speak very well.

After some other discourse, they concluded to put me into the Closet again;
until they were undrest, and their maids in the Chamber were gone; but when
they opened the door unto me, I found Delia in bed with her sister, and she
taking notice that I was not well pleased at it: What Cavaliere, said she unto
me, why do you frown upon me? It is your self that is the cause of my being
here. I do perceive, answered I, that I am the cause, and I cannot be sorry
for it, since my fairest Mistress will have it so. The truth is, I should have
been very glad, if I could have spoke unto her without a witness: Do you not
know, said she, that there should be Witnesses unto all good Contracts. Love,
replied I, never needs any witnesses, and love will serve us for witness, if
you need any: Love, said she, cannot be a Witness, for he is Judge. If Love,
replied I, cannot be a Witness in matters of Love; much less Diana, who is
always a declared enemy. Though I cannot be a witness, said she, yet I may be
the Executioner of the punishment. If you design that, answered I, have I not a
good occasion to desire you not here? Daphnide, who had not spoken all this
while, interrupted us, and addressing her self unto me; It was I Alcidon, said
she, that appointed her to be there, and my reason for it, is so much to your
advantage, as when you know it, you will not be angry; for it is not to
witness against you, nor accuse you: I am fully assured of Alcidons
diseretion, and of the power which he has given me over him: but being more in
doubt of my self, then of you, I desired her presence to keep me from doing
more than I was resolved, and lest my good will to you, should make me go
beyond the limits of duty and fittingnesse. I must confess Madam, said I unto
her, that these fears in you, are a great honor unto me, but the remedy which
you apply is very cruel and vexatio^s. Alcidon, answered she, you must love
me, as I love you, and know that she who deserves your love, ought not only to
be without blame, but also without suspicion of any blame.

We talked so long, and with so much delight upon this subject, as I took no
notice how day began to break: and then, the consultation was, whether I should
depart or stay. The fair Daphnide, who was still apprehensive of my being in
any danger, she was at the first, of an opinion with Delia, that I should be
gone before it was any lighter: but when I hinted unto her that perhaps, it
would be long before such another opportunity of seeing her would be found; she
consented unto my stay, though Delia was of a contrary mind. But love being
above all reasons, it was resolved that I should stay that day in this place,
and that when night came I might depart with more safety: And to the end I
should not stay alone in my little prison, the fair Daphnide resolved to keep
her bed all day, and seem as if she were not well: for this Closet was so near
her beds head, as we could talk together without being heard by any in the
Chamber. This being resolved upon, Delia undertook to acquaint my guide with
all necessary instructions what to do, and to appoint those Cavaliers to keep
themselves close till night.

Having often heard our Druids discourse of the Great Tautates, and of the
immortal souls of men, who after this life do sit within heaven, where they
remain for ever: I wondered, but could not comprehend that such a life should
be delightful, since they say, that they never eat nor drink, or sleep, or
any thing else, but perpetually think and contemplate, thinking that time
should seem very tedious unto them, since it is so long even past all
imagination. But I must confess, that now I know the contrary, when I consider
how quickly and pleasingly hours passed away, when I was so near this fair
one; for I was astonished when I saw it was day, thinking the night not an hour
long, so quickly had the time flown away.

Every one of the house being up, Delia was constrained to the like, and I must
be cloistered up in my closet: for she would not suffer me to see when she
dressed her self, because of her maids who waited upon her. I would gladly
have done the office of her maid, and helped her, but she would not permit it:
Delia also was against it, and bad me get into my Cage* I pray Love, said I, be
revenged upon you for it: Love, said she, has nothing to do with Diana. No?
said I; yet Diana quitted heaven for a kiss of Endimion; and she was not so
coy, but for a fleece of Wool she was very kind unto Pan, though he had a
cloven foot and horns on his head. Let that Diana of whom you speak, replied
she, answer the Calumny as she please; but let me tell you, that unless my
mind alter very much, I will never kiss him that is asleep; and as for the
horns of Pan, certainly if ever I love any, I had rather he should have them
then I; yet, said I unto her, the Moon, whose name you have, does wear them
very hansomly. That is, answered she, because she is not married, and what she
does, is only to advertise lovers whom she lights in the night, that the
horns which they are going to give another, shall at some time or other be
given unto them again. But, said she, you prolong the time, get into your
Closet; so she pushed me in, and locked the door upon me: Then calling in the
maids which were in the next room waiting she silently dressed her self,
pretending that Daphnide was not well: afterward drawing the curtains of the
Windows, she went to give such orders as were resolved upon; in the mean time,
although there was some in the Chamber, yet for all that, we talked together,
without opening the door; and though it was in very low voice, yet one of the
maids passing by the bed, did hear us, not what we said, but only confused
whispers. By fortune, Delia being careful of us, came back into the Chamber at
the same time: The maid then addressed unto her, and told, that she feared her
sister was sicker, then she imagined; why? said Delia, because, answered the
maid, she talks to her self, as if she were distracted; what did she say?
replied Delia; I did not hear the words distinctly, answered she, but I am
sure she talked. Alas, alas, said Delia, do you not know it is her custom
every morning, as soon as she wakes, to say her prayers. The wench believed
Delia, who a little after came to us, and told the story, advertising us to
speak lower. I shall, said I; but, fair Delia, is it not better to send them
all out, that the door may be opened. Ah, ah, said she, and laughed, I am now
fair Delia, and not long since nothing but homed Diana, who loved clubfooted
Pan for a fleece of wool; pray stay there where you are, until you have learned
to speak a little better of Diana, otherwise she will be angry, and punish both
you, and us also. Upon this, she went to send out the maids and commanded one
of them to bring up some meat for her sister, and to bring more then ordinary,
because she did not sup the last night. The maid returned presently as she was
commanded; Then Delia shut the door: Now said she, the Cavalier shall see how I
will be revenged of him; then opening his door, Come Cavalier, continued she,
before you receive the punishment which I intend you, I have brought you some
victuals, to strengthen you a little, for I should be very sorry you should
die, before you have felt my revenge. She spoke this with such a pleasant air,
as it was impossible to forbear laughing: and after her sister had taken a
little broth, But Delia, said she, where did you get this? will it not be
perceived? yes, answered she, if I had no more invention then you. Come, come,
no more questions, here it is, eat and be thankful, and the reffuse will serve
a hungry Cavalier, whom I wish so ill unto. It is better, said she, to let him
have it all; for having fasted so long, I am sure he has more need of it then I
have. Upon this, she forced her sister to take a little, and offered me some
also, which I refused: Nay, nay, take it, said she, it will down with the help
of a willing mind. In such talk as this, we passed away all the morning, and
dinner time being come, I must be shut up again, least I should be seen by
those who brought up meat: The worst was, that dinner was no sooner done, but
the Chamber was full of Gallants, whereof some perhaps had the sting of love
upon them; and by fortune; the brother in law sitting on the beds side, he
caused a Chair to be set for the principal of them, so near me, that I could
scarce breath but be heard. Consider Adamas, in what a case I had been in, if I
had been forced to cough or sneeze. The most of their talk was of King Eurick,
and the preparations which were making in diverse places against him; of which I
was very glad to be informed, that I might acquaint the King therewith, which
afterward did him good service: But the worst of all was, they stayed talking
until night, though in the Chamber of a sick person, and never from about her
bed: At last, having a mind to walk, they left her all alone; and then the
doors being shut, I came out of the Closet which Delia opened unto me. Well,
said she, How do you like the adventure? pray what will you call it? Shall the
name of it be Perfect love, or Extreme patience? It is, said I unto her, the
most pleasing adventure that ever I had. But, said Daphnide, what do you think
of your being so long in that Cell? I think, Madam, answered I, that I am
infinitely happy in being near you. You may say what you please, replied Delia,
but I am confident you think liberty better then a close prison. If Diana knew
what it was to love, answered I, and what contentment it is to be near the
person loved; she would not be so incredulous as she is, but on the contrary
that I have found the Proverb to be false, which says, No Prison sweet; for I
never found half the delight and contentment in the Palace of Great Eurick,
which I have done in this Prison.

We continued in this discourse a long while, and it was so sweet unto me, that
hours seemed but minutes: and supper time being come, I must be again shut up,
but it was for a short time; for Daphnide being as I think, sorry to leave me
alone so long, she made such haste, that her sister complained she had not time
enough to eat: yet she had me in memory; which done, I beseeched the fair
Daphnide, that since I was to depart so soon, she would be pleased to put off
all visits for that night, to the end that the time which remained might be
employed with her, which she might well do by feigning her self not well, and by
pretending that their being so long about her bed that afternoon, was the cause
of it. With much a do, she consented, and Delia went presently from her to bid
all the company good night, and to desire excuse, that she went to take her
rest so soon.

In the mean time, I was all alone with my fair Mistress: For Delia, lest any
should surprise us, had locked the door, and carried the key with her. Love
then, and this opportunity, gave me a great alarm: for loving this fair Lady
most passionately, and seeing my self alone with her, it was enough to invite
me unto the highest strain of Courtship: two other great Considerations
presented themselves unto me: one was, the assurances which she gave me of her
good will, which ought not to make me the more bold: The other was, The
precepts which I received from Great Eurick, not to let opportunity slip; yet
judge, Madam, how my affection was tempered: you know, Madam, that all I did,
was, I kneeled down at your beds side, and taking your hand, I kissed it with a
zealous kiss, and a sigh: thus was my love accompanied with most humble and
devout respect.

The truth is, wise Adamas, that after I had been thus with her a long while, I
said unto her: I beseech you, Madam, How do you command me to live? I would not
have you live, answered she, as you have done for the time past; for if you
should, I would never pardon you, after these testimonies of my good will which
you have received from me. This, Madam, said I unto her, is a strange command,
and I vow that I will never obey it. How Alcidon, said she and started up out
of her bed; Do you vow to disobey me? Consider well what you say. By fortune
Delia put the Key into the door at the same time, and we h^rd her opening the
door, upon which, fearing lestsome should come with her, I retired my self into
the Closet without giving any answer; but when she was come into the room, and
I saw her alone, I came out, and would have taken the hand of my fair Mistress,
but she pulled it away in an angry manner, saying unto me so loud that Delia
heard; since you are in that mind Alcidon, you would do me a pleasure, if you
would trouble me no longer. Delia hearing her give me this language, had an
opinion that I had courted her sister in some way that was displeasing unto
her: This opinion moved her to smile and say; I see that much may be done in a
little time, since such a change is happened in this little while I have been
away* I dare lay a wager Cavalier, that you have not observed the customs and
conditions which I told you off when you first undertook this adventure. Nay,
nay, answered her sister, but perhaps he has done much worse; for had he done
as you say, he had been only a perjured Lover, whereas by this which he has
done, he has declared himself perfidious and a Traitor. Observe sage Delia,
said I unto her, two great injuries, and yet you see me endure them patiently,
until that you have heard us both, and I will make you my Judge, hoping that
you will appoint what satisfaction she shall make me.

The Cavalier, said Daphnide, is infinitely impudent; for he demands
satisfaction, where he deserves punishment: but Delja since he has made choice
of you for his judge, I will also choose you for mine, that you may appoint a
punishment suitable to his crime, if you can find one equal unto it; and
because he shall not say, that I am too bitter in my relation, I am contented
you have it from his own mouth. Then I began to answer very calmly, Observe I
beseech you oh my Judge, how my affection surmounts the rigor of this Lady,
she requires that you should cruelly punish me, and if I have committed a
fault, I make the same request; but if she have done ( I will not say a fault,
for I do not think she can) but if she have done any injury against my love I
do not require that she should be punished; for if she smart, I shall die of
the pain; all I desire is, that she may not offend against that affection
which I bear her. I desire, answered Delia, that if you will have me your
Judge, I may hear your difference. Hear it I beseech you said I unto her,
from her own mouth; for besides that, I know she can speak nothing but truth;
it is reason you should know it from her, since she accuses me, and would have
me punished. It Is true, said Delia, it is your part to speak first: I shall let
you understand it in few words, replied she, for our discourse was not long; he
spoke these words unto me. How Madam, do you command me to live? I answered
him, I would not have you live as you have done for the time past; for if you
do I shall never pardon you, after I have given you such testimonies of my
good will. He answered; this is a most strange command, and I do vow that I
will never obey it, and when I charged him with his disobedience you entered,
and hindered me from knowing what he would answer. Then Delia turning toward
me: Has Daphnide told the truth, said she? Yes my Judge, answered I, and upon
these words, I require justice; as for the injury she offered in calling me
perfidious and Traitor, I say nothing, because you heard them, and besides
that, they are but consequents of the first offense. But said Delia, which way
has she offended you? For Cavaler, answer unto these questions; do you not
prosesse your self a lover of this Lady? Yes, answered I, so, that when I
cease to love, I cease to live. Then replied Delia, do you not know, that it is
one of the principallest laws of Love, for a Lover to obey the person loved?
Yes, answered I, and so, the commands be not contradictory to his affection; as
if she should command him not to love her, she is not to be obeyed. It Is true,
replied Daphnide, for every thing does naturally fly that which would destroy
it: but how can you excuse your self as not offending against this Precept, in
this occasion, where you have not only thought the command which she made that
you should love her, to be strange and hard, but also has vowed to disobey her.
My Judge, answered I, I did protest it, and I vow and protest it still; and
with this resolution, that if I could die and die again, a^ many times as I
have lived hours, since my first birth, I would rather choose all those deaths,
then not vow and protest it. You hear (said Daphnide, being extremely angry)
how he speaks, and judge whether he does not deserve punishment. My Judge,
(said I and smiled) let my Mistress command me to fight against a whole Army
of men; let her appoint me to cast my self into the fire, nay, if she please
let her presently put a dagger through my heart, I will immediately obey her:
And to let her see what dominion she has over me, let her put me to what test
she pleases; for I am sure she cannot command me any thing, be it never so
dangerous or full of difficulty, but my love will prompt me immediately to
obedience. Do you not remember that when you first admitted me entrance, and
enjoined conditions upon me, how I promised to perform them all, provided they
did not contradict my love? I do remember it, answered Delia: Then my Judge,
replied I, methinkes you should not take it ill, that I should make this vow
and protestation of disobedience unto my Mistress, for had I done otherwise I
had been perfidious and a Traitor, both to her and Love. I asked her how it was
her pleasure I should live; I would not have you live, answered she, as you
have done for the time past. Now if I did love her for the time past as much as
a heart could love, in commanding me not to love her as I did for the time
past, is not this to command me not to love her; and should I not be disloyal
and perfidious if I should obey such a command? No, no Madam I cannot do it; I
loved you when I was a Child; I have continued it when I was a man, and shall
love you till death; nothing can divert me from this resolution; it is so
rivitted in my heart that it will never out as long as I live, nay, it will be
found in my heart after my death. Delia then began to smile, and said, I see
that Love is a Child, and a little thing will set him a crying: my sentence is
this, I do ordain first that all differences shall cease; then, that Alcidon,
as a punishment for his fault in answering Daphnide so peremptorily, that he
would disobey her, that presently he do kiss the hand of his Mistress; and
that Daphnide as a punishment for commanding him a thing which she would not
have done, had she rightly understood it, that she shall kiss Alcidon, as a
testimony of her repentance. This judgment was executed to my great
contentment, and we spent all the rest of the night in such pleasant discourse,
as when I heard a clock strike, me thought that it did not make quarters of
hours.

I should never make an end, should I relate all the discourse we had amongst
us: I will therefore only tell you, that being ready to depart, after I had
deferred it as long as possibly I could; I took the hand of my fairest
Mistress and kneeling down I said thus unto her; I am now Madam upon the last
minute of my happiness; for Delia and the time forces me to depart; I
perceive that neither of them are sensible of my passion, and for ought I
perceive, you, who are the cause of it, are as insensible as they. Alcidon,
answered she, do not complain of me; but consider, that if I did not love
you, I should never run the hazard of my honor, and your life, which is dearer
to me then my own, and you think that the passion which blinds my eyes unto
all these considerations must needs be very great. Madam, said I unto her, this
is it which most amazeth me, that since you have already done so much for me,
you should now do so little. Then her Sister being at a little distance, doing
something in the Chamber, Daphnide answered me. Remember Cavalier, that the
conditions betwixt Delia and you, at your first entrance into this adventure
were, that you should not be too importunate in your demands, but to be patient
and persevere. At this word she held her hand unto me, which with a sigh I
devoutly kissed. Then, said I unto her, all that I have to do, is to pray unto
the great God Saturn, who is the Governor of time, that he will make it pass
away quickly, so as I may arrive at my happiness before my death: otherwise,
that if I must never arrive at it, then that my life may quickly pass, so as I
may not live and languish too long in pain. Live Cavalie^^, said she unto me,
and live contentedly, and consider that I do love you. These were the last
words she then spoke unto me; for the clock struck twelve, which was the hour
of my departure, by appointment. And Delia, lest he who stayed for me at the
door should be perceived, would not let me stay any longer: Besides, I was so
extremely grieved that the time was so expired as I could not open my mouth to
bid her adieu, at the lest, I do not remember what I said. Thus I parted so
confusedly melancholy, that I was in the midst of the Garden before I spoke or
answered Delia one word, at which she being half angry: What Cavalier, said
she unto me, and pulled me by the arm, have you lest both your tongue and your
heart behind you? I do not know fair Delia, said I unto her what I have left,
nor what I have brought; but this adventure has given me the greatest hopes,
and the least effects that is imaginable* Why? ungrateful Cavalier, said
Delia, could you ever imagine to obtain more then you have from my sister?
Much less in regard of my merit said I unto her, but much more in regard of my
affection: If you had a sound judgment, said she unto me, I believe you would
have thought quite contrary; for you might expect to obtain much, since you are
Alcidon, so much esteemed by all that know you; so as your merits might justly
plead highly in your behalf; but your love cannot yet pretend unto much, being
so young, as I cannot tell whether your affection can be called by the name of
Love; for the name of man, must not be attributed unto one which is but newly
crawled out of his Cradle. How saire sister of my fairest Mistress, said I
unto her; do you call my love young, when it took root in me as soon as I had
any knowledge of good or evil? and can you call it little, which in grandeur
surpasses the greatest Giant that ever breathed upon earth? I think it young
(said she) because it never took beginning, till the day before you began this
adventure: and I esteem it little, in comparison of what it will be, and in
reason ought to be. But, said she, and shaked me by the hand, let us leave off
this discourse, and tell me when you think to see us again, and what you have
resolved upon with my sister? You heard all our discourse, answered I, and I am
so much grieved to part from her, that I do not remember any thing. Since so,
said she, and smiled, your Mistress did very well to favor you no more, for
your grief would have made you forget all: Do not think so, replied I; for as
I have not forgotten, that I did not receive those favors which I hoped for,
so should I never forget, if I had received those favors which I desire.

Do not imagine so, answered she, for men do much longer remember injuries
then benefits; and bitterness has a longer relish in their mouths then
sweetness; but since you have not resolved upon any thing with my sister, let
me advise you to see her again, as soon and as often as you can: for you must
consider, that nothing but eyes will satisfy love, nothing will make it take
root sooner then seeing her; and nothing will make it grow better then often
talking with her. I desire Alcidon, to testify, that I do love you; and since
you have undertaken this adventure, and since it was I who opened the door unto
you, I will give you such advice, as questionless, if you do follow it, you
will bring your enterprise to pass; I am a little elder then my sister, and
consequently have a little more experience then she, and perhaps then you
either; therefore do not s^ight those instructions which I shall give you,
unless you mean to repent it. My sister loves you, she has told me as much,
and you may believe it, by her thus hazarding her honor for a sight of you:
but she is very young, and by consequence naturally subject unto the
imbecilities of youth. Youth is apt to take any kind of impression, and as apt
to lose it aagain; their moist memories are like soft wax, you may imprint what
you will, and it will as easily lose the impressions, if any new print be
offered: therefore to avoid this danger, and if you will still be loved, and
well loved, you must by your presence often renew these first impressions, if
you cannot do it as much as is requisite by presence, let it be by Letters,
and messages: for when such unhop't for, and unexpected Complements do come,
they work very great effects: for in love, those contentments which are
expected, seem to be due, and it is an injury if they be retarded or refused;
whereas others that come unlook't for, work great effect upon that soul which
receives them. Fair Delia, said I unto her, If I could requite these favors
which I receive from you, with the hazard of my life, I should think my self
much beholding unto fortune: But not daring to hope for so much happiness, I
beseech you believe, that in testimony of the esteem which I have of your
judgment and good advice, I will most religiously observe it, and preserve my
obligations unto you in my memory as long as I live; and in requital, though I
have not a heart of mine own to present unto you, I will engage my self to
send you one, which you will esteem much above that which was mine, and is now
Daphnides. Alcidon (said she, and smiled) I perceive by your discourse, that
every thing turns to its beginning: for when you came first into the Garden,
you talked thus of losing your heart, and do the same at your going out: I
wish that she who has it, may long enjoy it: and in the mean time, I shall see
what effects your promises will produce, as well in observing my advice, as in
sending me this heart which you have promised.

Being now come to the Garden door, I took my leave of her; and having found my
guide, we walked a gentle pace toward our rocks, but as if the heavens frowned
at our separation: they were upon a sudden overspread with Clouds, so as we
did not only lose the light of the Moon, but were so wet with Rain, as we were
forced to shelter our selves under a thick tree, until the fury of it was over.
My guide had so lost his aim of the way, as when we went unto those who stayed
for us, he wandered, and led me unto the head of that Fountain, which gives
both the name and beginning unto the River of Sorgues. This Fountain is so
beset with great Rocks, that it seems as if it were enclosed with high walls
every way, but that by which we came. When this Spring is calm, it seems to be
a great well, whose water being too full, runs over: But sometimes, as my guide
told me, it is most horrid to behold: For, said he, do you see that high Rock
upon your left hand, I assure you, that it will often belch out his water as
high as it, with such a fury and noise, that no Tempest at Sea does equal it.
Do they not know the cause said I unto him? No, answered he; for sometimes it
begins to be in this fury, when the weather is very fair, and as now you see,
when it raines, it will be as calm as other waters. The cause, replied I, must
needs be from wind enclosed, which forces the waters thus.

Whilst we were talking thus, the Rain still continued, and I, having found a
hollow Rock, under which I could shelter my self, I advised the Guide to go
unto them who stayed for me, in the mean time I would rest my self, and when
the rain was past, the Moon would shine, and help us in the way.

Now, Reverend Father, I shall here relate unto you a most strange adventure,
not as pertinent to our discourse, but for the strangeness of it. When my
Guide was gone, as I commanded him, and I alone under this wild Rock, Love, out
of pity would not let me be long without him, for I fell into the sweet
thoughts of Daphnide; and after I had pleased my self a while in those
raptures, me thought the weather cleared up, and the Moon breaking through the
thick Clouds, shined as bright as ever I saw it: This invited me out of my
hollow Rock, and whilst I was looking about me that way which I supposed my
company would come, I heard the Fountain make a noise. I went presently to the
side of it, thinking it would rise up, according to reports: and having a
desire to see this wonder, I set my self down upon a stone near unto this
Fountain; then did I see a thing which indeed is beyond belief, without a
sight: I saw the water rise above its bank, up to the height of four feet, and
then it appeared to be like an old man from the middle upward, with long hair
dangling about his shoulders, and a beard hanging down to his breast, which
being wet as well as his hair of his head, seemed to be so many several streams
about him, with another that flowed out of a pot which he held under his left
arm. This old man was Crowned with Rock-fern, and Rushes, and for a Scepter,
held a great Reed in his right hand. Whilst I stood wondering at this Vision, I
saw the water to divide it self into several streams, and as soon as he
touched them, I saw so many Naiades, or water-Nymphs about him, as there was
streams in the Fountain. All out of reverence, bowed unto him, and he raising
himself above them, as upon a Throne which the water made for him, they came
to kiss his hand, and to present him with some Gifts: one presented unto him a
Chair, made and covered with Moss; another, a Garland of Rushes and Ivy;
another, a Girdle of Fern; another, a basket of Chestnuts; one offered Poites of
water flowers; another, a Net full of several Fishes: To be brief, every one
gave him something, as testimonies of their good will, which he received with
many thanks. After this, with a loud shril voice, he said, Oh Divine Naiades,
whom the Destinies have ordained to live in waters, and who complain that you
are confined unto my little Spring, whereas your sisters swim with full spread
arms in the Rosne, and Durance. Cease your complaints, and with me rejoice at
the advantageous choice which they have made for you. For though the limits of
our Dominion is not equal unto others in largeness: yet we do excel them in
so many privileges, that we have no reason to envy any of our Neighbors: For
our life is sweet and quiet, none comes to break our sleep, nor interrupt our
pastimes; our banks are never smeered with Homicides, nor are our waters
ruffled with the swelling weight of sailing Ships. But that which ought most to
content us, nay which makes us glorious, above all the Rivers of Europe, is, my
divine sisters, the infallible promise which we have from Destiny, and which
was confirmed with these words.

Happy Demon of Sorgues, Hearken (said he unto me) to the promise which I make
unto thee, Nine and twenty ages shall be no sooner past, but upon thy banks
shall come the Florentine Swan, which shall sing so sweetly under the shade of
a Laurel tree, that ravishing thereby both Gods and Men, he shall for ever make
thy Name famous through all the world, and shall make thee excel in honor,
all the Rivers which like thy self do empty themselves into the Sea.

He would have continued on, when hearing some noise, and as I believe, espying
my Companions as they were coming to me, I was astonished that he and his
troop dashing the water with their hands, they made it rise so high that I
lost my sight, and I lay as if I were asleep, as those who came unto me told
me, not so near the Fountain as I thought my self, but in the same place
where the Guide left me when he went unto them.

This said Adamas, was a most miraculous vision, which truly for my part I
believe to be a dream, but not an ordinary one; for doubtless this does
signify that some great and remarkable person shall inhabit in those solitary
Rocks, and make those banks famous, by the renown he shall get; which is to
be supposed will be very great, since the promise of it is made by the
Destinies, with such advantageous words. I cannot tell, said Alcidon, whether
it was a Dream or no; but I am sure, that I thought my self to be awake: and
afterward he continued thus:

I took Horse, and to omit all the particulars of my return, after many
dangers, I arrived at the place where I left King Eurick, who received me with
many a Carrasse; and as it pleased him to honor me so far as to love me so
would he often ask me how I did thrive in my love; so now taking me by my
hand, he carried me into a private room where none could hear. Come, Lov's
Soldier, said he unto me, Does all go well in your enterprise, and have you
had a good journey or no? Sir, said I, when it shall please you, I shall give a
true relation of it, and then your self may judge. Let it be now, said he unto
me, for I much long to know whether you are as prosperous in Love, as I have
been in War: Then in obedience to his command, I related the whole Adventure;
but I have since heartily repented that I spoke so advantagiously of Daphnides
beauty and spirit; for I perceived that it pleased him exceedingly to hear
that all I obtained was good words, and a few kisses: then would I have applied
a remedy to my error, but it was too late: yet to turn the matter, I began to
extol Delia, and so, that at first I did believe I should imbarque him there.
The King, who was more subtle then to believe it, to put me out of my
suspicion, did set so good a face upon the matter, that perhaps any other might
have been deceived as well as I. Oh what gross folly it is for any Lover to
acquaint his Master with his affection! For it did kindle in him such thoughts
as were not in him before, and put him into hopes of being, if not a Possessor
of my happiness, yet at lest a pretender unto it; yet God knows what force
ambition has upon the spirit of a woman, especially upon a woman of a generous
soul. Whilst we were thus discoursing upon the business, news was brought
the King, that they of Arles were resolved to submit themselves into his hands,
upon those conditions he offered unto them; to wit, the conservation of their
Franchises and privileges, without which the Inhabitans of the Town were so
courageous, as they would never have consented to acknowledge him. This is the
reason, said the King, and took me aside, why I ask you whether you are as
prosperous in Love, as I am in War: For this City is the chief of all the
Province, and it rendering it self unto me, it is to be thought that all the
rest after its example, will do the like. Sir, said I unto him, it is a very
happy Omen unto me, and if I do bring about my design, I will not change my
prize for yours. The King embraced me with a smile, and said afterward aloud,
we shall hear the rest of your business another time; Mean while, I will go
and take orders to content those of this Town so, as may invite others to do
as they have done; that Sir, said I unto him is the best course you can take;
for a great King, as you are, should force people unto submission, more by
sweetness, then violence.

Whilst the King was busy on his side, I was no less on mine; for at the same
time I dispatched Alvian, which was the name of him whom Daphnide gave me for a
guide; and because she had a great trust and confidence in him, and that his
fidelity and affection was already known unto me, I desired him to contrive it
so, that by his prudence I might sometimes see that fair Lady; I told him that
I would never forget my obligations unto him, which I would repay any way he
would desire: so he departed with a promise, that he would study my
contentment, and upon every occasion would testify his desire of doing me
service. Thus I left him, and was in such raptures of Love, as I had no other
thought but of Daphnide; I found by experience, that Lovers do not measure
their time, like other men, but according to the impatiency of the passion
which possesses them; for days seemed unto me whole months, so long did I
think them, hearing no news from this fair Lady; my sweetest entertainment
was my own thoughts, which when I could get my self out of all company, ran
continually upon the passages of my voyage.

The great Eurick, having nothing to do after the rendition of this Town,
would refresh his Army for some days; for it had been much tired out in that
occasion, and dividing them into several Quarters, he kept no more about him,
then were requisite for the safety of his person. And because it was his
custom when he took Truce with Mars, to begin war with Venus, and with his
sport in hunting, he devoted himself unto them two, there being nothing more
odious unto his courage, then idleness; and it was his ordinary Apothegme,
that to live and do nothing, was to bury himself before he was dead.

My office called me to be continually about his person, but my affection to
him much more; and therefore I was never from his elbow. The truth is, this new
love, or rather this renewing of my old love to Daphnide, had made me so
melancholy that I could hardly speak unto any: Which the King perceiving one
day when he was hunting, whether it was to mock at my passion, or whether it
pleased him to hear talk of her, who tied my heart and my tongue, I know not;
but he called me unto him, and with a smile, said; May one not interrupt your
thoughts so far Alcidon, as to tell you, that they are so much taken up with
absent persons, that they care not for us that are present. Sir, said I unto
him, there is a necessity of it upon me, which I hope will serve for an excuse.
For ought I see Alcidon, replied he, none but I am a loser in this Adventure.
Why Sir, said I unto him? Because, said he, Daphnide has gotten a Servant, and
you, in lieu of a Master, have gotten both a Master and a Mistress: But I have
lost; for whereas, I alone did possess you, now I have a Companion who has a
share with me, and perhaps a greater then I have. Did I think Sir, replied I
pr^sently, that my affection would any manner of way divert me from that
service which I owe unto you; doubtless Sir, in lieu of Love, I would choose
Death, and should think my self unworthy to live, if I did not to my last
breath continue in this desigue. But then, if without prejudice to your service
I may obtain that happiness which Love does promise me, and which my heart
does so passionately desire, I cannot think it any loss to you; for a good
Master, as you are does always desire to see his Servants thrive in
contentment. I must confess, said he unto me, and laughed, that this
affection, so it do you no harm, it will not do me any; but I much fear, that
as disease cannot continue long, but it must needs either increase or diminish;
so if yours do not quickly diminish, it will so increase, that we shall be both
losers: And therefore you must either be diverted from it, or else use some
remedies. Sir, said I unto him, the care which you are pleased to have of me,
will guard me from all danger: But to cure or diminish my affection, is to
attempt a thing which is beyond the reach of all possibility.

This, said the King, is a most strong and violent passion, Sir, said I unto
him, did you but see her who is the cause of it, you would say, all is too
little to equal her: But is it credible, said he, that she should be so fair,
as you speak her? Sir, answered I, did I not fear that I my self should be
the cause of my own ruin, I would tell you (and truly) much more; but I am
afraid* that in so doing I should sharpen the weapon which will kill me. How
do you mean? said he unto me, and because I did not answer: Speak freely
Alcidon, said he, tell me what your fear is; and he commanding me two or three
times, at last I continued; I fear Sir, and not without reason, lest Daphnide
being so infinitely fair, should have as great an influence upon your soul,
as she has upon mine; if that should happen, there is no way for me but death,
and a death so desperate, that my most mortal enemies would pity me.

I knew by several circumstances, said he then unto me, that you were in this
doubt, and I had a mind to put you out of it: No, no, I would not offer such
wrong unto any of my servants, much less unto you, upon whom I have conferred
so many signal testimonies of my particular good will: live happily, and never
fear it, for I swear by my Crown, that no humane beauty upon Earth can make me
commit such a fault. Sir, said I unto him, I must humbly prostrate my self at
your feet, by way of gratitude: for I esteem this favor no less than a new
life, and am sure that if such a misfortune had been, I had been but a dead
man.

Our discourse had not so soon ended, unless the Chase coming toward us, had
not forced us away; as for me, I was the most contented man alive, putting full
assurance in his words, and therefore ever since, when he spoke unto me, I told
him freely all passages concerning my passion. Some days thus passed on, and I
heard no news from Alvian, which was no small trouble unto me: But at the same
time, the Kings affairs invited him to receive some place which would submit
into his hands; and therefore he drew out part of his Army toward that quarter
where Daphnide dwelt. When the King told me his resolution, I was ravished with
joy, and said unto him; Now sir, I hope you will grace me so far, as to see
my Mistress, for we shall pass close by her house; with all my heart,
answered he: then we shall see whether she be so fair as you same her to be;
and if I talk with her, I shall quickly know whether you will speed in your
hopes.

The King sets forward, and to omit all matters which are not pertinent to my
story, though in themselves worthy of Chronicle; and being within a mile of
Daphnides house, he told me that he would see her, and that in rrspect of the
good service which her Father had done him, he could do no less being so near
her and her Mother, but see them. I am still afraid Sir, said I unto him, that
this honor which you intend to do them, is mixed with Love. What? said he,
and smiled, you old fits of folly again? will you not believe what I have
promised with an oath; had I only promised, I should be only a deceiver in so
doing, but having sworn, I should be perfidious: Come, come, cast away these
foolish thoughts, unless you are resolved to offend me; and on the contrary,
be confident that I will do all the good offices I can, and as you can expect
from the best of your friends.

Upon this, I presently dispatched a messenger unto Daphnide, to let her know
of the Kings coming; and when we were in sight of the house, I would have gone
before, but he commanded me to stay with him, because (said he to me, and
smiled) I shall be more welcome if I bring you with me, than if I come by my
self. Sir, said I unto him, I believe that Lady has so much judgment, as
rightly to value the honor which you do her; but Sir, take heed lest you lose
the title of invincible; for I assure you, there are strange Captivaters in
that house; it is the habitation of the Graces; Daphnide is accompanied with
two sisters, who yield not unto any but her self; and had I not been already
engaged, there is one Delia who doubtless had absolutely captivated me. Is
that she, said the King, of whom you spoke to me before? Yes sir, answered I,
and doubtless the most accomplished beauty that ever I saw, if as I told you
before, she had not a sister. To her then, said the King, will I address my
self. By this time we were come so near the Castle, that the Ladies being
upon the bridge, the King lighted from his horse to salute them; and taking the
Mother by the hand, he went into the great Chamber, where they talked a while;
and the King enquired of her and her husbands health, and whether Wars were not
offensive to her. In the mean time, I talked to the fair Daphnide, who though
at all times fair, yet, that day, it might be said, she surpassed her self,
having added unto her natural beauty, so many Graces by her artificial dress,
as I never saw any so fit to conquer hearts. Delia stood next to her, and my
eyes and heart being fixed in contemplation of their beloved object, I stood
gazing a long time before I spoke. You went away, said Delia, without a heart,
and return without a tongue; if you lose as much every voyage, you will become
very ill company: Delia, said I unto her, you are very pleasant; but if she who
hinders you from being the fairest in the world, do use such Arts, I know not
what will become of me. Who do you speak of? said Daphnide; of you Madam,
answered I, who adds so much art unto your Natural beauty, that no eye can
look, and hope to escape imprisonment. I should in favor of Alcidon, answered
she, believe that this might be, if every one did look upon me with Alcidons
eyes. But let us leave this discourse, and tell us which way do you take. I am
sure, said I unto her, that the way hither, is the way of my felicity, and my
way from you, is the way of my hell: Nay, nay, said Daphnide; I mean, which way
does the King go, and whither does your Army intend to march? I would have
answered her, but the King called me away. Alcidon, said he unto me, come
hither, and be a witness; is not the strong Town of Arles reduced into our
hands? Yes certainly, sir, said I unto him; and you must look for other
Kingdoms, and indeed other Worlds, to exercise your Arms in, for there is no
more to Conquer which I know of. They will not believe me, replied the King;
and therefore I pray relate unto this incredulous Lady, how not only Arles,
but almost all the Province which is called the Romans, is in our hands. Oh,
sir, said the good old Lady, not but that I did believe what you did say; but
it is because till now, we thought the Town of Arles impregnable. Nay, nay,
replied the King, I will have you understand the whole series of the story, to
the end that hereafter you may not doubt of what I say: Upon this, rising up,
he set me in his place, and went to the place from whence I came; and because
Delia when he came, would have retired, he pulled her back, and talked awhile
unto them both. I could not possibly hear what they said, as well because it
was but a little too far off, as because I was engaged to talk unto this old
Lady. But presently after, when the King took Daphnide by the hand, and carried
her the Window, I must confess, then I began to doubt, and my words did so die
in my mouth, as if I were soul-lesse: I could not choose but observe their faces
and actions; and whatsoever I saw, made me suspect that which I feared most; so
as I wished withal my heart, for some hot alarm to call away the King from the
place where he was. I cannot tell how long his Courtship lasted, but I am sure
it lasted so long, that I thought every minute a day. At the last, the King
took his leave, and went on his journey. Daphnide seeing me following, did
beckon unto me, as desirous to speak with me; whereupon I commanded one of my
men to hide my horse, to the end I might have some color to stay behind; so as
though the King called me twice or thrice, yet stay I did, seeming to be very
angry with my servants, for the little care they had of my Horse. The King, and
almost all the Train departed; and I going into the house, seeming only
because I would not have the Ladies stay so long in the Sun, I took Daphnide
aside: Well Madam, said I unto her, what do you think of the Great Eurick?
Nay, said she, what discourse do you think we had? I cannot tell, replied I:
Then, said she, I will tell you, and you shall judge which of us two loves you
best: when he took me to the window, to the end Della might not hear, though at
the first he stayed her with me out of civility: he said unto me; I do not now
wonder, that Alcidon should run such hazard to see you, for I protest you are
the fairest in the world; and now I have seen you, I cannot think any in the
whole Universe worthy of esteem.

At the first, this discourse made me blush, especially hearing him mention
you, and of a business which I did not think he knew of: yet seeming as if I
did not understand him, I answered thus: I know not sir, why you should tell me
of Alcidon, nor what hazards he has run; but I am sure, that there is nothing
in me worthy of your eye, nor of the language of so great a King. Why, fair
one, said he unto me, did you think Alcidon could leave our Army without my
leave, and without telling me whither he went? The Law of War is very severe
and strickt: moreover, assure your self, that he is too young to enjoy so much
good fortune. I am so little versed in the way of War, answered I, and the age
of Alcidon does so little concern me, as I never learned the one, nor cared
for the other. Why, said he, do you think I know not, how he has seen you
twice; the first time at a Cavaliers house, who has the charge of my Artilery;
and the next time, at your sisters, where you kept him in a Closet: No, no,
Fair one, he has told me all, and so particularly, as you your self do not know
them better: Certainly, said I, Alcidon has a great confidence in you; and in
saying so, I was constrained to cover my blushes with my hand, being ashamed
the King should know all these particulars. But he smiling; This, said he, is
the common vanity of all young people; they cannot be silent, but must be
blabbing of their own happiness; but be not angry I should know this, since
loving and honoring you so much as I do, I shall take no notice of it; but if
you will follow my advice, and preserve your reputation, cast off this youth,
and reject his addresses; for you may be certain, that he who would tell me
these things, will in an humor tell them to any other, and perhaps to some
that are not so discreet as I am.

Judge, Alcidon, said she to me, into what a condition you have brought me, by
acquainting him with these things, which above all you should have concealed.
How can I choose but be extremely angry with you, when I reflect upon the wrong
you have done me? Madam, said I unto her, I must needs confess my self in a
great fault, but I am confident you will excuse it, if you will but please to
remember the manner how we lived in the days of his Predecessor King
Thorismond, who being the first cause of our love; I thought this King, being
as gracious unto me as the other, would also favor the accomplishment of it:
but I perceive their designs are far different; for the one aimed at my
happiness in giving me that which he had a mind unto himself: and the other
intends to make me most miserable by ravishing from me, her whom he knows is
mine, and without whom he knows I value not my life: For I do foresee, by the
knowledge which I have of his humor, that he will love you; his design I
perceive is to put you out of conceit with me; so as your mind then not being
engaged, he hopes the more easily to win upon you, and bring about his own
ends. But Madam, if you do think him able to compass his desires, and that I
shall ever see this change in you, I conjure you by the memory of great
Thorismond, who loved us both so well, never to let me see it, but to tell me
betimes, that my death may anticipate such a dire accident. Daphnide then
smiled, and said, I am very glad to see you so much perplexed as you are, as
well to prevent you from relapsing into your crime of being so liberal in your
tongue, as to know by your fears which you have of the King and of his good
will unto me, that you do really love me. But Alcidon, I love you too well to
let you be long in this perplexity; Live therefore contentedly, and be
confident, that as long as Alcidon loves me, Daphnide will never love any
other, and that neither the grandeur, nor authority of a King shall ever be
able to alter me in this resolution.

We had talked longer, if the King who had already sent twice for me, had not
sent the third time, fearing, as I believe, lest Daphnide should impart unto
me, what he had said unto her: Therefore after I had kissed the hand of my
fairest Mistress, and after she had given me assurance, that if the King
continued, she would impart all unto me, I departed, and galloped after the
King, whom I found gone but a little way; for he stayed purposely to dispatch
away an express to color thereby his staying for me, and to the end, that if
I came not quickly, he might send another messenger for me. When I was come
unto him; Alcidon, said he, I sent for you, because there is danger in coming
after an army with few men; for I have intelligence that the Enemy is not far
off, and if they have any design of doing any thing, they will watch such
occasions by their spies. I gave him most humble thanks for the care he had of
me, and though I made no show of it, yet I knew very well, that when he said
the enemy was not far off, he said truly, since he himself was near me, and
no enemy could be more dangerous nor cruel then himself. Observe, wise
Adamas, the follies of love; I resented the injury so deeply, that had I not
feared to incur the danger of being taxed for a perfidious Cavalier, I know not
unto what fury my resentments might have prompted me unto against him; but upon
good consideration of the matter, I resolved to smother my wrongs, and seem to
take no notice that I knew any thing; considering, that when the desires of
people are thwarted, they are most violent, and when the desires of persons in
power are once known, they are prompted to use violence. But the great
constraint in which I lived, did so perplex me that I fell sick: By this,
reverend Father, you may judge how great my affection was, since it had power
to bring me into such a condition. The King did not think my sickness so
great as it was; but it increasing every day, and his affairs constraining him
not to abide long in one place, he left me in the City of Avignion, upon the
report of the Physicians, who told him how great my disease was.

Thus I tarried in this Town so ill, that but for the contentment which I
received from some Letters which Daphnide sent me by Alvian, I know not what
would have become of me. However, it was more then eight days that I kept my
bed, before I heard any news from Daphnide, because she not knowing of my
sickness, but supposing me to be in the Army, she sent Alvian thither. In the
mean time I who thought that she knew of my sickness, I pined away with
sorrow and grief, having an opinion that her silence proceeded from a defect
in her affection, and then I blamed the inconstancy and ambition of women,
supposing that the Kings affection to her was certainly the cause of it. At
last, my impatiency not being able to endure this incertainty: I sent unto her
my Servant, who carried my Letters; the first time unto her, and in the
extremity of my sickness, I writ these few words unto her.

Alcidons Letter unto Daphnide,
I Have all the reason in the world at this time to complain against my
Fortune, being at once left both by my Master and my Mistress. (I know not
Madam whether it be permitted me to phrase you so) But in this I must needs
commend her, who seeing the injuries, which both of them do me, she would not
let me live any longer, least I should any longer endure this unjust punishment.

See, sage Adamas, how Love will sometimes both wound and cure his Subjects,
almost at the very same time. Alvian, who was sent to seek me in the Army, and
hearing that I lay sick in Avignion, he returned in all haste to his
Mistress, who presently dispatched him unto me; and by fortune, the same day
that her Letter came to me, mine came to her: The Letter which Alvian brought,
imported these words.

Daphnides Letter unto Alcidon.
THe Bearer hereof, has been a great distance off to seek you, and to my
great grief will find you nearer; If my Health be any thing deer unto you, let
me hear of yours.

When I received this message, and understood by word of mouth the reason why
she writ so short, was because she thought me so sick, as I was not able to
read more. Oh, sage Adamas, I cannot express my joys! I was indeed very
sick, and the Physicians, who applied only corporal remedies, were far
besides the mark, since my malady was only of the mind. The truth is, that
from the first hour of Alvians arrival, I recovered strength; and not to
disobey the command which I received from Daphnide; I sent him back the next
morning with this answer.

Alcidons Answer unto Daphnide.
Madam
IT is from Daphnide you must inquire of Alcidons health, since it wholly
depends upon her: If you continue upon him the honor of your favors, he is
well: otherwise he is not only dead, but sorry that ever he lived.

On the other side, Daphnide seeing my thoughts, or rather my jealousy, she
was very desirous that Alvian might remove it from me; for she knew very well,
that I had a great confidence in him. And further to make her good will
appear, she sent my Servant back, with so many good words, and assurance she
would never alter, as I was constrained to believe it: Her answer was this.

Daphnides Answer unto Alcidon.
IF it be so, that one may judge of another by themselves, I have great reason
to doubt of that fidelity which you have promised me, for you have done so of
mine. If you were in my room, should ambition transport you above love? Oh no,
I will not harbor such an opinion of you: For I must confess, Alcidon, if I
did, I would not love you so well as I do; wrong me therefore no more in this
kind, unless you would have me believe, that you would have that affection
diminish, which you have sworn unto me.

Thus we continued many days writing unto one another, with so much
contentment unto me, that my disease was forced to leave me: and when I had got
so much strength as I hoped every day to ride abroad, Alvian came to bring me
two Letters which the King had writ unto her from the Army: And in testimony of
her free way she lived with me, she sent them yet sealed, as when she first
received them.

Daphnides Letter unto Alcidon.
NOw the Wars are begun, I have sent you two Prisoners; none yet ever spoke
with them, treat them as you please, I freely give them unto you, as I will do
all the rest that fall into my hands.

In this, I received at once a great pleasure, and a great displeasure; I
cannot express my contentment, to see that Daphnide did so well perform her
promise to me; but it wounded me to the very soul, to see that the King should
attempt that, which he had sworn unto me the contrary. To withdraw my self
from Daphnide, I thought a thing impossible; and I knew that if the mind of
this fair one proved strong enough to resist him, he would in a transport of
passion banish me the Court: Also if she yielded or was overcome, then there
was no hopes of any life for me. I remained long in this doubtful incertainty;
at last, love having the predominancy in my heart, I resolved to advise her,
not to receive any such messages from him, if it were possible: yet my
curiosity prompted me to see what the King had writ, having an opinion, that
though I did not, yet she would read them, and I should never know; so I
returned her this Answer.

Alcidons Answer unto Daphnide.
THese two Prisoners, Madam, are not of that quality to be kept long in my
prison: I have therefore sent them both back: But take heed lest in harkening
unto any more, the Fort which Parleyes do render it self.

I should be too tedious, should I relate all the Letters which we writ unto
each other at that time; for since it was not above six or seven leagues
betwixt us, we sent unto each other almost every day: But so it was, that the
King being resolved to be as victorious in Love, as in War; he persisted so
close in the Courtship of this fair one, as what excuse soever she can find,
she must confess, that if it was not Love, yet it was Ambition at the least,
which invited her to hearken unto him, and to entertain his Courtship: Oh
Heavens? what gross folly it is in any, to look for any certainty under the
Moon? I mean for any thing which is not alterable? Whilst thus we continued
writing unto each other, the King continued his enterprise; and I who thought
that I had a good occasion to laugh at him, did find my self in the
conclusion, the party laughed at. Pardon me, Fairest Mistress, I beseech you,
if this truth offend you. Well, well, Alcidon, said Daphnide, and interrupted
him, I will not now answer you, go on with your discourse as you please. Upon
this, Alcidon continued.

The King having effected his enterprise against his enemies, he returned the
same way he came, purposely to see his new Mistress: and to the end I should
know nothing of it, he came the night before his Army, almost all alone, and
lodged in her house. He had made choice of such to wait upon him, as I knew
nothing of it a long time after; but at last, I came to know it by an accident,
which hereafter I shall tell you. In the meanetime, the King came to Avignion,
where he honored me so far, as to enquire of me: and because I was extremely
vexed at the pursuit which I saw he made of this fair Lady, I could not
perfectly shake off my sickness; but being neither well nor ill, I languished
away such a melancholy life, as I became scarce knowable: The King hearing of
it, sent several times to visit me, and he himself condescended to come and
see me, but spoke not a word of Daphnide, nor made any show of seeing her, or
had her so much as in memory. I for my part, kept not such a close Guard upon
my lips, but told him, that it grieved me so much, that against his promise he
should use me thus, as the very sight of him aggravated my grief, and
augmented my sickness.

Since the last time that the King was with Daphnide, she writ unto me only as
an umbrage for her intentions, and to keep me as long as she could from the
knowledge of all passages, though she knew they would out at last: for the
Courtship of Great Princes cannot be long concealed. As for the Letters which
she received from him, she sent them not unto me, as she was wont to do,
unless it were some out of which no great matter could be collected, and those
very rarely. Thus did I fret away my time with such heartbreaking thoughts, as
when I think upon them, I cannot choose but wonder they did not bring me to my
Grave. Sometimes in the evening when the weather was fair, and the Sun in
decline of heat, I should walk upon the banks of the River Rosne, toward the
house of this fair one, and there all alone contemplate upon my own thoughts,
until the Suns light had left our Hemisphere; and then I should return to my
own lodging, and spend the whole night in the same melancholy imaginations.

How often have I taken conjectures of my misfortune for certainties, and then
wished my self out of this life, as thinking that I lived only to resent my
own sorrows and her treachery? How often have I with disdain, thought my self
a fond fool for loving such a weathercock beauty? how many times have I
resolved to break off all those perfidious bonds that tied me to her service?
perfidious may I well call them, for all her oaths and promises, which
together with her beauty, tied me to her service, are all vanity and deluders.

But alas, how often have I also considered, that not being my self, I was not
able either to do or resolve upon any thing, but according to her will and by
as that drew me unto her? Till now, sage Adamas, my misery was only dubious,
and hanged only upon suspicion: but now, see how the whole truth came to be
discovered unto me.

I was walking, as I told you, upon the banks of Rosne, not with any intention
to divert my self, but only to entertain my mortal thoughts one evening, as
I was returning to my lodging, I saw a young Cavalier, who was one of my
friends, whose Father served the King in his Courtship of this fair one; and
he rid by me, and did not know me, not imagining that he whom he saw could be
alone so late, whom he knew never used to walk so slenderly attended* but
riding on a little further, and knowing and servant that waited upon me at a
distance, he asked him what he did in that place: and my servant answering,
that he waited there until I had done walking; the Cavalier presently alighted
from his horse, and having saluted me, beseeched me to pardon him, for passing
by and not knowing me. After some common discourse which we had together upon
that subject, I asked him from whence he came, and whither he was going? He who
was altogether ignorant of my love unto this fair one, and knew nothing neither
of the Kings but by his father, he answered me with all freedom and plainness.
I come sir, said he, from a place, where you are had in memory, and I have
brought you a letter which will testify as much; then putting his hand into
his pocket, he took it out, and withal another, the superscription whereof I
knew; and having a suspicion, that it was directed unto the King; also seeing
how free this young Cavalier was in his language, as I took my own letter, I
asked him, for whom the other was: For whom (said he) why? it is to the King my
Father is fallen sick, and he gave it unto me to carry unto the King: He spoke
thus unto me, as thinking that I knew of the Kings love, as I did all other the
Kings business before. Though this made a deep impression upon my heart, yet I
smiled at his simplicity, and said unto him: I do believe, dear friend, that
both you and your Father, are put to very much trouble in the business. Oh
Sir, said he very freely, I swear unto you, that all the voyages of War which
the King has taken has not been so troublesome to us, as this cursed love has
been, especially since the King in his return, went to see that fair Lady; and
you may imagine this a truth, by the sickness which my Father has gotten. My
dear friend, replied I, and embraced him such as great Princes do employ upon
such occasions, are such whom they best love; and therefore you are not a
little obliged unto that fair Lady who is the cause; besides your own merit, of
the Kings love and favor unto you. Sir, said he unto me, I cannot tell what
may happen; but I am afraid that this Lady of whom you speak, will so bewitch
him, as none can have any share in the Kings favor and love but herself.

These words went so to my heart, as they constrained me to dismiss him sooner
then otherwise I would: and having no curiosity to know any more, I told him
purposely to make him go away, that the King impatiently expected his coming,
and that I would not deprive him of his contentment by staying him any longer.

Thus I remained all alone, unless accompanied with so many dismal and mortal
thoughts, as it was above an hour before I would return: but at last, night
constraining me to retire into the Town: I went unto my lodging with a defigne
to depart all alone the next morning, and so shun all manner of humane Company,
as none should ever deceive me again. And to begin, I went unto my Chamber by
a back stairs, and having none but my Page with me, I went presently to bed,
and commanded him to tell all the Company that expected me, how I was not well,
and that I sent him to bid them all good night. I closed not an eye all the
night long, and Aurora began to blush before any mind of sleep came upon me:
And being in a full resolution of departure a Fever seized upon me so
violently, as I was constrained to defer until my recovery. I had not yet
looked into the Letter which Daphnide sent me, having neither so much courage
as to see what was in it, nor hate enough to cast it into the fire; but not
knowing which of these two I should resolve upon, I held it in my hand, and
kept it two days before I brought it to light: At last, being transported with
choler one night when I was alone, I must, said I to my self, I must needs
see the treachery of this perfidious woman, and afterward so exclude her out
of all memory, that nothing may remain of her in me but eternal scorn. Upon
this, raising my self up in my bed, I opened it, and by the help of a wax
Candle which stood by my bed side, I read what she had written unto me.

But, wise Adamas, unto what purpose should I repeat here those words which
were writ only with an intention to delude me the longer: And again, why
should I not repeat them, since it is requisite the Physician should know the
wound, before he can apply right remedy? I will therefore rehearse them, not
any thing to my consolation, but only to let you see how I was used.

Daphnides Letter unto Alcidon.
SHall I never hear anybetter news, but that Alcidon is still sick? Shall I
never see him as he was when he undertook the adventure of Perfect Love? Have
all my Prayers no efficacy in them? will the Gods be eternally deaf unto all
the supplications that I make unto them for your health? Oh ye Gods; if so,
then either abridge my grief, or else change my heart, that it may not be so
sensible of his sufferings: and you Alcidon, either resolve upon a recovery, or
else to kill me with grief.

See reverend Father, what a cruel Letter I received, after I had discovered
her treachery to me; unto which in a transport of anger I returned this answer.

Alcidons Letter unto Daphnide.
THere is nothing can cure Alcidon but death, since he finds no fidelity
either in his Master or his Mistress; and therefore to what purpose should I
live any longer amongst a Company of perfidious people? Never complain that
the Gods are deaf; for they have heard your prayers, and in not giving health
unto him whose life could do nothing but grieve for the breach of so many
oaths, they have made your heart insensible of me, but too sensible of
another, who perhaps will one day revenge so many per^idious oaths; for the
Gods are more just then not to revenge me, and punish you.

I gave this Letter unto my servant, who carried my first, and did command him
to return presently, and not stay for any answer. The smart of this
displeasure was such, that my disease increased very much; of which the great
Eurick hearing, although he was ashamed of his filching away this fair one
from me; contrary to all his promises made unto me, yet after dinner he
condescended to come and visit me. I was indeed very sick, and yet my greatest
pain was the remembrance of his theft; so as when I was told the King was
coming to see me I trembled, as if a new fit of an Ague had seized upon me; and
when I saw him, there appeared not a drop of blood in my face; but perhaps
those who observed, did think my palenesse was only an effect of my sickness.

He came to my bed side, where after he had asked me all circumstances,
concerning my disease, and I answered as civility and honor commanded; he sat
down, then turning his back upon all the Company, he began to speak in a
lower tone, and seeing that I scarcely spoke one word, he thought to waken me
by talking of Daphnide, little thinking that I knew how squares went betwixt
them. He asked me how that fair one did, and how long it was since I heard from
her. I answered him very faintly, that I thought she was well, and that I never
heard from her since the day that she writ unto him, by such a man, and then I
named the man who brought me the last Letter. The King blushed and at first
would have denied that he received any from her; but I beseeched him to pardon
me, for I knew he did, and that the same man who brought him his Letter,
brought one to me also. How? said he then unto me, did she then send one unto
you? Yes Sir, answered I, and moreover I know of the honor which you did her,
in seeing her at her house At this, he was a little confused, when he saw I
knew what he thought me ignorant of: and after a long pause: Alcidon, said he
unto me, I must needs confess my fault, though to my shame: It Is true, I did
see that Lady of whom you speak and have received Letters from her: and more
then all this, I must confess that I do love her above my own life.

I cannot deny but that in this I am a very bad Master, and a worse friend to
treat you thus after so many promises to the contrary; but in my confession of
this perfidie, I can say no more in my own defense, but that I was deceived my
self, before I deceived you: I was persuaded, that as I never met with any man
living who could overcome me, so much less that a woman could be able to do
it; and in this opinion I promised you that which since I find my self not
able to perform. The confidence which I had in my own strength against men,
did drive me into the error of despising all women in general, and of this
Lady in particular; and my sorrow is so much the greater, in that it reflects
upon Alcidon, to his prejudice; Alcidon I say, whom I loved so well; and it is
to be believed, that since I have been so perfidious unto him, it is a thing
absolutely impossible for me to do otherwise: Alcidon my dear friend, I freely
make confession of the wrong which in spite of myself, I have done you;
protesting that if I could any way in the world pay that debt unto which I am
obliged, I would presently do it, with as good a heart, as ever I received any
favor from heaven.

The King uttered these words in such a discomposed manner, and with such a
countenance, as testified that his expressions did not come from his heart: And
because I saw him stand silent, I answered him; Sir, said I, all that is in the
world were created to serve your greatness, especially Alcidon who is ready to
sacrifice himself upon the Altar of your contentment: And the Heavens
foreseeing it impossible I should be deprived of Daphnide and live, will take
away my life, lest it should be any obstacle unto you: And therefore welcome
death, since my life cannot conduce to your contentment. Upon this, I could not
restrain my tears, and the King being moved at them, after a while of
silence, said unto me: You cannot Acidon, wish me so ill, as the injury I have
done you does merit, I do most ingeniously acknowledge it, and wish that my
blood could remedy it; perhaps I shall do it in time, but for the present
there is no thought of it. And yet for your satisfaction, I am resolved upon
any thing you would have me, only take heart and recover of your sickness;
and believe to your contentment, that I will do all I can to procure it. After
this, the King went out of my Chamber, leaving me in such a sad condition as it
is incredible any other than my self should live under such a load of sorrows
and despaires.

Alcidon turmoiled with the memory of these painful passages, and the wrong
which he received both from his Master and his Mistress, he lost his speech,
so as after a while of silence, when he offered to speak, he could not; and
therefore he was forced for a long time to be silent; at last striving with
himself he broke out with much ado, and said: You see Madam, how in obedience
to your commands, I make my old wounds bleed afresh, but when I consider all is
by your command I do patiently endure all; but if your Rigor be not greater
than my Patience, I beseech you help me to bear the burden which you have
imposed upon me, I mean in the continuance of this relation of my misfortunes,
of which you may speak with more assurance than I can; for in all that is
hereafter to be told, I am only the sufferer of what you were pleased I should
endure. Methinks my request is not unreasonable, that the wise Adamas may
understand from your mouth the truth of those things, whereof you only are the
Author. Adamas not staying for the answer of Daphnide, turned toward her, and
said; Methinkes Madam the motion of this Cavalier is reasonable, and that by
your own ordinance imposed upon him, you are obliged unto it.

Reverend Father, answered she, the law is not equal betwixt him and me* yet
since you think it fit, I shall do as you please; and I must tell you, that
though Alcidon has spoken the truth, yet as good Orators use, he has inserted
some words to the great advantage of his cause: Then after she had paused a
while, she continued the discourse thus.

The Sequel of the History of Daphnide and Alcidon.
IT is a Proverb full of reason, that Parties interested or prepossessed with
any Passion, can never be good judges, because their judgments being offended,
they can never perform their perfect Functions, no more than a leg or an arm
can which has any great wound. Alcidon has made good the Proverb by the
consequences which he has so often drawn to my disadvantage being biased
thereunto more by passion then by reason: And because my discourse would be
very long if I should answer all his particular rovings into Passion, I will
omit them, and truly relate the remainder of our Fortune, and leave you to
censure of his passions. And to begin where he left, I will tell you Reverend
Father, that having received the Letter which he sent unto me, unto which I
returntd no answer, because the Messenger according to his command went
presently away without bidding any adieu. I became the most desolate person in
the world, being taxed with a crime (and with some color of reason) which I
could not help. I understood presently after by the Kings Letters, all the
discourse which they two had together, and afterward by Alvian, whom I sent
purposely to see how he did, though I did not write, who told me how ill he was.

I discoursed long with my self what I should do in the business; for on the
one side, his affection to me invited me to go unto him, and tell him how he
was mistaken: on the other side, I durst not do it for fear of being blamed. I
was long wavering in the balance between these two considerations, before the
Scale would turn to either side; but at last, the return of Alvian
constrained be to go unto him; for bringing me such very bad news of his
sickness, I cast off all other considerations, and resolved to see him: In
this determination I sought out for some excuse to color my Voyage: And
presently after, a very good one presented it self: For Peace being made, my
Brother-in-law was constrained to go to Avignon about getting of a Cozen of
his, who was a Prisoner in the Town which was rendered unto the great Eurick;
and who because he would needs contradict the general resolution, those of the
place seized upon him; and though Peace was afterward published, yet they
would not set him at liberty, least if the war should break out again, he
should interprise something against them: And seeing there was some difficulty
about his enlargement, and that the business by consequence would take up a
long time, he would carry his wife with him, and he had a great desire of my
Company, that I might be seen with him, if he was forced to make any addresses
unto the King. As soon as the husband made the motion unto me, I consented
with a condition of my Mothers consent: The good old woman gave her consent as
soon as ever she understood the cause; so as within two days after, we set
forward, and as fortune was, our lodging happened to be directly over against the
lodging of Alcidon.

His sickness was much spoken of, and the King went often to see him, for he
loved him very well: but when he was advertised of my arrival, he showed
himself more desirous of his health than before: For whereas he was wont to
see him but once or twice in a week, since I came, he went to him every day,
and as he went or came back he commonly came to my lodging. As for me, the
same day I came I sent to Alcidon, and told him by Alvian, that if he was
pleased, I would willingly come and see him* and as soon as I received his
answer, I went thither* I found him very ill, and his Chamber full of
Physicians and Chyrurgians, so as at that time. our talk was only of his
malady; unto which, he answered very little, and sighed much. The day after, I
took my time so conveniently as I found him almost all alone; and then after I
asked him how he did, he answered me with tears in his eyes, and in a feeble
and languishing tone: Why Madam, said he, do you ask me any questions
concerning that disease which you your self have caused? you must needs know
it better then I, or all my Physicians. Alcidon, answered I, I do indeed know
part of your disease, which is that of your mind; but I am altogether ignorant
of your corporal disease, and it is that which I am most afraid of: for, as
for the other, I am confident you will quickly recover. Ah Daphnide (said he
unto me, with a deep sigh) I see by this, that you have most care of that part
which least does merit it: for, if there be any thing in me which is
commendable, it is this soul, with which I have not only loved you, but even
adored you, with such a pure and entire affection, as I believe none but your
self could slight it as you do. This answer, replied I, argues your disease;
but have all the care you can for the cure of your body, and you will find
that the disease of your soul is not mortal; at least, if there be any spark
of ^^ason yet remaining in you. I do know, answered he, that the disease of my
soul is not mortal; for our Druids tell us, that the soul never dies, but is
immortal: but since the disease of my body, will not cure the disease of my
soul, I will further it with my own hands ere long, that I may no longer look
upon a person with the eyes of love, who has so little in her soul. I
perceive, replied I, that you are deeply wounded, and your greatest pain is in
your opinion: you think that the addresses of the Great Eurick have such an
influence upon me, that they will extinguish that affection which I have
promised unto you. Is not this your disease Alcidon? Do you not think you have
reason to complain against me, and your fortune, which was to love a person so
wavering and inconstant? To this he answered very faintly; Did you as well know
how to cure, as to find out my disease, I should confess you to be an
excellent good Physician. It is as easy to cure it, replied I, as to know it.
And to begin; tell me Alcidon, how came you to know, that I do not love you?
is it not by those answers which I have given unto the King, and by suffering
my self to be seen and courted by him? But lay aside your Passion a little,
and consider who King Eurick is; who I am; and in what times we live in: You
see Eurick is a great Prince, who is able to do what he will: against whom,
Cities, Provinces, nay whole Kingdoms are not able to resist, when he is
pleased to turn his Arms against them.

Do you think that love is not as strong a passion in him, as his ambition?
Can you believe that I am able to resist his force, more then so many millions
of persons? you know that I am his subject; that I dwell in the Country which
he has conquered, and in a time when he thinks all forfeited unto him: Can you
think me well advised, if I should disdain and reject him. Do you think he
would suffer me to live quietly in his Dominions, if I should treat him so,
especially knowing from your own mouth my love unto you? He would also accuse
You of all the harsh treatment that he received from Me. Is it possible your
passion should so blind your eyes, as not to see that the only remedy is this
which I have used? Into what a strange fury would his disdained love turn, if
it should besleighted? the name of hatred is too low; some new phrase which
signifies hatred, must be invented, before it can be rightly expressed: hatred,
anger, rage, fury, desire of revenge, nay tyranny, and cruelty, will not
signify his Disgust. Then Alcidon, consider, into what a condition I should
have brought you and my self also, if I had taken that course; the least you
could have expected, is banishment out of all his Dominions; and the least that
I could look for, is a thousand wrongs and affronts, which neither you nor I
could ever have endured without death or revenge: see into what extremities we
should have brought ourselves, and what contentments we may well hope for by
living thus; confess my counsel to be the best, since it secures us from all
danger, and makes a way for us to live happily together, and with more
contentment than ever we did. Alas, Madam, answered he, how easy a thing it is
to know, that all these reasons are but mere excuses, for did you intend as you
say, why did you conceal the matter from me? why did you not discover it at the
first, but made use of so many shifts and delusions, as may well be called
treachery, of which I had never known, unless I had made the discovery by a
mere accident? I shall in this confess the very truth, answered I, I thought
you to be so far from this opinion, that I thought it to no purpose to tell
you, but to use you as children are used who are sick, they sweeten the edges
of the Cup which holds the bitter medicine, and so tempt them to take it the
more easily, and by this means preserve their lives; assuring my self, that
you would not take it ill when you knew my intention, but would relish both the
benefit, and the medicine. Alas, said he unto me, with a deep sigh, a medicine
more bitter and difficult to take and endure, than the disease is of which you
would cure me. All sick people, answered I, when Medicines are presented unto
them, do say as much as you, but when they find the good effects, and recover
health, then they commend both the medicine and Physician, and reward them with
a thankful Fee: and I hope that ere long you will do the like.

He would have answered, but was prevented by a great company of Cavaliers, who
came to visit him; and presently after, I left him with them, not fully
satisfied in his mind, but so disposed, that my arguments began to work with
him* and because I desired his recovery above all things, I saw him again two
or three days after, and used such arguments, that he considering the state of
things, and that there was no remedy, he consented I should continue so with
Eurick: upon which, I made a promise unto him, that as he was the first I ever
loved, so should he be the last, and that I would love him until I was in my
Grave: That the affection which I bare unto Eurick, might be called Reason of
state, and that which I bare unto him, might be called Love of heart.

These, Reverend Father, were the remedies which I used to cure this sick man,
and they had such an operation upon him, that he began to recover, and rise out
of his bed; so as before I went from Avignion he was perfectly well, and so
contented that I should smile upon the King, that he himself would often come
with him, when he came to visit me. The truth is, I was put to use all my art
in carrying my self so swimingly, as to persuade the King that I was quite off
the hinges with Alcidon; and Alcidon had much a do to persuade him that he had
no design upon me; for the King knowing what good will had been betwixt us, he
could not believe that he could out of respect unto him, extinguish his flames
unto me: Also considering, that Alcidon was young and hansome, and at a right
age for love, he thought him so fit a subject for my love, as he could not
think I could quit Alcidon for him. Thus did he live long in jealous
suspicion; but the discreet carriage of Alcidon, and my coldness toward him,
did make him lose that opinion; and therefore thinking himself sole possessor
of my affection, he openly showed his love unto me; so as after my brother in
law by my mediation had obtained his desires, he sent for my Father and Mother
to come unto him, purposely as an excuse for his desires of having me near him.
Although they were both very old, yet ambition which always takes more root in
the souls of old people, then in young, did in obedience to his commands, move
them to leave their homes in hopes of preferment unto greater favors.

Now are both become Courtiers, and the King did not deceive their hopes, for
he loaded them with wealth and honors, which yet they did not long enjoy; for
whether it was that their age was arrived at that term, beyond which none can
pass: or whether it was that the Turmoiles and noise of the Court did abridge
their lives; yet so it was, that they both dyed presently after, as if they
came to the Court only to leave me in possession of it, for otherwise, I durst
not have come: but being there, I stayed there under excuse of taking order
about some domestique business which was left upon me, and afterward when the
Kings affection to me was published in hopes to be his wife, as he himself
divulged.

During all this time, few days passed without giving Alcidon an opportunity
of seeing me in private, and in which I did not spend two hours at the least
with him, which always seemed short unto me when we parted: He knows very
well that all this is true, and that many times in testimony of my good
affection to him, I have put both him and my self in very great danger of life
and honor. The truth is, I must needs commend both him and his discretion in
this, that what opportunities soever I gave him, and what favors soever I
showed unto him, he never offered to go beyond the limits of honesty: and
though I believe, he thought that I would not suffer him, yet I am much obliged
unto him, in that he never gave me any cause to repent of my kindness to him.

Living thus in the flow of contentment, though I was in continual fear lest
the King should come to know of this good will: and lest that should give him
occasion to change, as he had already done to the disadvantage of others; I
observed that there was many great Ladies, who to enjoy the favor and
possession of this Prince, whether it was out of a desire of the Glory to
command him, whom so many millions obeyed; or out of a spiring hopes to obtain
a Crown, I cannot tell; but they were very assiduous in sprucing themselves up
in hopes to be pleasing in the Kings eye. Amongst the rest, I observed two; the
one was called Clarinta, and the other Adelonda: As for Clarinta, I must needs
confess I never saw a fairer, nor more meritorious of love, having all the
amiable qualities that are desirable. In the first place, Envy it self could
not find the least tittle of a defect in her face; she had a hand, no eye ere
saw a fairer nor better proportioned; her stature was tall, straight and
slender, and the Majesty of her mind was such, as if she were borne purposely
to wear a Crown, as many of her Ancestors formerly had done: And to make her
Charms the more inevitable, the Universe had not a finer wit, the rays of
which shined in all her actions: but especially her speech was so infinitely
charming, that not to be taken with her, there was no other remedy, but not to
see and hear her. To be brief; I must confess, that were I a man, I had
devoted my self her adorer, what treatment soever had I found; and woman as I
was, I was never satisfied but when I saw her, and was with her, although so
many perfections and merits gave me sufficient cause to hate her, because of
the design which I had, and the pretension which I know she had.

As for Adelonda, truth is, she was fair, but not comparable to Clarinta;
neither in beauty nor merit; and moreover, being married, she could not have
the aspiring pretensions of the other so as though I was not troubled much to
see Eurick carrasse her, yet the other gave great gusts of suspicion; and
therefore I resolved to divert the mind of the King first from her, and
afterward at more leisure from Adelonda; especially when I saw that he went
sometimes unto her. And though at the first he feigned that he did visit her,
not out of love, but only honor; yet afterward his visits were ofter than
usual, and he hid them from me, as much as he could. I quickly observed this
my self besides those spies which I had continually about the Prince, did
presently advertise me of it. After I had well consulted with my self upon the
best remedy against this storm; at last, I bethought me of Alcidon, thinking
that if he would second me in it, my design might happily prosper. And because
the matter required present expedition, the first time I had an opportunity of
talking with him alone, I used this language.

Alcidon, I am unresolved whether or no I should impart a business unto you,
which troubles me more than I am able to express, fearing least the affection
which you bear unto me, should make you take my words otherwise then I desire:
and yet if you do but consider how I have lived with you for the time past,
and what evident testimonies I have given you of my good will, I am confident
you will think that it is only the necessity of our affairs which
constraines me to desire a thing of you, which I have hitherto delayed. You
know, how as my fortune is, all that look upon me, are enviers of my happiness;
so as I must stand upon my guard against all persons who would if they could
step into my room. The affection which you have promised unto me, and that
which I bear unto you, does strongly invite you to have an especial care of
me, but more of your own conservation: For though none knows of the great
league that is betwixt us; yet few persons but know that you have been ever
well affected to me. Now Maxims of state do say, that the fortune of the head
ought to be communicated to the Members; so as your ruin is most evident if
mine befall me. I lay these instances before your eyes, to the end you may not
think that strange which I am constrained to propound for our preservation. You
see how Clarinta, whether relying upon the grandeur of her parents, or building
her design upon the foundation of her beauty, I cannot tell, but you see how
she endeavors to get the good will of Eurick, and which is worse, her labor,
is not lost, for methinks that Prince begins to think her more amiable than I
wish he did; you know how fleeting and alterable his mind is, and how hitherto
none could make him fix.

If Clarinta should compass her design, consider how she would banish us from
Court, least she her self should fall into like confusion, wherein she has
brought us. Therefore before things proceed any further we must by way of
prevention use all the arts we can imagine for a shelter against this storm. To
think of using violence, and to force the wounded spirit of this Prince, would
show ignorance in those effects which love uses at the beginning to produce,
for nothing makes it greater than opposition, like unto a coal which the wind
makes blaze by blowing upon it. To think that dissimulation will mend the
matter, and in seeming not to know it, that time may produce some good remedy,
is very bad, and dangerous counsel: For although Love which finds no
opposition may by little and little lose it self, and become nothing, yet as
this case stands, the danger will be inevitable; for love does never lessen
till after fruition: Clarinta cannot be enjoyed till after the marriage; and
after marriage though Eurick should alter his affections, yet notwithstanding,
she would be Queen of the Visigots, and we by consequence subject unto her
will, and liable to all her violences. So that upon serious consideration, I
can find no better remedy against this menacing danger, than this which I
shall propose unto you, which once more I conjure you to take in a right sense,
and not upon any other surmises than as I intend it. You cannot be ignorant how
liberal the heavens has been unto you in the gifts of Nature, and in
accomplishing you every way above other men: you have had sufficient proofs of
it in all your attempts: I make no doubt but if you would cast your flaming eye
a little upon Clarinta she would presently melt at the charms of it, and
unless her heart be made of stone, she cannot avoid the amiable glances
thereof; If you would put this my request in execution, most certainly she
would love you, and presently reject Eurick and all his ambition; she would
wholly devote her self unto you, or else Eurick seeing his address, and her
entertainment of it, he will disdain her and retire: Thus shall we avoid a
misfortune which does much threaten us; if you can tell me any better
expedient, I beseech you propose it, that we may make choice of the best: I
have long deferred the making of this over-ture, fearing least you should have
an opinion, that I proposed it as a way to rid my self of you, though my
intention only is, that we may live together for the future in more
contentment and safety.

This was the language I used unto Alcidon, so plainly demonstrating my
intention unto him, as I could not imagine that he should be discontented at
it, or suspect that I had any other aim then what I told him: yet for all my
assurances of the contrary, and mauger all my reasons and arguments, he was
persuaded that my design in this motion was, to set him further from me, and
then to comply more freely with great Eurick. After a long musing silence, and
fixing his eyes upon the ground, he looked up, and with a smile which spoke his
discontent, he answered me; I wish, Madam, that I could serve you in this
according as you desire: and indeed I will, for your desire is to me a most
full command: but my heart tells me, that a great misfortune will take original
from this command; yet obey it I will, not out of any hopes I have in those
favors which you say the heavens have so liberally endowed me withal, but
only to let you see that I will obey you in all things as long as I live. Oh
Heavens! cannot the King be contented in the happiness of your love, but he
must needs make me entirely miserable? Oh Alcidon, have thou a heart that can
support these injuries of fortune? But why should I not endure them, since the
fair Daphnide commands it so: then turning toward me with abundance of
reverence, Yes, yes, Madam, said he unto me, I will do as you command me,
though it cost me a life, and all manner of contentment.

Upon this, he would have gone away, but I held him by the arm, and after a
second urging of my Arguments, and adding the best motives I had, I desired
him, that though our ruins would be inevitable if not prevented; yet if it
went so much against his mind, that he would not attempt it, for no misfortune
whatsoever would be more grievous unto me then his displeasure: but still if he
would allow of reason, he would plainly see that he was erroneous, in having
any such opinions, and that he did exceedingly offend me in entertaining them.
Madam, said he, If I do offend you in it, I will presently do my penance in
obeying your command; and so as I am confident you will pity me for it, but I
pray heaven your pity come not too late: yet I am so entirely submissive unto
whatsoever is your will, as I protest obedience unto whatsoever you shall
command; and do not believe that I will fail in it, further then my power
fails me: and though you do see me make a little do at your command, yet I
beseech you think that it proceeds from no other cause, then from my abundance
of affection, which cannot endure to hear of the least thought of any
separation from you; or that I am able to make any addresses of love unto any
whomsoever but your self, unless it be under a guise of dissimulation, and
that too with insufferable pain unto me. Alcidon, said I then unto him, I am
not now to begin the knowledge of your affection to me, nor of your merits, to
have my reciprocal love: but I pray you believe, that unless death do very
suddenly surprise me, I shall in some sort come out of your debt, and pay my
most due acknowledgements, for any thing I either have or shall receive from
you. And that you may more clearly see the end I aim at, I do promise you,
Alcidon, and swear by the great God who punishes all false Oaths, that all
the pains you shall employ in the Courtship of Clarinta, shall be put upon my
score and account, and that it shall be my self who will pay you your wages.
Methinkes that if Alcidon did love me, these expressions would content him; and
yet I perceive this enterprise goes against his heart, and he will attempt it,
only because he will not disobey me But so it was, that in observance of his
promise to me, he resolved upon it* and according to his best discretion, he
began this address, in which truly he found more difficulty then we imagined,
and much more had met with, if fortune had not removed some great impediments,
by an encounter which I shall relate unto you.

The History of the Artifice of Alcires.
IT is easy to be imagined, that Clarinta being such a captivating beauty, and
brought up in a Court full of generous young Gallants, was not long without
many servants: Amongst the rest, there was two who under an umbrage of
Consanguinity, had insinuated themselves highly into her favor: The one was
called Amintor, and the other Alcires, both of them indeed very valiant and
amiable Cavaliers. And who, if I be not mistaken, did imbarque themselves at
first into the affection of this beauty, under the notion of friendship; a
subtilty very ordinary and often used by love, the better to surprise those who
are of harder tempers to give it entertainment, Besides the kindred which was
between these two Gallants, their long education together, the conformity of
exercises unto which they addicted themselves, and their concurrency in age did
unite them in a strong league of friendship, and adopted them brothers in
matter of Arms, and to swear amity and assistance of each other: But love
which never admits of any companion, did make a fraction in this league of
friendship, as hereafter I shall relate unto you. Fire cannot be so hid, but
some smoke will appear, but I believe it is a matter more hard to cover love
long, especially from those who have any interest in it. And therefore Alcires
finding that Amintor did thrive in his addresses better then himself, and
seeing all just ways would not avail him, he resolved to have recourse unto
subtilty, thinking that, so he could overcome, all ways are allowable in Love.

It is usual amongst persons of any quality, to make choice of one amongst
their servants, whom they make a confident, and trust such a one more then any
other: Clarinta made choice of one amongst her maids, whom she loved very well,
and trusted with her most intimate secrets. Alcires, who knew what prevalence
such servants use to have with their Mistresses, had long before hand courted
the good will of this wench; and being a brave Gallant, and very liberal, he
got himself so far in her favor, as he could mould her into a model: so as
when Amintor and he met together at the fair Clarinta's, he would always
yield place unto him, and entertain this wench who stood a distance from them:
And when he saw Amintor look upon him, he would always have some secret to
whisper in her ear and smile, doing all he could to make Amintor enter into
some suspicion.

Amintor observing this, as the nature of lovers is, he presently suspected
that this familiarity betwixt them proceeded from some greater cause then from
that wench, and perhaps from some design which Alcires had upon the Mistress.
Amintor being a man of a free open heart, and one that could not long smother
his thoughts from a friend, one day meeting with a fit opportunity, he said
thus unto him: Good Alcires, what business of importance could you have with
Clarinta's maid, which made you so earnest with her as you seemed? Alcires
seeing his plot began to take, did at first answer him only with a smile* and
afterward, would you have me tell you? said he, you do so wholly take up the
Mistress when you are with her, as I being all alone, am forced to take up
with what you leave me, the maid: But heretofore, said Amintor, you were not
wont to do thus, and I am no more a taker up of the Mistress, then I was wont
to be; what new mood has of late possessed you? Alcires paused a while before
he answered, and then looked upon him with a subtle smile; at which Amintor
was more troubled then before, and seeing that he spoke not a word; Why, said
he, do you not give me an answer: have I any interest in your familiarity with
her? if I have, I pray let me know it, that I may share in your mirth. Alcires
then, setting a more serious face upon the matter: Amintor, said he unto him,
Although there was no ligaments of Consanguinitie us, yet as I am your friend,
you may easily believe, that I will impart any thing unto you; and the very
truth is, I had long since acquainted you with what you desire to know at this
time, had I not feared your disgust of it; and this consideration will still
stop my mouth, unless you assure me of the contrary. I will not give you that
assurance, said he, if you tell it with an intention of displeasing me; but if
you tell it with an intention that I may prevent any inconveniency, I shall
think it a very great obligation. If you will promise me, said Alcires, to use
it with discretion, and to take well the advertisement which I shall give you,
only with intention to bring you forth of a great error, I am very ready to
tell it you, as your kinsman, and as your friend: but otherwise I shall not;
for unless you make good use of it, it may do you much hurt. Then Amintor
making that promise unto him, Alcires went thus on: Know Amintor, that after a
long Courtship of the fair Clarinta, I prospered so well, that she is entirely
mine, aad I have enjoyed her. Oh Heavens! said Amintor, do you know what you
say? have you enjoyed Clarinta? Yes, yes, said Alcires, I have enjoyed her, and
therefore set your heart at rest; for she is so much mine, as very few nights
pass, but I am with her, and therefore you see I shun her company as much as I
can, purposely to deceive inquisitive eyes, as she desired me. Oh ye Gods, said
Amintor, and lifted up his hands; Oh heavens! will you not punish her? I assure
you, said Alcires, that I had a longing desire to acquaint you, because I was
extremely sorry to see you so deceived: but as I told you before, I much feared
that it would vex and displease you. Amintor upon this folded his Arms, and
stood silent a long time; at last said thus, I should be extremely angry with
you Alcires, for ravishing Clarinta from me, did I not know that when we both
courted Clarinta, we had no design of deceiving one another: for as those who
run for a prise, though many run, yet only one can win it: so I have no reason
to be angry with you for winning Clarinta from me; but rather, I have reason to
thank you for telling me, that I may run on no longer in an error: only one
thing wants, which would sum up my obligation, and which I conjure you unto;
which is, that you will satisfy my eyes in the truth of this, as well as you
have done my ears. I shall give you as good satisfaction as I can, answered
Alcires, but I am afraid it will only fester your wound the more, and be a
greater displeasure unto you. No, no, replied Amintor, it cannot more displease
me, but will rather encourage my resolution to do as I ought: Alcires seemed
to be a little puzzled at this question, but he foresaw it, and therefore
prepared himself for it from the first: Truly Amintor, said he, I know not
well how to satisfy the nice curiosity of your eye; for I have a good desire
to give full contentment, yet I am afraid it will be absinesse of difficulty to
get you into her Chamber, because it is not every night I go unto her, but
only when the opportunity falls hansomly out for it, which she cannot let me
know of, until every one be in bed: besides, I know how to get in, but you will
be seen. Nay, nay, said Amintor, I desire not to go so far, I had the same
consideration with my self; It will satisfy me, if I can but be with you, and
see when your self go into her Chamber. If that be enough, answered Alcires
presently, you shall be fully satisfied, and perhaps this very night if you
stay in my Chamber: then Amintor promising he would, they parted in this
resolution.

See, sage Adamas, unto what impostures we women are subject unto, by the
example of this wise and fair Lady, who though she was clearly innocent, yet
by the calumny of Alcires, was deemed as culpable by Amintor. He went and
waited with a longing impatiency, until the crafty Alcires came and called
him: Alcires in the interim hoping to complete his plot, which he had thought
was well begun, and having long before resolved upon this way; the time being
come when every one went to bed, he came to Amintor, and told him he would
conduct him to the promised place. The King who took great delight in bring
amongst Ladies, had lodged Clarinta, Adelonda, and me, in his Palace,
pretending it as a great honor unto us: Clarintas quarter was a ground Chamber
near the Court, and had only three or four steps unto it: from often the half
part of these little stairs, one might go into her Chamber several ways;
through one door, one came into a great Dining room, and a drawing room, out
of which was a passage through a little dark Gallery, which conducted into her
Closet by a back door; and here it was where Clarinta commonly lay; and if one
would go further without going into her Closet, they needed only to open a
door close by, through which they came into a great Chamber that conducted out
of the Palace, by a Gate very seldom frequented.

Alcires having long before hand observed these things, he conducted Amintor
into his little dark Gallery, where staying without any light when all were in
bed, he said uno him; you shall see Amintor, that as soon as I knock at the
Closet door, it will be opened unto me but I beseech you according to your
promise, return as soon as ever you see me entered in: then leaving him some
five or six paces from the door, he seemed to go unto it, but went unto the
other which passed into the great Chamber, and which being so near Clarintas
Closet, Amintor could not see the great difference; then after Alcires had
stayed a little while, he returned unto Amintor, and whispering him in his
ear, told him that they were come a little to late, for all were asleep, but
yet he heard them rising: but I beseech you o^ce more, said he, that when I am
entered, you may go away as softly us you can, and in the mean time stand a
little further off lest when the door opens and a Candle come, you should be
seen. Amintor did so, little dreaming of his subtilty, which was only to get
him further off the Closet door, lest he should see the difference of the
Doors: Alcires then going as gently as he could unto this door, he opened that
which passed into the great Chamber, and presently shut it after him; for the
spring lock was made after such a fashion, as it would shut of it self, and
Alcires having observing it, he came a little before, and had left it half
open. Amintor hearing it open, and shut presently again, did verily believe
that it was Clarinta's Closet door; and probably any other, besides him, might
have been deceived, the doors being so near each other, and the place so
dark* but for better assurance, he went and laid his ear to the door, and
hearkened if he could hear any talk, or any noise; but whether it was that the
noise which Alcires made, had wakned some in Clarinta'^ Chamber, or whether it
was his own imagination which made him think so; yet so it was, that he had
an opinion he heard a noise, which transported him into such a fury, as he was
ready to break the door open with his foot; but thinking upon the promise he
had passed unto Alcires, and the kindred between them: also considering into
what a confusion he should put all the house into, he had so much power over
himself as to forbear, and go away, but so vexed as he could not rest all the
night. On the other side, Alcires having played his part so well thus far, and
fearing lest Amintor should look for him at his Chamber, he would not go unto
it, nor unto any other place where any one might say the next day that they saw
him, and there passed all the night away in a grotto of the Garden, whereof he
had got the key: judge you into what a perplexity he put Amintor, and how
prudently wary a Lover ought to be in avoiding the artifices of a Rival. The
displeasure of this Cavalier was such, as not being willing to declare it unto
any, he was constrained to keep his bed, and murmur away the time against a
malady, without looking for any remedy; of which Clarinta being advertised by
common reports, and being ignorant of his disease, her love to him forced her
unto a visit; and she found him so full of sorrows, that he could hardly look
upon her, which she attributed unto the greatness of his malady: but going
another time to visit him, and still finding him more melancholy and cold then
at the first time, she could not choose but say thus unto him; Is your sickness
Amintor, so extreme, that it does not only make a change in your face, but in
your humor also, which is so much different from what it was wont to be, that
indeed you are not knowable? Ah Clarinta, answered he and sighed, how happy had
it been for me, if this alteration had come sooner? she stood astonished at
this answer; and when she would have continued discourse, his Physicians came
unto him, so as she durst not make any further replies; but after a little
longer stay, she went away, the worst satisfied person in the world: in the
mean time, Alcires to lose no time in the seconding so good a beginning, and
to comply with all occasions that presented themselves, he grew more kind and
familiar with Amintor then before, and kept himself so constantly near him, as
it was impossible for any to speak with him, and he not hear. For knowing very
well that his disease proceeded from despair principally, he was loath any
should undeceive him, or let him know the truth. But because he had not yet
accomplished his chief work, but thought it necessary that as he had deceived
Amintor, so to deceive Clarinta also, purposely to make her fly from him, as he
fled from her: one day therefore when he was with his companion alone in his
Chamber, he made a show as if he would write something which was of some
importance; but as if his fancy was not pleased with what he writ, he raced out
sometimes a word, and sometimes a whole line; and at last, as if he were angry
at the dullness of his genius, he tore the paper in pieces, and flung away the
Pen; at which Amintor smiling, and wondering at it, he asked him, why he did
so? I assure you, answered he, that my wits are off the hinges this day; This
morning the King commanded me to write a Letter of thanks unto a Lady, for
some favor which she had done him, and to carry it to him when I had done,
that he might transcribe it; but my genius is so dull to day, that I am not
able to write one significant syllable to the purpose. Amintor loving Alcires,
and knowing that Eurick used to employ his friends sometimes in such
Commissions, whom he thought had a happy faculty in penning; he would try
whether his malady would permit him to write this Letter for his friend, and
taking his scribled Paper out of his hand, the better to hint him upon the
subject, he writ these Lines.

Amintors Letter in the name of King Eurick.
IT is, Madam, by the grandeur of my affection, that you have measured the
favor which I have received from you: but by what rule can I square and equal
the thanks which I owe unto you for it? it must needs be by some rule that is
infinite, for such is my will to do you service, which I beseech you to
receive, as from a person who loves you above all the world, and thinks
himself the most obliged person in it.

Alcires did desire no more, but that Amintor should write such a Letter upon
this subject, not with intention to give it unto the King, as he pretended; but
to effect another design which he had plotted in himself; he much commended
therefore the acuteness of his fancy, and his facility of expression; then
thanked him for it, and put it in his pocket: after this he went away,
pretending to transcribe it in his Closet, where he was to do such things. By
fortune, the rude Copy which he first writ, remained upon the Table, which the
poor sick Amintor laid up in a little drawer where he was wont to put such
Papers, without any other design but that it might not be seen. Alcires in the
mean time, sealed the Letter, but gave it no superscription, and went to
Clarinta, taking a time when he thought to find her alone. Two days were
already expired, since the last time Clarinta did visit Amintor, and since she
returned so ill satisfied; and though she was very desirous to know why Amintor
should speak in that manner unto her; yet she durst not go again so soon,
lest she should thereby give occasion of scandal: And now seeing Alcires, also
knowing what familiarity there was betwixt them, and not being ignorant that
Alcires loved her as well as Amintor; yet she could not choose but ask him how
he did? Alcires, seeming as if he did not know that his friend loved her, did
answer her very coldly: I believe, Madam, he is very well; for he is of late so
jocond and merry, as it is not likely he will long keep his Chamber, since all
the Physicians say that the cause of his malady was excessive sorrow: I
believe, said Clarinta, that the Physicians said truly; but if he be so jocond
as you say, he is much changed since I saw him; for the last time I was with
him, he could scarcely open his mouth to give me a word. I know not, said
Alcires, when it was you saw him, but I am sure that never man looked with a
more contented face, then he did yesterday morning; and it was not without good
reason, if he who obtaines his desires has any reason to be contented, I
beseech you Alcires, said she presently, let me know what it is which causes
him so much contentment, that as his Cosen and friend, I may participate in
his joys. Madam, replied he, I should willingly obey your command, but that I
know very few women who can be secret; and should he ever come to know it, I
should quite lose his friendship, which I value at a very high and dear rate.
I must confess, said she, that I am a woman* but none of those who you say
cannot keep a secret, having ever made a constant profession not to speak of
any thing which I promise to conceal, as at this time I swear and protest I
will: Upon this promise, said he, I will tell it you, but upon a condition that
you shall not by your sovereign power over me, urge me to tell more then I am
willing to impart: I assure you (said she) that I will not: Know then, replied
Alcires, most craftily, that poor Amintor is secretly become desperately in
love with one of the prime and fairest Ladies in all the Court; and loving her
extreme passionately, he resolved to try how her pulse did beat in good will
toward him: but finding himself not not so happy as in his hopes, he resented
it so sadly, that he fell sick, and fell into such strange fits of melancholy,
as there are very few persons but that guess her to be the only cause of it.
Of which this fair one being advertised, was moved unto so much compassion as
to visit him: and since finding the grandeur of his affection, she gave him so
much cause of contentment, as before she did of despair Do not expect, Madam,
that I should tell you who it is, unless you can guess at her by the effects
which I shall relate: but so it is, that this very morning he has a writ a
Letter unto her, and made me his confident to carry it. Clarinta hearing this,
and being infinitely surprised at it, she could not choose but blush extremely;
and because she would not have Alcires see her, she held her Hankercher before
her face, and asked him who that kind Lady was, still keeping her Hankercher
close to her face: This is it Madam, said Alcires which you promised not to
urge me to reveal; but to give you full assurance of what I say, though the
Letter be sealed, yete will break it open and show it unto you, then he opened
it, and presented it unto her* She who knew it very well to be Amintors hand,
as soon as ever she cast her eye upon it, and therefore believed all that
Alcires said: she read it with a strange perturbation of spirit, which still
made her more and more desirous to know unto whom these thanks was directed.
Will you not tell me Alcires (said she unto him) unto whom this good language
was written? Madam, said he, I should have named her unto you at the first, had
I not taken so deep an oath to the contrary, as it is horror unto me to think
of breaking it: but let it suffice you that she is one of the fairest Ladies in
all the Court I believe it, said Clarinta, since you say it: but for all her
beauty, let me tell you that she is very kind: And since you will not tell me
her name, for want of other revenge she shall never have the contentment of
reading this Letter: Then out of spite, she tore it in several pieces. Alcires
seemed to be hugely angry at this and would have hindered her, although it was
the least of his cares: at last, seeing there was no remedy, he was pacified: I
will tell him, said he, that as I pulled my Handkercher out of my pocket it
fell into the Fire and was burned before I ever took notice of it, but if he
will write it, I will carry another.

Could he possibly use more subtilty to break of friendship and love on both
sides than he did? And it had such operation in them both, that Clarinta being
deceived by this Letter, and Amintor by his own eyes, they were both so ill
satisfied with each other, as they longed for an opportunity of meeting to
upbrald themselves mutually with infidelity: But upon better thoughts Clarinta
she resolved to see Amintor no more, and Amintor, he would not as he used, send
any more to visit her; and all this did but the more confirm them in those
opinions which Alcires had infused into them.

Now Reverend Father, be pleased to observe how easily Fortune can when she
will, facilitate the way unto her Favorites to bring about their designs. I
have insisted something long upon the subtilties of Alcires, and discontents of
Clarinta, that you may thereby the better understand, how Alcidon to effect my
request unto him, came to be in favor with Clarinta: for it is most certain,
that without this dissension he had very hardly compassed his design; but as
he was ever happy in all his attempts, so he was no less in this encounter.

Alcidon would very feign have palliated his infidelity with words; and though
I was silent when he spoke, and seemed the first time he came unto me to take
no notice of any thing; yet I know very well that he had other affections in
him than unto me; and without going any further, I was fully informed that
Thorismond being dead, and when Thierry his Brother assumed the Crown, then
did he see Clarinta in one of the Aquitane Cities, and loved her; and if I
would, perhaps I could tell him both the time and the place; but it will
suffice that his own soul knows this to be true. And because Alcidon seemed
to deny what she said; Nay, nay, Alcidon, said she, never deny the truth; you
know that what I say is true; And that a little after the accident of Damon and
Madonthe, Thorismond dying and Thierry succeding him, you followed him in his
Voyages, and at the seige of a City, you saw that Lady, in whose service you
had continued longer, if Thierry had not dyed almost as soon as he was King,
and being since much employed by the great Eurick in several enterprises, you
forgot Clarinta, as you did me. Come, come Alcidon be content^d; if I would, I
could relate, not only the beginning and progress of this affection; but
perhaps also so many particulars of your life, as will make you amazed.

I speak this, wise Adamas, not to upbraid his inconstancy; for I know that
his age would not then permit him to be more constant; but my drift is only to
let you understand that it was much less pains to him to make his affection
known unto that Lady. I do not deny, said Alcidon, and interrupted her, but
that at the time you mention, I did see Clarinta, and that her beauty did at
the first blush ravish me, by an unexpected encounter: For at the seige of a
Town, there being an intermission of Arms, I went up to the walls to fetch off
some Soldiers who lay a little too near: There I espied this Lady upon the
battlements, speaking unto one of our Army whom she knew: I must needs say,
that as soon as I saw her, I admired her, and that she had then like to cost
me my life, For the Truce being ended whilst I was gazing upon her, I took no
notice how Arrows flew about as thick as hailestones, which those of the Town
did shoot at me* I remember her dress was an emblem of death, for she was
then in mourning for her Father, so as the sight of her was almost mortal to
me in that kind: but I will never confess that this did ever make me fall in
my duty to you, and you do me most manifest injury if you say otherwise. We
will believe what you please, said Daphnide, but Alcidon, this time in which I
commanded you to speak unto her of Love was not the first time you saw her,
and therefore access was more easy unto you. Yet at the first, she knowing of
the passages betwixt us, because the King himself had told her, she did much
reject his address: For you must know, Reverend Father, that the great Eurick
desiring to insinuate himself into her favor, did let her understand, that all
the addresses which he made unto me, were only in the behalf of Alcidon, whom
he told her was passionately in love with me.

This Cavalier being very desirous to overcome this fair one he would not be
repulsed upon the first denial. But one day, when Eurick was walking upon the
banks of Rosne, and the better to pass away his time, had invited many Ladies,
amongst which Clarinta and I were; I observed how Alcidon accoasted her, and
how after he had talked a while with her, he gave a paper unto her, which she
took, and tore in pieces, and without reading it threw it into the water. I
could not then hear what he said unto her, or what she answered, because they
spoke very low, and I was very far off. But Alcidon told me since, that he
said thus unto her.

Do not think it strange Madam, I should in this place try whether I can
obtain that which I could not in another; I mean the honor and happiness of
your favor: For being always unfortunate, when I begged it upon the Land, I
will try whether the element of Water will prove more favorable unto me: And
because when I looked upon you, my soul was so wholly in my eyes, as my tongue
forgot its function, and I could not speak, therefore I present my hearts
humble desires unto you in this paper, which I would, but cannot speak: Upon
this, he presented it unto her, and she fearing that if she did refuse it, many
might take notice of it, she took it, and said thus unto him: You have reason
Alcidon to think that this element will be more favorable unto you than the
other, if it be true that every thing favors its like; for your inconstant
humor does not at all resemble the Earth, but the Water very much, which ebbs
and flows, and is never still. And to show you that I am of the same
judgment, I will bestow upon it this paper, in which you say you have writ
your desires, to the end it may grant your requests, assuring my self that you
being as inconstant as it, it will favor you, as much as possible it can: Upon
this she tore the paper all in pieces, and without reading it, threw it into
the Water. Oh Madam (said Alcidon to her, striving to stay her arm) can you
thus despise the most pure affection that ever was offered unto you? Are you
not contented, unjust beauty that you are, to burn my heart by the flames of
your eyes, but you must also drowned all my desires in this Water before you see
them? You do me wrong replied she, in accusing me of injustice, since I make
my self appear to be most equitable in detaining nothing of another, and in
rendering unto this element, which is so inconstant, the thoughts and
conceptions of the most inconstant heart in the whole Universe.

Whilst this Cavalier and Clarinta were thus talking, the King was discoursing
with me; yet I was not so attentive to his talk, but still I had an eye upon
Alcidon, assuring my self that Clarinta by some action or other would give me
some light of what he said; and to the end that the King should take notice of
them, I fixed my eyes upon them, and would not answer him: And he pulling me by
my arm, as if he would wake me out of a sleep: I am awake Sir, said I unto
him, pray see what I am observing; then I showed (...) Clarinta and Alcidon,
and as fortune was, just at the same time when the Cavalier gave her the
Letter, so as he saw how she tore it, and threw it into the water, of which I
was very glad, to the end he might take notice of this new Love; knowing very
well, that in such matters as these, you need only make them see a little, and
let jealousy alone to make up the rest.

Since this day, Alcidon followed his enterprise so close, that the fair
Clarinta thinking this would be a fit means to gain Eurick, and to make
Amintor lament the loss he had of her, she seemed to incline unto him; I say
seemed, for indeed she was then fuller of Ambition then Love; and therefore she
aimed at Eurickes love, and was vexed at Amintor, thinking he had left her for
some other; against which, she thought her Carrasse of Alcidon, might be very
profitable unto her: For she knew very well, that to reduce an Apostate Lover,
there was no better way then to make him jealous; and to get the affection of a
King, no better artifice, then first to get the favor of his favorites, as she
knew this Cavalier to be one, to the end that they by their good words in the
cure of their master, might induce him unto love: besides which, she had as she
thought, an example of this in me, whom she knew Alcidon favored; and she
thought that I was advanced unto the Kings favor by this means. Upon these
considerations therefore, she began to hearken unto this Cavalier, and to
confer some kind of trivial favors upon him, of which I was very glad,
thinking that when the King saw it, he would according to his humor, be
extremely offended at it: and when I could talk unto Alcidon in private, I
still solicited him to engraciate himself further into her favor, and to
court her as much as he could in the sight of King Eurick, which he did so
effectually, that not only the King, and Amintor, but almost all the Court
took notice of it, though neither Clarinta nor Alcidon, had at the first any
aims of making themselves loved in good earnest, but only as conducing to
their several designs, which could not be accomplished had they kept their
amities in secret; because all the effects which they hoped for, was to proceed
from the knowledge which others were to have of it.

They continued thus a long while, during which, Amintor still inveighed
against the affection which he bore unto Clarinta; his generous soul not being
able to consent, that his heart should ever love one, who as he thought had so
basely betrayed him. On the other side, she who thought that she had more
reason to hate him, for so unworthily casting her off, although she seemed not
to care a rush for it, yet her soul was so extremely nettled with spite at it,
as though she was not able to find revenge so soon as she desired, yet she
could not defend her self from extreme sadness, which in her face did
discover that discontent, which her heart would have concealed: And as a
snow-ball grows bigger for being rolled in the snow, so this her displeasure
being joined unto other vexations, whereof the life of man is very fertile,
together with some indisposition of her body, she was brought into such a
condition, as she was constrained to keep her bed, where all her pastime was to
sigh and lament.

Amintor was presently advertised of it; for by reason of their affinity, both
their domestiques had much familiarity together. But this was not enough to
appease the offended spirit of that Cavalier. It happened, that this fair one
growing every day worse and worse, he was told one night that she was so very
ill, as it was feared she would not live until the morning. Thus far he had
held out; but hearing talk of death, he thought it time to render himself,
and therefore without more delay, he dressed himself by force, and though
sick, yet crawling as well as he could to the lodging of Clarinta, he found her
in bed, yet not in such extremity as was reported. She who expected any visit
sooner then his, and who was much offended at him, could not endure his
presence without pain, thinking that he came to see her only to delude her
more; and therefore she rowsed up her self with a resolution to anger him as
much as she could: And in order to this, after some common discourse, she asked
him, what news at Court: For, said she, I keeping my bed as you see me, I know
nothing, but what out of pity is told me. Madam, said Amintor faintly, It is
so long since I was at Court, or in any place but my bed, as you must not ask
me for any news: I came hither only to see you, and am very glad to find you
in a better condition then I heard you were. Perhaps Amintor, answered she, you
were in hopes to find me dead: No, no, Sir, I will not yet put you to the
expenses of mourning for me: And to show that I am not, thanks be to God, in
such a bad condition, I will manifest to you, that my thoughts are quite
another way; then putting her hand under her Pillow, she pulled out a Paper
which she gave him; Here Amintor, read these Lines which were writ upon those
Flowers which you see at my Beds head; and if you cannot guess at the Author, I
will tell you who it is: Before I ever read them, said he, I am most confident
that I can name him; then opening the Paper, he began to read it.

When Amintor had read two or three lines, he paused a while: Well Sir, said
Clarinta unto him, what do you think upon them? Hitherto, answered he, I find
nothing which makes me alter my opinion, except the hand, which indeed is not
the same I thought it; but perhaps it was writ purposely to delude those that
read it. I am sure, said Clarinta, that you are mistaken; but read on, and
perhaps you will know better, and your opinion will be quite confused. Then
Amintor began to read again; and when he had read a line or two further; I
cannot tell, said he, whether that which follows may alter my opinion; but
thus far I am still in the same mind, and then he began to read out the rest.
When he had done, he mused, and was much gravelled to imagine who should be the
Author: for at first he thought upon Alcires, but the conclusion put him quite
out of that conceit: Clarinta seeing he could not hit upon it, and seeming to
make great esteem of the Paper, she laid it in the place where it lay, and then
turning toward him; I perceive Amintor, said she, that you cannot find out the
Author; but, I assure you, he is a person who merits as good fortune as any
about the Court, I must confess, Madam, answered he, that these last lines do
put me out of my knowledge, unless to disguise himself the more, he faigns to
be less favored then he is. Why Amintor, replied Clarinta presently, do you
think me so liberal of my favors, as to confer them upon any one? this
might serve such a one unto whom you gave so many fine thanks; but if you have
not forgotten the way of my living with you, when you made addresses to me, you
may know that I am not a person from whom any favors are to be expected. Oh
Madam, answered he, and sighed, I have but too good a memory of what you
mention; But alas, my own eyes are such certain witnesses, that I cannot give
them the lie. Clarinta was very ill; but when she heard him say so, she turned
in a fury toward him; what can your eyes witness, said she, to my
disadvantage? and because out of his respect unto her, he did not answer, she
continued; Nay, nay, Amintor, Never offer by your silence, to cover your ill
will unto me under a veil of respect, content your self with your past
treasons, and do o^ excuse them, by accusing me of your fault. Neither your
eyes, nor the eyes of all men living, can testify any thing to my
disadvantage; if they do, they are unjust, and I shall look upon Amintor as
the most perfidious and ungrateful man alive. If ever I failed, Madam, said he,
in my honourr of fidelity which I owe unto her who accuses me of perfidy and
ingratitude, I pray heavens this minute may be the last of my life. But if you
please, Madam, to give me leave, I will answer to the question you asked me.
Yes, yes, said she in an angry manner, tell all you know; but be sure there be
more truth in your words, then in your oaths. Madam, answered he, your command
is needless, and this is truth it self, that I would not desire life, but to
have the honor of doing you that faithful service which I have vowed: I do
impatiently desire to hear the end of your discourse, said Clarinta, that
afterward I may make you confess your self to be the most ungrateful person
in the whole Universe; I shall prove it by your own hand, unless you have the
impudence to deny it: Amintor, after a while of silence, answered thus; If you
will please, Madam, to tell me what moves you to use such bitter terms and
injuries against me, I will satisfy your desire with a Protestation, that if I
do lie in any thing I say, I will pray unto the Gods most severely to punish
me, before I stir from this place: but I most humbly beseech you, to let your
mind be at rest, until I have spoke a little in my own defense. When you
showed me the Paper, I believed the happy Alcires to be the Author of it; but
when I found in the last lines how he complained against those Flowers, for
enjoying the happiness he desired, and of which he was deprived; I presently
altered my opinion, unless it was so expressed purposely to disguise the
matter; for I have seen him enter into your Chamber so easily, that he could
have no cause to wish for more permission than he had. Oh ye Gods, Cried out
Clarinta, did you ever see Alcires come into my Chamber in the night? Madam,
answered he, I have seen him go in, and in the night; may the Gods never
prosper me, if these eyes of mine have not seen him do so: would any have
thought, replied she, that Amintors soul should ever have been so wicked, as
to justify a thing so false, and to call the Gods for a witness of it? I am
sorry, Madam, replied he, that in my observance of your Commands, I should be
forced to a discourse, which troubles you so much; but most assuredly I have
seen him go in, and so sure I am of it, that unless I had entered in with him,
I could not be more sure. This, replied Clarinta, is the most impudent villainy
that ever was invented: And oh ye ^ods that use to protect the innocent, take
my cause into your hands; make my innocence appear, and punish these
impostors; afterward addressing her self to the Cavalier: it is not a time,
said she, to dissemble any longer; I will have this villainy searched to the
bottom, and the mask of it taken quite off: Life is not dearer to me than my
honor, and death shall be evermore welcome to me than this Calamny and
therefore Amintor speak clearly, and tell me when, and how you saw Alcires
come into my Chamber, otherwise I shall believe that all you say is only your
own invention Madam, answered he, Alcires is the man who unhoodwinkt these eyes
of mine, who when I would not believe what he said, did let me see the
extraordinary favors you did him, and brought me to your very Chamber door to
see him enter, and upon this, he related unto her the whole story of the
business, both what he had seen, and what had passed between Alcires and him.

This poor Lady was so astonished at this cunning Calumny, as she stood along
time like a Statue, and was not able to open her mouth, at last recollecting
her self, and rousing up her spirits; is it possible (said she) that any
humane wit should be so wicked, as you tell me Alcires is against me, who never
gave him any cause? Can the clemency of the gods be so great toward men, as
not to chastise such a damned villainy? In the first place, Amintor, I do
swear and protest unto you, that there is nothing in the world more false than
this imposture, and may the gods pour out the highest of their indignation
upon me, if there be any part of this calumny true: in the second place, I
conjure you by our former friendship, and by all those promises of good will
unto me which you have vowed unto me, also by the obligation of consanguinity
betwixt us, that you search out this wickedness to the very bottom, so as
there may not remain in you or any that hears of it, the least doubt of the
truth: And upon this condition and no other, I will pardon the offense you have
done me in believing such false and wicked things of me; And though I could
clear the matter before you go from hence; yet I desire for my satisfaction,
that as Alcires and your own eyes have deceived you, so I would have it them
that should undeceive you, you say that he used to come very often unto me:
Look, but look well into the matter, and I am confident you will find he went
some whither else. And yet, not to leave you long in so bad an opinion of me, I
will let you see that Alcires does not manage his villainy with judgment; You
told me that when he brought you to my Chamber door, was the same day that
Eurick condescended unto Daphnides petition concerning a Prisoner; I do very
well remember by a remarkable accident, that it was the fifteenth day of the
Month of Mars: Now I would gladly have you hear the testimony of all the
servants in my house, before I speak with them, to the end you may know that
God may permit innocence to be slandered, but not oppressed; And it must be
confessed, that in this God has showed a particular protection, since for more
than eight days before, and more then eight days after the fifteenth day of
the month of Mars, I did not lie in my Chamber, but in my Mothers, unto whom I
went every night, by reason of some indisposition which she had.

If it be so, said Amintor, than the villainy is clearly discovered: You shall
immediately see (said she) that so it is: upon this, she called for all her
maids, and in the presence of the Cavalier asked them, how long it was since
the last time she lay in her Mothers Chamber, and how many nights she lay
there; all of them testified the very same she had told, and did make the
imposture of Alcires so plain that Amintor was put out of all doubt.

This Cavalier hearing the concurrent Testimonies of so many, he was so
convinced of the truth, as he thought it absolutely impossible to be otherwise.
And when all the women were retired, he said thus unto Clarinta; I must needs
confess Madam, that the imposture of Alcires is very great, and contains two
grand offenses; the one against you, and the other against me; and because I am
sensible as well of my own error as his wickedness; I most humbly beg a pardon
for retaining such an ill opinion of you, beseeching you to consider how
cunningly this villainy has been carried, and how true love is always apt to
be jealous: When I have the happiness to obtain this pardon, I shall then
call Alcires to a strickt account for staining the reputation of Clarinta and
for most perfidiously betraying his friend Amintor by his subtle impostures.
Clarinta who still preserved some sparks of good will unto this Cavalier,
seeing him so submissively upon his knees before her, she kindly took him up,
and causing him to fit by her, with tears in her eyes said thus unto him.
Although Amintor, the subtle villainy of Alcires be very great and much beyond
your crime; yet let me tell you that you are far from being blameless in
believing such things of me, having long before received so many testimonies
from me of the contrary: But when I consider your affection to me, I will lay
the whole load upon jealousy, which is ordinary with those that love, and so
pardon the fault upon two conditions; the one is, that since Alcires uses to
come so often unto me in the night, you to follow him, so as you may know
whither he goes, for certainly he comes not hither; in thus doing, perhaps you
will discover some other haunts, which I shall be glad to know, that I may pay
him in his own Coin, and do him the displeasure he intended to do me: The
other condition is, that you promise me not to resent this offense too deeply
against him; I know your courage is apt to call him unto satisfaction, and this
I must not suffer, because if you do you will offend me more than he has; it
would reflect much upon me, you would thereby make all the Court know that
which is now only known to your self; you know that a Calumny will blast a
woman's reputation and scandals will spread themselves like air into all ears.
Madam (said Amintor) this last command goes something hardly down; and I
beseech you consider, that though it be not in revenge of you, yet I am obliged
to let this impostor know, that I am not a person that can put up such
injuries: for reputation is so chairy and cautelous, as though none know any
thing, yet if we our selves can suffer any indignity without resentment, we are
not worthy to be called persons of honor; for a conscience is as good as a
thousand Witnesses. Amintor, said she unto him, I would have you do this for
my sake, and to consider with your selfs, that every Cavalier is obliged at
much unto the honor of Ladies as their own; you know Amintor that you ought to
have a care of mine, and ought not to do any thing which may give it the least
stain. I will not instance by way of obligation upon you, the affection which
heretofore you have promised unto me; for I now see, that the power I have over
you is but very little. Madam, said Amintor, and interrupted her, to show you
that you never had more power over me than now you have, I will do as you
command me, but still upon condition that you tell me, what the perfidie is
whereof you accuse me, and whether it arise from such another original as that
of Alcires. I do believe, said she, that it is possible to be so, yet your own
hand writing which I know very well, will hardly let me think you innocent.
Then causing a box to be brought unto her, she took out the torn paper which
Alcires gave unto her, and giving one piece unto him, can you deny, said she,
that this is your writing? Amintor having looked well upon it; I must confess,
Madam, said he, that this is my hand: Then said Clarinta, when all the pieces
are put together, they will show you the perfidie whereof I accuse you; for I
confess the Letter was brought whole unto my hands; but when I saw my self so
basely betrayed by a person from whom I least expected it, very spite and anger
made me tear it thus in pieces. Amintor was so much amazed as he could not
answer; but she raising her self up in her bed, and spreading the pieces of
paper upon it, she joined them so together as she read unto him, that thanks
which he gave for the extraordinary favor which he had received. Amintor
calling to memory the time when he writ this Letter, and by what cunning he was
induced to write it: I must needs confess Madam said he, that Alcires is the
most subtle, crafty and pernicious man that ever breathed; it is true I writ this
Letter, and gave it unto him only as a Copy, and without any seal; and so he
told the whole story and truth of the business: but, said he, I do remember
one thing which remains in my hands, and which confirms, as you said, that God
never fails the innocent, for that will show you the truth of what I tell you
and therefore by your permission, I will send for a little box, in which I put
the paper that Alcires writ, when he entreated me to indite that Letter for
him, according as he said, the King had commanded him. By which you may plainly
see, that what I did was only at his instance, and without any concernment of
my own. Clarinta had a great desire to sift out the matter, and therefore
desired him to send for this paper which being presently brought did clearly
testify the truth of what Amintor said, which gave such full satisfaction unto
Clarinta (for she knew the hand of Alcires very well) as giving her hand unto
Amintor, I ask your pardon wronged Amintor, said she, for the ill opinion
which I entertained of you protesting for the future, that no Artifice
whatsoever, shall make me mistrust your affection. Madam, answered Amintor, and
kissed her hand, I shall place this day in my Calender, as the happiest I ever
lived, since it has discovered two things which would never have come to light
by any other means: The one is, That it has let me know how my own eyes have
betrayed me: And the other is, That it has let you see, how I am still your
most faithful servant. These two happy encounter^ do so much t^nsport me
beyond my self, as I must confess I have not words to express my thanks
unto you, and my good fortune; He would have continued, but he was prevented by
the Kings coming in, who hearing how ill this Lady was, he came to visit her,
almost all alone, lest too much company should disquiet her: and he came in
upon such a sudden, as he surprised the pieces of the Letter which were upon
the bed: As for Amintor, he had presently put his up; but Clarinta was so
surprised at the Kings sudden coming, and finding that Cavalier with her, as
she forgot to put hers up: And the King spying them, laid his hand upon them so
quickly, as she could not hinder him, and all her prayers were fruitless to
make him render it back again. But on the contrary, lapping it up very
carefully in his Hankercher; and after he had talked with her a while, he
retired himself to his Closet, where putting the pieces of Paper into order,
and saw the thanks which Amintor gave her, (for he knew it to be his hand)
imagine you in what a case he was. All Lovers are commonly jealous, but
especially this King; whether it was that he loved with great violence, or
whether his generous courage could not brook a Rival; yet so it was, that
this jealousy moved him to such a hatred of this fair and wise Lady, as he did
not content himself with telling this unto me, and showing the Letter unto
Amintor; but he blazed it abroad, and made such a public matter of it, as all
the Court had talk enough upon that subject.

Observe, sage Father, how this pettish god, whom they call Love, is pleased to
make himself merry with such as serve him, I desired to break off the amity
betwixt Eurick and Clarinta; and in order thereunto, I made use of Alcidons
love by way of gratification; and to the end I should not be beholding to my
own prudence, did raise up Alcires, who with a Letter which fell into the hands
of the King, did do the work for me. The drift of Alcires, was to take off a
servant from Clarinta, and by his subtilty make her hate his Rival, and quite
contrary, the disatisfaction of Clarinta was the cause of her receiving Alcidon
into her favor: And so Alcires, in lieu of one Rival, found two. Alcidon on
the other side, who gave that Paper of Verses unto Clarinta, in hopes to
obtain her favor, he gave occasion to Amintor to be reconciled unto her, and
to find out the knavery of Alcires. Alcires he got Amintor to write a Letter,
with intention to make the fair Clarinta hate him by it; and this Letter quite
contrary to his aim, did make himself out of favor: But the worst of all is,
and which is the cause of my coming into this Country: I who aiming to make
Clarinta lose a servant, I gave her one, and deprived my self of him, to
resign him unto her; for Alcidon since that time, has so wholly devoted
himself unto her, that he is mine only in his tongue, and hers in his heart.
Oh the giddy and unconstant humors of men! There is nothing in the world will
make them and their fleeting minds firm and stable.

But this Cavalier, having begun a Courtship of this Lady, by my commands, he
continued it according to his will; so as she may very well boast, that as I
took one servant from her, she has also ravished another from me, and with this
advantage, that she loved Eurick only out of ambition: but I did love Alcidon
really and cordially: At the first, I did not resent the loss, because I
received extreme contentment in being, delivered from that inquietude which
Clarinta kept me in, till of late. But I did not long enjoy this rest, for it
seems the heaven is pleased I should tread always upon thorns; for I had no
sooner enjoyed this happy victory, but I was forced to take up Arms against a
new enemy.

For Eurick being extremely offended at Clarinta, but for some great and
prudent considerations, durst not make show of his resentments, he resolved to
make her repent it, and through envy would chastife her, by conferring those
favors on another, which might have been hers, could she have been contented
to be only his. And in order to this resolution, whereas before time his
affection was divided amongst three; now his intention was, to place it all, at
least all his favors, upon one only Mistress.

I told you before, that when I desired Alcidon to make addresses unto
Clarinta, there was another Lady whose name was Adelonde, unto whom the King
had made some signs of goodwill. And now, in revenge upon Clarinta, he devotes
himself, and all his favorable addresses unto her; she is now become his, and
the Courts only Idol; so as though her extraction was much inferior unto
Clarinta's or mine, yet such was his design to prefer her before us both; so
as I must confess I was two or three times in a mind to break off quite with
him: But Alcidon, by his wise advice, still dissuaded me, and in this made me
overcome both my self, the King, and her: so as I may well say, that I do owe
all the contentments which I have since received, unto him, and his patience.

Adelonde being now raised above all her hopes, she still raised her
pretensions unto a higher pitch and though all the world did think the favors
which this great Prince conferred upon her, to be very high, yet still her
desires were higher. These insatible desires prompted her to make use of all
ways, just or unjust, easy or hard, to accomplish them. And therefore, when
some of her friends advised her to use some charms, thereby to retain the
wavering mind of this Prince, she hearkened unto them; Whereupon, she gave
unto the Great Eurick, a bracelet of her hair, the lockets whereof were Lions,
set with stones: These Lions had such a quality, as whosoever wore them about
their arms, they could love none but her. Perhaps it may not be strange, that
two such puissant passions, as Love and Ambition, should tempt her unto this
Crime, had she rested here, and not add^d a second, which indeed proceeded
merely for want of judgment: But she thinking that he would preserve them as
precious Gemmes, and would wear them continually; or at least, to make him do
so, and not give them unto another: she told him, that a very learned Druid,
who had a very particular care of him and his Crown, knowing what wicked
attempts would be against his life and state, had made those Lions under such
Constellations, and with such Art, that as long as he wore them about his Arm,
no enterprise of his enemies should have any effect against him; but as often
as any enterprise was attempted to his prejudice, these Lions would advertise
him, by scratching his Arm gently with their Claws.

But see, sage Father, how the Heavens do mock at those, who would compass
their designs by unlawful means. That which this Lady had taken so much
pains about, to augment and preserve the affection of this great Prince unto
her, was it which made her entirely lose it: For as soon as ever he perceived
that she made use of Charms and Magic, he believed that all the inclinations
he had unto her, proceeded from some Devils, and not from her beauty, or any
merit in her: and from that time did so extremely abominate her, as he would
never come near her; and when he spoke of her, he called her his Medea, and
his Witch.

I have related this passage, Father, not as any way relating unto Alcidon, or
me; but only that you may better know the humor and spirit of the Great
Eurick, and by that to judge whether I had not great reason to preserve his
good will unto me, by all manner of prudent subtilty that possibly I could; and
whether I had not as good reason to impose this task upon Alcidor.

Now, whatsoever I shall relate unto you more concerning this great Prince,
will not at all concern the difference betwixt us; for since that time, we
lived together as we did before. The King he returned unto me with all manner
of submission and sorrow, for offending a person whom formerly he had loved.
Alcidon, he ^loved and courted Clarinta before my face, never rendering unto me
those offices which the affection I had unto him merited, and which by the law
of Fidelity he was bound to pay, had there been any spark of that virtue in
him. As for me, I bore it out as well as I could, and preserved the Kings
favors to me with all possible solicitations: so as I could with truth say,
that amongst all my cares, none was so great, as to see this fickle Alcidon was
not ashamed to serve that Lady in my very presence, after so many promises of
affection and fidelity to me.

But, Father, why should I talk any more upon this subject, since I now must
tell you of this great Princes death; and tell it I must, since, I owe it unto
the memory of the greatest and most generous Prince that ever reigned in Gaul.
Now therefore, sage Adamas, that the great Eurick finding the affection of
Clarinta fickle, and that of Adelonda, full of foul practices, he thought mine
only worthy of himself; for he saw me keep such a retired decorum in all my
ways, as he could not suspect I loved any but himself, unless it was
Alcidon, of whom he could not entertain the least spark of jealousy. But
calling all my actions into his memory, and how modestly I had tolerated his
various affections and departures, and also how sweetly I received him at his
return, he came at length to that resolution which I desired, and declared
that he would marry me, and make me Queen, as well of his Dominions, as of his
heart and affections. Judge, Reverend Father, whether I and all my relations
had not good reason to deem our selves fully happy: But alas, I find too well,
that the heavens are not pleased to let a high happiness last long: For when I
was arrived at the very top of all my hopes, happiness and desires; when I had
made all preparations of joy for the marriage, a cursed Assasinate being
inspired with a hellish spirit, did ravish him from me by a fatal blow which
he traitorously gave him to the heart.

Oh Heavens! Can you suffer such a horrid villainy to pass unpunished? must not
such a Monster as this be made an eternal example of horror to affright all
men, if there be any so unnaturally wicked from such a cursed act? You may
imagine in what a sad condition I was, when this fatal news was brought unto
me by the outcryes of the People: For my part I am not able to tell you how I
took it; for I did not only lose the use of my reason, but also of my senses
for a long time; for every one took me for dead. Oh happy had I been if it had
been to; then should I have buried all my sorrows, and all my contentments
would have followed him to his Grave. Upon these words such a flood of tears
flowed in her eyes, as she was not able to speak of a long time; which gave a
sufficient testimony how deeply she resented her loss; but at last, the wind
of several sighs drying up the rain of her eyes, she assumed her spirit, and
continued thus.

Pardon I beseech you Father, the weakness of a woman, for such an occasion
might perhaps excuse a spirit of a higher temper than mine, did any resent them
so near the heart as I do. But to pass over such sad remembrances which
cannot choose but be tedious unto you, and to fall into the discourse where I
digressed, give me leave to tell you, that whilst I was in the midst of
laments, and could not find any rest or consolation to my sad soul; this
cruel Alcidon, to laden me with more misery, did presently quit Clarinta and
comes impudently upon me, as if he had never let any other have a share in his
affection. I must confess I was much amazed to see him without blush talk to
me with as much confidence as formerly; but I was more offended at him for
coming upon me so impudently, and never offering to ask pardon for the injury
he had done me, and to talk to me of love and affection: For nothing under the
Sun offends a woman more than after profession of Love to quit her and love
another. I permitted his discourse a long while and gave no answer: I believe
he attributed my silence unto the resentments of my loss; but seeing he
continued on, my patience could hold out no longer, and therefore I was
constrained to say thus unto him. Alcidon let me entreat you to hold your
peace, such talk as this, is not now seasonable betwixt us; though heretofore
it was permitted, yet now, since both you and I are much changed from what we
were, it is not allowable. He would have answered, but I gave him the stop, and
said unto him; Yes, yes, Alcidon, both you and I are very much altered: I in
this, because heretofore I thought you had loved only Daphaide, and am now
assured of the contrary: And you in this, that heretofore you devoted your
self wholly unto me, and now the fair Clarinta only possesses you, and may
she long and peacably enjoy her Conquest: I promise you Alcidon that I am so
far from envying her happiness, as I will pray the Heavens it may many ages
continue: Alcidon was mightily amazed at this, and would gladly have justified
himself; but I was so certain of the truth, as all his talk did rather move
anger than love. Afterward (for at that time he saw me so angry, as he could
not put in a word) I left him in as angry a mood as I my self was: But the
next morning he surprised me before I was dressed; and by chance Carlis* and
Stiliana were then both in my Chamber, and they being very familiar with us,
neither he nor I concealed any thing from them: He fell down upon his knees,
protested that he would never rise, unless I would promise him to hear his
Justification patiently, and then he would let me dispose of his life and
happiness as I pleased. I, who was sufficiently loaded with misfortunes
already, had no mind to add unto them those displeasures which I foresaw, but
persisted in my resolution not to hear him, knowing very well, that good wits
never want good words to persuade what they will, especially Alcidon, whose
eloquence I was not ignorant of, but was afraid he would incline me to embrace
that service, which had so basely quitted me for another.

At last Carlis and Stiliana hearing our contest, they told me, that such a
Judge was unjust as would condemn a Party before he heard him. Most true, my
dear friends, said I unto them; but did you know as well as I, what charms his
words have whom you would have me hear, you would advise me to stop my ears,
rather than lend them unto the enchantments of such a Charmer as Serpents do:
But since you will have it so, let me oblige you to assist me; which both
promising they would, he rose up, and knew so well how to plead his Cause, as
they were both absolutely for him. And because I knew very well that all his
eloquence was but oyled words and gilded language to gloze over his excuses,
without any reality of truth, I so far resisted him, as it was resolved upon
by both sides to have recourse unto the Oracle, which returned us this answer.
Upon a day, you will see
A Fountain, in Forest
Called Loves Verity
Will set your hearts at rest.


This Answer, so obscure and full of ambiguity, none of us knowing the Country,
nor ever so much as heard of the Fountain of Loves Verity, it did much perplex
us: And Alcidon to show what a great desire he had that the truth of his
affection might appear, he made such enquiry of this Fountain, as hearing of
it, he could not rest until a Voyage unto it was resolved upon. I must needs
confess, Father, his importunity did much move me unto it; but one of the
chief reasons which induced me thereunto was my desire of being for a while
absent from the place where I had so many sad Memorandums of my loss, hoping
that being far off them, my sorrows would by degrees lessen: And unto this
may be added my curiosity of seeing whether that Country, and those who dwelt
in it were so happy as reports went; for wonders were told me of the places
beauty, of the sweetness of the Air, the abundance of Rivers, full of Fish,
and the pleasantness of the Fields. But when I heard of the delectable lives
of the Shepherds and Shepherdesses of Loire, of Furant, of Argent, of Serane,
but especially of Lignon, I was ravished, and wondered that all Europe did not
go and inhabit in Forests. To know therefore whether all this fame was true, I
conseuted unto this journey: and because we heard that all those who are there
were habited in the garbs of shepherds and shepherdesses, also desiring not to
be known, we disguised our selves in this habit, as well for the reasons
aforesaid, as because we needed not any great train of Servants to attend us.

Thus reverend Father, you have heard, not only a relation of our lives past,
and of our difference, but also the cause of our Voyage, and of our disguise;
we want nothing now but your prudent direction, how we may see and have
addresses unto this Fountain, and your sapient Counsel unto such as stand in
such need of it as we do.

Thus ended the fair Daphnide, leaving Adamas in a great opinion of her
Prudence and Wit; and because he perceived she expected his answer, he replied
thus. Who is it Madam, that has heard of great Euricke, and amongst the
wonders of his History does not admire the puissance that the beauty of
Daphnide had over his soul? I believe that Ganges and Thyle have heard so much
discourse of it, as that your names are as well known here as in Gaul.

But I must confess that presence which usually does diminish the opinion
which fame gives of absent persons, does make it appear that the opinion which
I had of Daphnides beauty and merit was much below what I find to be true: I
thank the Gods for honoring my house so much as to see you in it, and should
be much more thankful if I can be any way serviceable unto you* For, and it is
without any flattery, I was never more affected unto the service of Amasis or
Galathea, then I am unto yours, and I shall esteem ery day happy that gives me
any opportunity to show the truth of this: Let also this my devotion extend it
self very far unto Alcidon: And as to the Question which you ask me
concerning the Oracle, I can at present say no more but this; that it is
impossible you should receive that benefit which the Oracle promises from the
Fountain, unless some strange and even miraculous things do come to pass:
For Madam, this Fountain as I told you before is indeed in this Country, and
not far from this house, but Clideman and Gug^man procured a learned Druide
to inchant it, and set such guards upon it, as it is a thing impossible to
attempt the seeing it by force: For it is perpetually watched by most fierce
Animals; and such Charms cannot be uncharmed, but by the death of the most
faithful Male and Female Lovers in the world. What kind of Animals are they?
(said Alcidon): for to testify that I do, and ever did love this fairest
Lady, I am very willing to venture one.

If you can but find, said the Druid, and smiled, the most faithful female,
as it seems you have the male, perhaps you may with the loss of your life,
let the fair Daphnide see this Fountain: but I believe you will hardly find
a companion; and since it is so, I advise you to leave off your design, and
take my word that no humane wit or power can bring it to pass, but this way I
have told you: It is guarded by two of the greatest and most fierce Lions that
ever any eye beheld, and two of the keenest Unicorns, which guard the entrance
into this Fountain, whilst the Lions go about to look for their prey: As for
the Unicornes they fed like Horses and Deer, upon Grass and Leaves. But it is
most strange, that these Lions, though of a fierce and keen nature, yet never
offer any harm, but unto such as offer to enter into this Fountain; in so
much as the little Children fear them no more then they do little Dogs; but
if any do approach near a hedge which grows about the Fountain, you shall
see the Lions grin with their teeth, and their eyes sparkle; and also the
Unicornes prepare themselves in such a fearful posture, as is most terrible to
behold: There is no thoughts therefore of any force; but in as much as I know
that the Great Tautates is no liar, and that by his Oracle he answers you, that
one day you shall see the Fountain of Loves Verity; It is very fit methinks,
that we discourse a little upon this subject; for Oracles are never false, but
the interpretation of them does very often deceive us, because sometimes they
must be understood according to the natural word, and sometimes Allegorically:
To come therefore to the interpretation of this: If one should take it
literally, and according to the word, it might be thought that the Enchantment
of this Fountain will quickly end, were it not for one word, which is, One
day, which methinkes intimates as much, as if it were a thing far off: for so
we use to say, when we wish for any thing which we long for: And upon this
consideration I ground, that the Oracle is perhaps to be understood in another
manner, which I thus interpret.

The proper quality of the Fountain of Loves Verity, is to see whether or no
one do truly love. Then any thing that can let us see the same thing, may upon
the same reason be said in that particular, to be the Fountain of Loves
Verity; that is, working the same effects which this Fountain does; Now Time,
Perseverance and Services, may do the same. It follows therefore, that Time,
Services, and Perseverance, is this Fountain of which we speak. And that which
induces me unto this opinion is this word, One day; For that denotes length of
time, which gives occasions of doing service, and gives leisure to show
perseverance. To tell you why the Oracle did Allegorically speak rather of
Forest in particular, then of the Roman Province, since time may work the
same effects there, as well as here, is a thing which I cannot do: and yet
since there cannot be any thing superfluous or defective in the Oracles which
are the words of the Gods; I think this Country was made choice of for two
respects: The one, because you should be far from your own Country, where
your quality, your business, your kindred, friends and acquaintance, may so
disturb you, that the least part of this time which should be employed to
bring you unto this knowledge, is employed as the Oracle commands; whereas
being here free and without any constraint, the whole time is your own. The
other respect is, and I believe the greater; that heaven would have you
sojourne a while in this Country, to the end that by observing the daily
conversation of these sincere shepherds and shepheardesses, you may the better
come to know the sincerity of that affection which Alcidon professes to you,
or else his falsity and dissimulation: For whiteness will best appear, when
black is opposed to it. I conclude therefore, by one way or other, that the
Oracle is to be understood thus: That you ought to stay for a time in this
Country, as well to see whether the enchantment will cease, as to try the truth
of Alcidons affection; of which in the interim, I am in very great hopes; for
it is to be thought, that the Gods like good Physicians, would never apply
remedies to diseases that are incurable; I mean, that had they known the anger
of Daphnide would be perpetual they would never have propounded this remedy.

Thus the sage Druid ended his discourse, and because Daphnide offered to be
going away, Adamas did the like; but Alcidon stayed him, beseeching him to make
Daphnide sit down again, that he might in his presence import a business of
some importance. Then the Druid staying her almost by force, Alcidon began thus.

He, Revernd Father, who said he was cut with the sharpest sword, and being
asked what sword, answered, that it was the sword of Calumny, does thereby
intimate unto our understandings, that there is nothing which deeper pierces
the heart and the soul then it, and which I have very often found to be most
true in my self, since it so pleased my fortune and this fair one to have it
so; and the wounds smart now worse then ever, since she continues her ill
opinion of me, and blames me in the presence of so reverend a person as the
wise Adamas. And because I know that a charge untrue may pass for truth, and
because I had rather die any way then in her ill opinion, I must humbly beseech
you, Madam, give me leave to speak the truth in my own defense. Then because
the Druid said it was but reason, he continued thus:

THis fair one, sage Father, has taken the pains to relate unto you the whole
series of my miserable fortune, and I must needs say, she has done it truly,
unless in her two dogmaticall opinions: I must needs say, she is like unto
those who look through colored Glass, whose eyes see all things to be of the
Isame color: for her mind being possessed either with Love or Ambition, she
judges of all things according to those Glasses; so as every thing which she
sees in me, seems unto her to be as she sees them in her self: Alas fairest
Daphnide, it grieves me to upbraid you thus, and I wish I could make it false
with the loss of my blood and life: but you have testified that it is but, too
true, both by effects and by words: when you commanded me with so many
protestations of affection, to court Clarinta, what promises did you then make
me? you have heard them, grave Father; for she has rightly related them, and
the reasons also why she thought it requisite, I should address my self unto
Clarinta: I shall only hint at them, to bring them into your memory; If I be
ruined in the opinion of Eurick, said she, then are you the same, because our
two fortunes are conjunct and inseparable. But what kind of ruin was it she
menaced and meant? only forsooth, to be banished with her from the Court: If
Clarinta, said she, do prosper in her designs, she will banish us both the
Court. Why, Daphnide? Is it such an intolerable torment, and an utter ruin,
to spend the rest of your days with one that loves you beyond all expression?
Oh that your language had been as full of truth as cunning, and that Love had
as much power over you as Ambition? then would you never have enjoyed me to
court her, who would have ruined nothing in us but this idol Ambition. Nay on
the contrary, she would with abundance of thanks, have been glad of the
occasion of our living together. But I beseech you reverend Sir, observe what a
fine gilded Pill she gave me to swallow, and what a delicate cover she had to
excuse her setting me away from her. You cannot be ignorant, said she, how
liberal both Heaven and Nature has been unto you in all excellent endowments;
If you do court Clarinta, she will be taken with them, which Eurick seeing, he
will scorn her; and she will give her Self, and all her Ambition unto you.

Oh Love, will thou not revenge such poisoning flattery? She would persuade me,
that Clarinta would quit that same Ambition, which causes Daphnide to reject
me, and give me unto another: but why should any imagine, she should desire my
separation from her? Is it out of any secret hatred she bears unto me? or
because she thinks me troublesome? No, no, none of these; but for the same
reason she her self alleged. Eurick, said she, seeing you Court her, and she
entertaining you, he will slight her and retire. This, this, Father, was the
maine end all her candid eloquence did aim at: Thus would she have shifted me
off unto Clarinta. Well, she commanded it, and I was all obedience; but have I
not great reason to complain, since she is not satisfied with thus deceiving
me; but she must also at my return, accuse me of her own fault? I swear unto
you, said she, that all the pains you take in Courting her, shall be put upon
my account, and I will be your paymaster. Is it possible Daphnide, you should
speak this, and now blame me for Courting Clarinta? Nay have I not rather
reason to require my wages for doing your commands as near as I could? But
perhaps you say, that when Eurick was once out of fancy, I should have
desisted, and as the occasion varies, so ought the enterprise. I must confess,
Madam, that when the cause cease, the effects must cease also: but since the
King was diverted from his affection unto Clarinta, by reason of my address,
so had presently desisted, why might it not well be imagined, that then his
affection would have returned: would not this last fault have been worse then
the first? But fairest Daphnide, if you had a mind that I should have desisted,
why did not you command me. Could you imagine that you had not an absolute
power over me, having had formerly so many signal testimonies of it. But here
comes in a very fine accusation; As soon as ever Eurick was dead (says she)
he presently leaves his Clarinta, and never so much as asking any pardon, comes
to me as impudently, as if he had never devoted himself unto another. What is
it thou ever can do, unfortunate Alcidon, to give a testimony of thy
fidelity, since that which in all reason is the greatest evidence of it, is
taken for the contrary? I courted Clarinta by command and against my will:
only as Daphnide said, through reason of state, and to the end Eurick should
disgust her: Now can it be thought strange that when Euricke is dead during
this counterfeit Courtship, I should desist from it? had I not done so, it
might be thought I had some other design: But said she, you ought to have
asked me pardon before you returned to your wonted way of conversation with me;
Good God, must I in lieu of payment and recompense ask pardon? And why Madam I
beseech you, should I ask it? Perhaps you will answer, because you have
courted Clarinta; but I beseech you, did not you command it, and command it
with a promise of recompense? but perhaps you will say again, that I continued
longer in the service than I should have done; but why Madam, should I not have
continued longer since I expected your commands for it.

May not this same Question be as well asked a Gally-slave, whose will depends
upon another? If one should ask him why he is so long in that Captivity? Has
he not more reason to ask, why do they keep me in it so long? You tell me,
you are sure I loved Clarinta, and endeavored for particular favors: But
suppose I did, and that this affection did displease you, can you blame any but
your self for it; why did you command me to serve her? Is it not an evident
demonstration, that ambition is more predominate in you than love, and must you
not needs confess, that since I obeyed your command so willingly, Love was
more strong in me than your Ambition? For all those reasons which you alleged
unto me to shift me off from you, was only in favor of this cursed ambition:
And if the love which you say I bore unto Clarinta was so potent in me, why did
I reject her service as soon as possibly I could? Why else should I quit her
as soon as ever Euricke was dead? Had Clarinta treated me worse than usual,
had she made any new choice, or had there been any bad understanding betwixt
her and me, then there had been some cause to suspect my return unto you; but
since she never gave me the least shadow of any cause, what can you think
could make me leave her, but only the inviolable affection which I still
preserved for you? But Father, perhaps you may ask why the fair Daphnide, who
had formerly made so much affection unto me appear both before, and during
Euricks love, even to the hazard of our Fortune and reputation, should after
the death of this Prince, thus change her mind unto me, and give me no
entertainment: For it is not likely, that a Lady so admirably accomplished
every way, and so full of judgment, should alter her humor without some
occasion. No Sir, but will you see her reason for it out of her own words: It Is
true, that at first she loved that Prince only out of ambition, and as she
calls it Reason of State; but is it strange a finger should be burned if It be
held in the flame; nay it were rather a miracle if it should not, for that were
against Nature.

The great Eurick was doubtelesse a Prince so fully adorned with all
accomplished blandishments that allure Love, as the fair one was by degrees
caught before she was aware, and in lieu of loving him, as she said, she loved
him as he deserved: And to make this truth evident, do but observe how sadly
she has resented his loss even unto this day; who can doubt but that these are
effects and certain consequents of a most real and ardent affection? I cannot
relate the several sad resentments she has expressed of his death, for they
will but open my wounds the wider: But I am sure, sage Adamas, that you would
judge them full of extreme affection, and the bad entertainment which I have
received from her proceeds from no other cause, but from her love unto this
Prince; and as an umbrage of it she would set that fault upon my score, which
she should do upon the great Euricks and my misfortunes. But fairest Daphnide,
though you have loved him, not as you say, in reason of State, but in good
earnest, yet against whom do you think you have offended? Not against one who
has not love enough to pardon, to forget, my even to quite erasse the offense;
but it against Alcidon, who you know adores you; he is ready to give you his
life, and his soul, and not to upbraid you with the injury. Why do you not
put forth your hand unto him, and by that action of kindness signify, that
none but the great Eurick could ever interpose betwixt you and him. It is no
mean glory unto me, that she whom I love should have been adored by the
greatest Prince in the whole Universe; nor will it be a little satisfaction
unto the Ghost of that great Prince, you shorld love Alcidon, who indeed did
yield unto him in Fortune, but excelled him in love.

If I say any thing which your own soul knows not to be most true, tax me
with a lie; but if you cannot deny this truth, why will you toment me any
longer, and make me do penance for a fault which you your self have
committed? Upon this, Alcidon rising from his seat, and falling down upon his
knees before the fair Daphnide, and taking her hand: I do vow and swear,
said he, by this fair hand which is only able to ravish away my heart, that I
did never in my life render any homage, but unto her that owes it, and that it
is she alone who has and ever shall have the sole power over me. Dispose of me
and of my fortune as you please, and let Daphnide be as cruel as she can, yet
still shall Alcidon love her for ever. And you reverend Father, said he, and
addressed himself to the Druid; The great Tautates has established you a
Judge in this Country, why do you not condemn this Fair one to give me that
heart which she has so often given me, and taken away again? If she do
accuse me for loving any else, is it possible she should know better than I my
self? She affirms I love Clarinta, I swear and protest the contrary, why
should she think to be believed more than I? She sees only my outward
actions, but I know the intentions of my heart; perhaps she will say that I
would deceive her, and that she would not deceive me; but why should I deceive
her; for if I did not love her, I would not care for her affection; and if I
do love her, can she think that he who loves one will deceive her.

Thus spoke Alcidon, adding much other discourse, and many arguments which
Daphnide could not handsomely answer. At last, the Druide spoke; Methinkes
Madam, said he, that the Oracle is cleared, and that now is the time to compose
this difference. I would to God, said she, that it could be so composed, as
that quietness of mind might be restored unto Alcidon and me, which we have
taken from each other; Are you pleased Madam, said Adamas, that I should be
your Judge: If Alcidon will consent unto it, answered she, and if he will stand
unto what you shall doom, I will never be against any thing which you shall
deem fit. I do protest by all that is sacred, said Alcidon, that there is
nothing in the World which can keep me from loving and adoring you; and I
swear that I will so far stand unto the doom of wise Adamas, that if he do
sentence the contrary, I will so far obey it, as that you shall never be
troubled with me; and if I fail in this Oath, may all the Elements he my
confusion. Then Adamas, with the gravity of a reverend old Judge, began in a
Majesticall manner to speak thus: Tell me, Madam, said he, did you ever love
Alcidon well. Above my life, answered she; and do you now hate him, replied
he: I hate his levity and inconstancy, said she, but not him: But say he be not
inconstant replied he, nor ever loved any but you, would you then love him
still, and be sorry for charging him wrongfully? Doubtless I should, said she:
Can you charge him with any other inconstancy, continued the Druid, but in this
business of Clarinta? Is not that enough, answered Daphnide? But when he first
went about to serve Clarinta, said Adamas, was it not by your command, and did
he not undertake it against his will? I must needs confess, said she, that in
this I was unwise, and he adissembler; But had he made a retreat, said Adamas,
and Eurick closed with Clarinta again, would you not then have blamed Alcidon
for disobeying your Commandment? I think I should, answered she. Hear then
your dooms oh Daphnide and Alcidon, said the Druid; The great Tautates who made
the whole world by Love, and by Love preserves it, would not only have things
insensible, should be united and linked together by the bonds of Love, but
things also sensible and rational.

From hence it is that he has given unto the insensible Elements, qualities
which link them together by sympathy: Unto Animals he has given love and
desire to perpetuate their kind, and unto men reason, which teaches them to
love God in his Creatures, and the Creatures in God. Now this Reason tells us
that whatsoever is amiable ought to be loved, according to the degrees of its
goodness; and so, whatsoever is most amiable, and has most goodness, ought to
be most loved. Yet in as much, as we are not obliged unto this love, until
this goodness be known unto us; it follows by consequence, that themore any
good is known, the more it ought to be loved: But since God has made every
thing by love, and that the end of every thing is always most perfect, we may
easily judge, that since all good things have Love for their end, Love is the
best of all things. Now knowing this goodness of love, we are obliged by the
Laws of Reason to esteem it above all things; and the more it is known, the
more we ought to esteem it. The Oracle which was given you, for composing your
difference, makes good what I say: For it is this, Upon a day, you will see
A Fountain, in Forest
Called Loves Verity
Will set your hearts at rest.


That is, In Forest you shall come to know, that you do really love each
other, and then your hearts will be set at rest: for the Great Tautates, who
gave this Oracle unto you, knowing how religiously you paid what was due both
unto Him and Reason, did also know that as soon as you were assured of each
others affection, you would presently think it most reasonable, to love
according to your merits: And therefore Daphnide, since you see, that Alcidon
does love you, (for why should he so passionately desire your love, if he did
not truly love you?) And you Alcidon, since you see the love of Daphnide
toward you (for why should she be je^lous of you and Clarinta, unless her
love were the Mother of her jealousy?) I do Ordain, or rather, the Great
Tautates commands you, that forgetting all past passages, and without any stay
to see any other Fountain of Loves Verity, you do presently unite your
affections, and revive your ancient loves of each other; make it appear that
none loves better then you two, for none have more cause, since heaven has
infused it into both.

Upon this, Adamas took both their hands, and joining them together, said, May
this union be happy, and eternal. It is a thing impossible to express the
joys of Alcidon, or the thanks he gave unto the great Druid, but especially
unto Daphnide: Stiliana, and Carlis, and Hermantes, rejoyed for Alcidons sake;
for where ever he came, he had the happiness to get all men's love.

Thus was the dispute betwixt Daphnide and Alcidon, composed by the prudence of
the sage Adamas. Although he conceived the meaning of the Oracle to be, That
their jealousies of each other should vanish by a sight of this Fountain; yet
like a person of deep apprehension, judging by their discourse, that he should
do them a better office, and more suitable to their will in reconciling them,
he thought it fit to expound the Oracle in this manner, and also to advise
them, to stay in this Country a while, to the end that if any suspicions yet
remained in them, and that if it pleased the Heavens to uncharme the Fountain,
they might there be perfectly cured of their malady.

Whilst these things passed thus in the presence of Adamas, the shepherds and
shepheardesses, who were in the Great Chamber with Leonide and Alexis, as soon
as the Collation was ended, did fall into their several discourses where they
left. But Alexis and Astrea, for fear of being interrupted, did take each
other by the arm, and walked to the other end of the Chamber, which made well
for Alexis, for by moving, she might the better hide the alterations in her
face and better excuse her disorderd language. Astrea who was no less
transported, to see such a lively resemblance of Celadon, and not able to hide
her contentment, was very glad of this convenience to talk with Alexis
walking, as well because none could hear them, as because she might with more
freedom express the affection which she bore unto her. After therefore they
had walked two or three turns, neither of them knowing well how to begin
discourse; Astrea broke silence thus,

I shall as long as I live, Madam, observe this day as a Holiday, in memory of
the high favor which I have received on it in making me so happy as to know
you, and to express my most zealous desires of doing you service. The sacred
Missletoe which it has pleased the Great Tautates to make grow in our Hamlet
this year, was an Omen of the happiness which we were to receive by your
coming into this place; showing thereby, that the liberal hand of the great
God, where it bestows one favor, does accompany it with many others. The
happiness and good fortune of it, said Alexis, is all on my side, in coming
hither at such a season, when this sacred Missletoe is to be gathered; for that
is the cause of my happiness in seeing you, it being one of my greatest
desires. How, Madam? said Astrea, do you think it your happiness in wronging
us all, and me in particular, by thinking we came hither only because of this
sacred Missletoe? I will think, said Alexis, as you please; but give me leave
to say, that it is at this time the cause of my happiness in seeing you; and
though I had not been here, yet you would have come to invite Adamas unto the
sacrifice of Thanks. I do most seriously protest, Madam, said Astrea, that it
is your self only which invited me to come hither; for I never in my life had
a more earnest desire of any thing, than of seeing of you; beseeching you to
believe, that it is not my humor to meddle with any public matters, but I
leave them unto our wiser Pastors, who takes the cure of them according to
their custom, and according as they think most advantageous for this Country.
I should be very proud of my self, said Alexis, if I could be persuaded of it;
for it is a thing which I most wish, and prise above any happiness that ever
happened unto me. But pray tell me, fair shepherdess, in what place is this
Missletoe found? If the Sun would permit you to look out of the window,
answered Astrea, I should let you see it from hence. I believe, said Alexis,
that the Mountain does interpose, if it be on that side; but if it do not, I
believe the heat of the day being over, we may enjoy the pleasant prospect of
all that plain: upon this, opening the Window, and both looking out; after
they had looked about every way, Astrea began thus.

Do you see, Madam, the couse of that River which runs by the walls of Boen,
as if it did cut that plain almost in the middle, and empties it self into the
lap of Loire; that is the fatal and defamed River Lignon, upon which you may
perceive our Hamlet to be seated, opposite unto mount Verdan, which is a little
Mountain in form of a pointed Diamond, in the middle of the plain, and which
looks like a Rock in the Sea. If you please to cast your eye a little upon the
left hand, you may see the Temple of the good Goddess, a little round Temple
under which runs an arm of that detestable Lignon, and a little beyond that,
following still that ^ravinous River, you may epsy a little wood, and it is
there where the happy Oak grows which this year bears the sacred Missletoe. And
truly it is worthy observance, That, there, is the form of a Temple made out of
little Trees, pleached together most artificially. None knows who made it, nor
the time when it was so contrived; and yet it is so well ordered and contrived,
as whosoever considers it, must needs confess him that did it a most admirable
Artist. We almost all think, it was the work either of Pan, or Egipan, or some
other Rural God; for such exquisite inventions when the Author is unknown, are
commonly attributed unto some Deity. Alexis feemed to wonder at all this, and
the better to color her dissimulation, seemed as if she could not see this
place which was showed unto her, though none knew it better then her self but
Astrea pulling her a little nearer, and holding out her hand to direct Alexis
unto the place where this Temple was: Do you see, Madam (said she unto her)
that wood which grows almost close upon the bank of the River? Cast your eye
a little upon the left hand and you may see a little Meadow greener then all
the rest; the reason of it is, because the grass of it is not soyled, nor any
Cattle driven into it, because it has been long since dedicated unto some
Deity, as well as that little tuft of Trees which joins upon it. Now this
little sacred Meadow, seems as if it had been consecrated as the Court
belonging unto that artificial Temple, which stands amongst those Trees I
think, said Alexis, that I do see the place you mean, and I do observe one
tree much higher then all the rest: Right, right, said Astrea, that is the Tree
which supports the Temple, and to its fame, has this year the happiness to
bear the sacred Missletoe, for which we ought to offer a sacrifice of Thanks.
Had I so much wit as to relate all the rarities there, and the Art wherewith it
is made, I am sure you would admire them: Amongst the rest, I observed the
Picture of the Goodesse Astrea (for the Temple is dedicated unto her) much
different from those by which they use to represent her unto us: She is
pourtrayed in the habit of a shepherdess, with a sheep-hook in her hand, and
her flock about her: and which is most admirable, all that see it, say, that
she resembles me. Alexis could not choose but blush at this, and it was happy
for her none stood by; for it had been an easy matter to see what alterations
were in her face, and fearing lest if Astrea should accidently look toward
her, she should perceive it, she leaned upon her elbow in the window, and
covered her face with her hand, and to give her no leisure to look upon her I
believe fair Shepherdess, said she, that he who drew the picture of that
Goddess in that manner, did it with much reason: For Astrea, who is the
goddess of Justice, cannot be better represented, than by a shepherdess with
her sheephooke and her flock; both to show that in places most retired and
rural, the innocent and weak are by her kept in safety, and to show that by
the means of Justice, peaee and abundance is maintained amongst men, which are
two things which cannot be better represented, than by shepherdeses and their
flocks. But I do think him much more judicious in giving your, fair face unto
that goddess: For how could he possibly make choice of a better being to
represent a Diety, than in taking for his pattern, the most perfect that ever
Nature showed unto us? And such is your beauty, that I believe if that goddess
Astrea would look upon this picture she will be prouder of your features, than
of her own and had rather be such a one as you are on the Earth than as her
self is in Heaven.

These Praises, said Astrea and blushed, are much too high for one so full of
misfortunes as my self; especially coming from you Madam, unto whom they are
much more due; but such as I am. I am most devoutly yours, so as you may
dispose of me as you please, and speak of me likewise: For I profess, that I
have no higher ambition than to merit the title of your most devoted servant.
Fair shepherdess (said Alexis) would you have me believe what you say? Madam
(said Astrea presently, I do most earnestly beg it, and conjure you unto it by
what you love most; This conjuration, said Alexis, besides your own merit, has
a great prevalence and must needs be granted; and therefore according to your
conjuration, I do promise henceforward to believe all your expressions of good
will unto me, upon a condition you will never repent of it I and in exchange, I
do oblige my self by my fidelity never to deny any thing which you shall ask
in the name of her whom I love best. Madam, replied Astrea, may I never live a
minute longer than I devote my self, my services, and my life unto your
service. Fair Shepherdess, said Alexis, I do oblige my self in the
strongest ties of fidelity to entertain your amity with all my heart, and will
never whilst I live fail in any duty of a perfect friend.

Who is able to express the contentments both of Astrea and Alexis? since both
loved each other better than themselves, but that Astrea feared her friends
would never consent unto her following this dear Druide unto all places
wheresoever she went, and but that Alexis had an opinion she should lose all
these precious favors if she were known, it had been impossible for them to
hide the excess of their satisfactions.

On the other side, Paris who kept himself always next Diana, and who could
not sufficieetly express his high affection to her, being vexed to see so many
people about him who harkned unto what he said, and desiring to entertain them
with something else, he desired Hylas to take a Lute and sing. Hylas all
complacence, did take the Lute, and consented unto the desires of Paris, upon
condition every one would do the same, particularly Silvander. This shepherd,
who had an eye always upon Diana, knowing that she loved very well to hear him
sing, he took the Lute from Hylas, and sung a song, the subject of which was,
that though he loved extremely, yet he thought he loved not enough.

When Silvander had done, he kissed the Lute and presented it unto Corilas, who
willingly accepted of it, and fixing his eye upon Stella, he began to sing upon
this subject, that Now his Love was extinguished, it could never kindle again.
Stella hearing how Corilas twitted her, she offered to take the Lute, intending
to pay him back the money which he lent, but the shepherd doubting it he would
not let her have it: saying it was unreasonable that Hylas who first had it,
should be so long without it: Be not offended shepherdess, said Corilas unto
Stella, if I do give it unto Hylas, since if your design was to express any
thing of your humor, I assure my self he will satisfy you, if he sing
according to the dictates of his heart: You are very kind Corilas, said Hylas
unto him, to pay your debts with another money; at the least, Stella and I
have this advantage, that being both of one opinion, we have met with one that
will allow of our humors, but yours is so bad, that you are singular in your
Sect, then taking the Lute, and not staying for the answer of Corilas, he sung
in commendation of inconstancy.

Phillis, who could not endure that Hylas should pass without an answer,
Methinks Silvander, said she, that both you and I are obliged to answer this
inconstant shepherd, since he is so imp^^ as to speak thus in the presence of
our Mistress; for every right Lover when he hears any thing in disadvantage
of fidelity is obliged to defend that virtue. Most true, my Enemy, answered
Silvander, and I should have done it ere now, but that I was afraid my
indiscretion would have been blamed for interrupting, yet if Hylas will repeat
the same Verses he sung, I will try whether I can answer them Verse by Verse;
^^haps said Hylas, it will not please the Company to repeat what I have sung
already; but, Silvander, that you may be without excuse, I pray answer these: I
am ready, said Silvander; for being sure I have reason on my side, I am very
courageous to undertake the Combat. As the generous Lion, said Hylas,
contemnes all creatures that are his inferiors in strength; so do I you,
Silvander, being so much my inferior both in wit, and goodness of cause; thus
they began to sing, one for, and the other against inconstancy.

Whilst these two shepherds were thus singing, and the rest of the Company
attentively hearing, Paris closed with this opportunity, and got nearer Diana;
was there ever such a pleasant humor (said he unto her in a low voice) as this
of Hylas? I think (answered the shepherdess) that he is like all other men,
only he is a little more free and open in uttering his thoughts than others
are. Oh Madam, replied Paris, have you such a bad opinion of men, and think
them all as inconstant as he is? I have no bad opinion of men, (answered Diana,
and smiled) for I cannot think it an error in them to do as Hylas does,
since it is a thing very natural, to love where we like best: And since most
shepherds do love only to please themselves, have I not good cause to think
that where they find most pleasure, there they will without any difficulty
love, imitating in this our sheep, who use not to eat always of the same
grass, nor feed only in one Pasture, but loving variety, graze sometimes in
the Meadows, other times upon Hills, and sometimes again under Shades: The
shepherdess as she spoke this, smiled, to show she spoke against her
conscience, and Paris taking notice of it, answered thus: Hylas would be well
confirmed in his opinion, fairest shepherdess, if he heard you; but I believe
if you were condemned to follow this opinion, it would be somewhat difficult to
make you consent unto it. I must confess, answered she, that what you say is
true, for shepherdesses are not subject unto the same Laws which shepherds are;
for they do not only fly inconstancy, but constancy also. This is too
enigmaticall for me to understand, replied Paris, unless Fairest you be
pleased to make a cleerer interpretation. My meaning is, answered she, that the
Virgins of this Country, do not only fly inconstancy, because they are not of
a wavering temper; but they fly constancy also, because they will not be
obliged unto any kind of amity, loving and esteeming all that deserve it, not
with love and passion, but according to duty and reason.

I do believe it, answered Paris faintly: but for some interest which I may
have I wish that one amongst them were of another humor. Generous Paris,
replied Diana, you must needs pardon their dull capacities: for being brought
up, in rural and half salvage places, you cannot expect they should differ
much from such as they most converse with: you see what an influence education
has upon people, and above reason: for I believe there is very few in all this
company, who would not more contentedly choose to live with their flocks upon
the banks of Lignon, and under their homely roofes, than in princely Palaces,
and civilized Cities. I beseech you fairest shepherdess said Paris, what
opinion are you off, what do you think of this house? and how suits it with
your liking? I should show my self of a very weak judgment, answered Diana,
if I did not think it very noble, and very pleasant. Much more noble and
pleasant would it be, said Paris, if what is now in it, would be always in it.
It Is true, replied Diana, for so many fair shepherdesses and hansome shepherds,
do not only make the company very great, but also the place very pleasant. It
is not the quantity, replied Paris, but the quality of persons which makes me
esteem it: I am of your belief, said she; for most company does commonly most
of all make one weary of it; but they must be of a very bad humor that do
dislike the company which is here. I perceive, replied Paris, that you will not
understand my meaning; for it is not of all the company which I speak, but it
is, fairest shepherdess of one only, without which one, all the rest of the
company would be wearisome unto me. Diana faigning not to understand him: That
one (said she very coldly) is much obliged to you; though all the rest are but
very little beholding; there is none in the company, answered Paris, ought to
think much at me for it, since without that one my life it self is unpleasing
to me; after this, both standin^ (...) and Paris seeing Diana, did not reply, I
did never in my life (said he, and smiled) see a shepherdess less inquisitive
than Diana; Why do you not ask me who this one is? because said she, it would
be indiscretion in me; for I am sure that if you had a mind to name her, you
would, and if you desired to conceal her, I were very indiscreet if I did
importune you* She, added Paris, unto whom I have given my heart, may very well
know all the secrets of it, nor ought I to conceal them, Men in giving such
gifts answered Diana d^ often give and take again: If you mean by me, replied
Paris, pardon me fairest Diana, if I tell you, that you wrong me; since from
the first day that I gave my self unto you, the gift was with so full a
consent of my heart, as I shall never enjoy any contentment until you have
taken full possession of it; and it was of you I spoke when I mentioned one,
from whom I must receive my full contentment. I should be very unworthy
(answered the shepherdess, and blushed) if I did not receive this honor you
are pleased to do unto me, with much obligation unto your civility: Nay, nay,
said Paris, never tell me of any civility or respect, but in lieu of those
words, put in that word of Love. That word, said she, falls not handsomely from
the tongue of a woman; If it will not come off your tongue, replied he, then
let it be in your heart: That would be too great a crime, replied Diana, and
would render me unworthy of this honor you are pleased to do me.

Silvander and Hylas had now done singing, and there was not a word amongst all
the company, as if they were in hopes of their beginning to sing again, which
was a cause that many perceived not only the affection wherewith Paris spoke
unto Diana; but also the passion in which Silvander was to see their long
discourse; which Hylas considering, and thinking to get some advantage over
him: Come, come Silvander (said he) we have sung enough; let us now be a little
serious and rational if we can* Tell me upon your faith whether you persist
still in the same opinion which you were wont to be: I am not much addicted
unto changing (said Silvander) but of what opinion do you mean? Are you still
in the heart of Diana, replied Hylas, and is she still in yours? why do you
ask me this question, said Silvander? Because (said Hylas) I will at this time
make you confess the contrary. Methinkes Hylas, answered Silvander, you had
better have slept on then wake to no purpose: Whilst every one laughed at this
question and this answer, Phillis took an occasion to interrupt the discourse
of Paris and Diana, and to call her companion to hear this fine dispute: In
the mean time Hylas answered; shepherd, shepherd, I do not wake to so little
purpose as you think, since to put one out of an error, is a work never out
of season, but answer me; Are you still in the heart of Diana, and is Diana in
yours. Diana hearing this question; Hearken (said she unto Paris) what Hylas
says: For I am confident it will be some mad piece of discourse or other: Then
they heard Silvander answer thus; Do you think Hylas that because you are
continually changing, others are the like: Diana and I are in the very same
places we were wont to be; Why then, said Hylas, she is in your heart, and you
in hers. It is as you say, answered Silvander: Then, prithee good Silvander
tell me, said Hylas, since you are in the heart of Diana, whether the discourse
which Paris had now with her did please her or no? And Diana, since you are in
Silvanders heart, tell us whether Silvander was pleased at the Discourse.

There was none in all the company, except Silvander, who did not laugh so
loud, as they caused Astrea and Alexis to turn about and see what the matter
was; which Hylas observing, he stayed not for Silvanders answer (for Astreas
long discourse was as vexatious unto him, as that of Paris was unto Silvander)
but ran presently to her; Mistress, said he unto Alexis, These shepherdesses
of Lignon are such bewitching flatterers, that unless one take very good heed,
it is almost impossible to resist their charms. I believe Servant (said Alexis)
that you speak like a very knowing man. It Is true (said he) I have not been so
long Apprentice, but I have learned my Trade; For before I loved Phillis, I
thought Laonice fair, and before her, Madonthe, and before them both, Criside:
Here is three strangers, said he, pointing at Florice, Palanice, and Circenea,
can witness I am no Novist, when I was Servant unto them; and if Carlis, who
is in the Gallery with Daphnide were here, she could tell you how she was the
first who taught me my Primer. But Servant, said Alexis, I do not think that
Carlis can boast that you hold her for your last Mistress, as you did for your
first: for I have heard you say, that you have loved but as many as you have
met. Mistress, said he, you should have added as many fair ones, as I have
met: for I do confess, that wheresoever my eye observed beauty, I was a lover
and servant of it; and methinks you should like my humor very well, since it
has made me yours; and without which, ill-favored Carlis had still possessed
me.

I like your humor extremely well, answered Alexis, did I not fear that as it
is now the cause of your being mine, so it will hereafter make me grieve for
the loss of you. Oh fairest Mistress, said Hylas, I beseech you not to think
any such thing; for besides your offense unto my love, it is most impossible
any such thing should ever be; for I never loved any thing but beauty, and out
of you it is most impossible to find it. I should be very glad, answered
Alexis, to have you continue long in this opinion of me, that I may not lose as
others have; but I had rather that all your persuasions could make me believe
all you say of me to be true. I need no persuasions, answered he, where every
eye is able to testify. If all did see me with your eyes, answered Alexis,
their testimonies might perhaps be favorable unto me. I am certain, replied
Hylas, that there is none here, will give my eyes the lie. Your eyes indeed may
see things as they are, answered Alexis, but your mouth may perhaps be given a
little to Hyperbolize, and your tongue which is so glib in attributing unto me,
more then is my due, does testify that you have learned in more Schools then
one. I do confess it, replied Hylas, but withal I am able, and without
vanity to speak it, that the Scholar, surpassed the Master. You never told me
(said Florice) that when you were my Scholar, you learned your lesson of
Circenea, and Palinice also. And had we all three united our learning together,
we might have kept you longer at School. How servant, replied Alexis, what?
serve three at one time? You may judge by that Mistress (said he) the
greatness of my courage, and whether I do not serve you most devoutly, since
I attempt none but you alone.

Whilst he was talking thus, Adamas, Daphnide, and Alcidon came out of the
Gallery, because it was near supper time; and when they had talked awhile upon
several subjects, the table was furnished, and with such and so many
delicacies, as Daphnide admired that a country house could find out such
varieties of curiosities as this wise Druid had provided. Supper being ended,
and after much and various discourse which lasted long, Adamas observed by the
eyes of most in the company, that it was bedtime; and therefore he invited
Daphnide and Alcidon unto their rest, waiting upon them to their Chambers, and
leaving Leonide and Paris to carry the rest of the shepheardesses and
shepherds into theirs: but though the night was far spent, yet Alexis having
carried Astrea, Phillis, and Diana into their Chambers, she could not so soon
part from them; but, after a hundred good nights, still she had something to
say: At last, Leonide having lodged all the rest, came into the Chamber, and
hearing the clock strike midnight, she constrained her to retire. The three
shepheardesses being now alone, although there was several beds in the
Chamber, yet would they needs lie all together.

Whilst they were addressing themselves, Astrea could not for her life talk of
any thing else but Alexis. Sister, said she unto Phillis, was ever two faces so
full of resemblance, as this of the fair Alexis, and that of poor Celadon? For
my part, said Phillis, I never in my life saw two more like. Nay more, said
Diana, did you ever see any Glass represent a nearer similitude, betwixt the
substance and the reflection? Nay sister, said Astrea, what would you say if
you had spoken with her in particular as I did? her voice, her pronunciation,
her air, her actions, her smiles, nay every little feature are so resemblant,
as if Celadon were by her, I could find no difference; and the more I consider
it, the more I am ravished with admiration. I wish with all my heart, replied
Phillis, we could persuade Adamas to let her stay amongst us for a time; and if
we could, sister, I believe you would be well contented. Doubtless I should,
answered Astrea, for I can truly say, that since the death of poor Celadon, I
never enjoyed any pleasure but in the sight of Alexis. But alas, there is no
hopes that Adamas will ever suffer her to come unto us, for she is so dear unto
him, as he cannot suffer her to be out of his sight, nor would it be pleasing
unto her, being accustomed unto another kind of life: And fortune is always so
little my friend, as I cannot think she will ever do me so great a kindness.
Sister, replied Diana, If you desire that this fair one should come into our
Hamlet, we must use a little cunning; sometimes one shall bring that to pass
by subtilty, which would be denied; if it were openly asked; and such kind of
policy is not blameable when it will not hurt any one. Should we ask this
favor of the Druid, perhaps his civility would be so great as not to deny it;
and perhaps also, he would allege such considerations, as we should not
speed: but let us go another way to work; let us entreat him, and let all the
company do the like, that he would be pleased not to retard the sacrifice of
thanks for the sacred Missletoe: he has already promised as much unto other
shepherds, who came with the same Petition: If we bring him to that pass, as
to come presently with us, I am confident he will bring Alexis with him, as
well because Leonide will come, as to accompany Daphnide, whom we must entreat
to assist us in the business: Besides, the sacrifice being a business of
great and religious solemnity; and Alexis being a Druid, it is not likely she
should be left at home. Yet to be every way prepared; if it happen so that
Adamas do make any difficulty in it, we must entreat both her and Leonides good
will unto it; for I do percieve that she is not displeased to be in our
company; and yet truly considering the difference in education, perhaps she
does only constrain her self out of civility to be so complaisant unto us in
her Fathers house. But for all that, I am fully persuaded, if we could once get
her into our Hamlet, we three should keep her in it, by endeavoring to please
her in such things as she takes most delight in; and perhaps when she sees the
honest innocence of our lives, she will not think it much disagreeable to her
humor Truly, said Phillis, and shook her head, she is of a strange temper if
we did displease her; but I lay my life, that we shall all cry when she is
constrained to leave us, and therefore we had as good let it alone Astrea
hearing this, said unto her; Sister, if you take any delight in my company, let
us procure her to be amongst us, for otherwise I am but a mere lost woman. But
will you know what I foresee? (said Phillis) I make no question but we shall
get her amongst us, by the means which Diana has proposed; nor do I fear
but Alexis will be well pleased with us, if I do but take the pains to humor
her; but I plainly see that when she comes, Astrea will quite leave us, and
make no more reckoning of us then as mere strangers. And therefore I will tell
you what we will do if that happen: This Alexis will not stay always with us,
but will one day return either to Dreux or to Carnutes, and then we will make
no more reckoning of her, then she does of us. Fie, fie, Sister replied Astrea,
I cannot abide you should bring this sad separation into memory; for Gods sake,
let us not bring on a misery by the thought of it, which will come but too soon
of it self. No, no, replied Diana, let us lay aside all such Cogitations, and
do what our amity commands us: since Astrea has no contentment but in this,
let us do all we can to continue it to her: And though she should do as you
say, yet if we do love her, we should be sorry for her, since all things are
common amongst those that love one another and loving her as we do, why should
we not share with her in the contenment which she receives?

With such discourse as this, these shepheardesses got to bed, and after good
nights unto one another, they fell asleep in this resolution which they had
fixed upon. But on the other side, Alexis being retired into her Chamber, and
Leonide with her, Adamas entered presently after them, who having brought
Alcidon and the old Pastors into their Chambers, leaving the care of the rest
unto Paris; He came unto Celadon, to know what had passed betwixt him and
Astrea. After he had shut the door, lest any should hear, Well Alexis (said he
and smiled) how does Celadon? As for Celadon, answered Alexis, I cannot tell
how he does; but as for Alexis, let me protest unto you, she says that she
never in her life had more contentment since she was your Daughter. I am glad
on^, says Adamas, so it continue. But tell me truly, Celadon, Do you now
repent of your believing me? It is a thing impossible, answered the shepherd,
that any should repent following your counsel. For all you give is good, But
let me tell you Father, that this which I have received from you upon this
occasion, is full of danger unto me; for if Astrea should come to know me. I
protest there is nothing under the Sun could keep me alive; for besides the
just occasion which I should give her to blame me, for disobeying her command,
I should grieve so excessively for failing in my duty, as it would suffice to
take away my life; or if it did not, I would court all inventions in the world
to give me a sudden and cruel death. Well, well, said Adamas, I perceive
your condition is not yet in a fit temper to take those remedies which I would
give you, we must stay till time has a little more prepared your constitution;
in the mean time, be sure you put on a strong resolution, not to disobey any
thing I shall command, for otherwise you will give me occasion to tax you with
ingratitude. Father, said Celadon, I will never fail in my obedience to you,
provided your commands do not contradict those which I have already received,
which is most impossible I should not observe: I will never advise you (said
the Druid) against what you say: But let me tell you, that the patient must not
think, he knows what Physic is better against his disease, then the Physician
does.

To morrow, I will go in the company of these shepherds and shepheardesses, to
offer the sacrifice of thanks for the salubrious Missletoe which is found in
their Hamlet; and as it fortunes, under the very same Oak where you made the
Temple of Astrea, which let me tell you, is an Onch of very good fortune to
you. And because I must according to custom, carry Paris and Leonide with me,
it is requisite I should carry you also. Oh Father, (said Alcidon) what do you
mean? into how much danger would you bring both me, and your self also? Since
it has pleased good Tharamis to give me the contentment of seeing this
shepherdess, of talking with her, and yet not to be known by any in the
company; do not put me and yourselfe unto any further hazard: what a wound
would it be unto your unstained reputation, if it should come to be discovered?
and to me it would be most certain death. Let us thank the God for the favor
he has done us; and let me rather retire into some desert, where I may end my
miserable days. I see, replied Adamas, that you are to begin again your first
lesson: That God whom you name, has commanded me to have a particular care of
you, and I must be obedient. For, Child, you must know, that he never commands
any thing, but what is just and laudable: and though humane ignorance does
sometimes think the contrary, yet in the end we see, that he who keeps close
unto his Ordinances, does surmount all difficulties, and clear all those
trivial doubts which may obscure the glory of his actions. Therefore, never
trouble your self with any thing that relates unto me, no nor what returns
unto your self; for Thamires never undertakes a thing, which he does not bring
unto a perfect end: It is he, who by me does that which you see me do for your
good, having commanded me by his Oracle. Doubt not therefore, but that both You
and I shall receive contentment.

Celadon would have replied: bnt Leonide interrupted him, saying, You may see,
shepherd, that oftentimes one will do those things for another, which he would
not do for himself: If Adamas should leave you at home, and carry with him
Paris and me, what would be thought of you? what strange opinions would there
be, if you who goes under the notion of Druid, should not come unto a sacrifice
of such solemnity; since you have gone so far, you must go farther; and since
Tautates has committed you unto the tuitiod of Adamas, and you your self
confented to it, you cannot make a retreat without offense both against that
God, and Adamas also. You must shut your eyes against all considerations
whatsoever, and submit your self wholly unto his prudence and conduct.

Celadon shaked his head at this: Father, said he, since the Gods have
commanded it, and since you are pleased to take it upon you, I refer my self,
my life, and all my contentments unto you. Upon this, the Druid embraced him,
and taking Leonide by the hand, left him to his rest. But his thoughts would
not permit him to take any, for all the night long his mind ran upon the sweet
discourse which Astrea and he had, and upon every circumstance, not forgetting
a syllable, or the least action which gave him any testimony that still she
loved the memory of Celadou. And when he had long entertained these thoughts,
he would gladly have driven them out of his mind, as thinking them contrary to
his present condition.

Fie, fie, miserable shepherd (said he) why do thou suffer thy self to be
flattered up with the smiles of fortune? have thou not often found, that she
never Carasses, but with a design of deceiving? nor raises thee up, but that
thy fall may be the greater? Consider to what a height of happiness thou were
once elevated; remember that never any shepherd could call himself so blessed
as thy self: Then turn but thine eye upon the present condition, and tell me
if it was possible to fall from a steeper Precipice. And now at this time, when
under a shadow thou art taken for another, and under a borrowed Name much off:
Can thou take these favors as thine own? thou do not consider that thou
stealest them under the umbrage of another Name, and that they would be denied
unto thine.

This consideration did make all his first thoughts so bitter unto him, as he
was almost ready to fall into the same despair as when he lived in his Cave,
and he wanted but a little of resolving to return into his first design of
separating himself from the World, since he saw no hopes of any cure for his
miseries. And probably this resolution had prompted him to put his design in
execution, had not some good Angel brought into his memory the sapient advice
of sage Adamas, apprehending that if God had not designed him some solace in
his misery, he would never have put him into the hands of such a reverend
Person, who was esteemed highly good and wise amongst all that knew him. After
he had tossed away most of the night in these turbulent thoughts, this
comfortable consideration laid him asleep; and it being break of day before
he began, it was long before he awaked. Astrea, Diana and Phillis did not the
like; for Astrea passionately desiring to get Alexis unto her Hamlet, she waked
betimes: And Diana fearing least Paris should find her in bed, although he
carried himself at a respective distance, yet she would not put it to the
hazard, but as soon as she saw Astrea wake, she awaked Phillis, and began to
upbraid her; what Servant, said she, are you not ashamed to be asleep and your
Mistress awake? Mistress, said Phillis, I did not know you to be awake, but
methinkes you should sleep as well as I do* unless Silvander were in my
room. Oh Servant, said Diana, let Silvander be where he is, he does not think
upon us, and let us think no more of him. As well as I love you, replied
Phillis, I would not be tied to think upon you so much as he does.

This is a bad opinion which you have of him, replied Diana, but you shall see
that when I have given my judgment, which will be within this two or three
days, he will presently turn to his old byas. Sister, said Astrea, do you
really, and upon your faith, think as you say? When you ask me upon my faith,
said she, I must consider a little better before I answer; but if you will know
what I would have him do, I will tell you, and truly; that I do love him so
well and my self also, as for both our quiers I w^sh as I say. Upon my faith
(said Phillis and smiled) you do lie; and pardon me Mistress if this offend
you, for there was never any woman yet that was angry for being loved and
served by a person of merit; but on the contrary, I have seen many very angry
with those that did love them, and afterward did fall off from loving, though
they had no design upon them. Nay, I will go a little further; I never in my
life saw any who were not inwardly angry at such changes: I my self who never
did love Hylas, yet must needs confess that when he quitted me, I was angry at
him though I carried it as well as I could: and the reason of all this is,
because as the addr^sses of those who love us are arguments of our beauty and
merit; so their departures from us are arguments of the contrary. You may
think of me as you please, said Diana, but I protest that if it were in my
choice whether he should continue, or give over his address unto me, I do
foresee that they would both be so troublesome unto us both, as I know not
which I should choose: For if he do continue it what design can I have in
suffering it? For it is not probable my Parents would ever suffer me to marry a
person who is unknown, and I my self should be ashamed that Diana should ever
commit such a fault. Then again, if we should break off all amity, I assure
you that I should long lament it, because I think his merits make him worthy
of Love: It is the greatest folly in the World (said Phillis) that Parents
should make marriages, and we are very fools to let them. Has not this brought
Astrea into the condition wherein she is; had her Parents left her to the free
disposition of her self, she had married Celadon; he had been alive, and she
for ever contented; whereas, on the contrary, Parents crossing them has killed
the one, and the other is little better. And now, the old fool Phocion would
bestow her upon Calidon, and is so persuaded to bring it about that he never
rests. Ah that I had the hampering of him I should quickly resolve what to do.
What would you do (said Astrea) if you were in my room; I would tell him in
few words (said she) that I could not abide him: What would be thought of a
woman said Diana, that should speak so, and what would they say of her?
Mistress, said Phillis, words are but words, and opinion is but opinion, and
both but wind; but to marry a peevish Husband is a thing that would be felt all
ones life: And therefore I shall think you very inconsiderate in saying that
you will not marry Silvander, whom you confess to be a man of much merit, and
every way complete, only because you know not from whence he came. Ah
Mistress, will you not eat fine fruit unless you know the Tree whereon they
grow? Oh the grossest folly of all others, to pursue appearances with all
eagerness, and never care for things that are recall and truly good. God has
infinitely blessed me in giving me Parents of another mind; for I assure you, had
they been of such a temper, I should have found them work enough. Diana
smiled at this, and said, Your counsel Sister is very good, but not to be
followed always. For I beseech you tell me; this opinion which you slight so
much, and these appearances which you condemn, are they any thing else but
reputation, which is a thing as dear as life is? is there any thing upon earth
more miserable than a woman without this reputation, is there any condition
(...) pitiful, as that of a person who has lost it? I must confess, that
consider it rightly, and it will be found a folly; but is there any thing
amongst us which is not folly, if it be searched to the bottom? No, no
Servant, all the world is nothing but a gloss, a vain shadow of good; though
you and I do know this to be true, yet by the common consent of all, it is
judged otherwise, and you or I must not be the first, to break the Ice. This
makes me think upon the counsel that was given amongst the Rats, who resolved
for their safety to have a Bell tied about the neck of the Cat, to the end they
might hear her when she came, but upon the upshot of the result, there was none
amongst all the company that durst attempt the doing it.

Discoursing thus, these fair shepherdesses dressed themselves: and Astrea, not
well knowing upon what design, did trim up her self with more care and
curiosity than she did since the loss of Celadon; which Phillis taking notice
of, she could not choose but smile, and hinting it unto Diana, Mistress, said
she, the shepherdesses of Lignon are of a very odd humor: Why? said Diana,
because I see, said Phillis, that Astrea takes abundance of pains to dress
her self better than ordinary* For my part I know no reason she has for it,
unless it be her affection to this fair Druid, whose acquaintance was but of
yesterday. I pray tell me, is it the humor of the shepherdesses of Lignon to
assect so soon, and rather shepherdesses than shepherds? To which Astrea
answered; It Is true, I have a greater humor to make my self amiable, than ever
I had, and there is good reason for it, because when I was courted by
shepherds, I thought my self of merit enough to make my self loved amongst
them, never putting my self to any further trouble than to be seen: But now
if I will obtain the favor of this fair Druid, I must be as careful of my
self as any Servant is in getting the favor of his Mistress. But Sister,
replied Diana, Phillis and I are either much mistaken in our judgments, or
else there is great defects in such as see you and do not love you, though for
nothing but for your merit. Upon this, they had all dressed themselves, and as
they were going out of the Chamber, they saw Paris walking with Leonide in the
next room, and the shepherdesses were near them before the other perceived,
they seemed to talk very affectionately; of which Paris was much ashamad, and
when he saw them, after morning salutes, he asked Diana pardon, who answered
him that he had committed no offense whith concerned her: For she being the
meanest of the three, they had more reason to complain than she, if there was
any cause at all; and not staying for his answer, she addressed her self unto
Leonide, and asked her whether she had a good night? I have more reason to ask
the same question of you (said Leonide) who are up so early; was there not
something in your Chamber, or your bed which was the cause of it? Both in the
Chamber, said Diana, and in the bed, but it was this fair shepherdess, said
she, and pointed at Astrea, who waked us sooner than we would, out of her
desire to employ the time she is to stay here, as well as she can, I mean as
near the fair Alexis as she can get; for she is so zealously* devoted her
Servant, as I know not how we shall part them, when ye go from hence. Come,
said Leonide, let us go to her, if she be awake; but as we go, let me impart
one secret which I have thought upon, which will be a means they shall not
part so soon: You must entreat Adamas that without any more delay, he go and
offer the sacrifice of thanks for the Missleto, and that h^ carry us all with
him.

I know he will not deny you, for I know he must perform this duty once, and
he will be for one night contented with the house of Astrea, by reason of
Phocian whom he loves and esteems very much-and so shall we be all together,
all the day to morrow* but fair shepherdesses, be sure you conceal me in the
business; for if Adamas should know that this advice comes from me, perhaps he
would be angry, and make some difficulty in it. Nor is it necessary that Alexis
should know, because she is of a very retired humor, and never so well
contented as when alone. I matter not if Paris be of the plot, because I know
that he takes much delight in your company, and will not cross it. I shall
never deny the opinion you have of me, said Paris. Then Astrea after she had
smiled upon Diana and Phillis: Do you think, Madam, said she, that Adamas will
not deny us, and will let Alexis go also? for the truth is, if all the world
go, and Alexis stay behind, I shall be but in a very bad mood, and perhaps
shall hide my self from the trouble of all the rest of the company.

You see, Madam, said Phillis, that the shepherdesses of Lignon are no
dissemblers: both she, and all the rest, said Leonide, are more worthy and
estimable for it; but I beseech you, from whence proceeds this great amity? by
sympathy, said Astrea, and I am not my self unless I be by her: since so,
said the Nymph, I shall render you all the contentment that I am able, and I
cannot choose but admire, for Alexis, the last night did speak the same of you,
that you do now of her: I have a very intimate familiarity with her, and know
her usual humor; but now she is quite out of all her Naturalls, and the
alteration must needs proceed from some supernatural power. Madam, said
Phillis, you will make her so proud, that we shall not be able to live with
her: upon this they came to the Chamber of Alexis, where they found her yet in
bed; for being something early, and it being morning before her thoughts would
give her leave to sleep, she was hardly awake when all this good company came
into her Chamber.

The truth is, she was much surprised at this unexpected visit, but not so much
as to forget hiding the Ring which she took from Astrea, when she threw her
self into Lignon, and which she wore ever since about her arm in the same
Ribband in which it was tied: also she neglected not to close her smock before
her breast, lest a difference of Sex should thereby be discovered, and lest the
fair Astrea should see the Picture which she used to wear about her neck, and
which that shepherdess knew very well; she held one hand before her face, and
with the other took the sheet and almost covered her self, as if she were
ashamed to be seen in that posture. Leonide to make her self merry, said thus
unto her; What do you think, Sister, of these fair ones whom I have brought to
help you up? Sister, said Alexis, and raised her self a little up, you have
done me a great shame, in doing me a great favor; for what will all these
fair ones say, finding me thus long in bed? The worst they can say, replied
the Nymph, is that you are a sluggard, and that the Druids of Carnutes are not
such early risers as the shepheardesses of Forests? Upon this, all the
shepheardesses gave her the good morrow; and she after a general thanks for
their Complement, turned toward Astrea in particular; and you fair
shepherdess, said she, how have you passed away the night? Sister, said
Leonide, shall I tell you for her? I protest she has lain with you all the
night. With me, replied Alexis presently? Yes with you, said Leon^Ede, if not
in body, yet at the least in mind. That way indeed she may, answered Alexis;
and I believe it, for* I assure you fair shepherdess, (said she, and took
her hand) that the discourse we had the last night, has so taken up my whole
mind, that I never slept until it was day.

Leonide, to give her dear sister the opportunity of talking more privately
with Astrea, took Diana unto the window, and Phill^s also: There she kept them
in discourse, whilst Alexis causing Astrea to sit down upon her bed, and still
holding her hand, she was almost transported with an extreme desire to kiss
her. At the last, fearing to discover what she desired to hide, she contented
her self with pressing her hand betwixt hers: and after a while of silence. I
protest, fair shepherdess (said she unto her) I have thought upon you, and
the discourse we had all the night long. But tell me, I beseech you; Is it
possible that Phocion (as Leonide assured me the last night) should force you
to marry against your mind? Madam, answered Astrea, it is very true, that it is
his d^signe; but it is as true also, that he shall never bring it to pass* Not
that I have so much courage as to contradict him openly, but I shall treat
Calidon in such a sort, as I shall drive him out of any such fancy: Not but
that I know the shepherd is a man of more merit then I deserve; but for all
that, my genius is not agreeable, nor can suit it self to his. How is it
possible, Madam, I should ever believe Calidon loves me, when I know he loved
Cel^dea above his own life, and this with excess of disobedience to an Uncle,
who was unto him in lieu of a Father, and from whom he hoped for his estate.
But I have heard say, replied Alexis, that now he is out of this humor, and
does not love her. I believe it true, answered Astrea, but it was when she had
lost her beauty, and then his flame extinguished; so that as soon as my face
changes, his affection to me will change also. What a sad disaster would it be
to me, if I should live to see such a change, nay the least diminution of good
will to me? But Madam, continued she with a deep sigh, that is not the
principal difficulty; for perhaps I should hope to keep his mind in due amity,
having not so low an opinion of my self, but that with a little study, I should
hold him within compass of duty to me. But there is another obstacle in the
way which hinders me, from ever marrying, far greater then all these. Yet,
Madam, I dare not trouble you with any such ralations, and what would you think
of me, for being so familiar as to talk unto you of such trivial matters?
Alexis then shaked her hand, and said, Did you but know how infinitely I love
you, certainly you would never speak thus unto me, who am infinitely desirous
to know your business and intentions, that I may the better serve you in them;
whether it be by my own endeavors, and by the means of Adamas, or any other
way you shall please to employ me. Madam, replied Astrea, I am very sensible of
the great honor which you are pleased to confer upon me in your love, and
think it to be so high a happiness unto me, as I value it infinitely above my
life: but as for the offer you are pleased out of your abundant goodness to
make unto me concerning Adamas, I humbly beseech you never to speak unto him
in it, because I would not have him employed in a business of so small a
consequence, and which I can well enough bring to pass my self, assuring my
self that I can deal well enough with Calidon. I wish you may, said Alexis,
but I am afraid you will find it a difficulty: when I look upon the beauty of
your fair face; for beauty, fair Astrea, is Glue, or Bird-lime, which will
never let go those wings which are touched with it. Madam, replied Astrea, I am
not owner of so much beauty; or if I were, I hope my resolution is stronger
then all the violencies and wilfulness of Love.

And be pleased to know, that I will die a thousand death, rather then I will
ever marry, since it is the will of heaven, or rather my bad fortune so to have
it. At this word she stopped, and pulled out her Hankercher to wipe her eyes,
for she was not able to withhold her Tears. And when she was beginning her
discourse again, the coming in of Adamas prevented her; who coming into the
Chamber by chance, and finding this good company there, he was sorry that he
had interrupted them: for there was nothing he desired more, then to see Alexis
and Astrea together, in hopes that this way would remit Alexis into his former
condition, and consequently that his old age should be very happy and
contented, according to the Oracle. Yet seeming as if his coming in was of
purpose; and after he had saluted all the shepheardesses, he said thus unto
Alexis: What Daughter, in bed yet? What will all these fair shepheardesses
say, seeing you such a sluggard! Sir, answered Alexis, the fault is in my
sister, who brought them hither without giving me any notice. The fault,
replied Adamas, is in your self, who are yet in bed; and if they served you
aright, they would pull all the clothes off, and teach you to rise sooner in
the morning.

Then Astrea, who was risen off the bed, in reverence of Adamas: Reverend
Father, said she, There is reason why we should rise early, because we have
flocks to look unto: Moreover, it is fit, Alexis should preserve her beauty
without taking any pains. You may say what you please, replied Adamas; But my
opinion is, that if she will be fair, she must do as you do; for your beauty
may tell her, that your Receipt is a very good one. Astrea blushed a little, and
would have replied, if one had not come to acquaint Adamas, that Daphnide and
Alcidon stayed for him in the great Chamber; And therefore, he taking the
shepheardesses by their hands, they all left Alexis to dress her self, whilst
she went to show unto this good company the rarities of his house, which indeed
were curiosities of much admiration.

After all the Company was assembled together, and that to the great
contentment of Hylas, Alexis was come unto them, Adamas thought it best, before
dinner, to show them the Walks, and the rather because the Sun was masked with
many Clouds: Every one applied themselves unto those that best pleased them,
except Silvander, Hylas, and Calidon: For Paris took Diana whom Silvander out
of respect was constrained to quit: Alexis still was with Astrea, which kept
Hylas and Calidon from the happiness of talking unto this feigned Druid and
fair Shepherdess. As for Calidon and Silvander they durst not show the least
discontent: But Hylas who was not accustomed unto any constraint* M^stresse,
said he, as soon as they were out of the house, I beseech you let Calidon wait
upon Astrea: Who then, said Astrea, shall keep the fair Alexis company? Pray
good Shepherdess, said Hylas, never take you any care; he that cares for the
birds of the Air, will not let her be without help; and for want of a better,
I will tender my service unto her, and at the same time he took Alexis by the
other arm. Truly (said Astrea half angry that she could not be alone with
Alexis) it is easy to know Hylas, that you are none of the Shepherds of
Lignon, for they do never use to be so impudently bold: I do believe it, said
Hylas, and it is very likely, that they being Shepherds are not so courageous
as I am: Methinkes, replied Astrea, that since you assume the same habit, you
should also assume the same courage. No, no Shepherdess (answered he) a Hero
is not less hardy for having a rusty Sword; but on the contrary, if examples
of virtue have any influence upon Shepherds, Calidon whom I see there looking
upon you, as if he would began Alms; would do as I do. Astrea looked down
with her eyes upon the ground, fearing least if this discourse continued, that
young Shepherd should imitate Hylas, and so of one fault she should make two,
she was silent, and said not a word more: But Hylas observing this, and having
an opinion that if any would divert Astrea, he might the more easily talk with
Alexis, he made a sign unto Calidon, which made him more confident than
usual, and therefore after an humble reverence unto the Shepherdess, he took
her arm, pretending he would help her to walk. The Shepherdess seeing there
was no remedy, turned her head toward Alexis, and said thus; I see that bad
examples are sooner followed than the good* and I must now recall that
advantage which I gave unto the Shepherds of Lignon: Alas, said Alexis, and
shook her head if our lives had none of these bitter wormwoods, we should be
but too happy, she spoke this in so low a voice, that neither Hylas nor Calidon
heard her; yet the cold entertainment which this shepherd received from this
shepherdess did make him think that she had much rather be alone with the
Druide; but seeming to take no notice of it, he continued on his design, so as
now there was none without a Companion but Silvander. But Laonice who still
nourished a spirit of revenge against him, and sought for an occasion of doing
him some signal displeasure ever since the day that by his judgment she lost
Tircis; seeing him thus alone, she thought now that she had met with a fit
opportunity; she knew already what affection he had unto Diana, and what
affection Diana had unto him: For their loves being great, it was impossible to
hide it from her who kept a very observant eye over all their actions.
Therefore seeing him alone, and very pensive, she went unto him, and put on a
face far different from her heart: Shepherd, said she, I see so many signs of
sorrow painted in your face, as I cannot choose but think, that perhaps you are
in love: Shepherdess, answered Silvander, I have so many several occasions of
sorrow, as you need not ask me whether Love be a cause: I think, said she,
you have no new occasions, for of late days you are more contented than
usual; but will you give me leave to tell you what I think? The cause of your
melancholy proceeds either from a disease present, or from a disease absent:
You must explane the Riddle, answered the shepherd, before I can return an
answer; I mean replied Laonice, since you would have me speak clearly, that
either grief present torments you, seeing another in your room with your
Mistress: or else the good which is absent; for I know that you do love
Madonthe: Sage shepherdess, said Silvander, I see you are a great Propheresse:
For it is one of these two that does torment me* but perhaps (said he and
smiled) not so much as you imagine. Sometimes in such diseases (said Laonice)
one is apt not to think themselves so ill as they are, but in good earnest
Silvander, which of these two is it that most troubles you? Which do you
think, said Silvander? If I should tell you my opinion, said Laonice, perhaps
you would not confess it. Were it a crime to love, said Silvander, I must
confess I had no reason to confess; but since it is rather a virtue, or at
the least an action which in it self is neither good nor bad, why should you
think I will not confess it; since in denying a truth I should commit a
greater sin: Most true, shepherd, replied Laonice, for every one who would be
esteemed good, ought above all things to be very careful they never injure the
truth: and therefore Silvander tell me upon your reputation; does not the
absent good trouble you more than the present evil? Silvander had no mind of
making his affections known unto this stranger, if possibly he could avoid it,
and therefore with a smile answered her: I cannot choose but admire at the
quickness of your sight, discreet Laonice; for I durst have sworn that none
had taken notice of these things; but I beseech you, how came you to this
knowledge? Silvander, said she, content your self with this that all these
dissimulations which you use to Diana may perhaps amuze Thersander, but not
such as have with my eyes observed your actions: All those that live about the
delectable River of Lignon, have their hearts so possessed with their own
passions, as they never observe another? have no eyes for any but for them
they love. But I who have nothing else to do, but to observe the actions of
all, I do plainly see that Madonthe does please you more than Diana; but be
not sorry that I know it, for perhaps it will not be unserviceable to you:
Madonthe loves me, and I think she will be easily induced unto any thing I
shall persuade; I know what it is to love, and which way to compass the
contentments of it, and I promise you to aid and serve you in all I am able.
Silvander could not choose but laugh to hear her talk thus, and to confirm
her in the opinion which she had conceived, he beseeched her to be silent, and
above all, not to acquaint Madonthe, least it should offend her, and so ruin
his whole design; he thanked her for her kind offers, which he would not
refuse, but would not make use of at that time, for several reasons which
hereafter should be made known unto her.

Silvander thought himself very subtle in this, but Laonice who seemed to
believe him, began to contrive the mischief which she intended him, upon it,
and which since she made him pay so dear for. In the mean time Paris and Diana
were entered deep into discourse; for this young man was so inflamed with a
violent affection unto this shepherdess, as he could never rest, but when he
was with her. Certainly, if she had intended to love any, she would have
pitched here; but since the death of Filander, she would never suffer love to
take any hold of her affections, thinking none worthy to be Successor unto such
a shepherd as Filander. If she did afterward love Silvander, it was not out of
design, but upon a surprise which the merits and addresses of that shepherd
made upon her; so as the good will which she had unto Paris was no more than as
a sister unto a brother, and so far she thought her self obliged by the
affection he had unto her; and she was hindered from any farther, by the
affection she bare unto the memory of the courteous Filander; yet he whose
affection had no limits, to render unto her all possible testimonies of his
love, he resolved to try his fortune, and thinking this opportunity to be good,
he would not let it slip: leading her therefore by the arm, he drew her a
little from the rest, and whilst every one was busied in their own various
conceptions, he spoke thus unto her. I cannot choose but wonder, fairest Diana,
that all my endeavors to do you all service, should not let you see the great
affection which I have unto you; or if you do see it, I wonder more that it
should have no greater operation, nor produce any more reciprocal good will in
your soul: Though my services cannot merit so high as love, for that were too
much happiness, yet Methinkes they might at the least produce some sparks of
good will, and be in some degree pleasing unto you; I have tried all ways, and
in this cannot but accuse the meanness of my merit, and the greatness of my
misfortune; I have tried, I say, and do find all ways that are advantageous
unto others who are in love, but find them all unprofitable unto me; you injure
my extreme affection; my services displease you; my patience makes me
despicable: my constancy tedious unto you, and the very age I spend in loving,
serving and adoring you, is so sterile, as you hardly take notice, I am any
thing yours* Oh Heavens, can such cruelty, if not ingratitude, accompany such a
noble soul? will you never suffer my tears to mollify your heart of Ad^man^^

At this word Paris was silent, as well because he feared that his eyes could
not restrain those tears which these words would bring from his heart if he
continued his discourse, as because he would give Diana time to speak some
words of consolation to him. She, who did love him, as I told you before, not
thinking him so deeply engaged in the Fetters of love, and desiring if it were
possible not to let him depart displeased, after a sweet glance of her eye
toward him, said thus unto him; I did not think generous Paris to have heard
such language from you, which is as far from my expectation, as the Heavens
are from the Earth; you blame me for being insensible, and that I do not
acknowledge the affection which you have unto me, and I beseech you, what would
you think of me, if not loving you, yet I should behave my self toward you
as I do: Have I not showed you as much plausibility and favor as I am capable
off? Did I not always answer you with all courtesy and civility that was
hansome for me do; What can you desire more of me? do you see me Garasse any
more then your self? do I not apply my self more unto you, then any other?
and at this very time, do I offer to talk or glance any eye upon any but your
self? Oh fairest shepheardess (said Paris, and sighed) I do confess all you
say, and that you do more for me, than for any other: but what am I the better,
as long as you do nothing for any else, nor me neither? If my affection were
not as it is* I mean, extreme, perhaps I should not with so much importunity
beg testimonies of your good will. And as much as you say, you have done for
me: what I beseech you have you done, but only as to the son of Adamas the
first time you saw him, and before he gave testimony of any affection? All your
actions toward me, I must confess are full of civility and sweetness, But
are you not obliged to the same toward all of my quality? Can you think
these duties that belong to my Name and Quality, can satisfy for those that
are due unto a violent affection? No, no, fair one, Civility and Courtesy will
serve the son of Adamas, but nothing else but Love can satisfy Paris: There
must be a reciprocal compliance, before I can leave complaining; and I must
blame you of insensibility, and my self of ill fortune, in loving so great a
beauty with a hard heart. Then Diana after a little pause, returned him this
answer: I thought until now, Paris, that there had been nothing in my actions
but what would have pleased you, thinking that I had regulated them according
to the Rules which Virgins ought to observe, even when they have a design to
please and oblige; but I perceive I was mistaken, but to show my repentance,
and how free I am with you, I will very sincerely tell you my thoughts: I
honor you Paris, as much as I do any man in the world; and I do love you as
much as I do my brother; if this will not content you, I cannot tell what you
can desire more.

Fair Diana, said Paris, This Declaration is indeed very pleasing unto me, and
as the Son of Adamas, I am fully satisfied; but, as Paris, not at all: because
my affection requires nothing more; not Courtesy for Courtesy, but Love for
Love. If you be not contented and satisfied with this I have told you Paris,
replied the shepherdess, you must look for more from your self, since you
suffer your desires to go beyond due limits; and I have a just cause of
complaint against you, if I would take it, for pretending more from me, then I
ought to give* It Is very true, replied Paris, that you would have most just
cause of complaint, if fair shepherdess, I should desire any thing from you
which was not fit for you to grant: But all my desires being grounded upon
honor and virtue, methinks you should not complain against them; And to open
my heart most freely unto her that owes it, know fair shepherdess, that I am
so wholly devoted unto you, that I shall never enjoy any rest or contentment,
until you be also mine, upon condition of marriage. You do me much honor,
replied Diana, in having such thoughts: but you must know, that I have Parents,
unto whose wisdom I refer all such matters: and yet if you will have me show
you my very heart, I do swear, Paris, that neither you nor they, nor any
alive, are able to move me unto any such mind of marriage. I do love you as my
Brother, but cannot as a Husband; and do not think this strange, for my mind
is the same toward all men living. Oh ye Gods, said Paris then, must I never
receive any perfect contentment? You say that you do love me as your Brother,
but you ordain that this Love must all my life long be a barren, steril, and
fruitless love, Paris, said she, what would you have me say? have you a mind I
should deceive you? or with some smooth dissembling language, give you some
deluding hopes? methinks I have obliged you in discovering my resolution so
freely and genuinely unto you. Oh shepherdess, said Paris, with a profound
sigh, what a most disobliging obligation is this? how many sad sighs and
sorrowful tears must I pay unto your cruelty, to acquit my self of his fatal
obligation.

They would have continued longer, when coming to a cross-walk, they were
hindered by the rest of the company, who were returning to the house; for Adamas
was told it was dinner time, and Alexis tired with the talk of Hylas, and to
be so long separated from Astrea, she took all occasions of being with her
again; and as soon as she saw Diana, I beseech you fair shepherdess (said
Alexis unto her) help me to defend my self against the fine discourse of
Hylas* for I assure you, I know not how to answer him: Mistress (said Hylas)
those that cannot defend themselves, they must yield unto the courtesy of
their enemies. I had rather die (said Alexis and smiled) then render my self
unto the mercy of such a conqueror. Rather then you should die, said Hylas, I
would render the victory, and yield my self the conquered. Truly, said Alexis,
you are very courteous: but, Hylas, I am of so proud a temper, and so little
desirous to be obliged, as I know not whether I should receive your offer. Why
should you make a question of it, said Hylas? is it perhaps you scorn it? No
answered Alexis; but rather because I fear lest being victorious in that
manner, I should be overcome. Oh heavens, said Hylas, and cried out, I ever
thought it a dangerous business to love a learned woman, and one that is
brought up amongst the Druids of Carnutes: I do vow and swear by the love I
have to you, that when I began first to love you, I was afraid of nothing more
then that you were not simple enough. Why good Hylas (said Diana, who was very
glad to mingle discourse, purposely to be rid of Paris) would you love one that
was simple? Truly, said Hylas, I would not have her a fool, nor would I have
her overwise; so she have as much wit as to believe all I tell her, I would not
have her able to expound the deep sciences of our learned Druids. But if she
should have no more wit then to believe you, replied Diana, you would be put to
a great deal of pain, by reason of the cure you would have in the carriage of
her self. You are much deceived shepherdess (said Hylas) for what is pleasure
to one, is never painful. Some say so indeed, said Diana, but I do not think
so; for I believe the pleasure only keeps them from thinking of the pain:
but that they have none is an error, since if they be put to any violent
exercise, they will blow and paint as if they wanted breath. See Diana, said
Hylas, you are one of those two, whom I would not love; you have too much wit,
and put me to pain in studying how to answer you, which is a thing I cannot
abide: but on the contrary, I should be extremely contented, if she admire all
I do, and all I say: from admiration proceeds from a good opinion, and from
this good opinion will proceed the love that I desire.

Silvander who was near, and watched for an occasion of seconding Diana in her
discourse: Admiration, said he, will work the contrary effect which you desire.
Why so? said Hylas; for if she admire me, she will believe me full of great and
high parts; and when I speak, I am an Oracle unto her, my desires will be
Laws, and my will Commands: Admiration will produce quite contrary effects,
replied Silvander; For the learned say, that Admiration is the mother of
Verity, in as much as admiring any thing the mind of man is naturally apt to
search for the knowledge of it, and this search makes him find out the truth:
and so Hylas, in saying that she will admire you, you do as much as say, that
she will know you; and knowing you, she will find that if she esteemed any
thing in you, she is mistaken; and then in scorning you, she will admire that
she should admire you: I perceive shepherd, answered Hylas, that you are one
of those wits, which, were I a woman, I should never love: But though you can
talk well, yet talk as long as you will, I am still in the same opinion; for
he who does admire whilst he is in that admiration, does he not infinitely
esteem the party that causes it? It Is true; said Silvander; but then presently
after that, he will change when he comes to the knowledge of the Truth. This,
replied Hylas, does give me satisfaction: for in saying she will change
presently, let me tell you, my good friend Silvander, said he, and clapped him
upon the shoulder, she may chance to do as I may do; but let her make as much
haste as she can, I will pardon her if she change sooner then my self: and if
she do chance to be before me, faith i will over take her presently. This answer
caused every one to laugh, and this discourse entertained them till they came
into the house, where the Table was furnished with many delicacies, and every
one sat down as the night before.

All dinner while, nothing was almost talked on, but the merry humor of Hylas;
and to put him upon discourse, there was always some or other who took his
part. Amongst the rest, Stella, who though she did it in show to please the
company, yet was it not at all against her humor, she having all her life long
followed the rules of this Doctrine. And Corilas who had heretofore resented
the effects of it, hearing how she took part with Hylas: Shepherd, said he unto
Silvander, I beseech you tell me; is it true that love does grow from sympathy?
All those who ever spoke of it, answered Silvander, say Yes, Then, said
Corilas, am I the only one that believes the contrary, and have had full
experience of it: For can two humors be more like, than those of Hylas and
Stella? and yet I do not see there is any love betwixt them. There was not one
at all the Table, who did not laugh when they heard this discourse of Corilas.
And when Silvander would have answered, Stella interrupted him, in saying; I do
not blush, shepherd, at a thing which has given me all the contentment I
enjoy; for had I not changed when I loved you, I had lost it; and you must
accuse the reason which Silvander gave, for my changing which is, that
Admiration is the mother of Truth: for at the first not knowing you, I did
admire you; and when I did know you, scorned you; so as you may very well give
this Motto; Far off, something; near nothing. But, said she, and smiled; as
you say, that I am Inconstant for loving you once, and not loving you; so you
may better say that I am Constant, in changing once only and continuing in a
resolution of never loving you, as long as I live. The question which I asked,
replied Corilas, is not whether you be a wavering Weather-cocke or no: But
whether ( Hylas and you being alike, and simpathy being a cause of love)
whether you do love one another? Unto this she presently said, I will tell you
Corilas, that simpathy may work its effects, when there is no greater force to
oppose it; And that simpathy which may be betwixt Hylas and me, might have so
much force as to make us love, if it were not that knowing thee so little
worthy of love, thou have made me have such an ill opinion of all other
shepherds, as I know not whether ever I shall love any. You have taught me a
lesson, said Corilas: For having had so much experience of you, I cannot
conceive that those who are under the same habit you are, do not hide under
those habits the same imperfections: Fie, fie, said all the shepherds, this,
Corilas, is too much, to blame all the rest: No, said Corilas, my intention is
not to blame them: I only say, that I cannot conceive they have not same
imperfections; I do not say, they have them, and in this I blame only my
self, as not having the judgment to know the truth: But of all this, I accuse
this deceiver, who yet cannot glory in her victory, for she has paid deer for
it.

Daphnid^ and Alcidon did hearken with much delight unto the dispute of these
shepherds and shepherdesses, and admired that these Rural wits brought up
amongst Woods and in Fields, should be so polite and civilized. But Daphnide
having a very curious spirit, and desiring to know every thing, she addressed
her self unto the sage Adamas: Methinkes Father, said she unto him, that to
part these two friendly Enemies (for she knew they were so called) and to
satisfy a curiosity wherein I have long lived, you would do very well to tell
us what this Simpathy is, of which they speak, and whether it will cause love;
and in so doing, you will feast us double, both in our bodies, and in our
minds. Madam, answered Adamas, your curiosity is commendable, and did I not
give it satisfaction I were much to blame, as well in not obeying what you
please to command, as in not informing such as desire it, as my charge obliges
me; and the sooner, because I am able to do it in few words: Be pleased to
know, Madam, that Tautates the supreme Creator of all things, did make Heaven,
which is his chiefest Mansion, and the place where he created all souls, and
because it is nothing likely that any thing should come out of the hand of such
an excellent Workman which is not in its full perfection, he formed the soul
by intellectual participation. Now this participation is taken from the pure
intelligence of that Planet which is predominate when it is created, and this
perfection which it receives, is so agreeable to it, as it is inflamed with
love of that intelligence which did impart it unto it. And even as a Lover does
form an Idea of the thing loved in his fancy, as perfectly as possibly he can,
to the end it may fill the eyes of his soul, and please himself in this
contemplation when he is deprived of the sight of that beloved face; so
likewise this soul being in love with the supreme beauty of this Intelligence,
and of this Planet when it entered into the body unto which it gave the form,
it did imprint not only the sense and the airy body, in which the learned say
it is wrapped but also the fancy with this Character, with the beauty of which
it was ardently inflamed in heaven, so as it can apprehend a figure and perfect
resemblance of it: and pleasing it self in this contemplation it conceives a
certain natural disposition to esteem all that resembles it good and
beautiful, and to dislike generally all that is unlike unto it, accustoming
its judgment in such sort unto this will as it becomes habitual, from which
we cannot refrain without very great force upon our selves: From hence it is,
that as soon as we cast our eyes upon any one; if they do report unto our
souls, as faithful Mirrrors, that there is in this person something which
does resemble that Image of Intelligence immediately we do love, without any
farther discourse in our selves, or other search for the occasion of this good
will, being drawn unto it by an instinct which may be termed blind: On the
contrary we do hate, if we do find them different; and this is it they call
simpathy, which is that conformity which we find betwixt one another; and which
indeed is the source of love and not beauty altogether, as many believe: For if
beauty were the source of love, it would follow that all fair ones would be
loved of all: But we see on the contrary, that not the most fair and the most
worthy, but those only who come nearest to our humor, and with whom we have
most conformity, are those whom we do love best.

Here the Druide stopped, and Daphnide began thus; I must confess with thanks,
reverend Father, that you have at once cleared several doubts unto me, yet one
remains in which I much desire satisfaction. If it be so that love proceeds
from that resemblance that I meet with all in the party that I do love: How
comes it to pass, that the same resemblance does not make him love me? For, if
I do love by this simpathy, and if this simpathy do come as you do say,
Methinkes it is impossible but that he must have the same inclination unto me,
that I have unto him; My meaning is, that the same Planet must have the same
influence upon us both; yet for all that we see many who do not at all affect
those who are even ready to dye for the love of them. Your doubt, Madam,
replied Adamas, deserves a clearing; it is very ingeniously moved, and shows
the excellency of that spirit from whence it comes.

Be pleased therefore to know, Madam, that as I told you, the soul fancies
unto it self an Idea, and the most perfect image that it can of this Planet,
and of that Intelligence or apprehension which it loves; but in as much as, to
represent so fair and so perfect an Image, the matter is of such an inferior
sort, as it is able to do it but very imperfectly: It must ensue that this
representation is not equally perfect in every one, because the matter of the
body is better disposed in some than in others, and accordingly as the soul
does find it, so does it work more or less perfectly; As in painting, if the
pencill, and the colors be naught, the Painter must needs make bad work, and
but little resemblant unto the thing he would represent, so the soul finding
the body indisposed to receive the figure and lineaments, that she would give
of this beauty which it loves, the resemblance remains so imperfect, as the
features are hardly knowable: And when this happens thus, doubtless he that
has the most perfect representation of this Intelligence, and of the Planet,
shall be loved by simpathy of the other who has it, though ill done: For his
soul, though it has not the representation of this face which it loves, in
this body, to the life; yet does love the Portraiture when he sees it well done
in what place soever it be; but on the contrary, that soul which shall meet
with a matter: well disposed, and which by consequence has the Idea and
pattern well represented; it daigns not to turn its eyes upon the other,
either because it scorns it, seeing it so ill made, or because it knows it
not, having so little resemblance; and from hence proceeds that love which is
not mutual.

But (said Hylas and interrupted) good Father give me leave to ask you one
question: If these loves proceed from simpathy how comes it to pass, that
after one has loved another, he sometimes cease that love; nay, sometimes to
scorn, and often to hate. This question, answered the Druid, and smiled, is a
question fit for Hylas, and you may see that this simpathy is a blind instinct,
since Hylas loving and ceasing to love one and the same subject, yet he does
not know why he does so: But Hylas, I will tell you, to the end that hereafter
you may know the reason of those things which you do so well practice.

Imagine, Hylas, that those impressions which the soul makes in her body, by
which she represents this superior beauty of her understanding, and of her
Planet, be indeed corporeal: For she draws the lineaments in the fancy, as a
Lover does the features of those he loves in his imagination, and represents
them in such sort in his senses, and in his complexion, as she makes his humor
melancholy, if she have any influence from Saturn; and merry, if from Jupiter;
and so of the rest. And afterward, as we have already said, she takes so great
a custom in contemplating and approving these things, as she has made it
habitual, which though it be very difficult to change or lose, yet it may be
changed and lost. As we see commonly come to pass, in wax and a seal: Though
the wax have an impression and figure, yet if one will make a new impression,
the same wax loses the first figure, and takes the new; so the soul having
imprinted this Celestial Character in the senses, if they through
carelessenesse be not pleased with it, or else any new objects make the will
rove after them; it is certain, these will mark his fancy with another
figure, and it will so lose the first resemblance, as that it will retain no
shadow of it; and then the party who was loved by him, or who loved him by
simpathy losing this resemblance which he had, he loses also the love which it
caused. For even as Habitudes, so simpathy, may be lost, and gotten; but Hylas,
if every time you have changed, you have imprinted a new Idea in your self,
there is none in the world whose impressions are not in you; so as my daughter
may hope that you will be more constant unto her, than you have been to all the
world; not that she merits more then her world of Predecessors, but because she
is the last. Every one laughed at the conclusion; and Hylas had answered, if
Astrea had not interposed.

I beseech you, Father, said she, if it be so that love does proceed from this
sympathy, how comes it to pass, one should be long acquainted with another
without any love, and yet love at last? The answer which I gave unto Hylas,
replied Adamas, may serve unto this question: At the first, that person had not
the Character of the beauty of this intelligence; and since by a new mark, as
with a new seal, he might have it imprinted: but to demonstrate it a little
clearer.

The soul being wrapped in these bodies of ours, as long as it is there shut up
as in a Prison, she does not understand, nor comprehend any thing but only by
the senses by which, as by so many windows, she come to the knowledge of all
that is in the Universe: And she does not only not understand nor comprehend,
but by them; but also she can neither understand nor comprehend, but by
corporeal representations, although she does study and contemplate the
incorporeal substances. Hence it comes to pass, that she cannot have a
knowledge of things more perfectly, then as the senses present them unto her:
and if they be false and deluders, they deceive her, and cause her to be of a
false judgment; as we see in such as are sick, who think meats though never so
good, yet to be ill tasted, because their gust is depraved. So likewise, such
as have ill eyes, they oftentimes see things double, or of another color: or
yet, though the eyes be good and sound, yet some interpositions betwixt the eye
and the object may delude; as if they look through a blew or red Glass, all
they see seems to be of the same colors: A straight staff put into the water,
will seem crooked; and all things greater or lesser, according to the qualities
of the Spectacles through which they are looked upon. Now these falsities,
being represented by the senses, for truths, the soul which gives credit unto
them, is presently corrupted in her judgment, because the things presupposed,
and from whence she draws consequences, are such: The Judgment being made,
the Will immediately consents unto it: The Will, I say, which has that which is
good for her object, and that which is judged so, or which on the contrary,
does fly that which she thinks to be evil.

And from hence you may understand, fair shepherdess, that the reason why
sometimes we see one whom we do not love, yet afterward do love; is, either
because our eyes and our senses, whose office is to present these things unto
the soul, are not faithful in the functions; or else the Mediums by which they
act, have some imperfection which hinders them from doing their duties
faithfully; which imperfections being removed, they come to discover the truth,
and relate it unto the soul, which then finding this resemblance, brings
ardently to love that which before she saw and did not care for.

Diana, who hearkened very attentively unto Adamas: Reverend Father, said she,
and smiled, I would gladly propound one question unto you, did I not think I
should be too troublesome in it: No, said Adamas, whatsoever so sweet a
shepherdess shall ask, I shall answer if I be able: Surely, said she, the wise
Adamas is able to answer many more, then such a filly ignorant shepherdess as
I am can ask. Tell me, I beseech you, since love proceeds from sympathy, which
is an image represented in us, of that Intelligence and Planet under which we
were born; how comes it to pass, that fair ones are commonly loved by every
one? For it should seem that all those who love, are born under one and the
same planet, which we know they are not, being borne at several times.

I ever expected, answered Adamas that this subtle shepherdess would ask some
question which was not common; but I will try if I can answer it. All fair
things, although they be differing, yet have some conformity amongst
themselves, as all good things have; and therefore some have said, That there
is but one good, and one fair, after the similitude of which all things good
and fair are judged to be such. Now these Planets, and these Intelligences
which govern them, are neither good nor fair, but only as they resemble most
the supreme good and fair. And though they are amongst themselves separate and
differing; yet they are not amiable nor estimable, but as they are good and
fair: And this Goodness and Fairness having always conformity, though they
be in diverse subjects; it need not be thought strange, if many do love those
persons who are fair, though they be not born under the same Planet, since
every one observes in their beauty something which is conformable unto their
own.

I am now, replied Hylas, the most contented man in the world, for I have
learned one thing which will be highly advantageous unto me. And you Silvander,
said he, and turned toward him, you have reason to be mute at this discourse,
for it nothing concerns you. I do not know, answered Silvander, wherein it
will much advantage you. O ignorant shepherd, replied Hylas, did thou not
hear the wise Adamas say, that the reason why fair ones are loved by so many,
was, because their beauty had a conformity with all the Planets and
Intelligencies? I heard it very well, answered Silvander; but what does that
advantage you? In this, replied Hylas, since I do love so many several
beauties, it argues that I have conformity with them all; so consequently am
fairer then you are, who never looks but upon one. I think, replied Silvander,
and smiled, that if your argument be good, you are not only fairer then I am,
but then any in the Country, nay then all, put them all together; but you must
not understand the discourse of the sage Adamas in that sort; but on the
contrary, if you remember what he answered Daphnide, you will find that it is
a sign of a great defect in you, who has the portraiture of your Intelligence
and Planet so ill made, as there is not one of these fair ones who does not
disdain to see in thee so great imperfection of a thing so perfect.

This moved all to laughter, and Hylas had replied something in his own
defense, had they not risen from the Table, it being very late, and because
Astrea did very well remember the counsel which Leonide gave her, to entreat
Adamas that he would be pleased to come unto their Town, and offer the
sacrifice of Thanks for the fortunate Missletoe; she took Diana, Phillis,
Celidea, Stella, and the rest of the shepherdesses a part, and propounded to
them, that since the shepherds had already showed their forwardness in
requesting Adamas to offer this sacrifice; it was fit they joined with them in
the same desires, and to try if they could carry him with them when they
returned. Every one approved of the motion; and after a consultation, who
amongst them should be their speaker, it was agreed, that Diana should be the
mouth of the Company, which she accepted of, though at the first she made some
difficulty. So then addressing themselves unto Alexis, they intimated unto her
their desires of speaking unto the sage Adamas, they desired that it might be
by her means. Alexis never asking what the business was, went presently unto
Adamas, letting him know the desires of these discreet shepherdesses. Then
Diana in the Name of all her Companions, delivered their Petition in very
elegant terms. And added thereunto, that they would esteem it as a high favor,
if he would be pleased without any longer delay, to go now along with them;
also did humbly beseech him, to let the fair Druid his Daughter, and the Nymph
Leonide, honor the sacrifice with their presence.

Unto which supplication, they received this Answer from the Druid: Fair and
discreet shepheardesses, your request is so just, and I am obliged so much to
see the honor of the great Tautates performed, that upon one condition, I am
ready to do as you desire, I am most confident answered Diana, that there is
none here, who are not pleased with any thing you shall be pleased to command.
I desire then, replied Adamas, that you will stay with me all this day, that I
may take order for all things necessary for the sacrifice, and I promise you
that to morrow I will conduct you to your Town: And I shall most humbly desire,
that this Lady (said he, and addressed himself unto Daphniae) will do us so
far honor, as to be an assistant at this sacrifice of Thanks, as well to
render this honor unto our great Tautates, as to oblige us all, in not parting
so much good Company. The condition upon which our Petition depends, replied
Diana, is so much unto our advantage, as we cannot desire a more noble favor.

Thus the voyage of Adamas was concluded upon, and he at the same time in order
to his promise, beseech'^ the fair Daphnide she would be pleased to be an
assistant, which she freely consented unto, as well out of her complacency, as
out of her great desires to see the manner how these shepherds and
shepheardesses do live, of whom she heard so much. Alexis was a little startled
at her returning unto her Town, being still in extreme fears of being known:
Yet seeing it was a thing resolved upon, she dissembled her fears as well as
she could. Astrea, after thanks returned unto the Druid for this great favor,
she came to rejoice with Alexis, because they should enjoy her company a long
time. It Is I, fair shepherdess, replied Alexis, who ought to rejoice the most,
and, who can most truly say, that I was never better pleased at any thing,
since I came from the place where I had my education, than I am in my
contentments of seeing you. Madam, said Astrea, heaven forbid I should ever
doubt of any thing you say: but I must needs confess that if I could, it is of
this, because I can hardly persuade my self that I, inconsiderable I, who am
so very unfortunate, should have any thing in me, which can merit, or which is
capable of receiving so high a favor.

Fair shepherdess, answered Alexis, you may very well believe what I said,
for I never use to lie, and believe it also, that I had rather dye than either
lie or dissemble unto you whom I love so well. Does it please you then Madam,
replied Astrea, that I should believe it so? Not only please me, said Alexis,
but I do infinitely desire it with all my heart. Then Madam, said Astrea, I
would with all my heart also, it would please you to let me live with you as
long as I live, which if you do, you will make me the happiest and most
contented woman in the whole Universe.

Astrea, said Alexis, and took her hand, I am afraid you will quickly repent
of this resolution: Did you Madam but know Astreas humor, replied the
shepherdess, you would never think so, for she is of such a Nature that never
alters a resolution once taken. Alexis upon this stood still and spoke not, and
going a pace or two back, did look upon her with the same eye she did, when
she commanded her never to see her again, and this thought did so freshly bring
into her mind all former passages, as it was impossible for her not to give
some knowledge of her self, by the tears which trickled from her eyes, which
yet she had so much power over her self as to restrain after a few drops.

Astrea seeing such a sudden alteration in her, was much astonished, as not
being able to imagine the cause, nor conceive that any thing she had said could
possibly displease her: And in this perplexity they both stood a long while
speechless; at last the shepherdess was the first who began to speak: Madam,
said she unto her, I see that you are changed upon a sudden, and I cannot
possibly choose but be exceedingly troubled at it; if I be the cause, either by
my discourse, or otherwise, I do vow by that soul which loves you above all
the World, that I will presently be revenged upon my self for it; if I be not,
then tell me I beseech you, if my life can do you any service, and you shall
see there is nothing so dear unto me, which I would not sacrifice unto it.
Alexis, knowing her fault, and checking her self; did endeavor to excuse and
hide it as well as she could, and therefore with a deep sigh, she answered
thus; It Is true, fair shepherdess, that the alteration which you observed in
my face, did proceed from you, and yet you are not to be blamed, but only my
own soul, which is too sensible of a thing which your words did bring into my
memory: And to give satisfaction unto your perplexity, you must know, that I
being brought up amongst the Virgin Druids of Carnutes, amongst the multitude
that was there, I made choice of one, whom above all the rest seemed unto me
most amiable, and thought my self not mistaken in my choice, she being
esteemed so amongst all our Companions, and having all desirable qualities
which use to create love: She was fair, hansome, and as well extracted as any
in all the Country, her wit was suitable to the perfections of her body,
everyway accomplished, and all her actions were sweetened with affability and
civility; her sweetness flowed so upon me, that I loved her, and because I
thought she loved me, I loved her extremely, and this love came to that height
betwixt us, that I could not live without her, nor she without me: Thus we
passed over many years with abundance of content and satisfaction from each
other; but whilst I thought my self more happy in this condition of
friendship, than the greatest Monarch can be of his Dominions, this fair one
quitted me, and so separated her self from all terms of friendship with me,
as she would never see me again, and without ever telling any cause fell into
such hatred of me as she would never come near me

My perplexity at this alteration was so great, and the blow so sensible, as I
becoming all sorrow, I fell sick, and so dangerously, as I believe you have
heard, that I thought I should never recover it. Now when you fell into
expression of your constant and unalterable humor, I remembered the like
expressions which this fair and wise Virgin used unto me, and which were so
ill observed, and this caused the alteration which you observed in my
countenance. Madam, said Astrea, I am sorry that I should be any way the cause
of your perplexity; but I hope you will think me innocent, for had I known
it, I would never have committed this fault: But who would ever have thought,
that you who are so fair and full of all perfections, enough to invite and
keep the whole world in love with you, should ever find a woman so simple and
inconsiderate, as to let a happiness voluntarily escape her hands, which every
one ought to desire and covet? Oh God! Oh Heavens! Oh all that's sacred! how
careful should I be in keeping so great a happiness, if Heaven beyond my
merit should ever raise me to so high a fortune? And with how much careful
assiduity should I court it, if by my care, pains, and travel I had any hopes
to obtain it? But Heaven, which has looked upon me with a frowning eye ever
since I was borne, will I fear never be so favorable to me as long as I live.
Fair shepherdess, said Alexis then, let me entreat you, that unless you will
exceedingly disoblige me, accuse not this fair and wise Virgin of any crime in
treating me after this manner: For I cannot endure without much displeasure she
should ever receive any blame, for that which is only my fault, and the ill
influence of that planet under which I was born. And as to your desire of my
succeeding in her place, believe it Astrea, it is I that would covet it with
any Art, but for one thing which gives me a check. And most assuredly were it
not for that consideration, my desires of it should exceed yours But, fair
shepherdess I fear, that though now at the first, you judge me worthy of your
amity, yet when you do particularly know me, your judgment will find it self
mistaken, and look asquint at me as this fair and wise one did, whose loss I
do so sadly resent; and if such a fatal chance should befall me I know not
what would become of poor Alexis, being able to say, and truly, that I do
find my self so weak against such fatal blows, as I know not whether my
life will last after I have received them. And since it has pleased the great
Tautates to recover me from the danger of the last. I must confess that my
fears of falling into the like, makes me tremble, and turns my blood to ice.
It does not pleas^ you Madam, replied Astrea, I should say that this fair one
was to blame in treating you thus, and therefore because I will not upon any
consideration whatsoever displease you, I will not say it; but by your
permission I will say, that she will never find such a jewel as she has lost;
and that if Tautates as a most particular blessing would prefer me unto her
room, I would not part from it for a thousand worlds. Ah fair shepherdess,
said Alexis, and sighed, if such a happiness should befall me, I should vaule
your amity at as a high rate, as you can mine: But believe me fair one, you
know not what you desire, when you desire my amity. I confess Madam, what you
say, answered Astrea; for the happiness which I desire is so high, as the
weakness of my understanding is not of capacity to comprehend it: But Madam,
since it is not the meanness of my merit, what is it which hinders you from
doing me this high favor, since I do call Tautates to witness, that if I be
so happy as to obtain it, I will preserve it deerer than my life; nay, even
that life which would be an infinite happiness, if you think me worthy of it.
Alexis upon this, swelling with contentment, she took her hand, and grasping
it a little, said unto her; fair shepherdess, remember where we leave this
discourse, and we will finish it to morrow, as we go unto your Town; in the
mean time, be assured that I have a greater inclination and will to love you
and serve you, than you can tell how to desire.

The reason why Alexis referred this discourse until another time was, least
lookers on should have any suspicion, had it continued longer; besides, she
could not there hide her blushes and alterations in her face, as she hoped to
do by the way, when every one would employ their eyes in looking at their
feet, and choosing the way: And besides that, she intended to advise with Adamas
and Leonide what to do upon this occasion: And by fortune, Hylas, as if he had
been some express Envoy, came to interrupt their discourse. Mistress, said
he, if you continue talking thus long with this shepherdess, I shall believe
you think the shepherdesses of this Country more amiable than the shepherds.
Never doubt that, said Alexis, and lay the blame only upon Nature which
inclines every thing to love its like; but Servant be not angry nor troubled at
it, for I have love enough for you yet. I thought, replied Hylas, that being
brought up amongst the Druids and learned Virgins, you had known the Laws of
Nature better than you do; but since you come from amongst them so ignorant, I
will instruct you Mistress a little better than they have done. Perhaps
Servant, answered she, and smiled, you will lose both your time and your pains
as well as they; and therefore I advise you to let it alone: Yet I cannot
endure the wrong you have done me, replied Hylas, without complaint, since you
will not be told of your faults and instructed in your errors. I should be
sorry, said Alexis, that Hylas should complain of me in earnest, but I hope he
is only in jest. How can you think I should choose but be angry? replied
Hylas, when I hear you say that you have love enough yet left for me, after
you have loved these shepherdesses? It seems I must be contented with the
refuse of others, and take what they leave: I do expect, Mistress, that they
should have what I leave, and all reason requires it so. If that be it which
angers you, replied Alexis, and smiled, we shall make all straight. I will
divide my amity into two, one half shall be to love shepherdesses, and the
other shepherds; and amongst all the shepherds you shall be in the first place.
But of these two parts, said Hylas, Which shall be the prime and the greater?
There is no question, answered Alexis, but it must be that which is to be
employed amongst shepherdesses; and with reason, because of shepherds, you are
the only one whom I will love: and of shepherdesses, there is not one whom I
will not love and serve. Then (said Hylas) I must confess you are in the
right, and that I am too blame for accusing you of ignorance, since I see you
are more knowing then even Silvander is.

Whilst they were talking thus, the rest of the company were discoursing upon
several subjects in the Great Chamber; and Phillis who had her eye continually
upon Astrea, seeing Calidon going toward her, and knowing he had a design of
particular discourse with her, she advanced to interrupt them, and left
Silvander alone with Diana; for as fortune was, Paris desiring to consult with
Leonide, he was gone with her to her Chamber, so as Silvander had the
opportunity of coming nearer this shepherdess, with whom Phillis always
stayed, until Calidon caused her to go away: And because there was continual
contests between them, Mistress (said she as she went away) I would not have
you think me jealous, so as I dare not leave this shepherd with you; for I am
so confident of my good fortune, and of his shallow merit, as I do not at all
fear him: And to show the truth of my words, I will leave you both together,
whilst I go and help Astrea in a great Combat which I see she is preparing
for, against an approaching enemy; so without stay for any answer, she went
toward Astrea, who imagining the occasion of her coming, took her by the hand,
and pulled her so near, as Calion could not well accost her. But that young
shepherd who was really wounded with the beauty of Astrea, could not forbear
from coming to her: and because his addresses unto her were known unto Phocion,
who liked very well of it, and was advised unto it by Thamires, he thought it
no matter, though he spoke unto this shepherdess in the presence of any other;
and that Phillis perhaps would help him out in the declaration of his mind,
because she might think it a match advantageous to her companion. Phocion had
already declared himself to be of the same judgment, who was held to be one
of the wisest Pastors of his time, and Uncle unto the shepherdess, and who
since the death of her Father and Mother, had ever as much care of her, as if
she had been his Daughter.

Approaching therefore with this assurance unto this fair shepherdess; Shall
I not be too troublesome (said he unto her after a salute) if uncalled, I make
a third in your Council? Never Calidon, answered Astrea, for he cannot be
troublesome in what place so ere he comes, especially unto us who highly esteem
him: I could wish, answered the shepherd, that this Epithete of Esteem, had
been changed into Love. Sometimes we do wish (said the shepherdess) things
that are prejudicial unto others, and not advantageous to our selves. I do
believe (said Calidon) that what you are pleased to say, may fall out in any
other occasion sooner than in this which presents it self. For, fair
shepherdess, give me leave to tell you, that you may believe, my desires are
not disadvantageous to you, since the said Phocion is of another judgment:
Phocion, who in prudence and wisdom, is reputed for the Oracle amongst all the
shepherds of this Country, and who did me the honor to grant my request which
I made unto him by Thamires. Also, to say it is any prejudice unto my self, it
cannot be, for on the contrary I shall never enjoy contentment until it be
brought to pass. I cannot tell (replied Astrea, with a little anger in her
eye) what the request whereof you speak may be; But if it be any thing that
concerns me, there is none who either ought or can promise any thing for me
against my will and consent, since my Father and my Mother, to my sad
misfortune, are both taken away. And as to what you say concerning Phocion, you
cannot tell me any thing of his prudence and wisdom, more then I do know; but
this does not conclude him and I to be both of the same judgment: and though
that his may be the better, yet it must be some time before I can consent unto
it Also to tell you truly, I do believe that if this wise Pastor did know my
mind, he would quickly change his opinion; and that is it, which makes me
entreat you to change yours; for if you do continue in it, besides the doing of
your self no good, it will draw much discontent both upon your self, and me.
Fair ones, replied Calidon, are like unto Gods, they will be overcome by
supplications. I cannot tell what fair ones you mean, replied Astrea; but I am
most sure, that neither your words, nor your prayers, will ever obtain any
thing from me that will please you. Perhaps, said he, that when you see me even
ready to die before your fair face, you will not be so extremely cruel as to
let no pity be found amongst so much beauty. If you continue, answered Astrea,
you will make me believe, that you think you are still talking to the fair
Celidea. But Calidon, to be free and plain with you; since death has taken
from me, him whom I desired, I will never give death so much advantage as to
desire any more; do not think but that I do esteem and honor your merit, as
much as I do any shepherd in the Country: I do acknowledge my self obliged
unto you for this address, but never think that these considerations, or any
other whatsoever, can ever make me alter my will: And take this as a Doom
written by immutable destiny. Since Astrea has lost her first Love, she shall
not love any other but Tautates, unto whose service she shall devote all the
rest of her life. Consider this Calidon, and believe this Prophecy, which if
you do not, time will tell you how true it is, and make you repent of your
incredulity.

This Answer was so resolute, that Astrea amazed the shepherd, so as she stroke
him dum, and could not reply; and the shepherdess seeing him in such a
confusion, she rose up and left Phillis in her room: Then she went toward
Alexis, who seeing her coming, and knowing by her looks that she was troubled,
she left Hylas to ask her what the matter was. Madam, said Astrea unto her,
with a smile mixed with disdain, you may think that it is easy for me to
support my burden, but I was never more weary of it in all my life; for the
importunities of these Lovers are abominably troublesome. Calidon knows how to
choose his time, and he knows how well discourses of Love does please me: I
advised him to continue, if he did intend to lose his labor and his time, and
that perhaps he thought he was speaking unto Celidea. Then she related unto the
Druid all the discourse, and the answer she had given him, with so much
passion, as Alexis saw that there was no fear of this Rival.

In the mean time, Silvander was with Diana, she sat, and he kneeled, and so
over-joyed to see himself with her, in the absence of Paris and Phillis, as he
could not be thankful enough to Love for so great a favor. Mistress, said he
unto her, How shall I begin to thank you for this high favor, in staying here
with me, whereas you might spend the time in talk with these kind shepherds,
and fair shepherdesses? Silvander, said she, though I would oblige you, yet in
this I do not do it so much as you say; for I am confident there is none in all
the company, who would not be glad to change places with me: and I swear
shepherd, that I think my self so well, as I would not with them. Did I think,
replied Silvander, that your heart is consentant to the harmony of your tongue,
I should think my self the happiest shepherd in the Universe. If that be all
that's wanting to make you happy, replied she, be confident Silvander, that then
you are as happy as you can wish. What assurance, said Silvander, can I have of
it? You are a person of so much judgment, answered the shepherdess, as you
will quickly find the truth of it, if you will but be pleased to look for it;
or if you could not, what else, do you think could stay me here? I could find
excuses in abundance to go away; But I rather fear, Silvander, that I am
wearysome to you, and that it is only civility which keeps you here with me:
Fairest Mistress, said Silvander presently, This excess of kindness which you
are pleased to show me, does but offend me, since if you have that opinion of
me, or think me a man of so weak a judgment, you do a manifest wrong unto
your and my affection; for certainly I were a man without common sense, if I
did not see the perfections of the fair Diana, which every one that sees,
confesses, and admires. Is it possible that Silvander should be the only man
that is blind? Can he not see the Sun when it shines? But the truth is, I am so
dazzled with so great a light when I am with you, as I have no eyes but only to
see, nor spirit, but only to adore divine Diana upon earth, whom I hold
transcendent to her in the heavens, since the one is surmounted in Glory by the
Sun her brother; but the other surpasses all that is in the Universe.
Silvander, said the shepherdess and smiled, I permit you to say what you will
of me, who knows well enough what I am: but who would ever have thought, that
the wager which you undertook, could inspire you with such fained expressions.
But as to your wager with Phillis; how long shepherd, must I be your Mistress?
when must I change that Name to that of your Judge? Those expressions wherewith
I am inspired, replied Silvander, are so full of reallity, as they have no
dependence upon the wager: And as for the name of Mistress, whereof you
speak: believe it fair Diana, that you may take the name of Judge when you
please, but never can shake off the name of Mistress, which not the wager, nor
fiction, but your perfections and my affection have so justly gotten upon my
soul. I have formerly told you, replied the shepherdess, that I allow you to
speak thus until the wager be decided; but pray tell me, when shall we all
three be discharged of this business? For it has continued so long that the
term of three Months is almost doubled. For my part said Silvander, I shall
neither prolong nor retard the time, being assured that come when it will, I
shall not alter my condition. Do not talk of the future, said Diana, but with
doubt, since none but the gods can tell what it will produce, but tell me
Silvander, shall we employ the afternoon in ending the difference? I conceive
it a convenient opportunity, and we shall have as good assistance, as we can
desire.

Silvander knowing that he could not hope to live with her in such freedom,
when this fiction was taken away, he made a stop, and did not return an answer
to the shepherdess, which she perceiving how he was perplexed, it did the more
assure her of his affection; but feigning, as before accustomed; why do you not
give me an answer, shepherd, said she, would you have us take this convenient
opportunity, or would you have it deferred until to morrow when we are at our
own Town? See what a tractable Judge I am, I refer it unto your will. My
Judge, said Silvander, and smiled, before I give an answer I beseech you let
some Articles pass betwixt us; promise me that your judgment shall pass to
my advantage, and that the thing which is most pleasing to me, may not be
forbidden me, and then if you please I will receive your doom before I depart
from this place. My judgment, said Diana, shall be just; and as for the
forbidding which you so much fear, let me understand what you mean, and I
will answer you. Silvander then assuming a more serious look: I never had the
least doubt, said he, but that you would be most just; but give me leave to
tell you, that extreme justice, is extreme injury; and because you desire an
exposition upon my second request, I conceive Mistress, continued he, and
smiled, that it is best to defer the business until another time, to the end,
I may have the more time to inform my Judge: Upon this, they were interrupted
by Adamas, who invited Daphnide and the rest of the company to go and walk;
for the heat of the day being over, it was more pleasant abroad than in the
house. And most of the company being desirous to take the Air, the
delightsomenesse of the place inviting them, they all set forward, some
singing, and others discoursing upon such subjects as best pleased them.

The Cavalier who was close by the Temple of Astrea, taking the same way that
Paris went, he came present to the bridge of Botereux, and a little after to
the height of the Plain which discovered the Castle, and great City of
Marcellies. The Country seemed very delectable unto him: For on the one side he
saw the fertile Hills of Cousant, which from the tops to the bottomes were
enricht with many Vineyards, and upon the tops of all, great Woods, which
Nature had placed there to fence them from blustering winds; The Plain
extended it self as far as Mont Brison, and following those delightful Hills
enlarged it self toward Surida, Mount Round and Feurs, with so many little
Rivolets and Lakes, that the variety made the prospect beyond imagination
pleasant: And because the way in which he was, conducted to Marcellies, and his
face being that way, it was the first place his eye fell upon. The Castle,
situated upon the point of a Rock, which made it obvious to the eye, and seen
far, did presently bring into his memory, the place where he first saw
Madonthe: For its grandeur, its Towers and magnificence of structure had a
great resemblance of the place where she dwelt. This Memorandum brought into
his fancy the many pleasing passages which formerly he had seen with her, and
the extreme perplexities and sorrows he had sustained since his disgrace: And
because this comparison could not choose but much trouble his mind, this poor
Cavalier was constrained to lite from his horse, and rest himself under the
first shade he found, where leaving his Horse with his Servant, he went under a
shady tree, he lifted his eyes up to heaven, and stood so ravished in
contemplation, as he could neither hear, nor see anything about him

The Servant, who did exceedingly love his Master, and was sorry in his soul
to see what a miserable life he lived, did heartily curse love, and her that
was the cause of it. By fortune at the same time, hearing a voice, he began to
listen, and stepping a little nearer saw a Cavalier complaining against the
ingratitude and inconstancy of a Lady. And because he thought this would be a
good excuse to make him retire from his sad thoughts. Sir, said he unto him,
hearken I beseech you unto the Cavalier is singing who is near you. Away, away,
said he, I care not for meddling with the matters of another: Do thou not
think I have enough to do with my own? The business of another, Sir,
replied the Servant, may do good if good use be made of them: Upon this they
hearkened, and heard the Cavalier singing a very invective song against his own
Lady, and against all others.

The one Cavalier hearing the other blame all women against reason for the
fault of one was much offended against him for it, taxing him with indiscretion
and injustice: And thinking that if he should suffer it without revenge, and
let such blasphemies pass unpunished, he should commit a great fault against
the fair Madonthe: And therefore he would presently make him eat his words,
and cry mercy for the injurious language he had uttered; but upon better
consideration he thought it more expedient to give him occasion of seeking
Combat; for, said he, if he be courageous, he will resent the offense I shall
give, and require satisfaction, and if he be a Coward, he is not worthy my
fighting with him. In this resolution, the Cavalier rose up, and turning
toward the other Cavalier, after he had a little considered what he should
say, he sung in as loud, and distinct a voice as he could, a song which
intimated, That since he saw how inconstant his Lady was, it was his part
either to die, or else cure himself with disdain of her.

This being distinctly heard by the other Cavalier, he could not choose but
think that these words were intended against him. And being one of the most
courageous Cavaliers in all that Country, he took it for such an affront, that
without more ado, he pulled down his Helmet (for he was armed Capape) and
went through the Wood to the place from whence the voice came.

The other, who expected to see what effects his answer would produce as soon
as he saw him coming, and being resolved that if he did not resent his words,
he would add such as should provoke him to fight But the arrogance of him with
whom he had to do was such, as he needed small provocations, as well because he
was confident of his own strength and skill, as because he was Nephew unto
Polemas, whose authority was so heighted since the departure of Clidemant and
Lindamor, as he was near the capacity of making himself absolute Lord of the
Segusians. The name of this Cavalier was Argenteus; he was taller than the
common height, and so well proportioned every way, as it was easy to judge him
a man of great strength and courage. He had long courted one of Galatheas
Nimphs, and whether it was true or no, I know not, but so it was, that he
thought she loved him: her name was Silere, one that was very fair and highly
hansome; but when he was urgent with her for some testimony of her good will,
and when she denied him, he according to his arrogant humor would needs use a
kind of authority over her; which she taking very ill, she chose rather to
break quite off with him, than any longer to endure his arrogance. He seeing
himself deceived in his hopes, fell into such a passion of anger against her
as he conceived an extreme hatred against all women whatsoever for her sake,
and ever since, did vent the most bitter invectives against them, that he could
invent.

Argenteus then, according to his custom, arrogantly approaching the other
Cavalier without any salute or action of civility, was it to me Cavalier (said
he) that you intented your song. The Stranger who naturally could not put up
any incivility, and being already ill satisfied with him; Take it as you will,
said he unto him, I perceive by your arms and your language, (said Argenteus)
that you are a Stranger: For did you know me, you would give me another answer;
but since it is so, either get upon your Horse, or else be as you are on foot,
and I will make you know your folly and rashness. Then lose no time (said the
Stranger) but on foot let us end the difference: Upon this he stepped into the
high way, he drew his sword, and stood in such a bold posture that Argenteus
judged him to be a brave Cavalier.

When they were ready to begin fight, they heard a great noise of Horses and
Coaches, which came from Marcelleis straight toward them. This moved Damon to
say, that he thought it better to go into the Wood, and let the Company pass,
least they should be interrupted: But Argenteus who did imagine that it was
Galathea or Amasis, and was very desirous to show his valor: No, no, Cavalier,
said he, never let us hide our selves but when we do ill, and therefore as you
say, let us lose no time, unless your heart fail you to maintain your
quarrel My quarrel, said he is so just, that though in other occasions I had
no courage, yet I should in this, not only against you, but against all men
living. But if as you say, ill actions ought to be hid, I know not a place dark
enough to hide yours, who maintains a thing so unjust, and so unworthy the
name of a Cavalier, in blaming Ladies whom every Cavalier is obliged to
maintain, serve, and defend. Alas my good friend, said Arganteus, and mocked
him, how long have you been a highway Orator:* It is with this, said he, and
showed him his sword; that I use to speak; and if you have courage, you shall
find that I can do better then you can speak.

Upon this, they fell on very furiously, and as stout a Combat it was, as
could be seen betwixt two valiant Cavaliers: They were no sooner warmed in the
fight, but all the company, whom they saw coming, arrived at the place: And
because the Combat was in the high way, and every one knew Arganteus, they
stopped to see what would be the issue. Galathea, who was in the Coach with the
Nymphs, did hate the arrogance of Arganteus, and they all wished he might be
punished for it by this stranger. But knowing his great valor, strength and
skill, they were much afraid he would be too hard for this unknown Gavalier,
though his hansome presence and good beginning got him a good opinion amongst
them. Galathea seeing Polemas near her Coach, called unto him, and asked who it
was which was fighting with Arganteus, and what was the cause of the quarrel,
and whether it were not best to part them? To which he answered, That it was
injurious to hinder them from ending their difference, since they fought upon
equal terms, and without treachery: And as to the Cavalier and their Quarrel,
he could meet with none that could inform him, but the servant unto the
stranger. Polemas answered thus, because he was very confident in the valor of
Arganteus, and that the stranger would not be able to resist him: and he was
very desirous that Galathea might see the valor and courage of those that had
relation unto him. But she according to the curiosity of all Ladies, being
desirous to know who this stranger was, caused his servant to be called unto
her, whom she asked who that strange Cavalier was, and how the quarrel began.
The cause of their quarrel, Madam, answered he, is very just on my Masters
side; For he hearing that other Cavalier speaking very ill of all women, he
could not endure it, as thinking it against the honor of a Cavalier: But as
for telling you who he is, I am sorry it is forbidden me; yet I assure my
self, that as soon as the Combat is ended, he is so civil as to satisfy your
demands. Polemas laughed to hear him speak thus, and in mockery said unto him;
well said my good friend, thou art in the right, when thou said, my Lady
should know, when the Combat is ended; for his Epitaph upon his Tomb will tell
her. Sir, said the servant to him, if my Master had not come off a more
dangerous enterprise then this, he would never have been able to come so far
as he has done upon this he retired to the place where he stood before.

During this discourse, the two Cavaliers continued the fight most furiously;
and Damon had such a desire to come off with honor, as there was not a
by-stander, who did not esteem him a very brave Cavalier, especially Galathea,
and her Nymphs, in whose eyes might their contentments be seen, when Damon got
any advantage, which they would not dissemble though Polemas stood by, because
it was their cause in which he fought.

It was now near half an hour since they first began blows, theirs Arms were
broken and shattered in several places, when Argantens felt himself something
faint, and was not so nimble, nor laid on such vigorous blows. On the contrary,
Damon did not only seem hearty and fresh, but did rather increase in vigor
and agility, which did exceedingly trouble Polemas, but more Arganteus, who did
now begin to esteem his enemy very highly; but presenly after, the strangers
sword did reach his body almost at every blow, so as Arganteus fainted down
right, either by reason of the loss of blood, or greatness of his wounds. Now
Polemas did heartily repent that he did not part them at the beginning of the
Combat, and wished that some good genius would move Galathea to interrupt
them: she who perceived how Polemas was troubled, although she did not love
him, yet would give him this satisfaction in respect of the service he did her
Mother; and knowing no better way to part these Cavaliers, then by entreating
them her self, she came out of her Coach, and withal her Nymphs came to the
Combatants; At the very same time Arganteus not being able to sustain
himself, fell on his knee, and seemed as if at the sight of these Ladies, he
had done it purposely to ask them pardon for the injury he had done unto women.
But because Polemas thought Galathea too slow, and that his Nephew who drooped
already, would be quite dishonored if he stayed any longer; he made a sign
unto some of his servants, who presently gallopped, and fell upon Damon, who
never suspecting such treachery, nor had so much as looked back but for the cry
of Galathea and the Nimphs, toward whom turning his head, he saw seven or
eight Cavaliers coming toward him with swords in their hands, and menacing
him. All he could do, was to recoil unto his servant; but his courage was most
high and admirable since coming out of this Combat, after which he stood in
need of rest; as soon as his servant brought him his Horse, he vaulted into the
saddle without any stirrup; and he stood in need of all his agilitie to save
himself from the hurt they would have done him; for he was no sooner in his
saddle, and the bridle in his hand, but he had them all upon him, do what
Galethea could, who was much terrified with all her Nimphs amongst all the
horses. As for Polemas, he feigned that he never saw the confusion, being with
Arg^nteus, and taking order concerning him.

In the mean time, these Cavaliers did so assault this stranger, as though at
two blows he sent two of them out of the Combat, yet could he not prevent a
wound in his shoulder, and his horse from being killed under him, with several
blows which they gave him in his flank. The stranger perceiving him to faint
under him* let go his stirrops, and jumped nimbly upon the ground, which helped
him very well, for the Horses of his enemies would not come near unto his being
dead; yet it was impossible to save himself long, without some unexpected help.

The Nymph who saw such base injury done unto this Cavalier, and not being able
to endure it, she cried, and threatened the men of Polemas; but one amongst
their who commanded the rest, and to whom he had made a sign, knowing his
masters will, and seeming as if he did not hear Galathea, did still command
them to kill the Cavalier; when, as fortune was, one of the Lions of the
Fountain of Loves Verity, seeking for his prey came amongst the horses.

This Lion was so great and terrible, that all the Horses when they saw him
come amongst them, took such a fright, as there was neither Cavaliere nor
Servant that could be master of his own, but all ran away. That of Polemas and
the strangers servant, getting the bridle in their teeths, they ran as far as
the Town of Boen, no Bridge, no Gate, no Hedge, nothing could stop them; those
that stayed with the Coaches, took such a flight, that they never stayed till
they were above a league from the place, where they were overturned, and all
the Coaches and Harnesses torn in pieces; so as it was a thing impossible to
bring them back that day: as for Arganteus, they had set him on horseback, but
he was not able to hold himself on, so as being forsaken by all those who held
him, at the first start of the horse he fell down, and so unluckily, as he
broke his neck: Thus ended the proudest, and most arrogant Cavalier in all the
Country, and his horse by fortune running away for fear, and almost over the
stranger, he ran him through the body with his sword, and he fell down dead by
his Master. The Nymph thanked God for this encounter, for she knew that the
Lion would not do any harm, being so enchanted as he could not offend any,
but those who would try the adventure. And yet presently after she was driven
into fear; for the Lion who came only to seek for his prey of food, seeing
the strangers horse dead, he began to eat upon him: But the Cavaliere having
received so much good fortune from him, thought it a kind of ingratitude to
seen him torn in pieces without defending him; he went toward him with his
sword drawn, which the Nymph seeing, and fearing lest the Lion being provoked
should hurt him, she cried out, and entreated him not to go any further: But he
could not endure this indignity, he went straight to the Lion, but because his
back was toward him he would not strike him behind, and made him turn the
other way: The furious beast, seeing himself threatened with a sword, he leapt
aside, as if he would have run toward the Nimphs, which the Cavalier fearing,
he was much more exasperated to interpose betwixt them, so as the Lion who was
still before him, began to roar out extremely, beating his tail against the
ground, grinning with his teeth and sparkling eyes, he seemed as if he would
presently fall upon him, and but for the inthantment, doubtless, he had; But
that force being above his, he was constrained to turn above, and went to feed
upon the horse of Arganteus, of which after he was satisfied, he carried part
of the rest, according to his custom, unto the other Lion which guarded the
Fountain. The Cavaliere seeing the Lion going toward Arganteus, and fearing
lest he should devour his body, he stood by it, and guarded it, not being
willing the Corpse of so crave a Cavalier should be abused* But when he saw him
gone, then he went to the Nymphs, who having been Spectators of all his
generous actions did highly esteem him. He addressed himself first unto
Galathea imagining it to be her, as well by her Majestical deportment, as by
the honor which all did do unto her; and after civil salutation, he
beseeched her to pardon the inconveniency which upon his occasion she had
received.

I am very sorry Sir for yours, answered she, and extremely angry against the
indiscretion of those who have so unworthily and inconsiderately assaulted you
in my presence; but I promise you, Sir, that besides the correction which you
have given them, I shall cause them to be punished according to their merits.
Madam, answered the Cavalier, I should be very sorry that any who are in your
service should receive any displeasure by reason of me: I desire rather to
serve them all, and beg your favor upon them, Madam, and beseech you not to
refuse it at my request Sir, said she, it must be you that must forgive them,
since it is you whom they have offended; It is not the part of these Ladies and
my self to deny you any thing you shall please to ask, since you have so well
defended us against this discourteous Cavalier; and would have defended us from
the Lion; but we will speak of this another time. In the interim I think you
have received a wound in your shoulder, it is requisite the blood should be
stopped, until we come to a place where the wound may be dressed. The wound
whereof you speak Madam, replied he, is but a scratch; and all that you please
to say I have done for you, is far short of what low, and which I would most
willingly pay in your service: But since all your company is scattered* I
beseech you give me leave to conduct you unto some place of safty, for I
perceive this Country is not without very dangerous Beasts, so as it is not
safe to go without good guard. Galathea smiled, and said: I perceive Sir that
you are a Stranger since you do not know this Lion to be enchanted, so as he
will do no harm unto any unless unto such who will try the adventure of the
Fountain which he guards, and had you not provoked him, he would not so much
as have looked toward us. I could not endure, said he, that he should tear my
Horse in pieces before my face, much more that Cavalier, who though indiscreet,
yet was very valiant and courageous.

Silvia, who passed behind this Cavalier to look upon his wound, took notice
that it bled still which caused her to say unto Galathea; Madam, you talk too
much unto this Cavalier, for he bleeds very fast: Then they went all unto him,
and almost by force bound up his wound with their Handkerchers and made him a
Scarf to hold up his arm. Then Galathea conceived, that since their Coaches
came not, that it was the best course to walk gently unto Mount Verdan, where
they might conveniently stay, doubting that the Coaches were overturned and
broken: And because the way was but short and very fair, all the Nymphs
approved of the motion; and therefore the Cavalier took Galathea by one arm,
and Silvia took her by the other; and all the rest followed, discoursing upon
nothing else but the valor and merit of this Stranger: some extolled his
combat; others blamed the wrong that had been done him; Some admired his
boldness, and others could not highly enough esteem him for defending his
dead Horse, and his intention to defend the Corpse of Arganteus? But all desired
most passionately to know who he was, such extraordinary favor had his valor
purchased him amongst the Ladies.

He had not yet pulled up his Helmet, and walked on as if he did not intend it;
when Silvia observing the curiosity of all her companions: Is it not strange
Madam, said she, that we should be so much obliged to this brave Cavalier, and
neither know his Name nor his face: If you please, we will make trial of his
courtesy as we have already of his valor: for he walks on with his Helmet
down as if he were yet in hand with Arganteus. The Cavalier not staying for
Galatheas answer, answered: For my face, Madam, it shall not be concealed from
you if it please you; but as for my name, I beseech you let it be concealed
still, because I am sure you know it not. To which Galathea answered; You may,
noble Cavalier content us in both, if you please, and indeed you ought not to
make any difficulty of it: For since you say we do not know it, you may show
it and satisfy us, and yet it is no more known than before. I see Madam,
replied he, that it is an easier thing to vanguish Cavaliers, be they never so
valiant, than to defend ones self against fair Ladies. I will therefore
address my self unto supplications; and of two things which you ask I will
satisfy you in one presently, and beseech you to d^^er the other until we
come to Mount Verdan. It shall be then, replied Galathea, upon condition of
granting one thing which I will ask you.

There is nothing Madam, which you can command, replied the Cavalier which I
will not obey, and satisfy withal my power. Upon this, lifting up his Helm,
he appeared to be very fair, he was young, and his pains in the combat had
put such a fresh color in his cheeks, as none could by his face see the
sadness of his soul; and this was the reason, that all seeing him so very
fair, they were the more impatient to know who he was: And had they not seen
the aged Cleontine coming with a great number of Virgin Druids, with some of
the Vaci and Eubagi most certainly they had gotten him, not only to tell his
Name, but also what fortune brought him thither: But he answered, how one ought
never to despair of assistance from heaven, especially when one has right on
their side.

Whilst they were talking thus, the sage Cleontine was come so near, as
Galathea stepping a little before, received her in her arms, and held her so
whilst she said; What do you think Mother of the Equipage in which we come? I
do not think you expected us in this manner I did not expect Madam, said
Cleontine, that you should take so much pains as to come so far to see me,
for when you have any service for me, you may command me to come unto you; but
you do honor our great Tautates in condescending unto so much humility, as
coming unto this sacred place, where it pleases him to render Oracles. I must
confess, said Galathea, that my design was to come hither, but not so soon.
Upon this Galathea saluted the Virgin Druids; and afterward, continuing her
way toward Mount Verdan, and not seeing Celidea amongst the rest, she asked
where she was: Madam, said she unto her, never was a more happy marriage, than
that between Thamires and her; and I do not think that any who sees them but
do desire to marry: And what is become of Calidon, said the Nymph: Oh Madam,
answered Cleontine, he is perfectly cured of the disease which she caused in
him, he has now no other thoughts but of marrying Astrea. How, replied the
Nymph, will Calidon marry Astrea, and is she consenting? who is it that makes
this match? It is, said she, Phocion, Uncle to Astrea and Thamires, who is very
solicitous in it, but I am afraid it will hardly be a match: For Astrea is so
averse unto it, as they will have much ado to get her consent. And why, said
Galathea does she love any other Shepherd? We do not hear, replied Cleontine,
that she loves any yet, for she is too busy in lamenting her loss of Celadon,
and erecting him a Tomb. What is become of that shepherd, said the Nymph: I
think Madam, said Cleontine, that about seven or eight Months since, he was
drowned: And why, said the Nymph, do they make him an empty Tomb? Because
Madam (said Cleontine) that the learned Sarronides and Druids tell us the
spirit of him who dies, will wander and walk many ages if those who survive
do not pay the office of Sepulture: And because the body of Celadon was not
found, they erected him this empty Tomb of which I told you: How, replied
Galathea, when he was drowned, and his body lost, was it never since found?
Never Madam, said Cleontine, that we could hear of, and it is to be believed
that all the shepherds about used all endeavors possible; for never was any
shepherd in this Country more beloved, nor any truly more deserved it: And
Madam had he been so happy as to be known unto you. I am confident you would
have thought him so. And as I hear, this shepherd had a long time been a
devoted servant unto Astrea, but carried the matter so close and discreetly as
none could perceive it; and the less because it was unlikely ever any love
should be betwixt them by reason of an inveterate enmity that had long been
betwixt their Fathers: And because close and smothered love is always most
violent, probably so was theirs, both in that respect, and in respect of both
their merits: For I dare say Madam, and with abundance of truth that I never in
all my life saw a fairer nor more accomplished shepherdess. Now Phocion, who
is her Uncle, and who, as next of kin, has the care of her, would gladly marry
her unto Calidon, who indeed is a very fine shepherd; but there is so much
difference betwixt him and Celadon, as it is very unlikely, that shepherdess
will ever consent especially having yet Celadon so fresh in her memory; yet
Calidon still hopes, and keeps as close to her as possibly he can* As for
Thamires, he lives the most happily and best contented of any man in the world,
and says that the scars of Celideas face being testimonies of her virtue, do
make her so fair and amiable, as he cannot desire her otherwise; and in this
contentment, he is so well satisfied, as he cannot be an inch from her: I am
very sorry she is not here, that she might have the honor of kissing your
hand, as much disfigured and ill favored as she is. But Astrea, Diana,
Phillis, and other shepherdesses of the neighboring Towns, are the causes of
her missing this honor, having yesterday invited her to visit the Daughter of
Adamas, who is returned from the virgin Druids of Carnutes, and reputed one of
the fairest Ladies, and the most discreet in all the Country. Perhaps, said
Galathea, Celidea will return at night, then we may see her. I wish it, Madam,
answered Cleontine; but I am afraid that Thamires who accompanies her, is the
cause of her stay; for it being late, he will not let her travel, because he
is extremely careful of her health; besides, I know the venerable Chrisante
will not let her part from Bonlieu.

Thus Galathea, without seeming to take any great notice of things, gleaned
from the discourse of Cleontine, all the state of Celadon, and of his love; yet
much wondering that none should know what was become of him. Then considering
with her self that this shepherd not being in this Country, she was to blame
in accusing Leonide, she intended to call her unto her again, and in order
thereunto resolved to pass by the house of Adamas, as well to bring her away
with her, as in hopes to meet Astrea there, of whom she had heard so much, to
the end she might judge, whether her beauty was such as might invite Celadon so
much to slight hers. In these thoughts she could not refrain from sighing very
loud, which Cleontine observing; Oh Madam, said she, why do you sigh? Is there
any thing which troubles you? Galathea having no mind she should be the
secretary of her thoughts, answered her; I sigh Mother, to think of Clidemant,
you know where he is, and there are many occasions of danger to cause fear of
his being well. It is many days since either Amasis or I heard from him; and
of late the Vaci tell us, that when they look into the intrals of the Victims,
they find the most noble parts defective: Moreover, I have had some very horrid
Dreams, and believe it, these things much trouble me. My Mother also, who is
fuller of apprehensions then I am, has thought it fit we should offer some
sacrifices, and that I should come to consult with this Oracle, whether I
intend to come at my return from Bon-lieu, where I am going to offer some
sacrifices unto the Gods in lieu of her, who this morning designed it her
self, but being prevented by some intervenient and important business, she
commanded me to go in her room. Madam, answered the sage Cleontine, our Great
^autates, is so transcendently good, that when our sins do call for
chastisements, he gives us advertisement of it, to the end that the fear of
future evil may make us turn to him, and that with sacrifices, supplications,
and amendment, we do appease his anger, and divert the punishments from us. And
therefore, Madam, these advertisements are not to be despised; for if they
should, it would make his hand more havy upon us, for having so little care of
his advice: Let Amasis and you, lay these things to your hearts, since it is to
be believed they are not without great reason. Examine well all your actions,
and if upon a strict survey you find any that is not good, reprove them your
selves, and not tarry till Tautates make you more sensible of them: Afterward
make a strict inquisition what is done in your house, and if you find any
offenses in it, reform them so as they may be no more committed: Then let your
eye be over all the Country, and diligently inform your selves what abuses are
predominant and used there; chastife those that are the Authors of them; for
that state where vice goes unpunished, and virtue unrewarded, is very near
desolation. Know Madam, that the Prince and the State are but one body, whereof
the Prince is the head And as all the pain which the body resents does come
from the head, so all the pain which the head endures, does proceed from the
body: My meaning is, that as Tautates does chastise the people for the fault
which the Prince commits, so he does punish the Prince for those which the
people commit. This Madam is the counsel which I give unto you, and which my
profession would not suffer me to be silent in*

Galathea thanked the sage Cleontine for her prudent and religious admonitions,
promising her, not only to observe them her self, but to acquaint Amasis with
them, that she also might follow them: Afterward, she related unto her the
accident which had happened, and how much it troubled her; for besides the death
of Argenteus, the insolency of Polemas in her presence was very distasteful to
her, so as it wounded her to the very soul. Madam, answered Cleontine, sudden
passions are often to be excused, because they are often not in our own power;
and if we do not bear with one another in the infirmities of our humanity, how
should we think Tautates will bear with us. But said Galathea, for Polemas to
do thus unto a stranger, one that had right on his sight, and in my presence;
let me tell you Mother, that it is a boldness which proceeds from something
else then courage, and induces me to think, that he who dares do these things
does think he may do something which is worse. Indeed, said Cleontine, when a
subject does fail in that respect which he owes unto his sovereign, he does
it either out of defect in his judgment, or else because he thinks himself
so powerful, that he fears not not any displeasure, and therefore it concerns
him to take good heed.

With such discourse as this, they came to the house of the sage Cleontine,
into which Galathea entered, as well to rest self as to get the strangers
wounds dressed, unto whom all the Nymphs could not do too much honor, nor show
too much demonstration of good will: especially Silere, who when the time was,
would have been sorry for his victory, before Arganteus transgressed the limits
of his discretion; but since his love was turned into disdain, she fell into
so great a hatred of him, as she had courage to look on him when he was dead,
without bestowing upon him one single tear; so much did the present injury
deface the memory of all his past services.

The Cavalier was presently disarmed, and searched by the Chyrurgions, who
found only one wound in his shoulder, which was so slight that they made no
matter of it, only advlsed him to keep his bed that day, by reason of the
loss of blood. Galathea desiring to offer the sacrifice which she resolved
upon before she went from the place, she sent to provide bulls and other things
necessary against the next morning: Also she resolved to enquire of the Oracle,
and the Cavalier beseeched her, that he might consult with the Oracle also, and
join their sacrifices together: She was pleased to gratify him so far, as to
permit him, although it was not altogether the custom: In the mean time, they
sent out every way to enquire of their Coaches, and the servant of the unknown
Cavalier.

After they had dined, and every one expected to hear some news of those that
were thus scattered, Galathea sitting on the Cavaliers bedside, and seeing all
silent in the Chamber, she said unto him; Although, sir, we are much obliged to
you for the Combat you undertook against the insolent Arganteus, yet you are
in one thing obliged unto us; for when we entreated you to pull up your Helmet,
and tell us your Name, and what fortune brought you into this Country; you were
pleased to satisfy us in letting us see your face, but the coming of the sage
Cleontine hindered you from answering the other part of our desires; but since
we have seen your face, it does the more inflame our desires of knowing unto
whom we are so much obliged; and what was the cause of your coming hither: And
all this, that we may the better serve you in any way we are able. Now is the
time convenient; there is no fear of any prejudice to your wound, and
therefore we hope that you will satisfy our desires. Madam, answered the
Cavalier and smiled, Does the demanding of a thing make it a debt? Sir, replied
the Nymph, It is the peculiar privilege of Ladies in this Country; and you
know that every one is obliged to the observation of the Laws belonging unto
that Country wherein he is. It Is true, Madam, said he, but my greatest
difficulty is, not without reason; That I cannot imagine you should take any
delight in hearing the disasterous fortune of the most miserable Cavalier that
lives, if it be living, to consume his life amongst all the misfortunes and
miseries that a man can possibly meet wi^hal. Let not this be any difficulty,
said Galathea to him, since in acquainting us with your misfortunes, we are
desirous to serve you, and may help you. Madam, said he, If my misfortunes be
contageous, we had abundance of reason to fear them. No, no, Sir, replied she;
let every one bear their own burden, and I am sure there is none in all the
company but thinks their own the greatest: open therefore your wound unto us,
sometimes one may meet with another, who is able to give unexpected remedy. It
is not the hopes of any Remedy, replied he, which will move me to show mine,
for I know there is none but death: But it is only, Madam, to obey you, and
satisfy the curiosity of these Ladies: Then raising himself up a a little in
his bed, he began thus:

The Sequel of the History of Damon and Madonthe.
I Should think that I had great reason to complain against my sad fate, which
has so incessantly pursued me ever since I was bome, at least ever lince I
knew my self, if I did not consider, that those who complain and murmur are
sinners against the great Tautates, as if we were not all his, and would not
suffer him to have the free disposition of his own, and all that is in the
Universe: This consideration has often tied my tongue, when extremity of
sorrows would have moved me to murmu^ against my Fortune; yet if in the
violence of my pain it be permitted to let go some sad sighs, wonder not
Madam I beseech you if in the sequel of this discourse you observe me sending
forth some sad sighs at the memory of so many misfortunes* And believe, that
if it were not your express command, I should not relate my miserable life,
the memory whereof cannot choose but make my wounds bleed afresh.

Be pleased to know then, Madam, that my Country is Aquitane; I was educated by
King Thorismond, one of the greatest Princes that ever reigned over the
Visigots: A Prince so good and just, that he got the peoples love as much as if
they were Visigots. This King raised his Court unto a higher pitch of glory
than any other neighboring Kings, both by his arms, and the civility of those
that were about his Person: We were a jolly company of young boys brought up
under him with as much care and indulgency, as if we had been his own: Of
this Volley was Alcidon, Cleomer, Cel^das, and many others who all became very
brave and gallant Cavaliers; it was my fate to be brought up amongst them, and
I may say, that this education was the only piece of good fortune that ever I
had. My Father, whose name was Beliantes, and who by his virtue was raised unto
great Authority about Thierry, he left me an Orphan in my cradle, there
beginning the fortune which ever since has pursued me: For, not being willing I
should ever arrive unto that credit which my Father had gotten, she deprived me
of it when I was sucking my Mothers breast, and presently after took away my
mother also, and made me mourn in my cradle.

At my coming out of my infancy, I cast my eyes upon a fair Lady, whose name I
desire to conceal, as well as my own, because I would not discover all my
misery. Nay, nay, said Galathea, we must needs know both her name, and yours
also; for there is nothing you can tell us which we more desire. Then, said he
my name is Damon, and hers Madonthe. How, replied the Nymph presently; Damon
who served Madonthe, Daughter unto the great Captain of Aquitane, whose name
was Amorant, and killed in the Battle of Attila upon the body of the valiant
King Thyerry, and whom Leontidas would have married to his Nephew? Are you that
Damon, who out of jealousy fought with Thersander a little before the death of
Thorismond? I am the very same Damon of whom you speak, replied he, that is
the most unfortunate Cavalier that lives, or ever did live: You do infinitely
astonish me, said she, for every one believes you to be long since dead, and
that you sent your servant with a Hankercher full of your blood, unto your
Mistress, or rather unto the wicked Leriana, as a testimony of your death. It Is
true, replied the Cavalier with a deep sigh, but fortune intending to persecute
me more yet, would not let me go so good a way: Truly, said the Nymph, many are
deceived; for the opinion of your death is spread all the Country over, and
nothing is thought more certain.

I do remember, that when the news of your death came hither, and relation was
made of your Love, of your Jealousy, and of your death, many did pity you,
not only because you were dead by so ill a way, but because you did not live to
see the revenge which was upon the wicked Leriana, every one thinking that your
fidelity and your affection did merit so much satisfaction before you dyed, as
to know the innocence of the poor Madonthe. But how was it possible you should
be saved from that most desperate danger? Madam, answered the Cavalier, since I
perceive you are informed of all passages as well as my self, I will only
relate unto you what has chanced unto me since my combat with Thersander, and
so abridge a great part of my dysastrous life.

The truth is, I received in the combat which I had with Thersander very many
wounds, and amongst the rest two very great ones, which put me into good hopes
of dying, having no desire to live, since she for whose sake only my life was
deer unto me had so cruelly betrayed me. In that design, I took the blindest
way I could choose, thinking that when my blood failed me, I should end this
miserable life; and in this resolution, when I found my self begin to faint, I
commanded Hall^dine my servant to carry unto Madonthe the Ring which I took
from Thersander, and unto Leriana my Hankercher full of my blood: The one, to
show unto her whom I loved, that she was to blame in preferring one before me,
who did less deserve it, and the other to glut the cruelty of Leriana. I
perceived by the answer which Halladine gave me, that if I had followed his
directions he would have gotten me unto some place where wholesome remedies
might have hindered me from what I desired, my death.

This conceit, and finding my self faint, did make me strive to get unto the
River of Garrone, and by chance I came unto a place where the bank was very
steep, and under it so full of points of little Rocks, that I thought when I
fell I should certainly be dashed in pieces before I came to the water; but my
faithful Servant whose eye was never off me, perceived my design, as I think
by my eyes which perhaps were startled at the horror of death, and to prevent
it, stepped nearer, and catched hold of me. But see Madam, what a man will do
that is resolved to dye: I forced my self so suddenly and vigorously from him,
as I fell, and never touched any of those sharp Rocks, because I over leaped
them: Thus Fortune was pleased to save me against my will, and my extreme
desire of dying may be said to be the cause of my not dying. My Servant cried,
and ran presently about to look for me at the bottom, and finding me near
the side, he took hold of me; but the stream was so strong as it pulled him
into the water after me, and it was a very miracle that he escaped drowning,
for the place was so full of weeds as his feet were entangled in them; but it
is to show others that the Gods never forsake those as are faithful to their
Masters; he was so entangled that he lost me, and knew not what was become of
me, for I being further in the water than he, the stream was so strong and
impetuous, as it carried me away, sometimes under, and sometimes above the
water, near half a mile from the place; and doubtless I had been carried
into the Sea, had I not been stopped by some Fishermen, who by fortune were
upon the River in their little boats: They spyed me afar off, and not knowing
at the first what it was; a desire of gain moved them to separate, some one
way, and others another, to be sure of catching me; but when I was a little
nearer them, they plainly saw that I was a man; and then, besides assurance of
booty, a charitable disposition moved them unto their best endeavors, and with
a long hook catched hold of my clothes, and then pulling me into one of their
little boats, they carried me on shore, where laying me along upon the sand,
and stripping me, they perceived that I had several wounds, and that they were
fresh; at this they were much astonished, and much more when rifling my
pockets, they found a good quantity of money, and on my fingers three or four
Rings of good value: Upon which, one of them said, that this day was either
their enriching for ever, or else their utter undoing: For, said he, here is
riches enough to serve us all as long as we live: But if ever this come to the
ears of justice, it will be said that we killed him, and condemn us for not
revealing it; so as if we conceal it we are made for ever, and if revealed we
are all undone, all of them apprehended the same, and knew not what course to
resolve upon; at last, one of them having a little more resolution than the
rest: Brothers, said he, let us bury him, let us share and keep the riches
which Tautates has sent us, and not reveal it unto such as who doubtless will
take them from us; we know that we are not guilty of this mishap, and since we
are not, be assured that God will protect the innocent, and therefore let us
divide what we have found, and live happily all our days after it.

As soon as this motion was made, it was consented unto by the rest, and
presently they fell to divide, but in the first place they made a grave, in
which they would inter me, and till then would not divide, to the end every one
should work at it with the better will.

Whilst they were thus busied, there was an old Druid, who seeing these
Fishermen afar off, he had an opinion that they were dividing their Fish; this
Druid was a holy man, lived a very godly and exemplary life, and fasted almost
every day and therefore he was loved honored and reverenced by every one. This
grave old Druide, had in his younger days followed the glistering follies of
the world, as others did; but having found them all to be but empty pleasures,
he retired himself from the frequent society of men, and lived in a little
Cabin upon the top of a Rock close besides this River, and that he might the
more freely be devoted unto his contemplation, he divested himself from a good
estate which was descended unto him from his Ancestors an action which brought
him so much esteem in all the Country, as he was reputed, loved and feared as a
sacred Servant, and real friend unto Tautates.

This Druid then, spying these fishermen digging in the ground, he came unto
them, and they were so busy at work, as he was very near them before they saw
him, and so near, as he could see a naked body, riffled from its clothes; I
know not which were most astonished, they in seeing him so near as they could
not hide my body, or he in seeing as he apprehended, so many murderers. For he
verily believed that they had killed me; and the rather, because coming nearer,
he saw the blood fresh; for blood ran still out of my wounds, as fresh as if
the wounds were newly given. When he was come up unto them, and saw these
wounds thus fresh, and them bloody, he began to reprehend them very severely,
and menace them with the punishments of God and men. Do you think, wicked
wretches as you are, said he unto them, that though you should hide this body
in the very center of the earth, Tautates would not discover it to the sight of
all? Can you think this blood does not cry to heaven for vengeance? and that
you can fly into any any part of the earth where justice will not find you? How
durst you for a little miserable gain which will deceive you, commit such an
execrable wickedness? These Fishermen, who were not of any wicked temper, as
afterward they showed, did bear a very great respect unto this Druid; fell
down upon their knees before him, protested themselves innocent of the blood,
told him how they drew the body out of the water, what their design was, that
they had no arms to make these wounds, and that if they had been guilty, they
could easily have fled when they saw him coming, and passed unto the other side
of the River, but they stayed still, and would stand upon their justification.

The Good man considering all these circumstances, he began to think they spoke
truth; but the better to know it, he came unto my Corpse, and seeing the wounds
so fresh; Do you tell me, said he, that you are innocent of his death? We do
swear it, said they, by the sacred Missleto: Then, said the Druid, you may do
well to look out for the Murderer, for doubtless he cannot be far from
hence; and believe it, if you do not find him out, you your selves will be
accused for it: And because I would not have the innocent punished, and the
guilty go free, where are his clothes which he had when you first found him?
The Fishermen, as if they had been already in the hand of the Judge, and never
thinking upon their resolution, they did not only produce what the Druid
demanded of them, but also the money and Rings, and all that they found. Then
the good Druid, said unto them; Now friends, I do think, you really innocent,
since you do so freely produce these precious things; be certain that God will
assist you both in this occasion and all others. Then presently falling down
upon his knees, and making a sign unto them to do the like.

Oh great Tautates, cried he out, and lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven;
Thou who have a particular care of men, we beseech thee to turn thy vengeance
from us for the death of this Man, and let thy infinite goodness forgive and
amend them that did commit this sin.

And because my wounds still bled, he commanded them to wash me, and then do
that charitable office which they had begun in burying me: According to his
command, they did wash me, then he asked of them a piece of money, which he
intended according to the Custom when any was buried, to put into my mouth:
The poor Fishermen did all as he commanded them; and the good old Druid, weak
though he was, did take me in his arms, and thought that he found some heat in
me, which made him lay his hand presently upon my heart, which he perceived to
move and tremble. Courage, my Children, said he, I hope this man has life
enough to clear you from the Calumny which may be laid upon you, and to lay
the fault where it rightly deserves, for he is yet warm, and I perceive his
heart to beat: Then letting my head hang a little down, the water came out in
great abundance, and the good Druid bound up my wounds with Hankerchers as well
as he could; then he commanded them to make a devise with their Oars, whereon
they might carry me with more ease; and whilst they were working about it, the
good Druid went to seek out some herbs by the bank sides, which he knew were
good to be applied unto my wounds, and which would a little freshen and
invigorate my spirits; he was not long about them, but bruising those Simples
betwixt two stones, he put some of them into my wounds, and applied some to my
heart, and presently the blood stayed: Presently after, I began to breathe, and
my pulse came unto me, whereof they were all so glad, that after thanks unto
the great Tautates, they carried me upon their Oars into the Cell of this good
Druid, and laid me upon a good bed, where one of his Nephews used sometimes to
lie, when he came to visit him; for as for himself, his bed was only a few
dry leaves without any order or delicacy.

I was all the rest of the day and never opened an eye, or gave any sign of
life, but only my breath and my pulse: The next morning about break of day my
eyes opened, and I was never in my life more astonished, than to see my self
in that place; for I remembered the Combat which I had, and my resolution of
throwing my self into the River; but I could not possibly imagine how I should
come there. I continued long in this thought; at last, the room growing
lighter, and the little loophole which was in lieu of a Window being toward
the sun rising, I looked about, and the sight made me wonder more, for my
Chamber was only a Cave, the roof Rock, and Ivy my hangings: Seeing all these
things as I lay on my bed, I endeavored to raise my self a little, the better
to consider them; but I was not able, both in respect of my weakness, and also
by reason of my wounds. Bening then forced to lie still as I was, and as they
had laid me, I began to put my hand to the places where I found my pain, and
finding the Napkins and such other things as they had applied unto me, I was
still more amazed. Then, not being able to imagine how all these things should
come to pass, I began to think upon such stories as I had heard of concerning
Water-Nymphs, and Goddesses, who dwelt in Rivers, almost condemning my self of
incredulity that I had not believed them, and now thought that this place could
not possibly be any other, then one of their habitations: But as a wandering
mind does usually rove immediately from one thing to another; I presently began
to think upon the injuries and ingratitude of Madonthe. The memory of which
went so near my heart, as it forced from me so deep a sigh, as the good man of
God heard me; for he was set at the door, attending till it was time to come
and see me. As soon as ever he heard me, he came into the Chamber, and without
saying any thing, after he had a little looked upon me, he went and opened the
window wider, that he might the better see in what condition I was: Afterward
coming to me, feeling my pulse and my heart, and finding me much amended, did
seem to be very glad of it: Then sitting down in a Chair which stood by my
beds side, and looking a while upon me, he began thus to speak. My Son, since
the great God has made his love unto you evidently appear by sending you such
unexpected Assistance, you are the more obliged unto th^nkes for so great a
mercy and favor, and to be obedient unto whatsoever he command^: For as the
acknowledgement of favors received from him, does invite his hand unto more
liberality, so ingratitude provokes him to slack his mercies, and in lieu
thereof, to chastise. Take good heed of this my Son, and let us see how you
will express your thanks by your words, and with what demonstrations you will
acknowledge the particular Cure which has been over you: upon this he was
silent to see what I would answer. This good old man, had a very venerable and
grave aspect, a pleasing look, a sweet Physiognomy, and so mild a voice, as it
seemed as if some God had spoken by his mouth: But yet my amazement was so
great, as it was long before I returned him an answer; He fearing that it was
my weakness, or the pain of my wounds, which hindered me. Son, said he, if your
pain and weakness will not permit you to answer; yet make a sign in testimony
of your desire, and God will so well accept it, as he will give you further
strength. Then recollecting my spirits, I forced my self to answer him with a
feeble voice, in these words: Father, it is not the wounds of my body has
brought me into this condition wherein you see me; but it is the wounds of my
soul, which expecting no other cure or remedies, but such as death uses to
give unto those that are miserable, made me look for an end of my life from a
River, which it seems is so pitiless, as she will not not afford me that help
which she never denies unto others. These things are still in my memory, but I
cannot tell how I came out of that River wherein I threw my self; nor how I
came into this place, and in your presence.

Son, replied the Druid, I perceive your crime, and the favor of Tautates are
greater then I did imagine them: For I had an opinion, that some of your
enemies had thus used you, and that the great God had saved and delivered you
out of their hands but for ought I see you would have procured your own death,
a sin so great and execrable both unto God and man, as his mercy is infinitely
abundant in not chastising you in his anger* Fratricide and Patricide are
^innes of a very high strain, because they are near unto us: How monstrous
then is the murder of our selves, since none can be so near us as our selves
are. Madam, should I relate all his instructions I should be too long; and he
would have continued longer, if he had not been prevented by the Fishermen who
came into the Chamber, and brought with them a man tied with cords, so as at
the first I did not know him, as well because my mind was distracted another
way as because he looked with a strange affrighted look, and his habit had so
disguised him, as he was much changed.

As soon as ever he saw me, he would have fallen upon his knees, but he could
not because he was bound. At last looking more earnestly upon him, and hearing
him say A^ my Master, my Master, I knew him to be Halladine my Servant: You may
imagine Madam whether I was amazed to see him in that condition; for I could
remember how I pulled him into the water, and thought he had been drowned but I
was much more amazed when I heard one of the Fishermen address unto the Druid,
and assure him, that this was the man who had brought me into the condition I
was, and that he was not content with what he had done, but he was looking
about for the corpse that he might hide it and his wicked act together. The good
old man would have spoke, when I interrupted and told him* No, no, my friends,
you are mistaken, he is innocent, he is my Servant, and the most faithful
Servant I ever had, set him at liberty I entreat you, and let me embrace him
once more. The poor men wondered to see me hug him so affectionately, and he
falling down upon his knees at my bed side, with eyes showring tears, he was
so transported with joy, that he could not speak: But when he was unbound, I
embraced him as tenderly as if he had been my borther.

I was extremely desirous to know whether he had delivered my message as I
commanded him, and how he came to be brought thus unto me, but I durst not ask
him, least I should discover what I desired to keep secret. The Druid who was
discreet and wise did perceive as much; For presently upon it, seeming as if he
would go and enquire the manner of their meeting with this Servant, he went out
of the Cell, and carried with him all but us two. My curiosity would not suffer
me to be any longer without asking him whether he had seen Madonthe, what she
and Lerian^ had said and done, and how he fell into the hands of these men? He
answered me a far off that he had accomplished my commands, and failed in
nothing, that all those who heard of my death, did extremely lament me, that
had he thought to have found me alive, he would have brought me an answer unto
my letter; but being desirous to do me the last service he could; he came to
look for my corpse along the River side, that he might give it burial,
intending afterward to retire himself from that Country and all habitable
places: And this morning going along the River side, he met these Fishermen, of
whom he enquired for what he sought: And they, after they had looked upon him,
and whispered a while together, they fell upon him and bound him, as I saw he
was* thinking it was he who had treated me in that manner; that do all they
could; he would not tell my name, nor give them any light by which they might
know whom I was* But Sir, said he, I beseech you by what good fortune came you
hither, and what good God was it that restored you unto life again? Then
joining his hands together, and lifted up his tear swelled eyes to Heaven; for
ever happy may he be, said he, that did this good work. Halladine, my Friend,
said I unto him, I thank thee heartily for thy good will, and I am very glad
thou have not revealed my name, for I would not have any know me to be alive:
And as to thy question, how I came hither, you must enquire of some body else
than me, for I am as ignorant as thou art. And yet let me tell thee, that
though Heaven has preserved my life against my will, I cannot choose but thank
it, since I can by thee hear of Madonthe, Madonthe whom I beseech the Heavens
to preserve, and unto whom I wish all happiness and contentment. Oh Heavens
(said Halladine) is it possible you should continue still in this error? you
have little reason to make that prayer for her, or ever to remember her,
unless to detest her and to be revenged both of her, Leriana, and Thersander:
And were I as you, I would do it, and be as eager to displease her as you have
been to do her service. Were It thou, as I, replied I thou would not give
harbor unto any thought so ill; and be assured that were I not confident thy
language proceeds from thy love unto me, I would never look upon thee again
with a good eye, so extremely contrary are thy thoughts unto mine; and
therefore if thou will continue, with me unto the end of my days (which will
beer long: if it be as I desire) never offer any such language unto me again,
nor against a person whom I love, as she deserves above all the world.

Upon this, I was so weak that I could say no more; for whether it was my
sudden surprise of joy to see Halladine, or my anger to hear him utter such
language, I cannot tell, but my wounds began to bleed so fresh, as I grew cold
and pale, and almost without pulse. I perceived it, at the beginning of my
talk, but because I did not much desire to live, I would not speak of it, and
but for Halladine who took notice of my changing color, doubtless I had then
put an end unto all my miseries; but that faithful Servant ran presently to
the Druid, and told him: He who during all the time of our talk, was preparing
what he thought best for the dressing of my wounds, and stayed but for the
term of fifteen hours, before he would apply the first plaster, he came
presently into the Chamber, and finding me all in blood, did conceive that some
extraordinary emotion was the cause of it; yet not seeming to take any notice
of it then, but alter he had carefully dressed me, and made me take some broth,
he shut the window, and bad me rest a little; for this second loss of blood
had brought me so low, as I was not able to lift up my hand.

In the mean while he took Halladine aside, did put into his hands all that he
had taken from the Fishermen, and enquired very particularly who I was, and by
what accident I came to be in that condition, and thereupon related unto him
all circumstances, how I was saved. My Servant gave him very many thanks for
the assistance he had showed unto me, and assured him, that he would not be
sorry for the pains he had taken; conjured him by the great Tautates to
continue it, and that both God and men would reward him for so good a work; as
for the other question which he asked him, they were things he durst not answer
without my permission, because I had expressly forbidden him; but he might
assure himself, I was such a one, as when he knew me, he would not repent of
his pain and time employed in my service; all he could say, was, that I was
one of the principal men in all Aquitane* Is he then a Gaul, replied the
Druid, and not a Visigot? Most true, replied Halladine, but he was brought up
by the King of the Visigots in his house: It is enough, said the good Druid,
all I desire to know more, is only what belief he has in the great Gods, for
I took notice that he is extremely troubled in his mind, and most assuredly,
the mind must then be cured before the body can. Indeed, Father, answered
Halladine, you have rightly observed his distemper, for never was mind more
possessed with a deep melancholy, than the mind of this Cavalier: And for my
part I believe there are only two remedies to cure him. What do you think
them to be, asked the Druid? The one, said Halladine, is God who is able to do
any thing: Then replied the good old man, we must have recourse unto God, and
pray unto him to direct us in his cure; but what is the other? Death, said
Halladine: Still I see no way, said the holy man, but to have recourse unto
God. And since this time, he had so great a care of me, as he would never be
from me, at least as little as possibly he could: And one day when he perceived
me to be a little better, he used so many arguments unto me, and alleged so
many reasons as in conclusion I did acknowledge that nothing did come to pass
but by the appointment of God, who loving us better than we can do our selves,
it is to be in common reason supposed, that whatsoever he does is to our
advantage, though the Physic he gives us be sometimes bitter, and hard to be
swallowed. As soon as I was grounded in this knowledge, I presently rejected my
barbarous resolution of dying, and resigned my self so into the hands of great
Tautates, as I began to think all things sweet since they came unto me from the
Sovereign goodness. This resolution did operate so well, that in a little
time, I was past danger, and within a few days after that, so recovered, as I
wanted only a little more strength; which indeed by reason of my loss of so
much blood, was so great a want, as I must refer it unto time for my recovery.

During which time, having nothing to busy my self in, but my own thoughts,
I was most commonly out of the little Cell, under the excuse of taking the
fresh Air, though it was only because none should interrupt me. The good old
man spent most of his time in prayers and contemplation; and Halladine went out
unto the neighboring Towns and Villages to provide Victuals, and other
necessaries, whilst I in the mean time, was upon the top of the Rock, looking
always toward the place where I left Madonthe.

As soon as it was day, I was always wont to leave my little Cell, and crawl a
weak march to the top of this Rock; where sitting upon a mossy Cushion, I
summoned into my memory all passages unto that very time, not forgetting
neither my good fortune, nor my bad, which went deep to my heart; for the
misery past did wound me, as much as the misery present; and I resented the
happiness which once I had, and then had not, as a loss which was presently
ravished most injuriously from me

After dinner, retiring my self under some Trees which made a pleasant shade
not far from the Cell; there I contemplated the miserable condition unto which
fortune had reduced me: my own miseries, and the happiness of another did
equally offend me: the one, by my own resentment; the other, by envy and
jealousy of that contentment which was ravished from me. But after Supper,
walking along the River side, my contemplation was busied in consideration of
those miseries which might fall upon me for the future; and what little hopes
there was of preventing them, so as all my days journey was divided into three
kind of considerations; the morning, in things past; the afternoon, in things
present; and the evening in things future: and the last of these would last so
long, as they would take most of the night; being invited thereunto by the
solitude of the place, or by the silence of the night, or by the pleasure I
took in thinking upon my displeasures. For, Madam, life was a thing of so
little value to me at that time, as there was nothing I desired more then to
see the end of it: And being now resolved to use no violence against my self,
I wished that some accident or other would be so friendly to me, as to do that
good office for me, without my contributing unto the homicide of my self: And
I had an opinion, that if sorrow increased on, as it had done of late, it would
do the work for me; so as I suffered this opinion to sway so much in my mind,
as I could seldom begotten unto my lodging, unless the good old man or my
servant, came to fetch me.

This kind of life, was so agreeable to my humor, as I was often in a mind to
quit both Arms and Fortune, and stay here all the rest of my days. And in
order to this design, I acquainted my servant, advising him to retire himself
with those goods which fortune had given me, which I would freely bestow upon
him, if he would leave me in this place where I would despise fortune, and bid
her defiance. But Halladine in a flood of tears, could say nothing else, but
that nothing under heaven should separate him from me, unless only death; and
that he wished for no greater wealth then to serve me. Then presently after he
had gotten me to bed, and hearing me sigh he came unto me; and since he
perceived I could not sleep, he said thus unto me* Is it possible, Sir, you
should harbor such strange thoughts of ruining your self? Ah my friend, said
I unto him, I shall not be so ruined here, but grief and sorrows will find me
out. And so they may very well, sir, (said he unto me) as long as you do thus
forget your self, and what you were wont to be, in so much as you will not
endeavor your happiness, and try if you can restore your self unto that
state which you have lost. Halladine, (said I and sighed) It is the height of
imprudence, to attempt things impossible. Why, sir, said he, should you give
the name of impossible unto that which you have not tried, nor has any reason
to be so persuaded? For my part, I have such an opinion of my self, that any
thing which a servant can do is not impossible; and I am much more certain,
that whatsoever any Cavalier in Europe can obtain, you can if you will. If
this Thersander who is the cause of your misery, had this consideration, he
would attempt to remove you from Madonthe. And why should not you do as much
for him? you were once in her favor, and he removed you; and believe it, sir,
so may you him* for that which has once been done, may be done again. Do
thou not know, (said I unto him) that Madonthe loves him? Yes, said he, And did
she not once love you? But now, answered I she wishes me ill. Have I not seen,
sir, answered he, her scorn him, and scorn is much further from love then
hatred? Hatred, replied I, is further from friendship then scorn: It Is true,
replied he, but there is much difference between love and friendship; for Love
is more proud, and never looks upon things that are despiseable, but always
upon the rarest, highest, and most estimable things. And this is it which makes
me think, that Madonthe after she had scorned Thersander so much as she did,
and afterward did love him; so she may as well you, against whom she had only
hatred, but never the least shadow of scorn. Friend, replied I, It is the love
thou bear unto me, moves thee to talk thus in my advantage. I talk, Sir,
replied he, as any that is without passion may: Well, said I unto him, what is
it thou would have me do? My affection, sir, said he, is it which moves my
tongue; and I beseech you sir, receive my language as proceeding from thence:
And since you command me, let me tell you, I would have you assume the same
kind of life you were wont to live, and try if any happy encounter will help
you to recover that happiness which is ravished from you: For I cannot see how
it should any way advantage you to stay here: I have ever had an opinion, that
Madonthe does not hate you; or if she do hate you, yet that she does not love
Thersander so well as you imagine: or if she do love him, yet as she has
changed once, so she may change again: For I have heard say, that the whole
world is nothing but change; but say she should change, and yet believe you
dead, this change would not avail you at all; whereas if she do but see you,
it is impossible but she should revive her first sparks of good will unto you.
Put out a Candle, Sir, and bring it to another that is light, you shall see how
suddenly it will light again: The heart of one who once loved, is of the same
nature, when it comes in the presence of the person loved; whereas absence puts
all hopes out, and is the very ruin and death of love.

Well, well, Halladine, said I unto him, we will think upon it, and see what
the heavens will advise us unto; then turning me about, I seemed as if I had an
inclination to sleep; and yet it was only because I would not hear any more
disswasions from my solitary humor: but the Candle being put out, and I not
being able to sleep so soon, I began to consult and consider upon the reasons
and arguments which Halladine urged; and finding them upon serious
consideration to be very solid and good; I was almost in a mind to leave this
place, being especially invited unto it out of a puissant desire of dying. For
I hoped, that being in quest after adventures, I might perhaps meet with one
that would bring me to my death. Besides this, I considered that it was
impossible for me to stay long there and not be known, since certainly those
Fishermen would be blabbing out all they knew of me: And being not far from the
place where Thorismond kept his Court, I could very hardly conceal my self any
longer.

These considerations, and some others which I will omit, lest I should be too
tedious in my discourse, did move me to take the advice which Halladine gave:
And as soon as it was day I walked, then told him that I would take his
counsel; and that he should look out to buy Horses for himself and me, also
to provide me Arms and other things requisite. Away he went immediately, the
gladdest man in the world to see me in this mind: and though he made all the
haste that possibly he could, yet he stayed some twelve or fifteen days before
he could get my Arms fitted unto my directions. During his absence, I grew more
solitary and private then before, in so much as the good old man did wonder at
me. I must confess, that at this time, I often disputed with my self, whether
I should break Prison, and shake off my shakles or no, and using such arguments
as might be urged by Generosity unto a man of courage, I was a while staggering
in my resolutions. But this all-commanding Love, whom none is able to resist,
unless by flying, did out of spite, load me with new Fetters, and renewed my
chains by new means, so as I plainly saw there was now no hopes of ever having
liberty.

The Fishers, Madam, with whom I often talked when they came to see me, as well
to know how I did, as in gratitude for the money which I had given them for
their pains: and because they carried their Fish once a week unto the Town
where Thorismond dwelt, to sell them there, they would oftentimes bring me the
news of the Town. There was one amongst them, who was elder then the rest, and
showed to have more wit, of whom I used to enquire; and asking him what was the
talk of the Town, he answered, that all the talk was of a great Lady, who was
brough to bed of a Child; and because the Laws of the Visigots was to punish
such by fire, she was condemned unto it. Observe, Madam, how the heart will
sometimes soretell such things as it fears: and though I did never in my life,
see any action in Madonthe which could in reason move me to suspect her guilty
of such a fault; yet I did presently think it was she? And for more assurance,
I asked him the name of this Lady, but he told me that he had forgotten it; yet
he assured me she was one of the principal Ladies who was unmarried.

Then did I take my suspicions for certainties, when I reflected upon the
kindness which was betwixt her and Thersa^der; and because I would have no
notice taken of my displeasure, I was constrained to leave their company, and
retired my self under some Trees that were near the house; and there being
alone, oh what contrariety of thoughts came into my mind to torment me? My
vexation or rather my rage that I had been so extremely guld, moved me to a
desire to revenge for this injury: But how suddenly did I check my thoughts
when I considered my affection unto her: I must confess, that stifling all
thoughts of revenge, I could not restrain my tears, which flowed most
abundantly when I thought upon the miserable condition unto which Fortune had
brought me: I had continued longer in this Labyrinth of confused thoughts, if
Halladine who was returned, had not come to fetch me away. At first when I saw
him, I did imagine that he had something to tell me, but durst not, yet since
the old Fisherman had broke the ice, I was so bold as to ask him. Come
Halladine, said I unto him, have thou provided Arms and Horses? Yes Sir, said
he, all are ready, and I think you will be well fitted* I have brought the
Horses hither, but I have left the Arms at the Towns end, where I have caused
them to be locked up: Thou have stayed so long, replied I, as I was almost out
of all patience* But good Halladine, I charge thee upon thy Fidelity, to tell
me truly, have thou heard any news of Madonthe? Shall I tell you Sir, said he
what I know? With all my heart, replied I, for I do extremely desire it; I
fear, replied he that I shall but vex and grieve you Sir, if I should. Oh
Heavens, Halladine (cried I out) thou have told me enough, my suspicions are
all truths; Is she condemned to the fire for having a Child? tell me truly.
Whosoever told you so, replied he, told you the truth; but Sir, how came you to
know it? The Fishermen, replied I, who use to go and sell their fish, are my
informers: But Halladine I conjure thee to tell me all thou know, and
conceal not any thing, as thou love me. Sir, said he, since you are pleased
to command me with so many asseverations, I will; though I know that this new
News will vex you as much, as it ought to do the contrary. Then he related
unto me, how since the workmen required so much time, before they could finish
my Arms, he thought that he could not spend his time better, than in going to
Court, being confident that I would be glad of news at his return; that being
there as privately as possibly he could, he was put unto no great matter of
pains for news, because Madonthe was the Town talk all over; that Leriana
was her Accuser, and that Leotaris and his brother would maintain what Leriana
said, concerning her and Thersander. How, replied I presently, is it possible
that Madonthe should look so low, as upon a man so base? Halladine, who
thought that this consideration might make me scorn her. Yes Sir, said he, it
is so held for certain, and considering what proofs Leriana makes, none
believes the contrary.

I must confess Madam, that hearing this news confirmed, I was so astonished
at it, as but for Halladine, I had fallen to the ground. At last, recollecting
my self, and retiring a pace or two, I folded my arms one with the other, and
lifting up my eyes to heaven, with a deep sigh I said: Oh God, how deep are thy
judgments? and by how many strange ways do thou discover truth? Then
standing a while silent, as ravished with admiration, at last I broke out
again. Oh Madonthe, is it then true, that you have made choice of Thersander,
and preferred him before me, was your spirit so low, as to make him Lord of
your will, whom your Predecessors did highly honor in making him their
Servant? Is is possible that generous heart which heretofore I have seen in
you should be thus changed, As not to die rather than endure the shame of such
a choice? Oh God, oh Heavens, why would you infuse such a base dissembling
spirit into so fair a body?

After this, I stood a long while silent, as having so much to say, that I
could not speak at all, resembling a bottle that is full which will not come
out but with some difficulty. Halladine who considered my affection, thinking
to comfort me, and seeing me so long silent, he took occasion to speak unto me.
Had I thought Sir, said he, that this news would have relished so ill, you
should never have known it by me: Why Halladine, said I unto him could thou
ever think I would not be sensible of her shame whom I loved above all the
world? And why should you do so Sir, replied he, since she proves a person who
has given you occasion to hate her above all the World. Love, replied I, is
greater in me, than any wrong can be in her, and do thou not know that the
wound which is once made will never heal? If maladies may be cured by
Antipathy, and contrary medicines, replied Halladine, then that love which was
caused by virtues and favors may be cured in you by the injuries which you
have received from her, and by the knowledge of so foul a fault. That which
causes love, said I unto him, is fate and destiny unto whom the heavens have
submitted it, and therefore there is no thought that it will change, until the
very heavens and destiny themselves do change: And as for matter of shame I am
resolved to be her Champion against all those who shall oppose her fame with
any Calumny. Heavens forbid it Sir, said he unto me, for you will have to deal
with two of the sturdiest Cavaliers in all Aquitane; besides you will too
apparently wrong your self, and exceedingly offend a just God in maintaining a
quarrel that is unjust. As for the valor of Leotaris and his brother (said
unto him) it is not unknown unto me, and it shall not be that which shall
divert me from the Combat: But as to the offense which you mention to be
against God, I do refer it unto him, since it is his pleasure to make me
love Madonthe so passionately, as it is a thing impossible for me to do
otherwise. Good Sir, said he, will you offer to employ your courage in taking
arms for the defense of one who has most unworthily used you? are you not
sensible of such injuries, and would you have all the World take notice of this
insensibility? Do you not remember how insupportably rigorous she was to you,
whilst she was in the arms of Thersander, and loaded him with more favors than
he could desire? Will you against all reason expose your life in defense of one
who to content another, scorned you? Shall it be ever said that you did
unjustly arm your self to preserve the pleasures and delights of Thersander?
He would have continued longer had not I interrupted him. Enough, enough
Halladine, said I unto him, no more of this language to me; the stone is
already thrown, and it cannot be recalled; I am fully resolved upon it, all
that thou have said or can say, cannot unresolve me

When I do think upon Madonthes death, and that I shall never see her more
whom I do love so well; when I consider the pain and confusion in which she
is, and the shame which is prepared for her, and when I do remember, it is she
whom Damon has so long served, and that she must now be thrown into the Fire.
Oh God, oh Heavens, Halladine, do thou think I am able to endure it? and can
any injury or scorn hinder me from giving her all the assistance I can? No,
no, Halladine, Damon must either cease to live, or else he must not cease from
doing what is his duty: It is the duty of a Cavalier to relieve afflicted and
distressed Ladies, whether this Lady be accused justly or unjustly God knows;
as for us we ought rather to think the best, than to suspect the worst: And
since Leriana is her accuser, I must think Madonthe wronged, knowing the
extreme malice which she bears unto her; I will therefore render Madonthe
this proof of my affection. I know, Halladine, thou will say that she will
thank me no more for this service than for others she has received from me
but, friend, it is no matter if she do not; I shall satisfy my duty in it, and
then I have the recompense I expect. My Servant seeing me so fully settled upon
it, he told me, that since I was so resolved, he could do no more but pray
unto God for a blessing upon my intentions and endeavors; but if I would
execute my design, I must not lose a minute of time: For the last hour which
the King had given unto Madonthe, would expire to morrow by noone, and that
from the place where we were, the nearest way was five Leagues at the least
unto the Town of Tectosages, and above eight Leagues to pass by the place
where my Arms lay; so as it was full time to depart that very hour.

Upon this intelligence, I resolved to take Horse presently; and least the good
old Druid should make me lose any time, I thought it best to depart without
acquainting him until afterward, and then if I proved victorious, I would
make my excuse, and thank him for the great obligations wherein I was bound
unto him. I took Horse then, and made all haste I could to the place where my
Arms lay, I tried them, and found them to be very good and fit, they were
black, and on the Shield a Tiger feeding upon the heart of a man with this
Motto. Thou giv'st me death, and I sustain thy life.

Then, without more delay, I rode to the Town of Tectosages, and made such
haste, as I came a little before noon: I alighted, to give my Horse a little
rest, for indeed he was weary; and this might well have been Madonthes ruin;
for when I came to the lists, I found the Combat already begun, but one
Cavalier against two: and certainly had I stayed never so little longer that
Cavalier had dyed, and Madonthe been convicted; for he fell into a swoon when I
was entered not ten paces into the lists; and had he fallen before I had entered,
the Combat had been ended, and it would not have been permitted me to begin it
again: But God was pleased I should arrive so opportunely, as the innocence of
that Lady was made known: For to omit the particulars of the Combat, it will
suffice to tell you, that it pleased God to give me victory over these two
valiant Brothers, who were overcome rather by the innocence of Madonthe, then
any strength or virtue in me, unless so, that being armed for the life and
honor of my mistress, the whole Universe could not resist me.

Thus I was victorious; and when I least though of it, the truth was
manifested; Leriana detected, Madonthe cleared; the Child known to belong unto
one that was Niece unto Leriana: and to be brief, all things so cleared, that
the wicked Leriana was cast into the same fire which she had prepared for
Madonthe; Madonthe set at liberty, and I the gladdest man that ever was, to see
she had been wrongfully accused: and that though she had injured me, yet it
was without the least stain unto her honor or chastity. This was such a high
contentment unto me, as I esteemed all the pains I had taken in her service,
more then recompensed.

Seeing this thus settled, and thinking it not expedient to make my self
known, until I knew a little better whether or no she loved Thersander; or
whether all that I had seen concerning it, was only the artifice and subtilty
of Leriana, I went unto her scaffold, to know whether I could serve her in any
other occasion: She gave me many thanks, and had two requests unto me; the one
was, to tell her who I was; and the other, to conduct her unto her house: As
for telling her my Name, I excused it as well as I could; and as for conducting
her, I said I would, upon condition it might be presently: And because at the
same time, a throng of Ladies came to congratulate her delivery, and also
because I feared the King would cause me to declare my self, also because I
had some wounds which required dressing* I went into the crowd and so stole
away; so as every one being diverted another way, none took any notice which
way I went: And so I came to the place where I left my servant, where binding
up my wounds as well as I could, and letting my Horse graze a little, I got up
again, and went to my good old Druid.

I forgot to tell you, Madam, That meeting a man going to the Town, I entreated
him to make my excuse unto Madonthe; and, lest she should think me uncivil, I
feigned to be engaged another way by promise, but if she had any further
service to employ me in, she might hear of me toward Mount d'Or, and that I
would still wear my ensign of a Tiger. My design was, to make her believe I
was gone that way, though I did not intend it, least the Kings curiosity should
be such as to find out who I was.

I cannot, Madam, express unto you, with what joy the good Druid received me,
nor his thanks, when he knew the cause of my voyage, and the success and
service I had done Madonthe in her great necessity: For he told me, that her
Father brought him up; and that in this action I had over paid him, for all the
pains and care he had taken about me. And because he saw my arms bloody, he
took them off, and looked about every part of me; then finding some wounds, he
was so careful of me, and took such courses, as I was well again in a little
time.

But since the best Physic, and no other could cure me, but to hear more of
Madonthe, I entreated the good old Druid to send one of the Fishers unto the
place where Thorismond was, to inquire what news. The good man did as I
desired, and the Fisher inquired so well, as at his return he brought me but
too much news for my contentment: That Madonthe was gone to her house, and
carried Thersander with her wounded as he was; for it was he who before I came,
was in Combat with Leotaris and his Brother. I understood farther, that a
little after the departure of Madonthe, how King Thorismond was killed by his
Chyrurgion, who in letting him blood had cut the vein, and that his brother
Eurick succeeded him. I cannot express, Madam, how near these two accidents
went unto my heart; only thus far, I never think upon them, but the memory is
so sad, as I conclude no rest belongs unto me but in my Grave.

Thus every thing from whence I expected comfort, augments my misery; all my
hopes are now quite blasted, solitary places displeased, because there I
thought upon nothing but the Town of Tectosages, and my thoughts grated upon
my very soul, when they represented unto me the ingratitude of this woman. To
be brief, I was angry with my self, because I loved her against reason, and
could not choose but love her. My condition grew worse then ever; my wounds
indeed being but small, did heal in a few days; but I became so pale as if I
were dead, and this palenesse presently after turned into such a yellowness,
as if I had rubbed my self with Saffron. Halladine, who had heard something of
Madonthes actions, did suspect what the cause was of my being thus disordered,
and watched for an opportunity of speaking unto me But the good old man not
knowing what to think, he advised me to change air, hoping that exercise and
diversion might recover my health; and I according to the advice of this good
man, resolved to see the world, and wander from place to place, and rest no
where, till death arrested me.

After then, I had given most hearty thanks unto this good man, I departed,
without any other design in my voyage, than continual wandering: yet as
fortune was, our way did lie toward Madonthes house, where we heard such
news, as did more and more aggravate my misery. For we heard* that this ill
advised woman (as Halladine calls her) was gone, or rather stolen away, without
any in her company but her Nu^se and Thersander. Imagine what operation this
report had upon me; my Servant would have persuaded me, that she did me no
wrong in it, but only herself; for she believing me to be dead, as all
Aquitane did, I had no reason to blame her: But however, my displeasure was so
great, as not being able to endure the sight of such places where formerly I
found such delight, and now displeasure; I resolved to leave Europe, and never
to leave wandering till I met with something that would shorten my sad life. So
I passed into Africa, there I saw King Genserick and Honorius his Son, and
found every where that Love works the same effects that it did in me: I mean,
that it augments and diminishes, changes and rechanges, delights and
displeasures, in all those that are subjects unto it, according to its own
pleasure without any reason. For being amongst these Vandals, I heard of the
fortunes of Ursases and Olimbres, and of young Placidia, and her Mother Eudoxe,
wife unto Valentinian, all whom by their examples, could not divert me from
still loving; but I learned rather this lesson, That whosoever will love, must
prepare themselves for good and bad, and receive them both with the same
visage. And considering the various changes in the fortune of Eudoxe, the long
perservance of Ursases his love, the prudent behavior of young Olimbres, and
the happy conclusion of their loves; I resolved not to afflict my self so much
at the crosses which I had in my affection, but thence forward, to endure them
with more patience. And because Halladine who was tired out with my long and
tedious travels, did advise me not to love her any longer, who did not think me
so much as in the world, thinking that if he could bring me to this
consideration, I should easily be persuaded to return into Aquitane: I told
him, to put him out of all hope, that I would love her still.

In conclusion; finding no rest any where, nor satisfaction in any diversion, I
saw that all humane prudence was to no purpose, and therefore I would have
recourse unto divine Counsels; so as hearing that at the further end of the
Pirenian hills toward the Sea, there was an Oracle which was called the Temple
of Venus; I returned into Europe, and enquired of the Oracle, of which I asked
nine days together, what it was which would either put to an end, or else cure
my (...) The Oracle answered, Forests: The next morning I asked where Forests
was? it answered again, Forests; and notwithstanding my importunity, the
Oracle was mute, and would give no other answer but Forests; so as I resolved
to look for Forests all Europe over. I will not tell you, Madam, how many
several places I passed, and all in vain, only in general; how after I had
run through all Spain, Cantabria, Gaul, Narbon, and Aquitane, I came into the
Country of the Gebennes, and resolved to see Hircania and Ardennes, and all
other places through the world: For I cannot be persuaded, that this God who is
most true and just unto all other men, should be a deceiver unto me alone: but
on the contrary, I hope that in these solitary places I shall find that
contentment which is promised unto me.

Thus Damon concluded the History of his miserable life. And Galathea, who had
formerly heard the first part, was very glad she had heard the rest, and
desired to give him all the contentment this Country afforded. Therefore when
he had finished, she said thus unto him. I must needs confess, sir, you have
reason to complain against your fortune, having without any reason been so
long afflicted, but still you must not let your hopes droop: for the Gods are
no Impostors, nor deceivers; and having received such an answer from them, you
must believe that you shall find that contentment which you desire. It Is true
they are pleased sometimes to give ambiguous and obscure answers, and that to
teach us, that there is no happiness to be obtained without a mixture of
misery, and that they are pleased humane wits should busy themselves in
finding out the truth, and true meaning of their Oracles; and if you will have
my opinion upon this answer you have received, I think you have not rightly
understood it, in conceiving that this word Forests, does signify Woods and
solitary places, peopled only with Trees; but you must know that this Country
wherein you now are, is not only called the Country of the Segusiaus, but more
particularly called Forests, so as I do believe, it is this Forests in which
the Oracle intends you shall find that happiness which you are to receive. And
to tell you truly it is very probable that this is the Country and place, and
not in Woods and places solitary: For it may so fall out that Madonthe may come
hither upon some occasion which may be hid from you; therefore take heart, and
believe, that as one evil never comes alone, so one good is always
accompanied with another. It is a happiness you should light upon the place
which the Oracle foretells shall put an end unto your miseries, and ere long it
will be seconded with such another as may afford you the effects of all.

Madam, answered Damon and sighed, I find all you say to be grounded upon great
reason, and I do believe I shall shortly see the accomplishment of the Oracle
which promises that in Forests I shall find an end of my misery: For I hope
Death will do that which Love could not. No, no Sir, said the Nymph, you must
have better hopes than so, and being to inquire with me to morrow of the Oracle
in this place, I hope you will receive better contentment; and in this opinion,
I have taken order to provide all things necessary for the Sacrifice, both for
you and me. In the the mean time our Coaches and your Servant may return, but
I have one request, unto you, Sir, which is, that you will not leave me until
you have brought me unto the house of Amasis my Mother, who I am sure will bid
you most heartily welcome. The Cavalier, answered her, That it was his
intention to consult with the Oracle of this place, and that he took it for a
great honor she would permit him to inquire with her; also he would wait upon
her unto Amasis, and tender his service unto her, that as for the hopes which
she gave him, truly he did hope, but it was only in death, which could not
come so soon as he did passionately desire.

In the mean time Galathea dispatched a messenger unto Bonlieu to the venerable
Chrysante, to acquaint her that she would come unto her, and upon the
messengers return understood that Astrea, Diana, Phillis, and all the
shepherds dined there, and intended to go and visit Alexis, the daughter of
Adamas: This messenger was a young fellow that had been brought up in her
service from his infancy, and therefore being very familiar with her, he used
to acquaint her with all the news he met withal in any place where he had
been. At this time, after he had delivered the answer of the venerable
Chrysante, he followed his custom, and said.

I assure you Madam, that except your self, I never saw any so fair as Astrea
and Diana: Galathea, desirous to make him speak on, and to hear more of these
shepherdesses, hoping to find something concernin^ ^er beloved Celadon, and to
hear what was become of him, she spoke alowd before Damon, and said unto him:
How Lerindas, (for that was his name) do you think those shepherdesses so
fair, that you prefer them before all my Nymphs? It is not I who prefers them,
said he, but it is truth. But how can thou make us believe, replied Galathea,
that such Country wenches as they, are so very fair? Madam, said he, I vow,
that were I a Cavalier, I would maintain their beauties against all the World;
and did you see them, I am confident, that for all your valor you would not
enter into the Lists against me upon so bad a quarrel. But tell me Lerindas
(said Galathea, and smiled) which of them does please you most? Doubtless,
answered he, Astrea is the fairer, but she is so sad and melancholy, as
therefore Diana pleases me best: For those wenches that are so deeply in
Love, never pleased me so well as others. Who is it, replied Galathea, whom
Astrea loves? I can only tell you, Madam, replied he; that she is sad and
melancholy, and they say she is so because a Shepherd was drowned about four
or five Months since. And Diana, said the Nymph, is she in love with any? They
say No, answered he, and yet there are two about her who torment her much if
she do not love them; the one is called Paris, and the other Silvander; the
truth is, if I were to choose, I should give my voice for Silvander; for though
he be but a shepherd, yet I never saw one more Gentile, nor civilized. If thou
go on, said Galathea, thou will make us all desirous to become
shepherdesses, only to enjoy such good company. Madam, answered he, you may
chance believe these to be but Fables, but I am confident two or three days
could not, be better employed then amongst them. Then Galathea turning toward
the aged Cleontine. Mother, said she, I am half in a mind to stay here two or
three days, that Damon may a little ease his wounds whilst in the interim walk
toward Lignon, and see whether all these reports of the shepherdesses be true.
Madam answered Cleontine, their conversation is the sweetest and pleasantest
you can imagine; and believe it, there is nothing of Rustique in them but the
name, so as if you desire to take that pleasure, now is the most convenience;
for the great Druid is to come and offer a solemn sacrifice of thanks unto
Tautates for the Missleto, which is found near their Town, What kind of
ceremony is that? asked Galathea; for they use to gather this Missleto the
sixteenth of the Month of July. It Is true, answered Cleontine, but this is only
a sacrifice of Thanks, that Tautates would be pleased to honor that place with
it, before any other, and making it to grow, as they say, upon the goodliest
Oak that ever was seen, and in thus favoring that Town it is a sign he
loves it above others. How do you know (said the Nymph) that the great Druid
comes now to perform this Sacrifice? because, said Cleontine, he promised it
should be within eight days, whereof four are already past, so as if he keep
his word, he cannot defer it no longer: And I am certain, his haste would be
the more, did he know it was your pleasure to honor the solemnity with your
prefence.

This made Galathea resolve to retard her journey unto Bon-lieu, as well to
ease Damon, as to see these shepherdesses; and because she had not yet sent to
acquaint Amasis with the accident which had happened, and likewise because she
might wonder at her stay so long, she dispatched one of Cleontines Servants, to
acquaint her with all that had happened, with the cause of her stay at Mount
Verdan, by reason of Damons ^ounds, and the occasion of his coming into this
Country. As Soon as Amasis received this News, she was much pleased, and much
displeased both: For she was very glad to hear that Damon was alive, whom she
thought dead, because he was her Kinsman in a near degree, and the carriage of
Polemas did extremely displease her, it being against a person of so much
merit, and in the presence of her daughter, whom it was his duty to reverence:
And to show how ill she resented it, she took Coach immediately, and went as
fast as she could unto Mount Verdan, where her daughter was amazed at her
sudden coming, and asked her the reason of her sudden resolution. She told her
that she came to see Damon, and offer him whatsoever was in her power, as her
Kinsman, and as one who had much obliged her.

Damon being advertised of her coming, he arose out of bed to meet her for his
wounds were such as he might do it without danger, but being surprised upon
such a sudden he accoasted her only with excuses, and thanks for so great a
favor. I am obliged, said she, unto you more than this, as well by
consanguinity, as by memory of him who gave you life, who at the return with
Thorismond King of the Visigots, made unto Tectosages, after he had fought
Attilas in the Catalaunique fields with so great an Army, did prevent the ruin
of this Country, turning his passage by the Sequanois, by the lower Allobroges,
by the Veblomiens, and by the Mountains of Gebbenes, and so into his own
Kingdom. And this Obligation was not so little as it was thought of: For the
young King I know not how, did fall in love with one of my Nymphs, who having
no mind to marry he ravished her away by force, doubtless upon my instigation
of her unto that denial.

Madam (answered the Cavalier) all men are obliged to serve Ladies,
particularly those of your quality and merit: And my father in doing you this
little service, which you are pleased to remember, did right unto the title of
a Cavalier; and I succeeding him, do offer unto you my blood and life.

Much more discourse of civility passed betwixt them, and in conclusion she
told him, that she would have him carried unto Marcelles in a Litter, that his
wounds might be there better looked unto: But he excused himself so, as she
permitted him to stay there for some days till his wounds were better: and
this he desired, because he would be more quiet, and out of the world, since
Madonthe was not in it for him, resolving that as soon as he had consulted with
the Oracle, and conducted Galathea to her Mother, he would get himself so
far as where he should not be known, nor the name of Madonthe mentioned by
any. Galathea was very glad of his not going to Marcelles, because she might
the more conveniently stay at M^unt Verdun with him, under a pretense that she
might spend some days amongst the shepherdesses, where she hoped to hear some
news of Celadon, or at the least to see the beauty of Astrea, which had caused
that shepherd to disdain hers.

Amasis seeing he would not stir from the place where he was, and fearing to be
too troublesome unto him if she stayed any longer, because the house was
little; she returned unto Marcelles after many excuses, for the discourtesie
which Polemas had showed unto him, and which she protested should not pass
unpunished. Damon who was all sweetness and civility, and who had often passed
the like hazards, he beseeched her to think no more upon it, because it was a
thing above his merit; and because the offense of Polemas was sufficiently
punished by the loss of his kinsman. He did so extenuate the fault, that
though Galathea who was extremely offended at Polemas for being so insolent in
her presence, did give the crime all due aggravations; yet Amasis promised
Damon to do whatsoever he desired, intending to give him all the satisfaction
and contentment she could: Yet at her return unto Marcelles, she did let
Polemas see how much this action displeased her, though he excused it as well
as he could, saying it was not done by his command: but whilst he was busy in
helping Arganteus, his soldiers seeing him in that case, would needs revenge
his death. Amasis who was very well informed how all passed, commanded him to
turn off his service all such unworthy persons, as would offer such a base act;
which Polemas did with so ill a will, and was so vexed against Damon, as he
resolved to be revenged upon him. Besides, he being of an envious nature, and
seeing how much the Nymph did esteem him, he was not able to endure it. But
that which came nearest the quick, was, that having some hopes of marrying
Galathea, and finding that he could not with all his tricks make her love him,
he began to contrive the means how he should mak^ himself sovereign Lord of
the State, and to compass that by force which Love denied him: he was the more
induced unto this enterprise, because he saw much facility in bringing it
about; Clidemant being absent; with Lindamore, Gugamant, and all the Grandees
of the Country: All the chief places of strength in his hands, and all the
Soldiers listed; and being backed by a great number of his kindred and allies,
both within and without the State: Also, on the contrary, Amasis having nothing
but justice on her side, having conferred all the power upon that faith and
confidence she had in him.

He thus aspiring unto this enterprise, and being prompted thereunto by Love
and Ambition, he could not see any able to give him a stop; for Amasis had not
one Cavalier which had not dependence upon him, and were under his Authority,
except Damon, who though single, made him afraid of his valor: And fearing
that Amasis being displeased by this last action, should keep him in the
Country, and confer Authority upon him by the sunshine of her favors, he
resolved to prevent it. For he remembered that heretofore, the Father of this
Cavalier should once have married Amasis, and all the great value and esteem
which she now set upon him, he did attribute it unto the remembrance she had of
that. This consideration was a cause, why taking aside six of the Soldiers
whom Amasis had commanded him to discharge; he spoke thus unto them, after he
had made many a complaint against her.

Friends, said she, It is a thing impossible to change the nature of any thing,
use what art, or do what one can: you know with what care and pains I have
served Amasis, and how I have not spared any thing which depended upon meor my
friends, which might contribute to her service: And this, not once, but upon
all occasions that sell out. I must confess I have not given my best friends
all that satisfaction which I owe unto them. But it is a thing absoutely
impossible, take what pains, and use what art one can, to stay a wavering
mind, which is natural unto all of her sex She is now swayed wholly by a young
stranger, who by killing Arganteus, has got a little reputation; he who by
chance, and not by any virtue that is in him, killed my Nephew before our
faces; probably he had used some treachery before we came, otherwise it is not
likely he should by plain strength vanquish the valor and skill of Arganteus.
Your resentments of it at this time has so much obliged me, as I shall never
forget it as long as I live, but will be ready upon all occasions to require
you. But I am much afraid the means of doing it will be taken out of my power
ere long, unless you will arm your selves with stout resolutions, and follow
my directions. Amasis to gratify this new up-start, has commanded me to
casheir you out of my List of Soldiers, with express charge to banish you
this Country, your own natural soil. This blow, though it hit you by the by,
yet it will strike me down, and is done purposely to establish this new comer
in this Province, which she is no way able to do, but by taking from me that
Authority which my Services have gotten. She conceives that if she should do it
all at once, and upon a sudden perhaps I might oppose her; and therefore she
undermines me by degrees, thinking that the greater the building is, it will
the sooner fall by its own weight: And to begin her work, she first takes from
me my best friends, such as you are: I know her drift well enough, and if all
things go well, as I hope they will, I shall ere long prevent these disorders*
but as things are at present, if the remedy do not proceed from your courage
and resolution, I am afraid you will be forced from u^ for a time, which would
be one of the greatest displeasures that can befall me, but if you have still
the same courage which I have seen in you, I am confident you will send him out
of the world, who would send you out of your native Country: It is a matter of
no difficulty, for he is a single man; he is not able to resist one of you,
much less all six. Do but kill his Horse that he cannot run away, and the
victory is yours. As for Amasis, she will be highly enraged at the first, and
would be revenged upon those that took from her her vnew Adomis; but her anger
will be only a blast of wind, and quickly over: For he being a stranger, none
will prosecute in his behalf: I mean, none will care for his death; besides, I
know your discretion, as when you have done the business, you can be close, so
as none shall have the least suspicion of you. Then, when all the power is in
my own hands, be assured that you shall not fear any danger, whatsoever become
of my self. Consider well upon it, and be resolute, that I may know what to
do, both for you, and for my self, in a business of this importance.

These Soldiers were soon persuaded by such an Orator, and promised to attempt
upon this stranger what he had propounded; as for their parts, they had no
other considerations, but to obey him; and at the danger of their lives, to
keep up his grandeur and authority.

This attempt being thus resolved upon, the next morning, he assembled together
all those who were with him that day, and who had assaulted Damon; and told
them, that by express command from Amasis, he commanded them, not only to
retire from his service, but to depart the Country within six days; that he was
sorry to treat them so but he must obey; that they must not fail upon pain of
death; and yet not being able to forget those good services which he had
received from them, he promised to obtain the favor of Amasis for them, as
soon as he could, and to get them restored into their former service. And that
they might be better able to subsist in the mean time, besides their pay which
Amasis allowed for the time past, he would out of his own purse give them three
months pay: desiring them not to be angry with him for it; but to believe that
he did execute this command with much grief, being very sorry to part from
those that with so much valor and fidelity had served him, and in whom he had
great confidence. By this smooth language and show of sorrow to part with them,
he did not only get the good will of those who were dismissed, but of all the
Soldiers besides; and on the contrary, did steal away their hearts from
Amasis, which was no small advancement to the design which he had plotted in
himself; for what he took from her, redounded unto his advantage.

Adamas, who was extremely desirous to welcome all the good company in his
house, and particularly to make good his promise unto those fair
shepheardesses, in going unto their Town to offer the sacrifice of Thanks; as
soon as it was day, he ordered the Sacrificers to go before with their Cattle,
and other things necessary; and to give notice unto all the neighboring Towns
to be present. And whilst he was putting all things in order, the fair
Daphnide, and all the rest of the company, did dress themselves, and took the
way unto the place where the Sacrifice was to be offered. Alexis, amongst all
the rest, was most out of tune; for at first going out, when she cast her eye
upon the River of Lignon, and saw the place of her habitation: She did imagine
that this voyage was not real, but a dream only. As she was walking down a
little hill with Astrea, Hylas did so awake her by his discourse, as she
perceived it no dream, but a real voyage; and then she was so full of
contentment, that every one might perceive it in her eyes and face. Astrea on
the other side, who could not wish for more happiness then to be with this
disguised Druid, in whose face was such a lively picture of Celadon, she was so
fully contented, as almost forgetting the averseness of her past fortune, she
was now the happiest shepherdess of Lignon. And because Adamas did let her
understand that he intended to lie this night with Phocion, and that Leenide
and Alexis should be there also; she dispatched a messenger to give them notice.

In the mean time they all walked on, a gentle but a merry pace, some singing,
others talking, all doing something or other to beguile the length of the way.
Calidon who still had in memory the cruel answer which Astrea gave him, not
having so much confidence as to accoast her, yet not being able to conceal his
displeasure nor his extreme affection, he walked sometimes before her, and sung
some verses, which imported that to love her, was recompense enough.

Hylas who was next him, and could not endure any of these obstinate
affections, as soon as Calidon ended, he sung some other verses which imported,
that Let them change that that would, for his part he would never change. Every
one did laugh at the song of Hylas, and because Stiliana, who walked with
Carlis and Hermantes next them, did hearken very attentively unto what Hylas
said; surely Hylas, said she unto him, those who accuse you of inconstancy, do
you much wrong, since never was man more constant than you are: For from the
very first time I ever saw you until now, you were still the same: Oh, good
old Mistress, (said he unto her) I wonder you should not know this before now,
have all the men and women of our age so little wit, as not to know this truth?
This, replied she, and smiled, is a bad recompense for a good office; you call
me old Mistress, and do you not know Hylas, that there is nothing under the
Sun more offends a woman than to be called old. I do believe so, said Hylas,
but it is so long since we were acquainted, that I thought it no injury.
Daphnide, who was talking with Adamas hearing those that were about Hylas to
laugh so heartily, and being desirous to know at what; she inquired of Diana,
who was next her, and she acquainting her with the cause; I must confess said
Daphnide, that his humor is the most pleasant that any one can meet with, in
his kind; and I believe all the company would be very sorry to lose him. But I
beseech you tell me, how long is it, since first he came amongst you; what
moved him to come, and what business has he here? To which Questions, Diana
answered, it is about four or five Months since first he came; as for the cause
of his stay, I think it is superfluous to tell you, knowing his humor so well
as you do, for you may easily imagine it; but for the occasion which brought
him hither, I think none knows, except himself, not that he is of so close
and retired a temper, as that he will not tell any thing, but because always
when he began to tell us his story, either he has been interrupted, or else
time would not serve him to tell it out: And I assure my self, Madam, if you
would but intimate the least desire of knowing it, he would without any
difficulty tell it, for he thinks himself obliged unto any that will hearken
unto him in the relation of his fortunes.

I think, said Daphnide, that it would be a very good diversion, if he would
entertain us with it, and the way would seem less tedious unto us: but the
best way to bring him to it, will be this fair Druid, said she, and pointed at
Alexis, if she would be pleased to command him. Alexis hearing her self named,
and seeing Daphnide point unto her, to show that she was not too serious in her
discourse with Astrea, did ask her if she had any service to command her, and
knowing by Diana what she desired, I assure you Madam (said Alexis) that none
has more power than your self, yet since you are pleased to put me upon it, I
will try what I can do: Then calling unto him, Servant, said she, I am grown
very jealous. Fairest Mistress, said Hylas, you have no occasion for it. Yes,
(said Alexis) the occasion is very great: For besides the beauty of these fair
strangers, which is occasion enough; you know there is good reason to suspect
one of theft who is accustomed to steal: You mean, answered Hylas, and
smiled, that I have been accustomed to steal away the hearts of those who
look upon me, and you fear I should do the like by these new shepherdesses;
but never fear it, fairest Mistress; for it may be I shall commit this theft,
but though I do take their hearts, yet I promise you, they shall not take
mine, for it is only yours. This assurance, Servant, said Alexis, does please
me very well, but that is not my meaning: For it is, that these strangers are
very fair, and you do make it your glory and boast to love all those who have
any beauty. Hylas then going nearer Alexis, I perceive Mistress, said he unto
her, that you do not yet know after what manner I use to love. You must know
that I use to do as Merchants use; when any of them has an intention to buy
any commodity, they look well upon it, and consider what it is worth, and lay
by such a stock of money as is equal to the worth and as far as that sum will
go, they will bid, and no farther, and when they have bought the commodity,
they value it at such a sum as they gave, and spend accordingly: Now I use to
do the like; for when I first intend to love a Lady, I presently look upon
her beauty (for you must know that it is beauty which sets the worth and value
upon a woman) and when I have considered the full value of it, presently I lay
by a stock of Love in my soul, equal unto the price and value of beauty
which she has, and when I love, I bid so much as that stock comes unto, and
spend upon it. Then, after I have spent all that sum in her service, for whom I
first laid it by, I have no more for her; but if I will love, I must look out
for another beauty and lay by another sum for it, so as in this, my money and
my love are alike; I mean, that when I have spent them, I can spend no more;
therefore Mistress, you might have some reason to fear, if I never had loved
these new shepherdesses before, but it is so long since I spent all stock
which I laid by for their beauties as I have none left for them, my money is
gone, and it will not come again. But Servant, said Alexis, Merchants that are
rich, though they have once or twice emptied their purses, yet will they fill
them again, to buy that at the second bidding, which they could not at the
first. Perhaps they may, replied Hylas, but Mistress, such rich Merchants and
I am not alike; for they will chaffer and bid two or three times, whereas I bid
all at the first: besides, if they have no money, they will borrow upon their
credit, and I spend and trade only upon my own stock; This, replied Daphnide,
and smiled, is the finest way of loving that ever it was my fortune to hear
of. It is so, said Alexis, but not very advantageous unto me, for I am afraid
that you will quickly have spent your stock of Love, which you laid up for me,
and then you will love me no longer. It Is true indeed, said Hylas, that, should
I spend it all, you could not hope for any more in me, but that is absolutely
impossible; for when I first lay by a stock of Love, I do make it equal unto
the beauty which I love, and yours being infinite, you must think that the
heap that I laid up to equal it, is a vast Mountain. I am glad of it, replied
Alexis, and esteeming you as I do, should be very sorry to lose you; and this
moves me to entreat you, that if this Mountain be not so big as you do say it
is, you will abate a little, and lessen your expenses to the end your Provision
may hold out the longer; I had rather you would spend a little less, and
imitate those good Husbands who spend one day, as it may hold out the whole
year. Mistress, said he presently, if that be all your care, set your heart at
rest, for my mountain of Love to you, will last as long as I live. But good
Servant, said Alexis, though your mountain be as big as you say, yet
methinkes you should desire mine should be as big to you, least this love
should be lame, and let down of one side? You say very well, replied Hylas,
and I do desire it with all my heart. Then said Alexis, you must use some
means whereby you may come to the knowledge of it* I have heard, that nothing
is more requisite unto Love, than the knowledge of the thing loved; and how do
you think I should love you, unless I know you? Hidden treasures are not
estimable; your actions, I make no question would render you of high esteem, if
they were once known; and therefore if you do desire that I should love you,
than you must let me know the Story of your life, especially at this time when
you may have so good an Auditory, and therefo^ I would not have you let slip
the opportunity. What Mistress, said Hylas, is all this long preamble only
for this? the very least syllable you could have hinted would have commanded
it, and you shall see that my affection is above your curiosity, though let me
tell you* I hold the maxim in Love to be false, that one must know before one
can love, as well as I do all the rest which Silvan^er most absurdly vents.
But to show my obedience I will tell you all I know of my self. Then placing
Adamas in the middle of the Company, every one was very attentive, and to hear
the better, some almost trod upon his heels. And then seeing all silent, he
began thus.

The History of Chryside and Hylas.
IGnorance has this quality, that it causes many things to be condemned, which
in themselves are laudable: And this I have often found to be true, since I
came amongst these shepherdesses about the River Lignon, where the false
Tenants of Silvander are so much followed, as all he says is Oracle, and it is
held an offense against the very Gods, not to believe what ere he says. This
is an error so rooted in the opinion of all that fect, as it is, in matter of
Love, a crime of the highest nature, to contradict him. Yet I, who am not
swayed by opinion, but by truth; and who will not be convinced by words, but by
reasons; I have ever followed that which reason dictates unto me, and bids me
do. Can any be so irrational as to blame experience, which is the mother and
the Nurse of Prudence? yet talk to Silvander, or any of his heretical sect,
and they will maintain it even with their lives that all experience is vicious
and fallacious; and that they must cleave unto their own errors, like snailes
which once sticking to a wall, must not part from it: As if the Gods had not
given us a judgment and reason to discern things that are good, things that
are better, and things that are most perfect.

These Considerations, I beseech you, fairest Mistress, set before your eyes,
when you see that I have sometimes loved and changed; and yet do not fear I
shall change you for any other, because it is impossible to find one that is
better or more perfect; For when I am come once to the highest step, I cannot
go any higher. You are not the first, fairest Mistress, that has desired to
understand the sequel of my strange fortune; many others have had the same
curiostry, and some in this company. What I have formerly related into them, I
will not relate now, because they can inform you as well as I: And therefore I
will only tell you, that I am originally of Carmargues, where I began my
Apprentiship with Carlis, and ended it with Stiliana. Afterward, being but yet
a novist in my trade, I quitted that place and came to Lions, after that I had
by the way loved the fair Aymea, the fool Ploriante, and the sad Cloris,. Then
being come thither, I saw Circena, whom, as my love unto her began in the
Temple, so it dyed as soon as I was out again, and revived it self in the
charitable Palinice; and from her was transferred unto the kind Parthenopea,
afterward to the crafty Dorinde, and the proud Florice. And because Florice is
the last I named, I will begin my discourse where my love to her ended, that
you may the better understand what you desire to know concerning my life.

Periander, a very brave Cavalier, and one that was passionately in love with
Dorinde, to please her, was a cause of my declining Florice, by stealing from
me (though my friend) some Letters which she had written unto me: And Dorinde
to be revenged both of her and me, showed them (like a spiteful woman as she
was) unto Theombres the husband of Florice, who upon this, fell into such a
suspicion of her, as he carried her out of the the Town, so as in a little time
I began to forget her: for Mistress, I must ingenuously confess, that as my
love began first by my eyes, so it ended as soon as it wanted nourishment from
my eyes, according to that true Maxim Out of sight, out of mind, and what is
far from the eye never troubles the heart. Florices stay out of Town a whole
month (a term long enough to kindle and extinguish a dozen several loves in
me) had been enough to quench all my flames to her. But her stay being to
continue a longer time, I resolved with my self to take my leave of her: for I
could never like those loves, that can feed themselves with thoughts and
fancies, and fond imaginations. But finding Love to be a fire, and my self
burned with it, I thought the best Cure was by sympathy, and to cure my self
by another fire; and in order to this, I sought out for some new beauty which
might cure my old burn; and at last, heaven which always favors designs that
are just, sent me such a fire as I stood in need of.

One evening as I was walking without any other design, but taking the air by
the River Arar, close by a Bridge, and looking about, I espied three Coaches
drawn by six Horses apeece: And because that was amongst us an equipage
unusual, I drew nearer the bridge to see them pass. In one of them was four
Ladies habited much different from our Mode, and very rich; and their uncouth
habits made me look upon them with more curiosity and eagerness. The first
whom fortune fixed my eye upon, did keep it upon her as long as I could see;
She was in the first Coach, and seated in the best place; her hair was fair,
something inclinable to Chestnut; her Complexion, no dye could make a mixture of
such perfect vermilion upon snow; her eyes black, but so quick, sweet, and
piercing, as no heart had humor good enough to resist them; her lips exact
Corrall, her N^ck a Column of purest Alablaster, and every part proportionable
in perfection: as for her stature, I could not perfectly see it, but as near as
I could judge, it was neither tall nor little: as for her Hand, which she often
showed in lifting up her hair which lay upon her shoulder in curles, it could
not be equalled unto any thing so well as to the whiteness of her neck.

Judge, Madam, whether such a beauty could be looked upon and not loved; she
was the fire by which I cured all my other burnings, so as quite forgetting
Circinea, Palanice, Dorinde, and Florice, I devoted my self wholly unto her.
But perhaps you will think it strange, that she being in a Coach, and only
passant, I should observe so many particulars in this beauty; but you must
consider, that I looked upon her with more eyes then my own, and had those of
love to help me in looking upon this wonder. Nor must you believe any such
thing which Silvander is often alleging, that Love is blind: but on the
contrary, that those who look with his eyes, can look through dresses and see
such beauties as are hid from others. But it seems that love had a design upon
me at this time, for he would not let me make use of his eyes and my hands, but
loadned the Coach heavier then it was before, because it carried my heart away
with it.

I see Silvander, you laugh; and I know you would say that the Coach was not a
jot more loadned for having my heart in it; but know, that my heart as light as
it is, yet is as heavy as yours. I know not that, said Silvander, but I am sure
the Coach which carried your heart, had need go very fast, or else your heart
would quickly be out, for it cannot endure to be long in a place. This said
Hylas, was Perianders opinion, when he found me looking upon these strangers as
they passed. This good friend of mine perceiving me half out of my self, did
begin to suspect the cause; and coming unto me, Courage, Hylas, said he unto
me; you will recover of this, I warrant you, as well as you have done of others.

I answered him with a love sick look; I see Periander, you mock me; but did
you know how great my pain was, you would pity me, though I must confess it
proceeds from love, Ah, ah, my friend, said he and laughed, have a good heart;
this is not the first time you have been sick of the same disease and never
dyed. It Is true, said I unto him, then I did know who was the cause, but now I
am ignorant of it: How friend? said Periander and laughed; What? in love, and
knows not with whom? So it is, said I unto him, and I cannot help it, Love has
caught me. That you do love, said he, I do believe, but that you should love,
and not know her whom you do love, though I should believe you in any thing
else, yet in this I am incredulous: And if it be true, I say it is a thing as
easily done, as to persuade any to believe it. Whether you believe it or no,
said I, and sighed, yet I am sure it is so. How long, said he, have you been
sick of this fantastical disease? A little longer, answered I, then we have
been talking of it. Upon this, Per^ander laughed, and laying his hand upon my
shoulder, said; Well friend, if you be long sick of this disease, I will pay
your Doctors: then he offered to go away, but I laid hold upon his Cloak: What?
said I unto him, is this all the help and consolation I must expect from your
friendship? What can I do for you, answered he, as long as you do not know
her that is the cause of your malady? You may help me, replied I, and contrive
it how I should come to the knowledge of her whom I adore. This is strange
folly, said he, Can I know her better then you do? Why not, replied I; Is it
not ordinary for people in health, to tell sick folks their disease, and to
give them such remedies as they themselves knew not? Ah, Periander, did you
love me as well as you profess, you would not deny me that assistance which
friendship requires. To which he answered; In the name of Heaven, Hylas, what
would you have me to say or do? upon my faith I think you are become a fool. A
fool, said I, is it folly to love her whom I adore? she whom I am ready to die
for, will not yield unto any Goddess in beauty; she has more Graces, then all
the Graces themselves; and if Love were not hood-winckt, doubtless he would
dote upon her: but the truth is, I know not who she is. This is fine folly
indeed, replied he; where, and when did you see her? Oh Heavens, said I, are
you blind, that you could not see the Sun when it shined? Did you not see the
Coaches which passed by? In the first of them was she whom I love, and know
not, Is it so, said he unto me, then friend know, that you are a Prisoner unto
a Prisoner; Gondebunt our King did take them beyond the Alps, and has sent
them hither as Trophies of his Victory.

Thus I understood who this fair stranger was, and had it not been very late I
had endeavored to have seen her that night, but deferring until the morning I
retired to my lodging so tormented that I could not rest all the night. As
soon as day appeared, I left my bed: And because Periander promised to
accompany me to the Palace, where we might see them as they went to the
Temple, and staying in my Chamber till he came, I took my Glass, and trimmed
my self up as gay as possibly I could, and kept such a stir with curling my
hair, and setting my self in a right quirpo, as none about me were able to
please me. Then taking the Glass into my hand and and finding my hair
appeared a little too much of the gilded hue, also thinking that it would make
but a bad impression in the fancy of women, I loaded my head with so much
Cypress powder, as it looked more like the head of a Miller than the head of
Hylas: And Periander suprizing me, looked on a long while before I perceived
him; at the last, turning about, and lifting up my eyes, I saw him laughing.
Periander, said I unto him, you are no good friend of mine, since in lieu of
help and pity, you laugh at me. And so I may very well, said he, and I cannot
believe your pain to be so great, unless Love in revenge of your folly, do
make you find that in your self, which you would hardly believe in another.
Wherein, said I, have I been so incredulous? In that so great an affection
cannot be found, said he, as will efface all other cares but such as concern,
and depend upon it.

You are in the right (said I unto him) but did you ever see me so desirous to
please any of those I loved? Nay, put all the Loves I ever had unto this time
together, they cannot all equal the affection which I have unto this one, and
therefore you need not think it strange I should be so careful, and take more
pains with my self for her, then for all the rest: For I know very well that
the first impressions which are made in the minds of women, are not easily
blotted out. Thus talking to him, and still tricking up my self as fine as
possibly I could* Come, come, said he, and make an end of all your finerye, for
otherwise they will be gone before you come; then taking my hand, and pulling
me almost by force from my glass, he constrained me to follow him unto the
Palace, where those fair strangers were lodged, unto which we were no sooner
come, but we saw them going to the Temple, two and two together, holding hands.

I was so attentive in seeing them pass along, and observing which was she who
had thus wounded me, that Periander, by way of mockery whispered me in the ear;
take heed, said he, that she whom you admire so much, do not pass by, and you
not know her; should my eyes commit such a fault, said I, I would pull them
out, and they should never deceive me again. Well, well, said he, I am much
mistaken if she be not past already: Is it possible, replied I presently, do
you not mock me? Upon this, not staying for any answer, I ran a little
forward, that I might see them pass again; but then I found Periander only
mocked me, for presently after, I saw her whom I expected, the last of them
all, adorned with so many beauties, as she attracted the eyes of all upon her.
This second vision did so ravish me, that I knew not what I did, only I
remember that when she passed before me, I could not choose but say with a deep
sigh; Here comes the fairest of all; and it happened, of all these Strangers none
but she understood the language of Gaul, so as I obliged her without
disobliging the rest, because they understood me not; for most certainly to
undervalue a womas beauty is a wound almost incurable. And on the contrary, of
all flatteries none more pleasing unto them than those that applaud their
beauties, for let it be never so gross, yet it will be believed true. The
Temple was a good distance from the Palace, and yet I found it so short, that
I thought the way so short, as they were there before I imagined it half way,
and I thought the Sacrifice so short, as it was ended before I thought it
begun, and this because I received such extreme contentment in looking upon
this fair stranger, and my eye was never off as long as the Sacrifice lasted.
These Ladies also were as full of curiosity as we, and were not so fervent in
their devotions, but they would sometimes look round about the Temple, and it
happened that this fair Stranger never turned her eye toward me, but she saw
mine fixed upon her.

Then Diana smiled and said, Hylas I must needs interrupt you a little, and put
you in mind you do not blaspheme Vesta and the good Goddess. Temples were
made to pray unto the Gods and not for any amorous designs; Why, said Hylas,
will not the Gods permit us to do that on earth, which they themselves do in
Heaven? Then, not staying for Dianas answer, he full into his discourse again.

The Sacrifice being ended, they returned in the same order as they came; and
as fortune was, at their coming out of the Temple, which as you know stood
high, and had many steps to descend from it, this Fair one looking another
way, and wearing very high shoes, she fell at the last step, but without
receiving any hurt: I who had my eye continually upon her, ran presently to
her, and taking her by the arm, I helped her up, with so much contentment unto
my self, as I thought all the pains I took that day very well employed,
having done her this trivial service, which as she since confessed was the
first knowledge she had of my good will; and this was the reason why ever since
in all my other affections, I did never omit the least occasion, though never
so trivial, which might be any way serviceable unto those I loved, observing
from hence, that in imitation of good Fencers, it is better to make many blows,
though they be not mortal, then to stay all the day for one single blow,
because he is very ignorant in the mystery that cannot defend himself from one
blow; but when he falls on pell mell, and gives blow after blow; it is almost
impossible but some should take effect. In this I do hint particularly at
Silvander, who is so proud, that he will never do any less service unto his
Mistesse than the saving of her life, thinking that other less services do
not deserve to be put upon account.

S^lvander, least he should interrupt, would not answer, but seeing the eyes of
all the Company upon him, especially Diana, as if she expected something from
him, he thought himself obliged to speak. Hylas, said he, I do confess part,
and part disavow what you do say of my humor; for such trifling services as
do not merit the name of service, and are no more than common Complements,
they are not worthy of such account, as you do make of them, since the
greatest ought to be blotted out of the memory of him who renders them. How,
said Hylas, and shoke his head, must one blot out of memory a long service? Why
then should one ever do them, if things past must be forgotten? Believe it my
good friend Silvander, women will easily consent unto such a Law, for
Ingratitude, which is their Nature, is the mother of Oblivion; but I have so
observed the services which I have done them, as if they do seem not to
remember them, or to take no notice of them, I shall tell them of it, as they
shall be deaf if they do not apprehend them. And to tell you truly, I believe
if your services did merit as much as mine, you would not set so low a rate
upon them, or to say better, you would not make such good use of them: As for
me, I do think the very least service I do, does deserve a great recompense
Did I not know, said Silvander, and smiled, that the Isle of Camargue is your
Country, I should think seeing you set so great a value upon a little, that
you were borne in a certain Country of the Gauls where the Inhabitants have
three qualities which are not much unlike your humor. What are they? said
Hylas. I would not willingly tell them, said Silvander, but since you urge me,
you shall know.

The first is, that they are rich, yet have but a little; The second is, they
are Doctors, yet have but a little learning; And the last is, they are
extremely proud, yet have but a a little honor. Hylas would have answered
half in anger, but the laughter was so loud that he could not. And afterward
when he offered to speak, Silvander was before him, and with a smile, said,
let it satisfy you Hylas, that I said not this of the Province of the Romans,
where you were borne; but if you think your self obliged unto some resentment
of it, I give you leave with all my heart to say as much of the place where I
was borne, if you please. No question, replied Hylas presently, but that if
your Country were not as much unknown to me as to your self, I should not be
long mute, but should say as much for you, and with more truth, yet not knowing
where this strange Land is, one may easily judge that it produces nothing but
rushes and thistles, since it has sent forth such pricking and biting spirits
as yours. To which Silvander having no mind to reply, because he would not
hinder him from his story; Hylas after a little silence, continued thus.

The custom of the ancient Town of Lions which is to welcome and entertain
all strangers, and most religiously to observe all Laws of Hospitality, was a
cause that Amasonte Aunt unto Periander, a few days after the arrival of
these fair strangers, did enquire of those who had the guard of them whether
it would be permitted to visit them, and understanding that the King was very
well pleased to allow it, she went unto them, and offered unto them all manner
of assistance and service; she had a daughter called Orsinda, who was not
unhansome: This daughter was at the first visit so much pleased with these
Ladies, and so was Amasonte, that they went very often afterward to see them.
By fortune the greatest intimacy they had, was with that Fair one who had so
captivated me. And it was, as I believe, besides those perfections which she
had above the rest of her companions, because she spoke the Gaul language, and
because she had been brought up in those Countries, Periander acquainting me
with these passages, I told him, that he must needs contrive it so by any
means, that this good Aunt of his did might us admittance without acquainting
her with any design.

And we parting in this resolution, that same day Periander dining with his
Aunt, seemed to be inquisitive in hearing her to tell of these strangers, and
enquired very particularly how they behaved themselves, and whether they were
civil and affable, to whom Amasonte and Orsinda, both giving very high and
advantageous Characters of them, he feigned an extreme desire of seeing and
talking with them. If you will, answered Orsinda, you may go with my Mother and
me, so satisfy your curiosity. It Is true, said Amasonte, if men may be
permitted to visit them, and of that I have not enquired: but to morrow I
promise you to ask the question, whether any men have yet or may be admitted,
and if any have been allowed, you shall I warrant you, as soon as any. And
indeed; the good Aunt was as good as her word; for the next morning she
understood that any might come and visit them; for the King did not fear any
could steal them away, having them so far from home.

When Periander brought me this news, it was not unwelcome unto me, as you may
well imagine, especially when I heard, that the next day in the afternoon, they
would conduct us thither. The day seemed so long to my impatience, as I asked
what a clock it was, above a hundred times, thinking the Sun a sluggard and
slower then usual: I was no less unquiet all the night, nor had any more
patience all the morning, until the hour came, when Periander was to go unto
the Palace Royal; there I so well measured my time, as when they came to the
Gate I met them, and seeming as if the meeting was merely accidental; I asked
Periander whither he was going? He answered, that he was to wait upon his
Mother (for so he called Amasonte) then she addressed her self unto me, and
said, If, Sir, you be a friend, you will not leave Periander alone upon this
occasion, I will never enquire what it is, since you command me, answered I,
and since it is to serve my friend. And as I said so, I took Orsinda by the
arm; Periander could not choose but laugh, when he saw me seem so ignorant of
the voyage, and the readiness I used in taking hold of the occasion. Thus we
entered into the place where the strangers were; and at the first, I saw the
fair one whom I so much admired come with open arms, a smiling countenance,
and great demonstration of good will unto Orsinda, whose happiness I envied.

After the first salutations and complements of course, Amasonte desiring I
should receive some good looks from this fair Prisoner, by her means, did let
her understand who we were, acquainted her with the great intimacy betwixt
Periander and me, and with the desire we had to do them any service: and
therefore addressing unto us, she showed her self as sweetly kind, as civility
would permit her: Then turning toward me, she remembered how I helped her up
when she fell at the Temple stairs. I perceive, Madam, said I unto her, One
shall never complain of any services done unto you, since you can so well
remember so small a matter; Though our Ladies in Gaul either out of pride or
want of memory, do not only forget small services, but also the greatest one
can do them. I pray, Sir, said she unto me, how can you attribute this unto
their pride. They have such a high opinion of their own merits, answered I, as
they think all the world is obliged to serve them: and receiving all our
services as but due debts, they despise them, and despising them, (...) not
daign to remember them. Sir, said she unto me and smiled you describe your
Ladies to be of a very strange humor. But take heed lest what you say, do not
proceed from some other occasion: Our sex is so the Butt of detraction, that we
are very often constrained to seem as if we did not see things, which yet we
do see as well as men themselves; and in this, we are rather to be pitied
then blamed.

Periander and Orsinda, were retired a little on the other side, and purposely
that might have some discourse with her, whilst Amasonte entertained the other
strangers: This encouraged me to be more bold in my answer. Had these Ladies,
whom you, Madam, excuse so much, replied I, but such bodies, and such wits, and
spirits, as you have, though they were much more cruel then they are, yet would
they need no excuses; for then, be they never so austere, yet would they not
only be served, but even adored by all men.

This language did not at all startle her, but with a smiling eye she answered
thus: I see, Sir, flattery is in use here in Gaul, as well as amongst the
Romans: I thought it h^d only been beyond the Alps, but I perceive the Gauls
who are reported to speak from their hearts, have it amongst them, as well as
other people. Madam, answered I, I cannot tell whether your Nation do call
truth flattery, or whether to flatter be in your language to speak truth; but I
do swear and protest by our Great Tautates, which is the deepest oath I can
take, that I did never in all my life see any face comparably so fair as yours,
nor any wit so good and perfect as yours is.

Thus, Mistress, I continued my discourse, and before we parted, I did let her
understand, that I had a desire to do her particular service: perhaps you will
think it strange, I should thus at the first make this remonstrance unto her;
but you must know, that my humor was not to languish it out in amorous
Trances, nor to let my eyes be Orators as long as my tongue could tell her my
heart. For I ever thought that delays do rather mar then make it better,
and that in love, not to vanquish quickly, is to be vanquished; but the
principal motive why I would no longer defer the declaration of my affection
unto this fair stranger, was a double consideration, which at that time I had
in my mind: I considered that she was in the power of another, and not as
others are under a Mother or Parents: but a Prisoner of War, and kept by
command from Gondebert, as the rest of her companions were. And because it was
hard to know what design he had upon her, I feared lest this opportunity
should be taken from me, either by being guarded more strictly, or removed unto
some other place. I considered also, that she came from beyond the Alps, where
the women are much bolder to attempt what they desire, and execute what they
attempt, then our women of Gaul are: I sound this to be their temper by my
converse in Camargue, and in the Town of Arles, which made me think that this
fair one would not derogate from her Climate, nor think this sudden
declaration strange.

Following therefore the genius of her Country and my own, I did acquaint her
with my affection. And though perhaps my words were not at the first taken as
proceeding from love, but civility; yet however, they did break the Ice, and
facilitate the way to my ensuing addresses, and made her believe that which I
did desire to persuade her of: I had an opinion that she had no thoughts which
tended unto what I desired; and yet she took more pleasure in talking with me,
then with Periander, or any that came to visit her; she thinking that this
affection which tied me unto her, did oblige her to trust more in me. And
though I had no other knowledge of her good will then this, yet I can truly
say, that there were very few things which she did not communicate unto me,
though never so private or important; and within a month after the first time
I had seen her, there was so great familiarity betwixt us, as she advertised
me, how she and her companions intended to walk in the Athenian Isle at the
evening, in a Garden which was where the Rosne and Arar met, a place very
pleasant, both in variety of Wal^s, and Groves of Trees. I resolved not to miss
this appointment, as well because I had no other exercise nor design, as
because I thought she would be much offended if being so secretly advertised of
it, I should let slip that opportunity which she gave me. When she saw me
first, she seemed unto her Companions, as if the meeting were by chance and not
design. What fortune brought you hither, Hylas, said she unto me, where my
companions and my self did think to pass away the rest of the day unseen by
any? This dissimulation of the matter, did please me very well. For it is a
good sign of love, to hide from others the address which is made unto any
Lady. And to second her in her artifice, I answered very faintly. It is
impossible* Madam, but that the fortune which brought me hither should be good,
since I am so happy in meeting such company; and it would be much better, if I
knew any way how to do you any acceptable service.

Those who began to understand a little of our language did thank me in most
pitiful broken words, yet as kindly as they could, and went away into
several walks, leaving us two together as we desired to be. I took her
therefore under the Arm, and began to walk, but least she should think so
much familiarity strange, I said unto her, though this Madam be not the custom
and fashion of your Country, yet it is in Gaul, and therefore I beseech you
take it not ill, if I use our own privileges, and by taking your arm do
help you to walk, Hylas, answered she, your kindness unto me obliges me
unto more familiarity than this: It Is true, that the condition wherein I am will
not let me acknowledge it more than in words, so as I cannot require your amity
as I ought to do; upon this I observed her to sigh and change color, as if
the thought of her condition did exceedingly trouble her: And being very
desirous to know the particular cause of her sadness, after many thanks for
her kind expressions, I beseeched her to let me know what Fortune brought her
into this Country, and what stayed her in it: And because it is no small
advantage (mark well Silvander what I say) to know the fortunes and humors of
those, whose favor we desire, I was the more urgent with her: For I should be
thereby the better instructed what will please, and what will displease her*
Hylas, said she, do you not know that I am a Prisoner unto King Gondebunt, and
how much my Companions and I am obliged unto him? And I answering that I knew
it only by vulgar report. Then answered she, I shall acquaint you with those
particulars which you desire; and you shall hear the most lamentable Adventure
that ever befell a poor woman; only I beseech you to be very silent in it,
and impart it unto none.

The History of Cryseide and Arimant.
FOrtune is pleased to trouble not only Monarchies and great States, but also
to show her power upon private persons, to let us know that all things under
heaven are under her lash; the miseries I have endured, and the lamentable life
I have hitherto led, does but too well manifest this truth, as you may judge:
For, I being but a poor silly woman, yet his study is to cross me, and not to
let me enjoy a minute of quietness, never since I had the judgment to disceme
betwixt good and evil. I am of a Country whose people are called Salasses, a
place confined by the golden Baltea and the Libices on the East, by the Po, on
the South; the Taurinois, Centurons and Catur^es on the West; and the Alps on
the North.

This Country is very well known unto the Romans by reason of the many Gold
Mines which are in it, and for which the Inhabitants of the place have been
forced to revolt so often. I have made this description of my Country unto you,
that you may the better understand what was foretold my Father when I was
borne, by a female Druide, who came out of Gaw into this Country, by the
command (as she said) of a great God, whose name was unknown unto us, and I
think it was by him whom you did swear. Is it Tautates; said I unto her? The
same, answered she whom this woman said was a great God, and all others
depended upon him, Now this female Fortune teller came to my Fathers house, at
the same time when my Mother was delivered of me: And my Father seeing her look
very earnestly upon me, he asked her what my fortune would be: It will be,
answered she, like unto the Country where she is borne. This answer was very
dark: But some years after she chanced to come again unto the same place,
and my Mother being very inquisitive did press her to explain her former
prediction. To whom she answered, that this woman shall have the same fortune
which the Country wherein she was borne has; the Romans by reason of the Gold
found there have so harrassed the people by wars, as it is almost depopulated,
so as her abundance is the cause of her poverty; even so shall this your
daughter be very much troubled by reason of her beauty and merit. And
certainly this Druid was very knowing; for I have found ever since, that never
was woman more crossed by fortune than my self, as you may judge by the
ensuing discourse.

I was born, as I told you, amongst the Sallases, in a Town called Eporides,
seated between two great Hills, where the golden Baltea runs: my Father was
called Leander, and my mother Luira, and though my own praises be not hansome
out of my own mouth, yet that you may the better understand the sequel of
this discourse, you must know, that there was none in all the Country, who did
not yield unto my Father, in grandeur, in antiquity of Family, in offices which
he possessed, or in authority which he had gotten, as well by his own merit,
as by the favor of Honorius, and since of Vaelentinian, and all those who
since him ruled over Italy, who advanced him unto that height, that if his
death had not prevented it, when the Empire was in decline, doubtless he had
not only made himself Sovereign Lord over the Sallases, but also of the
Libices, of the Centrons and of the Veragrois.

This his death was the first blow which I received from Fortune and did not
resent it, for want of capacity: For, being but nine years of age, I knew not
what it was to lose a Father, and to be at the disposition of a mother who was
more careful of her self than her Children, yet I lived very contentedly till
I came to be fourteen of fifteen years old, for till then. Fortune did not
think me able to feel the weight of her blows; and see how subtly she
undermined me: for she gilded over her bitter pills of poison with a gloss of
good, knowing very well (cruel one as she is) that any misery that comes under
the shroud of a happiness, makes it self much more sensibly resented.

In the same Town where I was, did dwell very many Cavaliers: for that Gaul,
which is called Cisa^pine is not as it is here, for I have heard, that here
Cavaliers and men of quality do live in the Country. Amongst the rest, there
was one young Libicinian Gallant, who certainly was as much favored by Nature
in all the graces she could bestow, as was possible; nor did he want any
nobleness of Ancestors, nor alliance to the best Families, nor any other good
quality that could possibly be desired, but only Riches; and in that, he was
little beholding to his Father, who was all his life more thirsty after the
acquisition of Honor than Wealth, little considering that the one without the
other is like a bird that has good wings, yet has such a clog at her foot that
she cannot fly. This young man did dwell in Eporides by reason of the hatred
which Rhithimer bore unto his Father. I suppose, Hylas, you have heard, how
this Rhithimer though a Goth by Nation, yet through his valor and good conduct
was made a Citizen of Rome; afterward, Patrician, and lastly Governor of Gaul
Cisalpine, or indeed, rather the Lord of it; for his Commission was so large,
and his authority so absolute, that he might be called Lord as well as
Governor. The Father of Arimant (for so was the young man called) had most
just occasion to fear his Enemy; For though otherwise he was very well
accomplished, yet he had ever in him the Nature of a Goth: And this was the
reason why he came into this Town that he might so much the sooner go out of
Italy, in case he was forced to it, either by the Centrons, by the Veragrois,
or by the Helvetians.

This young Cavalier of whom I speak did accidentally see me at a marriage
which was kept in the house of one of my Cozens. The custom of the Country is,
that upon such occasion, entrance is permitted unto all as freely as into
Churches. I say that as ill luck was, he saw me there: For there he fell in
love with me, and this love was the scource both of all his miseries and mine.
He took occasion to declare his love unto me in a Ball, wherein many use to
dance at once by two and two, walking only round the room, and observing the
cadency a little. The name of it was the great Ball, and invented purposely to
give a hansome opportunity unto Cavaliers of talking unto Ladies. Arimant took
me out, and though it was with a design of discovering his affection, yet was
it long before he durst begin; yet at last, least he should lose such an
opportunity as was hard to be met with again, he forced himself, and said
thus unto me. Fair Chrysiede said he unto me (for he had enquired my name) the
Jaws of this Country are too rigid, if not unjust, in keeping so close, that
which is most fair: I do not know (said I unto him) upon what you do ground
your speech. Upon custom, answered he, which is to keep the Ladies up so
close: as that they show themselves so seldom, as a man can hardly say he sees
them, and not to go far for an example: Is it not extreme cruelty I should
be six Months in this Town, and this is the first time I have the happiness
to see you? Fair Ladies Sir, said I unto him, do conceal themselves upon
very good consideration. For too often seen, too much contemned: But why
should you put me in the Catalogue of fair ones, or complain of seeing me so
seldom? Since certainly the sight of me must needs be very indifferent unto
you? It is too much, said he and sighed, to overcome one person twice; it was
enough your eyes had already got the victory over me, without doubly
surmounting me by the sweetness and charms of your refined wit.

This sudden declaration did surprise me, yet I cannot tell how, it did not
offend me, and I answered him thus. You are easily overcome, Sir, if vanquished
by such simple arms, as your Conqueror is owner of; and since she never so much
as thought of obtaining this victory. However, said he, I am vanquished, and I
am neither ashamed nor sorry, for being vanquished by such arms.

I knew not all this while, who this young Cavalier was, having never seen him
before: yet since he was so confident as to address himself unto me, I did
imagine him a man of principal Rank amongst the Sallases; his hansome
presence, and the expression of his affection, made me very desirous to know
his name: And I must confess I had been put hard to it for an answer, if the
Ball had continued longer. But it being ended, I had opportunity to enquire of
what I desired. He who began to be sensible of loves first blows, which
commonly are full of impatience, and who thought that perhaps it would be long
before he had such another opportunity, he took me out to dance again although
it was not the custom; but being grown more bold, and a better husband of his
time, he said thus unto me; I have been assured, that fair ones will never
believe things that are true, and rather hearken unto things things that are
not so. Though I should leave it unto fair ones, to give you an answer (said I)
yet since they do not hear, I will ask you, why you accuse them of that
fault? Because, answered he, I find it so in you. Pardon me, fair Cryside, if I
offend you. Why do not you believe me, when I say that I am your most devoted
servant, for it is most true? Ar^mant, said I, words only cannot persuade me
to believe what you say, since reason gives your tongue the lie; and since I
know that men make profession of giving much for a little money. If it be so,
said he, then I do protest that I am not a man. What are you then, replied I
presently? I am, said he, your servant, and the most faithful and zealous
servant that ever was. I must needs confess, Hylas, that his noble extraction,
and his neat wit, had obliged me to give him another kind of answer then I did,
but for some other considerations which hindered me, and therefore I only said
thus unto him; we shall see Arimant, whether you continue in the same mind the
next time we meet, and I will defer my answer until then.

The Ball now ended and the company parted, for it was supper time, and do
what he could, I would not give him any opportunity of speaking unto me again,
thinking that for the first time he might be very well contented with such
answers as he had received. And because the joy for this marriage continued
many days, the next day, and as often as the meetings continued, he did not omit
any opportunity of testifying the truth of his expressions: which at the last,
I was persuaded to believe, and to satisfy him so far, as to let him think
I loved him. It Is true, I stayed until the very last day, before I did so
declare my self unto him, lest if I had done it sooner, he should pretend to
any greater favor, and had I tarried any longer, I could not have told him so
much; but I would not upon any terms, let him go without some assurance of my
good will.

Since this time, it was long before we saw each other, except in Temples and
public places, which I must confess did trouble me, because indeed, I did
begin to love him, considering his discretion in the carriage of the business,
so as none could suspect his design. He would come often in the night to my
window, and present me with some Serenades: but that was all the visits I had
from him.

My discourse, kind Hylas, would be too long and tedious, if I should relate
all the particulars of this Courtship. Let it suffice, that Arimant could not
with discretion testify the good that he wished unto me, although he sought
out all ways, and neglected no opportunity of doing it. Oh Hylas, how full of
subtilty Love is? and though they paint him but a boy, yet what old tricks he
has? They are very ignorant who know it not, or who think to master him. I
know, and I know it by experience, and to my grief, that they who would
overcome him, must fight as those do who get their victory by flying, for
otherwise if they come to handy-blowes, he will get the better, it is
absolutely impossibly to resist him: for he has so many tricks, and can use so
many several sorts of Arms, as with one or other doubtless if he do not
wound, yet at least he will foil and make scratches, and his weapons are also
impoysoned, that as soon as ever they draw blood, there is no hope of health
for him that is so wounded, for his wounds will so itch, as he himself will
scratch them and make them sore. Oh that I had known this before? For, Hylas,
at the first I did not admit of this address, but only to see Arimant
languish before my face, as a testimony of my beauty: Afterward, his
obsequioushesse and kindness, moved me to look upon him a little better, and
then his Noble Extraction, his Merits, his Generosity, and his Discretion, made
me think very well of him, and a little after, to esteem him so, as I should
be sorry to lose him And love was no sooner possessor of heart, but presently I
was constrained to render it unto him, since time did put me out of all doubt
of his loving me. But I beseech your consider how suddenly my humor changed,
when love had gotten this victory over me: As long as I did not love him, I
cared not at all who knew of his affection to me: but on the contrary, was very
glad it should be divulged, as thinking that the more passionately he loved me,
and the more it was known, the more was the honor of my beauty. But then, as
soon as I began to love him, I cannot express how I was offended at the least
knowledge of it, in so much as every time I talked of him, my principal charge
was to be silent and secret, and carry all close. Our affairs then standing
upon these terms, and our affections growing every day to a higher strain, our
only endeavors were for hansome occasions to testify them unto each other.
But such was the constraint in which the women beyond the mountains lived,
being kept as it were Prisoners, as it was impossible for us to see one
another, unless by chance, nor to speak together but in the presence of some,
and that too, very seldom. This made him think upon an old woman, who got her
living by going unto houses and selling Laces and Ribbands; that by her means
we might speak unto each other by Paper, though not by voice. He easily gained
the woman, what by promises, and what by Gifts. And she coming to the house
where I was, seeming to take measure of me for a piece of Lace to a Gorget, and
to that end drawing me to the window, she would have thrust a Letter into my
hand, saying not a word but only Arimant. I knew well enough it was a Letter
from him, but being unwilling to be obliged unto the discretion or fidelity of
this woman whom I knew not; and knowing well enough, that such kind of people
being insinuators into the secrets of such as are so fond as to trust them,
would afterward prove very Tyrants, or else sell their silence at so dear a
rate, as it was impossible to content them; I would not receive it, but on the
contrary rejected it with such sharp language, yet low, that the poor woman
was quite out of countenance, and carried it back unto him that gave it her,
entreating him to employ her no more in any such matters. He who thought it
would have been very welcome to me, and hoped for some assurance of my good
will in the answer to it; seeing this refusal, and hearing what sharp words I
used, he was the most astonished man in the world; and not knowing unto whom to
complain, he came that very night into our street with a consort of Music,
after they had played a lesson or two, and supposing I was come unto the
window, he came just under my window, and sung some Verses which contained a
complaint that she would not receive his Letters.

I easily apprehended the reason of his complaint; and because my refusal did
not pro^oed from want of affection, I thought my self obliged to advertise him
of it; so as taking Pen presently, I writ these lines as fast as I could, and
threw it out of the window.

Cryseide's Letter unto Arimant.
MY complaint would be more just, if my affection to you would give me leave to
complain of you; and if yours be equal to mine, it will not give you leave to
complain of me for my last refusal; nor to take it as an argument of little
love, since it proceeded from no other design but the preservation of my
honor and your tranquillity, which in that act you put in danger: I do not
accuse you of want, but rather excess of affection, which would not suffer you
to consider the danger into which you put me, by putting me into the hands of
one unknown unto me, and perhaps not faith full to you, since mercenary, end no
more yours, but as your money makes he^; Be hereafter not less loving, but
more prudent, and be contented that I know you love me.

Now Hylas, you must know, that considering with my self, it was impossible to
continue this secret affection long, without a third person, because as I told
you before, the constraint of women was so great as we knew not which way to
meet: Therefore I thought it a necessity to trust my self unto some discreet
person, who might both comfort and counsel me. In order unto this, I cast my
eye upon all that were in the house where I lived, and found none more fit than
my Nurses daughter, who was brought up with me and loved me so very well, as
she thought her self happy in any service she could do me. This wench was of my
own age, and such a one, as I stood in need of; for she had more courage than
I, and was so stout as she would often laugh at my fears and doubts. Moreover,
she had wit at will, and was full of such petty contrivances as I stood in need
of. As for her fidelity and discretion, I was so confident of them, as I durst
trust her as soon as my self with any secret: Moreover, she did govern^ her
own Mother, who had the guardianship of me, and lay in my Chamber. This was
she whom I made choice of for my assistant, and acquainting her with what I
thought expedient, I found her so suitable to my desires, as at last I imparted
the very b^ttome of my heart and that my resolution was never to love any but
Ar^mane.

Now Clarina (for so was her name) considering the danger unto which I exposed
my self, in throwing the Letter so out of the Window; she found out an
invention to write with less danger, and it was this. The evening before I
intended he should receive my Letter from me it was agreed betwixt us, that I
should hang out a Hankercher out of my window as if it were to dry, and by
which we understood, that the next morning at the time when others went unto
the Temple, he was to go also; and where we saw the greatest throng of people
there we would be, to prevent suspicion. If I could let a little Book fall, in
which I should seem to be at devotion, and none see, then I should do it:
otherwise when I went away, I should pretend that I had carelessly left it
behind me in the place where I kn^eled, or to let it fall some way or other
when he saw me; and he who had his eye still upon me and who at that time was
to be as near me as he could, he should presently reach it up: if none saw,
then he was to look into it; but if any did perceive it, then he was to give me
another which resembled mine, and which was made purposely alike. Now in these
Books we writ our Letters, but with such devices as were not easily discovered:
my Mother and my Nurse, have had these Books in their hands several times, but
could not make any thing of them, because they understood not the Charracters.
Since this way was agreed upon, not a day passed, but we writ unto each other,
which was no small comfort unto us in the constraint wherein we lived. But Love
was in this resemblant unto Fire, which the more you feed it, the more it
augments; so did my favors unto Arimant, for they did so inflame his desires,
as not contented with what I had done, he importuned me by a thousand
supplications, to admit him into my Chamber, unto which at last I consented, so
the means could be contrived, and so he would promise to require no more of
me, then I was willing to permit. This permission being given unto him, his
wits were at work, how to facilitate all these difficulties. The first was, how
to enter, but that was easily contrived; for by a Ladder made of a Rope, which
he would give unto Cla^ina, he might easily get into the window of her Chamber
when the casement was open. But my Norse whose bed was close to mine, and who
was not of our conspiracy, was a much greater difficulty unto us, and yet he
found out a remedy for that. There was in Epocedes, a very famous Mountebanke,
who had many most excellent receipts. This man was so much obliged unto
Arimant, that he was infinitely desirous to serve him. Love advises this young
man to make addresses unto him, and to ask him for a Receipt which would cause
sleep; he who made a particular profession of such secrets, did give him an
ointment, which being put under the Nose of the party that was fallen asleep,
would so stupifie the senses, as no noise whatsoever would awake the party
until it was taken away. Before Arimant would make use of it upon this
occasion, he tried the operation of it upon one of his Domestiques, who slept
so foundly, that no shouting at his ear could awake him; but he removed him
from place to place, and he never stirred, until taking away the Box, and
throwing a little water in his face, and then he awaked.

All things being thus prepared, execution only wanted. I must confess, my
heart began now to fail me; and when I considered the danger into which I
should put my self, I wished that a stop might be in the proceedings: But
Clarina who was more courageous then I, told me that I was gone too far to
retreat now; that had I put the Cavalier out of hope at the first, he would not
have been offended; but now as things stood, it was a manifest wrong unto him
and knew how to argue the matter so well, and to show the easiness of it, as
at last I resolved to go through. Bed time being come, we all retired and
seemed to take our rest: and my good Nurse who never dreamed of our business,
by chance did fall asleep sooner then her custom.

As soon as Clarina heard her snore, as she used to do when first she slept,
she laid the Box under her nose, and called upon her as if she was affrignted
at her dream: but the good old woman was so fast, that if the house had fallen,
she could not hear it. Clarina joyed at this good beginning, did rise from her
sleeping Mother, and helped me with my Night-dresse, as she pleased so to have
it; For I protest Hylas, I was so far besides my self, as I knew not what I
did: The Candle used always to burn in our Chamber, and therefore C^a^ina
brought me my Glass, and bad me trick up my self (...) fine as I could,
telling me that when Soldiers go to fight, they must put on their Arms that
they may get the victory.

Clarina said unto her, you are a fool, for if the victory were not already
gotten, we should not now trouble our selves as we do. But take heed said she
unto me, that the victory be not on both sides. I am more afraid, said I, that
the loss will be on both sides. Nay, nay, replied she, never think so, heaven
loves you better then to use you so hardly: but pray tell me, since the victory
will fall on your side, what Ransom must the Conquered pay into you? His
heart, said I unto her. His heart? answered she: but if he part with his heart,
what shall he have for himself? and how can he afterward love you? In lieu of
that I take from him, said I unto her I will give him mine. Yours? replied she
and smiled? if he have your heart, he will be the veriest cowardly Cavalier
that ever lived. Come come, said I unto her, you are a scold, and stand and
spend the time in tattling whilst he stays. Upon this, we went to the window,
and no sooner looked out, but I saw Arimant at a corner of a street over
against us. He had his eye so continually up in the window, as it was
impossible to look one and he not see us; and therefore the Casement was no
sooner open, but he was under the window, expecting when the Ladder would be
thrown out. I began to tremble so, both for contentment and fear, as I was
constrained to fit down upon my bed, leaving Clarina to all the pains, who
with abundance of confidence, fastened the Cord, and threw out the Ladder, by
which Arimant so suddenly mounted, that he was in my Chamber before I thought
his foot upon the first step. As soon as he was entered, he fell down upon his
knees before me, whom he found in such a maze, as I could not so much as speak
unto him. Clarina pulled in the Ladder, shut the window, and then came to see
what we did; but finding the Cavalier still upon his knees, and I speaking not
a word to him, nor he to me; I to see a man in my Chamber at such an hour, and
he with an ecstasy of contentment to have this assurance of my affection, she
said unto me; Methinks, Mistress (for so she called me) you are not very civil
toward this Cavalier, in letting him be so long in this uneasy posture: for
God sake, said the Cavalier, let me alone where I am, for I am where I most
earn stly desire to be, and think my self beyond all expressions, happy in it.
Then recollecting my self, I must needs confess, said I unto him, that
Clarina is in the right, and if my astonishment do not plead my excuse, you
may very well tax me with incivility, and indiscretion. Upon this I stood up,
and taking him by one arm, whilst Clarina took him by the other, we forced him
to sit in a Chair which was by my beds side. Then Clarina taking Arimant by
the hand, Swear Cavalier (said she unto him) and promise me upon your honor,
to observe the conditions, upon which you were admitted into this place. Then
Arimant stood up, and said, I do promise and swear, not only to perform all
I have said, but also not to fail in my very thoughts; I call God, Heavens,
Earth, and all the world, to witness my Oath, and pray them all to inflict
their most severe punishments upon all perjured Persons.

These Oaths and imprecations, Arimant, said I unto him, are needless, your
own word would have satisfied: As for my part, I have so great a confidence in
you, as I day trust my self with you as much as with my self. Then we both
sat down, and Clarina staying by her mother, lest by any accident the Box
should tumble from her nose, Arimant said thus unto me:

It is the quality of Gods and Goddesses, fair Crys^ide, to confer the
greatest favors, to the end that their power and their goodness may be seen
and acknowledged. So you, Madam, resembling them both in beauty and in virtue,
you have done me a favor which does not only infinitely transcend my merits,
but also all the hopes that ever I could imagine. Since it is so, and fince I
must needs acknowledge it so; what should I do, not to acquit my self, for I
cannot pretend unto it, knowing it to be impossible; but only to avoid the
brand of ingratitude? I must confess, the more I think upon it, the more I am
confounded and ashamed, that my fortune should he to receive such high
benefits, and have so little understanding as not to know, how I should be
thankful as I ought* I have no other way to come out of this Labyrinth, but
this only refuge, which is to refer my self wholly unto your will; that as
at my request you were pleased to do me this favors so* that I may by your
commandment do what I ought, to acknowledge it. After this expression, he was
silent, in expectation of my answer, which was this: Arimant, said I unto him,
that you should acknowledge that what I have done for you, to be something that
is great and extraordinary, is as full satisfaction as I can desire; but I
cannot endure you should esteem your self at so low a value, as to think that
you do not deserve this favor; for in so doing, you do not only offend
against truth, but against that judgment which I had of you, when I thought
you worthy of my amity. Do not think, Arimant, that I have done any thing at
random, or without sound deliberation. When I first gave entertainment to your
good will, I must confess it was without any design, and only because your
address did invite me to it: But when I bestowed my good will upon you, do
not think unless you have an ill opinion of me, that I did it without long
and serious debate in my self: whether I ought to do it or no, and whether I
should be blamed for such a choice. I considered your family, because I would
not disparage my own Ancestors; and I found it so full of nobleness, as I
could not choose but be contented with it, I looked upon the person, and I could
take no exception against it, either in your body or mind: I have observed your
behavior, and I could not find any thing which was not noble, and to be
esteented, all your actions being full of honor and virtue. Briefly, I have
cast my eyes upon your affection, and I find that you do really love me. Now,
Arimant, can you think that he who is owner of these qualities, does not
deserve any favor from the person whom he loves? Madam, answered he, and
kissed my hand, this favor which you are pleased to do me now, is greater (if
it can be) then the first; and I see you will put me out of all hopes of ever
being able to pay so great a debt. I received all those applaudes which you are
pleased to bestow upon me, not than I am so vain as to think them my due, but
because I desire you should think them so, that they may so much the more
oblige you to continue unto me the honor of your favors* Arimant, replied I,
you know very well, and I also, that what I say of you is true; and this may be
a great testimony of your merit, that Cryseide loves you; for you must either
think her without wit or knowledge, or else think your self amiable* because
she loves you. But let us leave this discourse, and tell me I entreat you,
whether the report be true that you are to marry? and whether, as I am told,
you intend it? At this question Arimant blushed, and though I spoke it
ignorantly, yet so it was, that his Father had made such a motion to him not
long before, and therefore he answered me, It Is true indeed, Madam, such a
thing is talked of, but my Father shall sooner make me die, then ever consent
unto it, for I am resolved never to marry any but the fair Cryseide, if she
will bless me with so much happiness. I would not be any means, replied I
unto him, of your disobedience unto your Parents. Madam, said he I am obliged
to obey God before a Father, and it is he who has commanded me to be none but
y^^^s: but why should we spend time, or consult upon a thing which is already
done? Then kneeling down before me, I do swear and protest before all the
Gods, said he, and call them all to witness what I say, That I will rather die
then not be yours; and that I will never rise off my knees, until you receive
me for the husband of the fair Cryseide. Ar^mant, said I unto him, I am
obliged unto you for your good will unto me; and you may think I would never
have permitted you entrance into this place, (...) I had not the same
^^tention. But being both of us at the disposition of others, this is a promise
which we neither can nor ought to make so rashly, but it deserves to be more
seriously, thought upon. Why, Madam replied he presently, have you given me all
there signal favors and deny me this which I ask with so much reason? but you
must resolve either to have me continually kneeling before you, or else grant
my supplication. I could not choose but smile when I heard his last words, for
he uttered them with such an action, as showed him to be in good earnest, Yet,
I said unto him, Perhaps, Arimant, you may quickly reperit, if I should take
you at your word. Oh God? Fair Cryseide, (said he do not offend so extremely
against my affection, and your own beauty. And to put you out of all doubt, I
call Hymen and Juno to witness, that I will never be husband unto any but the
fair Cryseide: and upon this word, I perceived that he would have put a Ring
upon my finger, which caused me to draw away my hand, and rise up; but he held
me by force, and said unto me; Will you, Madam, make me perjured, and rise from
hence, where I have vowed to stay eternally, unless you accomplish my request?
Your request, replied I presently, is unjust, and your vow invalid since your
first which you made at your entrance is contrary to it. Why said he unto me?
You promised, answered I, and bound it with an Oath, that you would move me
unto nothing but what I was willing unto; and since I am not willing you should
make this request, you are obliged to press it no further, and what vows
soever you have made since, which are contrary unto that first, is of no force
nor cannot bind. It is most impossible, said he, (and then rose up) to resist
either your beauty, or your will: And I know, I should receive but too great a
load of happiness, if this were added to the number of the rest. Arimant, said
I then unto him, do but still preserve your affection unto me, and I will
freely promise, that if I can make those who have the disposition of me consent
unto it, I will marry you, and give my self entirely unto you. It is impossible
I should express how this young man was joyed when he heard this; and I was as
glad as he, though he made greater show by words, and all the thanks that could
be invented. But yet, this was the cause of our ruin, for calling Clarina to
witness what I promised, and so she coming hastily toward us, did draw the
Box from the nose of her Mother, and so unluckily, as it fell off the bed, was
broke, and the liquid ointment ran about the floor.

It was a thing very strange, for almost as soon as ever the Box was from under
the nose of my Nurse, she awoke, but her head so dizzy with the smell, that she
knew not what she did, and was like one that was drunk. As soon as Arimant
heard the Box fall upon the floor, he doubted it, and said unto me hastily,
rise Madam, and stand before the old woman, whilst I get out at the window, for
certainly she is awake. Upon this, I ran to the bed, ^he to the window, and
Clarina to the Ladder; and I coming to her, I laid me down upon her bed, began
to embrace her, laid my hand upon her breast, and seeming as if I thought her
to be very fick; I bad her take good heart, told her, she would be well again
presently; called for Clarina, and sent her for some Vinegar or water to throw
in her face, and make her come to her self again: I did so deceive her by my
talk, and by rubbing one while her Pulse, and another her Nose, as I gave
Arimant time to be gone, and Clarina to hide the Ladder: Then seeming to be
very busy about her, we threw water into her face, and did so dash her, as she
had been soundly asleep, had she not awaked with it. Then in a great
astonishment, assuming her spirits: Oh my God, said she, where have I been? how
strangely have I been taken, what in the name of God is the cause of it? Oh my
good Children, I thank God and you, for bringing me to my self again, for but
for you I had dyed. Oh Mother, said Clarina, you have been in a swoone above
two hours, we have held you in our Arms, and done all we could to revive you,
and I believe if you had not vomited, you had dyed. And good Children, said the
good old woman, what did you do to waken me? Why, said Clarina, as I was lying
by you, I heard you keep a great stirring and a rattling in your throat as if
you were choked; upon which, I called upon you two or three times, and seeing
you did not answer, I leaped out of bed and waked Crys^ide; then taking the
Candle, we came both to help you, and thanks be to God you came to your self
again. And did I vomit, said the old woman? Vomit? said Clarina, Yes
certainly, and happy you did, for if you had not, I believe you had dyed, since
such black and filthy stuff did lie upon your stomach. Oh God, said she, and
held her Nose, do you not swell it? This she said, because of the ointment
which was spilt upon the floor, and smelt very ill: Yes, yes, (said my Nurse) I
do smell it; Good Clarina, said she, take the besome and make it clean, lest
it should do you hurt, Clarina, who desired such a command, did fetch some
water, and washed the place as clean as possible, and afterward threw it out
of the window. But the accident of the next morning, may move one to laugh a
little; for this ointment falling in the street, and a Dog passing by and
smelling at the oil, he licked it, and there lay as if dead. Clarina, who saw
this out of the window, and doubted the cause, she threw a little water upon
him, then the Dog rose up, shook his ears, and went away. The evening after,
Arimant, according to his custom, came with Music under the window, and after
they had played a while, he sung some Verses which intimated, that he would
most inviolably keep his promise. And while we lived in this manner, both our
affections increased to such a height, as I cannot tell which was the more
loved. But now fortune begins to mix many bitters amongst our sweets, or rather
to ravish from us all our sweets, and leave us none but bitters. Alas, alas,
well may I phrase them Bitters: for since this time, I cannot say I enjoyed any
delight or contentment. Rithimer of whom I have already spoke, a great Captain
and a Favorite of the Emperor Majoranus had obtained, not only to be a
Citizen of Rome, but also to be a Senator and Governor of Gaul Cisalpine, and
he attained unto such high esteem, as he disposed absolutely of all that was in
Gaul. This large Authority did not proceed only from good will and favor of
the Emperors, but much from the great exploits which he had done against the
Vandals, for the preservation of Italy. This valiant Prince, married one that
was of kin to my Mother; and desiring to see me well matched, did cast his eye
upon a young man, a little of kin unto Rithimer, very rich, but of a most
vicious spirit, and the most ugly and deformed body that was in all Gaul
Cisalpine. My Mother who desired to be rid of me, because she thought me to be
a rub in her way of marriage, she took occasion by the foretop, and resolved to
carry me unto this Princess, hoping at the least to leave me with her as she
desired.

This being resolved upon, and unknown to me, it was almost as soon executed
without my knowledge. For beginning to observe how I did much favor the
address of Arimant, she thought to prevent me, which doubtless she would not
have done, had his estate been equal to his merit and nobleness. But since it
was not, she thought that sending me away, was the best remedy she could use
against it. Yet seeing her so bufie in setting her house in order, and so
careful, that I should dress my self in my finest trim, I did imagine that
some voyage was intended. And because I could not depart without advertising
Arimant, I commanded Clarina to let him know it, and give unto him the Book
which was accustomed to pass betwixt us, and in it was this Letter.

Cryseide's Letter unto Arimant.
THey are hurrying me away from hence; I should have said from you, had you not
been always in my heart; and had not my affection been such, as it is
impossible I should live and not be near you. However, change places we must,
though I know not into what part of the world: but let it be the best in the
world, it will be but a place of torment to me, if I do not see you in it.
When I know where it is, I shall advertise you, to the end that if it be
possible, you may be there in person, where you shall be always in my thoughts.

Arimant read this Letter with abundance of dissatisfaction; my going away
vexed him to the very soul, and much more, when he heard from one that was my
mothers kinsman, how I was to go unto the wife of Rithimer; because then he
thought that his Father would not suffer him to go thither, by reason of the
enmity betwixt Rithimer and him. But he writ this Letter presently back, and
gave the Book unto Clarina.

Arimants Letter unto Cryseide.
IF this be not the most hard piece of fortune that ever could befall, I know
not what can deserve the name. I understand you are to go unto Rithimer, the
only place in the world which is forbidden me. But however, since it is your
command, I will ere long be there, and make it appear unto you, that my
affection is greater then all impediment that can oppose it.

I received this Letter, as we were taking Coach to begin our journey; so as I
could not read it, because I had not time to look it out, it being mingled
amongst many others in the Book, which was no small displeasure unto me.
Arimant on the other side, knowing I was to depart that day, met us upon the
way, as if accidentally with two Cavaliers his friends, whom he had not
acquainted with his affection unto me; and who yet were not altogether ignorant
of it; and who upon this occasion, being very familiar with my Mother; as soon
as they met the Coach, they saluted us, and enquired of her voyage. She who now
did not care who knew it, did freely tell them, and began to talk of Rithimers
Grandeur* of the power her Cosen had with him, and of the hopes she had of
doing great matters for me. In the mean time, Arimant had got himself on my
side, but in such a sad and afflicted posture, as he moved me to pity him: and
was so transported out of himself, as he began to rove, and talk very idly;
and yet to augment our misery, for fear of making known the good
correspondency betwixt us; he durst not address his speech unto me, though his
eyes were never off me; those who heard him, and did not know the cause which
thus distracted his mind, they began to laugh at his ridiculous language.

I who confidered that sometimes to be over subtle spoils all, I thought it
expedient to speak unto him as a person indifferent; and therefore I asked
him, from whence this great sorrow proceeded, which caused every one to take
notice of it? I do assure you, said he, and sighed, it proceeds from nothing
but envy. I did not think, answered I that a person of your merit could envy
any one; but of whom and why are you envious? I envy your Coach (said he unto
me) that is going toward the I^bices, and because I may not go with you,
although it be my Country. Why, replied I, are you such a lover of your
Country, as you should envy things that are insensible? What should I do, said
he, since such insensibles are more happy than I am? Heaven, I hope, said I, is
better unto you than so. This is the consolation, answered he, which is given
unto those who are miserable, yet I assure you any better shall never be
desired by me, but rather the contrary. Those who are sick, said I, do the
like, they think all medicines bitter, and such Physic is commonly given
unto them, as is contrary to their desires, though conducing to their health.
Great is the difference, said he, betwixt the diseases of the body, and
diseases of the mind: For those of the body are cured by contraries, but those
of the mind, by the possession of that thing which causes the disease. If
ambition wound us is there any better cure than to arrive at the thing aspired
unto? If beauty offend us, will any thing so quickly ture, as the enjoyment of
that beauty? And therefore they say, that desires satisfied do cool at the
very first, afterward are quite glutted; so as to the maladies of the mind
must be applied such remedies as have the quality of the Scorpion, which can
cure the wound it makes. It is long since you were in your own Country, said
Clarina; and what makes you think upon it so freshly now? Your journey, said
he, and sighed, brings it fresh into my memory.

Those who heard our discourse did not understand it, though if my Mother had
not been diverted by the questions of those two Cavaliers, doubtless she would
have smelt out something, but she seeing us thus talking, she would not suffer
them to go any farther with us, although they told her their way did lie that
way, but she was so urgent with them, that they were constrained to leave us.
Now did I find, that to part from a person loved might well be called a death,
both by my own resentments, and by Arimants, for he looked as pale as death it
self, and was so out of himself, that he could not bid adieu unto me: or any
in the company, which my Mother interpreted to be incivility, and perhaps on
purpose, though she believed the contrary; as for me, I knew the cause finding
in my self the sorrows of this cruel separation.

I cannot at this time tell you Hylas, how sadly both Arimant and I resented
it; only this, that both fell sick, and Arimant much worse than I; for mine
was only a certain languishment, and drooping of spirits, which many feared
would in a little time bring me into a Consumption: But his disease was so
violent as none looked for any life; every one came to see him dye; he himself
was of the same belief: but having a desire to take his leave before he left
his life, he forced himself to write these lin^t unto me.

Arimants Letter unto Chryseide.
FOrtune seems to be weary of tormenting, and will put an end unto my pains,
out of which I beseech you, Madam, give me leave to go: I beg thus with that
affection which brings me to my grave, and which shall never Iessen whatsoever
becomes of my ashes.

This Letter so short, and so ill written, together with the common report of
his sick estate, was a very death unto me: And when Clarina had enough to do
in giving me comfort, I gave her this answer, that his death and mine should be
both together, and therefore I desired her to send this Letter unto him and to
command the messenger to return with all haste possible, and bring me News how
he was.

Cryseide's Letter unto Arimant.
IT was ever your promise to do whatsoever I appointed; and now I do command
you to live, that yon may the longer love me, I shall see whether any thing
have more power over Arimant than my self: live therefore and love me.

We understood by the return of the Messenger, that the same day he came,
Arimant was at the height of his disease, and that the Physicians had good
hopes of his recovery; and also that the next day he was out of all danger. For
my part, I flattered my self so far as to believe, that the contentment which
he found in my Letter was the cause of it; but whether that was true or no, I
know not, but it is certain, that he perfectly recovered, which was so great a
joy unto me, that I also began to mend of my malady, as if there was some
sympathy in our Diseases, both falling sick, and both recovering at one time.

When I came to the house of Rithimer, and his wife saw me so much out of
temper, what through my long journey, and what through my sorrows to be so far
from him I loved, she thought it best to recover me before I was exposed to the
view, and not to speak of the marriage which she intended till then, thinking
that it was beauty which would bring on Cloringus (for so he was called whom
she aimed for my Husband). My mother cheered me up as much as she could, and
told me that within few days I would recover, and to my misery it happened so as
she said: For I was told that Arimant would come and see me, either in
disguise, or some other way, in which he should not be known. This hope gave me
health, and my face became as it was wont to be, so as I began to show my
self; and indeed many began to cast amorous eyes upon me, especially Rithimer,
as since I understood, his wife at the same time solicited the match,
propounded unto Rithimer, and desired him, that in respect I was her Kinswoman
he would be assistant He having a self design upon me, and knowing Clorangus
to be a man of that deformity, he did approve of it, thinking that the less I
loved my husband, the more it would make for himself; so as faigning all that
he did was at his wifes instance and desire, he sent for Clorangus, propounded
it unto him, advised him to embrace it, and at the same time got his consent. I
know not whether that which they call beauty in me, or my misfortune was the
cause, but so it was, that the match was concluded upon, before a syllable was
spoke of it unto me. Observe how Heaven does mock at all humane intentions;
when I fancied unto my self the fullest contentment, even then was I
overwhelmed with the greatest misfortune that could befall me.

My mother came one night into my Chamber when I was undrest and ready to go
into my bed; and after she represented unto me the miseries of poverty, she
extolled the happiness that would accrue unto me by matching into a very rich
Family; she propo^nded Clorangus, and told me, that Rithimer and his wife had
made up the match, that within two days the marriage was to be solemnized, and
that she thought good to acquaint me with it, to the end that when Rithimer did
me the honor to speak unto me of it, I should be prepared to set a good face
upon it, and to thank him, as the pains he had taken in my behalf deserved;
that though Clorangus was a little defective in his body, yet he had many other
qualities which supplied those defects, and rendered him amiable* and estimable;
that he was in love with me, and so deeply, that if I would but flatter him a
little, I might make him do what I would.

To be short, Hylas, she neglected no argument which might induce me to this
marriage; and not staying for my answer, she went presently to bed, thinking
that I would not relish it at the first, but hoping also that my
Pillow-cogitations would make me resolve according to her desires.

Oh Heavens, Hylas, in what a strange dumpe was I struck when I heard this, and
yet it was some comfort that my Mother was gone, for I could cry with more
liberty; I threw my self upon my bed, and least my complaints should be heard
I stopped my mouth with the sheet, but all would not hinder Clarina from
hearing me, who being advertised of it, came unto me, and would have given me
some good counsel; but turning toward her, I said; Away, away, Clarina, I am
tormented enough without any addition from you; let me weep away that little
time I have to live, and lament that misfortune, which cannot be lamented
enough; she who did most tenderly love me, and knew well enough what it was I
thus grieved at: I come not, said she, with any intentions of comforting you,
but only to help you into bed to the end none may molest you. I had rather,
replied I* that you would help me to my grave: Upon that I suffered her to
undresse me, and lay as still as if I had been dead: For so deep were my
resentments that I could not cry; but when I was in bed, and the Light taken
away, then tears began to flow in such abundance down my cheeks and breast,
that my bed was all water: Sometimes my thoughts were all upon Arimant, his
merits, and all those testimonies of his affection to me; otherwhile I
reflected upon Clorangus and his crabbed deformities, and finding such a vast
difference between them, I was in such an extreme Labyrinth of grief, that
truly the Gods were merciful unto me, that I did not fall into a most violent
despair; all Night long I did nothing but lament, and Day found me in bed
without ever closing an eye; and see what a violent affection may sometimes
do. I was fully resolved to dye, knowing that my Mother would not be stirred
at any prayers, so as still thinking upon Arimant, and his affection to me, I
thought it better to dye once, than be dying every hour as long as I lived.

The next morning when I saw Clarina and most of the house were gone to the
Temple according to custom leaving none to look unto me but a young Boy, who
served me, I desired him to go presently and fetch a Chyrurgion, without
telling any one. When he came, Sir, said, I am much troubled with a pain in my
head; and I desire you to let me blood in my left arm, for I have used to do
so when the pain took me, finding always present ease by it. He seeing me
look red, and my eyes heavy, verily believed me, so as he bound my arm,
opened my vein, and went away; he was no sooner out of the house, but I called
the little Officer, and desired him to fetch another, for this last had done me
no good; the Boy made haste, and brought another, I told him the same tale I
told before; I opened my other arm, keeping the other close, he did as I
desired, and went away.

Thinking that this was enough to end my miserable days, I caused the
Curtains to to be drawn, and the windows shut, as if the light offended me;
then thinking how sad the News of my death would be unto Arimant, but withal
thinking it would be a great comfort unto him to hear I dyed loving him, I
took my Hankercher and spreading it upon the bed, I dipped my finger in my
blood, and writ in it these words, Arimant I dye thine, which was all I was
able to do, for presently my eyes began to fail me, and my heart fainted, so
as I lost my knowledge, yet I do remember, that my last thought being of
Arimant, I said aloud, Now Fortune the Victory is mine: After this, I remained
as dead, and certainly had been so if Clarina had not come into the Chamber,
who knowing that all my grief proceeded from my loss of Arimant, she came to
bring me a Letter from him, brought by him who used to bring them before; but
when she drew the Curtains and found me swimming in blood: Oh God (cried she
out so loud as was heard into my Mothers Chamber) Oh God, she is dead,
Chryseide is dead, and wringing her hands together, she ran out of the room all
in tears, not knowing what she did. The windows were immediately opened, and
every one ran unto me; they saw I was all in blood, but not imagining it came
from my arm, they were long in searching for the wound. Clarina in the mean
time laying her hand upon my Hankercher, and opening it she saw what I had writ
with my finger; and though it was so ill written as she could hardly read it,
yet she put it in her pocket least any else should see it, and running out of
the Chamber to my Mother told her of the accident: By fortune, as she went, she
met him that brought the Letter from Arimant, who asked her for an answer,
because his Master had commanded him to return as soon as he could, to whom
she answered all in tears, it is a sad answer which you must carry to your
Master at this time, Chryseide is dead, because they would have forced her to
marry Clorangus. Carry him this Hankercher, there will he find writ with the
hand and blood of Chryseide the cause of her death: Upon this, she went all
tears to tell my Mother, who was then with the wife of Rithimer: when they
heard this said news, they were extremely astonished. But the Prince, like one
that was transported, ran presently to the place where I was, and seeing me so
in blood, by chance he took me by the arm to lift me up, and finding my sleeve
full of blood she has cut her veins (said he); and then turning up the sleeve
of my smock, he found that the blood did not run, because my sleeve stuck to
the wound (and I believe that saved my life) for as soon us it was pulled away,
he saw it began to bleed afresh; he put his finger upon it, and bad Clarina do
the like to the other arm, for he observed the other sleeve bloody also; then
causing some cold water to be brought; for certain (said he) she is not yet
dead, for I find she is hot: Then throwing some of it into my face, and rubbing
my Temples and pulse with some imperial waters, and such like, my Pulse began
to return, and I began to breathe. Then sending in all post haste for
Physicians, and they coming before it was ^ight, I returned to my self again,
and recovered my knowledge. Rithimer never stirring from me all the while, till
he saw me out of all danger: Afterward he told me, that he never saw me so
fair as then; for the loss of blood making me look pale and white, and that
whiteness being as it were painted with blood, one seemed to add beauty to the
other. Moreover, his pity of me did augment his love, and his love was covered
under the vail of compassion.

But when I was a little better settled, his wife and my Mother, asked me,
what, and who it was that had brought me into that condition? but I knowing
that they were the causes of all my misery, to avoid their importunity, seemed
not to hear them, and would not speak. And one of the Physicians told them,
that it was better not to trouble me, for speaking might do me harm; but it
was requisite I should take something, and be left unto my rest, which
accordingly they did; and in the mean time Rithimer enquired of the boy who
waited upon me, whether he perceived what I did unto my self. The boy fearing
a beating if he confessed, answered; No, and that only I commanded him to shut
the windows, and draw the Curtains. This caused Rithimer to call for Clarina:
Do not leave Crysedd, (said he) for if you do, she will make her self bleed
again and die, therefore be very careful of her. Sir, said she unto him, you
may if you will save her life, which certainly she will now, or some other time
lose, unless you do remedy it. I do vow and swear (said he) by the life of
Anthemius, that I will do all I can to save it: Clarina thinking she had found
a fit opportunity. Sir, said she, I beseech you in the first place, not to
discover me; and next, be assured that Clorangus is the cause of her death, and
she will rather choose a Grave then him. Think you so? said Rithimer. More then
think. Sir, said she, for I am sure, and if you will know the truth, observe
what alteration will be in her face, when I tell her of it in her ear. Then
both going to the bed and causing all others to retire from us, she said unto
me in a low voice; Be of good courage Cryseide, Rithimer swears by the life of
Anthemius, that you shall never marry Clorangus. I was so weak, as I could not
move any thing except my eyes: but this news was so welcome unto me, as
lifting them up toward heaven, I seemed to give hearty thanks for so great a
favor: Afterward, turning toward Rithimer, I forced my self to speak. Sir,
said I unto him, is it true. Yes sweet heart (said he unto me) and I swear it,
not only by Anthemius, but also by the head of my Father, and all that is
holy. Then replied I, I will live. Live then, answered he, and be assured I
will sooner consent unto my own death, than break my promise of it. Upon this I
changed countenance, and most miraculously assumed vigor. Rithimer admired
this resolution in me, and calling his Wife and my Mother: I tharge you, said
he unto them, that there be no more talk of marriage between Cryseide and
Clorangus; for I vow and protest, I will sooner consent unto the loss of all
my fortunes; then unto a match so unsuitable. They offered to reply, but he
interrupted them by saying, I have sworn it by the life of Athemius, by the
head of my Father, and by all that's holy. Not a word more of it; and whosoever
shall do otherwise, shall find my displeasure. Upon this, both of them went
away, and spoke not a word, Rithimer highly esteeming my generous resolution,
his good will unto me did so augment, as from thence forward it may well be
said, be was in love with me. He went away, and visited me a hundred times in a
day, and most commonly by himself. And because he durst not speak unto me,
lest it should be prejudicial unto me, he talked with Clarina, would sometimes
ask her how she came to know that the marriage with Clorangus made me take
that resolution; other whiles he would thank her for acquainting him with it,
and did so manifestly make the greatness of his affection appear, as his wife
perceived it, and Clarina also. As for me, I took all his actions as proceeding
from that compassion which such an accident caused in his generous soul.
Besides, the condition wherein I was, would not permit me any discourse with
him; for I was so weakened as I did nothing else, but sleep and rest my self.

I rested thus two or three days, and never remembered my Hankercher wherein I
had written with my blood; but one morning when I found my self a little
better, it came unto my mind; Clarina observing that she never went from me,
but she heard the ^igh, she asked me whether I felt any new pain. My pain,
answered I faintly, is in my mind: But, good Clarina, were you the first that
found me in that condition, into which I had brought my self? Who do you
think, said she, has the greatest care of you^ I know very well, said I, that
it is Clarina; but if you were the first, did you not see a Hankercher which
was spotred with my blood? Yes, answered she, I did see it; and alas now you
put me in mind, I have committed a great fault, which I must presently remedy
For Mistress, that unhappy morning, Arimant had written unto you, and I came
with all joy to bring the Letter, when I found you in that sad condition, I ran
through the house like a fool, crying and tormenting my self; and being thus
out of my self, I met the messenger which Arimant sent with the Letter, who
not knowing of the accident which had happened unto you, he was urgent with me
for an answer: I told him you were dead, and gave him the Hankercher whereof
you speak, to carry unto his Master in testimony of your affection to him. How?
said I, Has Arimant the Hankercher? Doubtless he has, answered she, for it is
three days since I sent it to him. Oh God cried I, I fear it will ruin him;
what will become of him, Clarina, when he sees that assurance of my death? Upon
this, she stood mute a while, and at last answered, It Is true, Mistress, said
she, that if the messenger did depart without any further enquiry of the
particulars of your death, it might perplex Arimant. Of whom, replied I, could
he enquire but your self? Indeed Clarina, you were much to blame: and if when
you saw me past danger, you did not advertise him of it, your second fault was
worse then your first. Mistress, said she, I beseech you pardon me: my grief
was so great, as when I saw you dead, I was resolved to follow you; and I must
confess, that I sent the Hankercher unto Arimant, purposely to invite him unto
the same. But since that danger was over, I have been so busy about you, as I
have hardly remembered to eat my meat. Go, said I unto her, and write unto him
presently from me; if I can, I will add a word with my own hand, Clarina upon
this, shut the door left any should surprise her, and taking Pen, Ink, and
Paper, did write these words.

Clarina's Letter unto Arimant.
I Do give my self the lie; for, Arimant, Cryseide lives still, and has
commanded me to acquaint you with it; the truth is, she was dead when I sent
you that message, but the Gods have revived her for you. You are the most happy
Cavalier that lives, in the love of the fairest Lady in the Universe; and
unhappy only in this, that you cannot be a witness of your own happiness.

Then with much ado, I took the Pen, and postscribed these words ( Arimant, I
do live, and live only for Arimant) Then sealing it up, she went with all
haste unto him, whom she had formerly employed upon such occasions, commanding
him to make all post haste. Afterward seeing none in the Chamber but our
selves, we opened the Letter, which Arimant had formerly sent, and found in it
these words.

Arimant's Letter unto Cryseide.
IN the day, I am nothing but a composition of frights and panique fears; in
the night, I do nothing but dream that you are going to die, and I am going to
follow you; this does so much trouble me, that I cannot call this a life, which
I live so distane from you. I have sent this messenger to know how she who is
my life does, I will follow him as soon as I find by his return, my way to be
ready: and at this time the hatred which Rithimer bears unto me, must yield
unto the love which I bear unto you.

This Letter did infinitely comfort me, upon several considerations; the one,
because I thought the nearer he was this place, the sooner he would hear the
reports of my death to be false; Another was, because I found that he did
really love me; and lastly, because I hoped ere long to see him, and to
communicate unto him a design which I had in hand. But in the mean time, his
messenger made such haste, that traveling both night and day, he found him in
bed, intending to depart that day: And the messenger coming unto him: Sir, said
he, I have very great News to tell you, and therefore let all the men retire:
Then commanding all to go out, and to shut the door, and seeing the Man stand
and stare as if he were out of his wits, he suspected to hear of some great
accident: Then rising up in his bed, and as it were divining it; What, said he,
is she dead or alive? Then the Messenger falling into tears, and presenting the
Hankercher unto him: Alas, Sir, said he, this will tell you that which my
grief will not suffer me to relate, and then he weeped and sighed as if he
would have dyed. Arimant spreading the Hankercher, and reading what I had
written with my finger. Oh God, said he, she is dead and then falling a cross
the bed, there he lay as if he were dead: The Man taking notice that the
Cavalier spoke not, did run unto him, and finding him in a swoone, he raised
him up, called upon him, and pinched him to make him come to himself; but
seeing all would not do, and fearing he should dye in his arms, he presently
laid the Hankercher upon the bed tester, and ran to call for help: All the
people in the house ran to him, and brought such remedies as at last they
recovered him; the first word he spoke was, Alas; but presently taking notice
that the Chamber was full of people, he restrained both his sighs and his
tears, least he should give knowledge unto any of the cause. And because his
constraint did almost trouble him as much as his malady, he entreated the^^ all
to leave him unto his rest, telling them that he desired to have none with him
but that young man. They who had not the least suspicion of the cause, and
thought it nothing else, but some faintness caused by fasting, they obeyed
him. Then seeing the room clear; What is become, said he, of the Hankercher?
Sir, said the young man; I am unwilling to let you see it again, since I know
the sight will but greeve you the more. No, no, said he, let me have it, for in
lieu of augmenting my grief, it will be a comfort unto me, seeing she had a
memory of me unto the l^st minute of her life. Then giving it unto him; Oh most
deer Hankercher, said he, the dire messenger of the greatest dysaster that
could befall me, what name should I bestow upon thee? Then being silent, and
fixing his eyes upon the blood: Well, said he, she has showed me the way, and I
am ready to follow it; I grieve at nothing more than that I did not go before,
at least keep her company. Then turning himself toward the young man; but
Friend (said he unto him) you have not yet told me how this accident came to
pass. Sir, said he, if you will be pleased to give me a little time, and
promise me that it shall not afflict you more, I will tell you all I know: No,
no, replied Arimant presently, nothing can either augment or lessen my grief,
therefore tell me all. I shall then tell you Sir, said the young man; That I
came thither betimes in the morning, and according to your instructions, I
watched when Clarina went to the Temple, where I found her and conveyed the
Letter so closely into her hand that none perceived me, and desiring her to
dispatch me with an answer as soon as she could, she told me, that tomorrow
morning I should have it. Presently after, I went into the house of Rithimer
where she lodged, and I was no sooner entered, but I heard a great bisling on
every side, and Chryseide, Chryseide, continually named. I went up the stairs,
and found Clarina all in tears and great disorder, who as soon as she saw me;
It is but a sad answer (said she) that you must carry your Master at this time;
alas Chryseide is dead, and only because they would needs force her to marry
Clorangus, carry him this Hankercher, wherein he will find written with the
hand and blood of Chryseide, cause enough to love her memory. After this she
cried, and went into another Chamber. Oh Heavens! cried out Arimant, can I
live, and hear this? But go on, I entreat you. You may imagine Sir, said the
messenger, that this did much amaze me, and to know the more certainty of the
matter, I stayed a little longer, and saw three or four persons come out of
Chryseides Chamber all in tears, holding up their hands, and saying, that truly
she dyed very strangely. This inspired me with more curiosity and boldness to
enter into the room, seeing all the house did the like. There, Sir, I saw her;
Oh dismal sight! I saw her dead on her bed, and it so full of blood, that it
ran down upon the ground. At this time Rithimer and many women entered; and I
heard Rithimer cry out and say, she had cut her veins. I was then afraid least
any should know me, and because you had expressly forbidden that, and thinking I
could hear no more, I came presently out of the Town, and made all haste that
possibly I could, because you had so commanded, though with much sorrow to be
the messenger of such sad News. Alas, alas, (cried he) I see it is but too
true that Chryseide is dead, since you have seen her so with your own eyes;
could the Gods ever consent unto such a cruelty, and can I hear this News and
still live? He would have continued on, when his Father hearing of his being
ill, and who loved him most tenderly, being his only Son, came and knocked at
the Chamber door. The young man knowing his voice, he advertised Arimant, who
setting as good a face upon it as he could, bad him open the door. The windows
were yet shat, and the curtains drawn, so as when his father came into the
Chamber, he could not well see the sadness in Arimants face; but coming to
him, and taking his hand, he asked him how he did? Well Sir, answered he, but
only for a little faintness which proceeds from repletion of humors, for want
of exercise, but if you think it good, I desire to ride abroad and take some
journey, as well to dissipate those humors, as for change of Air. I like it
very well, said the Father; but whither would you go? My greatest fancy,
answered Arimant, is to the Libicens, as well because it is the place of my
birth, and natural air, as to see my kindred and friends. I should like it
very well, said the Father but that I fear the hatred of Rithimer. Sir,
replied Arimant, never fear it; I must confess, that for you to go would be
dangerous, but not for me, for there will not any advantage acrue unto Rithim^r
by me, if I were dead; besides, being there amongst so many kindred and
friends, he could not have any intention against me, but it would be told me
and easily prevented. The Father believing what he said, was easily brought to
his opinion, which was not a little happiness unto us all, especially unto
Arimant: For having before resolved to kill himself, he now deferred the
execution of what he intended unto the end of this voyage. He accoutred
himself therefore as well as he could, and the next morning set forward,
taking none with him but this man, and another to walte upon him in his
Chamber, telling his Father it was more safe to go with a small Train, than
if better attended, because less notice would be taken of him. His design of
going to the Libicens, was to meet with Clorangus, and when he had dispatched
him, then to go unto the place where I was interred, there to sacrifice
himself unto my ashes. And truly it was happy that this revenge was thus
intended, for it retarded his intention of killing himself, and the messenger
whom I sent had more leisure to carry him our Letters.

The same day he departed from his Father, half of it was gone before Arimant
thought either upon eating or resting himself; and the messenger whom I sent
met him at a passage over a River which is called Tesin, and not knowing him,
passed on, as well because he did not think of finding him in any place but
Eporedes, as because his grief had much changed his face, and was but slenderly
attended, so as he never so much as dreamed of Arimant. And Arimant he rid on
so pensive, and his eyes so fixed to the ground, as he did not so much as see
him when he passed by: But as good luck was, the messenger who came unto me
from him, was not heedlesse, for he seeing the messenger who came from me,
acquainted his Master, telling him that if he would he might hear all the
story of Cryseide, for yonder was the man who once brought Letters from her.
What can I hear, answered Arimant, more than I have? Is it not too much that I
have heard she is dead? so never so much as turning his eye toward him, he rid
on; but the young man being desirous to know how I was interred, and all other
passages, he went unto the messenger whom I had sent, and taking acquaintance,
asked him of Clarina, and how she took the death of Cryseide? Cryseide, said
he, why, she is alive, and thanks be to God very well. (...) replied the other,
Cryseide alive? Yes, yes, replied he, she is alive, and has sent (...) your
Master; then embracing him; Oh most welcome News (said he) and (...) thee for
it: Come, come, follow me a little, and I will shorten your voyage a great deal.

Upon this, the young man putting spurs to his Horse, cried out to his Master,
Stay, stay, Sir, stay, and I will tell you good news: Arimant hearing his
voice, though not understanding what he said, and seeing him clap his hands as
an action of joy, he was amazed at it: and when he was come a little nearer,
What is the matter, said he; and what would you have with me? Sir, said the
young man, Good news, Cryseide is not dead but alive, and has sent this
Messenger to you. Cryseide alive? said he and transported, is it possible? Sir,
said the Messenger whom I sent, it is certain, and I am a Messenger from her;
upon this, Arimant lifted up his eyes and hands to heaven. Oh ye good Gods,
continued he, be ye for ever blessed, for this favor you have done me. Sir
said my Messenger, Clarina commanded me to give you this Letter; Arimant was so
much out of himself, as he took it with a trembling hand, and knew not what he
did. But at last, recollecting himself, he asked him how I did. Sir, said she,
she is very well, and in good health, Clarina commanded me to tell you as much.
They told me, replied Arimant, that Cryseide was dead: upon this, opening
Clarina's Letter, though he would have dissembled it, yet his countenance
betrayed his joys, especially when he saw my Postscript, without which, he
should have thought that Clarina deluded him; but seeing my hand, and knowing
it, he assured himself I was alive, although he imagined I was very weak. But
tell me, my friend, said he, Was it true that Cryseide was in such a condition
as I heard? Sir, answered the Messenger, she could not be well worse reported
then she was; for it night well be said she was dead, and afterward returned
to life: Then he related unto him how I had been, how I was, and what they had
done unto me. I must confess, (said Arimant then) that Cryseide transcends all
Ladies in beauty, and all Cavaliers in grandeur of courage: but fearing lest he
should say too much, he held his peace, and riding on repaste I himself at the
next Town, where he did nothing but repeat unto himself all that had passed.

New Accidents causing new Counsels Arimant staying in this place all the rest
of the day; all the night took up his thoughts in contriving means how to see
me. And not being able to resolve upon it alone, he called for the young man
whom he was wont to send unto me, and who besides his love to his Master,
wanted neither wit nor judgment. Unto him he did communicate his desire of
seeing me, and that he should never enjoy himself till then: And yet he told
him, that Rithimer did so extremely hare his Father, as he could not with any
safety come where I was, much less into my Chamber. The young man after he had
a little considered upon it: Sir, said he, you must make a Virtue of Necessity:
first send away this Messenger, that he may not discover your designs: Next,
disguise your self in the habit of a Merchant; so may you safely enter the
Town, and remain there a while unknown; and being there such opportunities
may happily present themselves, as you cannot here imagine.

Arimant liking the opinion of the man, as soon as it was day, he dispatched my
Messenger away, who the next day brought me Letters from him, told us where he
met him, and by what chance he knew him; I will not now, Hylas, tell you what
his answer was, but you may imagine it full of thanks and extreme contenment;
and in the conclusion of it, assured me, that he would see me ere long what
fortune soever he ran; in the interim, he lost no time. For thinking it no
discretion to come into the place where I was without a disguise, he caused
there suits to be made in the mode of Merchants, with all possible haste; and
going into a wood, they shifted themselves, and put their own clothes in a
Portmantle. Thus clad, and disguised as well as they could, they came into the
Town where I was, and lodged in an Inn near the Gate. As for Arimant, he kept
his Chamber all the rest of the day, but he sent his Valets abroad to hear
news: he commanded him whom he was wont to send unto me, to enquire how I did,
and to see Clarina if it were possible. At night both of them returned to him,
and told him what they heard; and he whom he employed unto my lodging, told him
that he had seen Clarina, and spoke with her, none perceiving him; that she
carried him to her Mistress, who was so weak through loss of blood, as she
still kept her bed, and swore unto him, he never saw her so fair in all his
life: That by fortune none being in the room, he talked to me along while, and
to tell me how he was diguised for fear of Rithimer, or some of his (...),
considering the old enmity he had to his Father; that Clarina and I laughed he
(...) hear he was in that habit: And that I told him; since he was so
disguised, he (...) some good Laces, and extraordinary Ribands, and such
knacks, and pretend that he would sell them; that if he found any in my
Chamber, to excuse it, and say he would come again when I was more at leisure;
but if I was alone with Clarina, at it happened very often, he might enter, and
speak to me with all freedom and confidence Arimant hearing this direction,
did find it very good, and in order to the execution of ie. he (...) into
quest of such Merchandise as was requisite for him As for his man, the news he
brought, was the fears of the Townsmen, of a certain strange King, who they
said, came into Gaul to plunder the Country as he had done diverse times
heretofore; then falling into particulars, he said, the Townsmen murmured,
because whilst this King was Pillaging and Ravaging all the Country, and
carrying away both men women and children Prisoners. Rithimer was making love
to a young Lady called Cryseide, and did not only neglect the people over whom
he governed, but lost that reputation which formerly he had gotten by so many
martial exploits.

This last part touched Arimant to the quick, yet being so near me and hoping
ere long to see me, he waved the thoughts of it; but giving his mind wholly to
provide such Merchandise as would admit him to my Chamber, he loaded both
himself and his man with the finest Laces and Ribands he could possibly
procure, and pretended to come from Gaul, from whence such things commonly
come: besides, having that language, he might the better be taken for a
Merchant of Gaul. He spent all the next day in triming up his equipage of
Merchandise; and having very well furnished his Packes, he came to the house of
Rithimer, and passed for a Peddler. The young man who had been already there,
conducted him to my lodging: Those who saw him go up with his Packs, never
questioned whither he went; for taking them for Pedlers, and many using to come
thither, they thought it not strange to see them there. They stayed with their
Packs in the Antichamber, where the little boy which waited on me, passing by
chance, did see them; and coming into my Chamber, told Clarina, that there was
Pedlers in the Antichamber, who asked if any would buy any Laces or Ribands.
Clarina did presently apprehend it to be Arimant, and coming unto me: We will
see, Madam, said he, whether or no they be our Merchants; Go and see, said I
unto her, and if it be they let them enter, for we are at leisure to see what
Wares they have, since none is in the Chamber. Clarina went presently; and
because the little boy followed her, she seemed as if she knew him not, but
asked what Wares they had? very fine Laces, Madam, answered Arimant, in the
language of Gaul, and very cheap. You come in very good time, said she, for my
Lady is alone, and will be glad to see what Laces you have; and upon this she
conducted them to me.

I must confess, Hylas, that I was strangely transported, and he also when I
saw him come into my Chamber, and none but we three in it: For Clarina had sent
the little officer into the Town of an errant. At the first when he entered, I
held out my arms, and he kneeling down by my beds side, I held him a long time
close to my breast, so surprised with joy, that I could not unloose my arms. My
dearest friend, said I unto him, here is thy Cryseide, whom the Gods have
retused, because they would not be so unjust as to rob thee of her. I do
acknowledge, Madam, said he, that they are Gods, since they are just But,
Madam, said he, what do you mean, when you say my Cryseide? Arimant, replied
I, be assured, that if Cryseide be not yours, he is no bodies. I writ it in my
blood, and if you would have a greater* Testimony, you shall have all I can
give, and that honor will permit me: For I think it reasonable that since I
exposed my life to preserve my self yours, I should reserve nothing but render
my self wholly unto your discretion.

He would have answered, when Clarina took him off, because she heard some
walking in the Antichamber. Retiring therefore with all haste, he went to his
Companion, who was begun already to lay open his Merchandise, and to show them
unto Clarina, who seemed to be very busy in looking upon several Laces, when
Rithimer came into the Chamber. He used to come unto me very often; as if the
report which went about the Town, of his love to me, were not false: soever
since the accident which happened unto me, his affection to me was increased to
such a flame, as his Wife perceived it; she being naturally jealous; and
unwilling any should share with her in that which she should enjoy alone she
began to hate me extremely, and was resolved to remove me from Rithimer, as
soon as I was able to go abroad: And seeing my Mother extremely angry with me
for refusing Clorangus, she told her of it. As for the was, Clarina heard their
discourse unknown to them, and told it unto me.

This remove which was intended did not trouble me at all; but on the contrary
I was rather glad of it, hoping it would be a means of my return unto
Eporedes, but I was much perplexed at the cruelty of my Mother, who swore and
vowed that as soon as I was out of Rithimers reach, she would, whether I would
or no, make me marry Clorangus.

This resolution of my Mother moved me unto another, which otherwise perhaps I
should not; it was to give my self wholly unto Arimant, and avoid that tyranny
which she threatened against me.

But to return unto Rithimer; seeing him enter into my Chamber, I desired
Clarina to tell the Pedlers that they should go away now, and come again in
the morning, and that then I would buy their Laces. This I did purposely,
because if Rithimer saw him again, he should not think it strange. Arimant
knowing how reports went, concerning this Princes love unto me, seeing him very
amiable, and considering what favor his Quality might procure him, he looked
upon him with an eye not like a Pedlers, and vexed he was to quit his place
unto him; yet seeing there was no remedy, he put up his ware, made a low leg,
and went away; and I seeing him going, said unto him; Farewell good Friend, be
sure you come again to morrow.

This was the first interview, but to shorten my discourse; Know, Hylas, that
the next day he came again, when all was gone to the Temple, and when none was
in the room but Clarina and my self. But to lose no time, seeing my Mother was
resolved as soon as I was well, to marry me by force unto Clorangus, we thought
it expedient to be beforehand, and that in the habit of a man Arimant should
steal me away, and carry me where he thought fit, upon a promise to marry me
at the first place where it could conveniently be done, and that in the mean
time we should live as Brother and Sister. This being the resolution, Arimant
provided clothes, as well for Clarina, as for me; he brought them unto us, and
promised without fail to be in the house where he lodged, the fifth day after,
which he showed unto Clarina, that she might conduct me thither. See Hylas,
unto what the severity of Parents may drive their Children, and see what came
on it: The five days being expired, and making no question but Arimant was at
his lodging according to appointment; I trimmed my self up like a man, and
Clarina also, and disguised our selves so well, as meeting my mother when she
came from the Temple, she knew us not; but I was much amazed when I came to
Arimants lodging, and found no Arimant there, and much more when night came
upon us, and could hear no news of him: Then did I begin to repent of my rash
act, and being so hasty as to stir out of the house till first I knew he was
in his lodging: But the greatest trouble was the report spread abroad all over
the Town that I was lost, and could not any where be heard of; that I was
searched for all over; This made me tell Clarina, that come what fortune would,
we must some way or other get out of the Town, and that since Arimant was not
there, certainly some great mischance had happened unto him: When we were thus
consulting, extremely perplexed and knew not which way to turn our selves, I
saw the young man who waited upon Arimant enter into the Chamber; imagine
Hylas, how great our contentment was when we saw him: Oh my good friend, said I
unto him, where is thy Master? He is in his own house, said he unto me, but so
wounded as he cannot come unto you. Who wounded him? (replied I, and trembled
every joint): One, answered he, whom he has killed, and to be short, you must
know that my Master not being ignorant of the design which Clorangus had upon
you, he challenged him, they fought, and he killed him; but yet he came not off
without two great wounds, which though not dangerous, yet are so troublesome
that he can neither ride nor go, the one is in his thigh, and the other in his
leg. Now seeing he could not come hither as he promised, he sent me to wait
upon you, and conduct you where he is, having furnished me with horses and all
things necessary. Friend, said I unto him, I knew some great occasion hindered
thy Master from being here, I am glad both he and I are rid of the trouble of
Clorangus, but I wish it had not cost him so dear; when thou will, we will be
going that we may the sooner be with thy Master, and see his wounds dressed:
Truly, said he, I think there is no better salve than your self; then calling
Clarina we consulted what we should do to escape, it being probable, strict
guards would be at the Gates: and after a long debate we concluded that the
young man should go unto the Palace of Rithimer to hear what people said,
and to learn if it was possible, in what manner they searched for me, and that
in the mean time we should cut our hair, to the end that if they did search
for us, they might not so soon know us.

This being resolved upon, the young man went accordingly, and was so nimble
and subtle, as he mingled himself amongst the Domestiques of Rithimer, where
he heard all their discourse to be of nothing but upon me; some said I was
fled, and had good reason for it, because they would needs force me to marry
Clorangus, the ugliest fellow amongst all the Cisalpine Gauls; others who
thought themselves more wise, murmured against the wife of Rithimer, saying she
had packt me away, being jealous of her husband and me, and this opinion went
so far that Rithimer believed it, remembering she had served him such a trick
before, and this was the reason that when my Mother fell down upon her knees
and beseeched him that a strict search might be made for me, he answered her
with an angry smile: Go, go, Madam, if you do not know where you daughter is,
ask your Cozen, and without further answer turned away from her. This was the
reason, that my mother telling this unto his wife, and how Rithimer slighted
the search for me, she believed that Rithimer had sent me away, and hid me in
some place for his pleasure.

As for my Mother, she knew not whom or what to suspect; one while she thought
Rithimer had ravished me away; another while, that it was his wife, who out of
jealousy had done it; and to think of Clorangus, she could not imagine he
should be any instrument in it. And so not knowing which to be the cause, she
suspected both Rithimer and his wife. Hence it was that all three being jealous
of each other, they were not very hot in searching for me, but rather laughed
at one another when such a thing was propounded.

This gave we the opportunity of getting out of the Town by noone, for it
being the market day, we easily passed amongst the crowd, none being at the
Gates who had any charge to look or take any notice of us. So when we were out
of the Suburbs of the Town, we took Horse, and when we came to a Wood we fell
to eat such Victuals as the young man had provided for us: Then setting
forward, we traveled all the night, and the next day till noone; then the
young man brought us into a House, the Owner whereof was a friend unto Arimant,
and unto whom the young man delivered a Letter from him, for whose sake we were
entertained with all possible welcome; but I was so weary with my travel, as I
fell asleep almost with the meat in my mouth, so as we went all to bed, and
rested our selves here all that day* and the night following; For my part I do
not think I ever wakened all the time, at least I am sure the Sun was up
before I opened my eyes, and before I got out of my bed; then the young man
called me, and methought the night had been shorter than usual: As soon as we
were all ready, we set forward again and traveled until night, when we came
to the Town of the Libicians with all contentment. But I cannot express the
joys of Arimant, when I came unto his bedside; it was such, as his wounds did
open again, and began to bleed afresh as he was forced to keep his bed still;
his joys were so great to see me in the house, as I believe, if I had not
taken notice of it, he had said nothing for fear of affrighting me; but seeing
his color to change, I asked him whether he did not find himself ill: It is
nothing, Brother said he (for so it was agreed we should call each other) only
I beseech you let a Surgeon come to me whilst you pull off your boots, for
though I be in bed, yet I will sup with you. Then after I had embraced him, I
called for the Surgeon, and retired my self a little to my Chamber: But oh
how jocund were Clarina and I when we were together: for, having passed over so
many frights, we now thought our selves returned even from death to life.
Whilst we were thus rejoicing together, one came to advertise us that Arimant
had lost so much blood, that his wounds were much worse than they were before,
and he in great danger. I ran in a fright unto him, and found that the blood
was stopped, but the Surgeon desired me to let him rest all that night, and
told me that there was no great danger yet, but that there might be, if good
heed was not taken. Then was I forced to retire my self without seeing him:
And see, Hylas, what love can do; the day before I was so weary with
traveling, as I was not able to keep my eyes open, but now after as much more
pains taken, I could not close an eye all the night long, but was still sending
to know how Arimant did, and could not rest till the next morning it was
permitted me to see him. Brother, said I unto him, were you so ill and would
not tell me? I must confess indeed, said he, that I did perceive my wounds to
bleed, but I must confess withal, that I was desirous to lose a little blood
for you, as in payment of the abundance which you lost for me. Oh Brother, said
I unto him, our designs in that were much different: for in losing mine, the
intent was to preserve my self for you, but you by this would take your self
from me.

But, Hylas, why should I stand relating all these passages, since this time,
which I must account the happiest of all my life, is thus changed, and nothing
remains of it, but so much memory as to lament the loss of it? But however,
let me tell you, that after we had stayed six weeks in this place, for the
recovery of Arimant, his Father sent for him; for he hearing of the Duel with
Clorangus, he was in continual fear of him, not only in respect of the
wounds he had received, but also of Rithimers hatred. His being thus ill of his
wounds, was the cause why he deferred all his designs that he had upon me,
until he was better recovered, and quitted his bed. And now when he was
recovered and well, he began to urge me further then I would permit him: I told
him, that he might consider, I was his, and that those Testimonies which I had
given, might well put him out of all doubt of it: That what he desired was not
reasonable, unless upon such conditions as might be free form all manner of
blame: That he might well think, that when I put my self into his hands, it
was with a design of giving up my self entirely unto him, as I had done, and
yet would do; but yet I beseeched him to have regard unto what both of us
ought to do; for as I owed unto him all manner of contentment and
satisfaction, so he owed unto me the preservation of that thing, which only
could make me worthy of him, which was my chastity. And when he answered, that
he never had any other design; and that he had rather die then move any thing
unto me, but upon conditions of marriage, I told him, that it was impossible
the marriage could be in that place, but Rithimer would know it, and pursue his
revenge, and therefore it was requisite to defer unto some other time and
place which was out of danger. Besides this consideration, it were good that
his Father were acquainted with it* And though we were both resolved to go
through with our design, yet it was but fit and reasonable to render him that
duty. I put him in mind that the Gods were well pleased with the reverence and
obedience of Children to their Parents; and that if we did so, they would
bless our intentions and actions the better.

To be brief, Hylas, I used so many arguments and reasons to him, as he taking
me in his arms, and kissing me; It is impossible (said he) to resist against
any thing you please; and therefore order and dispose of my life and
contentment, as you shall think good. And when he received his Fathers command
to go unto him; do you not see, said I unto him, how God begins to prosper our
design, since we are going unto that place where we may more easily accomplish
it?

He therefore went unto him, and carried me also; but being unwilling his
Father should know me, before he had consented unto his marriage, he changed my
name, and called me Cleomires, saying I was a Transalpine Gaul, and that I
having that language, I should the better pass so. Then for a better color of
keeping me with him, he said I had saved his life in his Combat with
Clorangus, having hindered two of his men in ambush from falling upon him, and
forced them to fly; so as this generous act forced him never to part from me.

Thus we set forward in our journey, and arrived at Eporedes, where Arimants
Father received us with such welcome, as did manifest the affection which he
bore unto his Son: And when he understood me to be Cleomires, of whose valor
and assistance his Son had informed him, I cannot express those thanks and
offers which he made unto me: for truly he was a very noble minded Cavalier,
full of virtue, and worthy of the Title which he had.

Both Arimant and I were very glad of so good a beginning, hoping that ere long
this good entertainment would bring us to a happy conclusion of our desires.
Some days being past, and Arimant not able to rest until our marriage was
concluded, we consulted together how to bring it about; In conclusion, we did
all four concur in opinion, (for Clarina and the young man, were always
admitted to our Counsels) that the best way was, for me to make the over^ture
unto the Father; because since I came, I had insinuated my self so far into
his good opinion, us he believed whatsoever I said, and would be counseled and
advised unto any thing I would. I took this charge upon me much against my
heart, thinking it to be against custom for me to be the wooer, it being
ordinarily the man's part: Yet having already broken the customs of other
women, and assumed the habit of man, I thought my affection at this time, might
well make me undertake it; and seeing it was Arimants mind, I thought it a
crime to contradict it.

I went therefore unto the Father, who was walking by himself in the Garden;
and after a salute, and some discourse of the fine situation of the place, I
fell at length to talk upon the contentment which every one had in seeing
themselves perpetuated in their Children: And afterward hinting unto him that
it should be his also, when ^e considered Arimant as the most nobly
accomplished Cavalier, not only of all the Salases and b^^bicians, but also of
all Aemilia; he answered me, that my affection to him, made me blind, and moved
me to think him so. I must needs confess, Sir, said I unto him, that I do
love him above any Cavalier I ever knew: but I do assure you, Sir, before I
did love him in that high degree, I did esteem and think him so, and all those
that ever saw him are of the same judgment. But Sir, since I am gone so far,
give me leave to tell you, I cannot choose but wonder, that it should be so long
before you marry him; It is full time, his age requires it; and I believe it
would be a great addition of contentment unto you, to see your self a
Grandfather of many sweet Children it is very true, answered he, and I desire
nothing more; but good wives are so very rare, and I see so few of them, (...)
we must of necessity tarry till heaven find such a one out for him. Perhaps
Sir, said I, you are too curious in your choice. I beseech you pardon me, said
he, for truly I am not; provided I could find out a noble and a virtuous woman,
in whose family there is no blemish, I should not insist must upon Riches.
Methinkes, Sir, said I unto him, that you omit one principal quality: What is
that, said he, it is, Sir, said I, that they do love each other very well.
Most true, replied he presently; but I did not insert that quality, because it
is to be first presupposed; protesting unto Cleomires, I had rather die, th^n
to see my self driven to such a necessity, as to force Ariman^ to marry a
woman unworthy of himself, or one he could not love: having already broke off
one marriage, because it was not according to his fancy. In this said I, you
are a good Father: But, Sir, what will you say, if I that am a stranger, should
propose one in this Country, who has all the qualifications and conditions
which you mention? and ^one with whom it shall be long of your self, if it be
not a match. I will then say, replied he, that you do know more then we do.
No, Sir, said I, not that I know more; but because perhaps I have had more
opportunity of knowing her better then others: and if you please I will propose
her unto you, but it shall be upon condition, that you honor me so far, as
to take all I say, to proceed from one who infinitely honors you, and loves
Arimans above all the world. You have already given, my Son, good testimony of
what you say, answered he, and I have such a belief of your affection unto me,
as you need not question but I shall take whatsoever you propound; as coming
from one whom I ought to love, honor, and belive, before any that I know.

In this assurance Sir, replied I, I shall tell you, that there is one in this
very Town, whose nobleness of Family, virtue, and such love as ought to be
betwixt Husband and Wife, may be found in her; and as for her Portion, it is
suitable to such as are of her quality* These things altogether, are not
inconsiderable. Good Cleomires, said he, name her quickly. It is, Sir, replied
I and blushed, Cryseide. Truly, said he then, as for her Family and Portion I
must needs confess it; but as for the rest, I know not what to say: and I must
tell you, the time was when I thought to motion it unto her mother, and had
done it, but that she was so near of kin unto the wife of Rithimer, who is my
mortal enemy. Sir, said I unto him, will you be pleased to let me speak in her
behalf, without offense unto your judgment? unto which he answering, yes, I
went on thus:

Cryseide has done two things, which may well make you change your judgment of
her: The first is, The cutting her veins* and choosing rather to die, then
marry Clorangus: And the other is, Her flight out of the hands of her Mother.
But to clear these two things unto you, Sir, I must discover a thing unto you,
which I believe you did not know, and which I beseech you not to take ill,
since all due respect was ever preserved unto you. Be pleased therefore to know
Sir, that Arimant having seen her of whom we speak, and considering her beauty,
he fell in love with her, and used all ways to make himself loved: She being
sensible of the honor which you Son did her; after long Courtship, and such
addresses as are usual amongst persons that love, she aked him what his
intention in it was, Arimant, in this, as well as in all other his actions,
showed himself a noble Cavalier, and one that did not degenerate from the
virtue of his illustrious Predecessors, but answered her, that his pretensions
were to obtain her favor in way of marriage:

And when she set before him the hatred which Rithimer bore unto you, and the
near relation betwixt his wife and her mother; Arimant answered, that the Gods
who would not have this emnity perpetual, perhaps intended to reconcile the
two Houses by this alliance; and assured himself, that when you Sir were
acquainted with it (for he would do nothing without your permission) you would
like of it, and commend his just design. After this, Love did every day so
increase on both sides as they promised each other to marry, provided your
approbation could be procured, and in the mean time both of them to use their
utmost endeavors to obtain the consent of their Parents.

When things was brought to this pass, Chryseide was carried away unto
Rithimers house, where they would needs force her to marry Clorangus; you know
Sir what kind of man he was, the most deformed and vitiously minded of all men
living, but though he had been the most complete and pleasing, yet Cryseide
could not marry him, having already given her self unto your Son: Yet in this,
you may see her virtue, because she had promised nothing but upon condition of
their consent upon whom she depended, and finding their minds so far from her
desires, she resolved to dye; this was an act of virtue beyond Lucretia's; for
Cryseide would prevent the crime before hand and dye; but the other dyed not
till after the crime committed. If this be not a great demonstration of her
love to Arimant, and whether she was not resolved to preserve her affection
entirely for him, I refer it Sir, unto your judgment. But so it was, that she
being miraculously rescued from the grave, and began to recover the great loss
of her blood, she was advertised by one of her Mothers maids, that her Mother
and Rithimers wife would pack her out of the presence of that Prince to make
her marry Clorangus whether she would or no. Now she thought it high time to
have recourse unto the last remedy, and doubtless had if Arimant had not come
unto her, and with tears in his eyes diverted her from that mortal resolution,
and told her that most certainly if she did dye he would follow her, and
therefore it was better to retire her self from this cruel tyranny of her
Mother; that if she would trust him, he would vow by all sacred and inviolable
oaths, he would carry her amongst the Vestals, where she might stay until he
could obtain your approbation of their marriage.

Now Sir, I beseech you judge whether these two actions can be disliked, or
whether there wanted any either generosity or love in this woman, or any other
quality or condition which you can desire?

And thus I ended, extremely astonishing the father, who walked two or three
turns without speaking one word^ whilst I was in expectation of the sentence
either of life or death: At last lifting up his head which he had all the while
hung down, he answered thus.

I must confess Cleomire you have told me most strange things, which may well
plead my excuse for being a little pensive. But considering that there is
nothing in this world which comes by chance, but by the wise providence of the
Gods, I will believe that all these things which you have told me, have
happened by their wills, and since it is so, I should be very harsh if I offer
to cross them. My Son, you say, loves Cryseide, and I do believe it, for I
have heard that his voyage to the Libicians, was only to make addresses unto
her, and fight with Clorangus who pretended unto her. Cryseide has also given
very great testimonies of her love to him. I do conclude from hence, that the
Gods do never make such contraries to meet, and sympathetically agree, but they
are contented with the good will which is betwixt them. Friend, I do commend my
Sons choice, for Cryseide does highly deserve to be loved, and now I know her
reasons which induced her unto what she did, my esteem of her is double unto
what it was. Tell therefore my Son as much, for I see that it was he who
employed you to speak unto me? Tell him, that since according to his duty he
has respected me so much as not to contract with Cryseide without my consent, I
do take it so kindly, as I both approve and commend his choice, and pray unto
the Gods that I may soon see them both together: And though I do foresee that
Richimer will rage more hatred against me, and color it with my Sons offense
in ravishing his wifes Cozen out of his house, yet that shall not make me alter
my opinion being resolved to countenance and maintain them in spite of all
danger that can come unto me.

I believe Hylas, you think that this answer did give me as much contentment
as I could desire, and well you might; for after I kneeled down and thanked
him in behalf of his Son and Cryseide (not daring to declare my self without
the advice of my dear Arimant) I thought he would never have satisfied himself
with thanking me, hugging and kissing me. Then I parted from him, and went to
acquaint Arimant with my happy success which ravished him beyond all
expression: At last it was resolved amongst us, that since I had told his
Father I was amongst the Vestals, I should not yet declare my self, lest I
should be taken in a lie; For all lies have this quality, that when they are
known, they make truth it self suspected. And to avoid the rage of Rithimer
and my mother we thought it best to conceal our marriage for a while, whilst
in the mean time endeavors were used to pacific them: Arimants Father approved
of this, and from thence forward referred the whole matter unto the will of his
Son.

Now Hylas see, how men purpose, and God disposes, who would have thought but
that their business was brought to as good a pass as we could wish or expect?
And yet all our crosses hitherto were but plays in comparison of what ensued;
For Arimant and I desiring to consummate our design, pretended to go unto
Cryseide, and after we had provided women's cloths, and all that was necessary
for our marriage, and were come into a Town of the Caturges, we intended to
stay there so long as to make the father believe we were gone unto her whom we
had with us. But as ill luck was, Gundehunt King of the Burgundians having
passed over the Alps with a puissant Army, did fall into the Territories of the
Taurinois and Caturges so unexpectedly as he found them without any defense, or
thoughts of any Enemy: And by fortune, the very next day we came into this
Town, he fell upon it, where all they could do was to shut the Gates against
the surprise of the first Comers; but when the maine body of the army came up,
all the inhabitants could then do was to render their Town upon such pitiful
condition as little mended the matter, unless that the women were not ravished
nor their Temples pillaged as they were in other places, and all the rest left
to the discretion of the ravenous Soldier.^ Oh heavens! Hylas what a
lamentable sight was it to see women carried away Captives out of the arms of
their husbands: No entreaties, no tears, nor no offers could redeem them: So
sadly did I resent this misery, as I can speak it experimentally: as fortune
was, I was that day in woman^ habit, and as I thought not ill dressed, though
my hair was so short that I could not trim my self so well as I desired; and
poor Arimant did carasse me, as if he did foresee it should be the last time:
The Town was presently distributed into quarters; and every place assigned
unto some troop, who by degrees turned the Owners out of doors, both men,
movables and horses* Arimant hearing of this base capitulation, went crying
through the Town, that it was better to dye than submit unto such unworthy
terms, telling the people that their walls were yet up, that the Enemies had no
wings to fly over them, that their arrows were not all spent, nor their bows
broken: he promised them that he would defend their Town till Rithimer came to
relieve them, who was already upon his march, and that they should never be
branded with so much ignominy. But seeing there was no remedy, and that none
stirred upon his words, he drew his Sword, and cried in the open streets that
the principals of the Town had betrayed and sold the people; that for their
parts they would receive no harm, but all would fall upon the poor people, so
as it was better to give them up to the Enemy, and save the rest: And thus he
cried out so loud, as he was followed by some, with whom he seized upon a Gate,
which he defended so well, that Gondebunt was forced to retreat, and fall on
upon another Quarter, where the Inhabitants did let him in: And thus betrayed
by those of the place, whilst he was repulsing those Enemies which were before
him, he was assaulted so furiously upon the back, as at last, virtue being
over powered by number, and he receiving many wounds, he was taken and killed,
though he would never yield, choosing rather to dye, then fall into the hands of
those, whom he called Barbarians. As for me, to my misery, though I may call it
good fortune, that part of the Town where I happened to be was assigned for the
Quarter of King Gondebunt; and those who were with him took me and many other
Ladies prisoners, and all committed to safe custody; where we stayed until the
coming of this great King, in hopes his generosity would give us liberty, as
well as his virtue had preserved out chastity.

Now Hylas you know both me and my fortune which I believe you will think to
be very strange; since when I was even at the very top, heaven dashed them, and
took away my ^^berty, and thus you see my miserable condition.

Thus has the fair Cryseide (said Hylas) related her fortune unto me, and I was
so delighted with it, as I did not think it a quarter of an hour since her
first beginning, when it was so late, that all her companions came to tell her
it was time to retire. And waiting upon them unto the side of the River Arar, I
then retired as full of love, as I was of satisfaction, to know that this fair
one had learned how to love, and that her affection was not settled any where,
since the death of Arimant, which gave me abundance of hope to arrive at the
Port of my desires.

All the company stood very attentive, and desirous to hear the conclusion of
this Relation; Hylas stood silent, and so as it seemed as if it was only
because they were then come unto a place where only one could pass at once:
And when all were passed, thy flocked about him, as desirous to hear the
continuation of his discourse, giving great attention unto it. What? what do
you expect more from me? said he, and wondered they should expect it: If there
be any amongst you, that knows any more of the story then I have related, I
shall willingly lend them audience; but if you look for any more from me, good
friends, you will be mistaken, for I have not a jot more to tell you. All the
company broke out into laughter to see their expectations thus frustrated.
Servant, servant, said Alexis, did you think that you performed your promise
with this short come off? Did you not promise me a relation of your several
loves? and you have related only the misfortunes of Cryseide and Arimant: you
have told us what you did not promise, and left untold that which you did
promise; resembling those who had rather give where they do not owe, then pay
their due debts. Hylas being thus twitted, smiled, and said not a word, knowing
that Alexis was in the right. At last casting up his head; Mistress, said he,
I do confess all you say, but the fault is your own: but if the money which I
paid you was not good, why did not you refuse it: I mean, if you did not like
what I told, why did you not interrupt me? for my part, I thought the money so
good, that when I received it from Cryseide it contented me, and was pleased
with the repetition of it unto you. However, said Alcidon, and interrupted,
since you have begun the story of this generous Lady, you should have ended it:
I assure you, Sir, said Hylas, I have emptied my Purse of all that money: I
mean, that I know no more of Cryseides story, only this, that she went away
without bidding adieu unto any, and I could never hear, whither. Madam, said
Florice then, and turned toward Alexis, are you desirous to hear the
conclusion of that story? Yes, answered the Druid, and I should be obliged unto
those that would tell it me, and I believe the rest of our way will permit it.
I shall be very glad, replied Florice, to satisfy your curiosity; for Cryseide
since the departure of Hylas, related unto me at Lions, all that he has, and
that I shall tell you, But it shall be upon this condition, that Hylas shall
make good his promise another time; and he assuring her he would, she began
thus:

The sequel of the History of Cryseide and Arimant.
BE pleased to know, Madam, that this generous Lady being detained a Prisoner
in Lions as you have heard, going one morning unto the Temple, a young man came
unto her, and in the crowd did put a little Book into her hand, and said unto
her in the Italian language, To morrow about this time you shall see me here,
and suddenly thrusting himself among the people he left her in the greatest
astonishment that ever was; for she knew him not, not understood the meaning of
this little Book; yet being very discreet, she made no show of her amazement
only as long as divine service lasted, she beseeched Mercury to grant that it
might be good news. The Sacrifice seemed longer unto her then ordinary; and
being extremely impatient to know what this Book was, she opened it: her
Companions who saw her very intent upon it, thought it to be a Prayer Book, as
indeed it was, and never took notice of any thing else: After she had turned
over many leaves and found nothing, she was more zealous in her devotion unto
Mercury and Apollo, who is the revealer of all obscurities, to direct her in
the understanding of this, never remembering all this while the way of conveying
Letters betwixt poor Arimant and her self: she thought him dead, and therefore
could not imagine any use of such a Book; but at last, looking upon it more
precisely, and turning over more leaves, she found a Letter, the superscription
of which she knew; Oh how she was startled (...) it; she blushed, her hands and
legs began to tremble; and all being ready to go away, she remained still upon
her knees not knowing what she did, nor what she should do; yet none took
great notice of it, only thought that her stay proceeded from her devotion. At
the last, her companion pulled her by the sleeve, and made her follow the rest
who walkked two and two, as Hylas related.

She was no sooner in the house, but she went into a Closet, shut the door
after her, and looking upon the Letter; also imagining Arimant to be dead, she
thought it some trick of Hylas; but opening it she found these words.

Arimant's Letter unto Cryseide.
MAdam, I live still, if it can be called life to be from you: I have sent this
faithful messenger to know how you do, and to tell you how I am: Oh ye Gods,
preserve Cryseide, and grant Arimant patience enough to endure all his
misfortunes.

Till now, she knew not what to think; but when she found the name of Arimant,
she knew that he was alive: she fell down upon her knees, and lifted up her
eyes to heaven. Blessed be the Gods, said she, for this transcendent
happiness, when I had the least hopes of it. Afterward rising up, she sat
down upon the bed, where she kissed the Letter a hundred times, accused her
self of oblivion, for not knowing him who brought it; and calling her memory
to account, she knew him to be the faithful Bellaris, that young man who used
to bring Letters from Arimant, and brought her from her Mother unto Arimant.
Where were my eyes (said she to her self) and where was my judgment, that
seeing him, and hearing his voice, yet I should neither know his face nor his
tongue? Then looking upon the Letter again, and knowing most certainly that it
was the Character of Arimant: Oh ye Gods, said she, I thank you most heartily
for preserving my life so long, as to hear this good news. I praise ye, oh
sovereign Goodnesses, and I now desire no more, but only to be so happy as
that these eyes may see him, and that this mouch which has so often lamented
him, may kiss him. She had continued longer, if Clarina who would neverforsake
her, had to come to look her; she opened the door unto her* Oh Clarina, said
she, and kissed her; I have good news to tell you; but Clarina telling her that
dinner was upon the Table, and that every one stayed for her, she could not
then tell her any more; but the joys of her face did sufficiently speak the
inward contentment of her soul.

Cryseide did love Clarina very well, but though she had loved her less, she
would willingly have lost her dinner to tell her this news; for it is the
quality of all those who receive any great contentment, never to think it
complete, until they have communicated it unto those they love. On the other
side, Clarina was so netled with impatience, that she no sooner saw her
Mistress from the Table, but she followed her into the Closet where she found
her before; and the door being shut, Oh Clarina, said she, and took her about
the neck, Oh my dear friend, I have great news to tell you. Know, my wench,
that A^imant it alive: Oh heavens, said Clarina, Arimant alive! Yes, yes,
Clarina, replied Cryseide, he is alive, and has sent me this Letter: and now I
value not all my miseries, since he is alive to help me in supporting them.
But, Madam, I beseech you, said Clarina, How came you to know all this? Here
sweetheart (said she, and gave her the little Book) here is the messenger of
the welcome news. Clarina then took the Book, and kissed it a hundred times,
and did so wet it with tears of joy, as Cryseide said unto her; Oh Clarina,
you spoil it with your tears, methinks you should better preserve it: Then
whilst Clarina took the Letter in it, and read it, Cryseide related unto her
all the passage in the Temple, and how she did not know Bellaris, whom yet she
hoped to see again the next day when she went again; but if by fortune I
cannot speak unto him by reason of my companions, and others who have eyes upon
me. Then Clarina, said she, you must by any means go unto him, and enquire how
all squares go with my dear Arimant: In the mean time, provide me Pen, Ink and
Paper, that I may return an answer. I shall not fail, Madam, answered Clarina,
and it shall go hard but I will speak with him; for in this Country they are
not so circumspect over us, as in ours. But, Madam, let us not stay too long
together here, lest we should give any cause of suspicion unto those who guard
us. True, Clarina (answered Cryseide) the Gods have sent thee into the world to
be my comfort and Counselor.

Upon this, they went out of the Closet unto the rest of the Ladies Prisoners,
who began already to ask where Cryseide was; for she having the first rank,
she could not be well missed; and besides she was so exceedingly loved of them
all, as there was not one amongst them who would not serve her with their
lives. She began therefore a hundred pretty sports amongst them, to pass away
the time of their Dete^^ion, or rather imprisonment: For Gondebunt had in his
absence commanded they should be so treated, as that they should have no cause
to grieve for being out of their Country.

This day seemed long unto Cryseide and Clarina, and the night longer; and the
morning being come, they both thought that they went unto the Temple later than
accustomed: At last, the so much desired hour being come, they went together:
And Cryseide cast her eyes on both sides, in hopes of seeing Rellaris; and she
had no sooner received the holy water at her entrance into the Temple, but she
espied him, staying there purposly the better to see her when she passed.
Cryseide going as near unto him as well she could, had no more leisure as she
passed by, but to say unto him; Clarina follows me; he quickly understood her
meaning, and conceiving it the best way to avoid suspicion; he looked about for
her passing by, which was after all the Ladies; and because the women went
without order, he thrust in amongst them, and going near her, he said unto her,
and looked another way as he walked; Where may I meet you Madam? In the
Athenian Garden, answered she, if we go thither this evening: but how does
Arimant? He is in good health, answered he^ Upon this, she lifted up her eyes
unto heaven, and went on, to avoid suspicion: Bellaris went presently and
enquired about the Town v^ry warily, to know where this Athenian Garden was,
and being informed of every thing, he went unto the Gardener, and for money got
leave to walk there, when he would: For the Gardener never refused such a
courtesse unto any that seemed to be of any kind of quality, especially he
pretending that he was sick, and the Physicians had prescrib^d him to walk
for recovery of his health. Having therefore put his business into such good
order, he went to the side of the River Arar, that he might see when they went
unto the garden.

In the mean time, as soon as Sacrifice was done Clarina acquainted her
Mistress with the discourse she had with Bellaris, and how it was appointed to
go that day unto the Athenian garden; how he assured her, Arimant was in good
health, and could not have any more particulars from him, the reason was,
because the place was not convenient, and it may be he desired to tell the good
News unto you first: I do like very well of the Athenian garden, answered
Cryseide, because there none will interrupt us. They had talked longer if
dinner had not been upon the Table, and because Cryseide did passionately
desire to speak with the trusty Bellaris, she went to walk something sooner
than usual, and all the Company did like well of her humor.

As soon as Bellaris saw her enter into the boat, for the River Arar was
betwixt the house and the garden, he got before them* and entering in, walked in
an Alley near the door. When the Ladies went to walk, Clarina and the rest of
the women who waited in their Chambers did not go with them, but might go into
the Town with any of the guard, and this was the reason why Cryseide went
alone. As soon as she was entered, she cast her eye on all sides, and presently
espied Bellari^, and he seeming to be very inquisitive, first looking upon one,
and then another, as they walked; then as if he were extremely moved unto
compassion, he spoke aloud in Italian: Oh what a loss has Gaul Cisalpine,
being deprived of so many fair and virtuous Ladies? But when Cryseide passed
by; Oh heavens ^ cried he out, Is this Cryseide? Oh most unfortunate Mother,
can she endure this loss? then speaking still Italian, and falling down upon
his knees before her, Madam, (said he aloud) I should think my self the
happiest man alive, if I could do you any service, being so much obliged unto
it, as I should think all my misfortunes nothing if I could but have that
contentment; for having received my education under your family, I think my
self commanded unto it, unless I were the most ungrateful person that lives.
Cryseide was a little surprised, and not knowing how to speak, was a little
silent; and this made those who looked upon her to be less suspicious. And
because Bellaris saw she was surprised; It seems, Madam, said he, you have
forgotten poor Bellaris, who was brought up in the house with you, and who had
not left you, if a fond desire of serving men when they travel into strange
Countries, had not moved me to follow the Noble and Generous Martiantes: Oh my
friend Bellaris (said Cryseide then, as if she remembered him) who could expect
to see you here? what is it which brought you hither? Until now, Madam, said
he, I thought that ^ bad fortune brought me hither; but now I say, it is the
greatest happiness I could wish for, since I have the honor to see you, and
offering my self unto your service. I thank thee good Bellaris, said she unto
him, but we can expect no help but only from God; for being in the hands of
King Gondebu^^ who but God can take us out? Why, Madam, do you not try to
^ansome your self said he? I offer my self to go to Eporedes unto your
friends, and (...) any thing I can for you. Friend, answered Cryseide, I do
not refuse your help; but we must stay until the King return, and then we
will see what may be done.

The rest of the Ladies hearing this man speak Italian, they gathered about
him, as very desirous to know what he was. One of them did ask him the
question; Madam, said he, I am a Sallassia^, brought up under the family of
Cryseide, and one who does so well remember the benefits I have received, as I
would at the peril of my life do her any service: I was brought into this
place not as a Prisoner, but as a servant unto Martiantes, a Cavalier well
known in that Province: he was taken and killed by a company of Soldiers, at
the foot of the Pirennian hills, who left me for dead by him, but the Gods Kept
me alive, to bring the sad news unto his friends, and to lament the loss all
the days of my life. Alas (said Cryseide, seeming to be sorry) is Martiantes
dead? He is, Madam, answered Bellaris. I assure you, said he, I am very sorry
for it, for he was a Cavalier of great merit. Upon this, all the Ladies divided
themselves into several walks, leaving Cryseide alone with Bellaris: and when
she saw none were in the compass of hearing; Ah my friend Bellaris, said she
unto him in a low voice, now tell me, how does my dear Arimant, and through
what fortunes has he passed? Madam, answered he, Arimant is in health; but as
for his fortune, it has been very various, and I doubt I shall not have time
to relate it I believe we shall answered she, and if we have not, we will take
another time for the rest. Then, Madam, said he, I will be as brief as I can:
Be pleased to know, that Arimant being so basely forsaken by the Townsmen where
we were, he still defended himself most valiantly a long time, and at last was
left for dead: Doubtless but for me, he had never escaped; but I being near
him, I used such care as I was obliged unto; though I was much wounded, yet not
being so bad as he I feigned my self dead and fell at his feet, for he was
fallen to the ground: The enemy having other designs then riffling the dead, all
the Plunder of the Town being theirs, they left us; and when I saw the cost
clear, I rose up, and bound up my wounds as well as I could; afterward went
to my Master, and by the help of a young man of the Town, I carried him unto an
uninhabited stable which was near, not daring to carry him into any house,
because all were full of Soldiers; I had an opinion, that he was not quite
dead, thinking the Gods would never suffer such a brave man to go out of the
world in the flower of his age; I searched his wounds, and to the best of my
poor skill, I did not think them mort^ll: but not knowing well what to do, and
seeing him bleed still, I tore my shirt, and tied up his wounds as well as I
could, and laying his head in my lap, it pleased God that he revived: when he
opened his eyes, he wondered to see where he was, and I fearing his
astonishment might do him hurt; courage, Sir, said I unto him, the Gods will
send us better fortune: The Gods, Bellaris (said he) are indeed very good, but
my destiny is bad, so as I can hope for no rest but in death: But Bellaris,
what is become of Cryseide? Cryseide, answered I, is safe, the wife to the
Burgundian King, who follows him all about, caused all the women to be put
into the Temple there to be preserved from disorder, and keeps Cryseide
particularly with her. Heaven be her reward, said he, forso good a deed.

I feigned all this, Madam, lest his grief should have caused his death. But,
Sir, said I unto him, do not trouble your self too much: No, no, said he, now
Cryseide is out of danger, I care not for any thing else. Then, though with a
little difficulty, I got him upon his feet, which was no sooner done, but we
heard many Soldiers quarrelling at the stable door; and presently after,
drawing their swords, they fell to fighting, about some Plunder which they had
gotten, and could not agree about the Division: The dispute was so hot that
many were killed; and the noise increasing, many others assembled, who as soon
as they came, took sides; at last, a Captain passing by, and seeing this
disorder, he would needs regulate the matter; But the Soldiers thinking he
would take all their Plunder from them, in lieu of obeying, fell upon him, and
so, as he was forced to save himself by running to the stable door where we
were. The Soldiers who had laid aside all respect, and knew that if he escaped
their hands, he would have them all punished; they resolved to kill him, hoping
then to be safe and enjoy their Plunder. In order to this design, they
endeavored to enter in; which Arimant considering, let us defend this Captain,
said he, perhaps heaven sent him for our assistance, so as if we do him a
courtesy, he will do the like for us: Upon this, drawing both our swords, we
took his part; and though my Master was much wounded, yet his courage which
never failed him, gave him strength enough to repel the fury of these
soldiers; some were killed, others taken, and the rest fled.

The Captain seeing himself out of danger, and not knowing Arimant: Cavalier,
said he unto him, I am obliged unto your valor for my life; and in requital
of this assistance, which I have received from you; command me any service
within the compass of my power, and I shall be most ready to do it. Sir, said
my Master, I was obliged unto all I did, and if I have done you any service, I
desire no other recompense, but that you will take me as your Prisoner, and use
me like a Cavalier, as both you and ^are. The Captain upon this looking better
upon him, and seeing by his habit that he was no Burgundian, he said thus unto
him: Sir, I do receive you as you desire, not to use you as a Prisoner, but as
my friend, and a Cavalier of merit. Also I pass my word, I will rather die,
then you shall receive any displeasure from our Army.

Thus was Arimant and I, under the protection of this Captain whose name was
Bellima^t, a man indeed of great Credit, but much devoted unto his wealth, as
afterward we found, and who according to the custom of the Visigots did
seldom remember any benefits; for though he was a Visigot yet he followed the
King of the Burgundians, as a person who sought for fortune wheresoever he was
in hopes to find it. The first day, we received all the kind usage we could
expect upon such an occasion; But the next day, being better informed of the
quality of his Prisoner, by some in the Town, he began to keep us under better
guard, pretending it was because he would have us keep our Chambers, that our
wounds might sooner heal, forbidding any to speak with us: Afterward, seeing
the Army was to move, and he not knowing whither, he took my Master apart, and
told him, that in performance of his word, he was forced to send him over the
Alpe^; because the King being informed, that it was he who had raised the
opposition in the Town, and had caused the death of many of his men; he has
commanded him to be searched for throughout all the Army, intending to put him
to death, as a terror unto the neighboring Towns: that perhaps he could make
a shift to protect him against any but the authority of the King: That he would
willingly let him pass free amongst his own Soldiers if he durst, but it
would hazard his life if the King should hear he permitted such a thing
without his consent: yet on the contrary, he could without any exceptions send
him beyond the Alps, since it was permitted unto all the Soldiers to send
their Prisoners and Pillage thither. But as soon as the Army was returned unto
Bungundie, he would send him back unto Eporedes, or any other place he pleased.
Arimant then asked him, whether the Queen had sent her Prisoners thither also?
The Queen, answered the Captain, is not here; but they have sent their
Prisoners thither, to the end the Army may be discharged of them. My Master
looked upon me, as if he had said, you are mistaken, and afterward continued;
I will go, said he, whither you please, assuring my self that a Cavalier so
courteous and noble as you are, will not use me otherwise then is fitting for a
person of my quality, and as one may expect from such a Cavalier as you are.

Do the next morning betimes, not without great danger of my Masters life, by
reason of his wounds, we were carried away by aconvoy, which guarded many other
Prisoners* not knowing Madam, what was become of you; only that the King had
put all the Ladies together, lest they should receive any injury. After we had
passed the Alps, they brought us unto this Town; and presently after, being
parted from the rest, they carried us into the Segusian Country, by the
Mountains of Gebennes: And at last, they put us up close into a little Castle
near the Town of Gergov^^: Well may I say [close up] for we were guarded so
close, that we hardly saw any light, and so we continued for a time: but the
merit, and sweet conversation of my Master, did work so well upon this harsh
Keeper, and the promises I made to gratify his courtesy, when Bellimart gave
him liberty, did move him to let me go out and treat with him about our
enlargement. This, Madam, has been my Masters fortune; but nothing touches him
so at heart, as being ignorant of your estate; hearing only in general, that
you were in the hands of the King. It was not any desire of his enlargement, or
treating with Bellim^^ which brought me hither, but only to know in what part
of the world you were, or whether you still retained any memory of him.

How? replied Cryseide, any memory of him? what should I else have an my memory
but him? Yes, yes, Bellaris, I must be dead, before Arimant be out of my
memory. The Gods do know, there is not a day, nor an hour, nor a minute, in
which Clarina and I have not talked of him with eyes full of tears. Now my
dear friend, I will declare one thing unto you, which I have not yet mentioned
unto any; but finding my self in this condition, and foreseeing that it will
be worse with me, I am forced to tell it unto you, that by your Counsel I may
find a remedy. Know Bellaris, that Gondebunt the King of Burgundy, is fallen in
love with me; I know it both by his deportment toward me, and his expressions.
I would not upon any terms reject him at the first, because an incensed love
may drive a man unto violent courses: but after I had given him many thanks for
the honor he did me; I told him, that I was none of the common sort of people,
but extracted out of the best Families amongst the Sallasses: Rithimers wife,
who was sister unto the Emperor Anthemius, was my near Cousin: That this
consideration might well move him to treat me according to my quality; and by
this means ^e might not only make Rithimer his friend, but Anthensius also
who was allied unto me. Unto this he returned no other answer than this, that I
did him great a favor in telling him as much; and that upon his return he
would make it appear, how much he esteemed my merit, and my alliance. Now
Bellaris, I do foresee a sharp Combat: For I am told that the King is upon his
return, and I see all preparations are making for him: Perhaps he may change
his humor and fancy to me* and perhaps not: Now if he do continue it, judge
you, how I shall be persecuted. To marry him, I had rather die: To refuse him,
he is a young arrogant man^ and blown up so high by so many victories obtained,
and al^s what can I do; so as I do foresee a most dangerous storm of misery
hanging over my head, and know not how to shelter my self from it, unless you
advise me in this great necessity. Bellaris stood a while and spoke not a word,
at last he said unto her; Truly, Madam, these considerations do speak you
full of affection unto my Master: and it must needs be confessed, that he is
infinitely obliged unto you, in slighting this King to preserve your self for
him: I will most freely expose my life to do you both any faithful service: I
beseech you, Madam, therefore tell me, Do they keep you very close? You see,
said Cryseide: if they use you no worse then so, replied he, you may easily
escape: But said she, if I should make an escape, whither can I go? For, to
pass over the Alps, is the way to be taken again, it is impossible to avoid
it: Never trouble your self, Madam, said he, so you could get but out of this
Town; I know a place whither to carry you, where you may stay in safety, until
Arimant be gotten out of the place where he is, by a way that I have thought
upon; and when you are both together, I am confident you will contrive a way
how to pass into Italy. Oh my dear friend, said she, Could thou but do as
thou say, my obligation to thee would be extreme; if thou can but get a
Boat upon the River Arar under my window, it is so near the ground, that by the
help of thy hand, I could come down in the night. Enough, said he, I can do it;
but how shall we pass the Chains which are at the end of the Town, before we
come to the River? Friend, replied she* God will help us; and if thou will but
take a little pains, thou will easily find the means; for I have heard that
others have escaped the same way: But Horses must be provided for Clarina, for
thee, and for me, and that I look upon as the greatest difficulty; for whom
can thou trust to hold them? That is nothing, answered he, for I will get one
to hold him, who shall not know what he does: But the worst is, I have not
money to buy Horses or Boat, or to make you clothes in the fashion of that
Country: for the soldiers have gotten all I had, and my Masters also. Let that
be the least of thy cares, said Cryseide, for I have yet good store of Rings:
then pulling a Diamant of good value from her finger, she gave it to him: Go
friend, (said she) sell it, and buy such things as thou will; if that will not
serve, thou shall have more.

It is not material to relate every particular; Bellaris provided Clothes,
bought Horses, found a Boat, and all with such expedition, that in two days
all was in readiness.

In the mean while, he took notice of the place where they were to pass,
where their Horses should stay, and of every circumstance: And the Chain,
being only Boats fasted together a cross the River; he went the night before
and filed the ring of one Boat, so as it was held together by a little
strength. All things being thus ready, and the hour appointed being come,
Cryseide rose out of bed, and Clarina also; And being in their first sleeps in
the dead of the night, they went out of the window without any noise, and took
Boat; and Bellaris being their conductor, pushed the Boat from the shore, and
hit right upon the Boat whose ring he had filed, which breaking out right, with
as little noise as he could for fear of being heard by the Guards, he passed
through with his Boat, though a little after they were all in great danger of
being drowned* For the Rosne, into which the River Arar runs, it was so rough,
and the Boat so little, also the Waterman not being very skillful, as the
danger was great, but at last he gained the shore: And though it was much lower
then he aimed at, yet by the help of the Moon which began to shine, he found
the place where a little boy held their Horses, who also promised him to be his
guide.

Whilst they were fitting all things about the Horses, Cryseide and Clarina did
take their new habits, which what by reason of haste, and darkness together,
they did put on so il-favouredly, as if they were some mungrell Gentlewomen
that would be fine if they knew how* But being as they were they took Horse and
passed through the Country of the Segus^ans, carrying still their guide with
them, lest he should make some discovery: And after they had with much
weariness passed the Cemmenian Mountains, traveling more by night then day,
and eating always in some wood, in which the Country was abundant; they came
at last to the Town of Gergovia, in which Cryseide was not afraid to lodge,
because it was in the Dominions of Eurick King of the Visigots. She took up her
lodgings therefore in an Inn; and the faithful Bellaris went the next morning
unto Arimant, unto whom days seemed very long, little expecting to hear such
good news so soon: Cryseide had given Bellaris another Ring of very good
value, to the end that if he who guarded Arimant would be corrupted, he might
give it unto him, and promise him more if need were.

As soon as he was returned, the Captain of the Castle brought him to his
Master: Come friend, said Arimant unto him, do thou bring me Life or Death?
Sir, answered he aloud, I do not bring any bad news, only that King
Gondebunt being not returned, the valiant Bellimart is not returned neither, so
as I have lost my journey. I met with one that was your Cousin, who was very
inquisitive of you, and offers you all assistance unto the King and Bellimart,
and is confident of finding favor, otherwise my journey is to no purpose: and
I believe that ere long; I must have another; for the King is daily expected*
You had done very well to have stayed, said Arimant, and not returned with so
little contentment unto me. Sir, answered he, I was in fear you would have
thought my stay too long; and having none to wait upon you I thought it better
to return, then stay so long to no purpose. Then the Captain began to speak;
you had better have stayed, said he, then make another journey; for according
to the intelligence which we have, if the King be not come already, he will not
stay long.

But as soon as the Captain was gone, and they two alone, Bellaris fell down
upon his knee, took his Masters hand, kissed it, and with a smiling
countenance, said unto him; I perceive* Sir, you are displeased with my
journey, but I believe you will bid me welcome when you know all How does
Cryseide, said Arimant? Does she endure her imprisonment well, and does she
still love me? Suppose, Sir, replied, Bellaris, I should bring you better news
then all this; would you then say I were welcome? What better news (said
Arimant) can thou bring then this? I will not only tell you, Sir, replied
Bellaris, That Cryseide is well* and that she loves you as well as ever: But
more, she is at liberty: nay more yet, she is coming to you; Clarina and she
do stay for you in Gergovia, Bellaris, said the Cavalier and smiled, is this
all true thou say? Do you think, Sir, said this faithful servant, that I
would bring you any lies? The goodness of the Gods be praised, said Arimant,
and lifted up his hands and eyes to heaven* Then turning himself toward
Bellaris: But friend, is it possible all this should be so? Can so much
happiness come all at once? Sir, answered he, do not make any doubt of what I
say; and to testify my affection and fidelity, you may to morrow, if you will,
see this fair one, who has taken so much pains to give you contentment: but
then I am afraid it will be the last service I ever shall do you: Alas, said
Arimant, I would not buy my contentment at so dear a rate as the loss of thee;
but if it could be any otherwise, I should be most heartily glad of it. I will
tell you, Sir, said he, what I did determine to do* Then he began to relate
unto him, how he met with Cryseide in the Temple, and in the Garden; her
resolution to escape, how they got away, how she was in Ger^^via in the Gaulish
habit where she expected him, and briefly all the whole passage. Then he
continued; Now, Sir, you must make all the haste you can to get from hence for
doubtless, King Gondebunt is even very now upon his return; and then you may
assure your selte, that Bellimart will either come or send for you; you know
his covetous and greedy mind, and God knows how he will use you: you may
remember his ingratitude toward you, and you cannot hope for any courtesy
from him, who has showed himself already so unworthy. Besides, it is
impossible that Cryseide should stay long where she is, and Gondebunt not be
advertised of it; and you must know, how that King is so much in love with her,
as he has declared some intention of marrying her. You see therefore it is full
time to make all possible haste out of this Country* and judge whether or no
Cryseide love you, choosing rather to run all these hazards for your sake, then
to marry so great a King? You must therefore desire the Captain to let me
return this night to Be^limart; you must seem much displeased with me for not
staying till his return, he will easily grant it* Then as soon as the doors
are open you may put on my clothes, and I will stay in your room. Oh Bel^ar^^,
said Arimant, I am afraid these men will do you some hurt, and if it could be
contrived some other way it would be better. No, no, Sir, said Bellaris, there
is no other way: For in the first place, time does press you, and there is no
probability that this man who guards you, will be corrupted by Gifts, because
he thinks your Ransom will be very high* and it is probable that Bellimart
has promised him a share. And as for me never let it trouble you for I am
confident the Gods will help those who hope in them, and are faithful to their
Masters, by some unexpected means* Can I do you any better service, Sir, then
in a business of this importance? But suppose the Barbarian should use me with
the worst of his cruelty; shall any danger whatsoever deter me from doing you
service? If I die, it is no more then I ought to do for you* And I can never
do it with more honor then in gaining your liberty and contentment: If on the
contrary, I should not, I may be upbraided all the days of my life, for losing
so fair an opportunity of testifying how much I am devoted to you. Do not
ravish from me this Glory, I beseech you, sir, I ask it in recompense of all
the service I ever did you, and only require three things from you: The first,
That if I die, you will remember, you never had a more faithful servant:
Secondly, if I live, that you will give Clarina unto me for my Wife: And
lastly, That when you are got out from hence, you will make all haste away that
possibly you can, lest you should be taken again. Thus continuing his
discourse with so much urgency, he prevailed so far with Arimant, as not to
deny him his request, though it was with abundance of sorrow to leave him in so
much danger.

Night then being come, Arimant entreated the Captain, as Bellaris proposed,
to give him leave to go again, who the King knowing would ere long beat Lions,
and desirous to be fingering of the Ransom as soon as he could, whereof he was
to receive a good share; he did not only give leave, but advised him unto it,
and that he would send a Letter by him unto Bellimart.

Thus the departure of Bellaris was resolved upon; and the Gate was ordered to
be opened for him when he would: Bellaris informed Arimant in all things; to
wit, where he should find Cryseide; in what place the Horses stood, and which
way he should pass; telling him it was better to go a little about, and go
more safely. In such discourse as this, they spent a good part of the night;
another part in shifting habits, and taking order for all things requisite; so
as when it was break of day, after Arimant had embraced his faithful servant
with many tears, and recommending himself unto Mercury, he set forward
toward the Gate in great fear of discovery; for though he had the clothes of
Bellaris, yet he was not like him, being much bigger, and faces so unlike as it
was impossible not to know the one from the other, if the least notice was
taken; yet he passed without any rub, it being dark, and special order being
given for it Bellaris looked after him out of his Chamber window, as far into
the plain as his eye could reach, and he observed how Arimant looked often back
to see whether any followed him. At last, when he was out of sight, then the
danger wherein he was, began to present it self before his eyes, and he
thought upon the horrors of death: But neither death nor danger, nor any thing,
could make him repent of what he had done, or be sorry for it in the lest
manner. Yet, as every one desires to prolong his life as much as possibly he
can; so soon as he had got his Master away, he would now try what he could do
for himself. He turned the Doublet and the Stockings of Arimant the wrong side
outward, and sullied his Hat, so as it had a resemblance of his own. As fortune
was, Arimant had left his Cloak behind him, perhaps on purpose to be the
lighter: To be brief, he tricked up himself as well as he could, and with a
confident countenance he went to the Gate and offered to go out: The Corporal
who commanded there denied him, saying, that one was already gone out, and he
had no command for any more. But Bellaris showing him a Letter which was
directed unto Bellimart, and the Captains hand which was known unto all those
at the Gates, they permitted him to pass. But first, the Corporal who was
exact in his office, would not suffer it without a new command, and therefore
sent him with a Soldier to know the Captains will; the Soldier went, but
being very early, and they keeping such a noise at the Captains Chamber door,
they awaked him: then he was very angry with the Corporal for not letting any
to pass who had Letters for him; so the Captain being angry at his being
wakened, he turned about and fell fast asleep again.

Thus Bellaris got out of the Castle, and taking his way toward Gergovia, he
made as much haste as if he had wings at his heels: But his Master having got
the start of him, and finding out the Inn, he went and knocked at Cryseides
Chamber door, who being but in a slumber did presently hear him, and called
upon Clarina to see who it was: Clarina she arose out of bed, put her Petticoat
on, and a Mantle over her shoulders, and went to the door with her eyes hardly
open. Bellaris, said she, thou art welcome, we have long looked for thee. And
Cryseide being very impatient, did ask who it was: It is Bellaris, Madam, said
she, let him come in, said Cryseide, perhaps he brings good news. Yes, Madam,
said Arimant, I do bring you very good news. Cryseide hearing him, and
knowing his voice: Oh my good God, said she, and started up, it is the voice of
Arimant: Then drawing the Curtain, she saw him already upon his knees by her
beds ^ide. Imagine, Madam, how this did surprise her, and how infinitely she
was joyed? She cast her arms about his neck, and kissed him so long, as if she
intended never to part from him again. As for him, he was so over-joyed to
have his dear Cryseide in his arms, that he held her so close against his
breast, as she was afraid he would have stopped her breath: Clarina having shut
the door, did look upon them, and stood immovable, so ravished with
admiration, as she knew not whether it was waking or dreaming. After she stood
thus like a statue a long while, she went to open the windows, afterward went
to them again, and found them still embracing, and her self as much ravished
as before: Then fearing they would even die with over joy, she thought good to
part them for a while, that they might take a little breath; but checking her
self, she let them alone to glut themselves with kissing and carrassing; and
doubtless they had not ended so soon, if they had not heard one knock at the
Chamber door. Clarina wondered, and could not imagine who should come so early
to trouble them. Arimant arose, and laying his hand upon his sword, he went to
the Chamber door; but never was man so surprised as he; for he saw Bellaris,
beyond all hope or thought; Oh Heaven my dear friend, said he, Is it thee? Yes,
Sir, said he, the Gods have delivered me, that I may do some service yet
again. O good Gods, replied Arimant, Can all this good fortune continue;
Cryseide at liberty, I at liberty, Bellaris at liberty too? this is happiness
beyond all hopes. Then taking him by the hand, he carried him to Cryseide,
related unto her how he had got him to escape, and unto what extreme danger he
exposed himself. When she and Arimant began to give him thanks, he interrupted
them, saying; spare your words, Sir, I beseech you, I am obliged more then so
to serve you: and lose not your time which is so precious unto you: I am afraid
they will follow you, let us pack out of Town and away, and when we are more at
leisure I shall tell you how I escaped.

Cryseide approving of what he said, she dressed her self so suddenly, that
she was at the stairs feet before the Horses were ready; Arimant helped her up,
and Bellaris Clarina; and after the reckning of the house was discharged,
Arimant took the horse of his faithful servant Bellaris, and so setting forward
with their Guide, who was already very affectionate unto Cryseide, by reason of
her natural sweetness, and liberality toward him, they went a good pace at
the first; but when they were got a little from the Town, they went slower,
because Bellaris was on foot; and who by the way, telling them how he escaped,
did make them laugh heartily at the extreme fears in which he was, when the
Corporal denied him passage, and at his haste which he made when he was once
out of the Castle.

Thus they passed on the way as pleasantly as persons in such conditions
possibly could; and being stirring betimes in the morning, they went over the
great Mountains of Cemenes; and afterward through the gloomy wood, called
Black-wood, and came very late unto Viveros shunning as much as possibly they
could all great Towns, and highways, the better to deceive those who perhaps
might follow them: But it happened unto them, as unto those who thinking to avoid
an ambush, do leave their right way to fall into it. For the Captain who had
Arimant in Guard* hearing that he was escaped, took with him seven or eight of
his men, and resolved to pursue him, or at the worst, to go and acquaint
Bellima^t with it; because he believed, that doubtless they would go to
Lions, either to embarque themselves, or else to take the way of Heluces. They
being that Country men, and knowing the shortest ways they got before them,
and that night came into the very same Inn where Arimant and his company were
to lodge: Bellaris was always wont to go a little before and provide lodging
and coming into this Inn, the Captain knew him presently, and thought Arimant
not far of; he assembled his men slily, thinking to surprise them both
together, which Bellaris observing, he ask^d for the Master of the house, and
asked whether he had any lodging, and being answered, yes; Well then, said he
in a loud voice, I will go and fetch my Master: The Captain who was in the next
Chamber and ready to seize upon him, hearing this, would not discover himself,
because he would catch them both together; but wary Bellaris, returning as fast
as he could to his Master; Sir, said he, Let us save our selves as well as we
can, for the Captain is in the Inn. Arimant was extremely surprised at this;
yet considering what a short time he had to consult upon the matter, he thought
it best that Cryseide and Clarina should go unto the Inn with the guard and
invent some tale or other to excuse their journey, and the next morning they
should take the way to Vienna, and to know which way they passed, they should
stick a little branch in the way they took, when they met with several paths;
and those who came first to Vienna, should lodge in an Inn next the bridge on
the other side of the River Rosne, and there stay for the rest.

The, would have said more, but they thought they heard Horses trampling in the
streets, which caused Cryseide and Clarina with their guide, to put on their
Horses the one way, and Arimant with his faithful servant the other: The
Cavalier by the favor of the night and the thick wood, did easily save
themselves; and the third day came to Vienna betimes, where they lodged in the
Inn next the Bridge: At night asking news of his Host, he heard how King
Gondebunt was returned from Gaul Cisalpine, loadned with victory and spoil; but
at his return had received a very great displeasure, because an Ital^an
Prisoner with whom he was much in love with, had escaped from him, and no
intelligence could be given of her. And to manifest the truth of this, said the
Host, I will show you the Kings Proclamation to that purpose this day
published: Then pulling out a great Paper printed, he read these words.

Gondebunt, the son of Gondioch, King of Burgundy, Lord of the Seguanois,
Lingones, Vellaundonois, Ambarres, Heduois, Catalauniques, Matisques, Alexens,
Allobroges, Basilians, Latobriges, Sebusians, Secusians, Secusienses,
Vabromaines, Sedunois, Augustes, Sallases, Centrons, Bramovices, Ebroduntians,
Segovellaunians, Galloligures, Governor of the Alps, Sempronians, Jovinians,
Pennines, Coties, Sebatians, Maritimes, etc.

Unto all to whom this our Will and Pleasure shall come, Greeting, In as much
as there is nothing that more offends a generous courage, nor gives it a more
just desire of revenge, then Ingratitude and Treason. And whereas, to our great
grief at our return from our long, glorious, and dangerous voyages, we are
advertised, that Cryseide one of our Prisoners, and one upon whom we had
showred abundant favors, has ungratefuly escaped our Guards, which was
impossibly for her to do, without the counsel and assistance of some persons
ill affected unto us, who have perfidiously stolen her away, in contempt of our
royal Power and Authority* For these causes, and many others, thereunto moving
us, and by the advice of our Great Council, to chastise such ingratitude and
Treason, We do Declare and Promise, by the Great God whom we adore, by the
soul of our most honored Father, and by the majesty of our Crown, That
whosoever shall bring unto us this ungrateful Cryseide, our fugitive Prisoner,
or shall reveal him or them who are the cause of her flight, or who does
perfidiously keep her, give her any assistance or favor, of what quality,
nature, or condition soever, we will grant unto him such favor as he shall
ask of us; and will not upon any cause, ground, color, or consideration
whatsoever, break this our Royal word, promise, and solemn Oath: And we do
enjoyne and command all our Sheriffs, and other Officers, to publish this our
Will and Pleasure throughout all our Dominions. Given at our Royal Town of
Lions, in the I^es of July, the second year of our Reign.

Arimant hearing this Proclamation, was in extreme fear lest Cryseide should
be known as she entered into the Town, especially when the Host continued his
discourse, and told him, that the King had sent persons who knows her, unto all
Bridges, and advenues of Towns. This caused him to take Bellaris apart, and
command him to provide men's habit both for Cryseide and Clarina in all possible
haste; and as soon as they were ready, to carry them that way they were to
come, that they might so disguise themselves before they entered into the Town.
Bellaris did as he was appointed, and all being ready he went to meet them. In
the mean time Arimant furnished himself with better Clothes, then those he had
from Bellaris. But fortune who was minded to vex these two generous Lovers yet
a little longer, and to have greater testimonies of their love and courage, did
so contrive the matter, that at the very same time Bellaris met Cryseide; and
when she thanked the Gods for Arimants safe arrival unto Vienna, the King
Gondebunt being hunting the Heart, he rode close by her, only with five or six
who followed him: and because he observed that as soon as she spyed him, she
retired her self behind the next bush which stood a little out of the way, he
followed her only out of curiosity: But Bellaris knowing him at the very
first, he clapped himself flat down upon the ground in a valley, which
Cryseide could not do, nor Clarina neither, because they were on horseback; so
as the King overtaking her, and seeing her in the Gaulish mode, he thought at
the first that she was some of that Country, who because she would be retired,
went out of the high way: but asking her who she was, and whither she went, as
soon as ever she opened her mouth, he knew her; for though she had the language
of Gaul very good, yet she had the accent and tone of a stranger. And looking a
little nearly upon her, though she endeavored to hide her face all that
possibly she could; Oh Heavens, said he, it is Cryseide: Then lighting from his
Horse, he ran to embrace her; How long is it, fair Lady, said he unto her,
since you first took this disguise? What good Angel is it that has bro^ght you
again into my hands? and what Devil was it that took you out of them? Poor
Cryseide, more amazed then is imaginable, to see her self in the power of him
whom she most feared, and fallen from such a height of happiness, into such a
gulf of misery, she stood a while and could not answer: At the last, seeing
there was no way to conceal her self, she resolved to take heart, and most
courageously answered thus; You ask me, Sir, when I assumed this habit and
disguise? and I answer, ever since Love did command me: And because you call
that good Angel who got me out of your hands, a Devil, I must vindicate his
honor, and let you know, Sir, that it is unworthy in so great a King, to break
both the Laws of Humanity, and the Laws of Chivalry, which commands you to
assist, relieve, and honor Ladies; and not to take them Prisoners, and keep
them against their wills. The King hearing the freeness of Cryseides language,
and his love not letting him consent unto what he knew was the duty of a
Cavalier, he answered her; Before any should do you any wrong, Madam, I will
lose both my Crown and my life; and in this which I do, I intend it for your
good and advantage, and not to harm or wrong you in the least degree. She
would have replied, but the King was so over-joyed at this happy encounter, and
not willing to enter any further into discourse, he took her Horse by the
bridle, and led him into the highway, where taking his own Horse, he returned
to Lions presently, more contented with this prize, then with all his
Victories. When Cryseide was thus taken, Clarina could easily have saved her
self, if she would as well as the Guide; but having no mind to leave her, she
did follow her voluntarily. Thus was the sad Cryseide carried back to Lions,
and put amongst the rest of the Ladies Prisoners, but under a more careful
Guard then before; although the King did really intend to marry her, as well
for her beauty, as for her affinity to Rithimers wife, sister unto the Emperor
Anthemius* and commanded that she should be waited upon with all service and
civility: and his joys that he had met with her were such, as he caused
Bonfires and great Feasts of rejoicing to be made. In the mean time, Bellaris
having escaped through Rushes and Bogges, he came in a pitiful fright, to
bring this said News unto his Master, who was so much surprised with wonder
and sorrow, that he was not able to speak one word; but throwing himself upon
his bed, there he lay till night, and say what Bellaris could by way of
consolation, he would not answer him: Afterward, he went into bed, and would
not eat nor sleep all the night; In the morning he called for Bellaris, bad him
go unto Lions, and enquire how Cryseide did, and how they used her: This
faithful servant, though with much danger to himself, did as he was
commanded; when he came into the Town, he found no great need of any enquiry;
for Cryseide was the talk all the Town over, and the Kings favors were such,
as it was generally believed he would marry her* though she was much against
it, for some reasons which yet were unknown unto them. But seeing so great a
difficulty to speak unto her, he returned to his Master, with a resolution of
persuading him to retire into Italy, since it was now not likely* but she who
was courted and honored by so great a King; Ambition to be Queen, would quench
all her love to Arimant: Being returned then unto Vienna, he related unto him
all he heard, afterward did set before his eyes the levity of Women, their
Ambition; the gilded flattery of being Queen, and the great probability that
she would entertain the honor which the King did her. He would advise him,
not to busy himself any more in the matter, but to consider how his Father
would grieve for his loss: How it might be the cause of his death, and the
utter ruin of his house; That to stay any longer here would not be safe,
because their Guide might discover him, and cause him to be taken: And that for
these reasons, and considerations, and many others, it was requisite he should
with all speed retire to his house. Arimant did hear Bellaris all this while,
though his mind was quite another way. But when he had done; Bellaris, answered
he, I shall perhaps follow thy counsel, after thou have done one thing yet
more for me: Go again presently to Lions, give this little Book unto Cryseide,
procure me an answer, and then thou shall see what I will do. This servant
infinitely loving his Master, did assure him he would do it, else lose his
life; but entreated him that he would not grieve so excessively; to remember
that his virtue is able to surmount the greatest misfortunes; that he ought to
hope still, and not to sink under his sorrows. And Arimant promising he would
take his counsel, Bellaris departed with his little Book, in which was a
Letter that contained these words.

Arimant's Letter unto Cryseide.
SHall this misfortune have a greater power over you then all others? Must
Ambition of being Queen, make you unfaithful? Do you intend to betray me, and
make me the most miserable amongst men? If so, then send me word, that my
death, I may keep you from being perjured.

Bellaris had no other way to deliver this Book unto Cryseide, but as she went
to the Temple; and therefore he got himself as near the Basin of Holy water
as he could, and as he had done formerly: when she passed by, he conveyed the
Book so nimbly into her hand, as none could perceive it: She presently
apprehended the business, and spoke not a word, but only, To morrow: In the
mean time Bellaris went out of the Temple, and as he used, into the Town, where
he heard that the King did really intend to marry Cryseide^ that she did deny
him; and that for all this, he would go through with it, assuring himself,
that when he had married her, she would then change her mind.

The next day, Cryseide failed not to return the Book again unto Bellaris, by
the same subtilty, saying unto him as she passed by, I will die first: He
understood well enough her meaning; and admiring the love and generosity of
this woman, he returned to his Master, and acquainted him with what she said,
as she gave him the Letter, which was so great a consolation unto Arimant, that
he almost forgot his misery; Then taking the Letter, he found these words.

Cryseides Answer unto Arimant.
I Will die, before I change; I will make it appear how far the resolution
of a woman can go, who whether alive or dead, will never be any but yours: be
the like to me.

Well Bellaris, said Arimant, Can thou advise me to forsake a woman, who has
these resolutions toward me? I must needs confess, Sir, answered he, that I
do admire her: her virtue is above my opinion of her: But good sir, what do
you intend? and which way can you relieve her? The Kings power is too great,
and his love is too violent, to afford any hopes for you? And your danger in
staying here is so great, as I will give you for lost, if you stay any longer.
Never fear it Bellaris, answered Arimant, I have thought upon a way to escape,
and doubtless it will take effect. Then he gave order for his departure, and
the next morning went unto Lions, where he arrived in the evening when it was
dark, and took up the most private lodging he could choose. There he heard the
continuation of the same reports, and more; That the next morning the King
intended to offer a sacrifice upon the Tomb of the two Lovers, in hopes that
they would mediate for him unto the Great Tautates, to change the heart of
Cryseide, and move her to consent unto his desires; and for the greater
solemnity, he would have her present with all the rest of the Lady Prisoners.

Arimant was very glad of this news, and thought it a fit opportunity to
effectuate his design, therefore he prepared himself against the next
morning. In the interim, the King solicited her with all manner of Courtship,
and used all his Rhetoric to persuade her unto compliance with him: But she
stood as constant and firm to her resolution as any Rock against the waves of
the Sea, which cannot be moved. And this was the reason why, before he had
recourse unto force, he would seek the favor of Tharamis, and by sacrifices
obtain from him so much grace, as to change the heart of this generous Maid.
When he entreated her to be present, she willingly consented: For, said she to
her self, if the God Tharamis be a just God, he will move the mind of this
King, to desist from any injustice.

The next morning, when it was time to go unto the Sacrifice, he prepared for
her a most glorious Chariot, and constrained her to wear the Royal Crown,
causing all the rest of her Companions to wait upon her in great state, as if
she were already the Burgundian Queen; thinking to shake her constancy with
such Grandures and Pomp: she appeared indeed very fair and lovely, and this
dress was not a little addition unto her beauty: but for all that, the inward
disgust of her soul appeared in her face, and all her actions. The King was so
much pleased to see her in this deck, as he did imagine her already his wife.
Thus they passed through the Town, and came to the Monument of the two Lovers,
where the sacrifice was to be offered.

When they were there; and the King, Cryseide, and all the rest of the Ladies
had taken their places; the Sacrifices came, and the Victimaries brought the
white Bulls, and the Priests approaching as near as they could to the Tomb,
they commanded the Victims to be killed; when they were opened, and their
intralls searched, they were found to be ^ound and perfect, such as presaged
happiness, of which the King was was very glad, and told Cryseide that it was
an evidence the Gods were well pleased with their alliance. She, who till then,
had some hopes in the justice of this unknown God; and now seeing her intent
frustrated she knew not what to have recourse unto you but despair. In that
resolution she seemed desirous to see the intralls of the Victim her self, and
asked permittance to go unto them.

The King who was confident in the Reports of the Priests, she was very glad
she had such a desire, thinking that the sight would make her more inclinable
unto him, when she saw the will of the Goddess. So being helped down, she went
unto the place of the Sacrifice, seemed very busy in looking upon the Liver,
upon the Heart, and the rest of the Noble parts. And whilst the Sacrificers
were all very busy in showing these things unto her, she seized upon a Knife
yet all bloody, wherewith they killed the Victims: Afterward running as fast
as she could unto the Tomb of the two Lovers, she laid hold upon one of the
corners, and then lifting up the Knife with a most resolute countenance, she
said aloud, Do thou see this Knife which I have in my hand, magnanimous
Prince? I will presently run it into my heart, if any one offer any force unto
me; and th^n setting the point of it against her breast, she continued thus.

The great God of Heaven and Earth be my witness; Oh great and invincible
King, that I do esteem and admire thy person, and all that proceeds from thee:
I see thou art favored by the Gods, loved by thy Subjects, honored by thy
Neighbors, and feared by the enemies: I acknowledge Prudence in all thy
actions, Generosity in all thy enterprises, Justice toward all in general,
and a particular love toward me, which does not only oblige me to admire
thee, and serve thee as all the rest of the world do; but also to esteem
thee, and love thee as much as possibly I can: Knowing therefore all these
things, and being sensible of the honor you are pleased to do unto me in such
an advantageous marriage: It must needs be something that has a great power
over my affection, and over my duty, that can divert my will from accepting of
it. Would you be pleased, Sir, to consider this, I should hope for a pardon if
I do any thing that displeases you^ for believe it Sir, could I dispose of my
self, I should be more willing to content you, then you can be to command me.

But be pleased to know, Oh great King, that as soon as ever I came out of my
infancy, the Gods would have me* love a Cavalier, I say the Gods would have me
for had it not been the will of the Gods* and had not they written it in the
unalterable Role of Destiny, doubtless this affection would have long since
withered away with so many bitter blasts and tormenting storms of fortune.
First, my Parents, who had power over me: Next, Rithimer, whom you know is
puissant: and now, you oh great King, would pull me out of the arms of my
Husband: for so may I call him unto whom I have promised marriage, calling both
Juno and Hymen for witnesses of our reciprocal oaths, and to send just curses
upon such as break them. If all this be not true, may these two faithful Love^s
who rest in this Tomb, and whose souls are with God, and enjoy the reward of
their fidelitity; may they, I say, punish me with all the rigor of divine
justice. But if all I say be true then I d^e conjure them by that inviolable
love they bore unto each other, to show their power in thee, oh Great King, by
obtaining of the Gods to change and divert thy mind another way. Be assured, oh
Great and generous Prince, that this is all thou can obtain of me, unless
by force; which if thou will use, then this knife shall send my soul out of my
body, and leave nothing in thy power but a cold carcass, without either life
or love. But if thou do indeed love me, and art that Great King who has made
all Italy to tremble at the very noise of thy Arms; make it now appear, not
only in setting me at liberty, but also restoring him unto me whose I am, and
from whom nothing but death can divorce me: If thou will get the name of just,
thou must render unto every one that which is unjustly taken from them* And if
thou will show thy self magnanimous, do it in surmounting thy self; thy
self, I say, who hitherto has been invincible. If all this thou do not do;
then O King, expect the vengeance of the Gods, who at this very hour do sit in
Heaven, and see how thou will carry thy self in this action, and will most
certainly either punish or reward thee for it: And you, oh perfect and blessed
souls, said she, and turned toward the Tomb, who perhaps whilst you lived
here, resented the same miseries that I do, have compassion upon me, and let m^
not this day before so great an assembly, embrace your Tomb in vain, or call
upon you without relief.

Thus Cryseide ended, and embracing the corner of the Sepulcher, she held the
knife against her breast, ready to strike it to her heart, if she saw any offer
to pull her from thence. All the assembly were infinitely astonished, when they
heard and saw the resolution of this Lady. But the King above all the rest, was
confounded at the Accident. For the Sepulcher of these two Lovers, was a
sanctuary unto all those who laid hold upon it, and received any wrong in
matters of Love; and was so religiously observed, that neither Father nor
Mother themselves could recall their own Children, when they held by one of the
corners. The King could not imagine, that Cryseid^ should make this use of it;
or that being astranger, she should so much as know or think of it. But seeing
it so, he knew not what to resolve upon: To let her go at liberty he would not;
to violate the privileges of the Sanctuary he durst not; both out of fear of
the Gods, and tumult of the people. At the last, after he had considered and
debated the matter with himself, he resolved to pull her from thence, without
any regard either of the place or the assembly; thinking the forces which he
had about him, would keep the people within compass; and as for any offense to
the Gods, he hoped to do well enough with them by Sacrifices, and hereafter
duties.

In this resolution he advanced, thinking himself to go unto her; and she
seeing him coming, had given her self the fatal blow, if the Priests had not
opposed the King; telling him, That a Prince so just as he* and one that feared
the Gods, ought not to violate and infringe their franchises. But his love
which had more strength in him then all these considerations, had doubtless
driven him beyond his duty, if Arimant, who was a spectator, and feared lest
Cryseide should be driven to the extremity, had not pressed through the Guards,
and stepped between Cryseide and the King, and falling down upon his knees,
said thus unto him; Sir, I come here intrudively, unto your Majesty, in full
assure of your Promise and Oath, that I shall receive the favor which you have
promised and proclaimed unto him, who shall tell you who it was which helped
this generous Lady to escape your Guards. Stranger (said the King) I never will
break any promise that I made: declare therefore the man, that I may punish
him; then ask what favor thou will, and obtain it. Sir, said Arimant then, and
rose up, The man is in your presence, and you may punish him when you please,
for it is my self. This, replied the King, is insolence in the height; and how
durst thou present thy self before my face? Only in hopes, Sir, said he, of
the favor which I shall ask: Never think, Sir, that it shall be my life, or
the lessening of any punishment upon my self, which I shall require; but that
in observance of your promise unto which you obliged your self by the great
God whom you adore, by the glorious memory of your Father's soul, and by the
Majesty of your Crown, you would grant me another favor which I shall ask.
The King stood amazed at the resolution of this man, and going back a pace or
two: Stranger, said he unto him, certainly thou art out of thy wits, otherwise
thou would never speak thus; but how were thou the cause of Cryseides escape?
Sir, replied he, my name is Arimant; and I am the happy Cavalier whom this
fair one says, she loves: I was taken Prisoner when she was; I was carried
Prisoner to the Town of Gergovia, where I found means to let her hear from
me: She who thought me dead, as soon as she heard I was alive, she resolved to
escape and come unto the place where I was, and help me out, which she did
accordingly, and was the cause of my liberty. You see, Sir, how I was the cause
of her escape, and having declared it unto you, you are obliged to grant me the
favor which you have promised. The King, who was on the one side astonished at
his resolution, and on the other side offended with him, as thinking himself
slighted by this stranger* Yes, yes, said he, it is very true, I do owe thee
a favor, ask it therefore, and prepare thy self to suffer the punishment of
my just indignation. Sir, replied Arimant, I never expected less from so great
a king as you are: and therefore I do freely put my self into your hands, not
fe^ring any of your punishments or torments, provided that first I do obtain
the favor which I shall ask. Ask it then (said the King) and by all the
oaths which I formerly took, I do oblige my self to grant it. Sir, replied
Arimant, then I do ask that Cryseide, whom I see at the corner of the Tomb,
and who is your Prisoner, may be set at liberty, and sent unto her friends, or
whither she shall please, without any force or compulsion offered unto her. Oh
Heavens, said the King, must I my self be the instrument of my own misery? and
having imprudently promised, must either be perjured, or else be the most
miserable Prince that lives? Then standing a while silent, and being inflamed
with anger, and ashamed to be accused before all the people of breach of faith
and promise; he resolved to maintain it, but withal, to satisfy and vent his
anger upon Arimant. And therefore with eyes inflamed with fury; I do declare,
said he, that Cryseide is at liberty; and I do strictly charge upon pain of my
great displeasure, that none whosoever, do offer her the lest violence or
injury: vowing by the soul of my Father, that he shall never obtain either
favor or pardon from me: Then turning toward Arimant, Well stranger (said he)
art thou contented with me? Yes sir, answered he, the most contented man in the
world. Then turning toward the Soldiers; Take away (said he) this sturdy
contemner of my anger, and let him suffer torment till he die, that other rash
men like him, may by his example learn to dread my anger. Arimant looked up
with a cheerful aspect, and observing Cryseide to weep: Oh Madam, said he unto
her, I beseech you let not your tears disturb the tranquillity of my soul:
Alas, my life could never be better employed then in procuring your liberty:
Liberty? said Cryseide, I value not liberty at so dear a rate, I had rather
suffer perpetual imprisonment, then see you so ruined in the flower of your
age: But go Arimant, and if I have my liberty, I will not be long after you; I
will make it appear, that I can die as well to follow you, as you can to save
my honor.

Whilst she was talking thus, and Arimant conjuring her to live as long as it
should please the Gods to prolong her days, they had finished the tying of his
arms with chains. The people were all so moved at the constancy of the
Cavalier at the compassion of Cryseide, as they sighed and cried at such a
pitiful separation. Bellimart who was with the King at this Sacrifice, and
hearing Arimant speak, he knew him to be his Prisoner, and so did the Captain
who was come to acquaint him, that he was escaped. And seeing that if Gondebunt
did put him to death he then should lose all his hopes of any ransom; he
addressed himself to the King, and said; That it was not to thwart the will of
his Majesty in any thing, because all he had, his Majesty might freely
dispose of, but only because he was unwilling to lose his right; that he
beseeched him to wave the execution of Death against this stranger, until he
had informed him of his reasons; and the King permitting it, he represented
unto him the great pains he had taken in his service* the hazards he had run,
and the wounds he had received: And Sir, said he, the ransom of this stranger
whom I took prisoner who escaped from me, was all the reward I ever hoped for:
But if this sentence of Death be executed* I shall lose all my hopes, and all
that fortune gave unto me; which I believe, Sir, is not a little; for he is one
of the chief of the Province of the L^bians, and his Father who has no
Children but he, is raised to that credit, as that great Soldier R^thimer has
more apprehension of him, then any in all Cisa pine Gaul. He had no sooner
spoke these words, but Bellaris that faithful servant, not knowing what his
Masters design was, running unto this place as almost all the Town did, and
hearing what he had done to save Cryseide, he was extremely desirous to free
his Master from this danger, by the loss of his own life; an^ therefore
crowded in, and cast himself at the feet of Gondebunt in such a resolute
manner, that he hindered him from giving Bell^mart any answer: and when he saw
the King hearkened toward him, he began thus:

Sir, you have this day gotten the title of a promise-keeping Prince; and I do
here cast my self upon my knees, beseeching you to be no less an observer of
your word toward me, then you have been toward this Cavalier, called Arimant.
Stranger, said Gondebunt, neither thou nor he, nor any living, shall ever have
any cause to upbraid me with breach of word: Sir, said Bellar^s, this action
speaks you worthy to be the Monarch of the whole world. Then rising up, he
continued thus: You have promised, oh Great King, to bestow a favor upon him
who was ayding and actually assisting in the escape of this Lady: I have so,
said the King; Then, Sir, said he, I come to inform you of him, against whom
you have just cause to be angry, and severely to punish: for indeed he is in
all the fault, and you cannot in reason accuse this poor Cavalier of any
crime; though it is true, he was a cause of her escape, because he did not
contribute any thing toward it, farther than that he lived and loved her: I
must confess that had he not been amongst the living, she would not have had
any mind to escape: But, Sir, is it a crime to live? Did he ever give her any
counsel or advise her to it? or did he ever take any pains or industry about
it? No, no, Sir, not at all, further then to let her know he was alive. But on
the other side, he whom I shall discover unto you, is only culpable; he first
gave the counsel, he contrived the way; it was he who loosed the Chain of
Boat^ which blocked up the River; he helped Cryseide to pass through; he found
out Horses for her to fly away: To be brief, Sir, he did all; and by
consequence deserves all the punishment.

The King hearing this stranger speak thus; Why, said he, art thou so long
before thou namest him unto me, that I may severely punish him? Sir, said the
faithful servant, I shall quickly name him, and more then that, I will deliver
him into your hands, when according to your Royal word, you have granted me the
favor which I shall ask. I do promise it, said the King, and confirm my
promise by attesting all that is sacred. Then, Sir, said Bellaris, the favor
which I ask is, That this Cavalier may be set at liberty, and that all his
fetters may be charged upon me; for it was I only, that helped Cryseide to
escape: It was I who brought her news he was alive; It was I that has been
with her ever since. To be brief, Sir, It is I only that deserves all the
punishment, because I was, I only, that am the cause of your high displeasure.
But now since I have made good what I have promised, it is your part, Oh great
King, to make good yours and grant the favor which I asked: I was from my
infancy brought up in the house of this Noble Cavalier, I do owe unto him all
that I am; I have been a witness of his affection unto Cryseide, from the very
first beginning of it; and I have seen so much virtue and nobleness of mind
between them, that I think the end of my days most happy, if I can be a
means of their long living together by virtue of the favor which I ask; I
should think my self culpable of ingratitude, if being able to save the life
and honor of him who gave me life, and who by his example has taught me all
things virtuous and honorable, I did not freely do it. And therefore, Great
Sir, I desire you will absolve Arimant from all kind of punishment, and not
only set him at liberty, as you have already Cryseide; but also, that you
would be pleased, out of your incomparable magnanimity, to make them marry each
other, as they are already by the consent both of themselves and their Parents.
Let all your anger which you aimed at him, be employed, good Sir, against me,
and add as many torments as you will, so they be safe; for the very Glory of
doing what I ought to do, will make them all so sweet unto me, as I shall not
resent the sharpness of the pain.

And because, Sir, I hear that the valiant Bellimart pretends to have some
right unto my Master, because he was formerly his Prisoner. Give me leave to
contradict his pretension in the presence of your Majesty. First, What can he
pretend unto my Master, but only this, that my Master gave himself unto him?
When you took the Town of Cartures, Oh great King, Bellimart knows very well
how much he is beholding unto this valiant Cavalier, for his life; I will not
repeat it, lest it should blemish such a generous courage as that of Bellimart:
But I must needs say (and he knows I say truly) that it was not he who took my
my Master; But my master after he had done Bellimart a very notable piece of
service, did entreat him to take him as his Prisoner, upon condition to use him
like a Cavalier, and a man of ^^ality: whether this make my Master a Prisoner
of War, or a Prisoner of Courtesy, I refer it unto the judgment of your
Majesty. But to wave this, and admit him his Prisoner; what is it he would now
have? If he was his Prisoner then, why did he not keep him? Did he let him go
upon his Parole? No, Sir, he guarded him as well as he could, and he could not
keep him. Now if a Prisoner do escape, and he who had him, do meet him in
another Province, can he take him again? No, sir, this concerns the grandeur of
your Majesty. I do not say, but that if Bellimart had kept him still his
Prisoner within your Dominions, he might now have had some Law to demand him:
But since he did not keep him safe within your own Realm, but sent him into
the Country of the Visigots; what reason has he to take him again now, since
he escaped as for safety into your Dominions; and so much the rather, because
your Majesty having made a peace with all the poor people of Cisalpine Gaul,
there is no likelihood that all those who fly hither for refuge, should be
seized upon as Enemies. This, Sir, is the last service I am like to do for
this noble Cavalier, unto whom I do owe much more then I am able to pay.

Thus the faithful Bellaris ended his speech, which contained in it so much
affection and reason, that the King could not choose but admire the love of
Cryseide, the Generosity of Arimant, and the fidelity of Bellaris; in so much
as he stood amazed at them along while, and began to relent; At last he broke
out into these expressions: Great are the Judgments of Tautates, and his ways
are so deep, that no mortal man can find the bottom. I made choice of this
sacrifice, in hopes of persuading Cryseide to love me; and on the contrary, she
flies to the privilege of the Tomb of the two Lovers, I published a
Declaration, thinking by promises to regain lost Cryseide, and that Declaration
is it which has ravished her from me, and made me quite lose her even when she
was in my own hands; and all this to show that all humane wisdom is but folly,
compared to the infinite wisdom of that great God whom we adore. And though I
do see all these things do conduce unto the confusion of all my designs, and
plainly foresee that there is no hopes for me in the fair Cryseide: yet must I
needs confess that all things have been alleged upon such sound reason* as I
protest that had I known the beginning and progress of this great and virtuous
affection, I would sooner have dyed then suffered it to be separated. And
therefore, oh you happy couple of Lovers, I do declare you free, and exempt
from all manner of punishment or imprisonment, be it either in relation to me
or unto Bellimart, upon those reasons so strongly urged by that faithful
servant, whose offense I do also most freely remit, wishing rather such a
friend and such a servant, then such another Kingdom as I have; I do give you
all three free power and liberty to live in any part of my Dominions or else to
go whither you please; yet if you will afford me so much contentment as to see
you married before you depart, I shall think both my Kingdom and my self much
honored and very happy in it.

Upon this, he commanded that Arimant should be unloosed, who with the generous
Lady and faithful Servant, came and cast themselves at his feet upon their
knees, some kissing his hands, others his knees, and all the Assembly did
commend the Magnanimity and justice of the King, who by the grandeur of his
courage, knew so well how to vanquish himself.

Thus Florice ended the relation of the fortunes of these two perfect Lovers,
every one admiring their virtues; some did highly esteem Cryseide for refusing
the Scepter and Crown of Rithimer and Gondebunt, to preserve her fidelity unto
Arimant: Others admired the resolution of Arimant, in offering so voluntarily
to die for the liberty of Cryseide, but all with one commune consent commended
the fidelity and affection of Bellaris. Hylas only laughed at all three, and
at all those who did commend their actions. Was ever the like folly seen? said
he. Cryseide like a fool as she was might have been a Queen, and now she is
only a silly Country wench; Arimant also, like a fond obstinate Coxcombe in
his courtship of Cryseide, must lose his time, be wounded, taken Prisoner, and
after abundance of peril and trouble, be at last like to lose his life in
disgrace, and had done so if Gondebunt had not been more courteous in
performing his promise, then he was wise in putting him to it: Had it not been
better for both parties if Cryseide had been a Queen, and afterward given
Arimant that satisfaction he desired? But Silvander, all their perplexities and
miseries do proceed from that which you call Constancy. It is that only which
tormented them so pitifully; only that, which had like ^o have cost them
their lives, and made them the sport of fortune and chance. Silvander hearing
himself named, came nearer Hylas, and answered him thus; All these things
which you have named, Hylas, are indeed the consequents of constancy which you
do so much condemn; and how much they are accompanied with pains and dangers,
so much more are they to be esteemed: they are only generous spirits that dare
attempt difficulties to accomplish their designs: They are but simple soirits,
said Hylas, who run after a shadow and leave the substance: Arimant is tied to
a thing called Constancy very finely; he must spend all his youth in the
service of Cryseide, and when he is old, then she will give her self unto him,
this is as much as to give a hard bone to know upon unto a Dog that has no
teeth: Had not this Cavalier done better if he had stayed in Eporedes, and
comforted his poor old Father who loved him, than to break his heart with
grief, or at least made his old age so full of sorrows and misfortunes, as
death was welcome to him: And then for Arimants own proper contentment do you
think there was no women in all the Town but Cryseide? Ah my friend Silvander,
what gross folly is it to lose ones time, and spend all one has upon one
Commodity? had he followed my Laws, when he met with so many difficulties
opposing his desires he would have wisely turned his back upon them, and have
made his addresses unto some other whose conquest would have been more easy,
and perhaps more advantageous: Every one did laugh at the opinion of Hylas; and
Tircis began then to speak; I perceive, Hylas, (said he) that you are one who
will never build any Temple unto Fortune, because you will not have any thing
to do with her. And I perceive (said Hylas) that you are one whom only those
that are old and ugly will adore. And why? said Tircis: Because, answered
Hylas, those who are old and il-favoured, to invite any to love and serve them,
do propose you as a God: You, I say, who are so far out of your senses as to
love one that is dead. This, Hylas, replied Tircis, is inhumane, to represent
unto the afflicted the cause of their grief; but be it so, that I should be
esteemed by these old ones of whom you speak, and proposed as a God, what hurt
is it unto me? Is it not better, my friend, to be thought a God, then to be
held for an unconstant man? And Hylas, are not Altars and Sacrifices pleasing
unto the Gods, whom we adore? and why then should they not be so unto men? Do
you think, Tircis, answered Hylas, that I have not as many Altars and
Sacrifices as you? certainly I have; for I can make my self more adoreable then
you can: This only is the difference, you are the God of the old and ugly, and
I the God of the young and fair: And therefore the sacrifices which are
offered unto you are old and wrinkled, and mine are young and plump: Unto your
Altar comes none but ancient Matrons, crawling upon Crutches, and crooked,
their heads and hands shaking and trembling; but unto mine comes none but the
fairest, youngest, and jolliest wenches in all the Country; so as I am then the
God of Pleasure, of Joy and of Life; and you the God of Envy, Sorrow, and
Death. Now tell me, Tircis, without p^ssion, which of these two Sacrifices do
you think more agreeable and estimable? Tircis would have answered, when the
venerable Crysante being advertised, that Adamas with his company would pass
by very near her house; she came through the wood which joined to the Meadow
belonging to the Temple of Astrea, and by her coming interrupted their
discourse, because the Druid advanced to salute her, and calling Alexis,
presented her as his Daughter. The venerable Crysante, kissed and embraced her
with abundance of joy and so did the rest of the virgin Druids, much admiring
her ^eauty and behavior. In the mean time, the venerable Druid addressing her
self unto Adamas, beseeched them not to think her so uncivil or negligent of
her duty, but that she would wait upon them if she could; yet being commanded
by A^asis to wait upon her, she was afraid she could not; which, said she, does
most trouble me; for I perceive she will come unto me sooner then she thought,
by reason of this new accident which happened: What Accident? said Adamas: I
thought, replied the venerable Crysante, that you had been acquainted with it.
You must know, Arganteus was killed in the presence of Galathea and Polemas, by
a Cavalier stranger, and in the conclusion of the combat one of the Lions
which guarded the enchanted Fountain, seeking about for food, came upon the
place, and so affrighted the Horses of Galatheas Coach, as they ran away, over
(...) the Coach, and broke is all in pieces; So as she, who by fortune was on
foot, to see the Combat and part them, was forced to walk on foot unto Mount
Verdune, where she stays, expecting her Coach, and the recovery of the
Cavalier who killed Arganteus, and I believe is there still. Whilst they were
thus talking, they were interrupted by the coming of young Lerindas, Galathea's
messenger, who addressing himself unto the sage Druid; Father, said he, The
Nymph Galathea has sent me unto you, to let you know that she intends to be
present at the sacrifice which you intend to offer for the Missletoe; and
fearing she should come too late, she desires you to stay a little, and send
her word in what place you will offer it.

Adamas hearing this message, was a little surprised at it, because remembering
that Galathea had formerly seen Celadon in woman's Clothes, and therefore he
feared she would know him now in the habit of a Druid: Yet not to give any
notice of his fear, he answered him thus: Friend, I desire thee to tell the
Nymph, that I should be very willing to obey her commands, but the time is so
short now, as I am afraid I shall not: For I know she would not have the
service of Tautates retarded: all things being in readiness, and the shepherds
and shepherdesses assembled upon the place, so as it is indeed impossible to
defer until another time, without great disorder and scandal; but if she have
a desire to see these fair and discreet shepherdesses, I promise to bring them
unto her within two or three days unto Mount Verdune: for I believe she would
be at the sacrifice, only out of a desire to see them altogether: I assure you
Father (said the young Lerindas) you have divined aright; For I have heard her
say, that she desires nothing more, then to see whether the shepherdesses of
Lignon be as fair as they are reported: I thought as much, replied Adamas; For
this Sacrifice which now we are about, is but a private sacrifice of a few, and
not worthy of her presence; but the great Day of Solemnity is the sixth day of
July, when I shall be happy in her presence, if she please to honor us so far:
Tell her therefore, Lerindas, that the shortness of the time, and the little
solemnity which is now to be used, is not enough to invite her hither, and that
I know these fair shepherdesses will make good my promise. I assure you,
Father, said Astrea, none of us will be against whatsoever you shall promise,
especially in paying a duty unto which we are all obliged: You do very well
(answered the messenger) to speak for all the rest; for I believe that you and
Diana, are the two whom she desires most to see, and you Astrea, above all. Had
I thought (said (...)) that (...) had been so happy (...) to be known unto so
great a Nymph, we should long since have paid the duty which we (...) Your
Names, and your Beauties, said Lerindas, cannot be (...) in these (...) and I
must confess that I think I have been partly a (...) of her desire (...) see
you having told her whom I saw. When she sees us (said the shepherdess) (...)
she will say, you spoke too high in advantage of our beauties I fear ^^plyed
he that she will accuse me for speaking too little in your advantage, rather
than too much* but I know she expects me with impa^tience, therefore I will go
and tell her of you, and swear^ unto her truly, that she must hide all her
Nimphs when you come, unless she would have: (...) blush for shame, and pine
away with envy. Leonide hearing these words, and see^ing to be offended: How
now Lerindas, said she, do you use my companions thus? I protest unto you, I
will tell them. If you do, answered he, you will do them a^double
displeasure* The one, in making it appear unto them that they are not so fa^^:
and the other, in letting them hear a reproach which will offend them, and
which in reason they cannot contradict. Upon this, without staying for an
answer ^he ran away toward Mount Verdune. And Adamas fearing still left
Galathea should come to the sacrifice, to the end he might dispatch it the
sooner, dismissed the venerable Crys^n^e, who would willingly have been
present, had she not feared that Amasi^ and Galathea would come in the mean
time unto Bon-leiu.

A little after all the company came into the little Meadow which was before
the entrance into the Temple of Astrea, where there was a very great assembly
of shepherd^ shepherdesses, with their (...) Eubages, Bardes, Sarronides, and
Druides of the Neighbor-hood, and all things requisite for the sacrifice in
readiness. Amongst the Pastors there assembled, was the prudent Phocion, and
the sage Diamis, so commendable for their yet ^erable age: Amintor also the
Nephew of Philidas was there, and by fortune, Daphnis the dear friend of
Diana, who being come the might before, would not fail to be there with
Callirea, as well to see the sacrifices, as her dear companion from whom she
had been long absent* As soon as they saw each other, they left all other
company, and running with open arms, they embraced one another with such
abundance of joy, as they made it appear, that absence had no power over their
affections* After they had long embraced, Astrea and Phillis came and parted
them, and desired to be participants in the Carraffes. See here my companion
(said Diana to her) see what I have got since you saw me, here are two other
Daphnis whom I do love as I do my life, and would have you love them also,
being certain that according to your merits, they will love you as well as you
love me. Then Astrea and Diana, confirming that assurance with a hundred
protestations of amity, and Daphnis receiving them with the like cordial
affection, they contracted such a society amongst themselves, as never after
was broken.

In the mean time, Adamas being destrous to know whether all things necessary
for the sacrifice was ready, he found that the Priests had been very careful in
their offiecs. So as after they had washed their hands and faces in the
fountain which was at the entrance into the Temple of Amity; and being clad in
white, and crowned with Vervine, He, and the Vaites, Eubages, Sarronides, and
others appointed for the sacrifice, they took all those things with which they
would sacrifice. One carried the Gilden Hatchet wherewith they used to cut the
Missletoe: Another, the white silken Rope, in which they tied it: Another a
bundle of Savine: Another, of Vervine; two carried the Bread and the Wine which
they were to sacrifice: At last came two white Bulls, Crowned with Savine and
Vervine, decked almost all over their bodies with Flowers, and driven by ^ight
Victimaries.

The sage Adamas, all these things thus prepared and passing in order before
him, he came with a Gravity becoming a great Druid, and taking two or three
turns about the sacred Meadow being followed by all the shepherds and
shepherdesses with great (...) rence, he set the Missletoe upon an Altar which
was erected at the foot of the happy (...) upon which the new Missletoe did
grow.

The place was where the Temple of Astrea was made, by lapping together little
trees one with another in form of an Arbor, by the shepherd Celadon^ And
because, they must first pass through the Temple of Amity, as formerly I told
you* many of those who followed the sacrifice, were constrained to stay there,
because the Temple of (...) was too little to hold so great a company:
Moreover, the two white Bulls, and the eight Victimaries took up a great deal
of the room; and yet Adamas was forced to offer the sacrifice there, because
the Tree wherein the Missletoe was, did b^are up almost all the roof of this
Temple* and according to the custom, the Thanks must be given at the root of
this Tree which heaven had so much favored.

After the Great Druid had ranged every thing in order, and saw all the people
zealously at their devotion, he caused a great Chaffing dish of coals to be
brought, and putting it on the Altar, he took three leaves of the Missletoe, as
many of Savine, and three branches of Vervine, and threw them into the fire.
Laying his hand upon the Altar, he said thus:

Unto thee, O great Hesus, Bellinus, Tharamis, that this people do render
thanks for the Missletoe which thou have sent amongst them; It is unto thee as
their only Tautates, that in this Wood they offer the sacrifice of Thanks, in
this Bread and Wine, together with the blood and lives of these white Bulls:
The one in testimony that we acknowledge it to be from thee, we have the
preservation of our lives: And the other to show our sincerity with which we
do adore thee, and consecrate these pure and immaculate Victims. As Hesus,
strengthen the arm of our Cavaliers and Soldiers, and infuse such courage into
them, as they may be able not only to defend us from our enemies, but also to
get the victory over them: As Bellinus, be thou the God of men, and preserve
them: As Tharamis, cleanse and purge us from all our sins: And as our
Tautates, be still our only one God, and look upon us through this Goddess
Astrea, from whom we hope for all manner of Benediction.

Upon this, he threw a little of the Bread and Wine into the fire, and made a
figne to knock down the Victims: Two did receive the blood in Basins, and two
held the legs of the Bulls lest they should hurt the Victimaries: Afterward,
the Priests causing them to be carried into the sacred Meadow; they opened
them, and searched their entralls, and found them to be very sound, perfect,
and of a good Augury* At which all being very joyful and contented, they made
the report of it unto the Grand Druid before all the Assembly, he thanked Great
Tautates for being pleased with their sacrifice of Thanks, beseeching him to
continue still his favors toward them. Then after a Benediction the sacrifice
ended, all were full of joy and contentment, and most of the old shepherds
returned to their homes.

In the mean time the Victims being cut in pieces, and the fire having consumed
a part according to the custom, the rest was dressed and eaten by the Priests
and other shepherds as would be in their company: None staying in the Temple of
Astrea, but Adamas, Daphnide, Alcidon, and the rest of the shepherds and
shepherdesses that came into their company. And because Daphnide, who had been
accustomed only unto sacrifices after the Roman manner, was very desirous to
know, why they used any other ceremonies in this Country: Madam, said Adamas
unto her, Though this Country of the Segusians which we call Forests, be in
extent much less then any Province in Gaul; yet the great God has had a
greater care of it then any other: For to say nothing of other, the
Gallo-ligures, which is that Country commonly called the Province of the
Romans, because they had a great affinity with the Romans; and the principal
Towns are Colonies of Focenses, and are addicted unto plurality of Gods, though
at the first as Gauls they had the Religion of their Fathers; yet as errors
are apt to insinuate themselves by degrees into all things, they did the same
amongst their Ceremonies, and brought into their sacrifices the false and
idolatrous opinions of several people, and made a Miscellany of the Gaul,
Roman, and Greek Religion, and so became much corrupted. But on the contrary,
this little Country of Forests, never having any communication with strange
people, unless with some Romans, have been exceedingly careful to preserve
these Ceremonies which you see pure and entire as they received them of old
from those Ancients, who after they had long floted upon the waters, brought in
that true and pure Religion which they learned from that great friend of
Tautates, who with his family saved himself (...) the general inundation.

Now this man taught them, that there was but only one God, whom he called
Tautates, whom by several surnames, he sometimes called Hesus, that is to say,
God omnipotent and omniscient* sometimes Bellinus, that is to say, God and Man,
because of all mortal Creatures man only does acknowledge him: sometimes
Thamires, that is to say, God purging and taking away the sins of the living:
and this belief has been ever preserved pure amongst us until this time: And
we may boast that we are the only people of all the Gauls, who have had this
happiness; for some by compulsion, others voluntarily, and by converse with
the Romans, Visigots, Vandalls, Almains, Picts, and Burgundians, have lost this
purity which we have still retained, both in our belief and practice.

Whilst Adamas was thus talking unto Daphnide and Alcidon, discovering unto
them the secret mysteries of his Religion; Astrea showed unto Alexis, the
rarities of this Temple, which she had seen before the shepherdess, and yet
seemed to admire them, especially when Phillis told her, that this Temple was
made by an unknown hand* and that there was not a shepherdess in all the
Country who knew him that made it. It Is strange, (said Alexis) for it is not
the work of one day: and yet, said Astrea, none took any notice of it, until
it was finished as you see. But I beseech you, Madam, said she, tell me whether
your opinion do agree with ours; look well upon the Picture of the Goddess,
and tell me whom you think it does most resemble? It does resemble, said
Alexis, the fairest shepherdess in the world: Then, replied Astrea, you are
not of the opinion of us all; for these shepherdesses assure me, and I think
they are something in the right, that this face does much resemble mine. Most
certain, replied Alexis. For the Picture does extremely resemble you; and yet
that does not at all hinder, but that you are the fairest shepherdess in the
world. I receive this commendations, said Astrea, from Alexis, because I desire
to be the more pleasing unto her, and because she being no shepherdess but a
Druid, I do not any injury unto her in accepting of it. Though I were a
shepherdess, answered Alexis, yet you ought to accept it, since it is so much
your due: And though you refuse it out of excess of modesty, yet reason will
force you unto it by the judgment of all. But fairest shepherdess, let us
talk no more of that which cannot be denied by any, and let us see, I beseech
you, what is upon this Altar, which I think have been dedicated unto you by the
Pans and Egypans of this Country, under the name of the goddess Astrea. The
shepherdess hearing Alexis, she thought that she heard the very voice of
Celadon, as he was wont to discourse unto her; and she was infinitely joyed at
this resemblance, as she could not hide her joys from her companions. And at
the same time when they came unto the Altar, Diana and Phillis came also having
Daphnis with them, who being astonished at what her Companions said concerning
that place, went along with them, looking upon all the rarities in it: and by
fortune, Diana laying her hand upon one of the little Roles of Paper, of which
there were many upon the Altar: she opened it, and found certain Verses in it,
and showed them unto Phillis and Astrea. Methinks Sister, said she unto her,
that I should know this hand: It is Celadons, answered Phillis, and I cannot
choose but be ravished with wonder at what I see in this place. Astrea blushed
at the name of Celadon, and Alexis much more, who to disguise it the better,
did ask who this Celadon was, of whom they spoke; He was, said Diana, one of
the most courteous shepherds in all this Country, and by unhappy misfortune was
drowned. In what place? said Alexis: It was, said Astrea, in the fatal River of
Lignon: but, said she, let us talk upon some other subject, and look upon these
other Roles; Then taking one which was in the hands of Daphnis, she saw some
Verses which were written in another Character: for they were written by the
Nymph Leonide, when not being able to persuade Celadon to forsake the
melancholy life he led in that place, she did visit him almost every day; and
because she could not conceal her passionate affection to him, she writ those
Verses as a testimony of it: When Phillis heard the name of Celadon, certainly,
said she, this is the place of wonders, for there is no question but every
thing in it relates unto Celadon, and yet we all know that he is dead. How do
you know that, said Alexis: Nay, said Astrea, it is but too true, for I saw him
die, and since have seen his Ghost, but I beseech you let us leave off this
discourse: and then offering to go away, Diana stayed her, and looked in
another Paper which was written in the same Characters the first was, and
contained these words:

Sighs.
I.
Sighs, the Children of that thought which so incessantly torments me; why do
you not, either blow out that fire which is in my soul, or else s^ inflame it
as it may quite consume me?

II.
Sighs, which were wont to be the Cordialls of him who gives you being; why do
you now change your customs of comforting, into a course of tormenting?

III.
Sighs, which do come from my heart; why do you not carry that heart unto her
for whom you are created, that so you may either give me a death by taking it
from me, or a lif^ by carrying it unto her, who is the original of my life?

IV.
Sighs; why do you come from my heart, since all my hopes are gone, and all my
desires ought to be quenched?

These fair shepherdesses had not left one Role unopened which was upon the
Altar; if Adamas, who was showing unto Daphnide and Alcidon, the mysteries of
the Temple of Amity, and the Temple of the Goddess Astrea, had not interrupted
them. They to give him place, went all out; though none of the company knew
more of them then Alexis, yet she seemed as much amazed at these things as any,
and was as inquisitive to be informed in every circumstance. When they were
come out, they found Hylas at the Fountain, and would not enter into the
Temple now no more then the first time* As soon as Alexis saw him, and not
knowing the reason why he did not follow them: How now servant, (said she) What
makes you stay here, whilst we have been viewing the rarest place in all the
Country? Mistress, answered he, my intention was to make you more desire the
sight of me, in being a little deprived of it: That needed not, answered she,
for I cannot desire it more then I do: If you had, replied Hylas, you would
have stayed here with me, and not have preferred your curiosity of viewing a
woody Grove before your contentment in being with Hylus. I had thought, said
Alexis and smiled, that my servant had been more religiously devoted unto these
sacred Groves, and had been the first that would offer himself at the Altars;
so as thinking him gone before me, I went after to seek him. You saw me when
you entered in as I did you, said Hylas; and if your affection to me had been
equal unto mine to you, you would have stayed behind them. Good Servant, said
Alexis, may I not as well tax your affection in not following me, for I should
willingly have stayed behind, had I known your intention of doing so? Nay, nay,
answered Hylas, this is but an excuse, you might well see that the God of this
place was not pleased I should enter, if you had looked upon the inscription
over the door: Then Alexis seeming not to see it before, looked up, and found
written, That no profane persons who were not inspired with a constant love,
should not enter into that sacred place. And what of all this, said Alexis? his
meaning is, said Silvander, That since he is not inspired with a constant love,
he dares not set his foot into the sacred place, lest he should profane it;
and in this, Madam, he shows himself more religious then a perfect lover
Servant, (said Alexis) Is this true which Silvander says? Mistress, answered
Hylas, Do you desire I should love you? Yes, said Alexis, with all my heart.
Then, said he, Lend not any ear unto any such sowers of sedition in love as
Silvander. Then turning toward him, Do you think Silvander, said he, that I
did not enter into this sacred Grove, because I was no perfect lover, as well
as religious? What else would you have me think? said Silvander; I think you
were afraid of punishment, and therefore durst not enter now, no more then the
first time we came unto it; I will not deny, answered Hylas, but that I do
stand in fear of angering the Gods, and let me tell you, the this my fear is
more commendable then your arrogance: For is there any who have not a Tincture
of some humane imperfections? Ah my good friend, Do thou think thy self
unsullied? and therefore how (...) you be so imp^^ent as to set^ (...) in this
forbidden place? I confess my self, said Silvander, subject unto humane
imperfections, but am not so grossly follied with them as some men are: I know
thou it (...) company without common imperfections, and yet for all then they
(...) into this sacred place; since the condition of their entrance is, that
there be no fault in their love: Now I ^m most certain there is none in mine,
for I had rather die a thousand deaths then suffer the lest stain of
imperfection in it.

A very fine fancy, believe it, said Hylas; Good Silvander, tell me if there be
any such pure pieces in the world as you do imagine your self? and if there
be any, pray tell me where they are? You may very well ask where they are (said
Silvander) for I do believe you know not any, though there be many in this
place? Pray tell me? What do you take Phillis to be? She said Hylas, is too
merry. What then, of Astrea* said Silvander: She, answered Hylas, in too sad.
What then of Diana? said Silvander: she, replied he, is too wise. What do you
say unto Alexis? said he: She, said Hylas, knows too much. L^^nide (continued
Silvander) she said Hylas knows too much, (...) too little, What faultin
Celidea, said Silvander: Her virtue replied he^ is (...) unto me. What do you
say of Florice? said Silvander; That fine has a jealous (...), answered he:
What of Palanice, replied Silvender She, said Hylas, does too soon believe that
she is loved: Of (...) said Silvander: She, said Hylas, is ^^^soluto: What
fault in Carlis? said Silvander: She loved me too much, answered he* What do
you think of Stilliana? said Silvander; She is too subtle, said Hylas: What of
D^^phnide, continued Silvander; That she has lost him, answered Hylas, who
would have made her esteemed more fair: What do you say o^ L^anies? said
Silvander. I say, replied Hylas, that I do not love her: And of Ma^^^^he, said
the shepherd; She, answered he, is too like Diana. Oh Heavens (said Silvander^)
Can I propose none in whom you will find no fault? You have forgotten one
shepherdess amongst us (said Diana) and that is Stella. Very true indeed, said
Silvander; what do you say of her? I must confess (said Hylas then) that if
she continue pleasing me, as well as she has done this morning, I think that I
shall find her according to my own mind. How, how? servants said Alex^s
presently, will you quit me for her? Hylas, after he had thought a little
b^^ter with himself, answered very faintly: No, no, Mistress, I would not
quit you, but I hope I may let you have some company* Why, replied Alexis,
cannot you content your self with me? Fie, fie, I must needs complain of you
to all the world. (...) you are too blame, answered Hylas; for have you not
always told me, that our loves should be equal: Most true, replied Alexis:
Then, replied he, if it be equal, you should let me love another besides your
self, since you do the same. Whom do you see me love, said she, besides your
self? Whom? said Hylas* What (...) you doing all the day upon this Country
wench, called Astren? Oh servant said Alexis, she is a woman^* Well then, said
Hylas, may not I also love a woman? Servant, said Alexis, if you were a woman
as I am, it were then allowable to love a woman; but since you are not, I have
great reason to be jealous. I beseech you, Mistress, said Hylas, let (...) law
be equal betwixt us: No, said she, I can never consent unto so much wrong to
my self* And believe in, Mistress (said Hylas) I will not lose any of my
privileges. I pe^^cive (said Diana) there is like to be a divorce betwixt you:
For my part, said Astrea, I shall be (...) ga^^ner by it, which way soever it
be; for if they do break off, I shall possess that (...) one to my self
alone; and if they do not, yet since she (...) Hylas to love Sre^^a, I shall
have the more opportunities of talking with her, whilst he is entertaining his
new Mistress: And for my part, said Hylas, I shall be also a ga^^er* By it;
for if we be divorced, then I shall be free, and if we continue, then I shall
have (...) to love me (...) of one. I perceive, said Alexis, that the loss
will be only (...) For if Hylas do cease loving me, I shall lose the
friendship of a person whom I value an a high rate of esteem: and if he do
still love me with a condition of loving another* I shall have but one half of
a servant, whilst Stella has the other* (...) as which way soever the wind
blow, it will be against me: But servant, is there no means to make you (...),
and (...) Stella from having a share? Alexis spoke this in such a resenting
manner, as one would have thought her in good earnest. Hylas, whose constancy
could not continue any longer, and fearing to offend against his old
principles: Mistress, said he, I cannot continue any longer upon uncertain
terms; you must either leave Astrea, or let me take in Stella, or else break
all off; our Market is quite done, for I am a Merchant at a word; your own law
of equality obliges me unto it. Do what Alexis could, she could not choose but
laugh at the discourse of Hylas, and staying long before she answered; What?
said he, are you laughing in lieu of an answer? Truly servant (said Alexis) I
must tell you truly, I had rather be alone, then to have ill company: It is in
your choice, Mistress, replied Hylas: Well servant, said she, since I see you
are a merchant so punctual to your word, I will believe you are resolved to
quit me: Stella hearing her self named, came in, and knowing that it was of
her whom Hylas spoke; Madam, said she unto Alexis, if you will but please to
let Hylas serve me, it will redound unto your advantage; for when he finds my
unworthiness, he will more esteem your merit. Kind shepherdess, answered
Alexis, I rather fear the contrary; for when Silvander asked him what faults
he found in me, he found some, but in you none. Nay rather, answered Stella, he
found so many as he could not name them all. No, no, (said Alexis) Love uses
to blind the eyes of all those who love well. Come, come, said Hylas, to what
purpose is all this talk? Mistress (said he) are you resolved; I pay tell me,
for I cannot stay any longer. Alexis, who began to be weary of him, because he
often interrupted her discourse with Astrea, she answered thus; Servant, we
Druids use not to be so hasty as others; for we use to consult with the Oracle
in all our affairs. But Mistress, said Hylas, do you never any thing without
the leave of the Oracle? Nothing, said she. If as a reward of my serving you
some months (said Hylas) I should ask you a kiss, would you consult with the
Oracle about it? Servant, replied Alexis and laughed, we never use to ask
leave of the Oracle for such things, for we know that we ought not to do it.
How, how, said Hylas, not after a long service, allowed one kiss? No, replied
the Druid. What hopes then is there, said Hylas, in serving you any longer? The
contentment, said she, in loving and serving me. Contentment, said Hylas, I
take no delight in such a journey, as will not bear its own Charges: Well
Servant, said the Druid, I perceive you intend to leave me, and I will not stay
you. Methinks, said he, that so many services as you have received from me, may
very well permit me to kiss your hand at parting. Although (said Alexis) I am
very sorry to part from you; and though the strict Laws of the Druids do in
some sort forbid it, yet Hylas for a parting blow, I will permit you a kiss of
my hand. Upon this, Hylas kneeled down, and said, I receive this favor in
testimony that I esteemed Alexis the most perfect in the quality of a Druid
that ever was; and having kissed her hand, he ran to Stella, and taking her
hand, Unto you fair shepherdess (said he) do I come and offer all those
favors which I obtained from those I loved; and that you may not think me
very poor, receive in the first place this kiss which this fair Druid has
given me. If you have no others, said Silvander that are greater then this, I
believe, Hylas, you have not many to brag of. Why? answered Hylas, Do not you
esteem it a favor which Alexis has done me? I think it, said Silvander,
rather a Ransom then a favor. What Ransom do your mean? (said Hylas) I mean
(said Silvander) that this fair and wise Druid, rather then be any longer
troubled with you did free and ransom her self from you, by permitting you
that kiss of her hand. I do believe, said Hylas that you are much mistaken:
but I know Silvander, that you have been long my enemy, and I will not believe
any thing you say, no more then I desire you should believe any thing I say
against you* But fair shepherdess, I beseech you believe not a word from this
shepherd, for if you do, I am sure we shall not long love each other. Stella
who was not ignorant of the humor of Hylas, nor much displeased with it: Now
servant, said she, I am so well acquainted with Silvander, that you need not
say any more concerning him: But pray tell me? are you in good earnest my
servant? How? replied Hylas, Do you think I dissemble as the shepherds of
Lignon use? No; no, be pleased to know that my heart is in my tongue, and all
my words are true: do you not see that I have lest loving Alexis, as I told her
I would. I shall believe all you have said, replied the shepherdess, and more
if need be; and therefore I desire you would do as much for me in what I shall
say; And to the end we may live contentedly together, I desire that Articles of
agreement may be drawn betwixt us, which will oblige us to the observance of
them, and which we will call the Laws of Love. And for our better remembrance
of them, I desire they may be put in writing, before we make a full conclusion.
My future Mistress, said Hylas, for so I will call you until our conditions
beset down in black and white; I do foresee so much contentment in our future
amity, that I will not delay it a jot longer: I think I have an Inkhorn in my
pocket, and as for Paper, I hope to find some also some way or other. All the
company who heard this new way of loving, could not choose but laugh, and were
so desirous to see the conditions, as they every one began to look for some
Paper, and a piece being found, Hylas himself would needs be the Secretary;
But Stella said, that it was more reason it should be she, because it was she
that first made the Proposition. At last, after a long dispute, Hylas agreed
that she should dictate unto him, and both parties should consent unto every
Article: But still Stella feared that Hylas would not set down according to her
Dictates, and Hylas feared the like of her, so as they durst not trust each
other.

This dispute could not be without abundance of delight to the company; and
because Astrea saw her dear Druid laugh heartily at the business, she told
Silvander that he might do very well to be the Secretary unto them both. I
should willingly undertake the office, fair shepherdess (said he) if that true
and perfect affection which I bear unto Diana, could suffer my hand to write
things so contrary to the fidelity and purity of my love; and truly I had
rather die, than any such conditions should ever be seen under the hand of
Silvander. Nay, nay, scrupulous Lover, said Hylas, never trouble your self for
an excuse, I will save you the labor of it; For the true love which is to be
betwixt this shepherdess and me, cannot endure that any one of so different an
humor, should ever be Secretary unto our Ordinances. Corilas who heard all
this discourse, and was extremely desirous to see Hylas and Stella linked
together since never two was more like. Hylas, said she, Pray put the office
upon me, and I promise to write just as it is agreed upon betwixt you; unto
which both consenting, he sat down and writ these ensuing Articles, as they
agreed upon them.

The twelve Articles and Conditions upon which Stella and Hylas do promise to
love each other for the future.
EXperience being that which makes persons the most prudent, and shows them
ways to avoid inconveniences, wherein we have seen many ruined; and seeing by
the several events which we have observed amongst Lovers, that most of their
dissentions and bitter quarrels have proceeded only from that Tyranny, which
the one would exercise over the other. We Stella and Hylas, to avoid all those
inconveniences are agreed upon these Articles and conditions following.

1.
That the one shall not usurp over the other, that sovereign authority which
may truly be called Tyranny.

2.
That both of us shall be at one and the same time, both the lover and the
loved.

3.
That our affection shall be eternally without constraint.

5.
That we shall love one another as long as we please.

5.
That the party who would cease loving, may do so without any brand of
infidelity

6.
That without any breach of Amity, we may love whom we please, without asking
any leave.

7.
That jealousy, complaints and tears, and all such pulings be banished from
amongst us, as things incompatible with our perfect amity.

8.
That we shall be free in our conversation, and both of us say and do what they
please without any offense unto either.

9.
That to avoid being liars and slaves, either in word or deed; all these terms
of fidelity, service, and eternal affection, be never so much as named betwixt
us in our discourse.

10.
That we may both of us, or else one without the other, continue or cease
loving one another.

11.
That if this Amity do cease on one side or of both, we may renew it when we
please.

12.
That, lest we should be tied unto a long love, or a long hatred, we be obliged
to forget, both favors and injuries.

These Articles being thus written; Well Hylas, said Stella, do these
conditions please you? Do they please you? said Hylas. Who I? replied the
shepherdess; I would never have suffered them to be written, had I not thought
them most just and reasonable. If the case were mine, said Silvander, I would
add one Article more, What is that (said Hylas) It is, replied Silvander; That
when you shall please you may break any one of conditions which you have
written, for otherwise you contradict your own intentions, because you aim is
to love without any constraint; Now if you be obliged to observe what you have
writ, are you not constrained to follow what you have writ? ^ protest, my dear
future Mistress (said Hylas, after he had better thought upon it) this
shepherd does not speak without reason. Why? my future Servant said Stella,
will you change your opinion upon the advice of Silvander? Silvander, I say,
whom you have published to be your pro^essed enemy: I do not think it any shame
(said Hylas) to take any counsel which I think to be good: It is a Maxim I
have ever followed, That none so bl^nd as they that will not see: As for
Silvanders being my enemy, I do confess it; But is there any thing more
venomous then a Toad? and yet it is used in Physic. Wise men will gather some
good from their very enemies, and so may I from Silvander. But let us consider
whether his advice be good or bad; for my part, I have ever lived in a perfect
and absolute liberty; and it would vex me to the soul, that a bit of scribled
Paper should tie me to alter my way of life, which I should be if I should
subsribe unto these Articles; for all manner of obligations are constraints,
unless Silvanders condition he included. For my part, said Stella, I am
contented it should be added, for my liberty is as sweet unto me, as yours can
be to you: but because I am afraid lest there be some hidden subtilty in his
words, I would have them written as a condition added by Silvander: I revoke
that, said Silvander, for I will not be mentioned in your conditions, neither
as adviser, nor as witness. You cannot choose, said Hylas, but be both; for
every one sees you are a witness of what we have done; and every one hears
that we add this thirteenth condition unto the rest by your advice. All the
company did fall into such a laughter, that the noise reached unto Daphnide and
Alcidon, who were talking with Adamas: and they out of curiosity to know what
the matter was, came out and asked Silvander what was the cause of their
laughter; he answered, that Hylas and Stella offered him wrong, which he had
rather suffer death than endure. Then he related unto them all the passage, and
showed them the writing which was approved of by both sides* And I advised
them, said he, to add another Article, that either of them might break any of
these Articles when they pleased; they will needs add this Article unto their
own, under the name of Silvander. The reverend Druid, Daphnide, and Alcid^n
could not forbear laughing at these fine conditions, and also to see Silvander
so angry his name should be used in such a contract; but the more Silvander
refused, the more earnest was Hylas and Stella to have it so* Then Adamas began
to speak; Children said he unto them, Are you contented that I should decide
the difference? For my part (said Hylas) I give consent both for Stella and my
self* And for my part, said Silvander, I do not only consent, but beseech him
unto it. Tell me then, Hylas, said the Druid, Why you would have Silvander to
be inserted both a witness and author of that Article; because (said Hylas) I
am ^a lover of truth, and cannot abide ingratitude* Now the very truth is* he
is a witness of the Conditions betwixt Stella and me, and gave us the advice
unto it, so as we should be ungrateful if we did not acknowledge it to proceed
from him. And you Silvander (said Adamas) what can your object to the contrary:
I say, answered Silvander that though I was present, yet I would not be a
witness, and in reason I ought not to be constrained unto it. For is not the
Great Tautates witness enough for all, and of all? and yet when any evil act
is committed, do they use him for a witness? And why not? said Hylas; because,
answered Silvander, he is to be judge and punish all wickedness; and upon the
same reason I cannot be a witness. But you, said Hylas, are not to be our
judge, for we have cause enough to except against your judgment. Though I must
not be your judge, said Silvander, yet I may be your Accuser, which I cannot be
if I am a witness. And as for the ingratitude of which you speak, it will be
much greater, if you should so extremely against my will, publish that which I
desire should be concealed; and I should take the very concealment for a
sufficient recompense. Then the reverend Druid, after he had heard the reasons
on both sides, he gave this sentence. Children, said he, upon serious
consideration of your difference, I conceive that th^se Conditions of your
future Amity, being for the conservation of that liberty which you pretend to
enjoy; there is no reason you should take that liberty from another, nor by
compulsion oblige any against their wills. But because you have thought this
Article worthy to be added unto the rest, I do ordain, that it shall be
written down amongst the others, in this manner.

The thirteenth and last Article,
Added by advice and counsel unto the Conditions upon which Hylas and Stella
do promise to love for the future, and which they do swear to observe most
religiously.

That notwithstanding all the aforesaid Articles; we Stella and Hylas, are so
tender of our liberty, and so much enemies unto all manner of constraint, that
it shall be lawful for us, whenever we please, not to observe any one of
these Conditions here above written and agreed upon.

Thus was the difference ended by the sage Adamas, unto the contentment of all
parties: Corilas, seeing Hylas and Stella, was beyond all measure joyful. Now
Stella, said he, thou art fitted in thy humor; and Hylas might have, searched
all the world over, before he found one so fit unto his: I must needs
acknowledge the heavens most just in preserving them for each other, and
linking them together in a mutual affection.

Hylas and Stella began to love one another in this manner; at the first but a
little, and after in jest, but at last it grew to be in good earnest: For
Stella was a very fine and pleasant shepherdess, and one of a quick and
sprightly wit: Hylas on the other side, was as good and jocund company as could
be imagined, and these conditions so suitable both in Servant and Mistress,
that there was nothing dislikeable in each to the other; so as living together
in great freedom, they did by little and little, conceive such affection the
one to the other, as they met not with any that pleased them better.

But Dinner being ready, and the Table spread under a shady Tree, as near the
Fountain as the convenience of the place would permit, all the company sat
down. The Vaices, Bardes, Sarronides, Eubages, and Druids, did sit at a Table
by themselves, where they did eat what was their due of the sacrifice; But
Adamas, to render the more honor unto Daphnide and Alcidon, did dine with
them, and the best of the shepherdesses and shepherds. As long as dinner
lasted, the discourse was all upon the Rarities of the place, and of the
sanctity of that sacred Grove. But Dinner being done, and the sun too hot to
stir from under the shade, Adamas thought how to pass away the time in the
best diversions; and remembering the judgment which Diana was to give 'twixt
Silvander and Phillis, he thought both the time and the occasion very fit for
that purpose; and the rather, because Daphnide who stayed in the Country only
to be acquainted with the sweet lives of these shepherdesses and shepherds,
would be very glad to hear this difference argued and what judgment Diana
would give upon it. He went unto Astrea and Phillis, and having acquainted them
with his design, he desired them to join with him in obtaining Dianas consent
unto it. Believe it, Sir, answered Astrea, there will not need much
solicitation; for I know that she has deferred it so long, only because she
wanted the presence of the Nymph Leonide, who since she was at the beginning of
that contest, she thought it fit she should be also at the end of it. I fear,
if Silvander know of your intention, he will break off company. Phillis, who
thought the Druids Proposition very reasonable, and besides was weary in
employing any time, but in the entertainment of her dearly beloved Licydas,
which was something hindered by her Courtship of Diana. No, no, sister, said
she, we must surprise our enemy when he least thinks of us; then addressing her
self unto Diana, Mistress (said she in a loud voice) This company desires you
would be pleased to come hither, and hearken no longer unto the discourse of
him who is talking with you; for I assure my self, he speaks nothing unto my
advantage. Silvander was he who was talking with her in the absence of Paris,
when Phillis thus interrupted him; at which being very angry, Oh Phillis (said
he) you are an evil spirit which continually torments me, and at this time
interrupts my happiness. Your happiness, replied Phillis, will quickly be at
an end, and my supreme fellcity begin: For, Mistress, (said she, and addressed
her self unto Diana) you are entreated by all this good company, to give
judgment upon the merits of Silvanders service and mine. Diana was a little
surprised at this; for though it was her intention to give judgment ere long,
yet she did foresee that after it, she could not allow any longer of Silvanders
addresses of love unto her. But the surprise of the shepherd was much greater;
for he saw there was no possibility of delaying it any longer, and then the
fiction of his wager, which was the cloak for his, real affection would be
taken from him, and he should be no longer permitted to make his amorous
addresses unto his adored shepherdess. These considerations made them both
silent for a while, which Phillis observing; Mistress, (said she) I beseech
you answer me; I am afraid you are loath to confe^ that glory upon me by your
judgment, which you cannot deny unto my services: or perhaps you are afraid of
losing that shepherd, and unwilling to be exempt from his importunities. Then
Diana, left she should let her discontent appear, did smile, and answer thus; I
know not what glory you can pretend unto by your services, since you do thus
publicly upbraid me with them; nor do I know why you should phrase the
services of Silvander to be importunities more then your own, since both do
proceed from the same cause. Silvander kneeled down, and humbly thanked Diana
for that favorable answer. Afterward, rising up, Mistress, said he unto her,
This shepherdess not knowing how to love, and finding that the longer she
continues, the more defects she should show in her affection; she would not be
put to any further Test of it, but desires an end of that which she cannot
prolong any longer. For, Phillis, said he, and turned toward her, why else
should you speak thus unto our Mistress? Your services wherewith you upbraid
her, are so small that the reward of them must needs be accordingly; and her
fears which you mention of losing me must needs be less, since most assuredly
as long as I live she shall never lose me. Even thus, replied Phillis, does all
faint-hearted Soldiers fly all occasions of any danger: but I on the contrary,
dare look the grimmest dangers boldly in the face, and give testimony of my
courage: Why good Silvander, do you shrink like a coward from the hazard of
that judgment which is to be the touchstone of our merits? And what other
excuses than those I have named, can Diana have for her retarding it any
longer? I am afraid, answered Diana, that your rustic discourse will be
troublesome to the assembly, especially unto the fair Daphnide, and the
valiant Alcidon, who being used to more high and noble subjects, will think
Country pastimes very tedious; and because Diana would have continued her
excuses, No, no, discreet shepherdess, you are mistaken, said Adamas, Daphnide
and Alcidon, are now become shepherds of Lignon, having assumed the same
habits, and will conform themselves unto us; and you must think, that as they
know how to behave themselves in their own high qualities; so they can as well
condescend, and suit their minds unto the humble innocence of your lives: and
therefore I did make this Proposition, to the end that by your judgment, this
new shepherd and fair shepherdess may see and learn how to behave themselves
after our Country mode and the rather, because the Sun does shine so hot, that
we cannot yet go into the great Meadow where the shepherds use to perform their
accustomed exercises after the sacrifice: and therefore the time cannot be
better employed, then to hear the difference between Silvander and Phillis
argued and judged. I know, reverend Father, said Diana, that nothing can
proceed from you but what is grounded upon great reason, and we are all obliged
unto whatsoever you shall command; and therefore without more ado, I will do
whatsoever you shall please; only I beseech Daphnide and Alcidon, to look upon
the simplicity of our trifles with a favorable eye, and attribute them unto
that obedience which we are all obliged to render both unto you and them. Fair
shepherdess (answered Daphnide) all that I have hitherto seen amongst you, has
filled me with so much contentment and admiration, that you need not doubt but
all your pastimes will be very pleasing unto me. Then the Reverend Druid
commanded, that seats should be set in a round circle, and one higher then the
rest for Diana, against the back of a Tree, whose branches do overshade the
Circle. And when all were placed according to his desire, he caused three
Garlands to be made of Flowers, and put one upon the head of Diana* another
upon the head of Phillis, and the third upon the head of Silvander; Afterward
taking Diana by the hand, he placed her in her sea^ of Judgment; before her, a
little on the right hand, he placed Phillis, and a little on the left hand,
Silvander; and after silence desired, he appointed Leonide to make known unto
these strangers, the beginning of the dispute betwixt Phillis and Silvander, to
the end they might better judge of the difference: thinking it fit and
reasonable that Leonide should be the relater, because she was partly the cause
of it. Leonide, who little thought of being more then an Auditor in this
assembly, was a little surprised to see her self an Orator; but in obedience
to the Druid she undertook it, and after she had a little recollected her
memory, she turned toward Daphnide, and began thus.

Perhaps Madam, you have observed, that Silvander and Phillis called Diana
their Mistress, and have been as officious and ready to serve her as shepherds
could be; I believe you will think it strange, that so fair and amiable a
shepherdess as Diana is, should be so free in the entertainment of that
shepherd: I believe also, you wonder that Phillis who is a shepherdess, should
court her as if she were a shepherd, and use the same expressions and behavior
of a most passionate lover: for it is not usual to see a woman so assiduous and
courtly unto another woman. But to satisfy your wonder, Madam, be pleased to
know, That Silvander lived long amongst these fair, young, and lovely
shepherdesses, yet never was in love with any; insomuch as he got the Name of
the insensible shepherd. None of all these young beauties having power enough
to kindle the least flame in his heart. Phillis admiring that a shepherd so
young and hansome, should live so long near such beauties, and never show the
lest spark of any heat, she could not choose but enter into some interrogatories
with him; faigning to believe that the reason why he did not undertake to serve
some one or other, was either want of courage, or else consciousnesse of his
own imperfections and want of merit: And because the shepherd whose delight
was all hunting, and looking to his flock, maintained the contrary, and said
that the reason why he did not love, was only because he had better
employment. Astrea, Diana, and I, being present, we condemned him, to give us
some good testimony, that the reason why he did not love any, was not as
Phillis had alleged: And Diana being a shepherdess both of beauty and and
judgment, fit to judge of his merit, she was proposed to be as it were his
Mistress, and he was to court her under that Notion, unless he wanted the
courage to undertake it* Upon this he began to serve her, and court her as
close as if he had been really in love: Phillis was not exempt from the same
task, she was also condemned to love and serve Diana with all the passion that
shepherds use unto those whom they do passionately love; and at the end of
three months Diana was to judge which of them two knew best how to love. Ever
since, there has been such an emulation betwixt this shepherd and that
shepherdess, that they have neglected no manner of behavior or expression
which could manifest a most servent and real affection: And though the prefixed
term of three months be expired, during which time they were to demonstrate
their merits unto Diana; yet their addresses unto her has continued longer
because it was thought reasonable, that as I was at the first condemnation unto
that task, so I should be present at the judgment which Diana was to give; so
as it seems the heavens did prolong it until now, to the end this judgment
might be given with more solemnity in your presence.

Thus ended the Nymph Leonide; and then Daphnide began to speak: I must needs
confess, said she, and turned toward Adamas, that it was not without some
wonder, I should see Phillis court Diana with the very expressions of a man:
But now, changing my wonder into envy, I must needs tell you, Father, That I
never did envy the happiness of any so much as yours; for heaven has exempted
you from the inquietudes of wordly affairs, to live in this sweet and harmless
tranquillity. Infinitely happy you are in all respects: happy are you in this
Country of Forests; happy in being obeyed and loved as a great Druid; but much
more happy in being so near a Neighbor unto the pleasant banks of Lignon,
which is furnished with more accomplished shepherds and beautiful
shepherdesses, then ever bore the Name. Madam, answered Adamas, I acknowledge
all you say, and do profess, that I would not change my happiness with the
greatest Monarch upon earth; having nothing to pray for from the Great
Tautates, but only that it may continue for many years. As for the commends
you are pleased to bestow upon our shepherds and shepherdesses, I am assured
that they will not receive them without blushes, though they will take any
thing well which proceeds from you. But Madam (said he) as you have heard the
cause of their courtship, will it please you to hear their judgment? With much
contentment, said Daphnide; Then the Druid turning toward Phillis, It was you,
shepherdess, (said he) who first provoked Silvander unto Combat, and therefore
it is reason you should also be the first who shall produce your Reasons and
Arguments why the victory should be yours.

The Speech of the shepherdess Phillis.
I Did not think, Mistress, that amongst all the shepherds in this Country,
especially about Lignon, any one would have been found so full of vanity, as to
think himself worthy of the esteem and love of a shepherdess so full of merit
as Diana: Diana I say, the most exactly accomplished, and most perfect beauty
that ever bore the name of shepherdess. And yet, fairest Mistress, you see
this man, this arrogant man stand before you in a posture of Love, and his head
crowned with a Chaplet of Flowers, as if he had already got the victory, which
he most unjustly pretends unto. But shepherd, I pray tell me, from whence
proceeds this rash presumption? and what pretended reasons can you possibly
have? Thy hopes cannot be grounded upon thy own shallow merits, when thou do
but look upon the perfections of Diana; for they are such as holding no
proportion with thine, love cannot be produced by things so far unequal. I
am confident thy own impudence cannot be so braz^n-fac'd as to deny the truth
of this; but thy own soul must needs tell thee, that there is nothing in thee
which can equal her perfections. How durst thou be so arrogant and rash, as
dare to love her? But as this is high impudence; yet methinks that to pretend
unto her love again, is much more extreme. But Silvander, what color can
thou have for this thy fond pretension? what should make thee think of
obtaining her love before me? Thou can not deny, but every thing is naturally
inclined to love its like; and I being a woman, as our Mistress is, certainly
she must needs naturally love me more then thee. But besides this; what will
cause love sooner then long acquaintance and continual converse? By it,
perfections come to be better known; and by it, merits being better known, love
must needs take better and deeper root; and by it, occasions do present
themselves every minute to render reciprocal amity and devoires, which are the
very Nurses of a true and real affection. Now thou can not deny, but that I
have had a longer and more intimate acquaintance with her then thou have, she
her self knows it, and is able to contradict thee if thou do deny it. But
should I wave all these Reasons, yet I have one which will put thee to silence
at the least, unless thou be impudence it self. You must of necessity
acknowledge, that^ whatsoever is most fair and perfect, is also most amiable,
and to be most esteemed; then shepherd your cause is quite ruined; for our sex,
being much more perfect then that of men, thou art driven to confess that I
ought to be loved before thee. But wave all these considerations again: can
counterfeiting, lying, and dissembling, ever cause love? Do you think that the
fair Diana does not know that all thy addresses, all thy services, and all
that affection which thou strainest thy self to make appear unto her, is only
in respect of that wager which is betwixt us? and proceeds only from a desire
thou have to overcome me, and not from her beauty or wit? Methinks I hear the
answer already, that it is true, and that this reason might not be alleged
against me, since the wager is reciprocal, and all the demonstrations of
affection which I make, may have the same fault. But shepherd, you are
mistaken, for I loved her long before our contest began, and I am sure she
loved me, which is more then thou can say, since all thou did was only to
come amongst us, and never look upon shepherdess in way of love, nor I
believe, had thou so much confidence as to dare it. But speak the truth,
Silvande, and confess that before this wager, thou did not discern any
difference betwixt Diana's face and mine, or any other shepherdess of Lignon?
And do thou not think that all these extreme passions which thou do
counterfeit in thy discourse, all these languishings, raptures, transports, and
follies, does rather invite one to laughter then to love? This man^ Mistress,
that is all in flame and rapture, that does* so Idolize your beauty at every
word, and that is ready to die with superabundant love: This is the man, that a
minute before our wager began, did hardly know whether such a one as Diana
lived; or at most, had no deeper knowledge of you then what your name gave him:
And yet he can at a minutes warning, be all in a flame, all affection all love,
all yours; will not such folly as this move more laughter then affection? But
admit that your beauty has kindled some sparks of love in him: Is it not my
self unto whom all the recompense is due? since it was only I that am the
cause of it? It is most certain, and Mistress you know it, that, if I had not
upbraided him, the wager had never been made; and if it had not, he had never
been so bold and confident as ever to look upon you: so as if he will pretend
unto any favor from you, for any services which he has done unto you since
that time, is he not obliged unto me for it, for making him what he is? It is I
then who in all reason may pretend unto any merits that are in him, ^ince all
his devices, and all his actions which made him amiable in your eye, ought to
be put upon my account, and teckoned unto my advantage* Cease then shepherd
contending with me, for a thing which thou know to be my due; prevent that
judgment which thou can not avoid, consent that the glory shall be given
unto me, which my Fortune, my Quality, and my merits have given unto me before
thee; which if thou do, thou will make thy self appear to be a man of wit,
and of judgment: Thy wit, in knowing so well how to disguise a ^alfe
affection, under a vizard of real love: and thy judgment, in acknowledging
and seeing the great advantages which I have above thee. But if thus thou will
not do, then expect the due punishment for thy arrogance, and do not think to
defer the just judgment of our Mistress, by tedious and frivloous answers:
And because I will be a good manager of time, and hasten to receive that Glory
which she will confer upon me, I will wave and omit many other reasons and
arguments which I could allege, and refer the whole matter unto the wise
consideration of our fairest Mistress; assuring my self that she is better
able to discern, then I am^able to speak my most just pretensions, which are as
clear as the Sun in the fairest day: only Mistress, I desire you to consider
this: That Silvander does not only make himself hateable by his fictions and
dissimulations, but also draws an odium upon all other men, and makes all
their Courtships and expressions of affection and sidelity suspected; so as his
crime is of so high a nature, as he cannot expect any thing but punishment from
a severe but just judge. But, fair and wise Mistress, I refer my just cause,
and his counterfeit Glosses, unto your wise and just censure.

Upon this, Phillis making an humble reverence unto Diana, and the rest of the
company, she set her self down, casting a smiling eye upon Silvander, who
being commanded to speak for himself, went unto Diana, kneeled down, and laid
his Chaplet of Flowers at her feet; Then returning to his place again, he
began to speak thus.

The Answer of the shepherd Silvander.
WEre I not before the Temple of Astrea, who is the Goddess of Justice, and
had^ a worse Judge then Diana, who is the intimate friend of the other Astrea,
I should fear the miscarriage of my cause, and tremble at the ensuing
judgment: Not that I am at all startled by the sophisticated language of this
shepherdess, and any of her glossed arguments she has urged against me, though
I must needs say, she has very cunningly contrived the matter, but my greatest
fears proceed from a more valid consideration, for the dispate betwixt us, is
grounded only upon this point, which of us two can best win the love of the
fair Diana, whom we have chosen to be the Center in which all our services,
and all our affections ought to meet. ^his is the point which we both aim at,
and which is so hard to be approached, as I hold it almost impossible, if it
did not please the Great Tautates to show himself as well a Tharam^s in
purifying my love* and clensing it from all imperfections which might make it
unworthy to be offered unto this sa^e Diana, as he makes himself appear a
Hesus, which is as much to say as puissant, in making her so fair and perfect,
as no mortal is able to equal her either in beauty or perfection.

Perhaps Mistress, you may wonder, that being in this sacred place, dedicated
unto the Goddess of Justice* I dare pretend unto a favorable judgment, since
I am deficient in this main point. But oh my just Judge, I beseech you hear
upon what basis I ground my just pretension. It is the propriety of Justice,
not alone to judge strictly according to the Laws which are given us; but
also, after she has considered the true state of every thing, to establish with
equity the Law of Nature, which is; that he who does all he can, is not obliged
unto any more* and though he do not reach so high as is necessary, yet is ought
not to be imputed a fault in him, but rather attribute it unto the Ordinances
of Nature, who was pleased to establish it so: And he is so far from being
blameable for failing in such a case, as he is to be much esteemed, that can
arrive at so high a point as no other of his kind can go beyond him, and as
very few can arrive at: And therefore fairest Mistress, why should I fear to
present my self before the Throne of this just Astrea's friend, although I can
never attain unto that height of perfection which is requisite in any that
pretend unto Dianas love; for my affection is arrived to as high a point, as
any other can reach, and higher then any lover will ever attain unto.

Why then, injurious Phillis, to fortify your weak pretensions, should you
without any reason blame me, since I cannot love with more adoration then I do:
It is not my fault, but Natures, who gave me no greater capacity, if I do not
love her to the height of her merit: but I cannot complain, since the same law
is common unto all mortals, none being able to do it more then my self: But
wise nature would have it so, and perhaps purposely to manifest the high beauty
of Diana, who constraines me to love her, an Act far above all humane force, or
power to do, and against the rule of equality, which Phillis you propose to be
in them who love.

Then shepherdess, were you not jealous of Dianas Glory, you would not blame
me for loving her, nor tax me with arrogance, since it is the force of her
beauty which constraines me, and since by this, the grandeur of her perfections
are more evidently seen. Aks me no more, I beseech you, how I durst love her:
for though I do acknowledge my self as unworthy as your self is, yet I cannot
choose but be the most lost man in love that ever was.

But in asking me from whence proceeds my rash pretensions unto her love, and
therein calls me the monster of Arrogance and presumption; you do plainly make
it appear, that you do not know what it is to love, nor what effects Love
uses to produce. You have often confessed unto me, that love in it self is
good, and I think you will not now say the contrary, your silence makes (...)
believe your consent unto it; and truly otherwise you would (...) reason: For
if every thing produce its like, that love which proceeds from the ^^^^ledge of
any fair and good thing, must needs be fair and good it self: And that which
is fair and good, cannot be seen and known, but it must needs be loved: I
cannot think you so out of all reason, but that you will confess that I shall
convince you out of your own words. Bea^ty, say you, has such powerful
attracts, as it does often dim the eyes of those who behold it, and makes their
desires go beyond all reason. If then that which is fair and good cannot be
seen, but it must be loved, and if love be fair and good; why do you call that
Arrogance in me, which is reasonable in another? Why should you say my
pretensions to obtain her love, are rash? For love being good, and she knowing
my love; how can she know it, but she must needs love it? if she did not, it
would argue a defect in her judgment which I think none, except your self,
will offer to imagine. Confess therefore, Phillis unless you will extremely
wrong her, that knowing my love, she does love me; and that my pretension is
not so nighly impudent, nor I such a deformed monster, as you would describe
me: If you object, that this does not prove her love unto me, but only my love
unto her. I answer, shepherdess, That the love which her beauty produces in
me, is an inseparable accident of my soul, so as the one cannot subsist
without the other: And should I say, that they are so incorporated the one into
the other, that my soul is this love, and this love is my sonle, I should speak
a most certain truth: For it is not more true, that I cannot live without this
soul which gives me life, than it is, that I cannot live without this love
which I bear unto her.

If you reply, That though this should be granted, yet it does not follow that
this shepherdess should love me, because she has not yet seen or known this
love in me: I shall answer, shepherdess, That indeed I do not believe she
knows yet the grandeur and extreme immensity wherewith I do love and adore
her, because there are no services nor demonstrations so great as can
sufficiently illustrate it: But yet I am confident, the excellency of herwit
cannot choose but see and observe it in part, and that in a great part also and
that my actions cannot do it so well as I desire; yet your own reproaches and
language has sometimes helped me against your knowledge; nay in the presence of
all this Noble company you told her, that I did present my self before her in
raptures of love: and surely the testimony of an enemy, when it is to our
advantage, is much more credible then the testimony of persons indifferent. So
as, fairest Mistress, you cannot doubt of my affection, since it is testified
by one that cannot be suspected of untruth.

But Phillis, what shallow argument did you use in having recourse unto those
favors which Nature has bestowed upon you? simply alleging that you being a
woman, therefore she ought to love you before a shepherd, thinking that by this
quality you have the advantage of me. But let me tell you, that it is more
natural for a woman to love a man, then a woman. And if you will but look into
the Laws of Nature, you will find that it is so amongst all Animalls: Does not
the Hen follow the Cock sooner then another Hen: Will not the widdowed Turtle
lament her loss? Does not all femalls of all kinds the like? you know this,
Phillis, as well as I do; or if you do not, common experience will teach you:
Nay, things even insensible, do observe the same law of Nature: The Palm,
will it thrive, unless by another Palm? Will the femall Myrtle live without
the male? Therefore, Phillis, It is not by the laws of Nature, that Diana must
love you more then me; for if she follow them, they will turn her eyes from
any thoughts of you. But if you will have it so, I am content, shepherdess,
that she should love you as a woman, so you will also consent she should love
me as a man, and her most devoted servant. You cannot be against this, for as
certainly as you are a woman, so certainly am I her servant: nor is it more
natural for one woman to love another woman, then it is for every one to love
whatsoever loves them: This is the way for us both to obtain what we ask: But
I see now, that you will alter your opinion, and without any further recourse
unto this natural amity, which cannot be advantageous to you, you will fly
unto such advantages as proceed from election. You conceive she must love you
better than me, because of your more intimate converse together, which you say
does beget a nearer and more mutual affection. But Phillis, you may be much
mistaken; for by the very same reason you may perhaps as well me^t with hatred,
as with love; for by continual conversation, close and hidden imperfections
are better discovered, as well as good qualities: And let me tell you, that
being perpetually together, does often break off amity as well as augment it:
little separations makes love more violent, continual presence is apt to cloy.

I would not urge this point so far, Oh my enemy, did I think you could make
any use of it to my disadvantage: But I must tell you, that you have done as
ill Orators use, who in lieu of maintaining their Clients cause, do mar it,
and discover the reasons which make against them; otherwise could you imagine
that continual conversation should get you more love, since on the contrary,
it shows the defects of your affection which are very great, and of which you
cannot deny, but I have convinced you a hundred times in the presence of my
fairest Mistress.

But oh my most just judge and fairest Mistress, my hope is that you will
punish her impudence in pretending unto so much of your love, by reason of her
continual converse, when as it has only showed her imperfections: and
therefore, Phillis, the advantage which you get by your intimate conversation,
does more hurt then help you; And indeed your Allegation has much more malice
in it then matter, and all things rightly considered, I think my self more
happy in my conversation with her, then you can be in yours; for your stay with
her is only in the day, and that also you employ much of it out of her
presence, either in the business of your house and flock, or other diversions
which steal you from her, so as you dedicate the least of the day unto my
fairest Mistress: whereas I on the contrary, what day did ever dawne, which I
spent not wholly in her company? When was the night I was not with her, as long
as decency would permit me? Could ever any diversion draw me from her? And when
any unwilling accident did keep me away, did I not continually think upon her,
and in my heart adore her? Can you say, Phillis, that you are more with her
then I? Fie, fie, shepherdess, never think it, but know, that she is not more
with her self then I am: for she is sometimes diverted from her self by the
presence of other shepherdesses, sometimes by visits of civility, sometimes by
domestique cares, and sometimes by cross accidents, whereas I am continually
with her as Prometheus upon his Rock, or rather as the body and soul are linked
by the ligaments of life: For it is not more natural for the body to die, as
soon as the soul is separated from it, then it is for me to die, if I be but
one minute separated from my sweet thoughts of her.

I see very well, shepherdess, how you laugh to hear me say that I am
continually with my Mistress, thinking that it being only in thought, I am a
man much pleased with my own imagination. But Phillis, what would you have me
do? I must confess that if I could be always present with her both in
thought and body, I should be more contented: but how ever let me tell you,
that as I am, I am more perfectly with her then you are, since when you are
present with her, your thoughts of her are far off, retaining nothing with
her but your body which is the inferior part, whereas my heart is with her,
though my body be distant: If you do object that these imaginary thoughts are
not at all serviceable unto her, because they are mere fancies, I must answer
you, shepherdess, that it is in thought only that we adore the great
Tautates, and never speak unto him but only in contemplation. And I do serve
and adore Diana upon the earth, as all the world does adore the great Tautates
in heaven which is in heart and thought.

You see therefore, Phillis, how this reason argues more for me then you. And
as to that advantage which you say your sex has over mine, I answer thus; That
I do most ingeniously confess, that women are really of more merit then men;
and do come nearer the divine and immortal Intelligences: I do believe that
women may well be ranked amongst them, and they do so much excel us in
perfections, as it is a kind of wrong to reckon them amongst men: we may with
reason esteem them the medium betwixt Angels and us, since we find by
experience, that all the good thoughts which men have, do take their beginning
from them. It is at them they aim, and terminate themselves in them; and
questionless it is by them that we come unto those pure thoughts; And God has
placed them on earth to draw us unto heaven: For my part, I do believe it, and
will maintain it unto the end of my life. But this does not at all argue you,
Oh shepherdess, to be the better loved by my Mistress: but rather will produce
contrary effects.

I told you before, that when one has done all that nature has given him power
to do, and has raised himself unto that height to which naturally he may
rise, it is highly to be esteemed. And I say again, that whosoever does less
then naturally he may do, is much to blame, especially when the thing is in it
self laudable, and he through natural impuissance leaves it undone. Now,
shepherdess, does not this argument much condemn you, who being born a woman,
of a sex so perfect as you hold a medium betwixt the Angels and us; and yet to
love so imperfectly as you do, especially a subject so full of perfection? I am
most confident, that Diana did never out of her natural sweetness consider my
extreme affection, without esteeming it, nor look upon the shallowness of your
Amity without condemning it* For when she found mine so perfect, so pure, so
entire, and so exempt from all exceptions, she could do no less then highly
commend it, that such a perfect love should be found in so imperfect a sex as
the masculine. And on the contrary, she is ashamed that so many faults and
imperfections should be found in you and your sex, which is by nature so much
above ours.

But Mistress, let us examine her other reasons, whereby she argues me so
guilty in matter of love. She says, that all my demonstrations of love are
only fictions, disguisements, and dissimulations; and she thinks she has
proved this Calummy very well, when she says that I began to love you only
upon the wager, and did not love you before. But I beseech you, my fair and
just judge, take notice of the evil consequences which she draws from these
presuppositions: I do confess, Phillis, That the wager did move me first to
love Diana, and that this wager did give beginning unto my affection: But must
it from hence be concluded, that my love is only dissimulation; or that because
I never loved any before, therefore I do not love Diana now? These,
shepherdess, are absurd conclusions. If one do run for a wager, and win it,
can it be thought he did run for it in jest, and not in good earnest? Tell me
no more my enemy, that my extreme passions and raptures are but disguisements,
fictions, and dissimulations: For it is true, I did love upon that wager, but
it is more true that my affection is most real: And I am not so sure I am
Silvander, as that I am the most real servant of the fair Diana. What a silly
syllogism is it to say, that because I did not once love Diana, therefore I do
not love her now? If such a conclusion may be drawn, then one may say, that
because Phillis was not in the world forty years since, therefore she is not in
it now. Had you said, it was not long since this love began, you had said
truly, and I would have confessed it with you, with sorrow that it was no
sooner: But to prove that I do not love, because the time was when I did not
know her, is as much as if you should say, that he who is not born to day, will
never be born.

Now Mistress, be pleased to observe, how she does contradict her self; But it
is not strange, for it is the property of lying and calumny to be in several
tales, whereas truth is always in one and the same. But admit, said she, that
your beauty did a little move him, and by this means, he is in some sort
become yours: Is it possible, Phillis, you should be so long conversant with
the fair Diana, and know her perfections no better? Do you think it is
possible to love her but a little? Oh ignorant Phillis in the force of her
beauty, not one dart flies from her fair eye, which does not reach the heart
and wound it mortally. You might well keep your littles for common beauties,
which when they have scratched the skin a little, do think they have given a
great testimony of their power; But as for Diana's beauty, it seems you have
not felt the blows of it, since you can talk so of a little. But know, Oh my
enemy, that a Remora which can stay a Ship under full sail, has not half the
force of her perfections: Diana's beauty takes not hearts by Littles, but by
Alls; and he assured that the Gordian knots are more easily dissolved, then
those by which she fetters souls. That fire which our Druids tell us must
consume all the Universe, has lesser flames then those of her fair eyes; say
not therefore, ignorant shepherdess, that one can love her a little, or that
one can be in some sort hers: All those who love her, do love her extremely;
and all those who are hers, are hers entirely; so as when you grant that I do
love her a little, you do grant that I do love her infinitely, and by
consequence that nothing can equal the grandeur of my affection Whereas you,
Phillis, that can speak so, do thereby argue your self incapable of being
moved, and is insensible of that which is able to kill others. But I beseech
you, Mistress, see what a fine piece of sophistry my enemy uses, to prove that
I do not love you, and to make you despise my affection; and judge whether she
ever so much as heard of such a thing as love? Is she not very subtle in
accusing me, for never loving any but you? and that you were the first that
ever fettered me: If this be a crime, I must confess I never heard of it
before, and must needs acknowledge my self culpable: for, Mistress, you are
not only the first, and only one that ever I loved; but more, you must also
be the last, and only one that ever I will love: And if ever it be otherwise,
let the Sun cover me with eternal darkness; let the Earth which nourishes me,
swallow me alive as not worthy to live in it; Let the Air become my poison, and
may all the elements become my enemies: and wise men are all mistaken in their
Tenet, that whatsoever has a beginning must have an end: For Phillis, this
affection which you have seen begin, shall last to all eternity.

But Phillis, I admire you should say, that if my affection deserve any reward,
it is all due unto you: You tell me that you were the cause of it, and that all
which does proceed from it, ought to be attributed unto you as the original
cause. But shepherdess, take heed, lest this being granted, it do not turn to
your disadvantage; for those who are the cause of any evil, deserve punishment:
And as you say, that my Mistress ought rather to laugh, then love me; so it
must consequently follow, that she ought to laugh at you, and not at Silvander,
because you attribute all unto your self.

But Phil^is, let that be the left of your fears; I do not mean to quit my
just pretensions upon any such t^rmes; when any one does any thing for another,
the intention of the doer is to be considered: if the intention was good, the
evil which insues ought not to be laid unto his charge, if he be no other way
culpable: but if the intention was evil, he ought not to have any share in the
benefit or glory which shall ensue by it: this being granted, as needs it must,
let us consider before we either commend or condemn you, what your intention
was when you propounded this wager. We shall not be put unto much pain,
Mistress, before we discover it: for she her self has told us: The fictions,
said she, and the dissimulations once known will procure him hatred: But Diana
knows, that all my Courtships, and amorous addresses unto her, do proceed
only from the wager which you made; and if all the consequents of it be
fictions and dissimulations, then you are the cause of them. You may observe,
Mistress, how she thought that I would use only fictions and dissimulations
in this wager. Now since it is the Intention which makes the Action either good
or bad, have I not just cause to say, It was you, Oh Phillis, who by your
dissembling wager, gave your self unto fair Diana, but it was my heart which
did really give me unto her, by the knowledge which it had of her perfections,
and so by consequence all the punishment which such dissimulations deserve, are
due unto you; and all the favors which a real and unfeigned affection
deserves, are due unto my heart.

Wish me no more to quit the pretended victory unto you, to show my wit and my
judgment; my Wit, in so hansomly disguising a false affection under the
umbrage of a real love; and my Judgment, in acknowledging the advantage which
you have over me: For on the contrary, I should show my self the veriest fool
alive, if I did counterfeit a love unto her, who deserves to be perfectly loved
above all the world: And I should show but little judgment, if I did not see
the advantage which my true and perfect affection does give me over your
feigned follies. I would have you, shepherdess, recant all your reproaches,
and be the first who shall say, That there is no affection, be it never so ill
begun, either by a wager, or pastime, but may prove in earnest, and become
real, as mine for an example.

But, oh my enemy, all this discourse is but air, and I believe in vain; for
we are contending with one another for the victory, whilst whosoever conquers,
perhaps may not be the couquerer* I make no question, but if either of us do
obtain the victory which we pretend unto, that this Chaplet of Flowers at the
feet of the fair Diana will be mine. But alas, Phillis, my great fear is, and
with abundance of reason, that it will prove to be neither yours nor mine; for
all our arguments which we have alleged to merit her favor, may be valid as
against one another, but not at all in relation to Diana: Diana, whose
transcendent perfections and merits is above all the power of Nature, and
therefore will not be subservient unto the laws of Mortals. And then, when we
say, That love ought to be paid with love; and that long and faithful lovers
are worthy of reward and acknowledgement; This is right, and good reason, as to
men, and does oblige them to follow those precepts, but not at all, Diana For
she is one whom heaven has elevated above the degree of mortals, and is equal
unto Angels. To whom then should I address my self, unto what should I have
recourse? Shall I address my self unto Love, and have recourse unto Justice,
by whom all things are equally balanced and recompensed? But alas, Love and
Justice has nothing to do with Diana, she is above them all. Address then thy
self Silvander, and have recourse unto her self; and waving all other powers
and reasons, say thus unto her.

Then he kneeled down before Diana, and holding up his hands, continued.

Oh Diana, the only honor of her Country, the glory of Men, and the Ornament
of the whole world: Be pleased to look upon a shepherd here before you, who
does not only love you, and offer at your feet his service and his life, but
does even adore you, and does sacrifice his heart and his soul unto you in a
most zealous and devout manner. As Nature cannot make any thing which can equal
you; so Love cannot kindle so great a flame and perfect affection as can equal
your merit. It has pleased the great Tautates to advance you so high above all
the rest of his works, as no extremity of love, no sincerity of devotion, can
in any reason hope for any grace or favor from you, or that you condescend so
low, as to look at my complaints and grievances: I do humbly acknowledge, that
all human hearts, and all mortal services, are most due unto you, and cannot
be denied you without a sin: But alas, we can merit nothing, all we can do is
to love* serve and adore you, and when all is done, we cannot claim any reward,
because all is but a just duty. Under these Notions and Qualifications, I now
present my self before you, as before a Deity, not daring to ask any
recompense for all my services, or my affection, for that were a demand too
arrogant, and above my hopes and deserts: but only to beseech you, that you
will be a witness how none knows better how to love than Silvander, nor any
that deserves to be more loved again.

Thus Silvander ended, and would not rise, but still continued kneeling in
expectation of her judgment. And because Phillis offered to reply, Adamas
seeing the time of departure to draw on, he told her, that it was not to be
allowed; so that Diana after a pause of consideration, she gave sentence in
these words.

The Judgment of the shepherdess Diana.
LOve being a thing which requires better testimony then words; and the
difference between Phillis and Silvander being of that quality, we have been no
less observant of their actions and behaviors ever since the first beginning
of the wager, then we are now attentive unto their Reasons, which both have at
this time alleged. And having seriously and deliberately balanced every
thing in an equal seal, we do declare and pronounce, That Phillis is more
amiable then Silvander, and that Silvander knows better how to love then
Phillis; And to make our intention more manifest, We do ordain, That Phillis
shall sit in the seat where I am, and that Silvander shall kiss my hand: That
Phillis shall restore the Chaplet of Flowers unto Adamas, who gave it unto her;
and that Silvander shall take his from my hands, and always wear it hereafter,
by renewing it with fresh flowers when these decay.

Upon this she rose up, and took Phillis by the hand, causing her to restore
her Garland unto the Druid: And taking up Silvanders Garland, she put it upon
his head, and gave him her hand to kiss as he kneeled; which he received with
so much contentment and joy, that the shepherdess was well assured, it was not
a kiss which proceeded from any dissembled affection.

The heat of the day was much abated, when Diana gave her judgment; and Adamas
being desirous that Alcidon and Daphnide might see the exercises of the
shepherds; he arose from his seat, which caused all the rest to do the like,
and so they parted; And because Phillis and Silvander did dispute the matter
amongst themselves, as questioning unto whom Diana had given the advantage; and
the Druid perceiving that the dispute was not easily determined: he advised
them to talk of it by the way, because it would be a good diversion to make the
way seem shorter. As soon as they were set forward, Phillis began to fall upon
the shepherd: Well, Silvander (said she) what do you think of Dianas
judgment? Shepherdess, answered Silvander, I never hoped for so much as our
Mistress has given unto me: And I will maintain, that never was judgment
pronounced with more equity nor wise considerations, then this which she has
given. Why shepherd? (said Phillis) do you think that Diana has given you any
advantage above me? Whosoever doubts it, answered Silvander, does either not
understand her judgment, or has no judgment to understand. For my part, said
Phillis, I do not only understand it, but do admire it; for I do very well
understand that I have won the wager, and do admire it, because both parties
are pleased; for commonly in other cases, one party complains of injustice. In
this as in all her other actions, answered Silvander, the admirable wit of
Diana shows it self: and yet (said Phillis) It is I that am declared the more
amiable; and it is I unto whom Dianas seat is given, as unto her who best
deserves it; intimating thereby, that it is I unto whom Silvander owes the same
duties, and honors which our Mistress formerly received from us. Oh
shepherdess (said Silvander) the mystery of this judgment is very deep, and
abundance of study is requisite to understand it: And if our fairest Mistress
would be pleased to constitute a Judge to declare her intention in it, I should
quickly make it appear that her judgment is more in my advantage then yours:
And if it please her to hear us now, you shall see that it is my part to thank
her for the victory which she has most justly judged on my side. Silvander,
said Diana then, There is no necessity of any further explanation, for I think
I have declared my self so plainly, as there is no necessity of it. But I
beseech you, since now there is no wager betwixt Phillis and you, and since I
am not now either your Judge or your Mistress, I pray remember that my name is
Diana, and so let me be called. These words were uttered with such a serious
brow, that Silvander saw it was her will to have it so; yet seeming to take it
in another manner, he answered thus* I do know very well, that you are the
fair Diana, whom Phillis and I have served: I know also, that you permitted me
to take you for my Mistress, which I did; and do you think I am of the humor
of Hylas? Pardon me I beseech you, if I hate inconstancy, and let me continue
as I begun, for I cannot change; Hylas, who did not hate Silvander; but though
they were continually in contest with one another, yet he thought him the most
accomplished shepherd in all the Country. Methinks, fair Diana, (said he) that
you are obliged by many reasons, to like this shepherds proposition, which you
cannot deny without offense against your own judgment. But if to ease you of
that labor, you will let me declare what your intention is in your judgment,
I should have quickly condemned Silvander. I perceive, Hylas, (answered Diana
and smiled) That you would be as good a judge unto them, as you are a
Counselor unto me* No, no, said Phillis, I will not admit of any partial
Judge, and Silvander has the same reason; But if it please the Reverend Adamas
to undertake it, let him ordain and compose the matter. No, said Adamas, there
is no reason that any should be judge but Diana her self; but if you please to
allege what you think conducing to your advantage, we shall all give our
advice unto her. Then, said Phillis, I do wonder Silvander, you should be so
prejudicated with the love of your self, as not to see a thing which is as
clear as the Sun: I am confident that none here but thinks you to be a man of
reason, and that you do this only to show the subtilty of your wit: Could
ever any speak more plainly then Diana did? I do declare, said she, that
Phillis is more amiable then Silvander, and the better to clear her intention,
she added the honor of setting me in her own seat, to show that there was as
great a difference betwixt you and me, as there is between you and Diana, and
that in this regard you should behave your self unto me with the same respect
and honor: Could she do more to show my victory? or declare it in more
express words? on the contrary, in saying that thou know better how to make
your self loved then I do; this was as much as if she Irad said, that you are
suller of subtilty and art then I am, and so far I confess it; but whatsoever
is amiable in it self, needs no art or subtilty to make it self loved.
Although she did give you a Garland of Flowers, and caused me to restore mine
unto him who gave it unto me; yet this was only to show, that she saw nothing
amiable in you* but such things as resemble flowers which grow and die in a
day. And because she thought my merits more solid and durable, she would not
emblem them by things so fadeable: And to the end you might the better know it,
not being willing any thing should pass without recompense; consider
Silvander, what it is which she gave you: and what it is which I receive in
recompense of my service: she permitted you to kiss her hand, which is a
gratification used unto slaves, and such as are in little esteem; but unto me
she surrendered her place, to show she thought none more worthy then my self,
and to intimate unto you, that she adjudged it your duty to do me the same
honor which you did unto her. Boast then, Silvander, of the advantage which
you pretend to receive by the this judgment: Keep well in memory the great
victory which you have this day obtained: Go unto the Temple of the good
Goddess, and there let it be Chronicled in the Annalls, that future ages may
also know it. After this, Phillis was silent: and when Silvander would have
answered, Hylas prevented him, saying; If I were to give my opinion, I should
declare Phillis victorious. Hylas, said Adamas, and smiled, you give your
judgment with too much precipitation; for you condemn a man before he be
heard; Silvander has not yet spoke for himself: It Is true, said Hylas, but
all is one, for I know he cannot answer any thing to the purpose. Every one
began to laugh at the discourse of Hylas; and when they were all silent,
Silvander began to answer thus.

The Answer of the Shepherd Sylvander, upon the Judgment of Diana.
I Have learned in the Massilian Schools, that Prometheus had such a subtle
wit, as he mounted up to heaven, and from thence stole that Fire from the Gods
wherewith he did animate the Statue which he made; and that for a punishment of
his Theft, he was tied to a Rock, where an Eagle did continually feed upon his
Liver. Shall not I run the same Fortune, if in declaring the intentions of the
fair Diana, I should steal from her that secret which she would reserve unto
her self; for I think the Theft not inferior to that of Prometheus, nor that I
sin against a less Divinity. But on the other side, shall I comply with the
crime of Phillis, who to my disadvantage, and against all equity, and the good
judgment of Diana, does attribute unto her self more then is her due? Truly,
should I let fall so just a cause, when I am able to maintain it by clear
Reasons, I shall fear my self extremely culpable. What then will thou do
Sylvander? Can thou not do what is fit to be done, unless thou incur a
danger? Have recourse then unto the fair Diana her self, and by supplications,
ask that by way of gift, which thou may justly steal from her. It is unto
you therefore, O fairest and divine Mistress, that I address my Prayers; begging
leave to declare the equity of your judgment, and the truth of my Victory;
Protesting, that in this action I will have a greater regard unto any thing
which shall concern you, then unto any thing that shall concern my self. For
the matter would not concern me so much, though Phillis had the advantage of
me, because notwithstanding I should be no less your servant then I am; but
that Phillis by her subtle glosses should make it thought that you are the
Author of a judgment against all manner of Reason: This would wound the honor
of your Wit and Judgment. But in a confidence that your silence gives consent,
I will answer Phillis thus.

It seems Shepherdess that you have a mind to be twice overcome, and will make
me your superior by two Judgments; I see you would have appealed from Dianas
Throne, unto another; and if our prudent Druide had not hindered you, perhaps
this injury had been done unto her: But it is no wonder, that she who does not
know how to love, should be ignorant in the secrets and ordinances of Love: yet
to the end that neither you, nor those who hear you, may not rest any longer in
that error, hearken Shepherdess unto this Truth, which I shall briefly declare
unto you.

That great God which is in the highest heavens, and who with one single look
does behold, not only all things which the Sun does shine upon, but also all
the secrets that are hidden in the Intrals of the Earth, and deepest Abyss of
Waters; he was pleased to give this privilege unto man, that he only can know
and understand his mind; and for his further help, he did not endue him with
this knowledge, to conceal it from all, but to communicate and participate this
knowledge unto others: And that he might do it the more intelligibly, he gave
unto him two ways whereby he might declare himself; which is, by Speech, and by
Actions: And by these two every one may discover their intentions, and make
them more intelligible unto one another: And therefore when our Actions are
Ambiguous, we add Speech, to make them the more plain: And when our Speech is
obscure and dubious, we do interpret them by our Actions. And the great
Tautates was pleased to order it thus, to the end that those deluding spirits
which take delight in deceiving all those they have converse withal, may be
without excuse, when their decreitfulness is discovered.

Now the most wise and just Diana, being willing to let us know what she
thought of our difference, and to manifest her mind more clearly unto us, has
used these two ways whereby to express her self. First, She has declared her
self in clear words; and to her words she has added actions, which
demonstratively do speak her mind: Yet since the ignorance of Phillis is such,
and to leave none in any doubt of the Truth, I am forced to go a little
further, and to say, That to discover this Truth, it is requisite to sound it
to the bottom, and to know who has got the victory by the judgment of Diana;
It is necessary to consider the beginning of the Difference, which caused our
Wager.

The Nymph Leonide did very faithfully relate the Truth, when she said, That
three months being expired, Diana was to judge whether Phillis or I did know
better how to make our selves Loved: For our wager was grounded upon the saying
of Phillis, that the reason why I did not attempt to serve any of our
Shepherdesses was, because I was defective in such things as might procure
Love: And because I maintained that the only reason was want of will, both
Phillis and I were ordered to serve the fair Diana three months; and afterward
she was to judge, which of us two did know better how to make our selves Loved.
This being well understood, I believe there is none here, who does not plainly
see, that by the words of the fair Diana, I have obtained that which I did
pretend unto: Her words were these, We do declare, that Sylvander does know how
to make himself beloved better then Phillis: Could she express her mind by any
words more intelligibly and clearly? And yet to leave no scruple of any doubt,
she has added actions unto her words; and such as none can consider, but they
must presently confess my victory. Her Actions were two, First, putting the
Crown upon my head, secondly, giving me her hand to kiss; both of them are
favors so high, as hardly any can be greater: For Phillis, Unto whom are
Crowns given, but such as overcome? and unto whom do Mistresses use to give
their hands to kiss, but unto those whom they think worthy of their Loves? I
cannot tell Shepherdess what Country it is, where the custom is to permit
such kisses unto their slaves, and such as they little esteem: but if they use
to confer such favors upon those whom they dis-esteem, what will they do unto
those who are high in their Favors? Believe me, O my enemy, that after this
rate, there are very few, who would not be very glad my Fairest Mistress would
despise them, and I assure you, I would be contented to live and die in such
disesteem. And as to what you say, That our judge in giving me a Garland of
Flowers, does intimate thereby, that whatsoever is amiable in me, is like those
flowers, which grow and die in a day: I beseech you consider what she has added
unto those flowers, as if she did foresee that this would be objected: We do
ordain, said she, that Sylvander shall take his chaplet of flowers from my
hands, and wear it hereafter, by renewing it with fresh flowers: Can you think
Shepherdess, that she intended it to wither in a day, since she would have me
wear it for eternal memory? But in this, I must confess you are excusable: For
it is one of those mysteries in Love which you do not understand, and which I
will unfold unto you, to the end you may know, why our just judge did ordain,
that you should restore that Garland which was given unto you, and why I should
wear mine always.

Love, which our sage Druides esteem to be the great Tautates, whom the Doctors
in the Massilian Schools do say, was the first of all the gods who after the
Chaos did separate things mortal from things immortal, and gave them life and
perfection. And because man was only created to know, to love, and to serve
this great Tautates, whom we were not able to comprehend by any corporeal
representations or Ideas, he did set before our eyes a body so perfect, as
might in some sort represent unto us, that which he would have us know of him:
To the end, that knowing him, we might come to love him, and loving him, to
serve him. And in as much as nothing is so bright and pure as this great
Tautates, he created that which he thought most pure and perfect, and did
imbellish it with all the beauties, and accomplish it with all the perfections
that a body could be capable of, and called it the Sun. Thus the Sun, appeared
presently from one side of Heaven unto the other, gave life and motion unto all
that was upon the earth, and wrought such admirable effects, as many did think
it to be the great God, of whom it was only but an imperfect resemblance, and
did adore it in lieu of that which it did represent. Now Phillis, if you would
know in some sort what this great Tautates Love is, you must learn it by the
Sun, and such things as fall under our senses: And when you see how the Sun
gives life unto all that is in the universe, you ought to say it your self,
that Love gives life unto all souls, when it shines, not only in heaven, but
also throughout all the earth: you must acknowledge Love to be the light, which
gives understanding unto all spirits; for there is none so blind, but it is
able to open his eyes, and make him clear sighted. And if this Sun of Love do
not shine, then is he all in darkness, without any light or understanding:
consider also, how as the Sun does alter and change seasons, Love does the
like: It causes the Spring, by producing in our spirits the flowers of hopes;
It causes Summer, by giving us the fruits of those hopes; It causes Autumn,
by letting us enjoy them; and it causes Winter, by giving us so much
understanding, as to know how to preserve them long. I should be too long if I
should relate all the resemblances betwixt Love and the Sun: Let it suffice
Shepherdess, that by this resemblance already instanced, you may understand,
how these flowers, which you so much undervalue, and say are withered as soon
as blown* are the hopes which Love produces in his Spring: Oh Love! What
greater favor could I receive from my fairest Mistress? Oh Phillis! how dear
and infinitely pleasing are these flowers unto me? especially when I consider
the consequents of this favor* These fair and sweet flowers, are the Spring of
my hopes; and can you think that Summer will not presently follow after the
Spring? Is not that kiss of her fair hand which she was pleased to afford me,
the fruit of those hopes? Does not this Glorious Sun of my soul, afford me also
an Autumn and a Winter? Doubtless Phillis, my fairest Mistress did not omit
them, when she ordained I should wear that Crown of flowers continually amongst
the Shepherds, and renew it with fresh ones: Is not this an Autumn and Winter
both, since I must preserve it long, and renew my happiness? Consider, O my
enemy, how in taking these flowers from you, and restoring them unto Adamas,
she intimates, that you must not hope for any thing. And if you have flattered
up your self with any fond hopes, without any ground of reason, it is fit you
be deprived of them before all this venerable company.

There remains nothing now to answer; but only to tell you, why my fairest
Mistress was pleased to say, that Phillis was more amiable then Sylvander, and
upon what reason she placed you in her own seat. For the better understanding
of it, know Shepherdess; That whatsoever is good is amiable: but if the good
be unknown, it is like unto a hidden treasure, which none can esteem until it
be known: when Diana did declare that you were amiable, she did it with good
reason, for doubtless the virtues which are in you, are good: for resembling my
fairest Mistress in sex, and other gifts of Nature, there is no doubt but
therein you are amiable, and much more then Sylvander: But being deficient in
other things which should make you loved, and which she finds in me, she has
declared me to know better how to make my self loved, then you do. And this
Shepherdess, if you do rightly understand it, is most just, and not at all
dis-advantagious to you: For all three must be considered; Diana is she who was
to receive our services and our passions: And you and I were to serve and Court
her. It is the property of a man to serve and Court a fair Mistress: I have done
according to the duty and office of a man, in my Courtship of Diana; and she
has done the right office of a woman, in receiving my services: But it is
preposterous and absurd for you, who are a woman, to Court a woman, and
therefore it is not at all strange, that though you be more amiable, yet
Sylvander should know how to procure love better then you, since it is his part
to court, and yours on the contrary to be courted; and certainly our just Judge
did so intend it, when she placed you in her room, intimating, that as it was
hers, so it was your part, not to serve, but to be served. Confess therefore
Phillis, that I have won the wager, and I will confess you to be more amiable
then I: And let us both say, that never was a more wise and just Judge, nor a
fairer Mistress, then Diana, whose judgment has given me the victory, and whose
perfections have made me eternally hers.

Thus Sylvander ended, leaving every one very well satisfied with his reasons
and modesty. Phillis her self was forced to yield unto him: and therefore Diana
seeing there was no need of a second judgment, she said no more. Hylas only,
who jeared at all he had said, and held Stella under the Arm, seeing all was
silent, he began to talk. Well Sylvander, (said he) To what purpose is all this
long Discourse? And what can we learn from it? You may learn (answered
Sylvander) that the just judgment which Diana gave upon such solid reason, had
like to have suffered the same injury by the mis-interpretation of Phillis,
that most Oracles do receive from those who will turn them according to their
own desires, and wrest them so, as they suit with their own passions. And
Stella and you may learn, That as there is but one Sun which resembles Love, so
all ought to have but one Love. If it be so, said Hylas, that Love, like the
Sun, gives life, and that none do live without it, and that you never loved any
until of very late, then you have been alive but very lately: And if so, good
Sylvander, tell me, how you did being dead, to look so well to your Flock, to
hunt, to talk, to sing, to run, and wrestle? I should be very glad to learn
that trick of you, that I may do the same when I am dead; for I have seen some
as soon as they are dead, cast presently into the earth, and there is an end of
them; but I must confess you are the finest dead man that ever I saw; and if I
could but do as you did before you were in love, I would not care a rush for
death. Sylvander could not choose but laugh at the discourse of Hylas; but by
way of answer, he said: It Is true, that Love is the life of our souls, if it be
rightly understood; and to that end, you must know Hylas, that there are two
kinds of life in a soul: The one, is that which it lives in the body; and the
other, which it lives with it self. The first does animate the Body, makes it
walk, talk, eat, and do all those things which you knew I did before I had the
happiness to love Diana. And the other gives life unto the Soul, and makes it
live in it self: For it enlightens the Understanding, forms the Imagination,
and takes up the Will. The first kind of life is common unto man, as unto all
other animals; for all living do produce the same actions: But the other
soaring higher then the Body, does give the Soul another kind of life, which is
common unto those pure thoughts of which we spoke before. Now Hylas, when I
said that Love gives life unto Souls; I did not then say that the Body was
dead, in that sense which you apprehend it; for then I had said things
impossible. Impossible, because none can die before he live; and he who never
loved, never lived; and he who never lived, cannot die. Ask me no more
therefore, how being dead, I came to talk, sing, leap, run, and such like; for
all those actions do depend upon a life, which love daigns not to meddle with.
Then I perceive (said Hylas) that your love is only in thought and imagination.
No question of it (replied Sylvander) and as for other things, I leave them
unto that instinct which Nature gives unto every one. Then (replied Hylas) It
is pity but we two should love one Shepherdess; for we should both agree
excellently well: You in the Favors which she should show you in thought and
imagination; and I, in those which your love leaves unto that instinct of
Nature. Alcidon, and most of the Shepherds, did laugh heartily at the merry
humor of Hylas; and especially Sylvander, who at last returned him this
answer. Ah Hylas, Did you know how to Love, you would not speak thus, nor
confound things as you do. Though my Soul does live in its own thoughts, yet
for all that, it gives life unto that body which it animates: The Sun, which as
I told you, is the true Emblem of Love, though it do shine upon Celestial
things, yet it does also cast his rays upon Bodies here below: And why should
not Love, which enlightens our Understanding, and forms the thoughts of our
souls, give such desires also unto our Bodies, as are natural unto it? No, no
Hylas, here lies all the difference; Those who love as I do, they have none of
those desires whereof you speak, but because they love: And those who love as
you do, do not love, but because they have those desires. But Sylvander (said
Stella, who was a little netled at this discourse) since you have these
desires, Are you not very bold, when you consider who you are, and who Diana
is? I must needs confess, answered Sylvander, That when I do look upon my self
with eyes of equality, I think you are in the right; but when I consider my
extreme love, and the hopes which she was pleased to give me, I think my self
not too blame. Your extreme love (said she) and your hopes also, are things
invisible. But the actions of my fairest Mistress (answered Sylvander) may make
them visible: And though mine have not hitherto been so great as to demonstrate
them, yet I hope to render her such service, as shall evidence it to her, and
all the world, that my Love is the greatest that ever was. But had you observed
her actions as well as I, you would not have upbraided me with my hopes, as you
have done: For is not every flower a hope? And to what purpose do you think she
ordained I should wear them upon my head? It is true replied Stella; but as you
received those flowers from the sage Adamas, so you must expect your hopes from
him, and not from Diana. O Stella, said Sylvander, I perceive your eye was only
upon Hylas: for had you looked about you, you might have seen, I had them not
from that Druide: It is true, I had them first from him, but I laid them at the
feet of Diana; to show, that from her I expected all my hopes: and now you see
them upon my head, from what other hand do you think I would receive them, but
from hers, upon whom all my hopes depend? Did I not receive this Crown of
Flowers from her fair hand? And did she not thereby as much as say, HOPE? But
yet, replied Stella, these flowers, and these hopes, did come from the sage
Adamas: This, answered Sylvander, is not without a deep mystery, for perhaps
the great Tautat^s would have me know, that the beginning of all my hopes must
take original from sage Adamas.

The dispute betwixt these Shepherds, and Shepherdesses had continued longer,
had they not come at the same time unto the great Meddow, where the Shepherds
used to perform their exercises. A great company was already assembled from all
parts, and were prepared with all things necessary, when seeing the grand Druide
and his company a far off, they came to meet him, with many demonstrations of
joy, to have him amongst them. After the Complements of Courtesy were
performed, the Prizes were set up, for Running, for Wrestling, for Leaping, and
for throwing the Bar: Sylvander had the honor of the first, Lycidas of
wrestling, Hylas of leaping, and Hermantes of throwing the bar: As for
Sylvander, every one was glad of his victory, and of that of Lycidas also; but
as for Hylas and Hermantes, who came with Daphnide and Alcidon; the Shepherds
of Forests did a little grudge at them: and Hylas going unto Stella, because
the prize which he had won, was a little Crown composed of Feathers; he
beseeched her to let him put it upon her head; Sylvander seeing this, by way of
mockery, said unto him, That, Hylas, is a very right reward for thy faithful
pains. What do you say? (said Hylas, after he had put the Crown upon the head
of Stella) I say (answered Sylvander) that those who know you, and dare leap
with you, are very bold; for having such a light head as you have, they might
easily imagine your heels like unto it, and be out of hopes to overcome you:
but they who made that Crown, showed more judgment, for nothing could suit so
well to your light mind, as a Cap of Feathers. I am not at all ashamed of it,
answered Hylas; for unto you who are lumpish and dull, they did very well to
give such things as the gross earth produces, as that Garland of Flowers,
which you have in your hand: But unto me, as unto one who is composed of a more
noble temper, they have presented Feathers, to show, that I do elevate my self
in the Element of Air; as despising such a lumpish piece as you are; you I say,
who does envy that which you upbraid me withal: since I will run against all
the rest of the Shepherds, to get the glory of being lighter then they. You are
mistaken (answered Sylvander) I did not run, to make it appear I was lighter;
but because I was desirous to be the first at my fairest Mistress, who sat at
the end of the Race: so as you are deceived, if you thought I did run for the
honor of running best: for my aim was only to make it appear, that none could
go before me, when I was going toward her. By Fortune Diana was so near, as
she heard all the discourse, and therefore addressing her self unto Sylvander;
Shepherd, said she unto him, these names of Mistress, and Fairest, and these
expressions of a particular affection, were in season as long as the wager
lasted; but now, let me entreat you to use them no more, unless you will
dis-oblige me: but remember that my name is Diana, and so, I pray, let me be
called. Sylvander answered, That he who desired life no longer then to do her
service, had rather die then displease her: but I beseech you, (said he) allow
me the rest of the day to unaccustome my tongue, before you lay this command
upon me; and in the mean time, I most humbly beseech you, to accept of this
Crown which I have won, to the end I may put this day in the Calender, as the
happiest I ever yet lived. The Shepherdess who did love this Shepherd, and
began to resign that place in her heart which Philander had, she was inclinable
to grant his request: but fearing lest her good will would too much appear, she
refused it, and had gone away, if Astrea and Alexis had not stayed her; telling
her, that Sylvanders request was so reasonable, that she would offend her own
Natural Courtesy, if she did refuse it: and almost by force, at least in
appearance, made her consent unto it. I wish, said the Nymph Leonide, that this
Chaplet of Flowers, which Diana wears upon her head, were given unto Paris; for
otherwise, it will grieve him at the heart, to see Sylvander's Garland upon the
head of his Mistress. That Title Madam (said Diana) is not my due: but however,
I shall consent unto whatsoever the Nymph Leonide shall think fit: upon this,
taking off the Chaplet of Flowers which she wore upon her own head, and
receiving that which Sylvander presented unto her, she set her own upon the
head of Paris, and put Sylvanders upon her own head: This caused no small
dispute between Paris, and that Shepherd, to know which of them was most
favored; but for that time they said no more: because the Sun was very low,
which caused them to retire homewards.

Astrea and Alexis walked together: Adamas, Alcidon, and Daphnide, kept
together: Phillis was with Lycidas; and Paris entertained Leonide with the
discourse which she formerly begun in the house of Adams; so as Sylvander
addressed himself with all humility unto Diana: Fairest Mistress (said he) will
you permit me to wait upon you unto your House? Sylvander, said she, I accept
of your courtesy; But I would gladly have you accustom your self betimes to
call me by my name. Believe it fair Shepherdess (answered he) you have no truer
Name, then that, when I call you Mistress. For I most earnestly beseech you to
believe, there is nothing under the Sun more certain, then that I am your
servant. Diana who had no mind to be quit of Sylvander, though she saw that she
had no reason to love him, being but a poor unknown stranger, she was at a
stand what to do; but thinking that then there was no better way then to seem
contented he should behave himself the rest of the day as he desired, she
answered him thus; I am contented Sylvander you should end the remainder of the
day, as you began it, since Alexis and Astrea would have it so. If I thought
(answered he) that when this day is ended, I should have done loving you; I vow
by him that gave me life, I would not live it out. You are permitted (replied
Diana) to continue on your way of behavior, as long as the day lasts; but take
notice, that the Sun is going to set, and that then the day ends. The day
(answered Sylvander) does last as long as there is any light. I confess it,
answered Diana, and therefore within an hour after the Sun is set, there will
be no light, nor by consequence, any day to continue the behavior which your
Wager permitted you. Give me leave to tell you, Fairest Mistress, said he, That
no time can limit the service which I owe you, nor any forbiddance has power to
divert me from that real Affection, which I have vowed unto you: And fairest
Shepherdess, Let me further tell you in words of Truth, That this Wager first
began without any other Design then to conquer Phillis, and for pastime unto
the company; But since, those perfections which I have found in you, have made
it appear, that there is no jesting with Love; and that it is impossible to be
long near a great fire, and not be burned. Sylvander (said Diana) If you do
intend I should believe these words, I must answer you, That I am so much
dis-obliged by you, as I cannot tell whether I shall ever forget the wrong, if
I did not think you intend to close the day according to your Wager: I shall
yet receive all you say, as I have done, since the difference betwixt Phillis
and you began: But when the day is done, Take heed how you answer me, that I
may know what to do; And I heartily entreat you to think well upon it.
Sylvander seeing Diana more in earnest then he imagined, and fearing that if he
went any further, she should for ever banish him; he resolved to incense her no
farther, but to refer it unto time, which by his long services might have
better influence upon her; hoping, that perhaps she might be glad of the like
occasion to receive his Services, and assurances of his Affection, under the
same cover which she now received them: and therefore looking her full in the
face, Fairest Mistress, said he, The day is not yet done; and when it is, I
shall be-think my self how to answer you; In the mean time, give me leave to
use the privilege which you granted me. Upon that account (answered Diana) I
shall most willingly entertain your Discourse; But methinks you should begin
now to talk as you must then; for you see the Sun is almost set. It is long,
Mistress, answered he, before you and I shall come to an account; since the day
you have granted me must last as long as I live. As you live! replied Diana, I
should be sorry your life should be so short; and am so much obliged unto you,
as to wish it may last long. Will you be pleased, Fairest Mistress, said he,
that we make choice of one to regulate this matter betwixt us? Who would you
choose? answered Diana. Whom you shall please, replied Sylvander, so it be one
that ever in their life loved. Shall we refer it, said Diana, unto Astrea and
Phillis? With all my heart, answered Sylvander, though I know Phillis to be my
enemy. You are mistaken, answered Diana, and smiled; for however she seems the
contrary, yet there is not one Spepherdess that takes your part more really
then she: But I would not have our dispute to be made a public business, as
that was betwixt Phillis and you; for several considerations: Let it be this
night, when every one is retired, for we all sup this night at Astreas house,
where Phocion does treat Adamas, and Daphnide, and us all; and there we may
talk as privately as we please.

Oh, what consolation were these words unto Sylvander! For Dianas desire of
secrecy was an argument unto him, that his business was upon good terms: And
the truth is, The good will of this Shepherdess was by degrees more and more
inclinable unto Sylvander; so as though she knew not well what to do, yet it
was impossible for her to dis-ingage her self.

In the mean time, Asrea and Alexis went talking together; and as it is usual
in Discourse, to pass from one subject unto another; they fell at last upon the
judgment of Diana. Fair Shepherdess, (said Alexis unto Astrea) Shall I speak my
mind freely unto you? As unto your self, answered Astrea. Then, said Alexis,
What do you think of Sylvander's love? I think, answered she, that this
Shepherd is very deeply in love, and that if Diana did not carry her self very
prudently, I should fear she does not dislike of it. For my part, replied the
Druide, I am of opinion that she does not wish him ill. You are not singular in
your opinion, Madam, replied Astrea; for I have observed that the addresses of
this Shepherd are not at all displeasing unto her; and the truth is, Sylvander
is no despiseable Shepherd, nor have I met with many of more merit. Upon this
she stood silent, and so did Alexis. At last Astrea began again, with a deep
sigh; It is most certain (said she) that Diana does love this Shepherd, and
both Phillis and my self are the cause of it; for we did constrain her even by
force, to permit Sylvander to make address unto her; and though it was at the
first in jest, yet it proved afterward in good earnest; and I foresee, that
unless she take good heed, she will not so easily dis-engage her self as she
imagines. Be pleased to know Madam, that Sylvander is a Shepherd unknown, and
nothing beholding unto Fortune, since she has concealed from him, both his
Country, and the knowledge of his Parents: So as Diana, who has as high a mind
as any Shepherdess in all the Neighborhood, will never permit Sylvander to
serve her openly, be his merits never so great: nor would her Parents, who are
the principal of all about the Banks of the Fatal Lignon, allow of it: And yet
I see that Sylvander is so much taken with her Beauty and Perfections, as I
dare lay a wager, that nothing in the world, neither the rigor of the
Shepherdess, nor the forbiddance of Parents, nor any other obstacle whatsoever,
can divert him; so as when Diana commanding him to speak no more unto her, as
he did, during the wager, he will constrain himself a little, but it will be
absolutely impossible for him to overcome himself; so as after so many great
expressions of his affection, the more he would hide it, the more will she see
it through his constraint. I will not say any thing of what I have already
thought concerning Diana; for loving her as I do, I should be very sorry to see
her any way miscarry; and yet considering the way she takes, it is almost
impossible she should do otherwise. What does she intend to do? asked Alexis.
The good opinion which she justly has of her own merits (answered Astrea) will
not permit her to allow of Sylvander's Courtship, but makes her resolve to have
recourse unto those extreme remedies of forbidding him, which women use unto
such whose Courtship is displeasing unto them. I do not like her way (said
Alexis) and if she follow it, she will repent it: For Sylvander loving her as
he does, he will not be diverted by it; and then, as you say, the business will
become the talk of the Country. But she had better take one of these two ways,
either to let him continue his addresses under the vail of a Fiction; for which
excuses enough are to be found; or else permit him secretly to make his
addresses: For I must confess, Fair Shepherdess, that the Virtues of Diana, and
the Merits of Sylvander, makes me desire they may live contentedly, though it
be to the disadvantage of Paris my Brother, who I know does love her; but it is
better he should miss of his desires, then by-obtaining them, to make two of so
much merit, miserable all the rest of their days: Besides, Diana loving my
Brother only by reasons of Estate, Doubtless the loss of one so dear unto her
as Sylvander is, would make her so full of sorrow, and so much change her, that
my Brother could not take any great delight in her: And though this do at the
first displease Paris, yet he will better pass it over then Sylvander can,
having not so violent an affection unto Diana as that Shepherd has. Moreover,
we shall more easily divert him from it, by propounding some other marriage
unto him, more suitable unto his quality.

In such discourse as this, they came unto the Town of Phocion, who received
them very kindly, and treated them with so neat a supper; that Alcidon and
Daphnide confessed, he shamed the great Cities. But Astrea was not so well
contented as she desired: For Phocion had young Calidon there, and set him at
the Table just opposite unto her: This young Shepherd was so passionately in
Love, that his eyes were never off her; which troubled Astrea extremely: for
she could never look up, but still met with his eye upon her. Alexis, who was
of Calidons mind, did the very same, though with much more satisfaction unto
Astrea, who also could not satisfy her eyes with looking upon Celadon under
the umbrage of a woman: But Alexis had the advantage of Calidon, for having
Astrea on her side, they could talk together and not be heard, which they did
almost all supper while: And because Alexis observed the eyes of Calidon, she
said unto Astrea: Fair Shepherdess do you not think that you sit in a very ill
place? I shall never think so, answered Astrea, as long as I am so near you,
which is the greatest contentment I can have; but I wish that some troublesome
eyes which are continually on my face, were turned some other way, or else that
the owner of them were further off. The trouble which you endure, said Alexis,
is a consequent of your beauty; and you must not think it strange, that
Shepherds should Love you, since I who am a woman, and one who never saw you
before this three or four days, am so extremely taken with you, that I think
my self in Love with you. As Alexis spoke these words she changed countenance:
The Zeal of her expression, or her fear of speaking too plainly, was the cause
of it. Astrea answered her with a smiling eye, I wish with all my heart Madam,
that there were any thing in me which might do you any real service, and
ingratiate me into your favor: For I am so perfectly yours that nothing but
death can sever me from you and I think the happiness of it so great, that I
would not change contentment with all the Kings, Emperors, and Monarchs upon
earth. Alexis fearing that if these expressions continued, hearers would think
they talked too passionately for women, she took her hand, and wispered unto
her, I will sooner refuse life then this assurance you give me: but for some
reasons which afterward I will tell you, let us break off this discourse, and
talk of it at night when we are alone, or to morrow when we walk in the woods.

After supper ended, and tables removed, many Neighboring young Shepherds came
to dance and sing, and rejoice, for finding the Missletoe of the New-year, for
so they called it. And because Daphnide and Alcidon were desirous to be
spectators of their harmless sports, they desired Adamas he would be pleased
they might wa^^ out and see the Shepherds and Fair Shepherdesses dance. Adamas
who was willing to give them all possible satisfaction, he took Daphnide by the
hand, and led her forth, leaving Leonide to conduct Alcidon, and all the rest
of the Company, who followed them into a great room, where such public
rejoycings were wont to be kept, and where they found abundance of Shepherds
and Shepherdesses dancing and singing.

The Sun had been long set, and no day appeared; but the Moon shined so clear,
as if she had borrowed more light then usual, purposely for that night:
Daphnide was much taken with the pleasantness of the place, and coolness of the
air: And all sitting down, some on one side, some on another, they began to
dance and sing, and performed their parts so handsomely, that Daphnide and
Alcidon could not choose but admire the Shepherds and Shepherdesses of Lignon.
After they had danced half an hour, there came from the neighboring Towns, a
company of Shepherds disguised in the habit of Egyptians, who danced after the
manner of that people: And as they had been formerly taught by Alcippe the
father of Celadon, upon his return from his long travels, they danced unto
songs, and sang as they danced: And when they had done, they went unto all the
company, and offered to tell the Fortunes of all such who would show them their
hands. This pastime having lasted long, and it being almost midnight, Adamas
thought it time to retire: So as they all parted, and went unto their Towns,
Phocion carried unto his house, Adamas, Paris, Alexis, and Leonide, being very
sorry that his house was not of capacity to lodge Daphnide and Alcidon with
their company also. But Adamas thinking before hand that he could not do it
with any convenience, he appointed Lycidas to lodge them in the house of
Celadon, where Diamis his uncle expected them; but by reason of his old age
left the management of all things unto Lycidas, which that Shepherd did perform
very exactly, though he was extremely perplexed, that he could not have the
company of his dear Phillis in his house: For she told him, that if he would
bid those strangers welcome, she would go with Astrea, and lie with her.

Thus every one retired to their lodgings, Astrea, Diana, and Phillis being
attended by Sylvander, they carried Adamas unto Astreas house, where Phocion
stayed to bid them welcome as well as he could. The Chambers were ordered thus;
Adamas and Paris did lie in one, where Phocion was wont to lie; Alexis and
Leonide were ordered to lie in that which was wont to be Astreas, and Astrea
took another. When Adamas understood that the chambers were thus ordered, he
did not like that Alexis and Leonide should be alone together in a chamber,
fearing lest the Female Druide, should, by a miracle of Love become a Shepherd,
and lest Leonide, whom he knew did not hate Celadon, should carress Alexis so
much, as to make him cast off his Druides habit: And therefore, taking Leonide
aside, he said unto her, that when all the Shepherdesses were retired, he would
have Alexis come secretly, and lie in his chamber; and though there was but two
beds in it, yet it was no matter; for Paris should lie with him, and Alexis
should lie in the other. I thought upon that before, (answered the Nymph) but I
thought it not expedient, because some of the house might perhaps come in and
see her, which would be no small scandal: besides, Paris perhaps might take
notice of her. What course (replied Adamas) would you then take? For I do not
think you can find a better way: Pardon me good father, replied she; I conceive
it much better for Astrea and I to lie together in one bed, and Alexis in the
other.

But perhaps (said Adamas) that Astrea loving Alexis better then she does you,
she will desire to lie with her rather then with you. If she needs will do so,
answered the Nymph, then let her, and I will take the other bed: but you may do
as I say very easily; for if you come under pretense of seeing us: you may say
it is unreasonable we should put Astrea out of her Chamber, that it is enough
you have displaced Phocion out of his, and so you may appoint that Astrea and I
should lie together, pretending that the daughters of Druides never use to lie
with any, but by themselves. Adamas thought this invention to be good: And
Phocion being retired, he commanded Paris to go to bed, and then he came to
visit Alexis and Leonide; but he found the Chamber fuller then he expected,
there being with Astrea, Diana and Sylvander, who was discoursing upon his
difference with Diana, when the Druide entered: Daughters, said he, I come to
see how you are lodged, but I perceive you are very troublesome unto the Fair
Astrea, for I understand that it is her Chamber. It is true Sir, answered
Astrea, but both my Chamber and my self are much honored in that we are able
to do any service unto such whom I love so infinitely. Daughter, replied
Adamas, I will not upon any terms suffer you to go out of it; Leonide and you
may lie together; and did not the Laws of Druides daughters forbid it, I should
entreat the Fair Diana take half of a bed with Alexis. Father, said Leonide,
the bed is so large, as we may lie all three together without any trouble. And
because Astrea out of respect unto the Nymph, seemed not to be willing. No, no,
replied Adamas, Leonide and my daughter shall go into my Chamber, were we will
lie as well as we can, unless you resolve to lie altogether, for I will not by
any means, you should have any other Chamber then this, Diana, then seeing it
was the will of Adamas, gave her consent, and Astrea, seeing Diana consented,
obeyed the Druide: All this while Alexis stood mute, so amazed to see her self
in Astreas house, and to lie with her, though not in the same bed, yet in the
same Chamber with her, as he thought this to be a fault unpardonable if ever it
was known unto her. Adamas observing it when he bad good night unto all the
rest, took her hand and said unto her. I think daughter, the length of the way
has much wearied you, it is good for you to lie long in bed to morrow, and rest
your self; for Phocion has desired me to retain Daphnide and Alcidon here two
or three days, so as if you be but ready against dinner it is time enough:
Afterward he whispered her in the ear; Alexis, (said he) what makes you so
sad? Take heed you do not spoil the plot which we have thus far carried on so
well; and from which you may expect so much contentment. Then Adamas retired to
his Chamber, leaving Alexis so astonished that Astrea took notice of it; and
believing that the length of the way had done her some harm, she showed
abundance of sorrow to see her in that condition. But Leonide who knew well
enough where her shoe did pinch her, did answer for her; No, no, Astrea, said
she, never trouble your self, her pain will be quickly over: I have seen her
often in these fits, and well again presently. But me thinks (said she and
turned toward Sylvander) that it is time for this Shepherd to retire, it being
not long before it will be day. Madam, answered Sylvander, I shall be quickly
gone, so I may but carry with me what I brought hither. Diana knowing that he
meant her; Shepherd said she, I do not intend to stir from hence this night,
but I will put Phillis in my room whom you may wait upon home as if it was my
self, and to morrow I will expect you give me an account of her here, where I
promise to expect you about ten or eleven of the clock in the morning: What
power, I beseech you, answered Sylvander, have you to give her unto me? The
same power, replied Diana, that she has to dispose of me, when she pleases. I
had rather, replied he, taste her liberality then yours. It is enough for this
time (said Leonide) that Diana to show what an absolute victory you have
gotten, does let you carry your enemy away as a prisoner. I had rather Madam,
replied Sylvander, be a prisoner unto her, who gave me the victory, and be tied
never to stir from her, then to be the Conqueror of this enemy, whom she has
put into my hands. Phillis offered to reply, when Lycidas, according to his
promise, came to wait upon her; and then loosing her self from the hands of
Sylvander, see ungrateful Shepherd, said she unto him, how the Heavens does
punish you! I have now nothing to do with you, and before you get me your
prisoner again, you must provide better Arms. Upon this, bidding good night
unto Alexis and Leonide, and kissing Astrea and Diana, being very sorry (as she
said) to leave them, though indeed constrained for want of room, she went to
her own house, and was conducted by Lycidas and Sylvander, who according to
their custom, did wrangle and argue, all the way.

In the interim, Astrea was so busy, and officious about her dear Alexis, in
helping to undresse her, as she would not suffer her to unpin, one pin; and the
Druide was willing to allow it as long as possibly she could: but when she came
to put off her Gown, fearing lest she should find some fault with her breasts,
she beckned unto Leonide; who knowing what she meant, came unto Astrea: Come,
come, Fair Shepherdess, (said she unto her) let us undress our selves, for I
see you do but trouble my sister, and will trouble her more, unless we make
have to bed; for she has a custom to fall a sleep immediately; and if we do
not the like, we shall awake her, and then she can sleep no more that night;
therefore let us make all the have to bed we can, least we should disturb he^
This caused Astrea to withdraw, and give the Druide time to undress her self,
and get into bed unseen. Her hair, which she let grow vvhilest she was in her
cave, and ever since she had the name of Alexis, was now so long as might
well become a woman; and if she had but any reasonable care in dressing her
self, she might easily make it pass: but it was impossible for her, to remedy
her breasts, and therefore she took all possible care to hide them, though it
was a hard matter to conceal them from any that would take any particular
notice. Having therefore pinned her smock before her breasts, and at the
sleeves, she drew the Curtains toward that side where Astrea undressed her
self; and calling Leonide, sister (said she) you will much oblige me, if you
come hither and undress your self by my bedside, to keep me from sleeping
until you be all in bed; Leonide who knew the reason why she said so: I
will sister (answered she) but then I must have these fair ones to keep me
company; then all three came unto her bedside: Leonide did sit in chair,
Astrea upon the bed, vvhilest Diana went unto the table, to reach something
which Leonide left: Alexis, raising her self up in her bed, she helped Astrea
to undresse her, one while taking off a knot, another while unpinning a pin,
and Astrea would sometimes kiss the hand of Alexis as it passed near her
mouth; and Alexis in requital of the favor, would kiss that part of her own
hand which Astrea kissed; so ravished with joy, and contentment, that Leonide
took great delight in seeing such excess of happiness. A great part of the
night was thus spent, and had they not heard those birds, which use to
rejoice at the approach of day, they had hardly parted so soon: but Leonide
with much ado, caused Alexis to let Astrea go; who being all undressed at her
beds feet, Alexis saw her naked arm, as white as any Aliblaster, and also her
naked breasts, as which no Snow had so perfect a white: Love vvounded the
heart of Celadon most deeply, at the sight of these: How often was this
disguised Druide in a mind to lay aside the habit of a woman, and become a
Shepherd? And how often did he again check himself for his boldness? At last,
Leonide, who observed his raptures, and disorder, thought fit to part them.
And bidding the last good night unto her sister, she with Astrea, and Diana,
went to bed, leaving poor Alexis alone in appearance; but indeed so
accompanied, that it was impossible for her to close an eye: So as it being
light day, and she not able to sleep, she cast her eye upon the bed where
Astrea lay; it being very hot weather, in the beginning of July, these Fair
ones left their Curtains open; and the Sun dispersed its Rays so splendidly
into the Chamber, that the curious eye of this disguised Druide, might easily
see Astrea, who by chance lay almost out of the bed; Leonide lay in the midst;
that, as she said, she might make it her boast, she had lain between two of the
greatest Beauties in the whole world: And indeed, she did so; for never was two
different Beauties more exactly perfect then these two. Judge then what a
Vision had Alexis, when he saw Astrea thus; one of her Arms hung carelessly out
of the Bed, and hardly any difference could be found betwixt her smock and it
in whiteness; her other Arm lay under her head, and caused the right side of
her Breast to lie naked, with which the Sun seemed to be in love, and kissed,
by shining upon it. O Love! How many several ways thou have to torment those
who are thy Subjects! How did thou treat this Shepherd in his solitary Cave,
when being deprived of the sight of his Shepherdess, thou made him to lament
his absence from this Fair one? And at this time, How do thou torment him
with too much light, and blinding his eyes by two Suns; so as whether absent or
present, he is still tormented? This thought did so possess the mind of Alexis,
that before ever he took any notice of it, the Sun was a great height; And had
not Astrea by chance turned on the other side, and by that means taking this
pleasant Vision from his eye, doubtless he had looked longer: but being
deprived of the light of this glorious Sun, she thought her self in darkness,
and that the other Sun gave no light. At the last, not being able to abide in
these impatiences, she arose softly out of her bed, dressed her self without
any noise, and went unto the bed of Astrea, who was turned toward Leonide,
with her right Arm over her, and her cheek upon her shoulder. What jealousy,
or rather, what envy did she not conceive against this Nymph? Oh heavens!
(said she unto her self) too happy Leonide, how can thou sleep, and have such
a glorious occasion to wake? Can thou shut thy eyes, and employ them upon any
thing then looking upon this Beauty, which every one ought to adore? Then
staying a while mute; What extreme Injustice is in the Fate of things here
below? (replied she presently after) Why should this insensible Nymph have a
happiness which she cannot enjoy? And why should I who am infinitely desirous
of it, be thus unjustly deprived? Then folding her Arms upon her Breast, she
retired back a pace or two, not removing her eye from this pleasing object: And
after she had long contemplated upon it; Oh Astrea (said she a little louder)
will you never recall me from my banishment? And must I, without knowing the
cause, Live continually in your presence, as if I were distant from you? But
against whom should I complain, since Fortune has brought me nearer my
happiness, then ever I could expect or hope for? And why should I not try
Fortune a little further? Perhaps she will as well give me as high contentment,
as before she dejected me into the Abyss of misery: Courage Shepherd, why art
thou so fearful to approach this Fair one? Why do thou not beg her pardon,
and restore Celadon unto her, whom thou have stolen from her under the habit of
Alexis? Say unto her, Here is the Shepherd whom you so much loved; Here is
Celadon that has given you his heart, and all that is his: You did once love
him; and if Celadon has done any thing which has offended you, then open this
Breast which he here presents unto you, and take that which is your own, his
heart; which most certainly never consented unto any thing that could offend
you. As thou say thus unto her, fall down upon thy knees, and present thy
naked Breast unto her, that if she please, she may take that heart which loves
and adores her, and which cannot rest until it be in her fair hands. Upon this
Alexis all in a rapture, stepped forward, as if he did intend to effect his
thoughts; and perhaps had now discovered himself, had he not upon a sudden
reprehended himself thus. Oh Celadon (said he) can thou be thus disobedient
unto the command of this Shepherdess? Must thou be upbraided with failing in
the Laws of perfect Love? Have thou thus long served this Fair one with
unstained affection, and now by an imprudent and rash Act, which will bring
thee too late repentance, spoil all? O Celadon, Do thou not remember these
words? Go disloyal Lover, and never see me again, till I command thee; Can
thou (I say) remember this, and have so little affection as to dare to disobey?
No, no (sa^d he) Die, die first, and carry to the grave a pure and innocent
love, without any stain or reproach.

Upon this, with tears in her eyes, she went out of the chamber to view those
places where formerly she had received so much contentment, and to ask an
account of all those sighs and desires which she had so often committed to
their custody. At first she went into the garden, through which an arm of the
River Lignon runs: Then looked upon the Fountain, which is in the midst of it;
over which stands the Goddess Ceres upon an Arch, supported by great Columns;
and under which is a great Basin, resembling a Crown, that receives this
pleasant source. Approaching unto this Fountain, she there washed her hands, and
her face, as formerly she was wont; and looking upon it, here is the very
place, said she, where Astrea has so often vowed eternal affection unto me.
This is the Fountain where taking my hand in hers, she swore that she would
sooner cease to live* then cease to love Celadon: Then stepping forward with a
trembling pace to the basin which held the water, here are the Letters of our
Names, said he, engraved by her own hand; Oh ye witnesses of my extreme
affection! and now ye just accusers of the fairest Shepherds in the world, why
are you not defaced out of this Marble, as well as out of her heart? Or do you
remain here still to upbraid her with her change? Then going from this
Fountain, she went into a little wood of Hasels, where the walks are contrived
with so many turnings and windings, that they will deceive those that walk in
them, and make them lose their way in going out again. This was the place which
brought into his memory his past happiness, which he now resented so bitterly,
that his tears did testify his grief: For it was in this little wood, where
he was wont to talk often with his Fair Shepherdess, when their Parents even
weary with crossing their loves, did permit them more liberty of seeing each
other, and talking together, then before they used. Calling into memory
therefore all the passions which she resented in that place, and all the vows
of fidelity which she received from her Shepherdess, she could not choose, but
wonder that she could forget all the vows and oaths which she had sworn in
that place.

This thought entertained her a long while, not without the company of many a
sigh, and many a tear; and had not her walk conducted her before she was aware
unto the side of that arm of the River Lignon, which ran about all the Garden,
she had not so soon got out: but the sight of this River did so freshly revive
the memory of her former happiness, as she could not choose but sit down upon
the bank, and was so much transported out of her self, as it was a long time
before she knew where she was.

All this while she did not remember that perhaps Astrea would wake, and that
Leonide and she, not finding her in the chamber, would wonder extremely what
was become of her. And so it happened; for it being already late enough Astrea
wakned, and the Sun shining very gloriously into the room, she looked toward
the bed of Alexis: but seeing all the Curtains open and none in bed, she
raised her self a little higher in the bed to look a little better, and seeing
she was not there, she could not choose but sigh so loud that Leonide heard her,
and asked her whether she was sick: No, answered Astrea, but I am troubled that
I cannot see Alexis in the bed where she lay the last night; How! said Leonide,
and started up, is she not there? Then raising her self a little, and finding
it true, and that the door was open: what in the name of Heaven is become of
her? said she. I believe, said Diana, that she is gone to walk before the heat
of the day begin: Leonide was afraid that the melancholy humor of Celadon
might make Alexis take up some new resolution: yet least she should discover
too much of her thoughts unto these Shepherdesses; I beseech you, said she,
unto them, let me dress my self as soon as I can, and see if I can find her:
for if Adamas should know that I let her go alone, he would be very angry with
me: The Shepherdesses rose all out of bed, and made such have, that they were
ready before the Nymph although she made all the have that possibly she could.
And going by Fortune out of the same door, which opened into the Garden, they
went unto the Fountain of Ceres, which Leonide found to be a very fine piece,
and exquisitly wrought: From thence they went forward into the grove of Hazels,
and as if they were guided through that Labyrinth by the thread of Ariadne, they
came directly to the River side, where Alexis was lying upon the ground; and as
fortune would have, it was rising up to view the rest of those places, where
she had left so many marks of her former contentments, and extreme affection.
Astrea spied her first, and showing her unto the Nymph, said unto her, I think
Madam, that Diana can divine; for see where the Druide is walking all alone
upon the banks of the water, which runs into that fatal River of Lignon,
Leonide then seeing that Alexis had no such intention as she feared, she was
very joyful: but as she was advancing toward her, she heard one call upon
her, and turning her self about, she saw it was Paris, who seemed a far off
very desirous to speak with her; and because she knew not what his business
might be, and perhaps it might be such as was not for Diana to hear: Fair ones,
said she, I beseech you go you unto Alexis, and stay with her, whilst I go and
see what business Paris has with me. The Shepherdesses were very glad of this
commission; for Astrea longed to see the face of Celadon in that Druide, whose
voice, words and gestures, were so resemblant unto that Shepherd, as she took
extreme delight in her company: and Diana was glad also to be thus rid of
Paris, as well because she did not love him, as because love made her think
very well of Sylvander, and she could not permit her ears to hearken unto any
words of affection, which came from any mouth but of that kind Shepherd.

Leonide then went to meet Paris; and the two Shepherdesses went toward the
disguised Druide, whom they found looking upon an old willow which time had
decayed, and which retained no more of it self but a hollow bulk, and a
withered bark: Oh Willow! said Alexis to her self, what is become of these
letters which I trusted thee with all? And why do thou not render me the same
good offices thou were wont, in assuring me of my Shepherdesses good will? For
thou see me now with no less love nor less affection then I had at that time:
Oh beloved Willow, I know thy meaning, for had the heart of my Fairest
Shepherdess retained the memory of my services, thou would have still
retained those characters, which were the dear testimonies of her good will;
but I see that time has vvorn both thee, and them, out of her thoughts; had she
spoken these words any louder, the Shepherdesses had heard them; but as luck
was, she expressed them unto her self only in thought: And because they were
unwilling to interrupt those pleasing imaginations, which they thought she
fancied, they stopped; and when the Druide vvalked, they did the like, not
with any intention to discover any thoughts of her soul, but only lest they
should divert her by their presence from that which she thought most pleasing;
Alexis then, thinking her self alone, continued on her thoughts, and likewise
her walk along the River side, until she found a Tree on her right hand, where
two days before her unfortunate accident, she had engraved some verses, which
testified with how much constraint she courted the Shepherdess Aminthe; and
casting her eyes thereupon, Oh how this sight did vvound her memory!

Perhaps the reading of those words had made her speak something so loud as to
be heard by those Shepherdesses, which followed her, if by fortune Sylvander at
the same time had not a far off began to sing; and the voice came so distinctly
toward them, that Alexis turning her head that way, espied the Shepherdesses
close by her; she was sorry to see them so near, and perceive them no sooner,
fearing lest her passion had made her utter some word, or use some action,
which might discover what she desired to conceal: But that which most
troubled her was her eyes, which were full of tears, and which being so
surprised she could not hide; yet faining not to see them, she turned the other
way, and wiped her eyes as well as she could, and then setting a good face
upon it, she came unto them, and bad them good morrow, calling them sluggards,
and faining she could not sleep, because the pretty birds began to sing so
sweety at her chamber-window: It was rather Madam, answered Astrea, because
they troubled you. No indeed, answered Alexis, for I took so much delight in
their Music: that I could not choose but rise to hear them more plainly as I
walked by this River side; and I think the time so short, that it seems not
above a quarter of an hour since I came hither. But Madam (answered Diana) you
have slept so little, that I fear it will do you some injury: It is true
indeed, answered Alexis, and you may see my eyes have done penance for it; but
I was so much delighted in hearing the warble of these pretty birds, and in
taking the fresh air, that it is impossible to receive any harm. The best
remedy will be, replied Astrea, to go to bed betimes at night, that you may
enjoy your rest and sleep before the day do break, and before these little
chanters of the wood begin to sing; and then we shall Madam be glad to bear you
company, and carry you unto places which are better furnished with this kind of
harmony. Alexis offered to reply when Sylvander began to sing, and because they
spied Phillis coming toward them, they stayed for her, whilst Sylvander sung.
Phillis being come unto them; after she had saluted the Druide and her company:
Madam, said she, how do you like this Shepherds voice? I like it very well,
answered Alexis, and think him to be a very well accomplished Shepherd, and a
very perfect lover. Madam, (answered Diana, and both smiled and blushed)
perhaps you may be mistaken in your judgment of him; for the Shepherds of
Lignon, do often hide dissembling souls under the innocent habit which they
wear. Perhaps indeed, replied the Druide, that this may be so in some, but I am
most confident, I am not mistaken in my opinion of this Shepherd. Tell her
Madam (said Phillis, and interrupted her) that she her self thinks the same;
and that if the Shepherdesses of Lignon were not greater dissemblers then this
Shepherd, she would not have spoken so as she did. Sister replied Diana, I am
much beholding to your rallary: for speaking thus of me in the presence of this
Druide, you will infuse a strange opinion of me into her. Do not fear (said
Alexis and smiled) that these words can make me believe any thing of you but
good: I know the virtue and merits of Diana very well; besides, dissimulation
is sometimes so necessary unto our sex: as it may well be taken for a kind of
virtue. But since we have gone so far, give me leave to tell you out of my
affection to you, what Phillis has formerly said unto your dear friend here,
upon the same subject: Madam, answered Diana, you will do me an honor in it,
but the worst is, I fear it is nothing worthy of your pains, which you can
tell me that concerns my self. I make no doubt, wise Shepherdess (said Alexis)
but you have often heard the same which I shall tell you: but because we are
all oftentimes partial in our causes, and because the advice of friends will
do no harm, I will tell you what discourse Astrea and I, had yesterday,
concerning you: and I shall desire Phillis also to give her advice, because I
know you have a great confidence in them both. Upon this, she related unto
Diana all the considerations which they had upon Sylvanders love: and after
they had all concluded, that it was no fiction nor by reason of the wager, but
real and in good earnest, she continued thus: Now Fair Diana, it concerns you
to consider well upon it; as for Sylvander, to love or not to love you, does
not depend upon him, he has but the choice of these two ways, either to
grieve, or to live happily with you, even as you shall appoint.

But upon you does depend not only his misery, and his happiness, but your own
also: And though I may believe that perhaps you are not sensible of those
torments, which his love inflicts upon him; yet I conceive it very hard that
one should be loved, and served so discreetly by such a very excellently
qualified Shepherd, and have no spark of good will toward him: but however it
be, can you think to exempt your self from all the torment of it? And that you
are not accessory unto his? You are mistaken, wise Shepherdess, if you be in
that opinion; for if you should forbid him to love you, you may as well do
nothing; for you may be certain he will not obey: and if by any rigorous
language, you command him to get out of your sight, then the violence of his
affection, will so divulge it self all over the Country, as perhaps not a
Shepherd but will know it: So as I see the inconvenience is unevitable, unless
you resolve upon some wise expedient. All those that know Sylvander, do think
him a Shepherd so amiable, as they think there is not a Shepherdess, but may
well daign to love him, and that the Shepherdess whom he loves may, if she
have any wit, very well do the like: what opinion then will the world have of
Diana, whom every one knows to have wit, and judgment, when they see how this
Shepherd loves her, serves her, and adores her with so much affection? I shall
by way of advice propose two ways unto you, the one of which I conceive more
safe then the other: The one way is, since I see it a thing impossible to
divert this Shepherd from his affection to you, permit him to serve you
secretly; and this permission will be a way by joining his prudence unto yours,
to hide this affection from all such as have nothing else to do, but censure
and p^y into the actions of others. But if you do not love this Shepherd, this
counsel is naught; because this secret correspondency will oblige you unto
certain indulgencies, and testimonies of affection, which may cost you very
dear: Therefore I conceive this other expedient to be better; Let him continue
that guise in which he has hitherto served you; by this permission, his flame
will not flash with such violence: and if by fortune it should so break out
that every one takes notice of it, they will not at all think it strange,
because he is already accustomed unto it: and his Courtship being under that
pretense of dissimulation, they will not think he loves you in earnest: I know
there will be some malevolent minds that will be spending their censures, but
who can avoid the lash of such tongues? But most will not believe it: And the
best thing of this way is, you will not be obliged unto him: For there is
nothing so dangerous, as for a woman to commit her self unto the discretion of
him she loves; because most men being naturally of a wavering temper, when they
change their affection, they will not for all that lose the memory of things
past; but on the contrary, thinking to make themselves the more esteemed, they
blaze them abroad, and brag how much they have been loved by such a one; and
the bad condition of our age being as it is, and people more apt to believe the
evil then the good, it is presently believed that such a woman is a very loving
soul, who will love more then she is loved. Now Fair Diana, by permitting him
to continue his guise of dissimulation, you will not be in any danger this way,
because you are not obliged to render him any knowledge of your good will: But
on the contrary, may take his real affection as if it were Fiction, and he
cannot complain against you. This also is another thing considerable in this
course: I know very well that Diana has a little vanity, and good reason has
she for it, being a Sherherdess so full of perfections, and the principal in
all this Country; on the contrary, Sylvander being a person unknown, and Owner
of no Fortune but what his own Industry can get, I am afraid that Diana would
blush if any should see her allow of any real address from a Shepherd so much
her inferior. But fair Shepherdess, you are by this expedient, exempt from
this inconveniency, having a good excuse when you receive his complements of
Love, as if all were but in jest, to exercise his wit, and sharpen it with
feigned conceptions of an imaginary Love.

Thus Alexis ended; and when Diana would have answered, Astrea interrupted her:
Nay, nay Sister (said she) there is no more to be said, after this fair Druide;
She has cleared all doubts that could possibly be foreseen, and fully answered
them, so as I shall not think you to be so wise as I ever took you, if you do
not follow her counsel; Phillis I am confident will be of the same opinion. But
one thing does a little scruple me, against which a remedy may happily be
applied; which is, That if Diana do permit this disguised Courtship of this
Shepherd, she must have a good occasion for the permission, otherwise I am
afraid the Artifice should be discovered: And you know, Madam, that if one he
found juggling in one trick, all the rest of their actions will be suspected.
Never trouble your self (said Phillis) about that, for Sylvander himself did
yesterday give an excellent occasion to color the permission: For Diana told
me, the last night when we were retired, that Sylvander having obtained leave
to continue his Courtship all the rest of the day, he pretended that this
permission was to last always; and both he and she falling in difference about
it, the business was referred unto Astrea and my self; and should have been
determined that same night: But because Diana was not willing the matter should
be argued in Public, and both you, Madam, and Leonide being in the chamber,
the difference was deferred until another time; and Sylvander accompanying me
to my Lodging, he told me how glad he should be if it could be deferred,
because till then he might enjoy his Privilege: There is no necessity
therefore, that the business should be made so private; but on the contrary, I
am of opinion, that the matter is to be argued in some public place; to the
end, that when all do see Sylvander continue his addresses to Diana, they may
know it is upon the old score as he begun it.

Alexis and Astrea did very well approve of this advice; and Diana, who perhaps
did like of it as well as they, and till then stood mute, she seemed to be
convinced by the reasons of Alexis, and the approbation of her two dear
friends; so as it was resolved, that the difference should come to hearing at
such a time when Adamas, Alcidon, and Daphnide were present; and that Astrea
and Phillis should give judgment in the behalf of Sylvander.

As fortune was, Sylvander hearing the voices of these fair Shepherdesses so
near him, he turned that way, and spied them; and seeing all their backs
toward him, being prompted by a Lovers curiosity, he got as near them as he
could unseen; and creeping upon the ground, he got behind a Bush which was
within two or three paces of the place where they were set; so listening
attentively, he heard what Alexis had propounded, and what was resolved upon.
Oh how much did he think himself obliged unto that fair Druide, for giving such
counsel unto Diana? And when they went away, he did accompany them with a
thousand wishes of happiness: and when he saw them so far off as they could not
think he heard them, he rose up and followed; and to make them look back, he
began to play upon his Corner.

Alexis who loved this Shepherd very well, as one whom she ranked in the
catalogue of her best friends: Come Sylvander (said she unto him) Do you not
think your self much obliged unto me for bringing the fair Diana hither? For
had I not been, she would have been still in her chamber, and you deprived of
your happiness in seeing her. Madam, answered the Shepherd, you cannot do me so
great a favor, as I expected always from your fair face. Why (said Alexis)
does my face promise you so much? Yes Madam (replied Sylvander) for it has such
a lively resemblance of a Shepherd who would have exposed his life for my
contentment, as I can think no less. I am very glad (answered Alexis) that
Nature has been so favorable unto me, as to make me like unto any whom you
love; for I make no doubt, but though I do not deserve it, yet you will love me
for his sake. Madam, replied Sylvander, were he alive, I should love him for
your sake; your merits being so high. as not to yield unto any: And to let you
see the truth of my words, I will put my life into your hands, if you will be
pleased to take so much pains as to judge a difference which is dearer unto me
then my life. Shepherd, replied Diana, Why would you change the Judges which
you have already chosen? Not but that I am willing to submit unto whatsoever
the fair Alexis shall ordain; but methinks it is a sign you know your cause
to be bad, and would corrupt your Judges by flatteries, and reject those who
are already chosen. I did not think, fairest Mistress, answered Sylvander, That
any praises which one could give unto this fair Lady, was esteemed flattery;
for merit cannot be flattered, nor can any flattery equal her perfections. I
would not have you think I refuse those Judges which you were pleased to choose;
But I propounded this fair Druide only to be an Umpire in case those two Judges
cannot agree amongst themselves; and that then she should ordain what she
thought most consonant to Justice. I cannot deny (answered Diana) the
advantageous language which you give of this fair Lady, nor any commendation
that can be given her, and therefore I do most willingly accept her for our
Umpire.

Sylvander would have replied, had they not seen coming Adamas, Daphnide,
Alcidon, and all the company which supped the night before at the house of old
Phocion, except Leonide and Paris, who parted from the rest of the company, to
finish the discourse which they had begun in the house of Adamas: for Paris
adoring Diana beyond all measure, and having received from her another kind of
answer then he desired, he would take Leonides counsel in the business; and she
being very affectionate to him, was willing to give him the best advice she
could: And therefore retiring themselves into the Grove of Hazles, Brother
(said she unto him) I have twice deferred the giving you my opinion in the
business whereof you spoke, hoping that time would alter your mind; but now,
since I see nothing will work any alteration in it: I beseech you tell me what
your intention is. Sister, replied Paris, my intention is, to Court Diana in
the way of marriage. And do you think (said Leonide) that Adamas will approve
of it, for you ought to have a special consideration of that? I have not
expressly acquainted him with it (said Paris) but he knows that I do love her,
and does not disapprove of it. This (answered Leonide) is not enough; you ought
to acquaint him with it seriously, and ask his consent. In the second place,
which indeed ought to be the first, you ought to consider seriously with your
self, whether this marriage be fit and convenient for you: For Love is a
partial Judge, and many things are handsome in a Mistress, which are
insufferable in a Wife. Oh Brother, there is abundance of difference betwixt
Love and Marriage: for Love lasts no longer then one pleases, but Marriage
must continue long, and therefore is more displeasing: Love is an Emblem of
Liberty, because it never forces the Will; but Marriage on the contrary is an
Emblem of servitude; because nothing but death can break the Bonds. It Is true,
when a marriage is made between fit and suitable persons, I believe there is no
greater happiness amongst mortals, because all joys and contentments are
doubled; the joy of the one, is the joy of the other: And because such is the
misery of all Mortals, as they are subject unto a thousand disasters of
Fortune, a faithful companion in marriage, does help to bear the burden of
them. To be brief, it is almost impossible to enjoy any complete happiness
without a second self, unto whom all things may be communicated. But Paris,
give me leave to tell you, that the man who marries, must not consult
altogether with his eyes, or his desires; but with his reason and judgment;
and you must consider whether there be any thing desirable in Diana besides her
Beauty, not only as a Mistress, but also as a Wife: For Beauty does ordinarily
deceive, and is often like an Inn-signe before a poor Inn, where no good
accomodations can be had. Beauty resembles those Spectacles which makes every
thing look greater then they are, and is at best but a fair fading Flower,
which when once decayed, and one is tied unto it, repentance comes too late: So
much in consideration of Beauty. Then Brother, Great heed must be taken that
nothing be done which may redound unto your dishonor and reproach; You are son
unto the Grand Druide; Diana I must needs confess is a Shepherdess of much
merit, but yet she is a Shepherdess; and do you think that such Alliance will
not be much wondered at? We are not born for our selves; we must sometimes leave
our own contentment, for the satisfaction of those who love us, and those unto
whom we are obliged: Consider Brother, that Marriage is the happiness or the
misery of every one: and therefore be not too rash in your actions. But to wave
all these considerations, this only is enough for all: That one had better be a
Gally-slave, and be tied to serve a Tyrant, then marry one that loves him not;
Imagine Brother, What delight can one find in eating, or drinking, lying, or
sleeping with his enemy? It is requisite therefore that you know her mind; For
if she do love another, or cannot love you, I would advise you to marry a
grave, rather then Diana. Think well upon all these things; and after you have
seriously considered them, tell me what you think of them, then I will further
tell you what I conceive best to be done.

Paris hearing Leonide speak with so much consideration and eagerness, did
think at first that she had some design to marry him somwhere else, and
therefore desired to divert him from Diana; But afterward seriously
considering her reasons, and finding much solidity in them, he altered his
opinion, and found that all she said proceeded from her affection to him: and
therefore he returned her this answer: That it was true, he ought to acquaint
Adamas with his intention; That he did not doubt but to find him a very good
Father, as formerly he had upon all other occasions: That as for the conditions
of Diana, It was mere folly to dispute upon a thing that was already resolved:
and that he could as well live without a soul, as live happily without her; and
that this did answer all those considerations. That as for the approbation of
his Parents, he thought none of them did love him better then he did himself,
and that therefore he was obliged to satisfy and content himself before any
Kindred or Friends. That as for the good Will and Affection of Diana; It is
true indeed, Sister (said he) I must ask your counsel upon that point; for you
being a woman as she is, you may better judge of her intention then I, whose
passion perhaps has disturbed my judgment. I have several times attempted to
know her Will; and the last time she was at the house of Adamas, when we walked
so long together, I complained unto her, that all my services were so ill
accepted, and almost thrown away: unto which she returned me an answer full of
courtesy and civility: And when I replied, that it was neither courtesy nor
civility, but only Love which I looked for from her; she answered, That she did
honor me as much as any man in the world, and loved me as well as any Sister
could love a Brother; and told me; that this was all she was able to do. But
when I replied that my design and hopes was to marry her; she answered me,
that she had Parents who had the disposition of her, and she always referred
such things unto their discretions: But Paris (said she) if you will know my
mind, let me tell you, that, I do not intend to marry, either you or any else;
no nor ever will, I will always love you as a brother, but never as a Husband:
upon this, Sister, we were interrupted, and I would not urge her any further,
until I had your advice, how to behave my self: I conjure you therefore by the
affection you have ever expressed toward me, to assist me: for to think of
diverting my affection to her, is mere folly, because death only is able to do
it. Brother (said Leonide and smiled) you ask my advice in a business, which it
seems you are resolved upon; but I believe your desire is I should tell you,
how you should demean your self to win the affection of this Shepherdess: and
truly, since you are in such an extremity as you say you are, I conceive your
best course is to obtain leave of her to speak unto her Parents; for they,
doubtless considering the advantage which will accrue unto Diana by it, will
not be against the proposition: and she who is very wise, and one that has
always carried her self with abundance of prudence and virtue, she dares not
be against their opinion, least she should be thought either wilful or in love
with some other, or else tax her discretion: Thus may she before she be aware,
engage her self so far, that she cannot handsomely retire. But my opinion is,
that your best way is, not to speak unto her until the very day we depart from
hence, to the end, that if you do obtain this leave, she may not know where to
find you, in case she have a mind to revoke it again, or at the least not find
you before you have made the overture unto some of her Parents.

This was the opinion of Leonide, which Paris resolved to follow; And whilst
they were thus discoursing, Adamas and all the Company joined with them. And
because Sylvander was grown very bold, by the discourse which he had heard, as
soon as all complements were passed, he addressed himself unto Diana: Mistress,
(said he aloud) I shall not refuse the judgment of those whom you appointed,
so you will but be pleased to do the like: you need not question, (said Diana)
but I shall consent unto it, since I know my cause to be good, and made choice
of my Judges: The difference (replied Sylvander) needs not so much arguing, as
that betwixt Phillis and me; and therefore, I beseech you, that without any
more delay, the matter may be judged. I shall never be against it (answered
Diana) since I hope for a decree to pass on my side. For my part, replied
Sylvander, I derive all my right and title from the permission which you gave
me, which was to continue my behavior toward you always, as I did during the
wager betwixt Phillis, and me: How, replied Diana, did I ever permit you to
continue always so? Good Shepherd, do you take one day, for always? And yet I
permitted you the rest of the day only, which being ended, you was not to make
any more use of your fiction. I beseech you Mistress, (said he) do you remember
how you permitted me to end that day which remained after the judgment, as I
had begun it, and to continue my behavior, as I did before? It is very true,
(said Diana) but that day is ended, and I have begun another. You had good
reason, fair Shepherdess, (said he) to say that you began another day; because
it is the quality of the Sun to begin and limit days, and you are the Sun of
all our Horizon; and therefore you cannot say, that the day which you granted
unto me is ended: For I beseech you, fairest Mistress, as long as the light
continues, does not the day continue also? I confess it, answered Diana; but
you must confess also, that when the Sun is set, and cannot be seen, it is
night. I do confess it, replied Sylvander, and thereupon I have gained what I
asked: for my soul and my eyes acknowledging no other Sun, but those glorious
rays of your beauty, and perfection, most certainly as long as I am not
deprived of this Light, and of this Sun, it is not night unto me: and since it
is not night, have I not good reason to say, that the day which you allowed me
was not ended; but on the contrary that it will last as long as I live, because
your beauty, and your merits, will be always in my soul? Diana a little
surprised, or at least seemed so, returned this answer; I cannot deny, (said
she) but that when you asked me leave for a day, you might mean such a day as
you speak of: but I know that the day which I granted, was only one of our
natural days. Fairest Mistress, (said Sylvander) things that are ambiguous and
doubtful, ought to be interpreted to the advantage of the poor, and him that
begs: Liberality and Generosity, are qualities so becoming a Noble soul, as I
am confident, O my Judges, that you will not diminish the least of what is the
fair Dianas due, Alexis smiled and said, For my part, under the favor of
Astrea and Alexis, I must needs condemn Diana, and think Sylvander in the
right; because those who give, ought to restrain and explain their gifts, if
they do not intend to give all that is asked: for otherwise it is to be
believed, it is in the same intention that he had who receives the benefit. Ah
me! cried out Diana, I am afraid my cause will go against me: for I know Astrea
will accord unto all that Alexis thinks good; and Phillis will not contradict
Astrea. And I said Adamas, do ordain, that if Sylvander do hereafter resent the
power of a beauty in good earnest, he shall not complain, neither of Diana nor
his Judges, but of himself only, who was the procurer of his own misery, and
that the Shepherdess shall not be obliged by his services to pity him.

Adamas said this, because he had a design to give Paris unto this
Shepherdess, and seeing that Sylvander was not displeasing unto her, he was
afraid the continuation of this courtship should engage her more. But Sylvander
seeming to take no notice of what he said, but kissing the hands of his Judges,
he kneeled down before Diana; Fairest Mistress, said he unto her, if ever any of
my actions do contradict that vow, which I make of my faithful and perpetual
service, let me immediately be condemned unto the most cruel torture, that ever
mortal endured. Diana answered him, very faintly: Remember Shepherd said she,
that you are permitted no farther then to faign and dissemble, and that I shall
take all your actions only as fictions and dissimulations.

Sylvander had replied, had not Diana, and all the Company, entered into the
grove of Hazels, and there met Leonide and Paris, who at the same time were
coming to look them: and after they had walked a while, they all went together
into the house to dinner, where they found the Table furnished with many
delicate varieties, far above the rate of a Country Village.

Lerindas, least the Nymph Galathea, should think him long, he made all the
have that possibly he could unto Mount-verdune. And being a good Footman, also
infinitely desirous to please his Lady, he made such have, that he was there
again before dinner. Madam, said he unto her, Adamas cannot retard the
sacrifice, because the people were already assembled; but because I told him
you were very desirous to see the Shepherdesses of Lignon, he sends you word,
that if you stay any time here, he will bring them all hither. I am very sorry,
said Galathea, that I cannot show this sacrifice unto the Generous Damon, that
he also might have seen these fair Shepherdesses; but if Adamas keep his word,
we shall see them as conveniently here; which if we do not, we cannot better
employ our time then in going to their Town. Madam, answered Cleontine, since
Adamas has said it, you may be assured he will do it: Doubtless he will come
before he return to his house, and will be glad that all those fair
Shepherdesses should accompany Alexis, when he presents her unto you. But as to
Alexis (said Galathea unto Lerindas) is she as full of beauty as they report
her to be? For I know thou art a person of judgment, and would be sure to view
her: Madam, she is fair, answered he, but in my mind there are three others
which are fairer, and please me more; and since you ask me, I had rather tell
you so, then let Leonide have that advantage of me: I am of opinion Madam, that
if they were changed for your Nimphs, you would have the fairest women in the
world to wait upon you. How Lerindus? (said Galathea) do thou think them
fairer then my Nimphs? Then your Nimphs Madam? answered he, Yes, yes, Fairer
then all the Nimphs in the world. What Lerindas? (said Galathea) are they
Fairer then I am? Ah Madam, (answered he, and was a little surprised) I speak
not of you, for you are the Lady and Mistress of all Nimphs; but I say, that all
others must yield unto them in beauty, for they are as much above your Nimphs
in beauty, as your Nimphs are above me. You shall see, said Silvia, that
Lerindas is fallen in love. Love (answered he with a disdaining look) Nay, I
should never fall in Love, with them, if they were as scornful as you. Galathea
then laughed extremely; Certainly, said she, Silvia is in the right, Lerindas
is assuredly in Love with one of these Shepherdesses: but which of the three
does please the best? Stay a little Madam (answered he) I cannot upon a sudden
resolve you: The one has more Attracts, The other has more Modesty, The third
more Beauty: The first is called Daphnide, the second Diana, the third Astrea.
I assure my self replied Galathea, that this Astrea is the fairest, Is she not
Lerindas? Certainly she is, said he, and Diana is more modest, and Daphnide
more attractive. To tell you truly, Attracts do much take me, Modesty does much
move me, but I love Beauty best of all: And therefore I conclude, that if I be
in Love, it must of necessity be with Astrea. Believe it Madam, when you see
them, you will say that I am a man of judgment; and Silara, as disdainful as
she is, would be glad to change Beauty with them. Then Galathea turned toward
Cleontine, Mother said she unto her I beseech you what does Celidea think of
these Shepherdesses? Madam, answered Cleontine, always when she begins to
commend them, she will never almost make an end* so as you will think her in
love with them as well as Lerindas: But indeed I never heard her speak of this
Daphnide, and if you please, I will call Lerindas to give you more particular
satisfaction: And because Galathea was very desirous to know all circumstances
concerning these Fair ones, she called for him. But Mother, said she unto
Cleontine, I could wish you would send for C^lidea, that we might have a full
relation from her. Madam, said Lerindas, and smiled, you will hardly speak with
her this night it is so late; for I left her near the Temple of the Goddess
Astrea, where she was to offer a Sacrifice, and Thamires with her: But Madam,
she can tell you no more then I can, either concerning their Beauty, or any
thing else. If you desire to know who this Daphnide is, I can tell you, she is
a stranger, late come amongst them, with one whose name is Alcidon: For though
I stayed not long amongst them, yet seeing her so fair, I enquired who she was.
Madam (said Cleontine) it will not be long before Celidea and Thamires will be
here, and then you may be better informed of all passages.

Thus did Galathea enquire of these fair Shepherdesses; and the more she
enquired the reason she thought Celadon had to love Astrea, since every one
gave her such a high Character above others: And Dinner being done, she went to
visit Damon, who stirred not yet out of his chamber, because his loss of blood,
and going so far on foot in his Arms, had so wearied and weakened him, that he
was constrained to keep out of the Air, for fear of a further inconvenience. In
the mean time Halladine was come unto him, and never stirred from his Beds
feet, but waited upon him with so much care and vigilance, that Galathea did
much esteem him for it. It was now the third day since he received his wounds;
and the Nymph who thought her self much obliged unto the valor of this
Cavalier, for being wounded in defense of Ladies; moreover, being her Kinsman,
and injured in her own Dominions and presence, she resolved never to leave him
until he was perfectly recovered: And to divert him a little, she would have
Lorindas relate in his presence, all the passages of his voyage.

Thus was the day spent, and when it was night, Celidea and Thamires returned,
Galathea would needs see them presently; as well because she highly esteemed
that Shepherdess, as because she desired to know more particularly of those
Shepherdesses, whom she had visited. Come wise Shepherdess (said she unto her)
tell us, I beseech you, the news of your Voyage. Madam, answered she, we have
done our duties both unto God and man; for we have offered a sacrifice of
Thanks unto Tautates for the Missetoe of the New Year; and we have done our
duty unto Adamas, in visiting his daughter Alexis: and I assure you, we are all
very well satisfied. For be pleased to know Madam, that Alexis is the most
fair, most lovely, and most courteous Lady that ever eye beheld; and has given
such contentment to us all, that there is not one of us who does not even adore
her: and Adamas has entertained us beyond all expression. As for the Sacrifice,
the great Tautates has well accepted of it; for all the victimes were as sound
and perfect as we could desire: The Missleto which we saw is so large and
great, that we call it another Tree that is fixed unto the Oak, so as our
Druides have no reason to spare either us or our cattle this year in our
Sacrifices. But besides this, we have also been highly delighted with the Loves
of Hylas who is the most pleasant humored Shepherd that ever was; that no
diversion could equal it: Also we heard the judgment of Diana upon the
controversy between Sylvander and Phillis; And the presence of Daphnide and
Alcidon was no small grace unto all the Assembly. Who is that Hylas of whom you
speak, said Galathea? He is a young man, answered Celidea, who falls in love
with all the Shepherdesses he meets, and maintains, that it is not inconstancy,
with such pleasant arguments and quirks, as it is impossible to hear him and be
sad: For Madam, he is not above twenty, or one and twenty years of age, and he
reckoned up above twenty with whom he had been in love, and most of them
present; The last he quitted was the fair and wise Alexis; and God knows for
whom: I assure you Madam it is not for a fairer, for he has made choice of
Stella, one that is old enough, and not comparable to the fair Druide in point
of Beauty.

But I beseech you, said Galathea, Does the daughter of Adamas suffer him to
serve her, and before the eyes of every one? Yes Madam, answered Celidea, but I
assure you, without any scandal; and if you saw her, you would say as much:
There is not the daughter of any Druide whom he does not Court. Nay Madam, I am
confident that if he had the honor to see you, neither you, nor any of your
Nymphs would escape his Courtship; for he would express his mind at the very
first. But what is the judgment of Diana, replied Galathea. Madam, answered
the Shepherdess, It happened upon a time that Phillis and Sylvander were in a hot
dispute which of them had most merits to make themselves loved: For Sylvander,
although he be as well a qualified Shepherd, as any in all the Country, yet did
he never love any particularly, nor was loved: And because Phillis did upbraid
him that reason was his want of courage and merit, and Sylvander said as much
by her, they were both of them condemned by the company to Court Diana, and at
three months end, she was to judge which of them won the wager. Doubtless, said
Damon, Diana would adjudge it on the woman's side. Her judgment, answered
Celidea, is something doubtful: She adjudged Phillis to be more amiable then
Sylvander, and that Sylvander knew better how to make himself loved then
Phillis did. Certainly (said Damon) Diana is a very discreet and wise
Shepherdess; for I see she had a mind to content both; and she has done it with
much discretion. But Madam, continued he, and turned toward Galathea, you have
not yet asked her who that Daphnide is? I heard Lerindas say, she was one of
the fairest of all the Shepherdesses, and I would gladly know who she and
Alcidon is, for some respects which afterward I shall tell you. Then Thamires
began to speak; Sir, said he unto Damon, Lerindas was in the right to say she
was fair, for indeed she is so; but he was in the wrong in saying she was a
Shepherdess; for she is not so, but only to disguise her self, does wear the
habit of a Shepherdess: We understood by Hylas that Daphnide is one of the
greatest Ladies in the Province of the Romans, and Alcidon the greatest
Favorite of King Euriche, and that they came into this Country out of
curiosity to see the Fountain of Loves Verity. It is enough (said Damon) and
then turning toward Galathea, Madam, said he unto her, you must by all means
see these two persons, and be acquainted with them, for Daphnide is one of the
fairest of all the Gallo-Ligurians, and was highly loved by King Guricke, so as
had he lived, she had been his Queen: As for Alcidon, I shall commend him unto
you, Madam, for the most accomplished Cavalier in the Court of Thorismond; and
I saw him so caressed and loved by that King, as he could not give
demonstrations enough of his good will toward him. I could relate many things
worthy of knowledge, but since he is so near you, it is better you know them
from his mouth then from mine. Damon then began to whisper with the Nymph,
which caused Thamires and Celidea to remove a little further distant, But Madam
(said Damon unto her) Is the face of this Shepherdess thus spoiled with
cutting? She seems to be very wise and discreet, how came this misfortune to
pass? These cuts in her face, answered Galathea, are the most glorious marks
that ever woman wore: thereupon she related the whole story, and how happily
her design prospered since the fond affection of Calidon was extinguished, and
the perfect Love of Thamires augmented by it, so as never was any more tenderly
loved then she is now in her deformity. Damon admired the resolution of this
young woman, especially in a Shepherdess, because such generosity is seldom but
amongst higher and more noble spirits. You are mistaken, Sir, said the Nymph,
The Shepherds of this Country are not Shepherds of necessity, nor constrained
to keep their flocks, for a livelihood, but have made choice of this kind of
life, purposely to enjoy more tranquillity, and live at ease: for the truth is,
they are of kin and allied unto the greatest Nobility in all our Dominions.
Madam, answered Damon, although the scars in this woman's face, were made with
the point of a Diamond, yet I do know one that can most certainly cure them,
provided she have so so much courage, as to do what is requisite thereto: As
for her courage, replied Galathea, you need not doubt so much as her will. How?
(replied he and was amassed) has she no will to become fair? Truly, I believe,
she is the only woman in the world who is of that opinion. Call her, said
Galathea, and you shall see what she will say. Upon which he calling her by her
name; she came to know what Galathea would be pleased to command her. Celidea,
said the Nymph, here is a Cavalier who pitying the misfortune of your face,
and inquiring how it came to pass, does say that most certainly he can get you
cured, and make you as fair as ever you were, if you please. Shepherdess, said
Damon, It is most undoubtedly true, for when I was in Africa, one of Eudoxes
women was wounded in her face with a Diamond, and so deep that the bone in her
cheek did almost appear; yet there was a skilful Surgeon, who wetting a
little stick with her blood, did dress the stick with a remedy, called the
Sympathy Salve, and so cured her against the opinion of all the world. And
because I thought this cure to be very rare; I was so full of curiosity, as to
ask some of the Salve; but he answered me, that it was a thing which he could
not give unto any, because he was obliged to it by oath: but that whenever I
had any need, if I would but sent unto him a little piece of wood, bloodyed in
the wound, he would presently work the cure, though he were a thousand miles
distant, if I would only keep the wound clean: Therefore Shepherdess, if you
would be cured, you need only but scratch the wound, so as blood may run a
little, and you shall see you will recover your former beauty.

Sir, answered Celidea, your kindness, and the care you have of my face,
obliges me very much unto you for it: but give me leave to tell you, that this
beauty, which you are pleased to speak of, is at this time a thing so
indifferent unto me, as if I could recover it again by going to the door, I
should hardly stir a foot that way, if there was any other way out of the
house. When I call to memory, what abundance of trouble, and importunity, it
caused me, I assure you Sir, I would rather go out at the window then that way,
or have any correspondency with it again. Surely, said Damon, all women have a
particular desire to be fair, or at the least not to be deformed. Those who are
so eager after beauty, replied Celidea, perhaps have some designs to procure
the Love of some whose amity they desire. But for my part, I do protest unto
you Sir, that I desire to be fair only in the eyes of Thamires, and if I would,
make my self invisible to any else. Me thinks yet, replied Damon, you should
desire that Thamires should see you fair. It is very true, replied she, but I
believe these scars in my face do seem as fair unto him, as all beauty, or
delicacy of Features can be since they came unto me only for his sake. This
consideration, replied the Nymph, may make him have a great opinion of your
affection, goodness, and virtue; but perhaps he desires you were fair, as well
as virtuous. For my part, Sir, replied Celidea, I am so very well contented,
and satisfied, with being as I am, that I think I should offend Tautates,
should I desire to be better: yet if Thamires do desire to have it so, I am
most ready to do whatsoever is his pleasure. Dearest, said Thamires, were you
never so fair, most certainly I could not Love you better then I do, as you
are: But I must needs confess, that if I thought it were possible to restore
you unto your former beauty, I would spare no pains, or cost, to procure it;
for I am obliged unto it, and should think my self most ungreatfull, if I did
not: and therefore Sir, said he to Damon, if you know of any remedy, I beseech
you, acquaint me with it, and I shall think my self eternally obliged unto you
for it. Most certainly, said Damon, she will be cured, and without much pain;
for I have seen the experience of it. A little stick must be wet in the blood
of the wounds, and carried unto the place which I shall direct very carefully;
you will not be above twelve or fifteen days in going, and I will write unto a
Surgeon, who questionless will presently work the cure: Now did Celidea hate
the very thought of this beauty since, for the gaining of it, she was to be so
long deprived of her dearest Thamires: Oh Heavens! said she, with tears in her
eyes, did I take so much pains to deprive my self of this beauty, to buy it
now again at so dear a rate? Ah Thamires! content your self with your Celidea
as she is; and do not run your self into so much hazard of losing her for ever.
For if you go so far into a strange Country from her, grief perhaps may bring
her to her grave, before your return, because she is not able to be so long
absent from you. Have thou not told me, a hundred times Thamires, that thou
could live with me as I am, the happiest Shepherd in the World? And what,
dear Thamires, needs more? Would thou be better then happy? No, no, the joy
of my life, enjoy that happiness which Heaven has given thee, and strive for no
more then thou art like to obtain; content thy self with what the Gods have
thought good for thee to be contented with: If it be for my sake, dearest
Thamires, you desire this beauty, believe it, that your absence is so odious to
me, as I had rather die then be deprived of you one week; the journey I
perceive is so long, so full of danger, that I cannot consent unto it: you are
to go amongst the Barbarians, perhaps he unto whom you go, is dead: who knows
whether his receipt be proper to cure me? Perhaps it has his right upon
another, but I am confident the wound which this Cavalier speaks of, was made
by some piece of glass, or some other counterfeit stone, and not with a right
Diamond: the wound he speaks of was dressed, and the receipt applied unto it,
as soon as it was made, but mine is old, and out of all hopes to be helped. But
suppose it possible, I may recover this so much despised beauty, by the
torments which you will put me unto, and which at best is but doubtful: yet
Thamires, since I do not value it, and since it is only to procure your self a
little more contentment; will you buy that contentment at a price which is so
dear unto me? In the first place, you must carry my blood, but alas! the blood
is nothing; I would give it all to keep you with me: but Oh? how many tears
will your absence cause? What sighs? What sorrows? What mortal displeasures
shall I have in this sad separation? Oh Thamires! did thou know how thou will
torment thy Celidea by it? I cannot think, that for such a fading thing as this
beauty, thou would be so long from her. When all is done, Thamires, when after
a long and wearisome journey, full of dangers, thou have brought back with thee
this beauty, what will it avail thee Shepherd, if a Fever, or sickness, or
sorrow, or the happiness of a child bearing, should take it away again? But
admit, it do escape all ^^ese has not time wings? Will not age creep on a pace,
and ravish away this fading flower, almost as soon as thou art returned?
Celidea tears did so accompany her words, that Damon was moved unto much
compassion: Wise and discreet Shepherdess (said he) your virtue makes you
admirable unto all those who know you, and obliges every one to serve you, not
only upon this occasion, but in all other. I must confess you have reason to
desire the presence of Thamires; but me thinks you might well dispense with him
upon such an occasion; yet to satisfy you both, I will promise to bring this
Surgeon hither ere it be long, and he shall cure your face without parting
you from your dearly beloved Shepherd. Oh Sir! said Celidon, if you will do
this favor for a poor Shepherdess, the great Tautates will reward you, for I
shall never be able; but I will pray for your happiness as long as I live.

Damon admired the virtue and affection of this Shepherdess, assured her, that
Thamires should not be put unto the trouble of parting from her: And it being
late, the Nymph retired with a resolution to offer her sacrifice the next
morning, and the day after to see these Shepherdesses: conceiving that Damon
would be in a condition to stir abroad, and by his means, she would try if she
could bring back Daphnide and Alcidon with her, that she might do them all the
honor their merits deserved; and having made her design known unto Damon, he
prepared himself, with an extreme desire to know what his Fortune would be: The
morning being come, and all things ready for the sacrifice, Cleontine put upon
her head a Chaplet of Flowers, girded her self about with Vervine, took a
branch of Missleto in her hand, caused the fire to be kindled, and after the
white Bulls were sacrificed, she sprinkled her self with some of the blood,
afterward she sprinkled some upon the Nymph, and then upon Damon: Then
throwing the Savine, the Missleto, and the Vervine into the Fire, she ran to
the Vault of Bellinus, and touching the Lock with the Branch of Missleto, the
door flew open with a great noise, and she leaning her self as far into the
Cave as she could, she received the Wind which with a kind of murmuring voice
came out of the Cave: Then, as if inspired with Enthusiastique Rapture, she ran
unto the place where the Sacrifice was offered, which was in a little Grove
near the Temple, according to the ancient Custom; There she found the Nymph
and the Cavalier upon their knees, expecting the answer of Bellinus.

Then laying one hand upon the Altar, and holding the branch of Missleto in the
other, with staring eyes, disordered hair, and trembling hands and head, she
uttered a voice far different from what it was wont to be, in these words.

The Oracle.
GO Nymph, and know, that thou shall find
Ere long, the Error of thy mind:
But still beware, Incensed Love
Should Fury turn; and worser prove.
And thou, O perfect Lover, when
Thou hear'st a Diamond speak; Oh then,
From Death to Life thou shall return,
By help of him whom thou did scorn.
The Nymph and the Cavalier having received this Oracle, they studied a long
while upon it; but it being impossible for them to understand it perfectly, one
of the ancient Priests who was present, and who was accustomed to interpret
such ambiguous answers, he came unto the Nymph, said this unto her.

Oracles, which are the words of the great Gods, are ordinarily rendered very
obscure; because future things ought to be concealed from Humanes: For did we
know the hour of our death, we should not relish the sweets of life, but live
as if we were going to our graves. Great Tautates, who ^ves us as his children,
does advertise us of future accidents but darkly, and will not let us know more
then is fitting for us to know, that we may have a dependency upon him. The
great Tautates does foretell you, that ere long you shall see your error, and
your sin; and this in words so clear, that nothing can be more manifest: Also
to show, that he does love you, lest you should be surprised by the evil which
^e foresees is to fall upon you, he does advertise you of it betimes, to the
end you may prudently prevent it, or patiently receive it: Furthermore, I must
needs tell you, That by the corrupt Intralls, and blood of all the Sacrifices
which we have offered, we expect some strange accident ready to fall upon our
heads: For the Victims do fall all upon the left side, and when they did fall,
did beat themselves extremely upon the ground, and died very impatiently; their
blood would hardly come out, and was defective both in quality and quantity:
and as for their Intralls, their Hearts and their Livers were rotten. To be
brief, we see so many apparent signs from heaven, that it is manifest unless
we do appease the great Tautates by humble and fervent Prayers, we must expect
some heavy judgments ready to fall upon us.

As for the Oracle which is rendered unto you, O valiant Cavalier, you may
expect great contentment from it, for it speaks good unto you: In being called
from death to life, is to be understood your coming out of some eminent danger;
Death signifies some deep displeasure out of which you are ere long to be
released by the assistance of him whom you scorn and hate: And therefore Madam,
and you generous Cavalier, it is your parts to render thanks unto Bellinus, for
the favor he has done you both, to the end your gratitude may oblige him to
continue his goodness still unto you.

Thus spoke the Priest: And both the Nymph and the Cavalier upon their knees
seemed to be very devout toward heaven, by many actions of thanks: Afterward
retired to their Lodgings, with intention to go the next day unto the Temple of
the good Goddess; and afterward in their return to see the Shepherdess of
Lignon, with Daphnide and Alcidon, though Damon's intention was to make himself
as little known unto them as he could, intending to stay amongst them a few
days, and afterward, if he found no remedy against his displeasures, to go so
far away, that he should not hear either Aquitain, or any he knew spoken of.
Being set down at the Table therefore, with this resolution, and Dinner being
almost done, the Nymph saw enter into the Room a Cavalier from Amasis, who was
in great favor and confidence with her. This Cavalier (after all due
reverence) came unto her, and told her in her ear, That he had great matters to
impart unto her from Amasis, but the discourse of it would be long, and fit to
be kept in secret, and therefore he would speak no more of it, until she
commanded him to wait upon her in private. The Nymph hearing this, and seeing
his face in a kind of confusion, she began to think upon what the Priest told
her concerning the defects in the Victims: And not being able to think upon any
greater misfortune then the loss of her Mother, she asked him aloud how Amasis
did? Madam, answered he, thanks be to heaven she is in good health, and does
passionately desire to see you, thinking every hour an age you are absent from
her. We will wait upon her presently, said Galathea, since Damon is in a
condition to ride; for it was not reasonable to leave him in a sick condition,
since he received his wounds by defending us against the injuries of Argenteus.
Upon this she retired presently into her chamber, and caused the Cavalier to be
called. Has my Mother (said the Nymph unto him,) received any News from the
Army of the Francks? And does she hear how Clidemant does? Madam (answered the
Cavalier) she did receive some news this morning, which is not very good, but
she desires to communicate it her self unto you, and would have you make all
the haste you can unto her: She commanded me to let you understand, that the
Francks have been in great Tumult upon King Childerick; who was forced to
retire into Thurin; I am afraid that this was not without great bloodshed, and
you know Clidemant, Lindamore, and Gayamant were always with him, I beseech God
no misfortune have befaln them. I can assure you of one thing, Madam, That
Amasis your Mother is very sad, and much troubled, and extremely desires to
speak with you. Friend, said Galathea, your discourse does much amaze me, and I
wish either that I knew not so much, or that I knew more: I must before I send
you away, talk a little with the sage Cleontine, and with Damon, who is a
person which may be very serviceable unto us in such accidents as may happen;
and causing them to be both called, she acquainted them how Amasis had sent for
her: And because she knew not whether she should return presently, or first go
unto Bonlieu, to offer some prayers there, as the Oracle did wish her, she
asked the opinion of the old Cleontine; who answered her thus: I conceive
Madam, that in all our affairs we should have recourse unto Tautates, and you
especially, since by the relation of the Priest, you are menaced with some
great misfortune; and to divert it, the best remedy is to have recourse unto
him, from whom all proceeds, and to beseech him he would with hold his
chastning hand. And therefore my opinion is, your best course is to go unto the
good Goddess, offer your sacrifice unto her, and the same day go into
Marcelles. Damon was of the same opinion. You hear (said Galathea unto the
Cavalier which Amasis sent) what the opinion of Cleontine and Damon is; Assure
Amasis, that to morrow I will wait upon her, and in the mean time, will pray
unto the great Tautates, for a blessing upon us all.

Thus the Cavalier went away, leaving Galathea in such a perplexity, as she had
no mind to see the fair Shepherdesses, or Daphnide and Alcidon, but resolved to
depart the next morning betimes: which being come, Damon armed himself
according to his custom; and having put Galathea and her Nymphs into their
Coaches, he mounted a Horse which the Nymph gave unto him, and which was one of
Clidemants her Brothers. This Cavalier appeared so gallant in the eyes of
Galathea, that he put her in mind of the generous Lindamore; and passing from
one thought unto another, she imagined that the news perhaps that Amasis would
tell her, was of that Cavaliers death; and then she plotted how to get Polimas
to go in his room, as well to pack him further from her, and be rid of his
importunity, as in hopes that Amasis would cast her eyes upon Damon, in case
Lindamore was dead: and yet remembering his actions and glory he had gotten in
this voyage, together with the affection he had born unto her, she could not
choose but lament the loss of him; and in case he was not dead, and that she
could be convinced of the imposture of Clemanthis, then to have some
advantageous thoughts of him. These thoughts entertained her a great part of
the way to Bonlieu: But passing over the river of Lignon, she began to think
upon Daphnide, Alcidon, and all those Shepherdesses whom she intended to see:
but being unwilling that this stranger Lady should go away, and she not see
her, she sent unto the sage Adamas, to desire him he would come to her unto
Bonlieu, and in case she was gone before he came, to follow her unto Marsellis,
and that he would infinitely oblige her, if he would bring Daphnide and Alcidon
with him: Afterward, she arrived at the Temple of the good Goddess, where the
venerable Chrisante received them with all honor and civility; and because the
Nymph acquainted her with her have unto Marselles, Chrisante caused all
possible have to be made with the sacrifice, telling her that the Victimes
which was offered for the public and the happy voyage of Clidamant, were
found so defective, as it was evident some great disaster was toward.

But in the mean time Sylvander, who had obtained that permission which he
desired, he was so intent and busy in it, as he had forgotten to tell Madonthe
and Thersander, that there was a Cavalier in quest of them, with many terrible
menaces and threats; and had he not accidentally met them one morning, as they
were walking to take the air, certainly it had been long before they had been
acquainted with it; for he was so much taken up with his passion, as he had no
room in his soul for any other thought: But meeting them so opportunely, he
acquainted them with all that Paris told him, and the danger which they had
incurred, if they had met with that Barbarous Man, who sought for them with so
much desire of revenge. Madonthe did thank him for the intelligence; and having
long debated amongst themselves, who it should be, they could not imagine it
could be Damon, because he was dead in their belief: but rather that it was
some of Madonthis kindred, who not being able to suffer her flight away with
Thersander, did seek to he revenged upon him. Sylvander, who always carried
much good will unto Madonthe, both because of her resemblance unto Diana, and
because she was very virtuous and modest, seeing her shed abundance of tears,
he had much compassion of her, and asked her the cause of them. Oh Shepherd!
said she unto him, have I not great reason to lament my miserable Fortune,
which thus cruelly torments me? Was it not enough, and too much, to persecute
me in my own Country, and amongst my friends, but I must be also tormented
here, where I hoped to find rest and tranquillity. O Heavens! O Gods! What crime
have I committed lately, that after I had forsaken my Country, my estate, and
all my acquaintance, I should be pursued still, and find no hopes of any rest,
but in my Grave. Upon these words, her tears did flow in such abundance, as she
was constrained unto silence, and to have recourse unto her handkerchief.
Sylvander who was moved when she began her tears, was moved much more at her
continuance of them, and offered to guard and defend her from all injuries this
stranger could do her, by the assistance of his friends, if she would stay in
the Country. As ill luck was, Laonice meeting them at the same time, and being
very familiar with Madonthe, she advised her to retire into her own Country,
where she might live more quietly, and not to refuse the assistance of
Sylvander to accompany her, at the least as far as Forests reached. Madonthe
fearing to receive some burt for this stranger, she resolved to be gone, and
accept of Sylvanders offer, to guard her with his friends: But Thersander was
much against it, and dissuaded her; so as she thanked Sylvander for his good
will, and would not permit him to go any farther then the place where this
stranger was seen: Then presently at the same hour, after she had taken leave
of some Shepherdesses, which she met with by chance, she desired Laonice to
excuse her unto the rest, she set forward with a resolution as soon as she came
into Aquitane, to admit her self amongst the Vestals, or the Drui^es daughters,
and forsake the world and all its adventures.

In the mean time Alexis lived freely with the fair Astrea, and made use of all
the Privileges, which the daughter of Adamas could have, and had been two
days in her own Town amongst the Shepherdesses and Shepherds, and was never
out of Astreas sight but when she was in bed; for all the day they talked
together, and were all the night in a chamber, where their beds were not far
distant: and the impatient Love of Alexis not permitting her to sleep; she
arose the second morning to contemplate upon the beauty of her fair
Shepherdess, before it was perfect light, and put on Astreas Gown in stead of
her own; and she took such extreme delight to be in that Gown, which covered
the body of her dearest Saint, that she took the rest of Astreas Clothes, and
trimmed her self completely in the habit of a Shepherdess, so as any one would
have taken her for one: and though Astreas Gown was a little too strait for
her, yet it was not so unsit, but it might well deceive the eye of any that was
not too strict an observer: being thus decked, she went unto the bed where
Astrea was asleep, and kneeling down, she began to adore, and contemplate upon
her beauty as she slept.

And though Alexis uttered many raptures in a loud voice, yet none of the three
awaked: Alexis still looked upon Astrea, and the more she looked, the more she
Loved: And being transported with her affection, she went near her to steal an
amorous kiss, but presently checked her self, out of her respect. But still
having a longing desire unto it, she uttered some verses in a lone voice, upon
this subject; That her Mistress slept, and she durst not kiss her; and perhaps
she had grown a little more courageous, if Leonide by fortune had not waked,
and perhaps again Alexis was so loud in her expression, as she was the cause of
it. As soon as she opened her eyes, she took her for Phillis, and bidding her
good morrow, asked her, why she was so early: Alexis smiled, and returning no
answer, covered her face with her hand, purposely to keep her the longer in her
mistake: Astrea and Diana waking at the same time, they were both deceived as
well as Leonide, both of them saluted her, and asked the same question which
the Nymph did, Alexis seeing all thus mistaken, she grew more confident then
when they were asleep, and going unto Astrea, kissed her cheek, and bad her
good morrow. Astrea hearing a voice unlike unto Phillis, pulled back her cheek,
and looking a little better upon her, she knew her. Am I mistaken, said Astrea,
or do I see Alexis in the habit of a Shepherdess? Upon this, Leonide and Diana,
looking also better upon her, they knewher to be Alexis indeed.

Astrea then, raised her self up a little in her bed, and taking Alexis in her
arms, kissed her, with abundance of joy, to see her in her clothes. Give me
leave, new Shepherdess, said Astrea, to kiss you; and give me leave also to
tell you most truly, That Forests never saw so Fair a Shepherdess.

Then all three looking upon her with admiration, they were all ravished to see
her so Fair in that unaccustomed habit: Alexis all this while, said nothing;
but at last, when she saw that she was known, Sister, said she unto the Nymph,
do you not think, that these clothes have not changed for the worse? I do think
(answered the Nymph) that you are a Fairer Shepherdess then a Druide; and that
if Hylas saw you, he would presently lay by a new stock of Love, to spend in
your service. And I think, said Astrea, that these clothes, could they be
sensible of it, would be infinitely happy, in being worn by the Fairest that
ever lived. But (said Diana, and interrupted) it were pity to put this Fair
Druide unto so much pains as to undresse her self, and therefore it would be
better, if Astrea took those of Alexis, and wear them all the day: I am
confident it would be an excellent mask unto Adamas, and he would certainly
take the one for the other: Truly, said Leonide, I dare venture a wager, that
most of those who see them, mistake them; especially if my sisters clothes were
as fit for Astrea, as Astreas are for her. Alexis, thinking it an happiness to
be in those clothes, which used to cover the body of her Fairest Mistress, had a
great desire to wear them all the day. Astrea who did passionately Love this
Druide, had also a most extreme desire to wear the clothes of Alexis; and yet,
neither of them, durst publish their desires. And because Diana was very
earnest with them to have it so. But sister, said Alexis unto Leonide, what
will my Father say when he sees me in such a disguise? What will he say?
answered Leonide; he will laugh, and be very glad to see you in such a merry
humor: he knows that nothing is more prejudicial to your health then
melancholy and sadness: and thinks nothing more conducible to your health,
then jollity, and mirth. Could I believe, replied Alexis, that I should delude
the eyes of those who shall see me this day, as well as I was deluded in the
choice of my clothes, I should be glad: For though there was much difference
between our clothes, yet I took Astreas for my own, and yet I see you mistook
me: Believe it, said Astrea, one would believe, you took much pains in
dressing your self, for it is impossible you should be better dressed; and as
for me, I will take some other clothes, to make it the more believed that you
are a new come Shepherdess, No, no, (said Diana) you must needs take the
Druides clothes: otherwise, what will they think is become of her? We will say,
answered Leonide, that my sister is not well, upon condition Astrea will
promise to take her clothes to morrow, that we may see whether she will be as
fine a Druide, as my sister is a Shepherdess. I shall do as you desire, said
Astrea, but I believe her Gown will be too big for me. As much, said Alexis, as
yours is too little for me; but both may be easily helped. Since Madam it is
your pleasure to have it so, said Astrea, I shall be the Druide to morrow: but
I am confident, that if Hylas saw this new come Shepherdess to day, he would
burn all his Artieles of Agreement with Stella, and add this Fair Stranger unto
the great number of his Mistrisses: I am sure, said Alexis, that neither he nor
any else can see you, but both he and all must needs Love you.

And because now it began to grow late, and full time for these Fair Ones to
rise; Astrea was constrained to rise out of the bed in her smock, to fetch
another Gown, and other Linen, which were in a Trunk at the other end of the
Chamber; and thinking none in the room but Women, she arose very confidently,
and carelessly.

The first thing the disguised Druide saw, was her bare Foot, and Leg; and half
her Thigh: The delicacy, and whiteness of her Feet, the handsome proportion of
her Leg, the plumpness of her Thygh, and the beauty of her Neck, could not be
equalled by any things, but themselves: And Alexis stood in such a posture of
amazement as she looked upon her, as invited Astrea, to take her in her arms
and kiss her: The embraces of Alexis might well have raised a suspicion, that
they were a little more affectionate and close, then such as women use: And
Astrea was as zealous in her embraces, as Alexis was, and perhaps received
them, not as the kisses of an Alexis, but as the living resemblance of Celadon.
Leonide observing these amorous kisses and caresses, and growing a little
jealous, she said unto the Druide: Take heed, new Shepherdess, lest holding
Astrea so long in your arms, you cause her to take cold. No, no, answered
Astrea; I cannot take any harm in being so near Alexis, I should be very sorry
Fairest (said the Druide) to be the cause of any inconveniency to you, but I
hope my sister speaks only out of envy: then Alexis took Astrea in her arms
from off the ground, and carried her to the Trunk, unto which she was going;
and there setting her down, kissing sometimes her Eyes, sometimes her Mouth,
and sometimes her Neck: And Astrea, thinking her a Woman, did freely permit it;
and was so extremely contented to be thus carressed by one so much resemblant
unto Celadon, as she paid back her kisses unto Alexis with double interest.
None can express the fullness of this disguised Druides joy, unless some that
have been ravished by the like accident. But it may easily be imagined, that
Alexis was very near making her self known who she was, although she knew that
all her happiness would be blasted, if she were discovered; and perhaps had
discovered all, had not Phillis in the height of their carresses knocked at the
door: And therefore, Astrea fearing it should be some body else, ran presently
to bed, and looked through the Curtains who it was which entered. Alexis, vexed
at the heart to be thus interrupted, she went to the door, and asking who was
there, did open it unto Phillis, so much against her mind, that she looked not
pleasantly all the day. When Astrea saw it was her Companion Phillis, she bad
her good morrow, and looked about for Alexis: and when she saw that she was not
in the Chamber, she thought that she was gone to walk, as formerly she had
done; Phillis also enquired for her, and they answered that she was not very
well, and was gone into another Chamber, but would return presently. Phillis
did easily believe them, especially seeing her clothes upon the table. But when
they were all dressed, and ready to go out; I beseech you, said Phillis, let us
see Alexis before we go: No, no, answered Leonide, she desired to be alone, but
we will return after our walk, and see how she does: So taking Phillis by the
hand, she carried her out.

In the mean time, the new come Shepherdess being walked into the Hazle Grove,
where she thought to be most private, and might best entertain her own
thoughts, in contemplation of those beauties which she had seen, and of those
favors which she had received, or rather under a borrowed notion, had stolen.

But the day being now well on, and most Shepherds retired with their Flocks
under the shade, she heard many Shepherds singing under shady trees, and
expecting the coming of their Shepherdesses: Amongst the rest Calidon, who was
up that morning betimes, and was come over the River of Lignon in hopes to see
Astrea, and to try his Fortune before he spoke any farther unto Phocion; And he
meeting Hylas by the way, they came together unto this place, where both of
them began of sing: And Calidon, thinking upon Astreas cruel answer, began to
chant his complaints againsts her cruelty, in a doleful tune.

Alexis not being accustomed to the voice of Calidon, although she heard him
sing, and understood his words, yet show knew him not; but she knew Hylas, and
heard him say: Is it possible Calidon, that Astrea should use you thus? Alas
Hylas! answered he, it is but too true, and I wish I were able to use your
receipt against such cruelties: The Druide heard no more of their discourse,
for being desirous to pass unknown, she left them; yet Hylas continued thus:
Believe it Calidon, there is one Shepherd, who is to be blamed for all the
miseries that befall all the Shepherds of this Country in this kind; Sylvander
is he, I mean, for he having a very subtle wit, does insinuate himself so in
the good opinion of the Shepherds, as by his false and sophistical arguments he
persuades them, That a Lover is a man lost in point of reputation, if when he
is ill entertained, he change his affection, as if a man were a Rock,
immovable, and able to abide all the angry bl^sts and storms of a raging Sea:
so as a Shepherd becomes so much enslaved, as in spite of all injuries, he
cannot discontinue his service and good will, but he must presently be branded
with inconstancy; and thus all become subjects unto the Tyrany of Women:
whereas if these maxims were not, they would not delight so much in seeing
their servants to languish, but would add every day fresh favors, in hopes to
keep us from changing. Unto all this Calidon answered thus; you are much
mistaken Hylas, if you think Sylvander to be the first Author of these
opinions: The Shepherds of this Country have for many ages observed the same
Laws; and though custom did not oblige us unto it, yet the beauty of our
Shepherdesses would constrain us: For is it possible to Love them once, and
not always? I see, replied Hylas, that now you do Love Astrea, and therefore
one must not argue the matter with you, according to the rules of reason: But I
hope to see you as far from this affection, as you are from that of Celidea.
Several reasons, answered Calidon, did divert me from her you last named, and
many more do oblige me never to cease loving the other, unless I cease to live;
for besides the accident, which took away the beauty of Celidea, and which was
the first cause of my affection, I was obliged to restore her unto Thamires, in
point of honor; but setting this and all other considerations aside, having
submitted my self by oath unto arbitration, doubtless I should have drawn upon
me, both the anger of Heaven, and hatred of men, if I had not been obedient
unto it. On the other side, all things do induce, and invite me, never to
change my affection unto Astrea; for in the first place, her beauty is such as
cannot be equalled. She is so much the prouder for that, said Hylas: No matter,
answered Calidon, a little pride in a Woman makes her the more amiable. Yes,
said Hylas, so she be proud unto others, and not unto us: but is not beauty
very subject unto the injury and blasts of time? Oh Hylas! answered Calidon,
when age has blasted the beauty of Astrea, the same age will make Calidon not
much care for beauty: moreover, Parents who have the government of her, and
those who have the power over me, do allow of this affection. The contentment
of Parents, replied Hylas, is often a cause that Women will not Love those who
otherwise are not displeasing unto them; as well because, they cannot abide
Parents should be courted more then themselves, as because constraint is odious
unto them: For Love never comes by constraint, nor the opinion of others; but
only by the will of those who love.

But Astrea is so wise (replied Calidon) that she will be conformable unto the
opinion of her friends. May be not (replied Hylas) Astrea is able to build upon
her own resolution. I should easily believe it (said Calidon) did I not see
that she is disengaged, and free from loving any: and as yet I have not done
her service sufficient to engage her: so as should she be easily won, she would
not be so estimable. Oh Calidon (said Hylas) Do you think long service will
make her love? Alas, alas poor Shepherd, I pity you, if you be of that opinion;
you had need to make provision of Spectacles to see her Beauty withal at that
time; for when it comes, I believe you will not be able to see without them.
Did you never hear how Celadon loved her? Yes (replied Calidon) but he being
dead, that makes nothing against me: Nothing against you! said Hylas, Yes, yes
perhaps more then you imagine: For why else, according to Sylvanders doctrine,
should she preserve the memory of him so freshly, as Tyrcis does of his dead
Cleon? But this is not that I would say: Do you know how long this Celadon
Courted her? Some four or five years (answered Calidon.) Well friend, answered
Hylas, Do you not think a pair of Spectacles will do very well at five years
end? I do not think (said Calidon) that so long a time is requisite to win her;
but though it be, yet I should not be reduced unto any such necessity as you
speak of. Shepherd, shepherd, replied Hylas, you may flatter your self as long
as you please, but you may consider, that nothing is more certain then
experience, and what you have formerly seen come to pass. Consider if you be
wise, that it may come to pass again: You say she is not engaged in her
affection unto any: Why, this is it Friend which makes me think worse of your
business; for those women which will love any, may be drawn and won to love us;
but these insensible Creatures are such things as do not so much as know what
and whom is to be loved.

Calidon began to boggle at the reasons which Hylas urged, and thought them
very strong. I assure you Hylas (said he) I stand in need of all these
consolations which you give me, I think my self happy in meeting with you. If
you would have me flatter you (said Hylas) I could speak in another dialect,
but if your judgment be sound, you will see I speak like a friend: If you
desire to find comfort in your misery, you must use the like remedies which I
always did in the like cases; which if you do, I will warrant you from taking
any harm from such a disease as this. But let me tell you (answered Calidon)
that if you mean, quitting Astrea, or loving any other, I had rather lose my
eyes then look upon any other Beauty then hers; and lose this heart which gives
me life, then ever love any other Shepherdess then Astrea. Upon this, being a
little angry with Hylas, he would have gone away from him: But Hylas held him,
and smiling, said unto him. Nay (said he) if you be upon that lock, and desire
so much to see Astrea, you may go into the Grove of Hazles: For I saw her there
alone, but would not tell you, because I feared you would but lose all your
labor: For a woman is sometimes like unto death, which comes upon us before we
be aware, and least think upon it. Hylas (said Calidon) It was not friendly
done, to keep me so long from my happiness in being with her. Nay, nay, said
Hylas, take heed you come not soon enough to receive a course entertainment.
Calidon having not so much patience as to stay so long to reply, he went as
fast as he could to the place which Hylas named, thinking it the most happy
opportunity that possibly could be, to find her in a place where none would
interrupt their discourse.

Hylas thought he had told him right; for seeing Alexis only behind in the
habit of Astrea, he was mistaken. In the mean time the Druide being desirous to
enjoy her own sweet Imaginations of that Vision which she had lately seen. she
went a great pace unto the wood, where the solitude of the place, and the fresh
memory of those Favors she had received, did represent before the eyes of her
fancy, the Beauties and sweet Kisses of Astrea in such lively apprehensions,
that folding her Arms, and lifting her eyes up to heaven: Oh good Gods, said
she, that Alexis could be happy without Celadon; or that Celadon could be happy
without Alexis: Were I really Alexis, and not Celadon, how happy should I be in
Astreas favors? And oh how much more happy should I be, if being Celadon, she
did not do me these Favors as being Alexis! Was ever Lover so happy and
unhappy both, as I am? Happy in being caressed by the Fairest and most Lovely
Shepherdess in the world; and unhappy, in that all these favors would most
certainly be turned into Torments, were I not shrouded under the vail of
Alexis. Here stopping a little, and afterward beginning again; But Celadon
(said he) how long must this disguise last? What end do thou aim at in this
thy design? Do thou think thou can delude always? Why (foolish Lover!)
do thou not declare thy self? Does she not as good as tell thee, that all her
amity with Alexis proceeds only from her resemblance unto Celadon? This
manifests that she does not hate this Shepherd, since thinking him dead, she
does cherish his memory: And do thou think thy presence would not be welcome
to her, when she sees himself upon his knees before her living, and adoring
her? Go, go and cast thy self at her feet; say thus unto her, Here Fairest
Shepherdess, is Celadon most humbly before you; he died when you were
displeased, and now is revived again, since you are pleased with him in the
face of Alexis: If he has sinned in any thing against you, he has done
penance for it: but if you think his fault yet unexpiated, command him what
torments you shall please, and you shall find him more ready to obey, then you
can be to command: Upon this, standing a while silent, he considered whether
this resolution was good or no; but afterward beginning again, Peace, peace
Celadon (said he) content thy self with being dead, and envy not the happiness
of Alexis; since thou can not thy self, let her enjoy it: for all the hopes
thou have, is by the intercession of this Druide, unto whose conduct thou ought
wholly to submit thy self: And do not flatter thy self so much, as to think
that she loves thy resemblance in her; Perhaps indeed thy face may be like
hers; but it is thy fault which invites her to hate thee: If there be any thing
in thee which can please her, it is that in thy soul thou did never infringe
the Laws of a perfect affection; and will thou stain the innocence of thy Love
by so great a disobedience as this? I do command you (said she unto thee) never
to see my face until I do allow it. Love her then, oh Celadon! Obey her, and be
silent, if thou will live and love without reproach. Thus did this Druide think
her self in a place where she might enjoy her own thoughts with delight; and
Love, who perhaps was jealous of the Favors which Fortune had done her, did
venom them with these mortal imaginations; so as her eyes being over-flowed
with Tears, she was constrained to the use of her Handkerchief: And because
Calidon at the same time came into the Wood, she no sooner spied him, but she
started back, as if she were ready to tread upon a Serpent; and went away
(shunning him) into another Walk, which was in the high Wood, out of the Grove:
But as Fortune was, Hylas was walking there; and seeing her, did suspect the
reason of her coming into that Wood; for he saw her run, and observed the place
into which she entered; and stayed a while to inform Calidon, whom he believed
was not far off; and yet he was deceived, for Calidon not thinking her to be
gone out of the Wood, he sought her in every place there, as if he had looked
for a pin: But finding all his labor lost, he then believed that she had
purposely hid her self from him; and thinking this indignity too great to be
endured, he was so vexed to see himself thus slighted, as first in anger, and
afterward in despair, he resolved an hundred times never to love Astrea any
longer: But then, as soon as he thought upon her Beauty and perfectious, he
changed that thought, and was more entangled in this affection then ever. In
the mean time, Hylas, who stayed to show him which way Astrea passed, began to
be weary of this stay, when he saw coming from toward the House, Leonide,
Diana, Phillis, and amongst them (as he thought) Astrea. At the first, he durst
have sworn the contrary; for he thought that he had seen her on the other side;
but going nearer, he could not give his eyes the lie, which assured him that
Astrea was in the company; when one came behind him, and laid their hands upon
his eyes, intending to make him guess who it was.

Hylas stood still; feeling her hands, and finding them to be the hands of a
woman: I know (said he) who you are; but my wonder is, how you got behind me:
whilst he was talking thus, all the company came up, and could hear Hylas
continue his talk: I do know (said he) that you are Astrea: Then letting him
go, he saw himself mistaken, and that it was Laonice. What Hylas (said she) do
you know your friends no better then so? No wonder Shepherdess, said he, that I
should thus mistake you for Astrea, for I saw her just now enter into that
Wood; and as soon as you laid your hands upon my eyes, I saw her just before me
amongst this company: What should I think, when seeing her in several places at
once, but that she can be every where? How Hylas! said Astrea, Did you see me
enter into that Wood? I did see you, answered he, and I am not alone that saw
you; for Calidon is still amongst the Hazles looking for you. Astrea and the
rest of the company did know well enough his mistake; but seeing otherwise,
Certainly (said Diana) your eyes are not very good this morning; for this Nymph
and we all are able to witness that Astrea has been all this day with us. I see
Astrea is there (said Hylas) and I know that the Astrea which I saw yonder,
could not possibly be so soon with you, for she went the quite contrary way:
But I am certain that I did see one Astrea there, else I Will never trust my eyes
again. Leonide and all the company laughed to see him in such a maze: And
because Astrea was very desirous to see this Astrea which he spoke of, Hylas
(said she) we will think you out of your wits if you do not show us this other
Astrea, and therefore show us which way she went. You may think me as much out
of my wits as you please (said Hylas) and I assure you, I think as much my
self; for I am the most mistaken man alive, if I did not see one Astrea there,
and another yonder, and therefore I beseech you let us go and look for her.
Upon this he led the way into the high wood, and having looked long in vain, at
last he thought that he saw her sitting by an arm of the River Lignon, under a
shady Tree. Hylas went on as fast as he could hye, and when he came so near as
to know her, he beckned unto the rest of the company to come nearer; and taking
Astrea by one hand, and pointing at Alexis with the other: Look Shepherdess
(said he unto her) Are not you sitting under yonder Tree? Unto which Phillis
answered, I believe late servant (said she) that you are of the nature of
Lions, who know their Keepers better by their clothes then by their faces. Why
do you say so, answered Hylas? Because (replied Phillis) those clothes which
you see are like unto those which Astrea wears, therefore you are persuaded it
is she. They talked so loud, and Hylas made such a noise, that Alexis turned
about, and saw all the company coming toward her: Therefore wiping her eyes,
and setting as jolly a look upon it as she could, she rose up and came to meet
them; And because Astrea and Diana beckned unto her to seem as if she were a
stranger, she demeaned her self so, that both Hylas and Laonice did not know
her: As for Phillis, they had acquainted her already with the passage. Hylas
went to her, and said, I assure you, fair Shepherdess, you had almost turned my
mind when I saw you at a distance; and now I see you nearer, I am afraid you
will quite make me alter my affection.

Alexis seeming not to know him, or what he said, I beseech you Shepherd, said
she, pardon me if I do not answer, for I do not understand what you say. I
mean, replied Hylas, that taking you for Astrea in one place, and seeing Astrea
presently in another, I was almost out of my wits; but now I do see you
perfectly, I fear you will steal away my heart, which I gave unto another. You
do very much oblige me (answered Alexis) to take me for so fair a Shepherdess,
whom I have so much desired the happiness of seeing and knowing; but then you
do as much dis-oblige me, in suspecting me for a Thief; for you must know, I
never use to take anything but what is my own: But if you will repair the
injury you have done me, show me which of all these fair ones is Astrea, and I
will pardon the offense. I believe, said Hylas, that did you know me, you would
not think, that in letting you take my heart from another, I have committed any
offense, for Hylas never gives it unto any: yet since it is an easy matter to
repair the injury which you pretend I have done you, I will not dispute it any
further; upon condition, that when i have satisfied your curiosity in showing
you Astrea, you will not disdain to accept the gift of this heart of Hylas, and
so free your self from the guilt of theft. First (answered the new Shepherdess)
show me which is Astrea, and we will talk afterward of the heart of Hylas, as
it seems you call your self. This is she (answered Hylas) and showed her
Astrea, who could not choose but laugh as well as all the company, to see Hylas
so blind as not to know Alexis; who going unto Astrea, saluted her, and held
some discourse of civility, purposely to deceive Hylas the more, who was so
much taken with the behavior of this stranger, that he could not choose but
press her to the reception of his heart: How now my late servant? said Phillis,
what will Stella say when she hears you offer your self unto this Fair
stranger? What should she say, answered he, but that I have observed our
articles, by which it was permitted me, to Love whom, when, and where I lifted,
without any offense to her? How Shepherd (said the new Shepherdess) can you
think I will allow of any sharer in Love? Why not? answered Hylas, as long as I
love you as much as you can desire? But I beseech you, said she, would you in
earnest Love me, and Love another besides? Yes said Hylas: and if after dinner
there remain any meat, would you have have me throw it to the dogs? And so
after I have Loved you as much as you can desire, and have some Love yet to
spare, why should I not employ it in loving those who stand in need of it? Oh
Shepherd, said the stranger, believe it, I will not allow of any sharers with
me; he that Loves me, must Love only me, and therefore you are not like to have
me for your Mistress: Nor you me (answered Hylas) for your servant; and since
you are of such an humor, I advise you to look out for one Sylvander, who is
such a one as will fit your turn. Now Sylvander is mentioned, said Phillis,
where is he? for I wonder we do not see him this morning? It is well for you
Hylas that he is not here, for he would have checked you for thus talking of
Love unto this Pair stranger, at the first sight. Hylas would have answered,
but Laonice interrupted him; Nay, nay, Hylas, said she, you may talk of Love,
or what you will to day, for I am sure you will not see him; and though he were
here, I could not contradict you, for he is employed in the like service, and
offered himself unto it. What service is that? (said Diana presently) You must
know, answered the spiteful Laonice, that Paris chanced to meet with a strange
Cavalier, who thundered out many menaces against Thersander; and Sylvander,
undertaking to acquaint Madonthe with it from him, he did this morning tell her
of it; and she fearing lest Thersander should receive some hurt by reason of
her, she resolved to return presently into Aquitain, and desired me to make her
excuses unto you all, giving a thousand thanks for the favors she has
received, and promising never to forget them. But poor Sylvander, seeing her
ready to depart, and not able any longer to hide the secret affection which he
bare unto her, in the first place he used all the arguments that possibly he
could to divert her journey, and then seeing he could not prevail, he offered
himself to wait upon her: but she, being unwilling to accept of his offer, lest
(as I believe) she should make Thersander jealous, she refused him an hundred
times: He seeing he could not obtain that favor from her, he fell down upon
his knees, kissed her feet, and conjured with the most earnest solicitations
that ever I heard, to give him leave; and she not knowing how in civility to
put him off after such importunity, she permitted him to go with her a days
journey or two.

I believe (said Astrea) that you are mistaken, if you think Sylvander in Love
with any: In Love with any, said Hylas, pray what do you think of his behavior
toward Diana? Oh! answered Phillis, that is only a Fiction. Yes Hylas, replied
Laonice, his behavior toward that Shepherdess is but a fiction; he himself
swore it this morning a hundred times, when Madonthe charged him with it. Well,
well Sylvander, said Madonthe to him, though my absence do a little trouble
you, yet the presence of Diana will comfort you. Diana, answered he, does merit
more then my service, neither should I ever have rendered her any, but in
respect of my wager with Phillis; and I wish she were here, that you might see
the truth of my words. Phillis who knew that this discourse would much
displease her Companion, did answer thus; I cannot possibly believe that
Sylvander does Love Madonthe, for he never made the least show of it. I believe
(said Diana and interrupted her) that you are much mistaken; for I have seen
sufficient signs of it: and why should not a young Shepherd that has Wit and
Spirit enough, Love a Woman that is so amiable as Madonthe? Especially since
Laonice speaks it knowingly, and saw him obtain this permission to wait upon
her with so much importunity? But good Laonice, said Astrea, is it certain that
Sylvander has followed Madonthe? Do you think (said the subtle Shepherdess)
that I would say it unless I saw them depart? Why should I verify a thing
which if it were not true, would so easily be proved to be a lie? Farewell
Sylvander, said Diana, and come back again even when you have a mind. Upon
this, seeming as if she were not troubled at it, she turned away, and went from
them; but Phillis followed her, and heard her upbraid Sylvander with
inconstancy: Ah Shepherd, said she, are these the effects of that Love which
you showed unto me? Is this the eternity of thy affection? And did thou
trouble both thy self and me with thy disguise, to quit me for Madonthe? Have
thou so often and so long blamed the Inconstancy of Hylas, to become as ill thy
self? Then Diana seeing Phillis follow her! Well Sister, said she, what do you
now think of Sylvander? I must needs confess, answered Phillis, that if Laonice
say truly, I was never in my life so mistaken as in this Shepherd; for I have
seen him make such demonstrations of a real passion, as I thought it impossible
to be ever extinguished. But is there any credit to be given to Laonice? Yes
doubtless (said Diana) for besides what she has told us, I have always
observed a great affection in him toward Madonthe; and when Paris sent him
word of the menaces which were threatened unto Thersander, how ready he was to
be the Messenger? It must be confessed that Madonthe is very fair and discreet,
yet truly in my eye she is not very amiable; and were I a man, I should serve
many others that are not so fair, rather then her: and all this while she has
been amongst us, have we seen any that loved her except Hylas and Sylvander?
For my part, said Phillis, I have the same opinion of Madonthe which you have,
but I cannot believe that Sylvander loves her; and as for your observations of
him, truly I think them only effects of his courtesy and civility toward that
stranger. But, replied Diana, what do you think of his so earnest solicitation
to wait upon her? Think, answered Phillis, That it was still his courtesy. It
had been courtesy sufficient, answered Diana, to have undertaken the office of
Laonice, and brought us her excuses; but to fall upon his knees, to shed tears,
and to go with her almost by force, and leave us without bidding one adieu, if
this be courtesy, and not Love, I know not what is Love. But its no matter, I
am sure he has much obliged me in this action; for I must confess, his
continual courtship, and his discreet behavior had begun in me such a good
opinion of him, as I began to be inclineable to wish him very well, and indeed
to love him. What a lamentable condition had I been in, if he had stayed a
little longer: And since he is of this humor, I had rather both he and I were
dead, then he should have known my mind.

Phillis perceiving that Diana did love this Shepherd, and foreseeing that she
could never decline it without most mortal displeasure; Sister (said she unto
her) let us not give such easy credit unto Laonice; stay till Sylvander
return; and condemn not a man before you hear him answer for himself. Nay, nay
Sister, replied Diana presently, the stone is already thrown; let him say and
do what he will, I know what to think. But sister, said Phillis, It is unjust
to condemn before you hear. No, no said Diana, all that hear him, will judge
him in the wrong: and if you love me, offer not to divert me from the mind I am
in. But because I remember he has a Bracelet of my hair, which once I made for
you, I beseech you ask it of him from me, the next time you see him. I know
that Shepherds of his humor use to brag of such favors as they can get from
unadvised Shepherdesses; and if I could, I would not have him do so by me.
Phillis seeing Diana much vexed, and thinking it not a time to contrary her,
she was silent a while; and when they offered to continue their discourse, they
saw all the company coming toward them, but much increased, because Adamas,
Daphnide, Alcidon, Paris, Hermantes, Stiliana, and Carlis were there: Amongst
them also was Lerindas, the messenger from Galathea unto the great Druide, who
would not return before he had seen Astrea and Diana, of whose Beauty he
thought he could not speak too high. But Adamas was much perplexed since he
understood by Lerindas the mind of Galathea; for he was unwilling to displease
her, and he saw there was no going to her without Alexis, and he feared that
she who had seen Celadon in the habit of Lucinda, would find him under the
disguise of Alexis. Therefore not knowing whom to advise withal but Leonide and
this disguised Druide, he acquainted that Nymph with his perplexity. Leonide
having an excellent wit, presently returned this answer. Sir, said she, you
must leave Alexis and me here; for be assured, if Galathea sees her, she knows
her; and if she should know her, it would be a great blemish to your
profession: The Gods do seem to direct you unto this course; for you see Alexis
so disguised in the habit of a Shepherdess, that Hylas does not know her; and
which is of most concernment, I am confident Lerindas will not; so as it is an
easy matter to persuade all the strangers that Alexis is not well, and keeping
her bed, you left me to keep her company, for I have no mind to see the Nymph
as long as she continues in the humor wherein I left her; But if you resolve
upon this course, which as I conceive is the only way to keep Alexis out of
sight: Two things must be done, first, This new Shepherdess must handsomely
steal out of the company, and get into her chamber, lest Lerindas or Alcidon,
or any else, should come at last to know her. The other is, That I do use some
artifice or other to get those Shepherdesses who know of her disguise to
entreat you, Father, that we may stay here a while under color of Alexis
recovering her complexion which she lost in her sickness; for otherwise they
may suspect something, and it is not yet time for our plot to be discovered.
Adamas who had not yet taken notice how Alexis was disguised, did wonder he
should not know her, and upon serious cogitation, did approve of Leonides
opinion: But Alexis much more when she knew it; as well because she thought
Galathea would know her, as because she was afraid that then she should lose
those sweet contentments which she enjoyed with her Shepherdess, whose kisses
and caresses could not choose but be pleasing unto her, though she received them
only under the notion of Alexis, and Celadon only the Bearer of the name. All
three therefore concurring in opinion, the thing was presently resolved upon;
and the new Shepherdess stole away from the company, and looked her self in her
chamber; where undressing her self, she went to bed, after she had dressed her
self as if she were sick, On the other side, Adamas having bid good morrow unto
Diana and Phillis, I am very sorry, said he unto them all, that I must leave
you sooner then I resolved; for fair Shepherdesses, Galathea has sent for me,
and I must go immediately unto her; Lerindas here swears he will not leave me
till I go. Astrea, who was most sorry for the news, Oh Sir, said she, is there
a necessity of your going so soon? Can you not prolong it a little? Lerindas
began then to speak; He cannot go so soon (said he) nor be with the Nymph so
suddenly as she desires. It is not to you Lerindas, that I speak (said Astrea
with an angry look) for I know messengers are always in haste. Adamas knowing
very well why she said so; Sweetheart, said he, I cannot now stay, because the
Nymph sends me word she has business with me, and Lerindas tells me there is a
stranger with her, of whom she makes great account: perhaps the business is of
some great concernment, and delay may do much hurt. The Shepherdess shrugged
her shoulders, and with a sad look retired to Leonide, who beckned to her with
her singer. In the mean time Adamas desired all the company to go homewards,
and after Dinner, to go with him. Of all the company, none was so much amazed
as Hylas; for every man looking for one to wait upon particularly, his desires
were devoted unto the new Shepherdess; and after he had looked all over for
her, and all in vain; Fair Nymph said he unto Leonide, I beseech you tell me
where and what is become of that Shepherdess with whom Adamas and you were
talking but almost just now? Unto whom (answered Leonide) did you commit the
custody of her? Unto my eyes, said Hylas. Then, said she, you must ask your
eyes; for we who were otherwise busy, did take no notice of her. Believe me,
said Hylas, if she return not again, I laid by my stock of Love in vain, which
I intended to employ in her service. Why, replied Leonide, were you so hasty in
making your provision? I thought you would have taken more time before you
resolved upon a business of that importance. Nay, nay, said Hylas, that would
be enough for Sylvander, who had need to assemble all the Orders of Gaul,
before he can resolve whether he should Love or no. For my part, I can resolve
upon such a business in a day, as well as he can in an hundred years: For
as soon as ever he sees a Fair one, he consults with himself whether she has all
the qualities that are fit for his Taste: Perhaps he will find her too tall,
or too low: too black, or too Brown: her eyes may be too gray, her nose too
long, or too little, her mouth too big, or too little, perhaps her chin too
sharp, her cheeks too lean; and if she be defective in any of these, he has
done: But as soon as ever my eye meets with a Fair one, and she seem fair unto
them, I never stay to examine any particulars, but presently my will consents
to Love her, and makes provision immediately to besiege the Fort, or lay by such
a sum of love, as I think will buy it. Me thinks Hylas, replied Leonide, since
you have taken so much pains about this stranger, you should take a little
more, and go to seek her, whilst this Shepherdess and I, do talk about some
business, which much concerns us.

Upon this, both of them turning another way, they separated themselves from
the rest of the Company, to the end none might hear them: then Leonide spoke
thus unto the Shepherdess: You heard, Sweetheart, how Adamas said he was
constrained to go away, and he was of necessity so to do; for otherwise the
Nymph would have occasion to be angry with him. But let me tell you, that I was
never in my life in a place from whence I am so unwilling to depart as this:
and not only I, but Alexis also, who I could never have believed would have
liked it so well, if I did not see it; for having been brought up in great
assemblies, and continually conversant in the business of the world, it is
hardly imaginable, that a life so retired and solitary, should sure with her
disposition: And yet I have observed, that since she came hither, her
complexion is much bettered, which I believe proceeds from the affectionate
Love she has taken unto you, which is so great, that yesterday she swore unto
me, that a separation from you would wound her very heart and soul. Madam,
answered Astrea, It is an unexpressible happiness unto me that our kind of
life, and our pastimes, are pleasing unto you, and the Fair Alexis, for my
part, I am most entirely devoted unto both your services, and think your
Company my greatest honor and happiness: such is my affection unto Alexis, as
I protest Madam, that nothing upon earth can or shall separate me from her, so
she will but be pleased to accept of me: And therefore I do most humbly and
heartily beseech you, to assist me with your favor in my addresses unto her
and Adamas, for I am fully resolved to follow her unto Dreux, and Carnutes,
when she returns. The greatest difficulty concerning that, said Leonide, rests
not in them: for I could find a way to procure both their consents; but it
rests in your own Parents: Oh Madam! said Astrea, let that be the least of your
care, for I know well enough what to do in that, you know it has pleased God to
leave me without either Father, Mother, or Brother: As for Procion my Uncle, I
ow him no such obedience, but I may very well dispose of my self amongst the
Druides Daughters without any reproach: No, no, Madam, there is nothing so just
as to devote our selves unto him who gives us all we have. Were it a matter of
marriage, or disposition of my estate, it were another case; but in resigning
my self up into the hands of the great Tautates, I cannot be blamed: and
therefore, Great Nymph, my only business is, by your mediation to procure me
the approbation and consent of Adamas and the Fair Alexis. I will do you all
the good offices I can, answered Leonide; and let me tell you, that Adamas does
extremely Love Alexis, and so, that there needs no more but to get her favor
and consent: But why should I say, get her favor? Doubtless you have it
already; you need no more but keep her company, and she will be the first that
will be against the separation. I believe her Love to you, surpasses yours to
her; but my advice is to keep continually in her Company, and entreat Adamas to
let her and me stay here for a few days, which we may easily do under a
pretense of her being sick: And I, seeing what delight she took in this sweet
place, I did advise her to retire into her Chamber, and pretend sickness,
purposely for an excuse of staying here: And though Adamas knows that she is
not sick, yet he is willing to let it pass so, because it will excuse his
carrying her unto Galathea, who has long desired to see her, and keep her with
her: But Adamas has no mind unto it, desiring she should continue her course of
life which she has begun, since Tautates seems to approve of it, by all the
sacrifices which he has offered, for that purpose. You see, Fair Shepherdess,
how freely I speak of things; and I do it, because I do much esteem you, and
would give you all the contentment that possibly I could. It is a thing
impossible to repeat the thanks which this Shepherdess rendered unto Leonide,
and as they were thus talking, they wandered a little out of the right way, and
because the Company had got a great way before them, they took into a path,
which might have brought them that were behind, to be before, had they not
heard a voice, which Astrea knew to be Calidons: and because she turned out of
the way to avoid hearing any more, thinking that to hearken to him were to
offend against the memory of Celadon, Leonide observed her, and knowing him to
be the same Shepherd that Phocion desired to marry her unto; let us hearken a
little, (said she) for I am confident he is singing something that concerns
you, and you may pass away through the wood unseen, when you please: Madam,
said Astrea, you will but spend the time in vain, for I am sure such a subject
is not worth it. Leonide answered not, but began to hearken, as he began to
sing out his resolution not to Love her longer. I knew (said Astrea) that you
would lose your labor and time in hearing him. Me thinks, said Leonide, that
he is extremely angry; may he be so eternally, answered Astrea. Upon this, both
turning upon the left hand, they continued on their way.

In the mean time, Paris, remembering the Counsel which Leonide gave him, to ask
Dianas leave, for asking her Parents consent that he might marry her; and
knowing that Adamas was to go unto Galathea as soon as he had dined, he
resolved to lay hold upon the opportunity which presented it self: For, as
Fortune was, Diana chanced to be all alone. And though Paris saw much sadness
in her countenance, yet after some ejaculations unto Tautates to prosper his
enterprise, he accosted her, and taking her under the arm, he said thus unto
her: You see, Fairest Shepherdess, that my Father is to depart as soon as
dinner is done, and that I am constrained to go with him; some comforts I
beseech you give me, to preserve the life of the most faithful servant that
ever you had. Paris, answered she, in the quality you mention, I cannot give
you any, but in the quality of a person whom I do much honor, I will give you
all I am able. In the quality you mention (answered Paris) I should find
nothing but death; and if you will not receive me as really I am, I beseech you
command me to dye: for I am not able to live and endure the torments which I
do. Now, see how far spite and revenge may carry the heart of a woman, be she
never so wise. Diana to be revenged upon Sylvander, will also be revenged upon
her self: I do esteem you so much (said she unto Paris) and do think the
preservation of your life so dear, that there are very few things which I would
not do, to preserve it. Tell me therefore what kind of contentments do you
desire I should give you? That you would be pleased (replied Paris, and kissed
her hand) to give me so far permission as to ask the consent of your Parents,
that I may take you as my Wife, and one whom I will Honor, and Love as long as
I have life. Bel^nde, answered she, is my mother, she only has the dispose of
me, and I give you all the leave you desire.

Diana spoke these words as briefly, and as fast as she could; imitating those
who take a medicine, and make all the have they can to get it down: For she
never uttered any words more against her heart, and spoke them only to vex
Sylvander; for had not passion possessed her understanding, she would never
have consented unto it. For if Sylvander did not Love her, she did not at all
vex him by giving her self unto another: and if he did Love her, why should she
offer to give him any cause of vexation? For she did not give this permission
unto Paris, but only to be revenged upon Sylvander; and would make her self for
ever miserable, rather then not prejudice him: and in this, Paris found that
there is a critical hour in which Women can deny nothing; and happy is he that
can hit upon it, either by Prudence or by Fortune. The thanks he gave unto the
Shepherdess, were very great, but to no purpose, for she was so much out of her
self, that she understood not a word; but as soon as she came unto the house,
she stole away, and retired all alone to her Cabin, where giving her eyes leave
to weep, she ceased not all the rest of the day, teaching us at her own
expenses, that sometimes we Love more then we do think we do, and never come to
know it, but by some imaginary scorn from the person loved, or when some
constraint deprives us of sight and presence.

Adamas hearing by the way that Alexis was sick, the better to disguise his
design, he entreated Daphnide and Al^idon to let him go and see in what
condition she was, seeming to be much troubled at his hasty departure: And
because both of them would accompany him, Astrea and Leonide finding her in
bed, they shut the windows, and made the room so dark, that her face could not
be seen. Alexis pretended to be exceedingly troubled in her head; and when
Adamas told her how earnestly Galathea had sent for him, she offered to rise,
and said, she hoped her disease was not so great, but that she might follow
him. But Astrea beseeched Adamas not to suffer her to walk in the heat of the
Sun, which doubtless would make her worse; she told him, that all the Town
would be extremely sorry his daughter should go from amongst them in such a
condition, and that every one would be as officious and ready to serve her with
all things that should be requisite, as he himself could be; and therefore, as
a witness of all this, she beseeched him to let Leonide keep her company:
Phocion and all the rest joined with her in this desire, and used so many
Arguments, that Adamas was easily persuaded to leave this disguised Druide
amongst them, yet seemed very sorry for her, and said he was afraid she would
be too troublesome unto them: But Phocion answered all those objections with
words so full of civility and affection, that Adamas told him, he would leave
her and Leonide amongst them, commanding them both to come away as soon as
Alexis was well again: Afterward going unto the Bed, and taking Leonide by the
hand, he told them in a low voice, that as soon as Galathea was past, he would
either send unto them by Paris, or come himself; Then hearing that meat was
upon the Table, he left the p^etended sick person; and as soon as Dinner was
ended, thanking Phocion and Astrea, he went away with Daphnide and Alcidon, and
the rest of the company. But Paris, who did not see Diana amongst the company,
did ask Phillis and Astrea where she was? Who answered, that perhaps she had
some business at her house: Which Adamas and the strangers hearing, they
desired Phillis and Astrea to present their sorrows unto her, that they had not
taken their leaves of her, and that if possibly they could, they would see her
again before they went out of the Country.

All being thus parted, and those who accompanied Adamas returned, Paris would
no longer delay his business; but addressing himself unto Adamas, he beseeched
him he would be pleased to let him communicate a thing unto him by the way,
which concerned himself and Diana. Adamas imagining his business, told him,
with all his heart: But Paris having obtained this leave, and not knowing how
to begin, he stood a long while, and spoke not a word: yet Adamas knew well
enough that love was the cause of his silence. Well Paris said he, and smiled,
Is this all you have to say? Paris opened his mouth two or three times, but
blushed and trembled so, as he could not utter a word. Well well said Adamas
unto him, I understand you very well, and to put you out of your pain. I know
that you are in love with Diana; but does Diana love Paris? Or rather, Does not
Sylvander possess that place which Paris desires to have? This infused so much
confidence into Paris, that he answered Adamas, That he was afraid he had done
amiss in suffering his affection unto that Shepherdess to go too far, before he
made him acquainted with it: That having used the habit of a Shepherd, and
seeing her so often, his love was grown to that height, as he was not able to
live unless he had such contentment as those who really love do desire; and
therefore considering that those Shepherds and Shepherdesses were extracted out
of as ancient and honorable Families as any was in the Country, he thought it
would be no disparagement unto his House, if he married Diana; and that Love
did at last force him to acquaint her with his passion. And what answer did you
receive from her, said Adamas? That Belinde (answered Paris) was her mother,
and had the sole disposition of her. Then said Adamas unto him, I have long
observed that you have loved that Shepherdess; and had I disliked that
alliance, I should have forbidden the Banes before now: I do commend your
choice, for Diana and Astrea are extracted out of the best Families not only of
this Country, but all Gaul: Amasis her self when she knows of it, will
acknowledge as much: Also the Virtue and Modesty of this Shepherdess is such,
as I shall think him very happy that marries her: I mention not her Beauty,
because that is one of the least considerable qualities in a Wife; though she
may brag that she is one of the fairest about all Lignon, and this Lignon
includes all Europe. And therefore, I do not only give you all the leave you
can desire, but do counsel and advise you not to lose a minute of time: And
because I am now going to Bonlieu, where Galathea may perhaps stay me a day or
two, I advise you to go home, and make all ready for your journey, and when you
come to Bonlieu, I will have a letter ready for you to carry unto Belinde, that
she may know who you are, and treat you, according to your own desires. Upon
this, Paris kissed the hand of Adamas, gave him a thousand thanks for this
favor, and taking leave of him, of Daphnide, of Alcidon, and of all the rest
of the Company, he took upon the left hand, and went unto the house of Adamas,
full of contentment, and joy.

As soon as dinner was done, the Nymph Galathea and Damon departed from
Bonlieu, to go unto Amasis, who being very impatient, or rather troubled at the
news which she received, had sent another Cavalier to haste them away. This was
a cause why Adamas setting out later then the Shepherds and Shepherdesses, he
did not find her at the Temple of the good Goddess as she extremely desired;
but he, being very diligent to observe her as his Lady and Mistress, and
knowing she was gone, he entreated Daphnide and Alcidon to continue on their
journey, and he would send Lerindas to acquaint the Nymph, who he was confident
would stay for them and take them in her Coach. These strangers were willing to
satisfy his desire, and continued on the way, and Lerindas at the Druides
command, ran before.

In the mean time, the Nymph and Damon, went on their journey, and talked upon
several things as well as the way would permit them: For Damon would not go in
the Coach, but armed, rid upon an excellent Horse, which the Nymph sent him,
thinking himself in a condition to defend Fair Ladies; and therefore that day,
he wore his Headpiece, and his Buckler, which at other times his servant was
wont to carry. Riding on in this manner, when they were past the Bridge of
Bouteress, and entered into a wood, through which the high way passed, not far
from the house of Adamas, Halladine who was behind Galatheas Coach, saw three
Cavaliers come rushing out of the wood, betwixt him and Damon, and ran with
their Lances in their Rest as fast as their Horses could ride, against his
Master: This Faithful servant, could advertise his Master no other way, then by
crying out as loud as he could; the Cavalier turning his head at his servants
cry, saw the three Cavaliers so near upon him, as all he could do was to draw
his Sword, and shield himself with his Buckler. These three were no sooner out
of the wood, but Galathea saw other three, who galloped as fast as they could
up to Damon also: who having not seen the first three, she and her Nymphs in
the Coach cried out, which caused Damon to turn about toward them, and miss
the shock of two Lances, which otherwise would certainly have thrown him to
the ground: the third who came a little after the other two, received the wages
for all three; for Damon in a fury to see himself thus unworthily treated, did
cut off most of his Arm, and he fell at his Horses feet. Damon still hearing
the Nymphs to cry out louder and louder, he turned toward them, and saw the
other three Cavaliers; who more advised then the first, ran all three with
their Lances at his Horse, so as he fell immediately, and gave his Rider no
more time then to get his feet out of the stirrups. Damon then leaping out of
the Saddle, and seeing himself set on by no fewer then five at once he thought
his best course was to keep near his Horse which lay dead; and those who
assaulted him, seeing their horses to boggle at the dead one, three of them
alighted, and two kept still on hors-back, and thus all five fell upon him at
once most furiously. Damon who had formerly been in the like condition,
resolved to fell his life as deerly as he could; and the first footman he met
with, he gave him such a blow on his head, that the man's Arms being good, but
he not able to bear the weight of that blow, he fell down in a dead swoon, and
falling with his head against a stone, his head piece fell off: so as the fight
being near the Coach, Galathea and all the Nymphs knew him to belong unto
Polemas, so as all the Nymphs persuaded Galathea to stay no longer there for
fear of some Treason against her: In the mean time the Soldiers were very busy
about Damon; but the Nymph answered, that it were a shame for her to leave so
brave a Cavalier in the midst of a danger, whereof she her self was the cause.
Whilst the Nymphs were thus talking, Damon had sweathed his sword up to the
very hilts in the body of one of his enemies; but another of them, spying his
opportunity, did close with Damon, and threw him to the ground, but yet Damon
was fully revenged: for there being a defect in the Soldier's Armor, Damon's
sword ran him into the belly, so as he fell dead some two or three paces off:
Of six, there remained now but three that were able to offend him, and all on
foot; and they fell upon him so resolutely, as doubtless they had dispatched
him, had not a Shepherd and a Shepherdess come luckily to the place: For the
Shepherd seeing so many upon one, he went to Damon's servant, and asked him why
he did not defend his Master? Alas friend (said the servant) most willingly I
would if I might; but not being of the Order of Cavalry, my Master has charged
me not to presume unto so much honor as to use a weapon. A most cursed
consideration it is (said the Shepherd) that hinders thee from helping so brave
a Master in his need: Upon this the Shepherd ran to one of the dead Cavaliers,
took his Sword and Buckler, and fell courageously upon one of them that was
upon Damon, giving him such a blow upon his shoulder, that he made him turn
toward him, and upon his turning, the Shepherd ran his Sword through the
Cavaliers body under his right Arm, so as he fell down dead close by his
companions: This did extremely amaze those that were upon Damon; and one of
them seeing the Shepherd disarmed, did bid his companion chastise him who had
killed their fellow; which he did accordingly, and fell upon him so furiously,
that having the advantage of fighting with one unarmed, he gave him two or
three great wounds in his Body, although the Shepherd defended himself very
bravely, and with much courage and dexterity; but alas, all the blows he made
were against hard Armor, and all those he received, upon his naked body. Damon
in the mean time having now no more but one to deal with, yet he received two
or three wounds in his Thigh; but however, he closed with his Antagonist, and
ran him into the Belly, so as he fell dead at his feet. Then running to relieve
the Shepherd who had relieved him, he fell upon the Soldier who had newly so
wounded the Shepherd, as he was staggering and ready to fall: Damon presently
with a dexterous blow divided his head and his shoulders; and the poor Shepherd
having seen his revenge, he fell to the ground almost dead. The Shepherdess ran
presently unto him, and sitting down upon the ground, did lay the Shepherds
bleeding head in her lap, so full of sorrow to see him in that sad condition,
as she wished her self in the same. Damon was going to help her, when Galathea
cried out, and bade him take heed; and doubtless he had been in great danger,
had she not cried out; for he thinking that all the six Soldiers were dead, he
never imagined that he who lay in a swoon should rise again, and come behind
him; but turning presently about upon her cry, he saw the man with his Arm up;
who gave such a weighty blow upon his Buckler, as he clove it in two; had this
blow been given behind upon his head, doubtless it had cloven it also in two,
for he had put his Helmet off. This fellow being both stout and desperate, and
Damon being both wounded and weary, the fight was very dangerous unto him, for
he was not so nimble and dexterous as usual: yet at the last, he ran his Sword
into the very throat of his enemy, who fell choked in his own blood.

In the mean time Adamas came to the place, and Alcidon and Hermantes seeing
all this, also thinking that perhaps there would be no more work, they ran
presently to those that lay dead, and seized upon their swords and bucklers;
then they went unto the Nymphs Coach to defend her, and presented themselves in
such a posture, as made it apparently appear, they could do something else
besides keeping of Sheep, although they were in that habit: As for Adamas, he
went to the Shepherdess, and finding him whose head lay in her lap to be very
much wounded, he helped her to bind up his wounds, which he had finished; when
Galathea seeing the Soldier dispatched, she went unto Damon, to know how he
did. Damon who saw that the man who had relieved him was in a bad condition, he
ran presently to help him, but he found that Adamas had already bound up his
wounds, and the Shepherdess leaning over him so swelled with Tears, that she
never looked up. The Shepherd finding that his end was near, did offer twice or
thrice to turn his head and look upon her, but he could not, because he lay the
contrary way; yet hearing what sad sighs and tears she shed for him: Be of good
comfort Madam (said he unto her) and fear not, but that he who is the just
Judge of all, will send you some in my room to conduct you into your Country:
the greatest grief that I shall carry to my grave, is, to leave you in this
Country, and see none with you that will serve you as faithfully as hitherto I
have done: but I know that the great and good Tautates will hear my prayers,
and guide you out of the place so full of danger. He would have spoken more but
his weakness would not permit him. Then the Shepherdess began: Alas (said she)
will you leave me in my greatest need? Have you not promised never to forsake
me, till we find the Cavalier whom we seek for? Madam answered the Shepherd, it
is the fault of Fate, not mine: for I protest, I would never leave you until I
have put you into the hands of the Knight of the Tiger, as you desire. Alas
Madam, you cannot justly accuse me of any thing, but undertaking more then I
was able to perform; In all this long voyage, I have rendered you all the
honor, all the rest, and all the services I was able, and the great Tautates
be my witness, I would have continued it still, if my life might continue: and
could I but see you in any place of safety, death should be must welcome unto me.

Damon as I told you, ran to held the Shepherd; but as soon as ever he cast his
eye upon him, and saw his face, he was amazed, and stood looking upon him as if
he were immovable: and doubtless his admiration had been more, had not the
Shepherdess lifted up her drooping head, so as he thought that he should know
her face, and the tone of her voice: but the habit of a Shepherdess and a
Shepherd, and the wan paleness of both their faces, made him stand in doubt,
whether his eyes and his ears did deceive him. In the mean time Halladine came
unto him to bind up his wounds; but he was so taken up with the sight of this
Shepherdess and Shepherd, that without answering Halladine, or so much as
seeing him, he suffered him to take away his Buckler, and began to dis-arm him,
where he saw the blood run, when Adamas and Galathea came to him, and when the
Shepherd, casting his eye by chance upon the Buckler which Halladine laid upon
the ground; Oh good God, Madam (said he unto her) what is this I see? and with
much a do, holding out his arm, he showed her the Buckler with a Tiger feeding
upon a man's heart: so as knowing it to belong unto that Cavalier whom they were
in quest of; Oh happy Thersander (cried he out) now dye when thou will with
full contentment, since Heaven has been so favorable unto thee as to see
Madonthe in the hands of her so much desired Protector. Damon hearing the name
of Thersander, and afterward Madonthe; and both of them looking upon him, he
had been blind if he had not known them. Now did he plainly see his long looked
for Madonthe, and Thersander also, whose life he so resolved to take away. His
love of Madonthe, his hatred of Thersander, and his unexpected meeting with
them, did make him tremble, as if he had an extreme fit of an ague upon him: He
knew not what to do; whether he should go away, or whether he should take
revenge, and kill the ravisher of his happiness before the face of her whom he
thought had used him so ill: The injury which he conceived he had received, did
invite him to it; and his affection and respect stayed his trembling hand: But
at last, thinking upon the Oracle which he had received at Mount Verdune, he
quenched all desires of revenge. But shaking from him all those that were so
busy in dis-arming him, who thought that his trembling proceeded from his
wounds, he ran presently to the Shepherdess.

Oh Madonthe, Madonthe! cried he out, has Heaven been so favorable to me, as
to let me once more see you before I dye? Upon this kneeling down upon the
ground before her, he offered to take her hand and kiss it; but Madonthe
surprised beyond imagination, first, to have met with the Knight of the Tiger
whom she sought for, and secondly, seeing him to be Damon whom she thought long
since dead, she was so ravished with wonder, that seeing him upon his knees
before her, when she least hoped for him, she could not choose but with open
arms embrace him: But this unexpected meeting, and sudden joy, made her look as
if death were in her face. Damon, on his side, looked as pale as she, so as if
Halladine had not run presently to hold them up, doubtless they had both fallen
to the ground. Thersander now knowing him also to be Damon, and hearing him
speak, he lifted up his eyes to Heaven, having not so much strength as to stir
his hands: Oh God! said he, How just, how good, and how omnipotent thou art?
Just in rendering Damon unto Madonthe, and Madonthe unto Damon; good in making
three persons happy at once: These two Lovers in meeting that happiness they
desired, and Thersander in seeing so good a conclusion of his services; and
omnipotent in bringing all these things to pass when we least hoped for them:
Oh Madonthe! Oh Damon! may you enjoy all fullness of contentment, and live
happily together many, many years. Upon this expression he grew pale, and
resigned his last breath with such a smiling countenance, as plainly showed he
left this life with contentment. Galathea in the mean time, and Adamas, who
with all the rest of the Nymphs were come to this Cavalier, they were all in
extreme amazement, to see all these three persons look as if they were all dead
alike. But Halladine who loved his Master extremely, Madam (said he) if there
be any spark of pity in you, I beseech you command Damon to dis-arm himself,
least his loss of blood prove the loss of his life. How friend, said Alcidon to
Halladine, is this Damon the Valiant Cavalier of Aquitane? The very same Sir,
said Halladine, who has lost more blood in eight days he has been here in this
Country; then he has of many years in all other places: Oh Father! (said
Alcidon unto Adamas) I beseech you let us contribute all the help we can; for I
can assure you, there is not a braver and more accomplished Cavalier in all
Aquitane then this: Then kneeling down upon the ground, he began to dis-arm
him, Damon not being sensible of it. As for Madonthe after she had continued a
while in a swoon, she came again to her self; and seeing every one so busy
about Damon, she thought that he was dead of those wounds which he received in
the combat. Oh my God! cried she out, and wrung her hands, must I lose thee
Damon as soon as ever I have found thee? And must I see thee now, never to see
thee again? Miserable wretched Madonthe, what malevolent Star is predominate
over thee? Must thou receive a happiness only to be the more sensible of its
loss? Oh Heavens! Oh Fate! was ever such bitter torments reserved for any that
lives? Life I defy thee; and torments do your worst till you have brought me
to my grave: upon this, her sighs and her tears did so stop the passage of her
voice, that she was forced to be silent; but her silence moved so much
compassion in all the Nymphs, that whilst Alcidon, Daphnide, Hermantes, Adamas,
and Galathea, were about Damon, they took the Shepherdess under her arms, and
removed her almost by force from the place where she was, every one giving her
all the consolation they could.

In the mean time, Damon was dis-armed, his wounds bound up as well as the
inconveniency of the place would permit; and a little after he began to open
his eyes: but being so weak as he was not able to rise, he turned his head two
or three times about to look for Madonthe: and Halladine knowing very well what
he looked for; Sir, said he unto him, do not trouble your self so much,
Madonthe is not far from you; assume to your self Sir a little courage, and all
will be well: Halladine (answered Damon) what do thou talk of courage? Do
thou think I can want any, that had so much as to love the perfections of
Madonthe? But where is she? And what is it, which hinders me from a sight of
that Fair Face? is she still with Thersander? Thersander Sir, answered
Halladine, is dead, and dyed to save your life, by which you may see the truth
of the Oracle, and what great reason you have to rejoice, since now your
troubles are all to end. Halladine, said Damon, help me to rise, that I may see
whether all thou say is true. Madonthe hearing all that Damon said, she took
heart; and being extremely joyed to see him in a better condition then she
imagined, she rose up, and ran as fast as she could unto him, and without any
regard unto those about him, she almost smothered him with embraces; but being
taken off by Halladine, who feared that her excessive kindness might make him
worse, she sat down upon the ground by him; and looking upon him with eyes full
of admiration: Ah Damon! said she unto him, is Heaven so good unto me, as to
let me see thee once more? Is it possible that the Knight of the Tiger, who
rescued me from the hands of the perfidious Leriana, should prove to be Damon,
whom she had so craftily given so much occasion to hate me? And is it possible,
Cavalier, that thy affection to me should be above her malice, and that out of
thy generosity thou should save her life, whom by her subtilty thou had
reason to hate unto death? But Cavalier, if thou art indeed that Damon of whom
I speak, and if all those causes, together with so long absence from me, have
not changed thy affection, why do thou stay so long before thou give me
some assurance of it? Damon then taking her hand; yes, yes Madam, said he, I am
the very same Damon you speak of; and sweat that I am nothing changed, unless
it be in loving you more then ever I did: All the venom of Leriana, nor all the
happiness of Thersander, was not able to diminish the least spark of my vowed
affection to you; Heaven is the witness of all my thoughts, and the Sun has
seen all my actions: and I challenge them both to upbraid me with the least
stain of my fidelity to you. I must needs confess, replied Madonthe, that the
treason of Leriana was enough to make you hate me, and to believe all that she
had infused into you concerning the happiness of Thersander: But I do vow unto
you by the memory of my honored Father, and by all my desires and hopes of any
happiness, that all I did was only to be the more loved by you; and all the
favors done unto Thersander, was only to reclaim Damon from an imaginary
affection; and my design in absenting my self from my Country, and my friends,
was only to seek out Damon under the Notion and Arms of the Knight of the
Tiger. Oh ye good Gods! (cried out Damon) Never was Cavalier in the world so
happy as I am, since I have received these assurances from the mouth of
Madonthe.

She would have replied, when Adamas mistrusting the security of that place,
and fearing lest the wounds of Damon should grow worse, he told Galathea, that
he thought it convenient to carry this Cavalier unto some place where his
wounds might be better dressed, and since he was very weak, he desired he might
rest himself some days in his house, because it was the nearest place of
convenience. Necessity made the Nymph consent unto this motion; so as sending
unto some of the Neighboring Hamblets, they got Damon to be carried unto the
house of Adamas, and the corpse of Thersander unto the Town of Marselles, to
give it an honorable Funeral. In the mean time Galathea advertised Amasis by
Lerindas, of all these passages, beseeching her that Damon might be put into
some place of safety, which when she had done, she would presently come and
receive her commands.

Madonthe could not possibly choose but lament the loss of poor Thersander, and
certainly it had cost her many more tears had she not met with Damon: But
however; his long fidelity, affection, and service, might well claim some tears
for his disasterous Fate, and in reward of all his pains, which she did most
zealously pay. In the mean time, they began to carry away Damon, who turning
his head every way to see what Madonthe did, and spying the body of Thersander,
he could not choose but sigh, not yet knowing whether he should wish him alive
or no. Yet considering that he dyed to save his life, his generosity
constrained him to say, Farewell Friend, rest contented, in that having Damon
for thy enemy, thou have obliged him to lament thy loss, and to call thee his
Friend. Upon this, he held out his hand unto Madonthe, who came unto him, and
never left him until he was in the house of Adamas, although Galathea did most
earnestly desire her to come into the Coach, choosing rather to follow Damon on
foot, then to be one minute absent from him.

On the other side, Adamas having presented Daphnide, Alcidon, and the rest of
their Company unto the Nymph, and she receiving them with all expressions of
civility, that the trouble wherein she was would permit; she took them into her
Coach: as for Adamas, he would needs follow Damon, whom they carried a shorter
way then the Coach was able to go. In the mean time Lerindas, leaving those
that were to bring the corpse of Thersander, he ran as fast as he could before,
to advertise Amasis, according to the instructions of Galathea; and though he
saw several persons running up and down the fields on his left hand, and though
he thought them to belong unto Polemas, yet he went on, having a command to
speak unto none but Amasis: yet he whom Polemas had set as a spy upon the way,
to observe who passed, ran presently unto him to acquaint him; and presently
after, another brought him word that they saw a Company coming, who carried
something like a corpse. Polemas who stayed there only to know the sooner what
was become of Damon, did presently believe, that is was he whom they brought
dead, or at least wounded. And rejoicing much in himself, though seeming to be
much troubled, he walked softly to the way, seeming ignorant of Galatheas
removing from Bonlieu, he asked those who were with him, whom it might be whom
they brought in this manner. None knew what to answer, because he had not
discovered his enterprise unto any about him, being more politic then to
divulge those design, which he intended to execute: after he had walked a
little farther, one of his men came and told him, that it was one who was dead,
whom Galathea had caused to be carried unto Marcelles, and who was killed in
her presence within the next wood. Now did he begin to think that the Soldiers
had executed what they had promised, and began to gust all the sweets of
revenge; but it lasted no longer then till he met this corpse: for observing it
to be the corpse of no Cavalier, and asking where they found that corpse, and
whither they carried it? The men answered, that Galathea had been set upon by
six Cavaliers, that one single man had defeated them all: that this Shepherd
offering to assist was killed, but all the rest lay dead upon the ground, and
that they carried the corpse of this Shepherd unto Marselles, by command of
Galathea, to be there honorably interred. But, said Polemas, what is become of
the Cavalier that resisted all the rest? He is much wounded, answered they, and
is carried unto the house of the grand Druide. Polemas then seeming to know
nothing of the business: This it is (said he as went away) to cashier Soldiers
without a cause; I do verily believe, these are some of them that were
cashiered, who being angry against Damon, did now seek to be revenged upon him
in this wood; and this he said as a preparative to an excuse when Galathea
should complain against him, for he did imagine that the men would be all
known. Then continuing still his hunting, to take away all thoughts that he had
any hand in the business; he presently dispatched one of his men to
congratulate Galathea from him, for the good Fortune which Damon had in this
Country, and commanded the man to take especial notice of all the words, and
have an observant eye over all the actions of the Nymph. And at the same time
dispatched another man to acquaint Amasis with the accident, beseeching her not
to suffer Galathea to go abroad any more alone, and without such guards as are
fitting for her Grandeur: he also commanded this man to have a special
observance of all that Amasis said and did.

Clidamant, Guyemant, and Lindamore, with most of the Cavalry in the Country,
being now in the Army of the Franks, Polemas stayed at home as Lieutenant unto
Amasis, in the room of Clidamant; And an ambitious design swelled him with
hopes to make himself Lord of this Province; and yet considering what abundance
of difficulties he was to meet withal, in altering the Fundamental Laws of a
State, and in taking the whole frame from off its basis, he thought it
expedient, first, to try all ways if he could marry Galathea, and left nothing
invented which might probably bring it to pass: Now seeing but only two ways to
compass his design, the one by sweetness, the other by violence, he would first
try if he could win her good will; and if that failed, then to have recourse
unto the fast remedy.

In order to his first design, he would employ that pretended Druide, called
Climanthes, who had formerly told Galathea her Fortune, having an opinion, that
the Nymph had a Genius, very apt and inclinable to hearken unto such impostures
and Novelties. He procured him therefore to set up his Cell again near the
Garden of Mount Brison where it was before; and setting all his things in
better order as he thought, then formerly; he showed himself two or three
days, in hopes that Galathea would come and visit him as before she had done.
And Polemas to make the best use of the absence of Clidamant and Lindamore he
could, he provided himself of many Soldiers in the Dominions of the Visigots
and Burgundians, who remained quietly in the neighboring Towns in expectation
of his commands. He had already courted himself into the amity of the neighbor
Princes, by corrupting their principal Officers; and was so liberal in the
Segusian Country, so Courteous both to people and Soldiers, and so respective
unto the Druides, Fubages, Sarronides, Vaces, and other Sacrificers, as every
one desired nothing more then the marriage betwixt Galathea and him, unless
some few, who being wiser then the rest, did plainly see that all this was not
his nature, but only forced to compass his ends in obtaining Sovereign Power,
which once gotten, he would not keep by the same means he got it, but by more
sharp and Tyranique courses. It was long before Amasis could see these things;
because an honest and good soul cannot imagine that a person obliged should
ever become ungrateful and traitorous. But at the last, she began to perceive
it by a letter which dropped from him, in which she found out what great
intimacy there was betwixt Gond^bant and him, and therefore as soon as Lerindas
told her of the accident which had happened unto Damon, and that it was by the
Soldiers of Polemas, she believed him to be the setter on; yet knowing how
dangerous it is to show any mistrust of a Prime Officer, before one be in a
good capacity to oppose him: when the Messenger of Polemas came to deliver his
message, she seemed very thankful unto him for the care he had of Galathea, and
sent him word b^ck, that his Counsel was so good, as she would follow it in
this and all things else; And dispatching away the Messenger, she left
Marselles, and went unto the house of Adamas with a good guard of Cavaliers to
wait upon her: For the news which she had received from the Army of the
Francks, did extremely trouble her; and she feared that since it could not be
long kept in secret, Polemas would resolve upon some ill design, as of late she
began to think he was apt to do.

Galathea was no sooner come to the house of Adamas, but the Messenger from
Polemas came also, and delivered the message of his Master very bluntly unto
her; but she not being able to hide the displeasure which she had conceived
against him, answered him very sharply: Go and tell your Master, said she, that
I am very much displeased with those that belong unto him; and if he do not
take some better order, I shall be very angry with him.

In the mean time Damon was got into bed, and when the Chyrurgions searched his
wounds, they found them to be more painful then dangerous; For though he was
run through the Thigh in two or three several places, yet as happy luck was, no
Nerve nor Vein was hurt, which joyed Madonthe beyond all expressions. The
Chyrurgions knowing that the contentment of the mind was highly conducible to
the cure of the body, they entreated Madonthe not to stir from him; and because
she was desirous he should know all her adventures since she came out of
Aquitane, she did not only answer unto all his questions, but related all the
plots and subtilties of Leriana, which she had contrived to the advantage of
Thersander: But when she came to rehearse the grief which she conceived at his
death, when Halladine brought the Handkerchief full of blood unto Leriana, and
Thersanders Ring unto her, she was not able to refrain from tears: then she
related the horrors of that ignominious death which she was to dye, and the
unlookt for relief which she received from the Knight of the Tiger: And his
departing unknown, continued she, was the cause of my resolution to seek him
out. But cruel Damon, said she, for I must give you that Title, how could you
find a heart to go away and never tell me who you were? Why should you after
you had given life to my body, ravish away the life of my soul? Why would you
not let me know you were alive? Oh Damon! how many sad sighs, sorrows and
tears, had you spared me if you had? Afterward she related unto him her
resolution of seeking out this unknown Knight, whom she was in quest of, though
she knew no reason, why she should be so earnest after him: But the allwise
providence of Heaven would have it so, that I might find Damon under the name
of another: The truth is, continued she, I had a far fetched conceit, that I
should find him thus, or else I should never find him; and you see how happily
God brings all things about: Thersander was the first cause of our separation,
and Thersander is the last cause of our conjunction; how faithfully has he
waited upon me, and kept himself within the limits of a respectful distance,
maugre all the falacies and false hopes that Leriana had insused into him; by
which the best advised man might well have been deluded? Upon this she
acquainted him how her Nurse dyed at Mount Dor; how she met with Laonice,
Hylas, and Tirsis; and how the Oracle caused her to come into this Country,
where she had spent her time in the Company of Astrea, Diana, Phillis, and
other Shepherdesses of Lignon, from whom she departed that morning, with a
design of returning into Aquitane, and there spend the rest of her days amongst
the Vestals and Druides Daughters. To be brief, she omitted nothing, but made a
most faithful relation of every passage unto Damon, who hearkened unto it with
so much joy and contentment, as he knew not which way to be thankful enough
unto his good Fortune, for this favor: and after a while of ravishment in this
contemplation, he said unto her, I shall Madam another time give you an exact
relation of my life since I had the happiness of seeing you last; but at this
time the Chyrurgions forbid me speaking, and therefore I will not use any long
discourse, only let me tell you, that I hope our future Fortunes will be better
then they have been: For the Oracle which I consulted with at Mount Verdun,
assured me that I should be restored from death to life by that man whom I most
hated and contemned: And see how this poor Cavalier brought you hither, where I
find you: For the Truth is, I might most rightly be said to be dead when I was
deprived of you; and alive again in the happiness of being with you; when I do
consider the passage, I cannot choose but admire at the wise providence of the
Great Gods, who has ordered Thersander to give me a double life, the life of my
body, by that relief which he brought me, and the life of my soul, in
conducting you Madam unto the place where I was: There is only one doubt in the
Oracle, which I do scruple at:

The Oracle.
AND thou, O perfect Lover, when
Thou hear'st a Diamond speak: Oh! then
From Death to Life thou shall return,
By help of him whom thou did scorn.
I see, (said he) that all is most perfectly accomplished, except this hearing
a Diamond speak, unless the Oracle will have me to take you Madam, for a
Diamond in constancy and excellency of amity. Adamas hearkened unto this
Discourse very attentively; Sir, said he, and smiled, if I had been known unto
you, the obscurity of this Oracle would vanish: for my name is Adamas, which
singifies in the Roman Language a Diamond; so as this Oracle let you know, that
as soon as you hear me, this accident shall befall you; and so indeed it did:
For at the very same time that Alcidon, Daphnide, and I, came unto the place
where you were, you met with Madonthe. I must confess (said Damon) the Oracle
is fully cleared, and I am most humbly thankful unto that Deity which ordained
me this happiness when I least expected it: But Reverend Father, continued he,
and looked about the Chamber, I heard you name two persons, whom I infinitely
esteem, and should think my self very happy to see in this place. Then Alcidon
stepped to him, and embracing him, said, yes Damon, Daphnide and Alcidon are
here, and are conducted unto this Country of wonders, by the same Love which
brought you into it: At the same time Daphnide came unto him, and saluting him,
said, yes, yes Damon, Madonthe can tell you, that Daphnide is also here, and
presents her self unto you under the notion of one of your best Friends. Damon
being surprised to see this Cavalier, and this Lady, thus clad in the habit of
Shepherds, he knew not at first whether he was asleep or awake; but afterward
touching them, and hearing them speak, he embraced them, and cried out; O
Alcidon! I must needs confess with you, that this Country is a Country of
Wonders, but they are wonders full of joy and happiness, greater then ever I
could hope to see. Whilst Daphnide and Alcidon were saluting, Madonthe, and
they were all rejoicing together at their happy meeting, news was brought unto
Adamas that the Nymph Amasis was entered into the Court; and he was no sooner
out of the Chamber to meet her, but he found her at the door, where after she
had stayed a little, she entered into the room where Damon was: I think, valiant
Cavalier, said she unto him, that I shall never come to see you, but shall find
you thus unfortunately wounded. Madam, answered Damon, I shall never complain
against any of these wounds which I have received: For the first, gave me the
honor of seeing the Nymph Galathea, and then you Madam; and these last have
made me meet with her, who only in all the World can make me happy: so as in
lieu of complaining against this Country, I have cause to Love it, esteem it,
and speak well of it. Upon this Amasis being informed of the quality of
Madonthe, she went to embrace her, and caress her according to her merits; and
because she took no notice of Daphnide and Alcidon; I perceive Madam, (said
Damon unto her) that those two persons are unknown unto you, but be pleased to
know, that they are worth your acquaintance; for though you see them thus
disguised, yet Madam the one is Daphnide, and the other is Alcidon; the very
same Daphnide whose merits so much commanded the affection of the Great Eurick:
And the very same Alcidon, so Feared and Loved for his valor by Thorismond
King of the Visigots, and all those that succeeded him. Amasis, upon this, gave
him thanks for his advice, and went to embrace them: It had been enough (said
she) if you had only told me their right names; for as soon as I had heard
them, I should presently have known these two to be the Great Favorites of King
Eurick: But I must needs confess, that seeing them thus habited, I should not
have known them for what they are, and therefore I am obliged unto you for
telling me. The obligation Madam, replied Daphnide, is on our sides, since he
has made us known unto the greatest, most esteemed, and honored Nymph amongst
all the Gauls. But Sir, said Amasis unto Alcidon, how came you to be thus
disguised? And where met you with this Shepherds habit? The Story of it Madam,
answered Alcidon, would be too long; but I beseech you, who can be in Forests
and not become a Shepherd? The Country is so full of accomplished Shepherds,
and Fair Shepherdesses, as I rather wonder that you Madam, and all your Nymphs,
are not in the Habits of Shepherdesses.

I am very glad (answered the Nymph) that you have found any thing in this
Country which pleases you; but when we have the happiness to see you in
Marselles, perhaps you will not think my Nymphs less lovely then the
Shepherdesses, nor find them in any humor of changing habits with them. Madam,
(answered Alcidon) I do not doubt of any thing you say; but I beseech you give
me leave to be silent, and to say nothing unto what I do not yet know.

The Nymph had continued the discourse longer, if she had not been very
desirous to have some talk with the sage Adamas: and having held a long
discourse with Galathea and him, upon the news which she had received, she went
at last unto Damon, and asked him how he did after his wounds were dressed? And
understanding that he found himself much better, she left him with Madonthe,
saying she would not hinder them of their contentments in talking privately
together: Then she commanded Silvia, and the rest of the Nymphs, to entertain
Daphnide and her Company, and to show Alcidon that the Nymphs of Marselles do
not yield unto the Shepherdesses of Lignon. Upon this taking Adamas by one
hand, and Galathea by another, she went into the Gallery, where the doors being
all shut, she took a whole turn before she began to speak: afterward assuming
another look more serious then before, and seeming to be much troubled, she
turned her self toward Adamas and spoke thus.

Father (said she) I have things of great importance to impart unto you; and
you must give me that Faithful and Prudent Counsel, which you were always wont:
and because I may perhaps forget some material passages, I desire that he who
brought me the news, may make the relation of it unto you, if we have but as
much time afterward as to return unto Marselles: Madam, answered Adamas, I
pray Heaven you be not mistaken in my Prudence, and I dare answer for my
fidelity; and as for your return unto Marselles, I shall hope that unless your
haste be very great, you will honor me and my house so much as to stay this
night in it: Father, (answered Amasis) if the urgency of my affairs would
permit it, I should be very willing; but when you shall hear what the Cavalier
will say whom Lindamore sent unto me, you will not judge it convenient: Then
causing Galathea to call in the Cavalier whom Lindamore sent, and the doors
being shut, pray Sir, said she unto the Cavalier, make us a relation of all the
message which Lindamore has sent unto me, and omit not any particular either
concerning our affairs, or the affairs of Childerick and Guyemant, since they
are so linked together, that they can hardly be separated. Upon this, placing
the Cavalier between her self and Adamas, and holding Galathea in her other
hand, they all walked together; and the Cavalier in obedience to her commands,
with a deep sigh, began thus.

The History of Childerick, Silviana, and Adrimartes.
I Cannot Madam without a World of grief, make this relation which you have
commanded me: And yet I cannot refuse any thing which comes with a command from
you; if you find any disorder in my Discourse, or if perchance I forget any
thing, I beseech you impute it to my sorrows, and let it find a pardon: and you
shall see by what I shall relate, how all those who have dependency upon a
Prince, are interested in his conduct: and how their good and their bad
Fortunes have their influences from him.

The King Merovius who by the grandeur of his actions has got the Title of
Excellent among the Franks; and in their own Language Mervoch, signifies
Excellent Prince. After he had gained many victories, as well over the Huns,
Gepides, and Almaines, as over the Romans and Burgundians; and after he had
Reigned twelve years, he died full of glory, and lamented by the people,
leaving by his wise Methina, the Daughter of Stuffart King of the Huns, and
Predecessor of Atillas, surnamed the Scourge of God, only one Son whose name is
Childerick.

The Reputation of the Father, and the Love which he had got amongst the
people, moved all the Franks with a common consent to make choice of Childerick
the Son; and having set upon his head a double Crown, the one to intimate his
succession, and the other to speak the conquests of his Father, they carried
him upon their shoulders throughout all the streets of Soissons, and proclaimed
him King of the Franks: before him went the Heralds of Arms, carrying in their
hands Ensigns won by Merovius from the Huns, Gepides, Alaines, Burgundians and
Romans, all which they trailed upon the ground: after followed the Ensigns of
the Franks, which were semi-Flower de Luces in an Azure Field: and last of all
followed the Ensigns of Merovius his Father; The first was a Lion endeavoring
to mount a steep Hill to devour an Eagle which sat upon the top, with this
motto; With Pains is the Prey obtained; and another was a Crown upon a
Buckler, with this motto: A Buckler secures a Crown. Thus going Triumphantly
through all the streets, the Air did Echo with the loud acclamations of the
People and Soldiers: Bonfires blazed befory every door, and when they were
extinguished, great Wax Tapers burned all the night before every man's house,
and nothing but dancing and joy could be seen in the streets; Tables
sumptuously furnished were set out for all comers: And it is impossible for me
Madam, to express the great hopes that the people had in this young King:
looking upon him as the Son of Merovius, whose memory was yet so fresh, that
all his great victories seemed to be before their eyes, and the generous
actions of the Father made them hope for the same from the Son, both in matter
of Arms, and management of public affairs. But he quickly showed them that
Dominion is a place so slippery, that few persons can attain to it, and fewer
can find firm footing without a fall: For in a short time after he was Crowned,
he began to lay Arms aside, and addict himself unto all manner of pleasures;
not remembering that it was the magnanimity, and martial exploits of his
predecessors, which had promoted them unto that Dominion: so as now the Court
was quite changed and swarmed with esseminate Sycophants, whilst valiant and
brave minds had nothing to do, but stand with their hands in their pockets;
young Gallants who under Merovius began to bud in valor, are now after the
example of Childerick turned women, and look not like the same men they
promised to be. So as all the hopes of conquest were turned unto fears, lest
the state which they had conquered should revolt; and the utmost limits of all
their hopes was only to keep what they had already gotten. Clidamant,
Lindamore, and Guyemant, were much displeased at the alteration of this Prince,
especially Guyemant, as one most concerned, and one who had devoted all his
services unto this King. So as when Lindamore advised Clidamant to return into
his own Country, because this Prince was so drowned in pleasures, that there
was no more glory to be got by staying there, Gayemant with tears in his eyes
dissuaded him, saying, that if any thing under Heaven would awake Childerick
from his drowsy security, it would be the generosity and virtue of Clidemant;
and if so much happiness befell the Franks by his means, he would get more glory
by it then any other way: besides, he was to consider, that he having assisted
Merovius against so many potent enemies, it would torn extremely to his
dis-advantage if he did not also assist Childerick, having made many Princes
his enemies by taking part with the Franks. Clidemant who was a generous
Prince, and who did love the person of Childerick, he was easily persuaded to
stay with him, and so stopped his ears against the sound advice of Lindamore,
as all his prudent propositions proved fruitless.

There was in the Court a young Cavalier called Andrimartes, Son unto one of
the most valiant Heroes of all the Franks: he had the honor to be educated
with this young Prince, when he was so young, as he was not fit to follow
Merovius in the Army. This Andrimartes with many other children of the Prime
Cavaliers, were continually with young Childerick, and instructed in all manner
of Noble exercises, that might make them fit to serve their Prince and Country.
And these yourhs were not only taught in all things requisite unto courage and
war, but also in all things that might polish their minds, and temper the
Natural Ferocity of the old Sicambrians, and the inhabitants of the Meotidan
Lake. Also to render them more plausible unto the Gauls, who are a people the
most civilized of all Europe, they were very often amongst the young Ladies,
which belonged unto the Queen Methina, and there was such pretty familiants
amongst them, as they would propound several marriages amongst themselves: this
Queen had command from the prudent Merovius her Husbandi to entertain as many
of the Gaul Ladies as she could, designing by this way to make himself King of
the Gauls by Love as well as by Arms.

Amongst those that were thus entertained and educated during the infancy of
Childerick, Silviana had the first place, as well in respect of her merit, as
of her family from whence she was extracted: This young Lady was adorned with
all such qualities as have power to cause Love; both Fortune and Nature had
equally been favorable unto her: And besides her beauty which was very high,
she had a wit so sweet, as all those whom her eyes attracted, were held by her
courtesy, and sweet conversation. This young Lady was not yet above ten or
eleven years of age; and Andrimartes who was about thirteen or fourteen, did
cast an amorous glance upon her: Silviana was esteemed the only Star about the
Queen Methina; and Andrimartes amongst all those about Childerick carried away
the commendations, either for dancing, leaping, or any other exercise of the
body. Moreover he was of such a sweet and tractable disposition, that when he
got the better of any of his Companions, he was so far from insulting, that
none was sorry to be surmounted by him, but very willing to yield unto him that
glory which was his due.

At this age the young Andrimartes began to cast an eye upon the Fair Silviana,
who being such a beauty as could not be looked upon and not loved, he began to
court her, and give her such testimonies of his affections as his green age
could afford. She, who yet hardly knew the name of Love, received his boyish
services, as other children use to do, without any further design: yet in a
little time she began to like him better then any of the rest, and resented
something which inclined her to talk with him, and to be glad when he was with
her from all the rest of her companions, though this inclination yet could not
be phrased either love or affection in her: But as the longer one stands by a
fire, the more heat he feels; so Andrimartes could not hold such intimate
familiarity with Silviana, without kindling such sparks of Love, as at length
so inflamed his soul, that neither time nor any thing else could extinguish
them.

The first time that he made it known unto her, was one evening when the Queen
Methina, according to her custom, went to walk upon the banks of Seine: for
she resided most at Paris, as well because it was the center of the conquests
of Merovius, as by reason of an Oracle, which was lately received from the
Temple of Ijis, and which said thus: WHen Paris is the Prime of Gaul,
A Gaulish stranger govern shall.


Now Merovius and the Franks thought that their Ancestors being Gauls, this
Oracle was spoken of them; and I assure my self that Madam you know how this
delectable River of Seine runs round about that City. And when the Queen went
to walk upon the banks of it, all the Ladies and Cavaliers waited upon her, and
walked also two and two, where and how they pleased. One evening therefore
after supper, Methina went to take the Air, and Andrimartes taking Silviana
under her arm, he entertained her as he was wont with his young affections,
unto which she answered in as innocent Language, as infancy it self could
imagine: As they were wandering amongst the thick of the wood, they sat down
at the first under an old Willow, which grew by the River side; but the young
Lady, not liking to stay too long in a place, and being weary with sitting, she
rose up and went unto a little tree of Osiers; and making choice of one whose
bark was smooth and tender, she had a mind to engrave her name upon it; so as
taking a Gold Bodkin which she wore in her hair, she engraved the Letters of
Silviana. Andrimartes seeing what she began to do, he went upon the other side
of the tree, and write upon the same stalk, as if it were in the very same
line, these words, I Love: so as what he writ, meeting with what Silviana had
written, both together made, I Love Silviana: but she going on his side, she
could see only what he had written; how Andrimartes, said she, do you Love? I
beseech you who? You may see Madam, (said he unto her) if you will please to
read on the Line: For my part, (said she) I see nothing but what you have
written; look a little better Madam, (said he) and you may find that which is
engraved upon my heart, as well as upon that bark: where is the name, said she,
that you speak of? Look well, said Andrimartes, and you will find it not far
off: I do not understand you, answered she, for I see nothing but that which
you writ; what then is this? (answered Andrimartes, and pointed unto what she
had engraved) That is Silviana, (answered she) Then, said Andrimartes, join
what I writ, and what you writ, together. I see, replied she, that by joining
them together, there is, I Love Silviana; but it was my self that wrote it:
Most true, answered Andrimartes, and it is you who has engraven it in my heart.
Your heart, replied she, and wondered, how could I do that, for I never saw your
heart? I know not Madam how you did it, answered he, but I am sure that with
you Fair Eyes you have done it. Fie, fie, (cried she out) I cannot believe it,
for my eyes cannot engrave, or if they could, I should surely have seen when
they did it; had they that quality, I should not have used my Bodkin to engrave
upon this bark. This childish answer did plainly show Andrimartes how ignorant
she was in matters of Love: yet for all that, he continued on; It is no wonder
Madam, said he, that your Fair Eyes cannot engrave your Name upon a bark,
because it is a thing insensible; but said she, I have often looked upon the
Queens little dogs, which she loves so well, and can you find one letter of my
Name upon them? No, no, replied he, they are animals without reason; it is only
upon the hearts of men, and men who are most worthy of that character. How?
said Silviana, can I do it and not perceive it? I beseech you Madam, said
Andrimartes, do you perceive your self to grow? Alas, said she, I do that
naturally; and you do naturally, replied Andrimartes, make wounds in hearts. Oh
my good God, replied she, I have heard say that all wounds upon the heart are
mortal; and if my eyes have wounded yours, I shall be the cause of your death,
and you will have all the reason in the world to hate me: It Is most certain,
replied he, that all wounds upon the heart are mortal, and those which you have
given me will cause my death, unless you give me a remedy: but however, I
cannot hate you, since on the contrary, I think that I cannot love you so much
as I desire, and as you deserve. I conceive the best way will be, (answered the
young Silviana) that since my eyes do hurt you so much, to hide them from you
for the future. By no means Madam I beseech you, answered he, unless you would
have me die, as soon as you begin that mortal remedy* for you must know, that
if any thing under Heaven can save my life, it must be by giving me new wounds.
This remedy, (said the young Silviana) is very strange, and least you should
dye, I will not only do as you say, but desire all my companions to do the
same, in hopes that the multitude of wounds which their eyes do make, may ease
you in those you receive from me: The eyes of your companions (answered he) can
neither hurt nor heal me: what difference (said she) do you find betwixt my
eyes and theirs? For my part, I know not any. There is so much, replied
Andrimartes, That I had rather be dead then want the least wound which I have
from you, and I would accord theirs as much as I can. I do not understand (said
she) why you should think so; for wounds are wounds, from whomsoever they be
received. There are (replied Andrimartes) wounds that are honorable and
pleasing, and others that are ignominious and painful: those which I receive
from you are of the first sort; and those which your companions can give are of
the other. I cannot imagine (answered the young Silviana) what the difference
should be. If there were other Silvianas (said Andrimartes) as Fair and full of
Excellencies as you are, and as able by their beauty to make such welcome
wounds, I should then agree with you that they would be all desirable alike;
but since that cannot be, assure your self Madam, I shall think nothing to be a
favor or a remedy which comes not from your Fairest self.

Silviana was very young, and yet not so young, but hearing Andrimartes speak
thus, she understood his good will unto her; for self love is so natural unto
us, that nothing does oblige more, at what age soever, then a good esteem which
is held of us; and that made him to return this answer: the good opinion which
you have of me, moves you unto this language; but believe it Andrimartes, you
are as much obliged unto it by the good opinion which I have of you. Perhaps
their discourse had gone farther, but for the coming of Childerick, who with a
great number of young boys came running and leaping through those woods, and
parted them; for this young Prince carried away Andrimartes almost by force to
leap and exercise with his companions, as he who excelled them all in agility
and nimbleness. He left the Fair Silviana with an ill will, and she remained
alone with no less displeasure; for though till then she never had the least
resentment of Love, yet these last expressions infused strange imaginations
into her fancy; and presently after, considering upon the merits and
perfections of the young Andrimartes, and calling into memory the expressions
of his particular good will unto her: Love did begin so gently to scratch the
skin, that it became such an itch, as by degrees became a wound incurable.

As soon as ever Andrimartes could steal away from Childerick, he returned to
Silviana, begging a thousand pardons for leaving her alone, and excusing it
with the force which that young Prince used unto him. I cannot blame him,
answered Silviana, nor your friends, for desiring the happiness of your
company. Oh Madam, answered Andrimartes, that you would rank your self in that
number, and think it a happiness to have my company. Do you doubt of either?
(replied Silviana) No, no, Andrimartes, you have merits enough, to make all
become your friends, and desire your company, and I have known you too long not
to esteem them accordingly. Madam (answered he) I should think this evening the
happiest time of all my life, could I think the Fair Silviana did ever daign to
cast her Fair eye upon my actions, and if I could have any assurance in what
you are now pleased to say. The young Silviana, not dreaming that Love would
oblige a heart to give it self away, but thinking it only a piece of pleasing
complaisance and delight in the company of one person with another, she did
believe that Andrimartes did Love her, and also did intend to Love him, as a
Sister may Love a Brother, or a Daughter a Father; and therefore according to
the innocence of her age, and simplicity of her soul, she answered him thus. Be
assured Andrimartes, that I do really Love you; and whereas you desire to have
some assurance of my words, I will most willingly give it, protesting unto you,
that I do not Love any Brother so well as I do you. Andrimartes who was older,
and more capable of Love then she, did know very well that all this was but the
words of a child; yet thinking that he had already brought her to a very good
pass, he contented himself for that time, hoping that time and continuance of
his Courtship would work this innocent Love into such a perfect affection as he
desired; and therefore taking her hand, he kissed it, and with a smiling look
said, Now Madam, do I think my self the most happy and best contented man
alive, since I have received this declaration from you, which I desire above
all the world: only one thing more I beseech you Madam let me beg, which is,
that you will be constant unto this assurance which you have given me, and that
you will be pleased to let me bear the name of your Brother, and to call you
Sister, as an obligation unto us to continue in this amity: With all my heart
(answered the young Lady) and I do promise to Love and esteem you as much as if
you were my Brother. Andrimartes would have answered, had it not began to rain,
which caused them both to remove: however, since that day, he courted this
young and Fair Lady so close, as by degrees he taught her know, that Love was
not to be confined by the Laws of Friendship, nor kept within compass of a mere
good will; for in a few days she loved him in such a height, as she perceived
it to be a thing impossible for her to make a retreat: So as one day when she
met him upon the banks of Seine, where Methina, according to her custom, was
walking, and taking an occasion to retire themselves under a shade of Trees,
she said thus unto him; Do you remember brother (for so she called him) what
discourse we had in this place, when I engraved my name upon the bark of yonder
Tree? Doubtless I do Sister, (answered Andrimartes) and shall remember it as
long as I live: no time is able to desace it out of my memory; for it was then
I received my greatest hopes of happiness from you. What did I then say,
replied she, which gave you so much contentment? These Madam, answered he, were
your own words; Be assured Andrimartes, that I do really Love you. Brother
(said Silviana) will you have me confess the truth unto you? I would have you
believe (said she and smiled) that when I spoke those words I knew not what I
said: how Sister! replied he presently, not know what you said? Certainly I did
not, answered she, for how could I give you assurance of a thing which I was
ignorant of, and did not know? Then, said he unto her, you did deceive me: It Is
true indeed (said Silviana) I did deceive you; but it was when I was first
deceived my self: for I must confess, that when I said I did Love you, I did
not know what it was to Love; and yet the good will which I had unto you, did
make me think it was Love, which was only a childish kind of an inclination.
Andrimartes hearing her say so, he was a little startled, fearing that she
intended to break her promise with this excuse: But she who had other
intentions seeing him so mute, and suspecting the cause of his silence; Brother
(said she) be not troubled at what I say, for it is only to give you a fuller
assurance of that affection which I have unto you; let me tell you now, that I
am more knowing then I was then; and am better able to discern your merits and
affection to me: I know now what it is to Love; not only as a Brother, but as
Andrimartes; and knowing this, I do protest unto you, that I do Love you as
well as you ought to desire. Andrimartes hearing this welcome expression,
kneeled down upon the ground, and said; Should I employ all my days in thanks
Madam, and spend all my blood in doing you service, I were not able to
recompense you for this happiness which you have conferred upon me by this
declaration: but since you are pleased to be so infinitely good, give me leave
to beg, that you will also be pleased to complete this my happiness. What is
it, said Silviana, that I can say more? Have I not professed that now I do know
what it is to Love, and that I do Love Andrimartes as much as he ought to
desire? I desire a little more Madam, answered he, for perhaps you may say that
I ought not to desire so much as I do. Then Andrimartes, answered she, I do
Love you as much as I oght to do: yet a little more, good Madam, answered he,
for there is not amongst men that can assume so much honor to himself as to
say that you ought to Love him: Then replied she, I do Love Andrimartes, as
well as he does Love me: upon this, Andrimartes was satisfied. Now, said
Silviana, I will go further, and do more then you desire; for I do Love
Andrimartes more then he Loves me: and I vow by all the Nymphs and Deities of
the River, that I will never Love any else: Only one thing Brother I shall
request, which is, that you will promise me upon your Faith, never to desire of
me any thing which my honor and decency may not allow. Let all the torments of
Hell fall upon my head* answered Andrimartes presently, and may Heaven* blast
all my hopes and desires, if ever I do entertain the least thought of offering
beyond those Limits which you shall freely allow me.

When this discourse passed betwixt them, Silviana was about thirteen or
fourteen years of age, and Andrimartes about sixteen or seventeen, an age so
apt to take all amorous impressions, that Love did imprint in their young
hearts all the characters of it self: so as ever since that time, they did both
so grow in affection, that had not their young and familiar education together
been an umbrage for all their amorous actions, and shadowed them with a vail of
courtesy and long acquaintance, certainly many had taken notice of it: but
since this familiarity did begin when they were little children, none did
wonder at their kindness unto each other, especially both of them being yet but
very young.

Thus they did live together in all possible satisfaction and contentment,
waiting until such time as they could handsomely procure the consent of their
Parents unto a marriage. And this happy condition lasted until such time as
Childerick did unluckily cast his eye upon this shinning Star: for seeing her
at a Ball where Silviana was disguised, according to the custom of the Romans,
he took such a liking to her, that ever since he loved her most desperately:
Silviana took notice of it presently; and because she thought it would be a sin
unpardonable in her, if she did not impart all that she knew unto her dear
Brother, as soon as ever she saw him, she acquainted him with all passages:
Andrimartes was apt to believe it; Sister, (said he unto her) it is no wonder
if all the World do Love you; but must your ambition to be the Mistress of a
Kings Son, extinguish your affection unto a Brother? And must I be the widdowed
Turtle left desolate without a Companion? Brother, (said she then unto him, and
took his hand) be assured that you shall never be the Turtle which you speak
of, until death do ravish me from you: and if I thought any such doubt did
enter into your soul, the affection which I bear unto you would be extremely
angry: be confident Andrimartes, that death it self shall not alter my
affection; for I will preserve it unto that second life, which our Druides tell
us of after this: Here Brother, (said she) take this Ring; and if you be the
same Andrimartes, which I take you to be, summon me by it either in this or the
next life, to keep that promise which now I do most solemnly confirm for ever
unto you.

I want words, Madam, wherewith to express the joys of young Andrimartes; he
fell down upon his knees, he kissed her hand, and the Ring which she gave him,
a hundred times, with a vow to present it unto her at that time when she
commanded him. Then taking a pin and pricking that finger whereon he wore the
Ring, he caused it to bleed in several places, and making his handkerchief all
bloody, he presented it unto Silviana: Madam (said he unto her) I do seal the
vow which I have made with my blood, and I conjure you to restore me this
handkerchief when you command me to restore unto you this Ring; to the end that
by these marks both the living and the dead may know how great the affection is
which Andrimartes bears unto Silviana, and how happy this affection has been
above its merits, in meeting with her reciprocal affection. Thus did Love link
the hearts of these two young Lovers together with faster knots, as if all the
powers upon earth were not able to unty them.

But for all that, Childerick continued his begun Love, which grew to that
height, that he could not enjoy any contentment nor rest, but when he was with
her. At the first, lest Merovius should be advertised of it, he hid his passion
as much as he could, and this was the reason why he durst not in words declare
it unto Silviana, though all his actions did make it so apparent unto every
one, as it was a thing superfluous to tell her that which none was ignorant of.

At the same time, taking infinite delight in looking upon her, he commanded an
Artist to take her Picture unknown unto her, thinking that she would not permit
it otherwise: and the Picture-drawer was so ready to satisfy this young
Prince, as he took her Picture very exquisitely, at two or three times seeing
her in the Temple: when Childerick saw it, he kissed it a thousand times; and
thinking that his happiness was not complete unless Silviana did know what
^ewel he possessed, and meeting her in the Antichamber of the Queen his
Mother, he took her aside and said thus unto her; Fair Silviana, I can tell you
some news, which perhaps you are ignorant of; for you think your self to be the
only Daughter of your Mother, yet let me tell you, that you have a Sister: Did
I think this news to be true, Sir, said Silviana, I should think it the best
that ever I heard, and think my self much obliged unto you for telling me of
it. You have good reason to be glad of it (said Childerick) for though she be
not so fair as you are, yet she does very much resemble you; and because your
self shall be judge whether or no I speak the truth, pray look upon this. As
soon as ever Silviana saw it, she presently knew it, and started to see her
self in any other hands then those of Andrimartes, and desiring to look upon
it, he gave it unto her. After she had a while looked upon it, and not knowing
how to get it handsomely from him; she threw it into the fire, and it was burned
before Childerick took notice of it, yet she did not cast it into the fire so
soon, as she repented of her haste, when she saw that young Prince stand as if
he were planetstruck with amazement, and to excuse her self in some sort: Oh
God Sir, said she, it was so ill-favouredly done, that I could not endure to
see my self so ugly. Silviana, answered Childerick, you have angered me to the
soul, and I cannot tell whether I have patience enough to endure it. Sir,
answered Silviana, and blushed; I am extremely sorry for it: but the truth is,
it was so very ill done, that I had rather have seen the Picture of death then
it. Love and anger had now a great debate in the heart of this offended Prince;
but Love, at last triumphing; I shall see (said he) whether that was your
reason or no, or whether you did it as an affront unto me; for if it be as you
say, then you will permit that another be taken with more leisure, that the
Artist may do it better then he could the first: but if you deny me this
request, then I have reason to think that you did it by way of affront, and
that you scorn a Prince who never adored any but your self. The young Silviana
fearing the displeasure of her friends, was constrained to grant what he
desired in such a civil and courteous manner, as he could not choose but be very
well contented with this satisfaction. Will you permit (said the Prince) that
another Picture may be taken? Sir, answered she, I will permit any thing you
please as far as is in me; but doubtless the Queen will take it very ill if I
should suffer it without her permission, or at least without the permission of
my governess. It is enough, said Childerick, that I know I have your consent
unto what I desire, and that you threw the Picture into the fire, only because
it was ill done. And because she seemed to be much troubled at her so much
displeasing him, last some bystanders should take notice of it, he himself
confessed that it was indeed so ill drawn, that it deserved no less punishment
then the fire.

If this Picture were good for nothing else, yet it served this young Prince to
make his Love known unto Silviana, for this young Lady durst not but receive
all that he said with a favorable aspect, last otherwise he should complain
against her for casting this Picture so hastily in the fire: and continuing
still his Courtship, he omitted no occasion which might testify the grandeur
of his affection to her: and because it is extreme hard for the violent passion
of Love to be confined unto the limits of reason and discretion, it so
increased, that very often transgressing the Laws of modesty, it happened one day
hearing her sing, that he was so transported with this puissant passion of
Love, that though it was amongst many Ladies and Cavaliers, yet he could not
forbear from kissing her per force. Silviana having no inclination at all unto
Childerick, seemed to be extremely offended with him for this violence, and
seeing it was done in the face of all the Court, she made many great complaints
against him; and the rather, because Andrimartes was present, unto whom she
would not give the least thought, that the Courtship of Childerick was able to
alter her from her vowed resolution. But the young Prince, though he saw her
much offended, yet he turned all to rallary, and laughed it out,

But yet Silviana would not take the continuation of his Love as in jest; and
Andrimartes, as good a face as he set upon the matter, yet was he netled to see
his master become his Rival; knowing very well that Love and Dominion will not
admit of any Companions: and therefore he resolved to ask the Queens consent to
marry Silviana; but because he would not do any thing that might displease
Silviana, he did communicate this resolution unto her, which she approved of
very well, as well (said she) to be out of the Tyranny of Childerick, as that
we may afterward live together freely without any constraint. Andrimartes
therefore whose only desire was to be the sole possessor of his Fair and dear
Silviana, made it his suit unto his Father, that he might not longer trifle
away his time amongst a company of boys, but rather employ i^ nobly in the way
of Arms under Merovius, to the honor of his Family, and after their examples,
especially his own: for he was now ashamed to be always amongst none but boys
and women: and therefore humbly desired him that he might leave off the name of
child, and assume the name of a Frank, in memory of his predecessors, and after
his own particular example, his humor and his age prompting him thereunto. The
Father who had a generous soul, seeing his Son so inclinable unto Arms, was
very glad to find this generous disposition in him, and promised to give full
satisfaction unto his desire; and to defer it no longer, he acquainted Merovius
with it, who approving of it, made it known unto Childerick, and intended to
honor him with the order of Knighthood, and with all those Ceremonies of
gird^ng him with a Sword, and putting on a Spur, in imitation of Arthur King of
Great Britain, when he admitted young Cavaliers into the Rank of Knights,
Childerick who was extremely in Love with the Fair Silviana, was very glad of
this honor intended unto Andrimartes, in hopes, that as soon as he was become
a Knight of Arms, he would be constrained to go into the Army, and leave
Silviana solely unto him, whose favor he hoped more easily to obtain when this
young man was out of her eye, who he saw wished him very well. Every thing thus
favoring the design of Andrimartes, he was dubbed a Knight by the hands of
Childerick, who had received the same honor a little before from the hand of
Merovius. When Andrimartes was to be girt with the Sword, and demanded what
Lady he would make choice of to be his Mistress, he kneeled down, and beseeched
the Fair Silviana to let him make choice of her, that he might make it his
boast, that he received his honors from the Fairest Hand, and Fairest Lady
that lives.

Childerick was extremely surprised at this request, and was ready to break out
into some violent demonstrations of his displeasure, yet the presence of the
King his Father restrained him, though not from blushing, and letting many see
how much this Act displeased him; and much more was he incensed when he saw in
what a joyful manner this Fair Lady gave consent unto the request which
Andrimartes made, and express her contentment by her eyes, and all her actions.
But the joys of this young Knight was unimaginable, when thanking her for the
favor which he received, he protested and vowed to employ both his sword and
his life in her service: And she, who never offered to hide the good will which
she bore unto him, knowing that ere long he would ask the Queens consent unto a
marriage, prayed heartily unto Hesus to make his Sword victorious, and said,
that she would with all her heart do any thing within the compass of her power,
to testify the great esteem which she had of his merits. But Sir, said she, I
neither will, nor can confer this favor upon you without the Queens consent,
who has the disposition of me. Andrimartes thinking that she spoke with much
discretion, he kneeled down before Methina; Madam, (said he unto her) Is it
your pleasure I should this day receive the greatest honor that ever I can
pretend unto? Childerick transported at this beyond all patience, interrupted
him and said; Me thinks Andrimartes, that unless you were too impudent, you
would never offer to make this request unto the Queen and Silviana, until you
had by some noble action made your self worthy of it, Andrimartes who knew very
well what it was which made Childerick speak so; Sir, said he unto him, I must
needs confess that I do not deserve this favor and honor; but yet I ask it
out of a desire I have of doing you some service: and I know that when once I
am honored with the Title of Silvianas Knight, that glorious name will so
invigorate and encourage my spirits, as no enterprise can be so difficult, but
I shall bring it happily to pass. This thought, answered the angry Prince, were
good, if it were not unjust: But it is not reasonable you should assume unto
your self a name which cannot be merited but with blood. My blood, replied the
young Cavalier presently, shall never be spared in such a cause, no more then
my life in the service of the King: But Sir, I find my self much mistaken in my
hopes; for I thought that in this, and upon all other occasions, you would have
been my Protector, and furthered thered me all you could, as a Prince, unto
whom I am devoted both by nature and my own inclination. Childerick would have
answered, and perhaps according to the violence of his passion, if Merovius
misliking the action of his Son, had not interposed; and to cover the
imprudence of Childerick, said thus, You had reason Andrimartes to expect all
favor from Childerick: I know that he intends it, and I do command him unto
it; what he said was only by way of rallary, and both he and I will become your
Mediators unto the Queen, to consent that Silviana may receive you as her
Knight; for it is but reason so Fair a Lady should have so brave a Cavalier for
her Knight. The young man all transported with joy, offered to kiss the hands
of Childerick and the King, and though the young Prince did permit him, yet it
was with such a brow, as plainly showed that he did it only out of respect unto
the King: and though Methina saw this as well as Merovius, yet she commanded
Silviana to receive Andrimartes as her Knight, since the King did approve of
it. The young Lady never obeyed any command more willingly then this, and did
it with a face so full of contentment, as every one took special notice of it:
This did so sting the heart of Childerick, that he resolved, whatsoever came of
it, to break off this Love which went so much against his heart.

And because he knew that he had too much discovered his passion, and that the
King was not well pleased with it, he constrained himself as much as possibly
he could, to make it believed that what he had done was only out of rallary, as
Merovius said: but there was not one in all the company which did not know the
contrary, especially Andrimartes, who knew very well that it proceeded from his
affection unto Silviana, and well did plainly foresee many a storm toward from
him: however, come what come could, he resolved to continue his Love; and
because that Honorable Order of Knighthood, which he had taken upon him, was
an obligation upon him to shake off the drowsy life of being always among
women, he resolved to quit that idle and effeminate kind of life, and to go
into the Army as soon as he had obtained Silvianas leave, and not to return
until some signal act had spoken him meritorious of the Fair Lady. She who saw
a kind of necessity upon him to take this course, and thought that it would
much conduce unto that contentment which they both aimed at; she consented unto
it, though with abundance of sorrow to part with him: and knowing that it was
the Kings custom to incite all Generous young Spirits unto gallant actions, and
to recompense those that by their valor did signalize themselves in the Army;
they did both of them overcome themselves, and with a River of Tears parted, in
hope that their absence would bring them to their desired end, sooner then
their presence.

To relate all the passages of this sad parting, and the demonstrations of good
will unto each other, is neither pertinent to the story, nor indeed possible:
let it suffice therefore, that Silviana expressed her affection as far as her
modesty and honor would permit, and Andrimartes, as became a perfect and noble
minded Lover. But I conceive it necessary to acquaint you with the sequel of
this design when he was in the Army, though the day be not long enough to
relate the hundred part of his brave deportments; for he gave such testimony of
his courage and valor, that Merovius made choice of him to command that relief
which he sent into Belgium, against the children of King Clodion, Renald and
Alberick; who being come at full age, Alberick being Lord of Cambray and the
bordering Countries, and Renald Duke of Austrasia, and having married Husemide,
Daughter unto Multiades King of Tongres, they contracted a league with the
Saxons, and with a formidable Army, fell into Austrasia, so as had not Merovius
very prudently sent this relief under the conduct of the valiant Andrimartes,
certainly their Arms had reached as far as the gates of Paris; and perhaps had
not only retarded all the conquests of this Valiant King, but also, had put his
very Crown into great hazard. But the Valor and Prudence of Andrimartes was
such, that giving a stop unto the progress of these two brothers, he
constrained them to keep within the confines of Austrasia, until Merovius had
quelled those enemies which the Romans had secretly stirred up against him: and
this piece of service was so great, that Merovius did highly acknowledge it; and
thought no recompense sufficient for such services as he had received from the
brave Andrimartes.

It is a hard matter to express the joys of Silviana, when she heard of all the
valiant exploits of her beloved Andrimartes, whose presence she did infinitely
desire, that she might rejoice with him for his happy success: and yet she was
well contented with his absence, since she her self was a sharer in his glory,
and since it conduced so much unto the advantage of the Crown of the Franks;
showing her self by her wise and virtuous moderation, to be the Grandchild of
Semmon Duke of Gaul Armorique, the faithful friend of King Merovius.

There was not a man who did not love, and highly commend the Valiant and Wise
Andrimartes (and for six years together which he continued in the Army, he met
not with one accident which did not end in happy success) Childerick only
excepted, who grudged at all his victories, though they were all to the
advantage of that Crown which he was to inherit after Merovius: but his love
being above his ambition, he disliked all his actions, and detracted from his
glory as much as possible he could; knowing very well, that all these applaudes
of him would kindle the affection which Silviana bore unto him. But at length,
Andrimartes not being able to live any longer from his adored Lady, though he
received Letters continually from her, he obtained leave from the King to
return unto Paris, to settle some affairs which he pretended, did require his
presence. He presented himself therefore unto the Queen, who received him with
all possible welcome; and he thought it expedient to strike now whilst the Iron
was hot, and speak unto the Queen concerning his marriage: and in
order-thereunto, he entreated a near Cosen of his to make this request unto the
Queen in his behalf. Methina who was well acquainted with the merits of
Andrimartes, and considered what signal services he had done the King her
Husband, she was very glad of any occasion to give satisfaction unto his
desire; and to testify how she approved of that marriage: Tell Andrimartes
(said she unto the party that was employed to deliver the request unto her)
that I do not only consent unto his desire; but also Silviana being Grandchild
unto Semnon our dear friend, I promise him to procure his good will, and the
Kings also: and in testimony of my forwardness to gratify him all the ways I
am able, I do allow him to live with her, not only as her servant, but also as
him that is to be her Husband.

This answer which was as favorable as Andrimartes could possibly hope for,
was received with so much joy, that it was impossible for him to keep it
secret: so as the news of it was presently all over the Court and Army; and
Methina having acquainted Merovius with it, it pleased him so well, that he
spoke of it openly, and said, that he was obliged to acknowledge the services of
that brave Cavalier, in the highest manner: so as to defer his satisfaction no
longer, he presently dispatched a Messenger to Duke Semnon his dear and ancient
friend, to procure his consent unto this marriage, promising to advance
Andrimartes unto such a height, as he should never repent of bestowing his
Grandchild upon him.

But Childerick hearing this news, first by the letters of the Queen his
Mother, and afterward by the discourse of Merovius his Father, he was so
displeased at it, that he could not choose but speak of it unto him, under a
pretense of doing him service; Sir, (said he unto him, finding him alone) I do
understand by the Queens letters, and also by your discourse this morning, that
Andrimartes intends to marry Silviana: now Sir, the service which I ow unto
you, commands me to hint unto you a thing which I think worthy of your
consideration. And though I do not doubt of your high prudence, yet your
multitude of other great affairs, makes me fear that you have not time to think
upon things of lower importance. I must needs confess Sir, that the services of
this Cavalier does deserve a recompense, but not so far as to make you commit a
greater offense against Semnon your dear friend and ally, and also against your
self: for certainly recompenses ought never to be made to the dis-advantage of
our friends, or such as trust us with things that are most dear unto them:
Semnon Sir, you know, is Duke of Gaul Armorique; it was he who at your first
coming into this Country received you into his friendship; assisted you with
all his strength and counsel; and it may be said, that he and Guyveline
Governor of the Edvois, were the two surest Pillars, upon which you laid the
foundation of your Dominion. Is it therefore reasonable Sir, that if he trust
you with his Daughter, who is to be the support and comfort of his age, you
should dispose of her without his consent? Or is it fit, to propound a match so
unequal and so dis-advantagious unto him? Will you Sir, let it be said that
Merovius does recompense his servants at the charges of his neighbor Princes
and friends? Pardon me Sir, for speaking so boldly unto you; and if it be a
crime, blame my natural desire to clear your name from aspersion, which I know
is contrary to your intention, and al your former actions: not but that I do
think it reasonable, and worthy of commendations in you, to remunerate
Andrimartes: But then Sir, I beseech you, let it be out of your own charges,
and with something in which you have an interest; in so doing, you will get the
name of a Generous and Magnanimous Prince: you will then be called the King of
Hearts as well as of Franks; there are other matches in your Kingdom, which
Andrimartes himself cannot choose but think much more suitable and fit for him,
then Silviana, whom if he pretend unto, in lieu of getting friends unto himself
by that unequal alliance, he will draw a mortal odium upon himself, and have
enemies that will never pardon that offense which he shall commit by your
instigation. Thus without advantage to himself, he will cause you to lose that
credit and amity, which you have gotten with so much pains, and which with so
much care and prudence you have hitherto preserved with all that know you. Do
not think Sir, that I am the first Author of these considerations, for many of
your best servants that dare not tell you as much, have addressed themselves
unto me, thinking that great Princes who are full of high employments, will not
reflect upon things of a lower sphere, which though small in themselves, yet
may draw after them many dangerous consequences: I believe if Andrimartes did
but consider of what importance, or rather what prejudice this marriage will be
unto your service, he would be the first (as deeply in love as he is) that
would decline it; I am confident he would not offer so much dis-service unto
your Majesty, as to discontent your people, in causing you to lose the amity of
your Allies. So as Sir, if you will please to command me, I will undertake to
divert him from it, and use such pregnant Arguments and reasons, as shall so
convince him, that he shall think no more upon it.

Childerick found such a patient hearing from his Father, that he hoped
presently to obtain commission for speaking unto Andrimartes. But that wise
King, having long since observed how this young Prince was in Love with
Silviana; and knowing that all these instances proceeded only from his desires
of enjoying her himself, having given him a full hearing, and seeing that he
expected his answer, he assumed a serious look, which testified the small
satisfaction which he received for his long Oration, and gave him this answer.

I am very sorry Childerick, to find in you such humors as I least desire,
especially in two things, which believe it my Son, will become your ruin, if
they be not prudently corrected. The first is an effeminate inclination, which
does bebauch you unto a dissolute kind of life, devoting your self wholly unto
pleasures and love: for if from contraries, contrary effects may be expected:
How can I imagine but that when I shall leave you this Crown, which was gotten
by so many hazards and toil from the valiant Romans, you will as soon lose it
as it was gotten? Alas you do degenerate from the martial virtue of your Nation
the Franks. The other quality which I do extremely condemn you for, is; The
employing your wit to cover your vice with a vail of virtue. Do you think me
Childerick so little versed in the affairs of the world, that I do not see how
all your specious arguments are only to hinder Silviana, whom you do love, from
marrying? Do you think I have forgot your Language which you used when
Andrimartes was made a Knight? Can you believe me ignorant of her throwing a
Picture into the fire, which you had gotten of hers, unknown unto her? Do you
think I never heard how violently you kissed her by force? Do not think
Childerick that any of your actions toward her is unknown unto me; and though
hitherto I suffered them, and seemed to take no notice, yet it was only in
hopes that you would reclaim your self from such a manner of life, as you could
not choose but know would exceedingly displease me. You take upon you to be a
very great Statesman, and will needs teach me how much I am obliged unto
Semnon, hinting upon all the good offices he has done me: Pray Childerick, unto
which of all my neighbors have you seen me deficient, and backward in paying
my duty unto their amity and good will? Why should you think me so negligent of
him whom I love and esteem above all the Gauls? If you cannot dive into the
depth of my designs, why should you not think those things which pass your
understanding to be done with as much reason, as those things are which be
within the compass of your capacity? What have I done hitherto, which any of my
friends can upbraid me withal? Nay, can any of my enemies charge me with any
neglect of duty to them? And is Childerick the only one that can condemn the
actions of his Father? Good Son give me a reason for your censure: Nay, I
believe you have no reason; but because I consent to the marriage of a Lady,
which out of a fond affection you would dishonor: do you think it better and
more honorable for Semnon, our generous and ancient friend to marry his
Daughter unto you, then unto Andrimartes? But Childerick, do you desire to
marry her? Can your foolish humor hurry you unto such a crime? I cannot
believe it, and had rather you were dead then ever see the day; or that you
should entertain such a thought: not but that I do highly esteem the virtue of
the Father, and like the Lady, for both are very worthy of much honor: but I
had rather restore back unto Reynald or his Brother Aberick, the Crown of their
Father Clodion, then consent that such a pusillanimious courage as yours should
have the Sovereign Power over such a warlike people as this which I command.
Now if your drift be not to marry Silviana, what would you do with her? Would
you make her your whore? Do you think the honor of my house can brook it? Will
the reputation of the Queen your Mother suffer it? Or the courage and
generosity of Semnon endure it? Fie, fie, Childerick, stifle such lewd
thoughts, and abominate them: let not such a fond love blind your
understanding; and then you will plainly see that if I do not consent unto this
marriage of Silviana unto Andrimartes, I am infinitely to blame; for Princes as
your self says, are obliged to recompense services done, with benefits and
honors: and if so, how much am I obliged unto Andrimartes? Who, not to mention
his other exploits which he has done for us, has not only repulsed the power
of Clodions children, but forced them to keep within the limits of Austrasia:
he may be said to have preserved all the rest of our Dominions, by his valor
and wise conduct, and repressing the insolency of our enemies, has given us the
means to make new conquests. Now tell me Childerick, how great is my obligation
for such signal service? How justly might I be branded with ingratitude, if I
should deny his affection, his fidelity, his courage, and his merits, the first
request that he shall make unto me? But you bid me pay my debts with my own
money, and not with Semnons, who keeps this Daughter for the support and comfort
of his old age. Let me tell you Son, that if I should deny unto his Grandchild
such a suitable and advantageous marriage, it would be a great prejudice and
injury to her aged Father; for there is no Prince, nor King, though never so
great; but would be glad of his alliance, who is able not only to preserve a
state, but by his valor and prudence is able to get a hundred Kingdoms: What
greater advantage or comfort can Semnon have in his old age, then to see
Silviana his Daughter in the hands of so brave and virtuous a Cavalier, and his
State under the guard of such a valiant, prudent, and prosperous Captain as
Andrimartes is? Consider Childerick, that I do ow this gratification unto
Andrimartes, for his Excellent services which he has done; and I do ow it also
unto Semnon, for the friendship and fidelity which I have always found from
him. I believe you your self will acknowledge as much, and if you contradict me,
it is not Childerick which does it, but a foolish effeminate passion which will
ruin him, and which if he do not presently correct, will make him lose that
Crown which now I wear. If therefore you have any desire to please me, leave
off this drowsy kind of life, which will render you the scorn and odium of all
that know you, especially of the Franks, whose martial dispositions will never
love nor endure such an effeminate person to be their King. Also Childerick, I
would have you leave off all your tricks of dissimulation, with which you would
cloak your effeminate designs with a vizard of virtue: otherwise, let me tell
you Son, that though I am your Father by name, yet I am not in affection, but
will make it appear both unto you and all the world, that I do not consent unto
such a contemptible life, as you do live.

Childerick was extremely confounded at this answer which Merovius gave him,
for his own conscience did convince him; yet according to the common custom of
of all such as would put a gloss upon their faults, he offered to excuse
himself of part of those things wherewith his Father upbraided him, by denying
the one absolutely, and so disguising the other, that perhaps he had made his
cause good, if he had had to do with one less Judicious then Merovius. But the
wise Father after he had heard all his gilded excuses, at last he interrupted
him. I perceive Childerick (said he unto him) that you are very sorry I have
been so quick sighted as to see your faults: but you ought not to grieve for
that; repent rather the committing them, then my seeing them: for being your
Father, I shall be as careful to conceal them as your self; but if you be wise,
continue no longer in this course of life, which will most shamefully become
your ruin: and consider that a Prince who is to govern a people, ought to
render himself more wise, and more virtuous, then the people, which are to obey
him; for otherwise his government will be only by Tyranny, which is less safe
unto him, and more displeasing unto them.

Upon this Merovius would hearken unto no reply, but leaving him, he dispatched
a messenger presently unto the Queen Methina, which let her understand, that
without more delay, she should propound this marriage unto Semnon Duke of Gaul
Armorique, and to assure him, that he would raise Andrimartes unto such a
degree, as he should have no cause to repent the bestowing his Grandchild upon
such a brave Cavalier. The Queen who was as desirous to give Andrimartes
contentment as the King, she dispatched an Ambassador immediately unto Semnon,
whose consent was easily obtained; and who having heard so great a Fame upon
the Name of Andrimartes, did embrace the motion, with many thanks unto the
Queen, for her desires of such a Match for Silviana: thinking himself so
obliged both unto her and Merovius for it, as he thought himself sufficiently
recompensed for all the services he had ever done them, and beseeched them to
dispose of him and his Grandchild as they pleased. Only this he desired, that
he might see Andrimartes, to the end he might be better acquainted with him,
who was to enjoy Silviana and his estate.

This answer being received, the Queen did presently acquaint her Husband with
it, who thought it expedient for Andrimartes to make this journey unto the good
Duke; and the rather, because at that time he had either Peace or Truce with
all his Neighbors, and could best spare him. Andrimartes and Silviana, hearing
of this intended separation, though they knew it conduced much unto their
future contentments, yet their extreme affections unto each other, could not
consent unto it without abundance of grief; for whilst he was in the Army, she
heard from him every day: but now the journey was long, and they foresaw that
the good Duke Semnon would not suffer him to return so soon as they desired:
yet necessity constraining them, Andrimartes departed, more desirous to return,
then to be the possessor of Gaul Armorique.

I shall not Madam, here relate the passages of his reception both by Semnon
and his people, who understanding the intentions of their Lord, did make
preparations to receive him with all manner of honor and joy; infinitely
applauding the election of their good Duke: Let it suffice to tell you, that
after Semnon had welcomed Andrimartes with all manner of magnificence, and kept
him a while in his Court, he did not only grant Silviana unto him, as he
desired; but also proclaimed him his Successor in Gaul Armorique, and caused
all his vassals and subjects to acknowledge him so: so as all the Grandees, all
the Soldiers, and all the Knights, received him as their succeeding Lord with
great applause.

Presently after this or a little before, Clidemant was come into the Army of
Merovius, and saw Andrimartes, being a witness of his brave exploits: So as
when this news was divulged in the Court of Merovius, it was very welcome unto
all the brave Cavaliers, Childerick only excepted, who was much displeased at
it: for though he made a show of the contrary, and since his Father had chid
him, was not so bold as to let his love unto Silviana appear, yet in lieu of
diminishing, it increased every day: not that he had any intention to marry
her, for he aimed at something higher; but his design was to enjoy her in
another quality. When he heard any commend the choice which Semnon had made for
his Grandchild, he could not forbear speaking very dis-advantageously of it,
and charge him, sometimes with injustice, and sometimes with indiscretion: of
injustice, in depriving his right Successors from his Estate; and of
indiscretion in submitting Gaul Armorique unto a Frank who was a stranger. So
as not being able to quench his flaming passion, and finding an opportunity of
discourse with Silviana, he said thus unto her: Is it possible, Fair Lady, you
should ever think of marrying Andrimartes? Sir, answered she, is he not a
Cavalier of greater merit then I can deserve? It seems, replied he, that you
are ignorant in matter of merit, since you do not see that the least of your
perfections does infinitely transcend all that is in Andrimartes. Sir, answered
she and smiled, If I be of such worth as you seem to make me, I shall quickly
make him rich; for I will wholly bestow myself upon him: and for my part, I
shall think my self sufficiently paid if he do but love me, and unto that I
shall hope to oblige him, by the extreme affection which I do bear unto him.
This speaks your judgment to be wondrous weak, said Childerick, and that your
will transports you beyond reason, Sir, answered she, if you think to vex me by
such discourse as this, you are to blame, since my will was always to honor
you. And if it be to cross Andrimartes, I shall wonder, since the only ambition
of that poor Cavalier, is to employ his life for the propagation of your Crown.
Fair one, answered the young Prince, my design is neither to vex you, nor
cross him; but only to prevent your ruin, which I foresee will be if you do
not retire your self from this young and indiscreet affection: believe it, I do
not speak without reason, and did you consider what good fortune is offered
you, perhaps you would not thus precipitate your self: Sir, replied Silviana,
set your heart at rest, and believe this for a most certain truth, that all the
great advantages in the world, shall never divert my affection unto
Andrimartes: The Queen and the King allow of it, Semnon approves of it also,
and what then can make me backward? Why good Silviana, replied Childerick, do
you make no reckoning of my will? And do you not think that my consent is also
necessary? Certainly I do Sir, (answered she) but I cannot think you will ever
cross the will of Merovius. The Love which I do bear unto you is such, (said
he) that if I saw it would be necessary for your good, I would cross even
Tautates himself. But since you care so little for your own good, adieu; and
remember that I am Childerick, a Kings Son, and one who hereafter will let you
see what a fool you are to despise that good will which he offers unto you.
Upon this, not staying for her answer, he went away in an angry mood: At which
she was very sorry, not in any consideration of her self, but out of fear lest
his anger should reflect upon her dear Andrimartes.

In the mean time, Semnon having kept Andrimartes a long while with him, and
thinking it now time for him to return unto Merovius, he dismissed him, upon
condition, that as soon as he was married he should return and bring Silviana
with him, with a resolution of staying always, and taking upon him the care of
his Estate, and spending the rest of his days in rest.

At his return every one received him with all imaginable honor, and caresses.
Merovius who treated him already as Duke of Gaul Armorique, was very glad that
one of his own nation, and one over whom he had so much influence, should
command so great a People, and become his Neighbor; thinking it to be a great
security unto his Crown: and in this consideration he commanded Childerick to
make much of him, and to love him, not as his Vassal, but as his Neighbor, and
one who might give a great settlement unto his conquests. But all these
caresses were nothing unto Andrimartes, in comparison of that welcome which he
received from his dearest Silviana, who now took him for her Husband, and lived
in all honest liberty with him; and though she did not conceal any of her
actions or thoughts from him, yet she would not acquaint him with the discourse
of Childerick, as well because she knew that all he said was false, as because
she thought that it would much discontent him: But she resolved to retire her
self with him as soon as possibly she could, into the dominions of Semnon; and
so avoid that Tyranny and those insolences, which she expected from him when
he should be absolute Lord of the Franks.

There being no stop in the accomplishment of this so much desired marriage,
Methina by the Kings authority, and by consent of Semnon, caused the articles
of marriage to be drawn; and about eight days after, the ceremonies were
accomplished, to the contentment of all, and with so much joy and satisfaction
unto Silviana and Andrimartes, that never two Lovers were better contented.
Childerick only sighed whilst all other rejoiced.

But as if Heaven stayed only until this marriage was past, before all Gaul
should become all sorrows, within seven or eight days after, Merovius fell
sick, and presently after dyed, full of glory and honor, and infinitely
bewailed by the people. Childerick was presently set upon the Throne, and
proclaimed King of the Franks, in false hopes that he would be the Imitator of
his Fathers virtues. Silviana remembering the harsh language which she had
received from him, advised her dear Husband to get out of the reach of this
young King, and to retire into Gaul Armorique, as well to avoid the malignity
of Childerick, as to keep his promise with Semnon. But Andrimartes who was
ignorant of the last language which he had used unto Silviana, and who thought
himself obliged to stay a while with this new King, and see the Crown settled
upon his head, he would not hearken unto the counsel of Silviana, thinking it
against his duty to retire before all was settled, and so delayed the time under
pretense of furnishing himself with all things necessary for their journey: in
the mean time he was always with the King, and so full of affection and care
in all his expressions, as any other but Childerick would have thought himself
obliged: But he on the contrary remembering the injuries which he thought he had
received, deferred the resolution of his soul only till the Ceremonies of his
Coronation were past: In the mean time news was brought unto the Valiant
Andrimartes and Silviana, that the good Duke Semnon was dead, and that all his
subjects earnestly desired them to come into their dominions.

Silvianas grief was very great, and that of Andrimartes was no less; for
having received so many benefits from that Prince, it grieved him extremely,
that he should die before he had done him any service. But when their first
tears were almost dried up, Heaven gave them cause for new ones, and more
bitter then the first.

Childerick now thinks all well enough, and his Crown fast upon his head; and
he fell into such a licentious course of life, as every one was out of hopes to
find his Fathers virtues in him. The People complained, the Grandees grumbled,
and his best lovers lamented him. After they had a while endured his shameful
kind of life, and suffered many Pressures and Tyrannies obtruded upon the
people, the Grandees of the State assembled themselves together at Province,
and afterward at Beauvois; where after deep debate and serious consideration,
they resolved to declare him unworthy and incapable of the Crown of Franks; and
at the same time to make choice of one, who though a Roman, yet they thought to
be a person of great merit and worthy to be their King: his name was Gillon,
who had long since left the Roman Empire, and followed Merovius, unto whom he
had done very great and faithful service, and had added unto the State of the
Franks the Town of Saissons, of which he was the Governor. But for my part, I
believe, they made choice of this ambitious man, because there was not any
Frank that would take the Title and charge upon him, and maintain it against
their natural and legal King: For treason was a most detestable sin amongst
them, and abhorred by all. But you may see Madam, how when the great Tautates
has a mind to chastise men for their faults, he can furnish out unexpected
occasions. Whilst Gi^lon was secretly preparing and arming himself, and all the
Grandees confederating and plotting together, Childerick drowned in a dull
security, was most indiscreetly contriving how he should get Silviana by force
from Andrimartes; not by any design of marrying her, for that he could not do,
she being married already, but to use her at his pleasure, as he had done some
others, since the death of Merovius: This young Prince was much induced unto
these disorders, by the poisonous advise of some base Flatterers about him, who
cried up, that all things were Lawful unto a King; that Kings made Laws for
their Subjects, not to tie up their own hands; and that since the lives of his
Vassals were in his power, he might do what he would with their estates or any
thing of theirs: These flattering but false maxims, moved him to offer this
injury unto Silviana, and the Valiant Andrimartes.

The Queen Methina retired her self to Remois, because she would not be any
witness unto the dishonorable and debauched actions of Childerick, and because
she desired to comfort her self after her great loss, by the consolations of
one Remy, a person who shined in all virtue, and one, who though the God whom
he adored was unknown unto the Franks and us, yet never any afflicted person
parted from him without much comfort. Childerick, taking the opportunity of his
Mothers absence, he desired no more but to make Andrimartes leave Silviana by
her self; in order to which he took him aside, and told him that he had matters
of very great importance to employ him in, and such as he would not commit unto
the fidelity of any one but himself: he told him that the business so nearly
concerned his Crown, and required such extreme haste, that he hoped he would
not deny him, but prepare himself for a sudden departure. Andrimartes who did
not think the Son of Merovius should ever entertain any such damnable thoughts,
did freely answer him, that he was ready to serve him in this occasion or any
other; and that though he loved Silviana as his wife, yet he loved Childerick
as his Sovereign: and to show that these two affections were not incompatible,
he would testify that he held nothing more dear unto him then his service.
Upon this Childerick gave him some colorable instructions, and gave him no
longer time to prepare himself for his journey then that night, and therefore
Andrimartes acquainted his dear Silviana with his employment, and told her that
he hoped to return within five or six days at the furthest. The wise Silviana
gave a patient hearing unto what Andrimartes told her, and having a quick and
apprehensive wit, she answered him with a deep sigh, thus: This journey, I am
afraid, will not bring me any contentment, and I beseech Heaven, I be deceived
in my thoughts: Andrimartes, you may remember that Childrick did once love me,
or at the least seemed so whilst his Father lived; and he has used very strange
expressions unto me, such as I never did impart un^o you, but such as make it
manifest that he slights all those services which you have done for him and
Merovius; and having all the power in his own hands, Heavens know how far he
will extend it: you see what kind of life he lives, and how apt he is to be
hurried unto any violent act; and therefore, what good can we ever hope for
from him? for my part I am extremely afraid of the man; and he has two
qualities which may well make any to fear him; that is, a wicked will, and
absolute power: what employments can he have for you that are good? Why should
he be so hasty in packing you away? I beseech Heaven, it be with a good design:
upon this, she took him about the neck, and kissed him, but bathed her kisses
in a flood of tears, which did exceedingly move the heart of this Generous
Cavalier unto compassion: then seriously thinking upon the discourse of
Silviana, and finding much reason in it, he answered her thus: These tears, my
dearest, do infinitely swell my soul with sorrows; and I must confess, I find
all your words so full of reason, that I wish some other were employed in my
room: but since I have already taken it upon me, and have his instructions in
my keeping, what excuse can I make to come off withal? And how can I be quit of
my employment without an extreme displeasing him? It cannot possibly be: but
since I have gone thus far, I must go further, and do as well as we can; and
therefore, I will tell you what I think we ought to do: First, I must go, and
return with all the haste that possible I can make; in the mean time, go you
unto the house of Andrenick our old and trusty servant, yet unknown unto any:
If Childerick have any bad design, doubtless he will either come unto you, or
send for you; by this his intentions will be known unto us: if they prove good,
I shall be very glad that no more noise is made of our jealousies of him: and
if they be bad, I shall give him but a very small time to execute his design;
for he shall not live a day after my return: because I will give his wicked
soul a passage out of his body in the midst of all his guards and soldiers:
but being yet in doubt of it, I would not have (...) said, that ever
Andrimartes committed such an act upon a bare jealousy.

This was the resolution of Andrimartes, who setting forward in the morning
very early, acquainted the trusty Andrenick with his purpose concerning
Silviana; commanding him to keep it secret from all the world. This Andrenick
was an old servant, who had the government of him in his youth, whose affection
was so great, and his fidelity so well known, as Andrimartes was as sure of him
as of himself. His house was near the house of Andrimartes, and he took it,
because he thought that ere long his Master would go into Gaul Armorique, and
he having a wife and children could not go with him.

As soon as ever Andrimartes was gone, Silviana without acquainting any of her
maids, went unto the house of Andrenick; and commanded them, that if any Ladies
came to visit her, to say that she was not well, and desired to see no body.
Silviana in the interim, locked her self up with the wife of Andrenick,
trembling at every noise which she heard, and thinking that she saw Childerick
at her Chamber door. It is very strange to observe, what a blind knowledge we
shall sometimes have of accidents that are to happen. Silviana indeed had
reason to fear the exorbitant insolences of Childerick; but yet since the
death of Merovius, she needed not have any such deep apprehensions, since his
insolences fell upon some others; so as she might well imagine his thoughts to
be diverted from her, and carried another way: but I cannot tell, some good
Genius told her, that she should never see her Husband again, and that some
misfortune would befall both him and her: this was the reason of her fears, and
study to prevent all manner of disasters; and because she had a great
confidence in the wife of Andrenick, she acquainted her with her fears, and
they two plotted together what course was best to be taken. Silviana asked her
what they should do, if Childerick not finding her at her own house, should
look for her there. First of all they sought out for some private place where
she might hide her self; for it was impossible to resist the power and force of
the King: but finding the house to be very little, and very inconvenient for
such a purpose, there being no places of privacy in it, she began to think upon
having recourse unto death as her ultimate refuge: but the good woman loving
her very well, and knowing that Andrimartes would never survive her: No, no
Madam, (said she) never think upon any dying; but if you will follow my
directions, I will secure you from all manner of violence. You are young, and
tall, you have a good leg, and no big breasts; I would advise you to disguise
your self in the habit of a Cavalier: I have here a suit of Clothes which is
newly made for one of my Sons, he never wore them, and therefore none can know
them; and I am confident that none who sees you with a Sword by your side, and
a Feather in your hat, will ever take you for Silviana; as for your hair, what
if you did cut it, though not till we see an absolute necessity of it? in the
mean time therefore, whilst we have leisure let us put you into this trim, for
however, there is no harm in it, whether you shall stand in need of it or no.
Oh Mother (cried out Silviana) blessed for ever may she be that bore you; for
now by your prudence I shall hope to preserve my self for my dearest
Andrimartes: there is no better way under Heaven then this; dear Mother, let us
make all the have we can; for my heart tells me, that we shall be presently put
unto all our shifts: and as for my hair, let the Scissers be in readiness, for
I will not make any scruple of it.

Upon this the virtuous Silviana began to undress her self, whilst the good
woman went to fetch the Suit of Clothes which she spoke of; and because she
desired to do her all the service she was able, she returned again immediately,
she shut the door fast, she helped to trick up Silviana, who appeared to be the
bravest Cavalier in all the Court, and so disguised her, that the good woman
verily believed she would pass unknown by any: the suit did fit her so well,
and became her, that when she girded the Sword about her, now, said she, do I
create you a Cavalier, and under that name oblige you to defend the honor of
Ladies. Mother, answered Silviana, this Sword will defend the honor of one
Lady at the least, and having it by my side, I fear not the violence of
Childerick, but will make use of it against him, or if he prove too strong for
me, against my self, who as feeble as I am, have courage enough to pass into
another world without any stain unto my honor: but Mother, me thinks I want
Boots and Spurs: for if this Tyrant do come hither, it is not likely I should
stay here; and if I go away, to be in this habit and on foot, is not handsome,
but will rather render me more suspicious: since you are so courageous, (said
the good woman) I do not fear your safety; as good luck is, there are two
horses in the house, which I have heard Andrenick say, are very gentle and fair
conditioned; I will accompany you, and before I disguise my self, I will
command them to be made ready: the Footman of Andrimartes shall hold them, and
if we stand in need of them, we will then mount them.

Whilst the good woman went down to take order about these Horses, and Boots,
and Spurs, Silviana stayed alone in the Chamber, so glad of her disguise, that
she knew not how to be thankful enough unto Heaven for this happy occasion of
preventing the designs of Childerick: for remembering his last language unto
her, she verily believed that he had sent Andrimartes away, only to have more
opportunity of offering some violence unto her; this memory filled her full of
chill fears: I know, said she in her self, that the Tyrant intends violence
unto me, and because he feared the courage of Andrimartes, has packed him away
with a design of getting him to be killed at his return. As she was in these
thoughts, the wife of Andrenick returned unto her, to whom with a trembling
voice and tears in her eyes, she said thus; Oh Mother! I am but a dead woman
unless you help me; for this wicked man, knows very well that the courage of
Andrimartes will never endure the injury which he thinks to do unto me, without
revenge, and therefore for certain, he will cause him to be murdered at his
return, if we do not some way or other prevent it. Madam, (answered she) let me
dress my self as soon as I can, that I may follow you; for me thinks I hear
some noise in the streets: what you say Madam is not without some probability,
for a Tyrant never acts his villainy by halfs: She had no sooner dressed her
self, but a messenger brought them word that the King had been at the house of
Andrimartes, that he sought for Silviana, and menaced Andrenick, and the rest
of the Domestiques, to know where she was.

Silviana now did cut her hair, and the hair of Andrenicks wife, and then went
all three to the horses, and so opportunely, that they were no sooner out of
the house, but Childerick with all his guard entered in at another door; making
such a noise, that the poor Ladies trembled out of fear of falling into their
hands: but the footman who had been in several dangers with his Master in the
wars, he was not at all affrighted: follow me, said he, and fear not, for I
swear by the life of my Master, that I will kill him who shall offer any injury
unto his wife. Thus hasting them away, because the noise increased, he got them
over the bridge; and mending their pace, he carried them toward the Mount of
Mars, and in a close valley under the Mountain, they did hide themselves,
intending when it was night to go unto some Town, a little farther off. But the
wife of Andrenick, who was in great fear of her Husband, and Silviana being
very desirous to know what Childerick did when he found her not; they commanded
him to go into the Town, and hear what news: the Footman went, and as luck was,
came into the Town just as they were ready to shut up the gates, leaving these
two Ladies so astonished to see themselves in such a solitary place so
disguised, as they could not choose but be in great perplexity. But Silvianas
great affection unto Andrimartes, when she considered the danger he was in at
his return, made her desire to be going toward him; and certainly had she
known the way, she would not have stayed for the return of the Footman: but
advising with the good woman upon the best course, it was judged dangerous to
venture without a guide; and therefore, comforting themselves as well as they
could, they stayed until Heaven showed them a better course. Expecting
therefore the return of the Footman with much impatience, and time beginning to
seem very tedious unto them, at the last they spied him coming, and running as
fast as he could; and because they perceived that none could see them, they
went to meet him, being extremely desirous to know what news he brought.

As soon as he came unto them, he wanted breath to speak; Madam, said he, unto
Silviana, the Heavens have helped you beyond all expressions; and you could
never have taken a better course, then thus disguising your self and getting
away: for Madam, that ungrateful Childerick (for he deserves not the name of a
King) that wicked man, that Tyrant, has committed more strange insolences and
violences in your house, and in the house of Andrenick, then any Barbarian
would ever have offered in the sacking and plundering of an enemies Town: Oh
Friend, (said Silviana) prithee tell us the whole story of his actions, Madam,
(said the wife of Andrenick and interrupted her) first let him tell me how my
husband does. Your Husband (answered the man) is well, and was joyed beyond all
measure when I told him what course you had taken; but because this place is
too near the Town, I think it best Madam to get us further from it, and by the
way I will make a full relation unto you. Good Friend (said Silviana) conduct
us toward the place where Andrimartes is, for I am resolved to go unto him,
and tell him my self what has happened.

The man then directed them the way which his Master told him he would come
when he returned; and because it grew late, and Silviana was not used to travel
in that manner, they resolved to go no further that night then Clay: the man
therefore placed himself betwixt them, and began to speak thus unto his Mistress
by the way.

Madam, said he unto her, Though it is but a while since you left your house,
yet such and so many strange accidents have since happened, that I know not where
I should first begin the relation of them. Happy you are that Tautares inspired
you with such fears of Childerick; and it is no less then a miracle that you
have escaped his inhumane hands: for he came unto your house in a more insolent
manner then ever was heard of. Be pleased to know Madam, that when I came to
the gates of the Town, I wondered to find them half shut, so as had I stayed but
a minute longer, I could not possibly have entered: all the Town was up in Arms;
and in such a tumult, that every street was chained, and all doors shut. With
much ado I got unto your house, which I found full of people and soldiers
ready to fall together by the ears; in the mean time, I heard many cries and
much lamentation made, some said that Silviana was there, that Childerick would
ravish her; and to have a better opportunity for it, had sent away Andrimartes
unto the good Queen Methina: many did grumble at it, and said, it was a shame
for the people of Paris to suffer such a piece of violence before their faces:
that if they endured this, they should encourage a Tyrant to commit the like
actions; that now, neither their Wives, nor their Daughters, were in safety,
since all was at the will of a luxurious Prince, and that they had much better
die once, then live always in such ignominy and slavery. I observed that
amongst those who used such plain language, there was both Gauls and Franks:
and I perceived that a very little spurring on, would move them unto Arms. To
the Franks therefore I said thus; Oh Sirs, can you endure to see Andrimartes
thus unworthily used before your faces? And unto the Gauls I said; Oh Friends,
must the virtuous Daughter of the good Duke Semnon be thus ravished in your
Town, and find no relief amongst you? There needed no more to set them together
by the ears, and with such fury, that of the Tyrants guard and soldiers some
were killed, others put to flight, and all in such disorder, that he himself
had much ado to get into his Palace, to which the people flocked, and God knows
what they did further. As for me, I ran presently unto your house, where I
found Andrenick, without either hat or cloak, and pitifully abused by the
followers of Childerick; yet he received not a wound: but all the house was
plundered, and all the women with their hair about their ears, and never was
greater violence and disorder offered unto any house. As soon as ever Andrenick
and those women saw me, they all cried out for joy, and asked me where you
were; unto whom I answered, that you were in a place where your greatest sorrow
was for them and their injuries: and taking Andrenick aside, I told him what
you had done, and where you were; at which he was so transported with joy, that
he fell down upon his knees and held up his hands to Heaven; Blessed for ever
be the great Tantates, said he, for directing you how to foresee and prevent so
great a misfortune: then rising up, he asked me of all circumstances; whether
his wife was with you, and what shift you made to escape: and having satisfied
him in all his questions as briefly as possibly I could, I left him the most
contented man in the world; but when he saw me ready to depart, he commanded me
to tell his wife, that she should rather die then forsake you. And because I
feared lest you should think the time long, I made all the haste that possibly
I could to return unto you, but with much ado, for I found every street chained
up, and it was long before I could get a pass: but at last, seeing the people
so much incensed, and hearing them all speak very advantageously of my Lord, I
told them openly that I belonged unto Andrimartes, and that you had sent me
unto him to acquaint him with the violence that Childerick had offered unto
you. I cannot express Madam, how affectionately they all offered themselves to
assist me when they heard this; I found my passage very easy after this, and
every one offered me any favor and courtesy I could desire: so as when I came
to the gates, they were presently opened unto me, and when I was out, he who
kept the guard, called me, and said; good friend, bid thy master make all the
haste he can, and tell him, that we are all ready to venture our lives for him,
in revenge of this injury which is offered. Thus the man ended his relation;
and in the mean time Silviana went on as fast as she could out of her extreme
desires of meeting Andrimartes, that she might acquaint him with this accident,
and move him to take that revenge which the people promised.

Be pleased to know Madam, that as soon as Childerick was sure that Andrimartes
was gone, he assembled a company of young Ruffians, which used to prompt him
unto such violences, and went unto the house of Andrimartes, where finding none
but the faithful Andrenick, and thinking that he had hid the Fair Silviana, or
at least knew where she was, he seized upon his person, and offered him a
thousand injuries; so as but for Clidemant and Lindamore, he had put him to
death. But they hearing that the people assembled themselves tumultuously
together, they Armed themselves, and ran into the throng of the tumult; and
well it was for the King they did so, for else he had found the danger of an
incensed people, who upon great reason had Armed themselves. But Clidemant
seeing Childerick in this danger, he drew his Sword, and dis-engaged the King
from amongst them, though Clidemant and Lindamore also were much wounded, yet
not so dangerously, but they accompanied the King into his Palace: unto which
all the Segusians presently flocked, and amongst them Guyemant, who though he
was known to be the servant of Childerick, yet was not hated by the people,
because every one knew that he was none of that debauched number, which
prompted the King unto these unworthy and ignominious courses. When Lindamore
spied him, Oh Guyemant, (said he unto him) must Clidemant do penance for a
fault which he never committed?

Heavens forbid, (answered Guyemant and was much troubled) I hope so great a
misfortune will not befall us: Then going nearer unto Clidemant, he kneeled
down by his bedside, and taking him by the hand, Sir, said he unto him, let
your courage make it appear, that you are able to overcome a greater
misfortune then this. Dear friend (answered Clidemant) I do not want courage,
but yet I am not able to resist the power of death. Guyemant with tears in his
eyes, then said unto him, I hope that Tautates will not afflict us so much, as
to ravish from us a Prince so necessary for the happiness of men, but will let
us enjoy him longer to our happiness and comfort. Guyemant, answered he, we are
all in the hands of the great Tautates; he may dispose of us as he pleases:
and for my part, so he will be pleased to let me leave this life, with that
good reputation which my Ancestors did leave unto me, I shall be well contented
and satisfied with the time that I have already lived. Then calling Lindamore
unto him, who was wounded, though not so mortally as he, and who was all in
tears to see his Lord in this extremity: You two (said he unto Lindamore and
Guyemant) are the persons in whom I have greatest confidence; Guyemant I
conjure you to tell Childerick, that I do die his servant, and am very sorry
that I have given no greater testimony of my affection: yet tell him, that if
the services which I have done unto the King his Father, have any influence
upon him; I hope he will not take it ill if you tell him from me, that if he do
not leave this ignominious life, which he has lived since he was King, he must
expect a punishment from Heaven. And you Lindamore, as soon as I am dead, or at
least, as soon as your wounds will permit you, carry back all the Segusian
Cavalry into their own Country; restore them back from me unto the Nymph my
Mother, unto whose service, I conjure you, to continue faithful as you have
begun: desire her not to grieve for the loss of me, since it is the will of
Heaven to have it so; and desire her to comfort her self with this, that I have
employed the time which I lived, in the way of honor, and die without
reproach. Also tell my dear Sister, that if any thing make me unwilling to die
so soon, it is my desires of seeing her, more then any thing else; then causing
us all to be called for, and seeing most of us standing by his beds-side, with
tears in our eyes, he stretched out his hand unto us, and commanded us to obey
Lindamore as himself; but above all to serve you Madam, and the Nymph Galathea,
with all the fidelity of true Cavaliers, assuring us that we should receive
from you a full recompense for all the services which we had done unto him.

He would have said something more, but his Spirits failed him, and he dyed in
the arms of Lindamore; who seeing this, for grief fell into a swoon. I cannot
express our sorrows, nor the sorrows of all the Court, when they heard of his
death: the very people of the Town, who commonly are very dull in such
resentments, did lament him, and also applaud him to the Heavens, saying; that
the death of this Prince was a great loss unto their Nation and Crown; they
were sure he never consented unto the Violent Extravagancies, and Tyranny of
Childerick, and doubtless our condolements had been much more, but for the
imminent peril and danger which presently after did threaten us; the fear of
our lives forced us to stand upon our guard: And at the same time, as fortune
was, all the Lords and Grandees which were assembled at Province, not knowing
of this accident, came all to feel the pulse of the people; and finding them to
beat after their own tempers, and with Arms in their hands, they put it into
the peoples heads to go and clamor at the Palace Royal, with abundance of Drums
and Trumpets; which making a great noise, Childerick began to fear the fury of
these mutinies. And because he had a great confidence in the valor of
Lindamore, and in the advice of Guyemant, he sent for them both to advise about
his safety: neither of them both would in this juncture of danger upbraid him
with his faults; but both offered him their aid and assistance to the hazard of
their lives. Lindamore though wounded, advised to fall presently upon the
enemy, and counseled the King to die like a King, and a man of courage. But
Guyemant, like a wise and prudent Counselor advised the contrary: Sir, said
he, let us not too desperately precipitate our selves, till there be no hopes
of safety; though we were near a thousand men, yet we were nothing to the
number of the enemy: time is the master of occasions, and may unexpectedly fit
us with them: it is wisdom therefore to submit unto time, and sail with the
wind; nothing is now to be done but to use our best endeavors for the changing
the mind of this tumultuous people, since we see all the Grandees both of Gaul
and of the Franks are joined with them; it is to be expected Andrimartes and
all his Friends will also comply, for he is already sent unto: Gillon the Roman
likewise with all his adherents will doubtless be stirring; and who knows
whether Renauld and his Brother the Sons of Clodion, will not be fishing in
these troubled waters? And therefore what good can we ever hope to do by force?
I advise therefore, and Sir if you will follow my Counsel, I will engage my
life to restore you unto the Crown of your Father: I advise you, I say, to
yield unto the violence of this averse piece of Fortune; retire your self out
of this Kingdom, and rest quiet with Basin, in Thuring; he is your Kinsman and
your Friend, he will be glad to have you in his house, and ready to assist a
great affied Prince: In the mean time I call the Gods to witness, that when you
are absent, I will employ my whole interest and endeavors to reconcile you
unto the People, and I make no doubt but to effect it, if you will follow the
advice which I shall give.

Guyemant had no sooner done speaking, but they heard a Trumpet, which being
come nearer the draw Bridge, sounded thrice, and afterward they heard these
words uttered in a loud voice: The Druides, the Princes, and all the Cavalry of
the Franks and Gauls, assembled and united, do declare and proclaim GILLON
King of the Franks; and Childerick a Tyrant, and incapable of wearing the Crown
of his Father.

Childerick and Guyemant upon this looked out of the window into the street,
and they saw Gillon carried, according to the custom, upon the peoples
shoulders, with such loud acclamations of the people, that Childerick saw
Guyemant told him truly, and therefore fearing lest his own servants should
betray him, he retired himself with the faithful Guyemant, and after some short
discourse together, he parted from him; carrying with him one half of a piece
of gold, for a token, that when Guyemant sent him the other half, he might
return into his Kingdom in safety: the Figure of this piece being joined
together, was on one side a Tower, to express constancy; and on the other a
Dolphin amidst the Surging Waves, with this Motto about, Destiny does not Cross
any: Then changing his habit, he entreated Lindamore, though he was wounded, to
accompany him with his Segusian Cavalry, until he was out of the hands of this
tumultuous people; Lindamore consented; and Guyemant promised to give an
honorable funeral unto the Prince Clidemant. Night being come, the King got
secretly out of the gates, and was conducted by us Cavaliers as far as Thuring,
and because Lindamores wounds would not give him leave to travel, he was forted
to stay upon his return in the Town of Rhemois, where the Queen Methina had a
particular care of him and his cure.

There we heard how the Generous Andrimartes having met with the Fair Silviana,
presently resolved upon revenge; but hearing the same day how Childerick was
punished, he thought it best to retire into his own dominions, and pardon the
fault of Childerick, which he did in some sort excuse, considering the
superlative beauty of Silviana.

Lindamore on the other side, thought it expedient to acquaint you Madam with
the news, which though it be extremely sad, yet fearing the neglect of it might
be dis-service unto you, I did undertake his commands, and became the messenger.

Thus the Cavalier ended with his eyes full of tears; but Galathea hearing of
her Brothers death, although she constrained her self as much as possibly she
could, yet she fell into such a flood of tears, that she did sufficiently pay
the tribute of human imbecility, and showed her good nature. Her Mother gave
her time to discharge her self of her just grief, and in the mean time asked
the Cavalier whether Lindamore intended to return ere it was long: and he
answering, that he stayed only for his recovery, she took Adamas aside, and
commanded the Cavalier to withdraw, until she sent for him again, but gave him
a most strict charge, to acquaint none living with the death of Clidemant, nor
of any accidents that had happened unto Lindamore, or King Childerick.

When the Cavalier was gone, and none within compass of hearing but Galathea,
she turned toward the Druide and said unto him: You hear Father this sad news,
and I must tell you that the loss of my Son goes very near my heart; nights can
best testify my tears: but the necessity of affairs forces me to dissemble my
sorrows in the day; and Daughter it is very requisite you do the same, for if
the death of Clidemant should come to be known before we have put our affairs
into good order, I am afraid Polemas should take advantage of the absence of
all our Cavalry, and plot some treason against us. I speak-not this without
some ground of reason, for I have observed of late, that this man assumes more
authority to himself then he ought; he has made two attempts already upon the
life of Damon, even in your presence, and this because he fears I have no
fancy to marry you unto him. But that which most discovers his bad intentions,
is the letters which Gondebaut King of the Burgundians did write unto him,
which I have seen, and which intimate a very close correspondency betwixt them;
These things being thus closely hid from me, must needs be unto my
disadvantage; and I believe his design is to attempt against the State, and to
establish his usurpation by ravishing Galathea from me, and marrying her either
by good will or by force.

Oh Heavens Madam, cried out Galathea; do you think this pernicious man has any
such abominable design? It is not to be doubted Madam, answered the Druide, and
I ground my opinion upon his procuring that Impostor to place himself so near
the Gardens of Mount Brison, to deceive you under a color of Sanctity, and of
being a Druide, and to try if by this means he could obtain your favor; but
seeing that this failed him, and that Clidemant, Lindamore, and all the Cavalry
are absent, he may very well take hold of this opportunity, and make use of his
correspondents to that purpose, since the whole government of the Country is in
his hands; therefore, I humbly conceive Madam, (said he unto Amasis) that your
best course is to hasten Lindamore's return as soon as possibly he can, and
that he bring with him al his Cavalry; in the mean time, retire your self into
the City of Marselles, where without any noise, I will send unto you as many
Soldiers and Cavaliers as I can: within two days I will come thither my self,
and if it be possible bring Damon with me, for I do not think the Country safe
enough against the violence of Polemas. I do vow (said Galathea) that if this
wicked man do offer any attemps upon my person, I will with my own hands and
nails strangle my self-Daughter, (answered Amasis) good Angels preserve you
from any such extremities; I had rather see you in your Coffin, then under the
subjection of this insolent man; but I hope never to see it: and yet it
concerns us to use that remedy which Adamas out of his prudence and fidelity,
has propounded unto us; this very night you shall go with me unto Marselles,
we will carry Alcidon and Daphnide, and all their Company with us, and entreat
them to leave off that habit which suits so ill with their qualities; to
morrow, I will send a letter for Damon and Madonthe: But Father (said she and
turned toward Adamas) as for the Druide, who was formerly at Mount Brison, who
told Fortunes, and lived with so much appearance of Sanctity, you must know
that he is returned again, and begins to live, and do as formerly he did: Oh
Madam, answered Adamas, he is a most abominable Impostor, and did you but know
how Polemas makes use of him, you would think them both worthy of punishment:
but the discourse of it will be too long for this time, for I see the Sun grow
very low, and you have no more time then to return unto Marselles by day light;
but if we could seize upon this Impostor, perhaps we should discover by him
what the design of Polemas is, for he is one of his great instruments. Galathea
whose very spleen against this man had almost dried up her tears, if you please
(said she) we shall easily take him; for there needs no more but to pretend
that I desire to speak with him: but I do not know how to manage the matter
handsomely, without the assistance of Leonide, and therefore it is requisite to
send for her. Assure your self Madam, answered Adamas, that to morrow I will
send her unto you; and yet I think it a good way to send Silvia to morrow very
early unto this Impostor, to tell him that you Madam have a very great desire
to see him, and that within this two or three days you intend to come unto
him; this will also deceive Polemas, and perhaps may cause him to retard his
wicked design, which will be very advantageous unto us: for we shall have more
time to provide for our defense, which I foresee we shall stand in need of.
This being resolved upon, Amasis without more delay, and to give Galathea time
to dry her eyes, she called for Pen, Ink, and Paper, to write unto Lindamore,
that he should in all possible haste come unto her, and that he should
understand the great necessity of his presence by the bearer: which done, she
called for the Cavalier, gave him the Letter, and commanded him not to lose one
minute of time, but post unto Lindamore withal possible speed, and tell him
that she should see his good affection by the haste that he will make in coming
to her, and bringing with him all his Cavalry and Soldiers: And because the
Cavalier was very trusty, and Lindamore, had great confidence in him, she
acquainted him with the wicked intentions of Polemas, purposely to make him
more quick in his employment, and to bring back Lindamore the sooner. The
Cavalier without more delay took his leave; and Galathea to oblige Lindamore to
make the more haste, Good Sir, said she unto him, tell Lindamore that I shall
know whether or no he be my friend, by the haste that he shall make.

Upon this the Cavalier departed, and the Nymphs with Adamas went out, and
after a little common discourse, they entreated Daphnide and her Company to go
along with them, and pass away some days in Marselles. Daphnide casting her
eye upon Alcidon, and seeing that he referred it unto her, she thought it not
civil to deny the Nymph, and therefore said she would wait upon her: for which
Amasis gave them thanks; and taking Daphnide by the hand, she went unto Damon
and Madonthe. Damon, said she unto him, I intend to send my letter for you to
morrow, and I desire that for the reasons which Adamas will give you, you will
put your self to a little more pains in coming unto Marselles. Madam, answered
Damon, I have both strength and devotion to serve you in whatsoever you please
to command. After this, night compelled the Nymph to depart with all this good
company; and she was so careful to send for Damon in the morning, that before
ten of the clock, he was at Marselles with Madonthe, Adamas, and Leonide. But
Paris being extremely desirous of going unto Belinde, he entreated Adamas he
would be pleased to write the letter which he had promised: Adamas being also
very willing to give him all satisfaction, did write according to his desires:
upon this, he departed immediately, so glad of Dianas permission, and Adamas
his consent, as he could not tell how to wish for more happiness.

Adamas in satisfaction unto Galatheas desire, sent the same night for Leonide,
to the end she might be with her the next morning betimes. And since she was to
go unto Galathea, he writ unto her that Alexis should not upon any terms go
with her, lest she should be known; and therefore she should provide her self
with some handsome excuse, and that this separation would not be for above two
or three days at the most. When Leonide received this letter it was almost
night, and as it chanced, Astrea had carried them unto Dianas house: so as
whilst Astrea was talking with Diana and Daphnis, Leonide showed Alexis the
letter which she had received. At the first, she was a little troubled at it,
thinking it very odd she should stay alone in a place, where if she should come
to be known, it would turn to her disgrace. But on the other side considering,
that if she went unto Galathea, she should be utterly ruined, she was contented
to stay still in that place, pretending that she was not yet well, and telling
Astrea in private, that she was so much in Love with this retired kind of life,
as she had no mind of going unto Galathea who had sent for her; and that she
would fain her self sick, purposely to stay with her in a place that was free
from the turbulent noise of a Court. Thus Leonide, got up betimes the next
morning, and left Phillis in bed with Astrea; and taking her leave of them, she
promised to return very shortly to see them and Alexis; then going unto this
disguised Druide who was not yet up: be sure (said she unto her in her ear)
that you manage your time handsomely, and let not good opportunities slip*
Alexis answered her only with a sigh, and then Leonide went unto Adamas, and
afterward with him unto Galathea, leaving the disguised Druide in abundance of
content, and more might have had, if she had had but confidence enough to make
use of that fair occasion.

Although Galathea out of a violent fit of jealousy had banished the Nymph
Leonide from her presence, yet she did after wish for her again, as well of her
own natural goodness, when she remembered the affection and fidelity of that
Lady; as because her passion being now a little cooled, her judgment reassumed
its strength, and suffered her to think her not so culpable, as in the heat of
her anger she thought her: moreover the help of Silvia did not a little help
her to discharge Leonide of Celadons escape, when they talked together. But
that which most made her forget all her anger against this Nymph, was the death
of Clidemant, and the enterprise of Polemas, who had some designs both against
her person and estate. And because great passions have a quality which drown
all inferiors, and makes the soul think upon nothing but it, this Nymph was so
extremely offended against the boldness and treason of Polemas, that her mind
did run wholly how she should chastise him: showing by this, that a generous
Spirit can hardly brook any unworthy violence.

And observe how Heaven does laugh at the subtilties of men, and how easily it
can confute all human policy, and turn it to their own dis-advantage: All the
Artifice which Polemas had used to ruin Lindamore in Galatheas affection,
being once discovered, it made her Love him more; and the rash enterprise upon
which he laid the foundation of his future Grandeur, did revive in her those
sparks which were almost quite extinguished by the subtilties of Polemas and
Climanthes. Lindamore being absent, could not so soon be a witness of those
favors which this renewed Love prepared for him: and Galathea longed for one
unto whom she might freely discharge her heart of such thoughts as were
necessary to be concealed; when she looked upon those that were about her, she
found none capable of the secret: as for Silvia and her Nurse, who knew most of
her secrets, she thought the one too young, and the other too old; and though
she was confident of both their affections and fidelities, and though the
prudence and wisdom of Silvia was above her age, yet she thought that matters
of State were things of too great a weight to trust them withal: and upon this
reason seeking for a good occasion to recall Leonide, and considering that she
never had any good ground to suspect either her affection or fidelity, unless
it was in the business of Celadon, which being now out of mind, and new
accidents coming in lieu of it, they blotted out the memory of the other. So as
this new business coming upon her, and so nearly concerning her, she accused
her self of too much rashness in banishing Leonide, she intended to let slip no
occasion of calling her back, and treating her better for the future.

And in as much as it is natural to desire the concealment of our faults,
Galathea desiring not to be taxed with levity and inconsideration in the
banishment of Leonide from her, she did with abundance of care seek out for a
good occasion of calling her back, without giving any knowledge of the cause why
she did banish her: so as when it was said that Climanthes was returned, and
when she heard that Amasis and Adamas desired to know whether it was the
Impostor who had formerly deceived them, she said that Leonide knew him better
then any other, though she knew well enough that Silvia knew him as well as
she; and not to let slip this opportunity, she desired Adamas to bring her back
presently: Leonide on the other side, when her Uncle acquainted her with
Galatheas will, she was willing to obey her, le^t she should seem too much
discontented: but with a resolution of returning unto the pleasant banks of
Lignon as soon as possibly she could, as well to avoid the confused life of the
Court, as to enjoy the sweet liberty in which she lived amongst those discreet
and Fair Shepherdesses: and though she did not tell her self as much, yet the
true reason of her desires to return, was to see Celadon, whom she left
disguised under the habit and name of Alexis: for though she had endeavored as
much as possibly she could to quench that flame in her self, yet she found how
hard a matter it is for a soul to reassume its former liberty, after it is once
captivated with a commanding love; and she could not free her self from that
passion, though she knew that Celadon would never leave Astrea: confuting
hereby the opinion of those who affirm, that there is no love without some hope.

When Leonide came unto the house of her Uncle Adamas, though it was very
early, yet she found all ready to depart: for the Druide knowing that important
affairs requires all haste, and that it is haste which gives them both life and
accomplishment, he had taken order for every thing requisite by the break of
day; both for Damon and for Madonthe: Amasis had sent a good guard of Soldiers
to be their convoy, under a pretense of an honor unto them, and not as if she
feared any injury would be offered unto them by the way.

Silvia, and most of her Companions, who knew of Leonides return, went and
waited for her at the outmost gate of the Castle, and did express so many signs
of good will, as made it most evident that they loved her, at the least, if any
true friendship can be found in a Court. Silvia above all the rest, embraced
and kissed her a hundred times: and as soon as she had saluted Amasis, who
received her very kindly, and had kissed the hands of Galathea, who welcomed
her with extraordinary caresses, they separated themselves as soon as they
could from the rest of their companions, and related unto each other all
passages which had happened since their last being together. Leonide with a calm
temper related how pleasingly she had spent the time of her banishment, in the
company of those fair and discreet Shepherdesses, and told even wonders of
their beauty, virtue, courtesy, civility, and wit, particularly of Astrea,
Diana, and Phillis: but in this, more subtle then her companion, she spoke not
a syllable of Celadon, thinking it no discretion to trust a young woman with a
thing which once known, might bring her much displeasure: and when Silvia asked
her concerning Alexis, as thinking her to be the daughter of Adamas, she
answered very coldly and carelessly, and said, that indeed she was a very good
harmless body, and had a wit suitable unto the profession, in which she had been
educated.

Damon and Madonthe were in the interim received with all honor that Amasis
and Galathea could do them, as well in duty to their merit, as to oblige Damon
to assist them in the urgent affairs which they foresaw. When he was got into
bed, and the Chirurgions looked upon his wounds, though the shaking in the
litter had a little altered them, yet they thought that in a very few days he
would be perfectly whole: for though his wounds were great, yet they were not
dangerous; and his meeting with Madonthe, and finding her as affectionate unto
him as he could desire, conduced much to his cure; and therefore every one
conceived that the Surgery unto the body, was to begin with the cure of the
heart and mind. Madonthe on her side, finding how much good her kindness did
unto him, she was almost continually with him, showing unto him all manner of
civil favors: and foreseeing that she was to stay long in that place in
expectation of Damon cure, she resolved to change her habit and become a Nymph;
she knew that Damon would be better pleased with it, as more suitable to her
quality: and her new dress did so well become her, as she appeared to be a
great beauty, which manifests, that beauty receives no small advantage from
trimming up it self.

Night being come, and Galathea having commanded Leonide to lie in her chamber;
when she saw that all the rest were retired, she called unto her; and causing
her to take a candle, as if she had some service for her: then looking a long
while upon her without speaking a word: at the last with a smiling eye she said
unto her, well Leonide, are you still angry with me? With you Madam (answered
Leonide and made a low courtesy) why, I beseech you, do you ask that question?
Do you think me to be out of my wits? I most humbly beseech you to believe that
Leonide will never fail in that honor and respect which I ow unto you. But
Madam (said she, and smiled) may I assume so much boldness as to ask you the
very same question which you do me? Yes Leonide, answered Galathea, and let us
here make a full confession, and so rip up the whole matter, that we never
after have any occasion to jarr: the truth is, you was angry with me, and I
with you; and for my part I will confess it proceeded from jealousy: but
Leonide why were you angry? If you will needs have it so that I was angry,
replied Leonide, it did proceed from the same jealousy: How? replied Galathea,
were you jealous of me? No Madam, answered Leonide, but if I was angry, it was
to see you jealous, and that you should suspect me of a crime, whereof I was
not guilty. Then Leonide, said the Nymph, I would have all things to be
forgotten, and if I was too rash, excuse my error; for truly I had an opinion
that all which the Druide told me, was as certain as if it had come from the
mouth of an Oracle: Oh Madam, replied Leonide, that Druide was a most vile
Impostor, and had you been pleased to have believed me, his villainy should
never have deceived you. Alas, answered Galathea, I was so deceived by his
language, as I was extremely offended with all those that spoke unto me against
him. But Madam, said Leonide, do you know the truth now? Oh Sweetheart,
answered Galathea, I have since found him to my cost, a very knave: I am most
heartily glad of it, replied the Nymph, for then you will find my innocence.
Speak no more concerning your self, replied Galathea, for I have quite altered
my opinion, and believe, that if I could have met with an opportunity, I should
have called you back unto me before now; but I would not upon any terms that
the cause of our difference should be known; yet I protest unto you Leonide, I
never wished you any ill; it is true, I was angry with you, upon the ground
that I have told you, but for all that, I loved you better then any that are in
my service: and I think it may be excused for being angry, for Leonide confess
the truth, did not you help Celadon to escape? And were not you to blame for
opposing my will? Confess it freely Leonide, for now, I care not for him, and
will pardon you. Madam, answered Leonide and smiled, I see you desire I should
confess a fault which I never committed; and since you have no more interest
in him, I will freely confess, and protest that I did nothing but change
Celadon into Lucinda, and you your self did approve of what I did, when I
dressed him in the habit of a woman. But why should I be so desirous of packing
him from you? And what interest had I in it? If you had no interest, replied
Galathea, why did you so often importune me to let him return unto Astrea? Many
reasons, answered Leonide did induce me thereunto: First, I was afraid lest
that a man should be seen amongst us, and what a blemish would it have been to
your reputation, if it had been known? Next, the ingratitude and scorn of that
Shepherd did extremely displease me: I thought him unworthy of that honor
which you did him, and which he did so ill acknowledge: but my chief reason of
all was, because I was sure you was deceived, and that the treason was invented
by Polemas and Climanthes, those two unworthy wretches: and how came you to
know there villainy? said Galathea. Madam, said Leonide, I told you then, but
passion kept you from believing me: when Celadon was sick, you sent me unto
Adamas; and by fortune coming into an Inn, I was lodged in a chamber, next unto
that where Polemas and Climanthes were all alone, and when they least dreamed
of it, I heard all their villainy. Ah Leonide, replied the Nymph, I will
remember that you told me as much, but time only could teach me how to believe
you. Amasis, my Mother was deceived in him as well as I, and would never suffer
him to be punished, according to his merit: but nothing is so close which time
does not discover, my Mother has since found out his knavery; for all that he
said in relation to Clidemant, is proved absolutely false; so as now, she hates
him as much as either you or I can. I am very glad, replied Leonide, that the
knavery of this wicked man is known, and more glad to see you convinced of that
error which he infused into you, and should be as glad to see him punished for
an example, and in terror of all such Impostors. Never fear it, said Galathea,
for I believe that ere long we shall be sufficiently revenged; you must know,
that he is of late returned again, and therefore I much desired your return
also. How Madam, said Leonide, is that Impostor returned again? It is as I tell
you, replied Galathea, and it is to be believed that he has some grand design
in hand, for he is the great Counselor of that Traitor Polemas. Oh Heavens
Madam, said Leonide, how infinitely you joy me to hear you speak thus of those
two wicked men; but, if I may be so bold as to ask, I beseech you what have
they done of late? They have done such things, answered the Nymph, that when
you hear them, you, will admire and abhor them both: they are plotting no less
then the ruin of us and all the Country: I do love you, Sweetheart better
then I did before, for in your absence I have found your discretion and
affection to me; I will therefore trust you with a thing that none but Amasis,
Adamas, and my self does know: then after a little pause, she began thus.

You know Leonide, that when this impudent villain was first at Savignea, my
Mother, as well as we, went to know of him the event of that voyage which
Clidemant my dear brother was to undertake. This Impostor amongst many other
things told her, that after he had gotten much honor and glory, he should
return safely and with much contentment unto all: But on the contrary, we have
received news from Lindamore, that poor Clidemant is dead, and himself so
wounded, as he is forced to stay with the Queen Methina in the City of Rhemois.
Oh Heavens Madam, (cried our Leonide) is Clidemant dead? Speak low, answered
Galathea, lest any should hear us: for it concerns us to keep it close for a
while, unless we would fall into the most base Tyranny that is imaginable. I
beseech you Madam, said Leonide, what does induce you unto such fears? And
from whom do you expect such insolence? From him (answered the Nymph) who did
before plot how to deceive me, I mean Polemas: you must know that this arrogant
wretch out of an incredible presumption, does not only plot how to marry me, as
you heard from his own mouth, and from Climanthes, but more, he intends to
marry me though against my will: and in order to that, he has plotted most
damnable treason both against me and the State, aiming to make himself master
of us both at once; you heard of his actions against Damon, and we do
understand what great intelligence he holds with Gondebaut, King of the
Burgundians, without acquainting us: certainly his treason had broken out
before now, were he not in fear of Clidemant; nothing else restrains him:
Amasis has therefore sent for Lindamore to return with all possible haste; and
though I assure my self he will not fail, yet being so far off, we are full of
many fears. We see how Polemas has all the Soldiers at his devotion, and my
Mother thinking she had done very well in it, has conferred upon him such ample
power, as he has the means to oblige them all to be at his own beck, though
against us. I assure you Madam, said Leonide, in a great amazement, you have
reason to say, that these are things of great importance; so great, as I
believe, nothing can more nearly concern you. Now Sweetheart, said Galathea,
this Traitor who is yet ignorant of Clidemants death, has caused him whom you
call Climanthes, to come unto the same place again where he was before: for my
part, I believe, it is to try if by some other subtilty he can win upon my will
to marry Polemas: and Adamas whom I believe you acquainted with the knavery of
this Impostor, has beseeched Amasis, to know whether it be he or no, and if he
prove the deceiver, to cause him to be seized upon; for it is probable that by
him we shall know of all Polemas his plots: and since he trusted him with his
design upon me, he would not hide the rest of his design from him. We were in
the house of Adamas when this course was resolved upon; and I had an extreme
desire to have you with me, I said that there was none who could manage this
matter better then your self, who had so often talked with him. In the mean
time, we came hither, and do all that we can for our own safeties: but we are
so unprovided of all manner of defense, as we know not which way to turn our
selves. This, Sweetheart, is the state of our affairs, which when well
considered is very deplorable; for we have lost Clidemant: all our best
subjects are either dead with him, or out of the Country; and we are almost in
the hands of an insolent fellow, whose impudent ambition threatens us with
intolerable servitude.

Upon this, the Nymph could not withhold her tears, nor Leonide neither, who
after she had emptied her eyes and recollected her self, did answer thus: I
must needs confess Madam, that of all treasons this is the worst, which being
grounded upon great ingratitude, it is to be hoped, Heaven will never let it
arrive at the end of this wicked man's desires. The Gods are more just then to
favor him in such unjust designs, and you shall see they will send us help in
our necessity from such means as perhaps we least expected. Put all your
confidence Madam, in God, and assure your self, that he will not fail you;
besides, your cause is such, that though there was none but women to defend
this place, I believe we are enough to keep it against all men alive: and for
my part, I believe, that upon such an occasion I should be more valiant then
Lindamore: but Madam, since you sent for me, as thinking I might be useful
unto you in the business, what service is it you are pleased to command me? I
would have you go, (said Galathea) and see whether this man be the Impostor or
no: if he be the same Climanthes, as I believe he is, I would have you make him
believe, that I have an extreme desire to confer with him upon a business of
great concernment; and if it be possible, persuade him to come hither, and
speak with me here: if you can prevail so far, we shall keep him so as he shall
not go out when he will; if you cannot, because guilty persons are always
suspicious of themselves, appoint a day when I may be sure to find him there,
for as you know, he uses to hide himself some days: and if we should go unto
him with a strong hand, and he not be there, this would divulge our design so
much, as we should lose the opportunity of ever catching him.

After much other such discourse as this, Galathea dismissed Leonide unto her
rest; but calling her presently back again. I must needs know (said she unto
her) what character you give of your Fair Shepherdesses, and how you have lived
all this while of your absence from me. Madam, answered Leonide, I can say
nothing of them but that they are the fairest, the most discreet and lovely
women that ever I saw, and their conversation is such, that whosoever is weary
of their company, is certainly of a very ill humor: the golden age Madam,
which men lived in long since, and which is so much envied by all that lived
after them, could never enjoy so much contentment and pleasure as is to be
found amongst them. I profess Leonide, said Galathea, you give them such a
character, as makes me wish my self a Shepherdess. Certainly Madam, replied
Leonide, did you but once taste those sweets, and tranquillity which they enjoy,
you would not desire to leave them. And yet, said Galathea, they also have
their distempers and cares, and inquietudes; for when they lost Celadon, did
they not exceedingly resent the loss? It is impossible, replied Leonide, to be
in the world, and be exempt from paying the tributes of humanity: but I call
them happy and free from inquietude, when I compare our cares and theirs
together: I know not why you should think theirs so little, replied Galathea,
for I have heard say that when Celadon was lost, not only Astrea, but all the
Town made great lamentations. Truly Madam, answered Leonide, they had showed
themselves very insensible if the loss of so well an accomplished Shepherd had
not moved them: I assure my self, replied Galathea very subtilely, that as the
loss of him did fill them with sorrow, the recovery of him was as joyful unto
them. Leonide knew the reason why the Nymph spoke thus, and therefore she
answered her very coldly, doubtless, when they do recover him, it will be
abundance of joy unto them all; for that Shepherd was exceedingly beloved of
all that knew him: why (said Galathea) is not Celadon yet returned unto them?
No Madam, said Leonide, and now they hardly so much as think upon him. Does not
Astrea, replied Galathea, sometimes speak of him? She does, answered Leonide,
but never unless some other begin the discourse. Why (said the Nymph) does she
not love him still? Or has some other succeeded him in her affection? Did she
love him, answered Leonide, she would love in vain, for every one thinks him
dead. I assure you, said Galathea, that if he were dead I should exceedingly
lament him; for he was the finest Shepherd of all his Country; and I must tell
you truly, the knavery of Climanthes did first move me to cherish him, and
afterward, his own merits moved me much more: and say what you will, I cannot
believe but Astrea, what face soever she set upon it, will have him in her
heart, as long as she lives; for I who am less concerned then she, I cannot
think upon him without much displeasure. But, added she, it is late, retire
your self therefore; and remember you go to morrow with your companion Silvia,
to see whether yond man be Climanthes, or some other like him, for the business
does not a little concern us.

This was the first discourse which Galathea had with Leonide in private, of
which she was very glad; yet she perceived that Galathea was not so well cured
of Celadon as she made a show of; and therefore she resolved not to discover or
discourse any thing of that Shepherd, which might bring him into memory,
knowing very well, that a Candle newly extinguished, will light it self again
even by the very smoke. But because she would not fail in those commands which
she had laid upon her, being of such great concernment, after she had conferred
with her Uncle Adamas, she went with her companion Silvia to make this
discovery.

When they came first to the place, they made a doubt whether it was Climanthes
or no; for they found every thing so changed, as they hardly thought it to be
the same place which formerly it was. Now was the place trimmed up very fine
and larger then before, with windows to give more light. This alteration did at
the first astonish them; yet seeing the door shut, they resolved to knock and
be better resolved. They went up eight or ten steps higher unto the Temple then
it was before: and when they were at the top, through the windows which were on
either side the door, they saw an Altar at the other end of the Temple, and
before it, a man at his prayers, but they could not know him, because his back
was toward them. The Cell being but little, they could hear what he prayed, so
it is; Oh most Puissant Deity, (said he) I beseech thee for a sign from Heaven;
and having repeated the same words thrice over in a loud voice, they saw the
fire kindle upon the Altar of it self, as readily as it was wont to do at other
times, which made the two Nymphs believe him to be the same Impostor whom they
looked for: and they were not deceived; for he having spied them afar off, he
prepared himself into this disguise of Sanctity: but they seeming not to have
the least suspicion of his Artifice, they uttered unto one another words of
great admiration, in an audible voice; which he hearing, did much rejoice at
it, believing that they did not suspect his knavery; and the more to delude
them by his new juggling, he turned his head toward them at the noise which
they made: and because they desired to enter into the Temple and speak with
him, he took some Holy Water and washed his eyes and his ears, because he had
both seen and heard these Nymphs whilst he was at his devotion; then throwing
some Veruin, and a few leaves of Oak and Misleto into the fire, he elevated his
voice and said: If it be thy pleasure, Oh most omnipotent Deity, that they
shall enter into thy Sacred Temple, then open thou the doors and let them in.
He had no sooner uttered these words, but the doors opened of themselves,
though none touched them, which made the two Nymphs to wonder so much, that
though they knew the fellow to be but a juggling knave, yet they could not choose
but be afraid; and therefore they stood a while as if they doubted whether they
should enter or no; until he himself in his Sacerdotal robes, and with a face
full of gravity, came to invite them, since it seemed to be the will of God
they should, by this particular sign of favor unto them. Leonide and her
companion being grown a little more confident, and seeming to bear a great
reverence unto him, they entered, and followed him as far as the Altar, where
kneeling down after the example of this Impostor, they remained in that posture
until he rose up, and said unto them; Leonide and Silvia, the Deity of the
place whom I adore, is pleased with your coming into this Holy Temple; for
having advertised me of your coming, and commanded me to let you enter without
purifying you either by perfumes or holy water, I could not choose but be
astonished at it; and therefore I asked of him an extraordinary sign of his
will; upon which, the fire did presently kindle of it self. Then when you were
come, I not being able to think that you should enter in this manner, I
beseeched him to show his pleasure by opening the doors of the Temple unto you,
which he most miraculously did, as you have seen. Now, Oh most Omnipent and
infinite Deity, if it be thy pleasure, (said he and turned toward the Altar)
that these Nymphs should adore thee in thy Sacred Cell, as it seems it is, by
opening the door unto them, show us some sign of thy divine will, that thou art
pleased they should make their supplications unto thee: When he uttered these
words, the fire that w^^ upon the Altar did extinguish, and the doors did
miraculously shut of themselves; at which the Nymphs were so amazed, though
they knew him to be a cunning knave, yet they feared that his tricks were done
by some enchantment or witchcraft; and therefore they would needs go out of
that place which they thought swarmed with fiends and devils; but he took them
both by their arms, and said, that since the doors were shut by the will of
God, they would greatly offend him, if they offered to open them before it was
his pleasure: but he desired them to let him know the cause of their coming
thither, to the end he might pray unto God to inspire him with an answer.
Though the Nymphs were both afraid, yet partly by force, and partly by ^^king
courage, Leonide acquainted him with the desire of the Nymph Galath^;
beseeching him, if it was his pleasure, to come unto her, and as soon as
possibly he could, because she had a business of great importance to
communicate unto him, and delay might be very prejudical unto her: We are not,
Oh sage Nymphs, (said he unto them) like unto other men, who may dispose of
themselves after their own wills; for we, who have dedicated our selves unto
the service of Heaven, neither ought nor can dispose of our selves, but
according to the will of Heaven: and I must tell you more, that I am expressly
forbidden to go out of the Limits which are appointed unto me by this Divinity,
without their express permission; and therefore, I cannot give you any direct
answer until I have consulted with the Oracle: if you will please to come again
unto me about four or five days hence, you shall know what answer I receive
from it; but in the mean time, that we may have some knowledge of his future
good will, let us offer unto him a small sacrifice, which we will make of the
Sacred Misleto, Veruin, and Savine, which are so pleasing unto him. Upon this
taking a few Oak leaves, and making two Chaplets in form of Garlands, he put
them upon their heads: then lighting the fire upon the Altar, he threw in some
of those leaves before named; lastly, kneeling down, he seemed to make some
prayers in a low voice, and when he saw it was time, Oh Great and Omnipotent
Deity, (said he in a loud voice) if the requests and supplications of these
Nymphs be pleasing unto thee, open thou the doors of the Temple unto them, that
after they have adored thee, they may go home unto their houses with content
and satisfaction. The Nymphs hearing these words, took particular notice of all
the Actions of Climanthes, to see if they could spy by what trick the doors
were opened; but they seemed to open miraculously, for neither his hand, nor
any other part of his body moved, which could move them unto any suspicion.

The doors then of the Temple being opened thus strangely, this Impostor taking
both the Nymphs by their hands, Go pure and innocent souls (said he unto them)
Rejoice in that the Heavens do love you, and for that there are few things
which you can ask that will be denied unto you: then conducting them forth, he
used a few Ceremonies, lifted up his hands and eyes to heaven, and returned to
the same place where he saw them when they first came: And because they were
extremely afraid that he was a Conjurer, they hasted away as fast as they
could, and thinking some Demon followed them. But Climanthes thinking that
perhaps they might hide themselves in some Bush near, to see what he did, he
kindled the fire upon the Altar, and made the doors shut of themselves; which
the Nymphs seeing as they looked back, fear made them go away faster then they
came. Thus did the knavery of this wicked fellow serve him for a cloak of piety.

Galathea was not out of bed when Leonide and Silvia returned, and when they
came unto her, they looked with such affrighted looks, that Galathea thought at
first that they had met with some disaster: But when they related all that they
had seen, and their fears at the opening and shutting of the doors, she could
not choose but laugh to see how they trembled at the very relation. I assure you
Madam (said Silvia when she saw Galathea laugh at them) that I am not of a very
timorous temper, but I must confess that when I saw those doors open and shut
of themselves, the hair of my head began to stare, and I do think any that saw
them would have done the like. Good Madam, said Leonide, suppose the doors of
your chamber should thus open and shut of themselves, would you not be afraid
as well as we? We know the man to be a knave, but withal, we fear that he deals
with the Devil, and is a Conjurer. No, no, said the Nymph, you know he is a
cunning fellow, and full of juggling tricks, and he did them so slightly, that
he deluded your eyes. No no Madam, answered Silvia, my companion and I both
observed all his actions so narrowly, that no motion, nor a cast of his eye
escaped us. However Madam (said Leonide) we can assure you he is the same
Climanthes which formerly we saw, and it is to be believed that he has a
design in project by his staying here: Whether he use conjuration or not, I
assure you he uses abundance of Artifice and pains, and certainly it is to
some Design of importance. But (said Galathea) when did he promise to come
hither? How Madam! answered Silvia, promise to come hither? Nay, nay, he is one
that never moves a foot without God's leave; he says he will consult with his
Oracle, and if we come about five days hence, he will tell us whither God will
give him leave to stir out of those limits allotted to him: But for my part, I
believe he will consult with one that has as many Devils at his command as I
have hairs on my head.

Galathea could not forbear laughing at their relation, and commanded them to
tell what they had done and seen unto all, especially unto Adamas. Climanthes
on the other side spent all the rest of the day in his wicked (though seeming)
Devotion, to the end that if any did come and surprise him, they might see his
sanctity: But when it was night, and he thought none could see him, he locked
up his Temple, put on other clothes, went through the Wood unto Polemas, and
acquainted him with all the adventures of the day, and consulted with him how
to demean him self toward Galathea in her questions which she should ask.
Polemas was much joyed when he heard the Nymph had a mind to talk with
Climanthes, assuring himself that now she gave credit unto his Art, which until
then he made a doubt of. I do believe said Climanthes in answer unto Polemas,
that the most subtle and cautelous men might be deluded as well as these women;
for never was design carried on with more prudence and circumspection then
ours: For my part think you what you please, I can never be persuaded they have
the least suspicion o^ any juggling in all that they have seen; for I have been
so punctual in every circumstance, that I think any one living might be
deceived as well as they: whatsoever they were by my first devices, I am most
confident they are much more deluded by my second.

Whilst they were talking thus, a Messenger brought some news of concernment
unto Polemas: upon this their discourse was interrupted; therefore making
Climanthes to go into a Closet hard by, he caused the messenger to enter. Sir
(said the messenger unto him, when he saw him alone in the chamber) your
faithful servant Meronthes salutes you, and has commanded me to deliver this
letter unto your own hand; and more, has given me in charge after you have
read it, to acquaint you with some passages from him which relate unto your
service. Polemas opening and reading the letter, and finding it only to be a
letter of Credence, he took him by the hand, and drew him as close to the
Closet where Climanthes was, as possibly he could, purposely that he might
hear, assuring himself that it was something which was necessary to be
communicated unto him, because Merontes was one of the prime Burgomasters of
the City of Marselles, and long since made his creature; asking therefore of
the messenger, who was his son, what he had to say, he acquainted him with the
arrival of Damon and Madonthe, and the honor and caresses which Amasis and
Galathea did unto them; the care which both of them had of him, and the opinion
which the Chirurgions had of him: Afterward he gave him an account of all the
Soldiers that were in the Town, in what manner the Guards were placed, the
little suspicion that either Amasis or Adamas had of any attempts, and briefly
assured him, that he would open a gate of the Town unto him when he pleased:
Polemas received this news with much joy; and after thanks unto Merontes for
his affection and fidelity, he conjured him to continue it, with assurance that
he would one day recompense him to the full: That when time served, he would
make use of his offer, as from one whom he confided in, the most of any man in
the world: then fetching a bag of money which he kept always ready for a
recompense of secret Intelligences; Here said he unto him, take this as an
earnest of my good Will, and when occasion serves, I will do more for you: But
pray tell me (said he unto the man) is there any News at Court? Sir (said the
young man) all the talk is of a Druide who lives near Mount Brison in so much
sanctity, that the Gods do grant unto him whatsoever he asks: I cannot relate
all the stories that are told of him, for they are so many, and so strange, as
are incredible: His greatest reputation did spring from a voyage which Leonide
did make unto him, who reports such wonders of him, as does astonish all
hearers: Amongst the rest (said Polemas) what does she report to have seen?
Sir, answered the man, she reports many wonders, and amongst the rest, of the
Door of the Temple, which opens and shuts of it self, at the very command of
this holy Man. For my part Sir, I go but seldom unto the Castle, and what I
report, is only by hearsay: But it is most certain, that many strange wonders
are reported of this holy person. Well Sir, said Polemas, Return unto your
Father, tell him, I give him a thousand thanks for the News which I have
received by you, and shall one day be as forward in real recompense, as I am
now in my verbal thanks: Desire him to continue in his Affection and Fidelity,
but above all, I desire both him and you to be secret. Upon this, Polemas
dismissed the messenger, and returned to Climanthes; who hearing what the man
reported of him, could not choose but laugh at the opinion which the world
conceived of him: And let me tell you (said he) that it is beyond the reach of
a Female subtilty to find out the Art which I have used. Good Climanthes (said
Polemas) I beseech you tell me how you kindled the Fire upon your Altar, and
how the Doors did open and shut of themselves at such a distance from you; for
I must confess I do not understand how you can do it. The truth is, Sir, said
Climanthes, these Arts, like all tricks of Legerdemain, are not to be
understood by words, as they may be most easily by sight and demonstration; for
I have ordered my Engines in such a manner, as words cannot describe them; but
be assured, they are the easiest things in the world to be understood when they
are once seen. I must needs say, replied Polemas, that Climanthes is a Master
in his Art, and now I am fully persuaded that these Women are deceived by it:
But dear friend, said he, and embraced him, how do you think our Design will
take? Doubtless Sir, said he, as well as we can wish; for though the event of
future things be uncertain, yet take it upon my word, a happy beginning is most
commonly seconded by a happy end; and I am certain you cannot desire a more
happy beginning then we have had. Within this Country all is your own; and out
of it, there is not one Prince nor Neighbor who does not love and favor you:
All those that can any ways hinder you, are at a far distance from you, and so
employed in the affairs of others, that they give you time enough to transact
ours; The best of it is, Clidemant who is the only mote in your eye, he is so
engaged in the assistance of a Prince so far distant from us, that any relief
from him is not to be feared; whereas your Confederates and Allies, are at
hand, so as we shall meet with no opposition, unless from a Company of weak
women, who though very potent in Wars of Love, yet are they but pitifully weak
in the Wars of Mars. But you must consider, replied Polemas, that Adamas whose
good will, will never be gained, is a very considerable enemy, by reason of the
credit and reputation that he has in this Country; the authority of Amasis, and
the averse disposition of Galathea, will be great hindrances unto us. Pray Sir
consider, answered Climanthes, that every thing will act according to its own
nature: Adamas may hurt you in words, but not in deeds; take but Arms, and all
his books are not worth a rush. As for Amasis, she is so affectionate unto
Galathea, as she will not cross her in any thing she shall desire: there is the
greatest difficulty, replied Polemas, for Galathea is young, and has no
consideration of the States tranquillity, but all her designs and inclinations,
are cross and averse unto mine. How know you that? replied Climanthes, perhaps
she desires it as much as you, but knows not how to bring it about: I pray tell
me, Has she not formerly loved you? True, answered Polemas, but Lindamore has
stolen her affection from me: Pray Sir consider, said Climanthes, that what was
once, may be again. The Nature of a woman, especially of a young one, is very
wavering; catches at every object of novelty that pleases the eyes, and fixes
solidly upon none, her mind is like a Ship at Sea without any Anchor or stay,
which flotes as every wind pleases. Now if we may be conjectures guess all
things hidden, I must needs think she is fully intended to observe whatsoever I
shall bid her; why else should she send Leonide unto me, to desire that I
should come presently unto her? I am either extremely mistaken, or else I see
her heart infinitely impatient to see me, with intentions to put her self
wholly into my hands; assure your self, that I gave her a very hot allarm, when
I told her that if she married any but him whom the Gods had appointed for her,
she would be the most unhappy woman alive. But suppose, said Polemas, she
should discover your subtilty? But suppose (said Climanthes) the sky should
fall? There is as much likelihood of the one as of the other: I would have you
to know, that Climanthes is such a Master in his Art, that if he would attempt
to make Amasis marry him, he could bring it to pass. Polemas laughed and said,
I wish with all my heart that I were a witness of your marriage with her, and
you of mine with Galathea. No, no, said Climanthes, I would be contented with
Leonide, Oh my dear friend (said Polemas) when I do marry Galathea, I will
promise you Leonide: and I promise you, said Climanthes, that I will give you
Galathea within a few days, or else I will lose my life. Upon this the
question grew, whether he should make Galathea come unto him, or he go unto
her; at last it was concluded better for him to go unto her, because in making
her come into the Temple it was to be feared, lest his tricks in opening and
shutting the doors, might some way or other miscarry or be discovered, and then
the whole plot was spoiled: besides, those things that are taken for wonders at
the first, and admired, do grow stale by often using, and scorned: Moreover,
since this opening and shutting is believed to be the Act of God, it will be
thought strange that this God can do nothing but still one and the same things.
But by going to the Palace, all these things are not to be expected, and
nothing is to be done but talking with her. Upon this they parted full of hopes
to arrive ere long at their desired ends.

But Polemas who was a man of a sharp wit, and a sound judgment, and a spirit
swelled with ambition, although he seemed to rely wholly upon the skill of
Climanthes, yet he neglected nothing which might bring his enterprise to pass;
and though he had some hopes in the subtilty of this fellow, yet he followed
his other business very close, so that if the subtilty of the one failed, the
force of the other might effect it. Besides the Soldiers of that Province, he
had entertained many others, both within and without the State: He had made
himself master of all the strong places, bridges, and passes; and not to do any
thing at random, there was neither King nor Prince his Neighbor, with whom he
had not close intelligence, and promise of assistance in case of need; he
provided himself of a vast Magazine of Arms, and all manner of Ammunition. And
because the whole management of all these correspondencies, and the whole
enterprise rested upon himself, he made choice of four men whom he employed in
things particular: these four confidents whom he relied upon, were the four
pillars of all his hopes and fortune; the name of the one was Pelidontes, unto
whom he committed the charge of his Cavalry: another was called Argonides, unto
whom he committed his Infantry; Listrandes had the command of the Artillery,
and Engines; and Ligonias of the Ammunition and victual. These four were
acquainted with the design of Polemas, and had long since contracted a league,
and linked their fortunes and lives together. As soon as Climanthes was gone,
Polemas called for them, and asked them particularly, how many men he might
build upon, if within the compass of eight or ten days he should have occasion
to employ them? Pelidontes promised him fifteen hundred horse, and besides all
the Inhabitants of the Country, two thousand strangers: Argonides promised
twelve thousand Pikes, Archers, Slingers, and Cross-bows, and six thousand
strangers: Ligonias promised victual for four months: and Listrandes promised
as many Arms of all sorts as they should need: now my friends, said he and
embraced them, my hopes are all in you; I do wholly rely upon you, and know
that you will have as great a care of my business, as I my self can have;
perhaps we shall not stand in need of all these preparations, I hope Heaven
will bring our enterprise to pass by fair means, and not by force. I desire it
may be so, as well for the good of the State, as because that way seems every
way the better. However, all preparations most go forward, for I am resolved,
within eight days to be either Casar or nothing; I beseech you therefore, and
conjure you to have a great care of every thing under your particular charges,
that they may be in readiness when we shall stand in need of them. Thus with
abundance of good language, and a thousand large promises, they parted; and
hoped to see the day when he should be able to make them all good.

But whilst the mind of Polemas thus boiled over with ambition, and the Country
was ready to break out into a flame: Love still boiled as fast as ambition, for
it gave no rest unto Celadon whom Leonide left in the habit of Alexis, and in
the house of Astrea; who with all her Companions could not know him to be
Celadon, so well was he disguised: But the wonder is, that neither Licidas, nor
any of his nearest kindred or intimate friends should have the least suspicion
of him; and that was the reason why Phoceon, when Adamas brought her into his
house, did lodge her in the Chamber where Astrea was wont to lie: and indeed
that Fair Shepherdess and her Companion Phillis, when Leonide was gone unto
Marselles, did endeavor to sleep, that they might let this disguised Druide
take some rest, whom they supposed to be not well. But this new, or indeed old
affection renewed, which Astrea bore unto this Shepherd, believing him a woman,
and her resolution to follow her unto Carnutes, and consecrate the remainder of
her days unto Tautates, did so possess her mind, that she could not entertain
any thought or imagination, but what proceeded from them and that desire.
Phillis on the other side, who knew how the Fair and Wise Diana was perplexed
ever since the subtle Laonices invention against Sylvander, she bad deffiance
unto any rest till she went unto her to comfort her in her grief, knowing very
well by sad experience, what it was to be troubled with the panges of
jealousy. Celadon who lay in the same Chamber with these Fair Shepherdesses,
had his enquietudes as well as they, and took as little rest; for calling into
his memory how Astrea had formerly appointed him never to see her until by her
command; when he considered his resolution to observe this ordinance most
religiously, and thought upon the reasons which the wise Adamas used to make
him quit that solitary kind of life, which he had begun when he reflected upon
the artifice which Leonide and the Druide used to bring him, not only into his
own Town, and amongst his kindred, but also into the very house of Astrea, and
leave him alone with her; these thoughts did so imbroyl the imagination of this
poor Shepherd, that he knew not what Council, or what resolution to take; for
though he had the same thoughts in his mind before, yet the several reason and
arguments of the Nymph, and the Druide, did help him to digest them; but now
when he was all alone, he thought himself surrounded with a thousand dangers,
and without all humane help or comfort. He considered that now he was amongst
abundance of his familiar and intimate acquaintance, and that it was a thing
almost impossible, to hide himself long from them: and though the prudence of
the great Druide Adamas, who did acknowledge him for his Daughter, did cast a
mist before the eyes of those that were the most clear sighted, and much
authorize his disguise; yet he knew very well, that those eyes which he was to
deceive, were so quick sighted, that if any of his actions or words should
betray him, he was sure his dissimulation would be immediately discovered: Upon
this consideration, he bethought himself how prudently ignorant he was to seem
of knowing any thing which related unto the quality of a Shepherd, how simple
he was to seem in their way of life, their exercises, and how unacquainted he
was to be with all his friends, kindred, acquaintances, and places, he thought
this a task impossible to be undertaken; and though he did all he could, yet
the face of Alexis was so very like unto that of Celadon, all her words,
actions, and gestures were so resemblant unto that supposed lost Shepherd, as
doubtless he should be known in spite of all his dissimulations and
disguisements. But his hardest task was, to rule and check a most domineering
passion, which amidst his greatest felicities, would not give his soul leave to
enjoy any full contentment. How often did he command his tongue and hands not to
take too much liberty unto themselves, lest they should betray himself to be
Celadon? How often did he turn away his eye from many Beauties which under the
notion of Alexis were permitted unto him; and all, lest his too much curiosity
should bring him into suspicion.

After all these considerations had long embroyled his mind, and the more he
thought upon them, the more Hydras of difficulties he found, the best counsel
he could think upon, was, to resolve to stay in that place as little as he
could, knowing it to be a thing impossible to stay, and not be known, and that
the surest foot may sometimes stumble; but this resolution he thought to be as
full of difficulties in the execution, and therefore he resolved to stay still
in that place: Upon which he began to think how he should employ himself; and
he conceived that he could no way better spend his time, then in still engaging
that Shepherdess unto a stronger league of amity, thinking very rationally,
that if she should afterward come to know him, she would not so soon consent
unto a second Banishment. And because he knew that we are much led by the
examples of those whom we esteem, and shall after them do those things which
otherwise we should never consent unto, he intended to express a love unto her;
not such a kind of love as one woman uses to express unto another, but such a
one as Celadon was wont to express unto Astrea, and thus by his example to draw
her unto the like affection, and so insensibly to bring her from Friendship
unto Love. But when he was to put this thought in execution, he found abundance
of more difficulty in acting, then in propounding it; it being a hard matter to
express love unto that Shepherdess, and not make her to suspect it to be more
then became a Virgin Druide.

This chaos and confusion of difficulties did so distemper him, that he could
not choose but sigh very often, and so loud, that the two Shepherdesses could not
choose but hear him; for they did not sleep, only seemed as if they did, because
they would not disturb the rest of Alexis. But hearing her to sigh so
exceedingly, and knowing her to be awake, Astrea feared, that though she said
that she seemed sick, only as a color for staying with her, yet I say she
feared lest some real distemper should be the cause of so many sighs. This
doubt caused her to turn toward Phillis, whom she knew was awake: Sister (said
she in as low a voice as she could) do you not hear Alexis sigh? I am afraid
that she is worse then she will tell unto us. I heard her sigh several times
(said Phillis) and I had the same conceit, but me-thought they were sighs of
one that was rather full of cares, then of one that was sick: For sighs of a
sick person are fetched from the breast with more violence, and those which I
hear, are but silent whispering sighs, such as proceed from passion and
distemper of mind. I think, said Astrea, that we should do well if we diverted
her from such sad thoughts, and yet if she be asleep, we should not waken her.
Certainly, said Phillis, she is not asleep, for she has turned her self several
times, but perhaps she is silent upon the same reason that we are, I mean, lest
we should disturb each other. Astrea being very impatient to see whether it was
so, she opened her curtain and peeped out; but she could not do it so softly,
but Alexis observed her, who for all his confused thoughts, had his eye and his
heart toward her, and who had not lain so long in bed, but only to make
Phillis believe her sickness was real. Astrea perceiving that Alexis was not
asleep, Madam (said she unto her) we are much afraid you are very ill, for we
have heard you complain very much since Leonide wakened you. I thank you
heartily, answered Alexis, for your care of me, which were I worse then I am,
would make me well again: yet truly I am not very well, and therefore I desire
not to stir out of the chamber this morning, but will try whether a little
headache will be cured with a little rest. Madam, said Phillis, I have heard
say that sleep is the best remedy against that disease. I have tried to sleep
since Leonide went, replied Alexis but I could not persuade my eyes together,
because many odd thoughts came into my mind, so as I think the best way will be
to divert it by discourse; for I have heard say, that pain will away when it is
least thought upon. What then shall we do, said Astrea, to make you forget your
pain? I desire, answered Alexis, that you will come and dress your selves by
me, and pass away the time with your sweet discourse. Madam (said Astrea) we
will do any thing in the world to obey you: upon this rising out of bed, she
put on her Gown: But Alexis remembering that she promised to dress her self that
day in the habit of a Druide, she claimed her promise. Sweetheart (said she
unto her) if you will make good your promise, and assume the habit of a Druide
this day, it would be a very great content unto me. Oh Madam, answered she, you
would never pardon me, if I should commit so gross a crime: Indeed it is too
much presumption for a silly Shepherdess. It may be so, replied Alexis, for a
silly Shepherdess, but not for such a Shepherdess as Astrea is, whose merits,
beauty, and perfections does transcend all the Druides that I do know; and
therefore if you will oblige me, lay all such considerations aside: for the
love of you I was a Shepherdess, and will be so as long as you please; why then
for the love of me should not you as well become a Druide: Come, come,
continued she, Were I but dressed, I would not put you to the trouble of coming
hither, but since I am in bed, I beseech you sweetheart come hither, and let
me help to dress you. The Shepherdess in obedience to this command, went to
Alexis, who ^aising her self in the bed, and closing her smock lest her Breasts
should be discovered, did receive her with such ravishment of joy, as it was
well Phillis was on the other side of the bed dressing her self, for it was to
be feared that had she seen them, she would have entered into some suspicion:
and though Astrea was ashamed of it, yet such caresses were now grown so
accustomed, that she took all in good part.

Celadon had a good will to continue his caresses longer, but some
considerations moved him to give over sooner then he had a mind, and helping
her to dress her self, her Breasts, and almost every part of her fair Body was
open to his eye, which being ravished at the sight of so many transcendent
perfections, she desired that Celadon were another Argus, full of eyes, that he
might the better contemplate all those excellencies: His wonder at them so took
up his mind, that not knowing what he did, he did and undid every thing about
the dressing of her, above three or four times; at which Astrea, who did not
observe from whence the fault proceeded, could not choose but smile, and reward
his erroneous pains with many caresses, which the timorous Druide durst hardly
repay, lest his actions should discover more then became Alexis, so as it may
be said, that Love was most sparing, when it was most prodigal of its favors.

Phillis in the mean time was dressing her self as fast as she could; and
because she did not use much art in trimming up her self, she was ready before
Alexis had got on Astreas Gown; at which she smiled, and said unto them, If you
be as long about all the rest as this you have done, Astrea will be ready about
the time when others are going to Bed. No matter for time, Sister, said Astrea,
for it cannot be better spent then in diverting the pain of the fair Alexis. If
that be your Design, replied she, it is well employed; but if it be only to
pass away the time with that fair Druide, I know a better diversion then yours;
and if you will give me leave, I will go and fetch one that will second me, and
help out better then I can do: Besides Sister, you know that if neither of us
go unto her upon this occasion, we shall be exceedingly to blame. Of whom do
you speak, said Alexis, if I be not troublesome in asking the question. Alas
Madam, replied Astrea, it is we that are troublesome in talking of such things
before you; for indeed it is too much pains for you to hear our trivial affairs:
Then turning toward Phillis, Go sister (continued she) and assure her we all
believe that all which is reported is false. Phillis then as she went away, I
need not ask (said she) where I shall find you at my return, since it is not
likely you will stir out of this chamber. If the distemper of the fair Alexis
would give her leave to stir out, answered Astrea, I believe you might find us
in the Grove of Hazles sooner then in any other place, but I believe you will
find us here at your return.

Upon this Phillis went out of the chamber, and Alexis with a smiling
countenance said unto Astrea, Do not think that the Grove of Hazles does
delight me more then any other place where the fair Astrea is; for where she is
not, no place is pleasing unto me: It befits me Madam, answered Astrea, to use
the same words, since I have no contentment but in your presence, nor no
ambition but in the honor of your favor, which I desire above all the world.
Astrea said Alexis, you need not desire that which you do most entirely
possess. Indeed Madam, replied Astrea, I cannot wish for any addition unto my
happiness, further then the continuance of it; nor desire any more, but to
employ all the rest of my days in doing you service, and never be absent from
you: I have already entreated the Nymph Leonide to favor me with her credit
and advice in order thereunto; and though she urged many great obstacles unto
me, yet I account them but trifles in comparison of that happiness which I
should have in it: As for the contrariety of my Parents, which she thinks so
great an impediment unto my desired happiness, since it has pleased heaven to
take from me my Father and my Mother, what Parent have I that has any dominion
over my Will, or can hinder me from dedicating my self unto that course which
the very Laws of Nature do oblige all Humanes unto? Upon this ground I do but
laugh at the pretensions of Calidon, who thinks me his own already, because my
uncle Phocion would have me marry him; for I know well enough how far the
obedience and respect which I owe unto him does extend: I know him to be so
wise and discreet a person, that he will not look for any more observance then
I pay unto him: But Madam, my fears and my doubts arise not from that side; the
great difficulty is to obtain your favor, and the consent of the ancient
Druides, to be received amongst the Virgins of Carnutes, that so I may never be
absent from you: This Madam, is the humble petition of your devoted creature,
which I beg with all the humble and most affectionate supplications I am able
to express. Fair Shepherdess (answered Alexis) I cannot thank you enough for
all your affectionate expressions of good will toward me, and I have such an
esteem of it, as I do wish with as much zeal as possibly you can, that we may
never part as long as we live; and therefore be assured it shall be long only
of your self, if ever we separate: But my fear is, that when I tell you what is
to be done, your mind will change, and your design alter. Oh Madam cried out
Astrea, I beseech you wrong me not so far, as to have such a thought. But on
the contrary, be most certainly assured, that both in life and death this
resolution will continue in me. I am apt to believe (answered Alexis) any thing
that you shall say, especially a thing which is so advantageous unto my self,
and so suitable to my desires; believe it therefore that I will do all I can to
satisfy your desires. Know Shepherdess that there is no great difficulty in
bringing your desire to pass, if you will your self; and in this I am contrary
to the opinion of Leonide. These two things, I shall only require from you; the
one is, that you do love me, as well as I do you: and I shall tell you the
other, when I see you have effected this first proposition. Astrea, with a
smiling look, kissed the hand of Alexis, by way of thanks: If your second
proposition (said she) be no harder then your first, you have good reason to
say Madam, that there is no great difficulty in the matter. For I beseech you,
give me leave to swear, that if I do not Love the Fair Alexis far above my own
self, nay better then ever any person loved another, then let the Gods deny me
the honor of your favor, and blast all my hopes of any contentment: Oh
Astrea, replied Alexis, do you think for all this, that you love me more then I
Love you? Oh Madam, answered Astrea, I cannot think my self worthy of so much
affection from you; but should think my self infinitely happy if I were sure
that mine to you were accepted: Fairest Shepherdess, answered Alexis, be
assured that never Love did equal mine unto you; and in this, I cannot be
deceived as you may, because I know what I say by experience; for I think I
told you, how formerly I did Love one of my fellow Virgins, and I am confident
it was impossible for any humane to equal my affection to her; but when I do
compare my affection unto her, and my affection unto you together, I find that
they hold no comparison, for mine unto you do infinitely transcend that unto
her. Whereas you on the contrary, who never Loved any, you may easily be
mistaken, and think your Love great when it is not so, for you want experience.
Madam, answered Astrea, the dispute betwixt us is of such a nature, that the
victory is prejudicial to the Conqueror; and the conquered is victorious: and
yet I will not throw away my Arms upon very easy terms, though I will yield
unto you in what you please, but it would be a most extreme shame unto me, if I
should let you outstrip me in affection as you do in merit. Give me leave Madam
therefore to tell you, that I began to Love when I was even in my Cradle, and
have continued that affection so constantly, that no difficulties, no time, no
absences, no commands of those that had the dispose of me, nor any thing under
Heaven could divert me from it, but death only: and yet I swear, and swear most
truly, that I do Love you better then ever I loved any; and though this be but
a proud word to issue from the mouth of a poor Shepherdess, yet give me leave
to pronounce it, and say again, that though others may bear a greater respect,
yet never any more Love and more Affection, then Astrea unto the Fair Alexis.
Upon this, they embraced each other with such mutual expressions of Love, that
if Alexis durst, but have said I am Celadon, nothing could have made them both
more happy in each other. But the fears of this Druide, did make her relish
all these sweet embraces with a kind of bitter amongst them, because she still
feared lest her raptures of joy should make her discover her self; and
therefore she withdrew her self a little with a blushing color which came
into her cheeks; and after she had stood a while silent, she uttered these
words with such a modest shamefastness, that if any of her actions had raised
any doubts of what she desired to hide, it was enough to clear them all. But
fairest Shepherdess (said she unto her) I cannot tell, what the violence of my
affection to you, may make you think of me, unless yours and your goodness
plead me excuse: and yet I do swear unto you by Vesta, and all that is sacred,
that I am so far from any such affections as many women of my age are apt unto,
that I did never love any man: but all my passions were wholly employed in my
love of one woman, whom truly I did love as much as I was then able, though not
comparable unto you now; and though perhaps you may laugh at my humor, yet I
must tell you, that I took as great delight in kissing and caressing of her, as
if I had been a man, or she not a woman. And indeed I find the very same humor
to revive in me when I am with you, which I can attribute unto nothing but the
excess of my affection which I bear unto you, and which I should be infinitely
sorry if it were displeasing or troublesome unto you: Astrea, showing by her
countenance, how well she was pleased with these expressions, did return this
answer; It is my part Madam, to use the same excuses unto you, since I have
more reason to fear being troublesome unto you, by following the inclination of
my affection too far: I must needs confess Madam, that I did Love a Shepherd;
but let me tell you truly, that I was never more joyed at any testimonies of
his good will unto me, then I am of yours.

Oh Heaven! (said Alexis) how much am I obliged unto it, and you, for this
affection: my joys and my satisfaction is complete. But Fairest Shepherdess
(said she) shall we live together, in the same freedom and affection when we
are together in private, that we do now? I say in private; for it is fit to be
more reserved before other Shepherds and Shepherdesses, least we should give
occasion to suspect us of something which may be disadvantagious unto us. How?
Madam, (said Astrea) do you ask me this question? Nay, may you not better ask
whether I should not die for sorrow, if you should forbid me? But Madam, since
you see I have observed your first command, I beseech you what is the other?
That by obeying it also, I may call my self the wost happy woman alive. Fairest
Shepherdess, (answered Alexis) it is not yet time to tell it; but since I see
you are desirous to know it, I promise you, that when I think it fitting that
you should know it, I will not put you to the trouble of asking me. In the mean
time, to try whether this kind of life will be as agreeable unto us as we
imagine, let us begin to live together as we must do all the rest of our days;
I mean, with that honest freedom and liberty that two perfect Lovers ought to
use unto each other. In the first place I beseech you, let us leave off in our
discourse, these terms of Madam, and Druide, and begin to be free and familiar,
as we must for ever be. Madam, (said Astrea) in what place soever I be, and of
what quality soever I am, I will always render unto you, those respects which
I am bound to pay; that will not be any hindrance to those contentments which I
hope for from you, but rather further them by keeping my self within the terms
of my duty. You are mistaken, answered Alexis, and though you can have so much
power over your self, yet I cannot; for I am not able to endure that one whom I
take to be my other self, should use such words as speak any difference betwixt
us: and if the principal consequence of Love be union, why should we allow such
Tyrannies disguised, under the names of respect, or civility, or duty, to
hinder that perfect union of wills, which ought to be betwixt us? I do ordain
therefore that Astrea shall be Alexis, and Alexis shall be Astrea, and that we
banish from amongst us, not only all words, but also all manner of actions that
may put any difference between us, and you shall see that when we have lived
long in this mutual freedom and liberty, Love will double and still increase.
Then Madam, replied Astrea, I beseech you let it be under the notion of a
command, that my obedience unto it may excuse the fault which I shall commit in
it. If that be all (answered Alexis) to satisfy you, I do command it, with a
promise that I will not repent it as long as I live. And because it is fit we
conform our selves unto the customs of those with whom we are to live: know
therefore Shepherdess that it is the custom of the Druides at Carnutes, not to
call themselves by their proper names, but by others, which their affection
unto one another makes them invent; and their new names are called amongst
them, Alliances, as much as to say that they are Allied and obliged by those
names unto more Affection and Love. I conceive it requisite we do the like as
well to confirm our Loves, as to let those Druides see when we come amongst
them, that we do not only know their customs, but most religiously observe
them: now I cannot think of any which are fitter for us then the names of
Mistress and Servant, as well because they are names not ordinary amongst them,
as because me thinks they sound well betwixt you and me. I do accept of this
honor, said Astrea, with a thousand thanks, and with a protestation and vow
unto the Goddess Vesta, that for ever, not only in name but in deed I will take
you for my Mistress, and profess my self your servant. Alexis smiled at this, I
had rather, said she, that you would take the name of Mistress, and let me have
that of servant: but since you have made your choice, I am contented: Now
Servant (continued she) give me your hand, in testimony that you accept of this
name, and that you will never break this alliance of Love which we now make;
and I swear by the Great God of Love, who is the God that is adored at
Carnutes, that I will eternally live with you as with the only person whom I
perfectly Love, and of whom only I desire to be Loved in the like manner. Then
Astrea said, I do not only give my hand, but both hands, nay more, my heart and
my soul, in testimony, that I will love you and you only, consecrating and
dedicating my self, my desires, my affections, and all that is mine unto you:
and if ever I fail in the observance of this promise, or ever stain that
honorable Name which I have received, let me be abhorred by Heaven and Earth,
and all that is in them. Upon this they both embraced and kissed each other, as
an assurance of what they had promised; and carrassed themselves with so much
affection as if they would never have ended.

In the mean time Phillis went unto Diana, thinking to find her in bed, but
that Shepherdess was so very ill pleased, that she could not rest so long; for
she was up long before, and after she had put all things into order in her
little house, she went out with her flock, and without any other company but
her own thoughts. By fortune, she came unto the same place upon the Banks of
Lignon, when the accident of Celadon did happen, when the jealousy of Astrea
made him throw himself into the River. After she had seated her self, and long
looked upon the current of the water, without any other action which showed
life, but only sighing; at last, as if she had revived out of a profound
Lethargy, and sending forth a deep sigh. Thus (said she) does all things
mortal, run into the Gulf of Oblivion: then stopping a while, she broke out
thus. This River is not the same water it was yesterday, for it glides away,
and fresh comes in the room of it; nay I my self am not the same Diana that I
was when I came hither: time by an uncontrollable power runs on and drives all
before it. The Sun it self, which is the measure of time as all things in the
universe is, is hurried on by time, and is not the same it was when I began to
speak: why then Diana should thou think an ordinary thing to be strange and
extraordinary? Every thing changes, and rechanges again: If it be a general
Law amongst all things, that nature produces to change, why should thou
wonder that one particular person should do so? It is very unreasonable to
observe it in thy self, and not allow it in another: can thou say that it is
not thy self which does change, but art the same thou were wont to be? Ah fond
flatterer of thy self, remember what thou were before Fiiander saw thee, what
operation his Courtship had upon thee? and how thou did behave thy self after
his deplorable loss. Consider thy humor as it was when Sylvander, or rather
that deceive, began first unluckily to look upon thee: How wast thou won by his
counterfeit affection? And how do thou find thy self now after a knowledge of
his treason? Needs must thou confess, that as the humors, complexions, and
tempers, do change once every seven years; thine changes ofter, and not only in
seven years, for a year is an age unto thee, but in a month, in a week, in an
hour, nay even in a munite.

This thought touched her to the quick; for never having this opinion of her
self before, yet finding it now to be true, she was so astonished at it, that
she was not able to utter one word. At the last, rousing her self up, as out of
a dead sleep, she began again thus: Oh Heavens! Oh Earth! art thou not changed?
Yes yes, Diana, and so that if thou do but look well upon thy self, thou will
hardly know thy self, thou will not find any thing of the first Diana in thee,
but only the very Name. Answer me, I pray thee to these questions; how did
thou heretofore abhor the flatteries of men, what credit wast thou wont to give
unto their supple language? Have thou quite lost the memory of all those wise
instructions and good Counsels thou were wont to give thy companions? Or do
thou think that thy self does not need them as much as they? Ah Diana! do not
deceive thy self, but confess, that thou art now much different from what thou
were wont to be. Recollect thy self a little better, and tell me; do thou not
remember the time when thou were the first Diana, and when all that this
cosening Shepherd either said or did, was indifferent unto thee? And why should
thou now, if thou art the same Diana, be angry at this loving Madonthe, at his
following her, and at his going with her, whether she would or no? If these
things do vex thee, then confess that thou art not the same Diana; and if thou
do deny it, will not thy own conscience accuse thee? Well, (said she) if I be
not the same Diana I was wont to be, then what am I become now? Quite contrary
(answered she) to that Diana I was wont to be: Oh Heavens! what a deplorable
alteration is this? How much better and more honorable had it been for me to
have dyed in the days of the first Diana, then have lived to see this
alteration?

When she was in the height of her displeasure against her self, she was
diverted by the coming of some Shepherds and Shepherdesses, which talked and
disputed amongst themselves very vehemently; and though she was very busy in
her own perplexed thoughts, yet they making a great noise, and she hearing them
a far off, she had time enough to withdraw her self unseen, behind a great
Bush, which grew close to the way; which she did with intention to let them
pass on, and then to return unto the place again, and continue on those
thoughts which they had interrupted; but she was disappointed; for they, as if
it was upon some express design, went straight to the place from whence Diana
came, and seated themselves upon the bank, as if they intended to stay there a
long time: but she fearing to be discovered, and perhaps constrained to remain
with them, according to the Laws of civility, which were most Religiously
observed about the banks of Lignon, she thought the best way was to let them
enter into discourse, and when they were most earnest and attentive unto each
other, then she to steal away unseen. Then peeping through the Bush, she saw
them sitting in a round figure, and that they whose faces were toward her,
were Shepherds and Shepherdesses, which were not altogether unknown unto her,
having formerly seen them at their general Solemnities and Sacrifices. Then she
began to wonder more why they should come directly to that place, and stay
there as if it was upon some premeditated design; at last she heard one
Shepherd amongst them, begin thus: Oh Delphire, you are a most partial and
severe Judge, in condemning a person without ever hearing what he can say for
himself. I see Thaumantes (answered the Shepherdess) that you take more pains
in pumping for excuses and glosses unto your false reasons, then I have done to
convince and prove them false: If the Gods, replied the Shepherd, had seen your
soul unbyassed, and fit to judge the difference betwixt us, they would not have
appointed us to come and look for a Judge in this place. The Gods, replied the
Shepherdess, are pleased that the laudable actions of men should be divulged
and recompensed, and likewise their faults made public and punished. If
punishments and recompenses (replied he) be to be expected from their hands. Oh
Delphire, I begin to pity you, for you are never able to endure the
punishments that are due unto your cruelty: and I know not how my heart, which
is so much unaccustomed unto any happiness, will be able to receive that bliss
and reward of my fidelity and affection. If we do meet with a just Judge,
answered the Shepherdess and smiled, I believe you will not so much pity as
envy me: But Thaumantes, let us leave off this discourse, I see you use it only
to please some that are in the company, but assure your self, there is none
that has a sound judgment will approve of it. I know, replied the Shepherd,
that nothing angers a person who is in the wrong, more, then to hear that
string touched upon, because it puts them in mind of the injury they do: but he
that has Justice on his side, cannot be silent at the injustice which is done
him: yet since you command me to be silent, I will obey; yet I hope you will
give me leave to sing: so not staying for her answer, and having a very good
voice, he began to sing a very invective and bitter song, which upbraided her
with cruelty and injustice. As soon as he had done, Delphire said unto him;
there needs no other testimony of your change then this which you have given
me, in contemning my commands which formerly, for your life your durst not have
done: for singing and speaking are crimes alike, if what is forbidden be
pronounced. The Shepherd answered not a word, but shrugged his shoulders and
made a sign that his tongue was tied: and this gave occasion unto another
Shepherd in the company, to speak for him: This, said he, is excess of
cruelty; and very hard that a man may not so much as complain of his torment.
That I must confess is very hard, answered the Shepherdess, but you must also
confess with me on the other side, that to hear a man baul and keep a coyl when
he has no cause, is excess of patience. But I beseech you, replied he, if you
will not suffer Thaumantes to speak, upon what design did you come unto this
place? We came hither, replied she, not to dispute and wrangle as we have done,
but to see if we could find that Judge which the Oracle has promised we should.
Are you sure replied he, that this is the place where you are to expect this
Judge: No question but it is, answered Delphire, for it is named, and we are
told that this is the place where Celadon fell into the water. There is not one
in all the neighborhood, who does not know it as a place observable for
several disasterous accidents: and as for our Judge, we cannot be mistaken: for
the Oracle is this:

The Oracle.
WHere Celadon they say did find a grave,
There you, a just and prudent judge shall have,
Who though unseen shall see you, and shall hear
Your difference, and do you right, never fear.
This, replied the Shepherd, is an Oracle very obscure; for if you do not see
the party who is to be your Judge, how should you ever know who he is: Nay
more, said Delphire, the Oracle says, he shall hear us though we do not see
him: but certain it is, it must be so, for the Gods have said it, and we are
bound upon pain of disobedience to believe it, and therefore we must expect he
will make it manifest unto us. But I beseech you said the Shepherd, how should
this Judge hear the difference since he is not here? And how should you tell it
unto him? These difficulties (answered Delphire) must be resolved by the God
that gave the Oracle.

Diana who was all the while behind the Bush, heard all this discourse; and
looking through the leaves, she knew all the Shepherds and Shepherdesses,
though she had no great familiarity with them; for they were neighbors, and
dwelt upon the banks of Lignon toward the Mountains of Rochfort and Chevieres:
and she had often seen them at the public Sacrifices of Misleto, and other
assemblies: she remembered also the high esteem which every one had of the
beauty of Delphire, and merit of Thaumantes, and so was not altogether ignorant
of the amity that was between them, because they did not offer to hide their
affections. But seeing now such a divorce betwixt them, she could not choose but
wonder, and yet her wonder ceased, when she considered what occasion she had to
complain against Sylvander. When she heard the Oracle, she concluded that
certainly it was she whom the Gods had chosen to be their Judge, at which she
was much displeased; for the ill humor she was in, made her desirous to shun
all company, even of her own companions. Thus seeing her self forced to stay
all the morning, and to hear their difference, though it went against her mind,
yet she resolved to obey what the Gods commanded. Therefore she resolved to
take little truce with her sorrows, and show her self, and take upon her the
office of their Judge, but to defer her judgment until the next day, hoping
that in time she should overcome her passion, and put her mind in better order.
In order therefore unto this resolve, she spoke in a loud voice these words:
Trouble your selves no further, Oh Delphire, and Thaumantes; for here is your
Judge, whom the Heavens have ordained to determine your difference: upon this,
rising from behind the Bush, and striving to show a well contented countenance,
she went unto them, who were all in such an amazement, that they stood like so
many Statues: but when they had looked well upon her, and knew her to be Diana,
they broke out into an universal joy: for there was not one of all the company,
who did not know the virtue and merit of that Shepherdess: and Thaumantes was
so over joyed to see such a Judge, as he fell down upon his knees, and offered
to kiss her hand; but Diana would not permit him, yet saluted him, and went
toward Delphire, who embraced her as heartily as Thaumantes, who seeing it and
seeming to be very envious at it: I am afraid (said he in a loud voice) she
will be as partial in her judgment, as she is in her caresses. Diana hearing
this, smiled and said; Do not ^ear, for I will balance every thing according
to equity, and render unto each one what is due. It is the custom of those
(said Delphire) who have a bad cause, to suspect the judgment of the most just
persons, and corrupt it if they can by their impostures: But Thaumantes, those
favors which I receive from this fair Shepherdess, are no more due unto me
then unto you; and know, that whatsoever is freely given out of mere
liberality, cannot be claimed as a debt due, and therefore you are to blame in
asking any part or share in those favors she is pleased to confer upon me,
since neither you nor I can pretend unto them as due. To which Thaumantes
answered, it is no wonder, Fair Delphire, that he who has so often troubled you
with his angry questions, should continue to ask them, since he has got a habit
of them: and it is no wonder, answered she, that you be denied now, since you
have been so accustomed unto it.

Their discourse had continued longer, if the rest of the Shepherds and
Shepherdesses in saluting Diana, had not interrupted them. But when they had
all done, Delphire began again; Fair and discreet Shepherdess, said she unto
Diana, I have often heard say, that the Graces are never painted alone; to
intimate unto us, that the party who confers one, will immediately second it
with another; or perhaps that the party who receives one, may be encouraged to
ask more: if it be so, then this Shepherd and I may hope that by what favors
you have done unto us, you will add more, which we do most humbly beg at your
hands. Sweet Delphire, answered Diana, it were a great discourtesie to deny any
thing which so fair and so discreet a Shepherdess as you are, shall ask; and
therefore you may assure your self of any thing within the compass of my power.
The Gods (said Thaumantes) are not like unto men, for men may give and bestow
Offices as they please, but they cannot confer capacity to exercise them; But
when the Gods do give any thing, they give with it all that is requisite and
necessary unto it; And therefore, since it has pleased the Gods to make choice
of you, fair Diana, to compose all those distempers which have fallen out
betwixt us, and which without you can never be reconciled, it is not to be
doubted but that they have endued you with wisdom, power, and capacity to
effect it. Thaumantes (answered Diana) If I had been asked who I thought lived
together in most tranquillity and contentment, I should have answered Delphire
and Thaumantes; and I do exceedingly wonder to hear you say that you seek for
any reconcilements and composures; But since it is so, and since the Gods have
made choice of me to that end, I will obey them in the execution of their
Ordinances, and as their Instrument, who though of my self less capable, yet by
their assistance, may render them the glory that is due unto them. Every one
(replied Delphire) are mistaken as you are, in their opinions of this Shepherds
and my happiness, but since you are pleased to undertake the office of our
Judge, we beseech you to hear what we can say for our selves, and by your
wisdom and judgment recover us out of that gulf of discontent and inquietude
wherein we are plunged. That which you do ask as a favor, said Diana, I do
think my self obliged to pay as a due debt, as being enjoined unto it by the
Ordinance of the Gods, and prompted by mine own natural inclination to serve
you: But I shall desire one favor from you both, which if granted, I shall
take as a very great one; which is, that you will defer the whole business
until to morrow, at the same hour and place; for I am obliged to do a piece of
service unto a very dear friend, which cannot be delayed without much prejudice
and inconvenience unto her. Unto which Delphire replied, Fair and Discreet
Shepherdess, we are obliged unto whatsoever you shall desire or command, and
therefore you may take that leave which out of your sweetness you are pleased
to ask of us, for you have a most full and absolute authority over us. Since
you are so well contented, replied Diana, I will go unto the place where
necessity calls me unto, being very sorry to part from such good company, and
promising to be here to morrow at this place, and about this time: Upon this
she took her leave of them, and went away as fast as she could, to show that
her business was urgent.

Phillis on the other side not finding her at home, she went to seek her in
such places as she used most to drive her Flock: But as Fortune was, she made
choice of a place more retired that day, purposely because she desired not to
be seen by any: so that Phillis, after she had sought for her in several
places, she came at last to the great Meddow, and at the one end of it she
espied some Shepherdesses, amongst whom she thought she saw Diana, but when she
was come nearer, she found her self mistaken; and that they were the three
strangers, who came from the coasts of Arar, I mean Florice, Cercinea, and
Palinice: And because she saw them talking very affectionately unto each other,
and would not tell any the cause of their coming into this Country, she thought
that perhaps she should learn something if unseen she could hear what they said.
This curiosity caused her to creep from Bush to Bush, till she came so near,
that she could hear Florice say, The truth is, I begin to doubt that the Oracle
which caused us to come into this Country of Forests, will either deceive us,
or else those that did interpret it unto us are themselves deceived: for we
have been so long here to no purpose, that it seems the Gods have either
forgotten us, or else laugh at us for understanding them no better. For my
part, said Cercinea, I am the youngest, and submitted my self to the conduct of
you both; if I have failed, the fault is Palinices, unto whom I wholly referred
my self; so as without diving into any deep mysteries, I understood the Oracle
as she did interpret it unto me. I am sure answered Palinice, that I did not
deceive either of you; for you heard the Oracle which we received from the
Temple of Venus: and as for the interpretation of it, I did not lie in a
syllable, but told you truly, as the old Druide told me. Since it is so replied
Cercinea, we must not make too much haste away, and though the time be long,
yet it is no longer here then upon the Banks of Arar, for the sweet
conversation of the discreet Shepherdesses of Lignon, is as pleasing as any
company we can find in any other place. I must confess, said Florice, that the
company of Astrea, Diana, and Phillis is very sweet and pleasing, and that here
is many pretty innocent pastimes which are suitable unto their honest
simplicity: but I must tell you, that they are fitter for such inferior
spirits as theirs are, then for us, who are accustomed unto a higher and more
noble strain; and to tell you truly, this kind of life begins to be very
irksome unto me, so as if I stay here a little longer, I shall throw away my
Sheep-hook and my Scrip. I know not why you should so much dislike it (replied
Cercinea) but methinks there is nothing in Cities which equals the liberty and
freedom of these Villages. Here (said Florice) is nothing to be seen but Sheep
and Hares, and Shepherds and Shepherdesses. Tell me no more of Shepherds and
Shepherdesses, answered Cercinea, but find me out such another Wit as
Sylvander's amongst all your great Cities and Towns; or a Woman comparable unto
either Astrea, Diana, or Phillis, either in beauty, wit, or discretion: I
mention none of the rest, bur do admire their civility and sweet conversation;
and I do abominate all the constraints, tricks, and dissimulations of Cities. I
see (said Florice) that you are like those Sorcerers, who having used some
charm upon the skin of a Wolf, do no sooner put it upon them, but they
presently participate of their nature; for this habit of a Shepherd which you
wear, has infused the wit and courage of a Shepherdess into you: But well
Cercinea, be you a Shepherdess as long as you please; but for my part, I desire
to be amongst those of my own quality, and in my own Country: For to tell you
truly, I am most delighted in seeing a Cavalier bravely Armed and Mounted, and
breaking his Lance handsomely: But what pitiful sport is it to see two Shepherds
run for a Garland of Field-Flowers? To be short, the Purple and Scarlet
pleases my eye better then the Russet and Gray; Satin is softer then Wool;
and I love to be amongst my equals. Unto such as aim at their contentment,
said Cercinea, Grandeur, and such vanities as you speak of, are not the way
unto it: and such as consider things as indeed they are, not embracing shaddows
for substances, will most certainly condemn them; the glister of gold, and
silver, and purple, which dazles so much the eye, are not half so pleasing as a
green Field diapred with Flowers; What needs the Body more then such a cover as
will defend it from the injury of wind and weather? Provided such a Suit be fit
and handsomely made, it is better then all the gaudery of Gold, which does but
beguil the eyes of those who are not able to look what is in the inside of such
a Suit: As for a comparison between the feats of Chivalry, and the harmless
exercises of Shepherds, it must needs be confessed the one is all blood,
violence, injury and murder, and the other is all innocence, and gives no
offense unto any; the one comes near the nature of Bears, Tigers, and Lions,
and the other of men: And as for the reproach which you put upon me for loving
the habit of Shepherdesses, I say that I wish I were exempt from all those
turbulencies and cares which does torment those that do live in your perpetual
confusion.

She would have continued on, if Palinice had not interrupted; It is not our
business (said she) to dispute which of these two Lives is the happier, but
whether we should stay any longer here to see the fulfilling of the Oracle
which sent us hither, I conceive it good for us to peruse it again, and
consider seriously upon the words of it: Upon this she put her hand into her
Scrip, and pulled out a paper, in which she read these words.

The Oracle.
AGainst the pains which all you three endure,
In Forests you shall find a certain cure:
One that was dead, and afterward shall live,
Unto you all one medicine must give.
Another medicine you shall have from one,
To whom against her will, a good is done;
Which she rejected, with her will: It Is she,
Not you, by whom the overture must be.
What she ordains, as if ordained by me,
Believed, as Oracle, by you must be.
Phillis who till now never knew the cause of their voyage, she was very glad
that she had found it out, even when she least thought upon it; for finding
them to be very discreet and virtuous, she and her companions were exceeding
desirous of it; not only out of a common curiosity, but a will to do them
service: And this had been impossible to discover otherwise, because these
strangers in obedience to the Oracle durst not reveal it unto any. But Phillis
having found it out, she endeavored to remember the Oracle, which she had never
done, unless Circenea and Palinice had repeated it several times, For my part
(said Palanice) I must needs conclude that we ought to stay here yet a while
longer, since it is certain that the Druide told us, Forests was the place
where we should meet with our satisfaction, and that our happiness must proceed
from three persons, of which, two are hard to be found out; but the goodness of
God is great, since that which must instruct us, is so clearly expressed that
we cannot mistake: for (said she, and I observe it in the words) when you shall
find a person who shall tell you that God has appointed you by his Oracle,
that a living dead man shall be your Physician and Medicine, with a person unto
whom they shall against her will restore a happiness, which she did lose with
her will. One of you three upon which the Lot shall fall, must relate unto her
the pain which you endure, and she will appoint you what she conceives best for
you. The worst of all this, is (answered Florice) the loss of time which will
seem very tedious. Circenea answered and smiled, that no happiness is attained
without pains. Your happiness is completed, replied Florice, for you are of a
more Shepherdish humor, then the Shepherdesses themselves. I have often heard
you say (answered Circenea) that it is great wisdom to be pleased with any
thing that necessity makes inevitable.

Whilst these Shepherdesses were thus disputing amongst themselves, Phillis who
had learned as much as she desired to know, did think it best to steal off
unseen; and therefore when she saw them most eager in their contests, she crept
away, and went to seek Diana, who on her side was not a little perplexed; for
as she designed to separate her self from all conversation, Fortune would have
it so, that which way soever she went, she met with several encounters; for
having quitted her self of Delphire and Thaumantes, as soon as she was out of
their sight, looking for the most unfrequented place of all the Wood, she had
no sooner seated her self under a shady thicket, but she heard a stranger sing
very near her, singing, and the effect of the song was, That men are without
any amity.

As soon as Diana heard this voice, she had a good mind to go and see who it
was, but hearing her begin to talk unto her self, she thought it best to hear
what she said; and she heard her say thus: What a hard and severe thing it is
which Nature has imposed upon Women, that they must not only live amongst
their enemies, but also be subject unto their Tyrannical Dominion? Had she but
put a little more strength into our body, we had not been subject unto that
proud and fierce animal, called Man: but why did she not as well subject this
man, unto an Ox or an Horse, which are stronger then he, as he is stronger then
us? For if weakness be the cause of our subjection, why should not they be
subject unto them? Nay, upon the same reason, why should not the weakness of
their minds subject them unto our bodies? For the strength of their judgments
cannot be equal unto the strength of our bodies. Is it not an infallible
argument of a weak judgment, to desire a thing most passionately, and
mediately not to desire it? Which is he amongst men, that has not deceived her
that trusted in him? Show me the man, who makes it a matter of conscience to
keep his word, his promises, nay his very oaths and execrations, when he
intends to deceive? They think their disloyalty is handsomely covered, when they
say, that the Gods will not punish the oaths of perjured Lovers: It is true
indeed, they do not punish them immediately upon the very act, but yet they
defer it only, because they will punish them according to their merits
altogether: there is not a man breathing upon the face of the earth, that does
not swear and protest, and vow, and yet his intention is quite contrary: their
designs are mere Chimeras, empty clouds; one is no sooner begun, but another
seconds it, and quite obliterates the first* their promises and their oaths
resemble great claps of thunder, whose noise is no sooner ended, but no more is
heard of it: what God is there whom they will not call to witness? What curse
will they not call for upon themselves? And what assurance will they not give,
when they would obtain any thing of us? But when the humor of it is past, or
when they have obtained what they desire, who cares for any performances of
promise, or fears any curses they called upon themselves? But presently seek
out for excuses to avoid those chastisements which they deserve: they are the
very Pests of the earth, the most imperfect works of the Gods, sent only for
our punishments and eternal torment.

Diana, who heard every syllable that this Shepherdess spoke, and thought all
alluded unto Sylvander, she approved of all she said, and going to her with a
desire to see her face, she could not tread so softly, but she made such a
noise, that the stranger heard her; who thinking at the first that it was some
man, out of a hatred unto the very name, she would have gone away: but
afterward perceiving it was a Shepherdess, she stayed, but looked about her
with such an affrighted countenance, and wild eye, as testified, the words of
her mouth proceeded from her heart. Diana seeing her in this condition, and
thinking her astonishment proceeded from the same cause that her own
perplexities did, ^he began to pity her; and saluting her with a kind aspect,
offered all the assistance and service she was able. The stranger seeing her so
fair and full of courtesy, began to leave her affrighted and wild looks, and
assume her ordinary countenance and temper. After she had saluted Diana, and
thanked her for her courteous offers, she answered thus; I am very willing and
desirous, Fair Shepherdess, to render the same services unto you, which you out
of your goodness are pleased to offer unto me, and wish with all my heart, I
were able to second my desires with real performances, as your civility does
oblige me; but as the case is with me, I must now be all upon the craving side,
and not only beg your assistance, but also that remedy, which by the
appointment of the Gods, I come to look for in this Country. Assure your self,
answered Diana, that you will find none here who will not be very ready to do
you any service: but I believe you will not find any here so vain as to think
themselves able to Counsel others, the innocent simplicity of our words will
not permit so much arrogance to be amongst us: Yet two things, replied the
stranger, makes me hope well in my voyage; the one, that the Gods are no liars,
nor breakers of their promises, but have left that quality unto men: The other
is, because my first encounter in this Country, is a very good omen that I
shall find what I look for: your beauty, your civility, and your prudent
expressions makes me hope for a happy success in my voyage. The Gods indeed,
answered Diana, are no liars nor deceivers, but sometimes they are pleased to
render their Oracles so full of obscurity, that men do often mistake and
deceive themselves in the interpretation: as for any thing that relates unto
me, I wish fair Shepherdess that the meeting may prove as serviceable unto you,
as it is pleasing unto me, and as I desire to serve you. If there be any thing
in this Country which you think conducible unto your contentment, I beseech
you, tell it unto me; and if without prejudice to your self you may, tell me
what occasion brought you hither, and what reason you have to enveigh so much
against men? Upon this the stranger stood mute a while, and looked upon the
ground; at the last, lifting up her head with a sad sih, she returned this
answer: The question which you ask, Fair Shepherdess, is so reasonable, that I
will very willingly give you satisfaction; knowing very well that the patient
must discover his disease unto that Physician from whom he desires a remedy;
but before I trouble you with a hearing of it, I beseech you satisfy my
curiosity, and tell me whether you be not either Astrea, or Diana; for one of
my greatest inducements unto the voyage, was my hopes of so much happiness, as
to be acquainted with those two Shepherdesses, as well by sight, as by those
reports, which Fame gives of them. There may be many Shepherdesses in this
Country (answered Diana blushing) whose names may be Diana, and perhaps some
one of them more favored by the Heavens above the rest; so as the name of
Diana which I do bear, cannot make me believe my self the same you speak of,
since Fame has no ground of any reports from me: but such as I am, I will not
deny the name, of which you have so good an opinion, and wish I were able, as I
am willing to do you any such service as might make you continue here. Are you
(said the stranger) the companion of Astrea? I am, replied Diana; Then (said
the stranger) there are no more Dianas in this Country whom I desire to know:
it is you only and your companion who have filled me so full of curiosity, and
made me more willingly come into this Country, though the Gods did advise me
unto it by their Oracle: upon this she saluted her with such demonstrations of
good will, that Diana was obliged unto the like.

At the same instant, Phillis, who had been looking for Diana in all places
where there was any probability of finding her, saw them thus saluting and
caressing each other, and therefore she made the more haste toward them. The
stranger seeing her coming, and being very desirous to see Astrea, she showed
her unto Diana, and asked her whether that was her Companion? She is my
Companion (answered Diana) but I believe, not that Companion whom you desire to
see, for the name of this is Phillis; and though perhaps she must yield unto
the other in point of beauty; yet I assure you, there is not one in all the
Country that exceeds her in discretion and virtue. I make no question of it
(answered the stranger) since she is your Companion: Indeed she is, answered
Diana, and the dearest Companion that Astrea and I have, and such a one, as
when you know her, you will think worthy of Love and esteem. Upon this, Phillis
was come unto them, and broke off their discourse, and Diana going to her,
Sister said she unto her, make much of this stranger, and for my sake Love her,
since she is come to increase the number of the Shepherdesses of Lignon.
Phillis, as well to answer the desires of her Companion, as in observance to
the Laws of the Country, she presently advanced toward her, and the stranger
did the like, infinitely satisfied with the kind entertainment of these
Shepherdesses, whose sweet civility she could not sufficiently admire, thinking
that they did much surpass all the reports that Fame had trumpetted in their
praise.

But Diana, though she made no show of it, yet, was her soul full of
perplexity, by reason of Sylvander; and the constraint wherein she was since
she met with this stranger, seemed intolerable to be endured any longer: and
therefore she intended as soon as she had learned the cause of her coming into
this Country, to leave her: Sister, said she unto Phillis, This fair stranger
is come into the Country to find a remedy against a displeasure which presses
her; and because she merits the service of us all, I shall desire her, since
you are come, to acquaint us with the cause of her voyage, that we may be
better enabled to do her that service which we desire, and she deserves.
Phillis on the contrary, who was not willing to lose so much time as to hear
this discourse, she answered thus: I must confess Sister, that you have great
reason for your desire, but methinks we should much wrong our companion, if we
do not answer her expectation of our company; and therefore I conceive it best
to defer it until such time as Astrea may be present. Diana did quickly
understand the reason which caused Phillis to say so, and approving of it, they
all went together toward the great Walk; into which, as soon as they entered,
they saw Florice, Cercenea, and Palinice very near them; who having long
debated upon the subject which Phillis overheard, they came thither to pass
away their time, till the rest of the Shepherds and Shepherdesses assembled
according to their Custom.

When the stranger first saw them, she knew them not, nor ever imagined that
they were in this Country, also their habits of Shepherdesses did so disguise
them, that she might very well mistake them; and when they came nearer, she
knew them by their voices, and not by their visages: I am either extremely
deceived (said she in a great amazement) or else I do see my dear friends.
Florice then and her two companions looking upon her, and hearing her speak,
they knew her; they went unto her, and embraced her with such extreme joy, as
made it manifest that people love one another better when they meet in a
strange Country, then when they are together in their own: For they had not so
much patience as to embrace her one after another, but fell upon her all at
once; one kissed her lips, another her cheek, and a third grasped her hand,
with such demonstrations of good will, as perhaps never passed amongst them
when they met upon the Banks of Arar.

Phillis who saw all these great caresses, and was half weary of this company;
Sister (said she unto Diana in a low voice) had we not best leave this stranger
amongst her acquaintance? For I am afraid Astrea will not like we should carry
her unto her, before we have given her notice, as well in respect of Alexis, as
because you know she will be in the habit of the Druide. Sister, answered
Diana, I am of your opinion, and am very glad that these other strangers come
in to relieve us; for otherwise I know not how we should have been rid of her.

Whilst they were thus talking, Florice and her companions could not
sufficiently satisfy themselves with caressing their companion, and had not
ceased so soon, but for Phillis, who addressing her self unto them; Fair
Shepherdesses, said she unto them, since my companion and I do see there is so
much intimacy and affection amongst you, we will not be any cause of separating
you; and therefore, since we must needs go and wait upon the Druide, who (as
you know) stays at the house of Astrea for the love of us, we cannot leave this
fair stranger in better company then she has met withal: And therefore, said
she unto the stranger, I beseech you give us leave to pay our duties, and we
promise that ere it be long we will wait upon you unto Astrea. Fair and wise
Shepherdesses (said she) since it is your pleasure I should stay with my dear
friends whom I have met withal, I will willingly do so: but upon condition you
will be as good as you promise, in making me known unto the Fair Astrea, and in
the mean time assure her, that you have met with one who with all her soul
desires the happinesses of her Love. All this (answered Diana) we do faithfully
promise, and more, we promise to do any thing else which may conduce unto your
real service.

In the mean time Phillis thought it expedient to engage Florice, Cercinea, and
Palinice, lest their impatience should make them depart the Country too soon;
and therefore when she saw that Diana had taken her leave of the company:
Sister (said she unto her in a loud voice) I beseech you stay a little for me,
and I will wait upon you presently, for I must needs talk a little with these
three fair Shepherdesses. Sister, answered Diana, what haste soever I have, yet
I will stay for you, and therefore say what you please unto them. Then Phillis
addressing her self unto these three strangers, Florice (said she, in a low and
grave countenance, otherwise then she used) and you Cercinea and Palinice, The
Gods do let you know by me, that which they have already spoken unto you by
their Oracle, how that one who was dead, and yet lives, is to be your medicine,
and likewise another unto whom is rendered against her Will, a benefit which she
lost with her Will. O ye Gods! cried they all out, and clapped their hands
together, oh blessed Shepherdess, whom the heavens have ordained for our
happiness and contentment, may you for ever find the accomplishment of your
desires, as we have of ours in meeting with you: Then gazing upon one another,
Is it not most certain (said they) that the Gods are no Deceivers, but will at
the last most infallibly perform all their promises? Upon this, all three
saluted Phillis with so many expressions of joy, that Diana, and the other
stranger who knew not the cause of their coming, stood amazed: But Phillis who
continued her grave countenance, after she had returned their salute; Now, said
she, I cannot stay with you any longer; the time is not yet come that your pain
must have an end, but it will be very shortly: content your selves therefore
with this, that the Gods have not forgotten what they told you by their Oracle,
but will in fit time and place accomplish it. Florice then began to speak; now
(said she) we know unto whom the Gods have committed the care of us, we will
with all contentment wait as long as you shall please; assuring you sage
Shepherdess, that we are infinitely pleased with the choice which the Gods have
made of you. Diand and the other stranger was very attentive unto their
discourse, but not understanding it, Diana asked Phillis, what contentment this
was which they spoke off. The Gods, answered Phillis have sent these three
strangers into the Country to receive a remedy unto some perplexities which
troubles them, and by their Oracle have forbidden them to speak of it unto any,
but unto that person who shall repeat the answer which they received from the
Oracle. Now I have repeated it unto them, and more, I do assure them, that they
shall receive all manner of satisfaction and contentment. As Diana was
astonished at the first, so was she much more, when she heard these words, for
she could not imagine how her Companion should come to the knowledge of this
Oracle. But Phillis counterfeiting admirably well, that it was by divine
inspiration; after some other such discourse, she took her leave of them;
assuring them, that ere long they should find ease and satisfaction to their
minds: and by the way, she related unto Diana how as she was seeking her, she
met with them, and unseen of them, heard them repeat and discourse upon this
Oracle.

Thus they went talking upon this encounter, till they came to the house of
Astrea, but finding her no further dressed, then when they left her; Oh Sister
(said Phillis and seemed to wonder) what, not farther yet? Do I find you just
as I left you? It is to show (answered Astrea) that I am no changeling. Nay,
nay, replied Phillis, my meaning is, you are dressed no more then you were when I
went to seek Diana: Pray what have you been doing all the while? Certainly
Sister, answered Astrea, you are very weary, since the time seems so long unto
you: I assure you I thought you but newly parted: It seems quite contrary with
you, answered Phillis, and that you have been so pleased, that hours seem but
minutes unto you. If contentment and happiness can do it, replied Astrea, I
must needs confess what you say: and yet Sister, do not think that I have done
nothing since you went, for in this short time, I have gotten the Fairest
Mistress that ever was: And I, said Alexis, the sweetest Servant that ever
lived. I warrant you (said Phillis) you have spent all this morning about this
piece of work. Sister (said Astrea) you need not slight it so much; for it is
not a work so easily done; some are whole months and years, nay whole ages
about it. Yes, (said Diana) and for all the haste which they make, they have
time enough to repent all the days of their life: That is a thing (said
Astrea) which I shall never do, unless I repent that I begun it no sooner: I do
believe it, answered Diana, because your Mistress is a Woman, but if it were a
man, believe it Sister, you would be no more exempted then others; and for my
part, I shall advise all those that desire to have a quiet life, never to
contract amity with any but Women, and to shun all the assurances of any good
will which Men use to make, as a Serpent does the words of enchantment. I do
wonder (said Alexis) you should accuse men of that vice which they do so much
charge us with all. Madam, answered Diana, did you never hear the Proverb, The
Debtor demands money; Men likewise do prevent us, and blame us for that which
themselves are guilty of: believe it, the greatest servitude that nature did
impose upon us, is in that she constrained us to live in their company. Then
(said Alexis and smiled) how happy are the rest of our Druides who are exempted
from this inconveniency. Doubtless they are Madam, answered Diana, and you will
know it better, if you will but he pleased to consider what I shall say unto
you; certainly if men be at any time pleasing unto those they court, it is when
they are inflamed with Love, and seem as if they adored them, for then they are
all complacency, all service, all cares, all submission, all flatteries;
briefly their continual study is to get the favor of those who hearken unto
them: so as questionless if ever a man be not troublesome, it is at this time;
and yet if we do but well consider it, into how many inconveniences and
troubles do they bring those poor unfortunate women, whom they have designs
upon? For if they do not Love them, then all their cares and courtships are so
many wrongs and injuries unto them: and if they do Love them, consider, I
beseech you Madam, how unsupportable they are if they find entertainment, and
how troublesome they are if they be rejected: they think one favor to be a
step unto another, and never leave till they arrive at the highest: if you
reject them, then they are all complaint, reproaches, and despaires, and very
often driven unto hatred and revenge: if thou entertain them, they are still
never contented, till they arrive at that which they cannot obtain, without the
ruin of those that give the entertainment; if you do not grant them all that
they desire, then, the more favors you have done them, the more occasions have
you given them to ruin you. Then to Crown the work; when they are arrived at
the height of their desires, you run a hazard either to be slighted, or to live
in a continual inquietude for their inconstancy. As for those that are repulsed
at the first; how infinitely troublesome they are unto us? What insupportable
torments they are by their importunities, and subtilties? They will hang upon
you like a bur; they will follow you as a shadow does the body; they will
never be absent from you, but when night comes and separates you from them and
all others: you can have no other object before your eyes but them; and will be
so troublesome unto you, that you will be glad to banish from you such company
as you love, only to be rid of them you love not. At the last, if their love do
die, as they are very subject unto such changes, what is it which their spite
will not make them belch forth against you? Their calumnies will blast the most
unblameable life that ever lived: the hercest Tigers that ever nature created,
are not so full of revenge as they will be against us. So then it must be
concluded (said Phillis, and interrupted) that men are troubles at all times,
according to Dianas Doctrine. For my part (said Astrea) I shall not need to
fear them, when I am with Alexis amongst the Virgin Druides of Carnutes: but to
tell you truly, I do believe, there are very few men who have not a tincture of
those vices, wherewith Diana upbraids them. These few words from Astrea, did
touch Celadon so to the quick, that he knew not what to say, yet lest he should
give any notice of it, he thought himself obliged to say something: For my
part, replied Alexis, I know not what to say, for I never made any trial of
these deceivers, and have known some changing women: Then turning to Astrea; Oh
Servant, (said she in a low voice) when we are amongst the Virgin Druides, we
shall care but a little for the inconstancy of these wavering men, and we will
laugh at your Companions who do live in that servitude. I hope so, (answered
Astrea) and I protest unto you Mistress, I do with extreme impatience long to
see the day when we must depart.

Diana seeing them whisper, lest she should interrupt them, did stand a little
farther off, but Phillis who was of a very pleasant and gay humor, and knew
very well that Alexis would take delight in it, Sister, (said she unto Diana)
is not my prophecy come to pass? Does not Astrea who was wont to Love none but
Diana and Phillis, and who took delight in no company but theirs, does not she
I say, disdain them now? and Loves only this new Shepherdess? Whereby you may
note, that men may well accuse us also of levity, and inconstancy. Ah Phillis
(answered Astrea, and smiled) do you not observe that I am now no Shepherdess?
Do you see, how I am become a Druide? And do you not know that honors change
manners? But I hope, replied Phillis, that when this Druide is gone, who has
infused so much pride into you, then you will return unto your former humility,
I beseech you angry Shepherdess, answered Astrea, withhold your revenge upon me
till that time, and then I will not complain of any hurt you can do me: your
meaning is replied Phillis, that then you will be full of greater displeasures
then ours, and will not value what we can do: that, replied Astrea, is not my
meaning. Then, said Phillis, do you think us of such good dispositions, that
seeing you afflicted for others, we will have no mind to augment your
displeasures? But you will deceive your self in that; for ingratitude is a vice
so detestable, that it turns the sweetest natures into harsh dispositions, and
makes the most courteous and kind, become surly, and vindicative. That is not
my meaning neither, replied Astrea, but it is, because you shall not see my
here after my Fair Mistress is gone; for I am fully resolved to follow her
whithersoever she shall go, and she is pleased to permit me. Nay, nay, said
Philis, Calidon will never permit that voyage; Calidon, answered Astrea, has no
more to do with me, then I will have with him: But Phocion (said Phillis) will
order it after another manner. The will of Heaven and of my destiny, replied
Astrea, is above the will of men. But I beseech you, added Phillis, has not
those friends which you have here any prevalence with you? I must needs
confess, answered Astrea, that if any have, it is they, and this consideration
only can make me resent my displeasures: but when I think upon those sorrows,
which I have received from the detestable River of Lignon; I shall desire to be
so far distant from it, as that the memory of it may be quite extinguished. If
that be your design (said Diana) then you must resolve to carry us with you,
for you know our affection will never suffer us to be far from you. Should
Heaven consent unto that, replied Astrea, I should be but too happy: I hope,
answered Diana, that Heaven will favor us as well as you, and deliver us from
that servitude wherein we live. Paris and Belinde (said Alexis) will pronounce
an arrest against you: Yes, said Astrea, and Lycidas will no less oppose the
voyage, unless he may have leave to follow Phillis. Paris and Belinde, answered
Diana, will never ordain any thing against my will, nor against the service of
Tautates; for both of them are Religious and Wise. But if they should, I should
be excusable in my dis-obedience to Belinde, because I ought to imitate my
Mother in dedicating my self unto the same God unto whom she her self is
devoted: And as for Paris, I hope that I may displease him to exempt my self
from all manner of displeasures. This consideration therefore, need not to
hinder you from carrying us with you. If this consideration will not hinder,
(said Phillis and smiled) I have one that will, which is, a resolution never to
put Lycidas unto the trouble of following me so far; for I do not intend to be
distant from him, farther then the limits of our Town will extend.

Alexis and Astrea could not forbear laughing at Phillis, which caused her to
add further; do not think Sister, whatsoever I say of Lycidas, but that I love
you as well as any Sister in the world can: but I must needs confess, that the
affection which I bear unto the Shepherd, is of another kind then that which I
bear unto you: were I as well learned as Sylvander, perhaps I should make a
better definition of it; but so it is, that I can hardly be deprived of his
sight for any other: I hope you will not take my freedom in an ill sense, but
rather excuse it, because lying is not permitted amongst us. Sister, answered
Astrea, I shall never be one that will condemn your humor; but perhaps I shall
be extremely sorry to be so far distant from you. Could I divide my self into
two parts, replied Phillis, the one should wait upon you which way soever you
went: but since that cannot be, I beseech you, give me leave to make good my
promise unto Lycidas. Diana then smiled and said, I perceive there is none but
my self who will keep the promise which we made unto Astrea. I shall supply the
place of Phillis (said Alexis) and perform the office of amity which that
Shepherdess has sworn unto her. Do not think Madam, replied Phillis, that I
will ever fail in my promise to her: but she knows very well, that when we
contracted our league of amity unto each other, one condition was, not to deny
any thing that the one should ask of the other; and since I ask her pardon if I
do not follow her, she cannot, unless she be perjured, deny it. It is very
true, answered Astrea, and sighed, nor will I blame you for what you do, no
more then you upbraid me with my past misfortune.

Their discourse had lasted long, had it not been for Astreas dressing her
self: but Alexis being taller then she, and by consequence her Gown too long
for her, Diana and Phillis did take it in, by tucking it up so handsomely, that
it was as fit as if measure had been taken of her. The Druide, on the other
side thinking that she had counterfeited sick long enough, also fearing that if
she continued in bed, she should discover the defects of her breasts; she
resolved to get up, and walk in the little grove of Hasles with Astrea;
foreseeing that otherwise if she stayed in her chamber, they two should never
be alone, and so should be deprived of the pleasure which she took in talking
with the Shepherdess without interruption. In order therefore unto this design,
Servant (said she unto Astrea) see what an excellent operation your discourse
has had upon my sickness: Since you came hither, I have been as well as I can
wish: if therefore you will let me rise, we will go and walk away the rest of
the morning in the little Wood: If I have been any Instrument of your well
being, answered Astrea, I shall think my self the happiest Woman in the world,
for I have no greater ambition then to do you service. Oh Madam, said Phillis;
we will all thank Astrea for being so good a Doctor. Indeed, said Alexis, I
find my self very well, and if you will give me the Gown which I am to put on,
I will dress my self and go with you whither you please. Phillis ran presently
to reach Astreas Gown, and helping her to put it on, she was dressed presently:
then coming unto the window, she dressed up her head, and tricked up her self
so, that this disguised Druide appeared to be one of the Fairest Shepherdesses
of Lignon: Astrea seeing her, could not choose but say unto Phillis; Well
Phillis, do you think the time I spent in getting such a Fair Mistress, was not
well employed? Certainly it was, answered Phillis, and smiled, if you were
Astreas Brother; for it is the custom in this Country, when one speaks of a
Mistress and Servant, a Shepherd and a Shepherdess is to be understood. Oh
Phillis (answered Diana) amongst the Virgin Druids, the custom is quite
contrary; and you must know, (added Alexis) that in the Sacrifices of Vesta,
men are not received.

When the Druide was dressed, she took Astrea by the hand, and led her out; and
the Flocks of Diana and Phillis being near the door, Alexis would needs drive
them, to show she was not ashamed of her habit; but to make them believe she
was ignorant in that mystery, she used her Sheephook and talked to the Flock
very aukwardly, at which Astrea could not choose but laugh, and Diana would
needs undertake to direct and teach her what to do. After they had a while made
themselves merry at this exercise, they walked to the Wood, into which they
were no sooner entered, but they spied upon their left hand, a great company of
Shepherds and Shepherdesses, who were walking there in the shade: this
encounter did a little trouble the two disguised parties, for being not yet
grown confident enough of themselves, they were afraid to be seen by any; and
therefore they desired Diana and Phillis, to walk toward that company, whilst
they, lest they should be known, would take another way: the two good friends
according to their desires, went forward and came up to the company; who seeing
them, did advance themselves to bid them good morrow. Diana having met with
Daphnis amongst them, as her special and intimate friend; she went to embrace
her, and ask her how she had passed away the night. All complements and
salutations being ended, Hylas who was in the company, and Corilas also, not
being able to be together without several disputes, they continued on the
discourse, which they had begun before those two Shepherdesses came unto them.
Good Hylas, said Corilas, tell me one thing; when thou did change Alexis for
Stella, at what game did thou play? Why, (answered Hylas) do you ask me that
question? Because I think, replied Corilas, that thou dare hardly say it was
the game of the Fairest, as thou were wont to say when thou did leave Phillis
for Alexis; for I cannot believe thy eyes so bad, but thou must needs see, that
she whom thou have left, is Fairer then she whom thou have taken: Oh thou
ignorant novice, in beauty (cried out Hylas) what is it that can be called
Fair, unless it please? I confess (said Corilas) that beauty does please; but I
cannot confess, all that pleases to be Fair: and so that which a depraved
taste thinks good, ought not to be esteemed so therefore. How now friend?
(replied Hylas) What, one of Sylvanders disciples? Perhaps thou think as he
does, that beauty is a right proportion, and a true mixture of colors; Oh how
grossly thou art mistaken, if thou think so? Beauty is nothing but an opinion
of her whom we judge to be so: and to demonstrate it unto thee; when a woman
has a little mouth, a well proportioned nose, a clear skin, a fresh complexion,
and buxsom plumpness, do thou not call this beauty? I do so, answered
Corilas; then tell me (replied Hylas) beauty, and ugliness, are they the Mother
and the Daughter of one another, or are they contraries? Certainly, said
Corilas, beauty does never engender ugliness, and they are so contrary, that
the one cannot be without destruction unto the other. Then confess, replied
Hylas, that beauty, and ugliness are only in opinion: for I will show thee how
that which very often we esteem Fair, does seem very ugly unto us, according as
opinion commands. When a dog has a crooked nose, a wide mouth, large lips, and
ears hanging down to the ground, do they not say, that such a one is a very
fair and a fine dog, and yet all these are quite contrary unto what you call
fair. All this were right, replied Corilas and smiled, if the beauty of a
Woman, and the beauty of a Dog were all one and the same thing. Nay, nay, said
Hylas, this excuse will not pass, and if thou were but as learned as thy master
Sylvander, I would ask thee questions concerning Ideas of Beauty: But thou my
Friend, who art not so high a Flyer, I must deal with thee by demonstrations
more easy and sensible: Thou think that thou have given me a sufficient
answer, in saying, That the beauty of a Woman, and the beauty of a Dog are not
the same: But what will thou allege when I show thee that the beauty of Women
has a contrary estimation: The Gauls esteem white to be Beauty, the Moors
esteem Black to be the same: The Transalpines loves those that are high
colored, almost red, they esteem great and fat women to be the prime Beauties,
the Gauls are for the slender and lean: The Greeks admire the Black eye, the
Gauls the Gray. All Europe esteem a little mouth, red lips, and an even
proportioned nose: The Affricans quite contrary, a wide mouth, flapping lips,
and a large saddle nose: Now my good friend, prithee tell me, wherein does
Beauty consist? If thou do deny it to be in the opinion of him that looks
upon it, tell me no more that Alexis is fairer then Stella, since thou judge
by the Genius and Rules of thy Country, and I by mine, which is Camargue; for I
will tell thee, that according to the Rules of that place where I was born,
there is none so fair as she who pleases.

Every one did laugh so much at the discourse of the Inconstant Hylas, that
Corilas could not answer him: and just as he began, they heard a Shepherd begin
to sing, who by his voice was known to be Sylvander. All the company did
presently turn their eyes upon Hylas, as if they did advertize him, that now he
was like to have a more powerful enemy. Stella who took notice of it: Servant
(said she) all the company looks upon you, to see whether you begin to look
pale at the encounter of this fierce Champion: I amongst the rest do expect to
see what defense you will make of my Beauty, for I should be very glad for your
own honors sake, if you can with honor bring about the enterprise: Not that I
care for my own Interest at all, for I do know very well that if Beauty do
consist in opinion, there is not a Shepherdess in the world who has more of it
then I have. Mistress, answered he, let this Giant come when he will, I value
him not, it is not the first time we have grapled together. Then said Corilas,
I am confident the victories were never doubtful. No more then those I obtained
over you, answered Hylas. I should confes^, answered Corilas, if you could
persuade me that Stella is fairer then Alexis, you have gotten a most signal
victory of me. It is very hard, replied Hylas, to persuade a man that is
wilful; but I am contented that all who hear us, do judge me to be in the
right. If they do, replied Corilas, it may be said that Right is without Reason.

In the mean time Sylvander came unto them, with a countenance of contentment
more then he had cause for: For Diana, who was not able to dissemble her anger,
and left her countenance should discover it more then she was willing, she went
unto Phillis, and whispered in her ear; I beseech you Sister (said she) do not
follow me: for I am constrained to go unto Astrea upon a business which I
forgot, and I would not by any means draw you from this good company. I will do
whatsoever you command me, answered Phillis, but I shall be very glad to go
with you. Do what you please, said Diana, but if you do come, let it be a
little after me: Upon this she went away four or five paces; and then, as if
she had remembered something which she had once forgotten, she turned hastily
back to Phillis, and said unto her in a low voice; Be sure Sister you remember
the Bracelet of my Hair, for I desire you by all means to get it from him; and
afterward I shall be extremely desirous to hear what discourse you have had
with this Lover of Madonthe. Sister, answered Phillis, you believe upon too
light grounds, but if you will, I shall speak unto Sylvander, and give you an
account of his answer. His answer! said Diana, No Sister, I desire it not, nor
any thing else from him, but that unfortunate Bracelet which he had of mine;
But if you will take so much pains as to observe his countenance and gesture
when you ask it of him, you will do me a pleasure if you relate it unto me. I
know your mind, answered Phillis and smiled, and therefore trouble your self no
further, but commit the care of it to me. Upon this Diana went away as fast as
she could go, and durst hardly look back, lest she should give some suspicion
of the passion which she desired to conceal. On the other side, Alexis and
Astrea who were separated from the company, purposely to enjoy themselves in
freedom of discourse, they were no sooner alone, but Astrea with contentment,
began thus: I cannot tell Mistress what will be the end of my Enterprise, nor
how the Destinies will dispose of me; but this beginning is so infinitely
pleasing unto me, that nothing can be added unto my desires, for I am able to
say, that hopes never durst promise unto themselves so much as the kindness of
my sweet Mistress has granted unto me. Servant, said Alexis, such is your
merit, that you may well assure your self of all the favors you can desire
from me: But if you will oblige me, consider I beseech you how favorable the
Heavens are to me in meeting with you: For having such a bitter remembrance of
the change in that woman whom I loved so well, and yet do love her, that bitter
memory of her is driven from my heart, by the sweetness which I find in your
amity, making it appear that the best remedy against a misery, is always the
contrary. Give me leave, sweet Mistress, replied Astrea with a little smile, to
tell you, that by these extreme favors which you do me, you do make me
jealous. Is it, replied Alexis, because I say that I do love this Maid still,
of whose change I complain so much? Have I not a little reason for it, said
Astrea? Servant said Alexis, You have no reason for it; for I love you as my
Servant, and her as my Mistress. This answered Astrea, does not remove my
jealousy, but rather much more augment it, because the love which one bears
unto a Mistress, does much surpass the good will which one bears unto a Servant.
Well Servant, said Alexis, to let you see that I will conform my self unto any
thing you would have me, I will take this course: To cease loving this woman of
whom we speak, is impossible, as well because it shall never be said that I am
unconstant, as because it would be an unpardonable error to see so much merits
and not love them: But to cut the thread as even as I can betwixt you, I will
love this changeling still, but I will love her only for your sake. Perhaps I
should be satisfied with this promise, if I did understand it, replied Astrea.
My meaning is, replied Alexis, That I will love her only, because I am certain
that when you do know her, you will love her as well as I do: and if it do not
prove so, then I protest that I will not love her: But Servant, I remember you
once told me, that you did love a Shepherd, I beseech you let me know who that
happy man is; for if our amity continue, as I make no question but it will,
then it is not reasonable we should live together, as we are resolved to do,
and let any thing be concealed from each other. Though Alexis had a great
desire to know the cause of his Banishment, yet this question came out before
she was well aware, otherwise, her fears of a sharp answer would doubtless have
stopped her mouth: But the word being out, and past recall, she expected Astreas
answer, as a sentence of either life or death. The Shepherdess on the other
side, or rather the new Druide, she was a little troubled at this question, and
knew not well what answer to return; but at last, after she had stood a while
mute, she returned this answer, with a deep sigh: Ah Mistress! you command me to
tell you a thing which has cost me many a bitter tear; and the very memory of
it cannot come into my mind without much sad resentment: But since I am forced
unto it by your command, I will shut up my sorrows within my soul, and tell
you, because I have made a vow never to disobey you. Know therefore Mistress,
that the name of this Shepherd whom I loved is Celadon, and an enmity that was
betwixt our Families, was not able to give any stop unto the affection that was
between us; but when we were in our highest hopes of a happy conclusion, Death
did ravish him away from amongst men, and made me a widow before I was
married. This, Mistress, is it that has cost me a Sea of Tears, and I beseech
you pardon me that I make no longer a relation of it unto you: for besides that
I think it both out of season, and impertinent; also I desire you to have so
much pity upon your Servant, as not to open a wound, which perhaps will never
be cured, and which is the most sensible that ever any received. Alexis might
well have been contented with this answer, but his extreme desire to know the
full cause of his misery, urged him to go further, and say; I am very sorry
Servant, I should be any cause of your sad resentments; but you may think that
this my curiosity is no small testimony of my affection to you; and therefore
if this consideration have any influence upon your soul, I beseech you tell me
why and how this Shepherd died, when he was at the very top of all his hopes?
Ah Mistress, said Astrea, you touch the wound where it is most sore, and yet let
the pain be what it will, I cannot disobey you.

When Astrea was ready to satisfy the Druide, they were at the end of the long
Walk; and when they turned back, they spied the Shepherdess Diana at the other
end, who was coming to them, purposely to avoid the sight of Sylvander. Astrea
was very glad of this encounter, which would serve her for an excuse in not
satisfying the curiosity of Alexis; who desiring to have no witnesses, was the
first which entreated her to defer this discourse until another time.

Presently after, Diana came unto them, with a countenance that spoke the
displeasure she had received by meeting with Sylvander: And because this
alteration was very apparent, Astrea and Alexis perceived it as soon as ever
they saw her. This moved Alexis to ask her whether she was not well: to whom
she answered yes, but was on the contrary much delighted at the discourse of
Hylas against Beauty: But said she, he found a more easy Antagonist of Corilas
then he will of Sylvander. Sylvander! said Astrea, is he in the Country? Yes,
answered Diana faintly, he came just as I came away, and I saw all the company
preparing themselves to hear him. Then Astrea smiled, and turned toward
Alexis; Mistress, said she unto her, you need not ask Diana whether she be ill,
for I know from whence proceeds that alteration which we observed in her face.
The reason of it is, said Diana, because I made such haste in coming to you;
and indeed I have not found my self of late so well as I was wont to be. This
excuse, replied Astrea, cannot hide it from us, nor will our amity permit you
should be thus close unto us. Do you not consider (said Diana) in whose
presence you are? Very well, replied Astrea, both what I say, and in whose
presence; But my Mistress is pleased to allow us so much liberty and freedom,
that you ought not to use any such distimulations and disguisements, which it
seems you would hide your self withal, both from her and me. Servant, said
Alexis, and smiled, unless you will have me accuse you of the same fault for
which you blame Diana, you will tell me openly what it is that she dissembles.
Mistress, answered Astrea presently, I cannot conceal any thing which you have a
desire to know: but lest this Shepherdess should have any reason to complain
against me, I beseech you command me, and I will tell you. Then I command you,
said Alexis, with all the power that you have given me over you. Astrea
offering to speak, Diana put her hand before her mouth, and hindered her: But
Astrea putting her hand away, and pulling Alexis betwixt them, Diana, said she,
though it cost me my life, I will obey my Mistress in all her commands. Madam,
said Diana, Do not either hear or believe her, for she cannot tell you any
thing either of truth, or worth your hearing: But if you please, you may spend
your time much better in hearing the disputes between Hylas and Sylvander,
which cannot choose but be very pleasant, since your self is concerned in it;
for the Dispute is betwixt your Beauty and Stellas. We will do so said Alexis,
since you will have us, though neither Astrea nor I have any great confidence
in our new Habits; and as we go, Astrea shall tell us what it is which you are
so shye in imparting to us. I would not have her tell you Fancies and
Imaginations for truths, replied Diana, especially such imaginations as cannot
be told without much offense. Then Alexis taking in each hand one, they walked
that way from whence Diana came: And Astrea began thus: Sister, said she, you
will be soon offended if what I shall say will do it: For when I assure my
Mistress that the alteration which she observes in your face proceeds only from
your meeting with Sylvander, do I tell any thing but what is truth? Why should
she change her countenance (said Alexis) at the seeing of one whom she so much
loves and honors? Mistress, said Astrea, I beseech you do but look upon her,
and you shall see her face answer for me. Diana then held her hands before her
eyes, and turning her head the other way, she held it so a long while, and
would not be seen: But at last, considering that her companion would certainly
tell what she desired to conceal, she thought it better to tell it her self,
then suffer another to do it. Madam, said she and smiled, What Astrea tells you
is a mere Imagination: but since you have such a desire to know, I had rather
tell it my self, then suffer her; and when I have told you, then judge what
probabilities there is in the matter. You know Madam, that according to the
Wager that was betwixt Phillis and Sylvander, this Shepherd seemed long as if
he had really loved me, and since we have discovered that he is extremely in
love with Madonthe. Who is that Madonthe? asked Alexis. A stranger, answered
Astrea, who was here a while amongst us, and one whom Diana has an opinion that
Sylvander is in love withal. An opinion, replied Diana, Why Sister do you not
positively say, she is one whom Sylvander loves as much as he can love, for you
know it to be true? Did I know it, answered Astrea, I would say as you do, but
I swear that I think all he does is only out of civility. Civility! cried out
Diana, Do you call it Civility to cry, to pray, to beg, to importune, and to
kneel at the feet of Madonthe, to get leave that he may follow her? If this be
civility, then I do not know what is Love. Sister, said Astrea, you believe all
that Laonice tells you, and I would have you suspend your Belief, until the
Shepherd return, that you may have the truth from his own mouth. Fie, fie
Friend, replied Diana, I wonder you should speak thus: Would you have me look
for any truth from the mouth of a Man? a man in Love? Or (to speak all in one
word) from a Sylvander? from him that thinks he can by the volubility of wit
and tongue blind the eyes of our mind, as Juglers do the eyes of our Body? No,
no, there is no credit to be given unto any thing he says. Why should you
think, said Alexis, that Sylvander loves any but your self? I never thought he
loved me, answered Diana, nor ever had any intention to suffer him. Surely,
said Astrea, you had an opinion once that he did love you; but if he did not,
why should he take so much pains about you as he did? To pass away his time,
answered Diana, or because he had nothing else to do. Do you think, said
Astrea, that so fine a Wit as Sylvanders can find it self nothing to do but to
trifle away his time about one whom he loves not? You may remember Sister, if
you please, how that Shepherd lived before he cast any amorous eye upon you,
and compare that time with the time of his love unto you, and consider what a
difference there was; which of your commands, nay the least shadow of your
will did he not observe as a Law inviolable? To be brief Sister, Tell me what
greater reverence he could render unto any Grandee upon earth, nay unto the
Gods themselves, then he has always done unto you? And whether there be not
certain symptoms, signs, and consequents of a real love, let any hearer judge?
Sister, answered Diana, since you speak so highly in behalf of Sylvander, I
believe you think as you say; But I who never saw, nor will see any such
matters, I will believe the reports of Laonice; and if those signs which you
have observed in him be any testimonies of Love, they may be of his love to
Madonthe. No replied Astrea, for I have heard him in my presence say a hundred
and an hundred times, that it is you, and you only whom he loves. It is the
common quality of men, answered Diana, thus to delude those silly women who
hear them: and do you not think he has said as much in private unto his dear
Madonthe? But if I be not much deceived, he never said as much to me, nor ever
shall. I perceive, said Alexis, you are apt to believe all that is said against
Sylvander, as confidently as if you had seen it your self. I believe it Madam,
answered Diana, because it is true: But I am contented to forgive him with all
my heart, and will believe all that Laonice has told me. Me thinks said Alexis,
you are over-apt, and too partial to believe the reports of that woman: you
ought to suspend your belief and judgment, till you hear him answer for
himself. Ah Madam, said Diana, I assure you that I care so little either for
his love or hate, as I would not have one word more spent about the matter: For
do you think to draw truth from a false and dissembling tongue? For my part,
said Astrea, I cannot believe him in any fault: But if he be in fault, his
fault is his love unto Madonthe; now when she is gone, his fault will appear;
and if he be in no fault, then he will continue his addresses still unto you. I
do not think (said Diana) that he will continue them. But if he do continue
them, said Astrea, what will you say then? I will say, answered Diana, that he
will be ashamed to show his Inconstancy. If he was ashamed of that, replied
Astrea, he would not have so freely discovered it before all those who saw him
take his leave of Madonthe. Perhaps, answered Diana, he was not so absolute a
master of himself, but he was surprised with this sudden and unexpected
departure; so as though he be his Arts master in matter of lying, yet he could
not choose but upon such a surprise discover the truth. But Sister, why should
we spend so much time about a thing which is not worth it? Let us leave
Sylvander to his beloved Madonthe, and have no more memory of him then he has
of us; for I believe his soul is capable of no thought but his sorrows at this
sad separation.

Whilst these Shepherdesses were thus discoursing, presently after Dianas
departure from Phillis, Sylvander came to the place from which Diana went; and
he had hardly saluted all the company before Hylas accosted him.

Will you, say Sylvander (said he unto him) that Diana is Fairer then Stella?
Will you deny Hylas (said Sylvander) that the Sun is cleerer then Darkness? All
the Company began to laugh at the answer of Sylvander, and the question of
Hylas: but Hylas without being at all daunted, I will maintain (said he) that
Stella does not only equal, but much excel the beauty of Diana. I do not wonder
at what you say (answered Sylvander) but yet me thinks thy very ignorance
should have made a better judgment then so; I should answer you after another
manner (said Hylas) if I had not right on my side, and if I did not think to
make you confess before we part in the presence of all these Shepherdesses,
that Stella is fairer then Diana, at the least if you will answer me. Doubt not
but I will answer unto all you shall ask, said Sylvander and smiled, but if you
make me confess what you affirm, and which I can never believe, I will say you
can do more then is possible, and makes use of some enchantment. The
enchantments which I will use, answered Hylas, shall be the strength of my
reasons, of which, not you, but all the company shall judge: therefore
Sylvander, answer unto this question; How Fair do you think Diana to be? As
Fair, answered Sylvander, as any woman can be. And I, said Hylas, do think
Stella to be Fairer then any Woman in the world can be: thus you see Sylvander
how you have spoken truth before you were aware; you hold the beauty of Diana,
only in the comparative degree, but I Stellas in the superlative: If opinion,
replied Sylvander, were to end the difference, or were that which makes a
person more or less Fair, then I should confess that in this argument you have
in some sort the advantage of me. But how grossly are you deceived if you have
that belief; for beauty is the perfection of that which has it: and can you
say that perfection is only an imagination? But can you deny, replied Hylas,
that beauty, even the beauty of Women, is any thing else but the opinion of him
who sees it? For if it were otherwise, she who seems Fair unto one, would seem
Fair unto all eyes, which holds false in the opinion that you have of the
beauty of Diana, and the greater beauty of Stella. The ground you build upon,
replied Sylvander, is such a loose sand, that it must needs fall presently to
ruin: for it is not opinion which sets a value upon things, but their own
proper quality which is in them; for otherwise a piece of Glass or Alchimy well
wrought and counterfeited, were as good as Gold, or a right Diamond, for they
are oftentimes thought to be as good as the other: but Hylas, you know from
whence this opinion has its rise; even from nothing but ignorance: for if
people knew that the Alchimy, and the Glass, were counterfeit; they would never
set so much esteem upon them: the very like is of the judgment which you make
of Diana and Stella; for did you know what beauty is, you would give a sound
judgment, and not rashly at random as you do: for my part, replied Hylas, I
cannot think my self in any error, I have most men on my side; and most
ignorants also, replied Sylvander, yet if you will refer it unto the vote of
this company, I am confident you will find very few on your side: for as there
is commonly more sound then sick persons, so there are more sound then simple
judgments, otherwise nature was defective in her works, and did not accomplish
them according to the right rule, which to think, were a blasphemy both against
her, and the God of Nature.

Silvander having an ample field for his discourse, would have continued it
longer, if Hylas had not interrupted him with another question.

I know Sylvander (said he) that it will be a very dear year when you want
words: but answer me to this; If beauty be not mere opinion, then how comes it
to pass that one should affect the gray eye, another the black, a third the
brown, and every one according to their several fancies; is this from
ignorance? whole Provinces we see of the same opinion, and contrary unto
another; this, answered Sylvander, is easily answered: I know the Gauls are
for gray eyes; the Greeks and Latins black, because the women there are
commonly black, and the Gauls white: now Hylas, can you fancy that white eyes,
and white hair, would show well upon a black complexion; or black hair or eyes
upon a white complexion? But Hylas, all these anchantments which you menaced,
cannot make me confess Stella to ^e so Fair as Diana. Upon this, casting his
eye upon Phillis, and she making signs unto him that she would speak with him,
he would not stay any longer; but (...) toward Hylas, content your self (said
he unto him) that I have lost so much time already; when Diana is present, I
shall read you as long a lesson as you please: so leaving him, he went to
Phillis, and said unto her, in a low voice; Who, would have thought, Oh my
enemy, if I may so call you, that you would have par^^^ from that Mistress which
you have given unto Sylvander? Shepherd, said she unto him, all things are so
apt to change, that it is no wonder to see any thing go contrary to custom: As
for the name of enemy which you bestow upon me, I kn^w not how I may deserve
it; but you must not give the name of Mistress unto Diana* Sylvander was a
little astonished to see Phillis so serious, and hear her speak so; yet
considering that Phillis was wont to play the wag with him; he smiled: but then
thinking that she did personate too well to be in jest, and continued it too
long, he separated from the rest of the company lest he should be heard: but it
was more then needed, for all the Shepherds and Shepherdesses gathered so about
Hylas, and see^ed him with the victory which he had gotten, that none took
notice of his action; but being distant from all the company, he began th^^;
Your language Phillis, and your gesture, does speak you to be my neemy. But as
for Diana, there is none but (...) me that she is my Mistress. Whatsoever I am,
answered Phillis, it is no matter; (...) as for Diana, I am sure she is none of
your Mistress: Oh my most cruel enemy, said Sylvander, I beseech you no more of
this counterfeit language, lest it cause my death. Whatsoever occasion you give
me to hate you, said Phillis, yet my hatred shall not reach so far as to wish
your death* but if you will go a little farther, I will tell you that you are
not now upon the same terms with Diana you were wont to be: and if all reports
be true you are to blame. I beseech you Shepherdess, said Sylvander, if you
speak thus only to perplex me, tell me as much, and I shall thank you:
Shepherd, Shepherd, said Phillis, I have no intentions of perplexing of you,
but rather desire to bring you out if I can; for believe it Sylvander, I speak
in good serious earnest* Diana is extremely angry against you, and if all be
true that is said, she has good reason. Oh sweet Phillis, said Sylvander, for
Heavens sake tell me what i^ said of me? I tell you the very truth, replied
she, and that you may believe I do not lie; know also, that as soon as ever she
save you, she went away from the company, and gave me a charge to get a
bracelet of her hair from you, which she gave you, for she says the time that
you were to keep it being expired, there is no reason such a testimony of good
will should remain with one who can make no better use of it. Sylvander was
struck dead with wonder, he stepped a pace or two back from Phillis; folded his
arms a cross his breast, and being not able to open his mouth, he fixed his eyes
upon the ground, and stood like a Statue without any life or motion. Phillis
seeing him stand so long in this sad posture, she had compassion upon him, and
pulled him by the arm: he started out of his study, and looked wildly about
him, as if he were affrighted out of his wits, and said, Oh God, what fault
have I committed against thy power? Doubtless it is some great one, since you
suffer me to be so unjustly condemned for a fault which I never committed, and
which I never will commit. These expostulations, said Phillis, and interrupted
him, are all in vain, for you know, the God of Love is Privileged above all
the rest of the Gods, and that Heaven never punishes his falsities. But
Shepherdess, said Sylvander, do you and Diana also believe that I have no good
will unto her? I do not say that I believe it, replied Phillis, but I say that
if all be true which is told Diana, she has no reason to Love you: for do you
think Sylvander, that she is a Shepherdess that will be contented to be a
pretense for your affection unto another? Do you find so little merit in her,
as that she is not worthy to be served any further then as your stalking horse,
to hide another amity? Tricks and dissimulations may perhaps sometimes deceive
such as do not suspect any treason in them; but when notice is taken of them
which rubbed a little, it will presently show its falsity. There is nothing
comparable to a free, clear, and genuine way in all things; subtilties, tricks,
and fetches, are arguments of a vile and base Spirit. I do confess (said
Sylvander) all that you say, but I beseech you what have I done? You know,
answered Phillis, better then any: the thing is made public, and if you will
have it from my mouth, I say Sylvander, that you have made a show of loving
Diana, whilst you have given your whole soul and affection unto Madonthe: this
is a truth which you cannot deny, unless you be the most brazen faced Shepherd
in the whole universe; all the Country knows this, and laughs at it; Diana her
self amongst the rest makes it her rallery; if you be sorry for any thing, it
is, that Diana cares not for your Love: It is a great credit indeed to be
courted by an unknown vagabond Shepherd as you are; especially to her who is to
eminent in virtue and merit; but all our sorrows proceeds from our being so
much mistaken in you: Tell me truly, Sylvander, what design did you aim at in
all your dissimulations? How could you imagine you should continue long
undiscovered? And when you were discovered, could you think to avoid a se^ere
but just censure from all the world? Diana is Fairer at her worst, then
Madonthe is at her best; the very frowns of Diana, are sweeter then Madonthes
smiles: and Dianas anger is more estimable then Madonthes caresses and favors:
where was your eyes and your wits Sylvander, when you made so bad a choice? Can
Diana believe all this? replied Sylvander: Believe it, said Phillis, why should
she not believe it, when every one says it? And since she has seen such
apparent effects of it, for else why should you he every way so obsequious and
observant of that stranger? Why all that eloquence to persuade her not to
depart? Why else should you cast your self at her feet? Nay why tears when you
bade adieu? and why that unseasonable voyage which you made with her? Now
Sylvander, I tell you all this, not that Diana cares a rush for it, but on the
contrary, she thanks God, that she is so well rid of all your importunities and
troubles; my aims are only to let you know, that all your dissimulations and
tricks are discovered, and that there is no more hopes of deceiving us by any
arts you can use.

Thus spoke Phillis unto Sylvander, not that she had any commission for it from
Diana, whose modesty was such, and Spirit so great, that she had rather have
died then make any show that the dissimulations of Sylvander did displease her;
but Phillis did it, because she was angry with that Shepherd, and resented the
injury done unto her Companion, as her own, And well it was they were so far
from the rest of the company; for otherwise it would have been impossible but
every one would have perceived the disorder which this discourse had caused in
him, and which indeed was greater then Phillis expected. His regret to see
himself accused of a fault which he never committed; the loss of Dianas favor
which he hoped that he had obtained, and the harsh language of Phillis, which
he supposed came from his Mistress, all these did so surprise him, that he was
not able to utter one word; he was constrained to lean himself against a tree,
and growing weak, he fell down to the ground, where such a faintness of heart
seized upon him, that within a little time, he was immovable, and without any
sense. Phillis, who saw him in this condition, did pull him several times by
the arm, and afterward, seeing him ready to dye, she ran to a little Rivelet
which was close by, and taking some water in her hands, she came and threw it
in his face: but these remedies doing no good, she was extremely affrighted,
and ran that way which she saw all the company pass, to call some to come and
help; but most of the Shepherds were all gone to their several homes, for it
was near dinner time; so as she had run long in vain, had she not spied a far
off Astrea, Diana, and Alexis, who were going in gentle pace to hear the
dispute betwixt Sylvander and Hylas, although Alexis and Astrea had no great
desire to be seen amongst all that company in those habits; nor Diana any mind
to be in the place where Sylvander was: so as it seems they walked without any
design but taking the air; and as if the good Genius of Sylvander had conducted
them thither, to see him in that condition. When Phillis saw them, she cried
out as loud as ever she could, and made signs unto them with her hand to make
haste, though she was so affrighted and out of breath, that she could not be
heard at any distance, Astrea was the first that heard her, and fearing that
some mischance had happened unto her: I beseech you, said she unto the rest, let
us make all the haste we can to help Phillis; for I see her run and make signs,
certainly she stands in need of us. Upon this all of them doubled their pace;
and Diana, as if some Demon had inspired her, did feel such a kind of
unaccustomed temper upon her heart, as made her almost divine what the matter
was. When Phillis was come nearer, and within distance of hearing; Oh Diana!
Diana! cried she out, Sylvander is dead! Sylvander is dead! Sylvander! replied
Diana, who killed him? You and I, answered Phillis, you in commanding me, and I
in obeying you. At this Diana was seized with so much sorrow, that she could
not speak a word, nor go one foot further; making it appear, that in her heart
she never believed what was reported of Sylvander, and that what she said
against him, was only words of an offended Love, which was prone to jealousy.
Astrea and Alexis on the contrary, who did highly esteem the virtue and merit
of that Shepherd, Alas, alas, said they, is he dead? It is but too true,
answered Phillis, his face is pale, and all tears; do but follow me a little,
and you shall find him in the condition I tell you. Then both of them began to
run after her as fast as they could, they presently saw him lying all along
upon the ground, and in the same condition Phillis left him. Diana who followed
a slower pace after them, lest she should too much discover that passion which
she desired to hide, she no sooner cast her eye upon the Shepherd, but her
cheeks were all tears, which she was not able to with hold, and which to
testify the sorrows of her heart, forced their passage through her eyelids:
And because the modesty of this Shepherdess would not permit her to discover
this passion, she stayed ten or twelve paces from her companions, and turned
her self fromwards them, seeming as if the accident did not trouble her. But
Alexis, Astrea, and Phillis, out of abundance of compassion, were very busy
about him; one lifted up his arm, another his head, and a third feeling if his
heart did beat; but finding no signs of life in him, they gave over all hopes,
and said unto one another that he was dead. These words reaching the ears of
Diana, were so many sharp swords, which wounded her heart with new sorrows: and
coming unto Phillis, she whispered her in the ear; Good Sister seek about his
arm for the Bracelet which you know of, lest it should be found. Phillis to
give her companion satisfaction, and thinking that she had good reason to
desire that none should know of it, she took the Shepherds arm, and pulled off
the Bracelet; But as she was untying it, she and her companions also spied a
mark which in all probability he had worn from his Mothers womb; it was a
branch of Misleto, so plain, that any might know it to be so; for the leaves,
the berries, and the knots of Branches, although they were not green, yet were
so perfectly marked, that none could doubt it to be Misleto.

Whilst they were busy in looking upon this Misleto, and untying the Bracelet,
and Diana at a good distance from them, Sylvander revived out of his swoon; but
so much amazed to see himself in this condition, and amongst so many
Shepherdesses, that he knew not whether he dreamed or waked. All three did not
a little rejoice to see him alive, after they had lamented his death; for the
virtue and merit of that Shepherd, did get the love of all that knew him. When
he revived, Phillis had not quite untied the Bracelet; and though he perceived
they had unloosed his sleeve, yet he did not perceive the theft, but thought
that they only untied his sleeve to feel his pulse. Alexis seeing that he spoke
not a word, but let them do what they would unto him, she thought it good to
begin. Shepherd, said she unto him, How comes this to pass? What? Does your
Courage fail you? Sylvander taking Alexis for a Shepherdess by reason of her
Habit, he thanked her and her companions for the pains they had taken about
him, and then told them, that it was rather a sign of want of courage to
endure the miseries which he resented, and not die. No, no, said Astrea, you
are deceived, for it is courage to surmount all manner of accidents whatsoever:
and believe me, your misery is not so great, but being a man you may easily
surmount it. Phillis who feared that this discourse would renew his grief,
Come, come, said she, Let us talk no longer of miseries and disasters, but let
us think how to cure them. Sylvander then answered Astrea, taking her for a
Druide because of her Habit; This Shepherdess, Madam said he, knows the
Grand^ur of my disease better then any other, and therefore, she thinking it to
be incurable, has reason not to have it spoke of. But (said he, and raised
himself up, though with pain) the good Genius which hitherto has had a care of
my deplorable life, will conduct me ere long unto a place where I hope to find
a cure, though that Shepherdess think it impossible. Upon this, thanking them
for their help, he offered to go away: But all of them considering how wildly
and ragingly his eyes looked, they were afraid that he would kill himself.
Astrea, as best experienced in the like accident, she took hold of his arm, and
seeing that he took her for a Druide, Know Shepherd, said she unto him, that
the Genius of whom you speak, commanded me to come hither, as well to help you,
as to tell you for him, That he would have you live with assurance, that his
aid shall never fail you, neither in this occasion, nor any other: Also that
within three days you shall find some favorable effects of his assistance,
unless you want will and courage to wait the time. Remember what I say, and I
take all these Shepherdesses to witness that I have told you. Upon this Astrea
who counterfeited her voice as well as she could lest she should be known, she
went away, seeming as if she did not know any of the Shepherdesses in the
company, and as if her coming thither were only upon that occasion. Now, see
what power an opinion of Divine assistance has over the spirits of men; Astrea
had no sooner pronounced these words, but Sylvander received them as coming
from an Oracle: so as beginning to hope again, those wild and raging looks
which despair had brought into his eyes, did leave them, and his countenance
became more calm and settled: Afterward with a religious look, he kneeled down
upon the ground, lifted his hands and eyes up to heaven, and uncovering his
head, he said: From you, oh omnipotent Tautates and Tharamis, Do I expect that
help which from no other I can hope for: You know my punishment to be unjust,
and that I am not guilty of that fault for which I am condemned: Help,
therefore, Oh great Gods! those injured persons who trust in you. Alexis who
saw Astrea go away, and who could not endure to be from her, she intended to
follow: and because she was afraid lest the Shepherd should know her in Astreas
clothes, she would stay no longer: upon these considerations, they made a sign
unto Phillis to stay with him a while, lest he should follow them: At parting,
she said unto him, Remember Shepherd you follow the good advice your good
Genius has given you, and take heed you do not make your self incapable of
that help and assistance which he has promised. Then not staying for his
answer, she went away toward Astrea, whom she quickly overtook: And it seems
that Heaven would have Astrea render the same Office unto Sylvander, which
formerly Celadon had done upon the like occasion unto Vrcases.

When Phillis was alone with Sylvander, she was much moved to think what harm
she had done him, which indeed was much more then ever she intended: Shepherd,
said she unto him, since heaven has taken care of your conduct, I hope you will
find more contentment then ever yet you did: but I beseech you tell me, and
tell me ingeniously and freely, and with an assurance that you tell it unto one
of your best friends, and one that can keep a secret, and will, if it concern
your good: Is it true or no that you love Madonthe? It is not a crime
unpardonable to love a fair woman as she is: There is none but does know that
it was the wager which was betwixt us did give beginning unto the Love which
you bore unto Diana; a thing which cannot oblige you any longer then the time
of the wager, and the cause which gave it a being.

Whilst Phillis was speaking to this purpose unto Sylvander, Diana though she
went away before the Shepherd revived, yet she saw him rise up, for she was
continually turning and looking back to see what would become of him: And when
she saw he was not dead, as she once thought that he was, for all her anger,
she could not choose but be extremely glad, and resented as much joy, as her
apprehensions of his death caused sorrow. Her jealousy and anger had so much
power, as to make her sensible of the offense which she thought was given her,
but not to extinguish the affection which really she had unto that Shepherd;
and upon this occasion, she gave an apparent proof of it; since seeing Astrea
go away, and presently after Alexis follow, she was swelled with an
extraordinary curiosity to hear what they two ( Phillis and Sylvander) said,
and be unseen, assuring her self that their discourse would be relating unto
her: And in order to this design, she crept behind a Bush, and came time
enough to hear the question which Phillis asked, and the answer which the
Shepherd gave, which was this, Phillis (said he) if ever the Gods did punish
perjury, I beseech them to punish me with the rigor of their fury, if I do not
give a true answer unto your question: may the Druides excommunicate me from
their sacrifices; may they all deny me justice when I ask it, may men banish me
from their Society, may fire and water, and all the rest of the Elements, be my
enemies, may I never thrive in any of my hopes or desires, may all these curses
fall upon me at once, if ever I Loved any but Diana. I know that this word Love
is too rash, and does not become me, I know this declaration is too bold,
considering the merits of that Shepherdess and my own unworthiness: but
discreet Phillis, seeing your compassion upon me and my misery, and knowing
your good will unto Diana; I should think it a crime never to be forgiven, if I
should dissemble the truth: assuring my self, that I shall find you as discreet
in this as I have known you upon all other occasions.

Shepherd, answered Phillis, you have reason to trust me, especially in any
thing that rela^es unto that Fair and Wise Shepherdess, since the affection
which I bear unto her, is not equalled by any but your own; and knowing her
merits, and your judgment, I will believe all you tell me concerning your
affection unto her. But Shepherd you must first clear your self unto me, and
give me your reasons why yon were so officious and indulgent toward Madonthe.
You know Sylvander that Love is like a little child, and is offended at a small
thing, soon angry, and as soon jealous: do you think those extraordinary
indulgencies which you manifested unto Madonthe, the tears you shed at her
departure, the earnest supplications you made to wait upon her into Aquitain,
nay to go with her, almost whether she would or no; do you think I say, that
all these circumstances coming to the knowledge of Diana, are not sufficient
enough to make her offended at you? Ought you not to have considered, that as
Madonthe would not suffer you to follow her any further, lest she should offend
Thersander whom she loved, so you ought not to have made the motion, for fear
of making Diana jealous, whom you loved? Could you hope for any better looks
from her at your return then now you have? For my part, I think she has obliged
you in treating you thus, and no otherwise: for if she had, you might have
thought her to be in a state of a cold indifferency toward you, which is a
most certain sign of small good will.

Whilst Phillis talked thus, Diana who lost not a syllable of what she said,
did so approve of it, that if any had seen her, they might easily have known
her disease. For when Phillis talked upon those points which touched her most,
she made such actions with her head, her hands, and every part of her body, as
plainly showed what she so much desired to conceal: but when Sylvander began to
speak, she was immovable: her eyes fixed upon him, and her mouth half open,
and ready to convince him of a lie upon the first excuse he should make: Being
then thus prepared, she heard him say thus: Discreet and Wise Shepherdess, I
beseech Heaven to furnish me with a good occasion and opportunity to requite
this compassion which you show upon a poor afflicted and innocent Shepherd; as
innocent and as much afflicted as any that lives upon the face of the whole
universe: you accuse me, Shepherdess of a crime unto which I am so far from
being accessory, much less guilty, as I am constrained, most earnestly to
beseech you, that you would be pleased to tell me more clearly and plainly, the
sault wherewith you charge me, that I may answer unto it which such candid
ingenuity and truth as becomes me. Diana who heard him, see the crafty man
(said she to her self) he knows not what to answer, and he would have her make
a repetition, that he may invent an excuse in the mean time; and then she heard
Phillis reply unto him thus; Confess freely your fault Sylvander, here is none
to hear or observe your actions; or if they do, none that will tell Diana: I do
believe also, that she who acquainted her with these things, did not think any
harm, for she spoke very simply and innocently: I beseech you, said Sylvander,
what did she say? She said, answered Phillis, that you your self were
instrumental to your own hurt, of which, afterward you could not cure your
self: for meeting Madonthe, you acquainted her with the coming of that
stranger, who had some bad designs upon her: It is most true, answered the
Shepherd, I did so: and I thought my self obliged unto it by the Laws of
Civility. The Laws of Civility did not enjoin you to accompany her as far as
Aquitane, replied Phillis, much less when she denied you, to fall upon your
knees, and with a torrent of tears, beg, nay force her to give leave you might
wait upon her, at the least, part of a days journey; telling her, after your
tears had obtained leave, that she might well permit you the happiness of so
short a time, since you were to endure so long a torment of absence from her.
But here comes the misery of it: when she answered you with a smile, that
though her absence did grieve, yet the presence of Diana would comfort you: you
answered again, Diana merits much more then my service, but I pay them unto her
only upon a wager: I wish she were to go this journey in your room, and you to
stay in hers here in this Country. Do you think Shepherd that any Laws of
Civility oblige you to use any such discourse unto Madonthe, and to speak with
such scorn of Diana? Do you think it strange she should be offended at you, and
resolve to take all occasions from you, of treating her so unworthily? Oh
Heavens! Oh Earth! Oh God! Oh Diana! (cried Sylvander) What treason is invented
against me? Treason, (said Phillis) why? Can you deny it? How? replied the
Shepherd presently, I say or do any such things as these; I had rather my
Sheep-hook were run through my heart, then any such thoughts should be in it;
do you deny (replied Phillis) that you accompanied Madonthe, as far as she
would permit you? I must confess, answered Sylvander, that it is true, I did
accompany her, but it was upon such reasons, as if I have done otherwise, I had
been blamed by all those that heard of it; and that you may know the truth,
give me leave to make a short relation of it unto you.

Diana hearing Sylvander prepare himself to speak; I am confident (said she to
her self) that if one word of truth be in his discourse, it is against his will
and design; but see with what a brazen face he sets himself to lie: Then
Sylvander began thus; Shepherdess (said he) it is long since Paris was telling
how that stranger was come into the Country, with a bad design upon Madonthe,
and when I saw him much troubled how he should acquaint her with it, I took
upon me to make it known unto her: he does not tell (replied Diana to her self)
how ready he was to offer himself in this service, lest any other should
undertake that charitable office. In the mean time Sylvander went on with his
story. Yesterday morning (said he) I met her with Thersander, and I thought the
blame of all the accident might be charged upon me, if I did not acquaint her,
I told her therefore as it was told me, and seeing her eyes flow in tears, I
must confess I was much moved unto compassion: nay passion you should have
said, (replied Diana to her self) And I to assure her (said Sylvander) against
the injuries of this unknown person, I offered my self to accompany her with
some of my friends, if she pleased. He is her Champion (said Diana) and will
defend her against all her enemies. And so I did (said Sylvander) but it was no
further then the place where Paris saw that stranger: It was (said Diana)
because she would not suffer him to go any further. Could I do any less (said
Sylvander) unless I transgressed against the Laws of Civility and Humanity? If
I did any more, then what I have told you Shepherdess, may I be denied Heaven,
and perish eternally as a punishment of my crime. But, said Phillis, did you
not follow her as far as Aquitane, or would you not if she had permitted you?
Had I thought, answered Sylvander, that she had stood in need of me, I must
confess, I had accompanied her farther, thinking it the duty of man to help any
in distress, Henceforward, said Diana, we shall have this Shepherd become the
Hercules of Gaul, and wander from Province to Province, to fight with Giants
and Monsters. But, continued he, that I should be importunate, or press her, or
do any more then civilly desire her, is a thing so false, as I admire any
should be so impudent as to invent it, or say it. None more likely then
Sylvander (said Diana) It Is true, I did offer my self (said Sylvander) to be
her convoy, and guard her till she was out of Forests. But is it true, replied
Phillis, that you did not shed any tears, nor kneel down, nor speak of Diana,
nor lament her departure? Now, said Diana, is he pumping, and preparing himself
for a lie. Shepherdess, (answered Sylvander) if any one syllable of all these
be true, let the Justice of Heaven strike me dead immediately; let the earth
swallow me up alive, and never let me see the face of men again; let the anger
of Gods and men do all their worst against me, if all that you have said unto
me be not false, and invented by some who wish my death, and has some designs
upon Diana. Now has he hit upon it, said Diana, for what pretensions or designs
can Laonice have upon me, or his life? Shepherd (said Phillis) when you know
who it is, certainly you will be of another mind: But you must needs confess a
fault in accompanying this Shepherdess without asking leave of your Mistress. Ah
Sister, said Diana, I beseech you give no such Name unto me, that Shepherd
shall be none of my Servant. You know Sylvander, said Phillis, that one who
loves truly, ought never to dispose of himself without the Will of the party
loved; why then would you go away and never tell her? He is at a nonplus, said
Diana, and knows not what to say. Certainly answered Sylvander, if the journey
which I was to take had deserved the name of a journey, I had done as you say;
but since it was not above two or three miles, I thought neither she nor you
could take any exceptions: Besides, Madonthe departed so suddenly, as it was
impossible for me to have done it, unless I had failed in doing her that civil
office. Observe (said Diana) that rather then fail Madonthe, he will fail in
his duty to us. But it is impossible (said Sylvander) that the excellent wit of
my Mistress (Raze out the words, said Diana, unless you speak of Madonthe.) It
is impossible I say, (continued he,) that the Judgment of Diana, which is
never deceived, (Unless in you, said Diana) should so easily believe such a
falsity: But good Shepherdess tell me, If it were true that I were in love with
Madonthe, and had taken upon me that office which Paris gave me, to acquaint
her and Thersander with the coming of this stranger; If I say, I was so greedy
and affectionate to take it upon me, can you think my violent love would have
let me stay so long before I acquainted her? Yet if Diana please, she may
remember I received this Commission the same day that we went unto Adamas, and
I did not acquaint them before yesterday. Believe it Shepherdess, those that
are enflamed with Love, are seldom so slow in rendering such services, or to say
better, in forgetting them as I did: for I swear that I never thought upon it
till I saw them; and had I not seen them, I think I should have never remembered
it. But I beseech you consider, that if I were so far in love with this woman,
as you seem by your discourse to believe, why should I not follow her
whithersoever she went? What consideration should stay me in this Country?
unless my love to Diana, I know no occasions I have else in it, more then any
where else: My miserable Fortune is such, that I have neither Parents or Estate
to stay me, nor do I get any thing here more then my industry would get me in
any other place. If then I do not leave this Country to follow Madonthe,
methinks it should be a stronger argument unto my Mistress and you, that I do
not love Madonthe, and that nothing stays me here but the love of Diana. But I
beseech you Phillis, Did you not see that I did not love her before our Wager?
I know you will confess you never saw the least inclination in me that way: I
must confess, that naturally I am not prone unto that passion, But then the
conversation which I have had with Diana, has forced me to serve her; she has
ravished my heart. I cannot tell what you have thought of me since I have had
the honor to live amongst you; yet I think you have had a good opinion of me,
and thought me not without some Wit and Judgment, till this action whereof I
am accused, and which is a disaster so fatal, that I cannot tell whether the
poor Adrastes had a greater. What a gross defect in Wit and Judgment were it,
to choose Madonthe, and reject Diana? Diana! the fairest, the wisest, and the
most accomplished woman in the whole Universe; and Madonthe, who only merits to
be esteemed in her resemblance of Diana, though in an inferior degree of
perfection. Moreover, were it not madness in the highest degree, if I knowing
that Madonthe does love a Cavalier, and wanders in quest of him, if I should
pretend to divert her: These considerations are so strong that when I reflect
upon them, I cannot choose but admire at the opinion which you have conceived of
me, and fear, that heaven which from my birth has condemned me unto so many
misfortunes, will have the end of my life like the beginning.

The Shepherd had many other arguments, and was full of such discourse as this,
unto which Phillis and Diana did hearken with much attention; for though the
opinion of Diana was extremely prejudicated, yet being rational, these last
considerations did work upon her heart, and made her think there was some truth
in them: moreover, commendations which are given without suspicion of flattery,
do get more favor then such as are given in presence; so that this discreet
Shepherdess began to relent, and champ upon the reasons which Sylvander urged:
yet her haughty spirit would hardly permit her to clear him absolutely, but put
the question whether Laonice or he said truly: And that she had learned enough
for that time, also fearing she should be perceived either by that Shepherd or
Phillis, she stole away as softly as she could, and went to seek Alexis and
Astrea.

Phillis also at the same time, thinking the Shepherd to be well recovered, and
that her stay any longer at that time would do him no good; Well Shepherd said
she unto him, I am very glad to hear as much as you have told me; Comfort your
self, and believe that your discourse shall not be unprofitable to you: for
indeed, when I consider your reasons, I believe you to be wrongfully accused;
and I promise you, I will not be mute unto Diana, but hope that ere long you
shall find the effects of my solicitation: in the interim, do what is fit to be
done on your part, and continue loving that Shepherdess, who cannot possibly be
excelled in Beauty and merit by any, nor equalled but by very few.

Upon this Phillis left him, and stayed not to hear the thanks which he would
have given her for her kind promises, nor the protestations of inviolable and
eternal affection which he would ever have unto Diana, what treatment soever he
had from her. But when he was alone, and none to divert him, then did his
displeasures present themselves before his eyes: And though the assurances
which he received from that Druide which was unknown unto him, and the promises
which Phillis made, did give him some hopes, yet the consideration of those
misfortunes which besel him even from his cradle, did put him out of all hopes,
for against them the arms of prudence and reason were almost of no validity.
Being thus pressed with extreme sorrows, he walked gently toward the River
Lignon, and sat himself down upon the Bank^ Then there was not a syllable of
that cruel message which Phillis brought him from Diana, but the solitude of
that place did freshly bring into his memory; and he lamented the crossness of
his sullen fate, in a thousand various expressions. He had continued longer in
this lamenting vein (had not Florice, Cercinea, and Palinice, with that
stranger their companion, who were retiring homewards) heard him, Cercinea knew
his voice; and because the stranger was desirous to know how they should pass
away the rest of the day, Cercinea said unto her, that if they were in the
company of that Shepherd whom they heard talking, it would be impossible to
think the time tedious or ill spent, and I am confident, said she, when you see
him, you will say as much as I. But tell me I beseech you said she, if he be a
man, how will it please Dorinde? who says, that if she were one, she should not
abide her self. I do believe, said Cercinea, and I dare venture a wager, that
when you have seen Sylvander, if you do continue your hatred of men, yet at the
least you will say that Shepherd is not a man: What should he be then asked
she? Something more answered Cercinea, and the trial will but cost you the time
that you shall employ in seeing him. He must indeed be more then a man (said
Dorinde) if he force such a confession from my mouth; For if a God (be it
spoken without blasphemy) should assume the shape of a man, he would grow near
to become ungrateful, and a Traitor, and I could not choose but hate him.

It seems (said Florice) that you have a very bad opinion of men. Yes, replied
Dorinde, and worse then my words can express; for I do believe that there is
none, no not one single one that can love. You will alter your opinion said
Palinice when you see Sylvander with Diana. I cannot tell what I may do,
answered Dorinde, but I never yet met with any woman who trusted in them, that
was not deceived. When you understand, replied Florice, how some do drown
themselves, some banish themselves, and others kill themselves by reason of too
much passion, you will be very hard of Belief if you do not confess that there
are men in this Country that can and do love. Those resolutions of which you
speak, said Dorinde, are indeed very high, but anger may produce them as well
as love, and who knows but that they were transported with that Passion? for
believe it Ladies, Men are of a very bad Nature, they do all by contraries;
they are a kind of Beasts, which never do any good, but when they think to do
ill.

Thus as these Shepherdesses disputed, they came to the place where Sylvander
was, whom they found so plunged in his own sad thoughts, that for all the noise
which they made, he never heard them: he lay all along, his head leaning upon
his hand, his eyes up to Heaven, and upon either cheek a river of tears.
Dorinde after she had looked upon him in this condition; Is this the Shepherd
(said she in a low voice), that never deceived any who trusted in him? Why do
you ask this question? answered Palinice; because, replied Dorinde, if he never
did deceive any, he weeps because he never did: and if he has deceived any, he
weeps because he has deceived no more. This Shepherd, said Cercinea, has a
better reputation then so; and is held for a very good man: This reputation,
answered Dorinde, is the stalking horse, by which men come to deceive us. But
dear friends, observe how a glass shows those things which are on the right
side to be of the glass in its left side, the best remedy is to do so with
them; take all that they do or say by contraries: and as for the tears of this
Shepherd, assure your selves my Companions, they are but the tears of a
Crocadile: he can cry and feign, till he has gotten one into a belief of him,
and then he will deceive.

Nature to our misery, has given them power to cry or laugh when they please,
so it be but to deceive a poor woman that puts her trust in them: they are of a
most depraved nature, and are like unto hunters, who make it their delight in
taking abundance of pains to catch a poor silly harmless Woman that flies
before them.

The earnestness wherewith Dorinde spoke, made her raise her voice so high
before she was aware, that Sylvander heard her: and turning her face toward
them, he was ashamed they should so surprise him in that condition: for such
was his wary discretion, that he had rather have dyed, then give them any
knowledge of that real affection which he bare unto Diana: therefore to remove
all such suspicions, he enforced himself to show them a more contented face,
then his heart was; so as drying his eyes as well as he could, and seeming to
be doing something else: Oh Fair Shepherdesses, (said he unto them) how much am
I obliged unto you for diverting me From a melancholy mood. There is none of
us, answered Florice, who are not very glad to pleasure Sylvander in any thing,
and thinks not our walk well employed since we have met which such a courteous
Shepherd: and the rather (added Cercinea) because at the first we were afraid,
lest we should be a disturbance unto you: Oh never, answered Sylvander, it is
impossible but the presence of such Fair and Lovely Shepherdesses, should bring
me all manner of happiness and contentment: The posture in which we found you,
replied Palinice, made us doubt it: for every thing will trouble us, when we
are troubled our self: Sylvander now conceived that they saw those tears which
he would have concealed; and to drive them from any opinion that they proceeded
from any Love: It is very hard (Wise Shepherdesses, said he unto them) to keep
dry eyes, when the soul is pressed with any tormenting thoughts; for to
consider, that I know neither who was my Father nor Mother, no nor the ground
upon which I first breathed, nor to have any estate or fortune, or any hopes
but in my own industry: are not these thoughts enough to draw tears from the
heart of him who is in that miserable condition? Did I not say, replied
Dorinde, that they were not tears of Love? Though all my Companions would needs
persuade me to the contrary. Sylvander then looking upon her, and not knowing
her, but seeing her to be very Fair, and Lovely: Why Fair stranger, said he
unto her, can you discern tears of Love from others? Before you ask that
question, answered Dorinde, you should tell me, whether there be any such
things as tears of Love: Nay rather (replied the Shepherd) whether there be any
else but tears of Love. Why? said Dorinde, do you think one never cries but for
Love? I do not only think it, said Sylvander, but I am sure you will confess it
when I have made you understand it; That, said she, can never be, at the least
I am sure, that if one never cry but for Love, Dorinde never cried; your beauty
and your age, answered the Shepherd, will hardly excuse you from paying that
tribute, unless Love be contented, which make those only cry who do Love you.
If some must cry, replied she, I had rather the lot should fall upon any other
then my self: yet to return unto what we spoke of before; be assured Sylvander,
that if none ever cried but for Love, then never any man cried, for never any
man neither did, nor will, or can Love. This opinion, replied Sylvander, is
much worse then the first; and if you please to give me leave, it shall be the
first that I will make clear unto you. I am afraid; answered Dorinde, you will
but lose your labor, because I have had most certain experience of what I say,
against which no reasons, nor arguments, be they never so well framed, can
prevail or work any effect upon me. But perhaps, (answered Sylvander) when we
ha^^ examined your reasons and experiences by a true touchstone, you may be
convinced of your error, Upon which, she was so prepossessed with this
opinion, that she would needs turn the discourse upon some other subject: but
her Companions did almost force her to hear what Sylvander would say, and then
the Shepherd began thus.

Amongst all the Doctors in the Massilian Schools, I learned this lesson, never
to dispute with those that will deny Principles: Tell me therefore Fair
Shepherdess, whither you do believe that there is any such thing in the world
as is called Love. I do believe, answered she, that there is such a passion
which is called by that name, and which men are not capable of. We will not
meddle with that yet, said Sylvander, but I am contented that you do confess
there is such a passion which is called Love. Then tell me I beseech you, what
do you think this Love is? It is, said she, a certain desire to possess that
thing which one judges good and beautiful. There is not a Druide in all Gaul,
replied Sylvander, who could have given a better answer then this Fair
Shepherdess. But, continued he, and turned toward her, is there not in the
world some Animals that have reason, and some that have none? I have heard say,
answered Dorinde, that there are such. And in which of these two ranks, replied
Sylvander, will you place man? You put me to it, (said she and smiled) for I
cannot deny but that they are rational in some things, and not in others, and
most commonly without any reason at all. Yet is it not true, (added Sylvander)
that men do always seek after their delights and contentments? Of this,
answered Dorinde, there is no doubt: for there is not one of them but will lose
the best of their friends, rather then the least of their delights. I am
satisfied, replied Sylvander then, that you confess there is a Love, that this
Love is a desire of that which one thinks good or beautiful: and that men are
very earnest to accomplish their desires. Now it will be an easy matter to
prove unto you, that men do not only Love, but also, that they do Love better
then women. If what I have said, answered Dorinde presently, will help you to
prove what you say, I will unsay it again: and I had rather be reproached with
it, then such a false conclusion and consequence should be drawn from any thing
which came from me. All the company began to laugh at this answer, and desired
Sylvander to continue on, which he did in this manner.

There needs not many words, Fair Shepherdess, to decide the business: for it
must of necessity be concluded, that since men have such violent desires of
their contentment, and the will having nothing but a good for its object, or at
the least esteemed so, it follows by consequence, that Love being nothing but a
desire, as you have confessed, he does Love most, who has most objects of good
before his eyes; and the woman being much fairer and fuller of goodness then
man, who can deny but that a man Loves better then a woman, who has not so
worthy a subject to employ her desires upon? I do confess all, said Dorinde,
until you come unto the conclusion which you infer: you cannot, replied
Sylvander, unless you take away that advantage which women have above men, and
therefore it is better for you to confess, that there is none in all the world
that knows how to Love so well as man: yet if it happen that any judge the
contrary, it is not that the truth is so, but is like a straight staff, which
being put into the water, will seem crooked; and all that we see through a
glass, seems to be of the same color that the glass is: for the Meduim by
which the sight is conveyed, does represent it false to the eye: Even so it
comes to pass that the actions of a Lover are seen and judged otherwise then
indeed they are; and all by reason of some defect in the Medium, through which
they are seen. But the truth is, every man does Love, and this assertion is so
true, as one may boldly say, that all those who Love not, are not men; for
there was never any man that did not Love.

Though Sylvander was in no fit humor for any such discourse, yet he could not
but smile when Dorinde answered: and when he began to offer other more solid
reasons he was prevented by the coming of a great company of Shepherds and
Shepherdesses, who where all returning to their several homes, as well to dine,
as to pass away some hot hours of the day in the cool shade, and therefore he
desired those Fair Shepherdesses to give him leave to retire himself for that
time. They who were very desirous to hear him talk, and had a desire also to
rest themselves, especially Dorinde, they invited him to their Cabin; but he
excused himself, upon a promise, that when they pleased at any other time, he
would better explain himself upon this subject.

Upon this leaving them, Dorinde after she had considered well of him; I must
needs confess, said she, that if all the men of this Country were like unto
Sylvander, when I speak of my hatred unto all men in general, I must except
those who live about Lignon.

In the mean time, this great company ^rew near, and these four strangers
having no mind to engage with them, they retired themselves to their Cabins; so
likewise Sylvander, who desiring to shun all company: he was no sooner out of
sight, but he sat himself down under the first hedge he came to, and
entertained himself with his own new thoughts But his good Genius, who had the
care of his conduct, being not willing he should gangrene his wounds too much
by being alone, did conduct all this great company which he desired to shun,
unto the very same place where he was, and so opportunely, that when he began
his complaints, he was prevented by their coming; and some of them knowing him
by sight, did stay all the rest, to ask him whether he knew where the great
Druide was, or else where he was that used to judge causes in his absence. The
great Druide Adamas (answered Sylvander) is perhaps at his house, which is a
remote distance from hence, on the other side of the River Lignon, upon a
little hill, which you may see on your right hand as you go to the great City
of Marselles: but the Druide Cloridamantes is not far from hence, dwelling at
an ancient Palace, which is called Julius, after the name of him who conquered
Gaul. Then all the company entreated him to conduct them thither, to the end
they might have more speedy justice upon an injury which had been done unto all
the Shepherdesses of Lignon, and by one whom they had brought along with them.
Sylvander hearing this, and casting his eyes upon the Shepherdess that had been
wronged, also being much moved as well by her beauty and modesty, as by the
general offense, he thought himself obliged to conduct them, although he had a
great desire of staying alone, to complain against his misery and disaster. He
quitted therefore his shady bush, and went before them to show the way; having
an opinion that if he did otherwise, the Gods perhaps would punish him for the
offense which others had committed, since they had directed this company unto
him.

All the way as they went, this great company observed a very wary and strict
silence; which was no small contentment unto Sylvander, for by that means he
could both guide them, and entertain his own sad thoughts. When they were come
to the house, and Cloridamantes understood that they were persons who demanded
reparation of some injury which had been done; he came into the great Hall,
where he was wont to do Justice unto such as demanded it: and there entered, not
only all those whom Sylvander brought, but also many others who followed them,
only out of curiosity. Cloridamantes was no sooner entered into the Hall, and
seated upon his Tribunal, but an old Pastor, holding his wife, almost of the
same age, by the hand, began to speak thus unto him:

Most Reverend and most Just Father, you see here before your Tribunal, a
Father and a Mother extremely grieved and offended by a new way of Proceeding,
and by injuries committed against them and their only Daughter, all who come to
demand Justice of you: we have brought before you, the offenses, the offenders,
and the witnesses, that when the matter is heard, equity and right may be done
according to your custom, and wicked offenders punished according to their
merits.

The Druide then, with such a gravity as became a Judge, assured them that the
Scale of Justice should be held even betwixt both parties, offenses should be
punished, and right should be done unto them all: and to the end, continued he,
a more sound and just judgment may be given, make choice of one amongst you,
who is not interested in the business, who may let us understand your
difference, and afterward let each party alledg what they can for themselves.
Then the old Pastor turning himself toward those who came with him, to see who
amongst them was without interest, and knew all the particulars of the
difference: all the company cast their eyes upon a Shepherdess who came with
them: and because doubt was made whether being a woman the Druide would admit
of her; yes, yes, said Cloridamantes, truth is as good from the mouth of that
woman, as from any other, provided the parties interested, do acknowledge what
she says: and therefore if you think her able to inform us of the whole matter,
we will admit of her: for the innocence of her age and sex, will be a strong
argument and testimony of the truth. By the command therefore of the Druide,
and by the election of all parties, this woman began thus.

The History of Silvanire.
SInce it has pleased you, most Reverend Father, that I should relate unto you
the cause of our coming before you, I shall do it with as much truth as
possibly I can, or you can desire: and since you think a Person un-interested
is required to be the Relator, I cannot altogether say that I am such a one;
for I am a friend unto the parties who are most offended: and besides, I am
concerned in the general injury that is done unto all the Shepherdesses of this
Country: but withal I must tell you, that what interest soever I have, my
humor is not to lie, especially in this occasion, wherein is concerned the
life and honor of those whereof I am to speak; and since there is not a
Shepherd nor a Shepherdess in all the company, but can relate all the
particulars better then my self, I shall faithfully relate all I know: for from
my infancy I have been brought up with the young and Fair Silvanire, (said she
and pointed to a young Shepherdess which stood between an old Pastor and a
Shepherdess of the same age) and therefore I have been a witness to all the
passages of that Love, from the beginning until now, which is the cause of our
now coming before you: so that if you would know every circumstance which
relates unto that business, none can give you so exact account as my self.
After therefore a most solemn-protestation to speak the truth, I shall tell
you, Reverend Father, that near this place on the other side of the River of
Lignon, at the foot of that high and great Mountain, which is called Mount
Luna, is seated that Village where we inhabit, and amongst us is a very
venerable Pastor, whose name is Menander, (said she, and pointed to him) one
that is held of the best rank and reputation, both for his estate, and for his
wisdom: This sage Pastor being joined in marriage many years with Lerice, that
wise and discreet Shepherdess whom you see next unto him, they never had any
testimony of their mutual affection, but only that Fair and young Shepherdess,
whom I named before, and who stands now betwixt them. As soon as it pleased
Heaven to bestow her upon them, all their care was to see her educated in all
those virtues which beget esteem: and nature (whilst her Parents were careful
in the cultivating of her mind) did imbellish her body with as many graces and
beauties, as she was able to bestow: were she not in presence I should praise
her more: but so it is, that in the spring of her age, she grew unto that
height of perfections, that she attracted all eyes upon her, and swelled them
with admiration at her beauty.

One of Menanders next neighbors, and perhaps also one of his best friends,
was that Reverend old man, whom you see upon the other side of him, whose name
is Arion; a Pastor without reproach, and whose Ancestors have long with great
integrity, governed the small business of our Village. But I must tell you, and
I hope he will not be angry with me for saying it, that his Father was studious
to leave him more honor then estate: so that though he was well to live, yet
perhaps not so rich as some of his neighbors. Some two or three years before
Silvanire was born, Arion had that young Shepherd to his Son, who stands next
him, and whose name is Aglantes, whom he educated in all commendable qualities.
The friendship and good correspondency of the Fathers, the neerness of their
dwelling, the beauty of Silvanire, and the inclination, or rather the destiny
of Aglantes, made it a thing impossible for this young Shepherd to see her, and
not devote himself wholly unto her; and he courted her with a design so
innocent and harmless, that none could but think very well of it. Silvanire on
the other side, seeing her self served with so much submission, not knowing yet
what Love was, did entertain this Shepherd with such a childish sincerity, and
good will, that neither her Father nor Mother seemed to dis-approve of it: when
Aglantes attained to the age of twelve or thirteen years, and Silvanire unto
nine or ten, they always played in the fields together, and seldom were they
seen asunder: and when they returned home Menander and Lerice did make so much
of the little Aglantes, that he was more at their house, then at his Fathers.
All those that observed their actions and behavior, did admire them; the
extraordinary indulgence, and continual care of this young Shepherd, in
courting this Shepherdess, and her sweet modesty in intertaining him, was very
strange: If the Sheep of this young Shepherdess did at any time go astray, he
was never at rest till he had brought them back unto Silvanire: If she chanced
to lie longer in bed any morning then ordinary, he was so careful in enquiring
of her health, and in driving her Sheep with his own unto the pasture, that
none living could be more officious and careful: And when she came unto him, he
would give her an account, not only of what he had done, but also of every
thought, beseeching her to have a care of her health, and leave the care of her
flock unto him. One day, when he brought back a strayed Sheep unto her; Sweet
Aglantes, (said she unto him) which way can I requite all this pains you take
for me? By permitting me to serve you, answered the Shepherd. That payment is
easily made, answered she; but I fear such coin is not good enough to satisfy
so great a debt: I do esteem that permission which I ask at so high a rate,
said Aglantes; that if I do but obtain it, I shall think my self over paid,
not only for those services which I have already rendered, but also for all
those which I shall or can render: Why do you esteem that permission, continued
she, at such a rate? because, said he, my highest contentment, and my greatest
ambition, is all my life to be your servant. I see, answered she, that those
servants which my Father keeps, do ask other wages then that permission. Oh
Fairest Silvanire (answered he) they are not servants, but varlets, drudges, or
slaves: What difference do you put, said Silvanire, betwixt them and servants?
They, replied Aglantes, are mercenary, and serve for money or fear; but
servants, since all they do is out of Affection and Love; are most commonly,
and may rightly be called Lovers, who are fully contented, if their services be
but acceptable to them unto whom they are rendered. I do much wonder then,
answered the child, why my Father does not rather keep of these Lovers, then
others; Aglantes could not choose but smile at this simplicity: and though in
reason, his age should not make him more knowing in these things then
Silvanire; yet the freedom which is commonly used in talk of such things
amongst boys, more then amongst wenches, had made him better acquainted with
such things then she was: he smiled therefore, and answered thus: There is,
Fairest Silvanire, abundance of difference betwixt slaves and Lovers, not only
in that which I formerly said, but also, in that one may entertain as many
mercenary varlets as they please, but they must never entertain above one
Lover; and more then that, none but women can have them: So then, replied she,
since you are my Lover, must I not entertain any other? The truth is, answered
he, that unless you do me wrong, you must not. I shall never by my good will
wrong you, answered she with a strange innocence, but if it happen so that any
other should meet with one of these Lovers who is ill favored, and
dis-agreeable, can she never have any but him? Sweetheart, answered Aglantes,
you must know, that Shepherdesses are not constrained to entertain all the
Loves which present themselves; they have liberty to choose: but when they have
once made their choice, they cannot quit them without showing themselves,
either inconstant or weak in judgment; and both these reproaches, are shame
unto a discreet and wise woman. Then it seems, replied she, that if any of
those Lovers do offer themselves unto me, I may refuse them, by saying that I
have one already.

I do relate these trivial particulars, Reverend Father, to show you, at what
age Silvanire and Aglantes began to Love one another. For ever since that time,
this plant so grew, that whosoever offered to cut it up, was doubtless
punishable before the Throne of Love. But when Silvanire was grown a little
elder, and old enough to know the truth of these Queries which she put unto
Aglantes, she learned that every wise woman ought to obey those unto whom she
owed her being, and not to dispose of her self according to her own will,
farther then as they approved. And because this knowledge came a little too
late, because Love had already sowed such seeds, as had taken deep root in her
soul, and could not be pulled up without abundance of sorrow; she resolved,
since she could do not better, to feign that she was free in her captivity. And
though this dissimulation was a hard task, yet she showed her self to have a
very great power over her actions. Aglantes for four years together, lived in
such incertainty of her good will, that he could not say he ever received any
other testimonies, then such as might make him think that she held him in the
rank of common indifferency, such as she showed unto all: a most incredible
prudence, for a woman of her age, and certainly not to be parallelled.

At that time, I began to be familiar with this Fair and Wise Woman; and I must
confess that her virtue, her discretion, and her beauty, made me almost in Love
with her: and to my great happiness, I met with a mutual return; also I
believe, that upon this, she resolved to retire in appearance, from that good
will which as a child she had signified unto that Shepherd: so as by help of
this diversion she was able to be absent from him.

The cold usage wherewith she began to entertain Aglantes, went so to his
heart, that it almost struck him dead with wonder to see such an alteration:
and after he had filled all our solitary places, woods, and caves, full of his
complaints; an old Pastor came unto him when he was in a dark valley, and
thinking that none heard him, he broke out into a thousand sad complaints,
which might give knowledge unto this old and experienced Shepherd of his misery:
this old man, being long since a friend unto the Father of Aglantes, after he
had harkned a while unseen, he went unto him, and gave him a very sharp
reprehension, telling him he ought not to spend his precious time in such vain
thoughts, but rather in comforting his aged Father, and looking to his Flocks
and Family. That the Gods would punish him if he thus deceived the hopes which
every one had in him; that this enemy which kept him in such servitude, was to
be overcome by flying; that idleness was both the Mother, and the Nurse of
contempt and want; and repentance would be all the fruit he would gather from
it. But the young Shepherd being swelled with his pleasing passion, Father
answered he, I must needs confess that those who do Love a subject which does
not deserve it, ought to be blamed and reprehended; and those again who do not
Love that which is amiable, want judgment, and are ignorant: and therefore for
my part, I will cherish my affection; and when I cease, my life shall cease
with it. As for Arion, I hope he will help me to support my torment; I know
what filial duty belongs unto him, and I have ever found his Paternal affection
toward me: so as I hope that when he remembers how he himself has heretofore
passed through the same difficulties, he will consider mine: and as for you
Father, who shows so much good will in your sapient admonitions, I do beseech
and conjure you to assist me with all your aid and power. Aglantes, answered
the good old man, it is true I love you, and knowing how hard a thing it is for
a young heart to be rid of that passion which you resent, I wish you were free
from it, that you might avoid those evils which may fall upon you, and which I
see almost inevitable: but since you are resolved, hearken unto the counsel
that I will give. Does she whom you court deserve to be your wife? I know your
passion will make you tell me wonders of her merit; but for this time setting
aside all partiality, answer me if you can, like a judicious man, and
ingeniously tell me who she is, that I may out of my Love to Arion, to you, and
your Family, give you such sound counsel as may be good for you. Aglantes
knowing this old man to be a lover of him, and all his Family, did name
Silvanire. The good man, hearing her named, answered thus; I must confess
Aglantes, that if you have committed a fault in Loving, you are to be pardoned,
and your crime is commendable: I would yet farther know, whether you ever did
let that Fair one know that you Love her: I have spent all my time hitherto in
serving her, answered he; and to my misery, when she was not in an age to know
Love, she seemed as if she did know it, and Love me: but since she came to be
of age, she seems absolutely insensible: Perhaps, said the prudent old man, she
does it to try your constancy: Four years, answered Aglantes, is too long for a
trial; Does she not Love some other? (asked the old man) The question may
better be asked, said Aglantes, whether ever she turn her eyes upon her self:
Did you ever give her any cause, asked the Pastor, to alter her good will unto
you? Never that I know of, answered Aglantes. Then said the old man, believe it
from me, and assure your self, that you will not repent it; she Loves you, and
to dissemble it, according to the humor of most women, lest other should see
it, she will not make it appear unto you. I assure you, said Aglantes, that I
cannot accuse her of dissembling it; for she treats all others, as she does me,
and behaves her self toward all alike: So much the better (answered the old
man) for were she engaged unto any other, you would find much more difficulty
in your enterprise; but she does dissemble it, to make you the more
affectionate; knowing that things most hardly obtained, are most desired: Oh
Father, (said Aglantes, and interrupted) I fear that in this you are mistaken,
for she cannot wish me more affectionate, then she knew I was. Then (said the
old man) it is because her Father has commanded her so to do; and she being
wise and virtuous, will not disobey him: but be her reason what it will, I
would advise you to make a show as if you Loved some other; for by that, you
will know what her design is: she is extreme crafty if she dissemble it then;
and to tell you truly, women are sometimes tired with being too much loved: as
you see, there is none but loves light, but too much light dazles, and we are
often forced to put our hands before our eyes to ease them: I do believe (said
Aglantes) that this stratagem might be good in them that can act it; but I must
confess, it is impossible for me to do it: I should be ashamed that any should
think me of so little judgment, or that Silvanire should any way suspect my
fidelity. Oh young man (said the old one and smiled) you are a very novice in
the mystery of Love; the shame or the glory of him that attempts any thing, is
to effect it, or not effect it: and if a Lover can make himself loved, that is
all he desires or aims at. For my part, said Aglantes, my design is to Love
her: and, said the old man interrupting him, to be beloved: To be beloved,
replied Aglantes, is above all my hopes. Then Shepherd, said the Pastor, if you
cannot seem to Love another, I would advise you however, to let it be reported
so; for you must know, that these young women, though they show the contrary,
are not always affectionate, when they smile upon those that court them; but it
is more out of vanity, that it may be said their beauty has gotten such a
number of servants, and sometimes out of envy at their companions; but be it
what it will, it is still very good for him that Loves, to put them into some
doubts: and if you be not so hardy as to undertake this enterprise, leave the
pain of it unto me; and I will effect it for you: it will be sufficient for
your discharge, that when it is a fit time to make known your real affection,
to say that you are not accessory unto the stratagem.

The wise old man made it presently be rumoured abroad that Aglantes was
changed in his affection; and every one was apt to believe it, because
Silvanire was so cold toward Aglantes. But though Silina a Fair and Virtuous
Shepherdess, and Daughter to this old Pastor, was reported to be his Mistress,
and that the marriage was ready to be solemnized; yet Silvanire would never
believe it. It Is true, it did a little trouble her, but not so much as to make
her alter her behavior toward Aglantes: for Menander her Father had a design
to marry her unto Theaner one of the richest Shepherds in all our Village; and
though she did scarce know him whom they would have her to marry, yet was she
resolved to follow the will of Menander. One day, I chanced to surprise her, as
she was saying aloud unto her self, that he could not change, though he feigned
the contrary. Silvanire was a little astonished to see her self surprised as
she was saying so: but seeming as if what she had said, was not any thing that
concerned her, but only a part of some song which she had heard some other
sing, she continued talking upon several other subjects: but as cunning as she
was, I suspected that she was troubled at the report of the marriage of
Aglantes: And by fortune, as if that Shepherd came purposely to answer for his
own innocence, we saw him afar off coming with a sheep before him; as soon as
Silvanire saw him, she knew the Sheep; Yonder (said she) is the man that is to
be married, who it seems thinks very little upon it; for yonder sheep which you
see, is the same which I lost this morning. It will be very hard for him,
answered I, not to have Silvanire always in his memory: But, continued I, what
do you conceive of that marriage? You must ask him that question, answered she.
But replied I, what do you think of it? I believe (said she) that he never yet
thought upon it, and that he is too young to think of it yet this long time.
When I would have replied, Aglantes came to us, who presenting the Sheep unto
Silvanire, told her where he found it, what mischance it had, and what great
care he had of it: The Shepherdess thanked him kindly, but yet with such a
modesty as might be called coldness in any but Silvanire: And because I saw
Aglantes was a little astonished at it, though he was sufficiently accustomed
to such usage, to let him understand why my companion used him so, I said unto
him, Have you any mind Aglantes, or any permission to serve any other then
Silina? Silina? said he, and stood amazed, why should she pretend more unto my
service then any other Shepherdess? Because, answered I, you are ere long to
marry her; Do you think to carry it so secretly that we must not know of it?
No, no, said he, assure your self that my wise is yet unborn: Silvanire could
not choose but laugh, and ask him why? Because, said he, she whom I would have,
my own small merits makes me receive a denial; and she who perhaps I may have,
my heart forbids the Banes. But I hope, said I, that when she is born we may
know her, and tell us in the mean time (I beseech you) what kind of creature
must she be that pleases you? If Silvanire do command me, answered he, I will
tell you. I am very willing (said Silvanire) that you satisfy my friends
curiosity. Know then Fossinde (said he, and addressed himself unto me, for that
is my name) that she must resemble Silvanire in all things; and assure your
self, that if she differ from her in any thing, she shall never be mine. Yet
Aglantes (said I unto him) let me tell you that Silina is a very handsome
woman, but she does not at all resemble her: I confess, replied he, that she is
handsome, and has no resemblance of Silvanire, and therefore I have nothing to
say unto her: How? said I, will you not marry Silina? No, no, said he faintly,
Silina deserves better then me, but yet though Silina were Galathea, and would
have me, yet I would have none of her: But suppose she did resemble Silvanire,
and were Galathea, said I, would you refuse her? Though she did resemble
Silvanire, said he, yet being Galathea, I swear by the sacred Misleto, I would
not have her.

Whilst we were thus talking, my companion made a show as if she minded nothing
but the found sheep, yet I observed that she hearkened very attentively unto us,
which made me afterward look a little more narrowly into all her actions; so
as within a few days after, I came to know, that though she made it not appear,
yet she did love him: And truly I cannot but admire the wisdom of this young
Shepherdess, who at such a tender age had such an absolute power over her own
will.

At the same time Tirintes returned into our Village, he is the Shepherd that
is brought before you as a Delinquent, and against whom, sage Clorimantes, all
this company demands justice: I say, he returned into our Town: for though he
was from thence originally, yet was he educated and lived upon the confines of
Furan: his Father sent for him home, and as we all know, very unluckily. When
this Shepherd was amongst us, he no sooner saw Silvanire, but he fell in love
with her, and that so passionately, that many thought him in danger to imitate
Adrastes.

Silvanire on the other side, whose resolution was upon exact obedience unto
her Father, and had no inclination unto any but Aglantes, though she showed it
not, she did dis-intangle her self from the addresses of Tirintes with as much
discretion as possible she could; and though she carried a very great
indifferency both toward him, and toward Aglantes, and all the rest of the
Shepherds who courted her, which was no small number, yet his passion did from
day to day so augment, that he resolved, since he could not live in her favor,
not to live at all. That Shepherd, oh sage Druide, whom you see before you, and
whose name is Alciron, he was always a great lover of Tirintes either by
reason of cons^nguinity, or rather, as I believe, out of that drawing sympathy
which makes us love or hate one another: He seeing his friend so unprofitably
spend his time and labor in the courtship of this fair and wise Shepherdess,
he used the best arguments his Wit would afford him, to dissuade him from it;
and at this time finding him in such a desperate humor, also see^ng no hopes
of his cure, he resolved upon one of the boldest pieces of wickedness that can
be imagined.

Tirintes had that day driven his Flock almost upon the tip of Mount Luna, as
well because he would be out of sight, as to have the more cool Air for his
sheep; and perhaps this last reason made Alciron to go thither a little before;
Tirintes not seeing him, sits down under a Fir Tree, seemed for a while to be
immovable, his eyes fixed upon some certain Rocks which were close by; and at
last fetching a most deep sigh, Alciron heard him utter many sad complaints
against the obduracy of his Mistress, comparing her unto those Rocks, and his
eyes flowing with tears.

As soon as he had ended his sad complaints, it was not long before Alciron
would needs help him to condole: oh my dear Tirintes (said he unto him) how
long will this most lamentable life last? Are you not weary with shedding such
Rivers of Tears, and raising so many winds of unprofitable sighs? Do you not
know how all your labor and pains is unfruitly lost? Is not Hope it self
(which seldom leaves a Lover) quite vanished? Is it possible that with the loss
of thy liberty, thou should also lose the use of thy reason? If thou have thy
wits, when will thou make use of them? Must they be always unprofitably idle?
Do thou think any service will ever oblige yonder Shepherdess? Will any Tears
mollify her? Will any pains move her? Or will any Affection or faithful
obstinacy win her? Oh Tirintes, if thou art in that error, how grossly art thou
mistaken? She is deaf, and absolutely insensible to all manner of prayers, or
services, or tears: She is stark blind, Man land cannot see any of those pains
and passions which thou do endure for her; and what can thou ever expect in
any reason from such a deaf and blind soul, but that she should neither hear,
nor see, nor resent any thing? Oh ye Gods! replied Tirintes, what would ye have
me to do? Command me what you please, I am here ready to obey you in all, but
only in bidding me cease to love her. In this, I beseech you pardon me if I
disobey; for the fault is not mine, but that all-commanding Beauty which I have
not power to resist.

He had long continued his complaints, if Alciron, who could not endure to see
his friend in such torment, had not interrupted him, with intentions to give
some comfort. The Gods Tirintes (said he unto him) do know our weakness and
imperfections, and out of their infinite goodness, will excuse and pardon them:
But they will not endure the crime of those who will make them guilty of their
own errors: Therefore, dear friend, Do not by any such blasphemies provoke
their just anger against thee. Oh my dear friend, replied Tirintes with a deep
sigh, since they do know our imbecilities and imperfections, and will pardon
them, doubtless they will not impute that crime for which you reprehend me, for
it is weakness only which makes me commit it; protesting, that my intention was
not to transgress their commandment, but when I could not obey them. And to
make it appear that it is so, good Alciron tell me, who is he that can love
such a most amiable piece less then I do? And in loving her so passionately,
who can blaspheme less then I, if it be blasphemy to say that I cannot choose
but love her? Oh Tirintes, replied Alciron, Do not flatter thy self in thine
own fault, for this passion which you say is so potent in thee, is indeed only
thy own Will, which if thou would surmount, thou have power enough to do it.
I do confess (said Tirintes coldly) that it does depend upon my own will: But
do you not see that I cannot will any thing but what she please? So then it
seems said Alciron, you will cease to be a man, that you may become a Lover. If
being a man, said Tirintes, be not to love Silvanire, I neither am, nor will be
a man. Not to make use of Reason, replied Alciron, is not to be a man; and can
there be any thing more unreasonable then to cease loving ones self, to love
another? Is not self preservation the great and principal law of Nature? Oh
dear friend, said Tirintes, let me not see the greatness of my wound; I hope it
is not incurable: but you take the course to make it more desperate: But the
stone is thrown, it is resolved upon, that I will die in loving Silvanire; and
be assured, that I wish for nothing now, but to end this life quickly; for here
I hope for no mitigation of my pain. And I conjure you Alciron to promise, that
when I am dead, you write this Epitaph upon my Tomb, Here lies he that was
murdered by the Fairest Eyes under Heaven: I hope, that one day this cruel Fair
One, will in these few words read my affection, and her own cruelty, and the
Gods to my satisfaction move her unto some repentance. Oh how happy should I
be, if in the other life I hear one say that her Fair Eyes was once wet, or
that one single tear did trickle down her Fair Cheek: Fie, fie, Tirintes, said
Alciron, why this talk of death and Tombs? Love is the God of life, and nothing
can ruin his empire but death: Live, live man, though it were for nothing but
to preserve a faithful Lover for this Silvanire whom you Love so well: and for
my part, I will promise you, that if you will follow my directions, and do as I
bid you, I will quickly give this Fair One unto you. Oh Alciron, said Tirintes,
impossible promises never oblige those unto whom they are made; this which I do
promise, replied Alciron, is no impossibility, provided you will but do as I
say: then he continued thus.

Tirintes (said he) I desire as much as I do my own life, to see you rid of
this tormenting passion; but since I see all persuasions are in vain, I promise
to give you this woman, in a very short time; she shall be so much your own,
that it shall be long only of your self, it you do not dispose of her according
to your own will: do not think it a thing impossible, for you shall presently
find it effected, and confess that I never promised, but I performed. In order
to this, within a few days after, he came unto him again, and brought him a
Mirror, in which he forbad him to look; and assured him, that if by any
artifice he could so contrive it as Silvanire might cast her eye upon it,
certainly she were his own, How? said Tirintes, is it an enchantment? No,
answered Alciron, but it is a natural power, which is in this glass; and what
effects will it cause? asked Tirintes. Nay, nay, said Alciron, be not too
inquisitive; be contented she shall be yours. And what? said Tirintes, will she
Love me? Still too much curiosity, answered Alciron, can you not be contented
that she shall be yours? But Tirintes, take special heed that neither you nor
any other whomsoever, look into it; for the consequence will be very bad: and
if you should before you are aware, cast your eye upon it, come presently unto
me, that I may remedy the fault which you shall commit.

Tirintes took this Mirror with much contentment and thanks, and to lose no
time, went presently unto Silvanire, unto whom he presented the glass with many
supplications she would be pleased to take it. And because she made some
question whether she should receive it from him; as thinking it not handsome,
for any maid to take any thing from a young Shepherd, without the knowledge of
her Parents, he pressed her with so many humble entreaties, and arguments of
persuasion; that at last, she would give him that satisfaction; but upon
condition, that she would keep it no longer then she pleased. So after she had
looked in it, and much commended it, she gave it him presently back: he who saw
his design was attained, he pressed her no farther, but was well satisfied that
he had done as Alciron appointed him: but his contentment lasted but a while;
for presently after, Silvanire was taken with such a giddiness in her head, and
such a drowsiness, that she fell a sleep, and they could not awake her, she was
troubled above three hours in this manner, and none knew her disease.

The noise presently ran about the Town, that this Fair One was poisoned, and
no hopes of life left in her: you may imagine that Aglantes and Tirintes did
run with sad hearts to see what the matter was: but as soon as Tirintes saw her
in that condition, he knew it to be an effect of the Mirror, which made him so
extremely angry against Alciron, that had he met him, doubtless he had dyed for
it. This villain (said he to himself) designed her death, to deliver me from
the affection which I bare unto her: but cruel wretch that he is, he never
considered that my life depended upon hers, and that when she dies, it is
impossible for me to live: O thou most inhumane Tiger! Could thou find a
heart to hurt this Fair One? Who never thought thee the least hurt? Certainly,
the blackest fiend in Hell was thy Nurse and gave thee suck: but Barbarian,
thou shall receive a death by no other hand but my own: Oh Tirintes, Tirintes!
Can thou know who did this damned act, and live or breath without revenge?

This Shepherd in this mind, went as fast as ever he could to seek Alciron,
transported with so much fury, that had he met him, he had never told who hurt
him: In the mean time Silvanire grew worse and worse, and none looked for any
thing but death. Amongst those that were in the Chamber, and who, sadly
resented this loss, was the sad Aglantes, whose grief was so great, that he
swooned almost as soon as she. Menander also and Lerice, whose hopes and
comfort was in this Fair Daughter, seeing her in this sad condition, they
repented that they had lived so long, and accused the Gods of cruelty, in
bestowing so many rare endowments upon Silvanire, and depriving them of her so
soon; all eyes that saw her in this state, were turned into tears in such
abundance, that nothing could be heard but sighs, groans, and great
lamentations. At the last, she being in extreme agony, and not looking to live,
she forced her self to speak thus unto her Father and Mother, who stood sighing
and sobbing by her bed side.

Father, said she, I am afraid, lest the Gods should be offended at your
excessive sorrow for my death; you know better then I call tell you, that life
is not more natural then death; and those who begin to live, begin it with a
condition to dye: why then should you be sorry, that I am now ready to pay that
debt, which all humanes are obliged to pay unto death? Perhaps you are sorry
the Fatal Sisters have spun the thread of my life no longer, and your good
nature makes you desire, that as you preceded me in life, so you might in
death: But Oh my dear Father, consider how good and wise the Gods are; who
foreseeing the miserable condition of a young woman that is deprived of Father
and Mother, they would not leave me in this wicked world without a guide: if
you do but consider this favor which they do me, you will acknowledge it to be
the greatest they ever gave me. But perhaps you will complain, that having
taken so much care, and bestowed so much cost in my education, I should now be
taken from you, when I am best able to render you those services which I ow. I
must confess, that if any consideration can move me to desire longer life, it
is this; for it is a kind of ingratitude not to desire the payment of that debt
which I ow: at this word, her pain forced her to stop, and recover a little
strength, and she gave leisure unto all that heard her, to admire her wisdom
and courage, thinking her to resemble a Candle, which gives greatest light at
the last end: this consideration forced so many sighs and tears, from all that
heard and saw her, as they were not able to speak; so as when she had
recollected a little strength, she spoke again unto Menander and Lerice in this
manner.

I have many things to say, but my end which I perceive approaches, does
hinder me; only I beseech you both, my dear Father and Mother, to conform your
selves unto the divine will of God: and assure your selves, that I should
depart from hence more contentedly then ever I lived, were I but eased of two
burdens, which extremely oppress me. Menander then forcing himself to speak,
discharge your heart my dearest child (said he unto her) and assure your self,
that as never Father had a better child then I, so never child had a Father who
loved her more then I do you. This permission (said Silvanire) is the only
thing that can make me leave this life with contentment; which since you are
pleased to allow, I shall tell you Father and Mother also, that I was extremely
troubled, having received so many favors and benefits from your goodness, and
having been hitherto so unhappy in my return of that service which I ow unto
you both, as I shall grieve in my very soul if your good natures does not make
it appear, that you accept my good will, and desires, in recompense of so many
infinite services which I ow. Then Menander kissed her, and with flowing eyes
said, your good desires, sweet child, are accepted far above the duty or
service which you ow: great God be praised, said she, but alas, d^^e I
discharge my self wholly? Indeed best Father and Mother, I want courage, and
must ask a new permission, or else I cannot. Lerice and Menander also, and all
that heard her, could not forbear their sighs to see her pain, and their
admiration to hear her speak, even when every one judged her to be at the last
gasp; all that were about the bed pressed Menander to give her a speedy
permission, which he freely did, and then Silvanire fetched a deep sigh, and
lifting her eyes up to Heaven to show her extreme contentment, and forced her
self to utter these weak words.

You have both of you so often taught me, that ingratitude is the most
detestable vice amongst humanes, as I think the Gods would never forgive me, if
I presented my self before them, stained with that horrid sin. Therefore I
cannot hide the extreme contentment which this your permission brings me; since
by it, I may not only wash away the crime, but also the thought that I was
guilty of it. Then taking a little breath, and striving against the violence of
her disease, she continued thus: You see (said she and pointed at Aglantes)
that Shepherd who stands at my beds-feet, and who seems to resent my sickness
so sadly, be pleased most dear Father and Mother, to know, that ever since the
infancy of our days, he has had so great affection to me, that perhaps not any
about the River of Lignon, can equal him, and yet all this while, I do protest,
I never could observe in him, the least action or word that could offend the
most modest maid upon earth; but the great Gods who know my actions, my words,
and my most secret thoughts, are my witnesses and judges, whether in all this
time I ever let this Shepherd know that his amity and affection was pleasing
unto me. And yet Aglantes do not think that any scorn was the cause of it, for
I know you deserve better then what you desire: but it was only the duty of a
maid, as I am, which constrained me to use you so.

Upon this word, feeling her self extremely in pain; Oh death! (said she with a
deep sigh) I beseech thee stay a little longer, and give me leisure to end that
discourse which I began. Then taking a little breath; Oh Aglantes, said she,
though I have been brought up in these Woods, and amongst wild Rocks, yet am I
not so insensible as they: your Virtue, your Love, and your Discretion, did
work that effect in me which you desired; but knowing that my Father had a
design to (...) me otherwise then with you, and being resolved never to
dis-obey my Parents, I resolved also never to let you know that good will which
I wished unto you* and from hence proceeds all those incivilities, and
discourtesies which you have erceived from me. But now, since the Gods, who are
all goodness and wisdom, have by my death untied those knots which tied my
tongue, as since those who have the power over me, do give me leave: Know
friend, that never was any greater affection conceived in the heart of any
human, then the affection which Silvanire does bear unto you. And that I may be
clearly purged from that ingratitude, wherewith I might be charged, give me a
little farther leave, Oh my most dear Parents; which they permitting, and she
thanking them; she hasted to utter these words: Alas! (said she) I can do no
more. Then holding out her hand unto the Shepherd, she said unto him; here
Aglantes, ^ake my hand and my heart, in assurance that though I cannot live the
Wife of Aglantes, yet I will die the Wife of Aglantes; and as the last favor I
shall ever ask, or you give, O most honored Parents, I beseech you consent
unto it.

The Father who had another design, would not have been so forward if he had
thought she would have lived; but thinking her even dead, he thought it good to
let her die contentedly: and indeed he had no sooner consented, but she turning
her head gently toward her Shepherd: Oh Gods! (said she) I die, but Aglantes I
die thine: Upon this word she grew speechless, and lay as dead in the arms of
Menander and Lerice. To relate here all the lamentations and cries of the
Father and Mother, and principally of Aglantes, I conceive it not pertinent;
for it will easily be imagined they were extreme: but so it was, that they were
forced to take them often her, even by plain force, and carry them away, for
grief did enrage Aglantes: and to remove the occasion of so much sorrow, they
intended to bury her out of hand, without any Pomp or Solemnity; and had
according to the custom embalmed her, had not Alciron prevented them, who told
them that it was not humane to bury people, especially of her quality, before
they were quite dead, at the least quite cold: so as upon this, they left her
without pulling off her clothes, in this sad condition.

Tirintes on the other side, he was in raging quest of Alciron, that he might
open his breast, and pull out his heart, and so ^e revenged for the wrong he had
done him; and afterward with the same sword, sacrifice himself upon the Tomb
of this Fair One. And doubtless if he had met him, he had done so, though he
was the greatest friend he had: but the Prudent Alciron, he went to him in bed,
because he feared the anger which Tirintes might conceive against him. At the
first when Tirintes saw him enter, he roused out of bed to run upon him; but
Alciron holding the door half open half shut; Tirintes said he unto him, can
you possibly imagine, that he who loves you the best of all the world, should
ever deprive you of that which you hold most dear? And yet cruel Tiger, said
Tirintes, and interrupted him, the Fair Silvanire is dead. Silvanire, replied
Alciron, is alive, and I will die the most cruel death your rage can invent, if
I do not put her into your hands alive, and well, within this hour, if you will
let me go where she is. Tirintes all amazed at this, is not Silvanire dead?
said he, and did not you cause her to be let in the room by her self? It is
true (answered Alciron and smiled) but she is left there for you; Oh good Gods!
Alciron (said Tirintes) Silvanire to be dead, and to be for me are two things
that cannot hold together. I confess, replied Alciron, that they cannot; but to
be alive, and be yours may: Surely, said Tirintes, you do deceive me: why
should I deceive you (said Alciron) or indeed how can I, when I offer, if you
will go with me, to put her into your hands alive and well the same hour? And
if it were otherwise, why should I come unto you? You see I do not shun you,
nor fear meeting with you. Come, come, set your mind at rest; dress your self,
and come with me, and you shall presently see what I say punctually performed.
But prithee tell me, said Tirintes, and shrugged his shoulders, can you fetch
souls back after they be once wasted over the Stigian Lake? Will Charon suffer
that? No, no, I cannot (answered Alciron) but Tirintes know most assuredly that
Silvanire is not dead, but by a secret virtue of nature, which is in that glass
which you had of me, she is so stupefied, that every one thinks her so. Oh
Heavens, cried out Tirintes, what wonders do you tell me? I tell you nothing
but truth (replied Alciron) and to satisfy your wonder, and perplexity, know
Tirintes, that the glass is made of a Stone, called the Memphitique Stone,
which has a virtue to stupifie the senses so extremely, that as soon as it is
touched by the eye, it presently takes away the understanding: And unto this
Stone is added some of the bones of a Fish, which is called the Torpedo,
extracted by such art, and concocted together, that as the Torpedo benums the
arm of the Fisher, when it touches the hook that is fastened to the line; so
also as soon as the eyes are touched by this glass, they receive a poison so
subtle, that first seizing upon the brain, it dilates a general stupifaction
all over the body, as every one would think it dead. Now Tirintes, judge
whether I have not reason to complain against you, who ever found my extreme
affection flowing toward you; and yet can think I would offer such a mortal
displeasure: what advantage could you imagine I could draw from the death of
this woman? If it be so, said Tirintes, and went nearer him, you were to blame
Shepherd in that you did not acquaint me with it: By that, replied Alciron, you
may better know that I do love you; for did I not know Shepherd, that thou
neither would nor could live after thou were deprived of Silvanire, and
could thou hope ever that thy services or thy merits could gain her? I know,
that having but that only remedy, thou would never have used it, if I had
acquainted thee with all the effects of it: consider seriously with your self,
and answer me; should I have told you, that as soon as ever Silvanire did look
in the glass, she would fall into such extremity of pain, as she would fall
down like dead, and being so judged by all that see her, they will embowel her,
and put her into her grave: answer me I say Tirintes, durst you have executed
such an enterprise upon her? No, no, I know what power a person that loves
has, to make any such attempts upon the party Loved.

Tirintes hearing this, and knowing that Silvanire was not dead, he held out
his arms, and went to embrace Alciron, with such abundance of contentment, that
he was almost speechless; but recovering himself, he asked a hundred pardons
for the anger which he had conceived against him: and dressing himself as fast
as ever he could, he beseeched him to conduct him unto the room where Silvanire
rested, to the end that she who was the life of his soul, might not remain any
longer in the lodgings of death. But dear friend, continued Tirintes, by the
way as they went, when Silvanire is taken out of the vault, (for you must
understand that they had carried her out of the Town into one) How do you mean
she shall be mine? Yours? answered Alciron, who will take her from you? Does
not every one think her dead? And when she is in your hands, who will ask her
of you? Oh Tirintes, Tirintes! learn how to make use of the time present, as
well as I do: and if you do not, blame not me, but your self. With such
discourse as this they came to the place where the Vault was; where the stone
being presently taken away, Silvanire was found in the same condition they left
her, at which Tirintes was extremely ast^nished for all the assurances of life
which Alciron gave him. But to see the wonderful qualities and effects of some
things which Nature does produce; as soon as ever Alciron threw a little water
which he had in a little Bottle, into her face, and rubbed her pulse and
temples, she showed some signs of Life; she began to breath, and presently
after she perfectly waked. Then said Alciron unto Tirintes; Here Friend, I give
you Silvanire, I have performed my promise, and make use of your Fortune and
opportunity: Upon this he left them alone together, as thinking that he had no
more to do with them.

But Silvanire opening her eyes, and finding her self in that place, and at
that time, for it was hardly day, she was the most astonished woman in the
world; for she remembered all that had passed very well: but she could not
imagine how she should come out of the Tomb: so as remaining a while in her
astonishment, and seeing none by her but Tirintes; Shepherd (said she unto him)
I pray tell me what miracles are these? Fairest Silvanire, said he, I can tell
you no more, but that they are the ordinary effects of your Beauty. But
Tirintes, replied she, have not I been dead? and, am I not now alive? You are
not only alive, replied he, but can give life unto whom you please. If I was
dead, added Silvanire, how came I to be alive again? who was able to bring me
back from the Stygian Lake? One that is so fair as Silvanire, answered the
Shepherd, cannot stay in so foul a place. This is flattery, said the
Shepherdess, but pray Tirintes tell me seriously, was I not dead? and am I not
now alive? Dead you never were I am sure since I knew you, said Tirintes, for
you were always alive in my heart. The truth is, the affection of Tirintes
unto you is such, that when death was ready to triumph over you, I changed
death into sleep, and afterward, that sleep into the condition wherein now you
are. Your affection replied Silvanire, changed my death into sleep, and that
sleep into the condition I now am in? How could you do it? For my part I must
confess I do not understand it.

Tirintes who had no mind to stay any longer in that place, lest he should be
found by some who might mar all the plot before him, he thought it best to deal
plainly, and tell her truly the whole passage. Know therefore Silvanire (said
he) that to satisfy your curiosity, after I had loved, served, and adored you
with infinite devotion, and found all to be in vain, I had recourse unto Art.
Do you remember a Glass which I beseeched you to take from my hand? I do
remember it very well answered she, for I never had my health since. That
Glass, said Tirintes, was of such a composition, that as soon as any did look
in it, they were presently surprised with such a stupifaction and lethargy,
that they would seem to be dead: The same operation it had upon you; and they
laid you in this Vault, from whence I now come to take you out. Oh Heavens!
cried out Silvanire, How dangerous all men are? But what was your design in so
doing? My design was, answered he, to do as I did, that is, to make all believe
that you were dead, and afterward to live the rest of our days together in
some place where none might trouble us. Oh Tirintes said she, and shook her
head, could you ever imagine I would consent unto it? I thought (said he) that
an obstinate service might surmount your obstinate rigor. Service (answered
she) which is not pleasing, is always in vain. Love, replied he, did put me
into that hope. Love, answered she, is never the Author of such Treason; and
that you may find the truth of what I say, Love will so punish your treason,
that you have quite lost all the hopes of my being ever yours; you are much
mistaken Shepherd in your designs, for Silvanire is not her own to dispose of
if she would. How, said Tirintes, not Silvanire her own, unto whom is she
given? She is his, replied the Shepherdess, unto whom you have given her, which
is, unto Aglantes. Who I? replied Tirintes, Did I ever give you unto Aglantes?
Yes, answered Silvanire, Tirintes did give me unto Aglantes: Hearken and I will
tell you how: Menander and Lerice my parents, did intend to marry me unto the
Shepherd Theantes: And the truth is, by my good will I would never marry any
but Aglantes; Death is more welcome to me a thousand times, then to be the wife
of any other: yet I was so fully resolved never to fail in my duty to my
Parents, that Aglantes, nor any other, should never make me fail in my
obedience to them. Now being in this extremity of pain, your artifice did
obtain that for me, which otherwise I never durst ask; The poison in your glass
proved my happiness: So as when every one did think me dead, Love did inspire
me to ask my Parents consent to bestow my self upon Aglantes, in gratitude and
reward of his long and faithful services: They seeing me in great pain, did
give me free leave to dispose of my self; upon which I took Aglantes by the
hand, and declared my self to be his wife: Therefore Tirintes, your hopes are
all blasted, and it is in vain for you to attempt any further. Come, come (said
Tirintes in a great rage) Menander, Lerice, and Aglantes also are dead unto
you, as you are to them. Upon this he offered to take her by the arm, and carry
her away: But the Shepherdess with a greater confidence then the place could
allow her, did stoutly defend her self against his violence; sometimes by
persuasions, otherwhiles opposing force against force, and sometimes flying. But
she seeing him past all respect, and that her flight and resistance was in
vain, she was constrained to cry out: As Fortune was, Aglantes came in upon her
voice, who (as I understood since) was looking for the Tomb of that
Shepherdess, that he might there end his days: When he saw her first, he had an
opinion that it was some delusion of his Fancy; but afterward, knowing him to
be Tirintes, and hearing her voice, he knew that she was alive whom he thought
to be dead: and fell into such an extreme passion, that he fell furiously upon
Tirintes; so doubtless one of them had ended his days, (for they were both
extremely incensed) had not a great number of Shepherds come in and parted
them; and who seizing upon the miserable Tirintes, brought him hither before
you, oh sage Cloridamantes, to be punished according to the quality of his
offense.

But all these that came in the company, did not come upon the same cause; for
the joy and contentment of Menander, Lerice, and Aglantes was so great, that
they would willingly have forgotten the injury, or at the least would have
disdained all revenge. But their coming is to have judgment upon another
difference which has happened since.

Be pleased to know therefore, oh Reverend Father, That this great Tumult being
appeased, and Tirintes in the hands of those who have brought him hither,
Aglantes full of joy to see the fair Silvanire risen from the dead, or to say
better, born again, addressing himself unto Menander and Lerice, he besought
them both that they would be pleased to consummate his happiness by a
conclusion of this so much desired marriage, as thinking that the delay of such
a happy union could not be profitable unto any. Menander at the first stood a
while mute, seeming as if he heard not; but Aglantes seconding his first desire
with most earnest supplications, he took notice that Menander walking about the
room with his hands behind him, he muttered so as none could understand him, or
as if he was deaf on that ear; but he went shaking his head, as it is usual for
one to do that would deny a request. This silence and this action did
exceedingly surprise Aglantes; for he thought his marriage so sure, that when
he saw the old man make a doubt of it, he first grew pale, and afterward was
taken with an extreme trembling. Many of the Shepherds that were in the room
wondering at the silence of Menander, and his way of proceeding, they drew
nearer, and seeing Aglantes in that condition, to wit, almost beside himself,
they feared that if Menander did not keep his word, some fatal accident would
befall his house; therefore gathering about him, they beseeched him not to
trouble their great joys, by such an alteration as appeared to be in him: But
Menander not so much as giving them a look, he walked still on, and held his
eyes fixed upon the ground. Friends (said he unto them at last) New matters,
new resolutions. How, replied Aglantes, New matters, new resolutions? What do
you mean by that? My menning is, replied Menander, That when I promised my
daughter unto yon, I thought her dead, and so I am contented she should be
yours; But now, since (thanks be to heaven) she is alive, I mean to dispose of
her another way. Menander (answered Aglantes) you have already given your
Daughter unto me, her Mother consents unto it, and Silvanire would have it so:
I have accordingly taken her, I conceive her to be mine, and none can take her
from me, but they must take away my life also. Your life (replied Menander) is
nothing unto me; but my Daughter is my own, and none can take her from me; you
cannot pretend unto her by virtue of my promise; for if promises oblige,
Theantes may better claim her as his, because I made a promise unto him long
before any to you: Therefore Aglantes, if you have a mind to marry, you may do
well to look for a wise somwhere else. Oh ye good Gods (cried out Aglantes,
stamping his foot against the ground, and striking his hands together) Oh
heavens! oh Earth! is there any Justice amongst men? Is it not beyond the
bounds of any patience to endure so great a wrong.

All the Shepherds who heard them talk thus, fearing (and with reason) some
great disaster if this dispute went any further, they gathered themselves
together, and were of opinion that the best course was to present themselves
before you, and receive such judgment as in your prudence you should think
most fit in such a case. It was not without much ado that they consented unto
it; for Menander thought it an undervaluing himself and his daughter; and
Aglantes could not endure a thing so justly his due, should be so much as
disputed, or put unto the arbitriment of men: yet at last, by the mediation of
friends and kindred, they were persuaded to submit unto whatsoever should be
ordained by you.

Fossinde had no sooner ended, but Menander transported with rage, and not
staying till the Druide gave him permission to speak; he stood up, and in a
loud voice began thus: I do demand Justice, Oh sage Cloridamantes, against the
insolency of this age; which would take away from a Father, that power which
nature has given him over his child: I do conjure you to maintain, that which
all Laws ordains, all customs observe, and all the world approves of: I demand
no novelties, since from the beginning of time, Fathers have used to dispose of
their own children: I require nothing but what is just, since nothing is more
equitable then for every one to be the Master and Lord of his own workmanship:
and I require nothing but what is according to natural sense and reason, since
it is reasonable, that those whom a grave experience has preferred above
others, should be believed and obeyed, in what they advise and appoint. The
whole dispute rests upon this single point, whether a Father may not dispose of
his child as he will: If the negative, then I have lost my cause; but then I
would advise all Fathers, never to care for having any children, nor to trouble
themselves with giving any education unto them, since they are not their
children, but their companions nay, their Masters; if the Proverb be true,
which says, Have a Companion, and have a Master. Then will the Father, who is
Lord Paramont in his little Republique, be outed of his Dominion by him whom he
bred in his own bosom; Oh most depraved age! I have seen the time when if a
child had in the least circumstance dis-obeyed the command of a Father, he had
been hissed at in the street, and pointed at by every finger: but now, it is
grown wit to domineer; it is courage and spirit to slight commands, and it is
duty in a child to usurp authority from the Father. The name of Father, sage
Cloridamantes, does signify absolute Lord and Sovereign Master of his child.
This being so, I am most confident that you honor the Gods so far, as to
maintain my Title and Prerogative over this young Daughter which is mine, and
whom I have brought up with such abundance of care, cost and pains. For my
part, I will use no other argument but this, she is my Daughter; if she be
mine, I may dispose of her as I please. If the disposition of her be taken from
me, It must also be declared that she is none of mine: and if I may dispose of
her, I do give her unto the Shepherd Theantes, according to my promise long
since made unto him: of this, Aglantes cannot complain, because he has no right
but what he claims by promise; but if my promise oblige, then that promise
which I made first unto Theantes, has much more strength and validity in it, by
reason of precedence: and therefore I conclude, that, Oh Aglantes, if you have
any desire to marry, you must seek somewhere else for a wife.

Thus Menander ended, and Aglantes offered to answer, but because Silvanire
thought that his passion perhaps would make him over sharp in his argument, she
pulled him by the arm and interrupted him, beseeching Cloridamantes to appoint
some other to answer for them, whose spirit was less possessed with anger and
choler; for else, said she, Aglantes in the heat of passion, may utter
something which may displease Menander. Cloridamantes admiring the discretion of
this young woman, man, and imposing silence upon Aglantes, he looked amongst
all the Company for one that should speak in his behalf; and after he had
veiwed them all, he made choice of Sylvander, to answer Menander, and plead
those reasons which Aglantes could allege. The Shepherd would gladly have
excused himself, because he was in no good humor: but thinking it a crime to
refuse any thing the Druide commanded, he undertook it: so after he had
required a little time to consider how he should frame his Arguments, he began
thus:

The answer of Sylvander, in behalf of Aglantes and Silvanire.
THE weight which you lay upon me, Oh wise Cloridamantes, is a little too heavy
for my weak shoulders to bear: for it is not a light matter to speak in this
place, or to undertake the clearing of the duty from a child to the father, or
the authority of a father over his child: there are few here who are not
interested, either as a father, or as a child; and to hold the balance so
even, as it shall not lean more on one side then another, is not a thing so
easy as many may perhaps think it. Do not think Aglantes, that if by the
command of this Reverend Druide, I do undertake to answer Menander, it is any
way to maintain, that children are not obliged to obey their parents; God
forbid I should utter such a word, for all our services and all our obedience
that we can render unto them, cannot acquit us of that duty which we ow unto
them: neither would I have Menander think that if I do declare the exact
obedience of children to their Parents, I do infer thereby as you do, that the
Father has power to do what he will with his child. It Is true, the Gods have
named them Fathers, but has not made them absolute Lords of men; but it is
rather to show the love that the Gods do bear unto them, because nothing can
more resemble it then the love of a Father to his child; and to teach men that
they ought to ask all things that are necessary for them, and expect them from
their goodness. For that tyrannical authority which you suggest, is not that
which Fathers ought to have over their children; that does too much resemble
the authority of a Master over his slave: there is a vast difference between a
child and a slave. It Is true, a Father ought to be obeyed in all things; but
still with this proviso, that the Father do command as he ought, and according
to reason: for a child is more obliged to obey reason, then any one that can
command him; for it is reason which gives him a soul, and makes him different
from irrational animals: and this soul is it which gives him his very being. A
man, Menander, is composed of a soul and a body; the body he has from his
Father, but that is common with all brutes: The soul he has from God, and this
soul is rational: consider now, whether a man be obliged more to him that gives
the body, or to him that gives the soul; I think then you will conclude with
me, that a child is not bound to obey the command of the Father, if the command
be against reason; for in such a case, his obedience would be a sin: and
therefore I say, Fathers have no such absolute power as you imagine, nay
perhaps they have no power at all, if they go beyond the bounds of reason: It Is
true, the child ought not of himself to judge whether the commands of the Father
be just or unjust, or unreasonable, unless they be so apparently gross that
common sense will show them so, but if the child do at any time doubt, he ought
always to incline toward the obeying side, and that he think his Father more
wise and better able to judge then himself, until those who are constituted
judges, do determine and declare it otherwise. Now, the case which is presented
before you at this time, Wise Cloridamantes, is of this nature; for here is
Menander, who is not willing that Silvanire should marry Aglantes, but would
have her marry another Shepherd; she who is wise, and knows how far the name of
daughter does oblige her unto obedience, she presents her self before you, to
know whether the command be reasonable or no: It is you, Wise Druide, that must
set down the Law unto her, for she is ready to obey it; the reasons of Menander
are that absolute power which he pretends unto over his child: that the promise
which he made unto Aglantes, does not oblige him for two reasons; the first,
because he promised Theantes before: the second, that though he did promise her
unto Aglantes, yet it was when he thought his daughter would dye that same
hour. The reasons of Silvanire and Aglantes (for they are inseparable) are,
that the promise which he made unto Theantes, was never consented unto by
Silvanire; and her consent unto Aglantes was not only in the presence of
Menander and Lerice, but also by their permission, consent and approbation:
that the essence of marriage consists principally in the will of the two
parties who do marry, and therefore reasons tells her that she is more obliged
to perform this last promise, then that which Menander made unto Theantes, unto
which she was never privy, though had she been called, she would have
consented. As to that point of Menanders, that his intention was not to suffer
this marriage, but only because he belived his daughter would dye the same
hour; Aglantes answers, that contracts are never made by thoughts, but by
words: for thoughts are not to be dived into.

Sylvander would have proceeded, when Menander transported with extreme
impatience, did interrupt him: But upon the first word he uttered,
Cloridamantes commanded him to be silent, and Sylvander also, when he offered
to continue his discourse, telling them, that the case was well enough
understood, and therefore there needed no more time to be spent. At the same
instant Theantes desired audience, and in a loud voice said, Oh wise
Cloridamantes, there is no greater folly under the Sun, then to love without
any hopes of ever being loved again; and marriage is a most miserable torment
when it is not tied with mutual and reciprocal knots, and therefore I conclude
and declare, that Silvanire may marry, but never Theantes: Upon this he made an
humble reverence to the Druide, and the Assembly, and went his way.

Cloridamantes then rose up to ask the opinion of other Druids, and to give
judgment upon the case; But Tirintes, who could not with any patience endure
to hear that Silvanire should be given unto any other, he said with a raging
voice, and incensed eye, Who is he that does accuse me? and why am I kept here
a prisoner? Fossinde then began to speak; Wicked Shepherd, said she unto him,
Dare you be so impudent as to ask why you are kept here, or who will accuse
you? Does not your own conscience tell you, that never was a greater malefactor
brought before the Tribunal of any Justice? Does not every thing, every
circumstance accuse you of Treason and Infidelity? The Heavens that see you,
the Earth that bears you, Trees, Men, Gods, and all things, oh perfidious and
miserable Shepherd, do accuse you, and call for vengeance upon your crime.

Every one wondered to hear Fossinde give such tart language; for there was
very few in the whole assembly who did not know that she loved Tirintes, and
though unfruitfully, yet had done long; so as to see her now thus exasperated
against him, it seemed much against the stream of her long continued custom,
and it was strange that her extreme affection should so soon change it self
into such an implacable hatred, as she would have made him lose his life. But
Tirintes stood still, and without any alteration in his countenance, Speak
(said he) unto the Judges if you have any charge against me, it is they from
whom you must have justice: Do you think I have not courage enough to abide all
your objections? Fossinde blushed at these words, and turning toward
Cloridamantes, she beseeched him to sit down again, and hear what she could
say; and then she began thus.

This impudent Shepherd, oh wise Cloridamantes, who is brought before you, is
the most worthy of death of any man that lives; he says he loves Silvanire, but
who believes him? Nay, who can believe him if they consider his actions? Most
certainly he never knew the power of Love, though to excuse himself, he would
cast all the fault upon that God. For what are the effects of love? To serve,
to honor, nay even to adore the person that is loved: But what witnesses does
this wicked Shepherd give of his affection unto Silvanire? In lieu of serving
her, he gives her poison; he caused her to be buried alive, and suffer
intolerable torments; in lieu of honoring her, he would have blasted her
reputation, and made her the most infamous Shepherdess that lives: if these be
the effects and consequents of Love, I dare say that Love has changed its
Nature: But happily he will be apt to say, that these are mere impostures, and
aspersions cast upon him, and that he did never commit any such crimes. Sage
Druide, here is the wicked man, he cannot deny it, his conscience flies in his
face, and ties his tongue: The truth is, his vilany is so great, that it is
hard to find words to excuse it under the umbrage of a Lover, or with any
glosses of affection and fidelity: To give poison unto a poor innocent woman so
subtly couched in a glass, what excuse under heaven is there for such a black
horrid invention? He cannot gloss it over with an excuse of ignorance, nor say
that Alciron did not tell him the effects of it; for it is most infallibly
certain, his intention was to make her die, and be revenged upon her for loving
another, or at least, for having no inclination unto him: But seeing his design
frustrated, perhaps by the strong constitution of Silvanire, which resisted the
poison, or as it is most probable, by the Will of God, who would not deprive
the world of so fair, so wise and sweet a woman, to excuse or extenuate his
crime, he must pretend that his intention was only to cast her asleep. But oh
sage Druide, I beseech you ask the good Menander, Lerice, Aglantes, and all
those that saw her in the Agony she was, whether in any sleeping fits they use
to have such cruel pain, such convulsions, such contraction of Nerves, and so
many symptoms of inevitable death; and then judge whether it was not a most
mortal poison, which the Gods by a miracle made ineffectual to his intentions.
But this cruel Barbarian, not being satisfied with her death, but he would also
with the same cruel eyes see her in the Tomb, to glut his cruelty; and finding
her revived, he never offers to ask a pardon, but would carry her into some
desolate place, God knows where, and certainly, but for the relief of those
Shepherds which came in upon her cry, he had executed his most wicked design.
Judge now, just Cloridamantes, whether in all this there be the least shadow of
any Love: Consider, that if such a Treason as this pass unpunished, there is no
safety for any Shepherdess to live in Forests; How can we guard our selves
against such violences? I beseech you therefore let us dwell safely in our
houses, and quietly in our fields; and make this man exemplary, by inflicting
such severe punishments, as may be a terror unto others. Thus spoke Fossinde,
who after a low congie unto the Druide and the rest of the Assembly, she fate
down in her place. Every one were astonished to hear this tart accusation,
Tirintes only stood un-amazed; for having lost his hopes of Silvanire, he
valued not his life: But making a sign that he desired to speak, and the
Druide permitting him, he answered thus.

This Shepherdess, most wise Cloridamantes, is in the right, when she says that
I have done ill; but she is in the wrong, when she accuses me of a crime unto
which I never consented, but am as innocent as her self: No, no Fossinde, I
refuse not one of those torments or punishments which are prepared for me, and
which I know are my due; I will not excuse my self, for I cannot; and assure
your self, that though I could, I would not: But bitter and malicious
Shepherdess, Why should you add false crimes unto crimes that are true? You had
no reason in the earth for it; for those which I have committed, are sufficient
to glut your soul, be it as cruel as it can be. Oh Cloridamantes, the affection
which I bear unto the fair Silvanire, is too great to make me think of any such
impieties as Fossinde falsely charges me: It is true, I did give poison unto the
Fair one, but it was because I was deceived by the words of him whom I could
not suspect to have any such thoughts. Let the fair Silvanire tell you how she
found Alciron and me about her, when she awaked, with a Bottle of Water which
we cast in her face to awake her. All those of Menanders house can testify,
that it was Alciron who hindered that Fair One from being embalmed, lest it
should have hurt her: Oh Cloridamantes, Could I but be declared innocent of
this imposture, I would willingly confess all the other crimes which are
charged upon me, I value not the torments of death a rush, so my love and my
fidelity be preserved pure and innocent, for them do I extremely desire to
carry with me unblemished into the other world.

Thus spoke Tirintes, leaving all the Auditory ravished at his resolute
alacrity and pitying his misfortune: Alciron who could not endure to see his
friend thus at the stake, and himself the author of the crime: Sage Druide,
(said he) Tirintes is not only clear and free from any guilt against Silvanire,
concerning the glass which I gave unto him, but also from all the consequents
of it: for first, though the glass be broken, yet the pieces are to be seen,
and easily tried whether the composition be mortal poison, or only of a
stupifying quality. It is compounded of such ingredients as Fossinde has
named: here are the pieces, and trial of them if you please may be made; then
he pulled out his handkerchief wherein he lapped them up, when Tirintes in
anger against Fossinde broke it. Every one turned away their eyes, lest they
should be tainted by the virtue of this Stone, and Cloridamantes himself
commanded him to put it up; no, no, said he, I cannot believe that either you
or Tirintes had any such abominable intention; because it is an act so
extremely horrid, as it cannot be imagined it should enter into the thoughts of
any in this Country: but if you have any thing to say which will quit Tirintes
of the violence which he offered unto this Shepherdess, you may speak it before
all this Assembly. Then Alciron offered to speak as to that, when Tirintes
interrupted him; Peace, peace, friend, said he unto him, for I will dye; and
happy is he that dies who cannot live happily. Yet I thank thee heartily for thy
good will, and evidencing that it was not my intention to make Silvanire dye,
whose life I beseech the Gods preserve to eternity. But for all this, the
affection of Alciron made him begin to speak; yet he had no sooner uttered the
first word, but Tirintes interrupted him again. Oh sage Druide, said he, it is
only compassion upon his friend, and not the truth, which makes him strive for
some arguments to defend me, for my part, I disavow what he says, and beseech
you not to believe him, but to do Justice according to the Law.

Cloridamantes then, after he had imposed silence upon Alciron and the rest, he
arose from his seat, and went to gather the voices of the other seven Druides;
for when the life of any one was in question, they were to call that number at
the least to assist them. The time which he employed in taking their votes, was
very long, because there was some difference of opinions concerning the
judgment. Tirintes being resolved to dye, since he had no hopes to obtain
Silvanire, all delay was tedious unto him: Aglantes and Silvanire, who thought
the pain no less then a death to be separated one from the other, they expected
the issue of their enterprise with incredible impatience: at the last, the
Druide after a long dispute and debate of the matter, came and took his seat;
then pronounced these words.

The Judgment of Cloridamantes.
WE Cloridamantes, being established in the absence of Adamas our Arch-Druide,
by the Great Tautates, by Amasis, and by all the order of Druids and Cavalry,
to do Justice in this Country of the Segusians; after a full hearing of the
difference that is betwixt Menander and Lerice of the one part, and Aglantes
and Silvanire on the other: and also of the accusation preferred against
Tirintes for an attempt against Silvanire, after a long solemn and serious
debate, and consideration of the premises, We do Sentence and declare, that a
Father and a Mother, have by the Laws of God and Nature, all that power and
authority which can be had over free persons; and that their children in this
quality cannot disobey them without offense against Laws both divine and
humane: but withal, we Sentence and declare that children are not born slaves,
but free: for otherwise it were a shame for Fathers to get none but slaves; and
it would be a most miserable blemish to the Country, that it of all Gaul should
produce none but people of such vile quality: for these causes therefore, and
for many other just and good considerations us thereunto moving, we do ordain,
publish and declare, that marriages be free, and that no contract be but with
consent of both parties that are to tie themselves together with that holy
knot: and that the rigor and compulsion of Fathers in such cases, be held as
tyranny, and be null. Upon these grounds this contract betwixt Aglantes and
Silvanire is declared to be firm and indissolvable, all due circumstances and
conditions being observed. And furthermore, as in Justice to Tirintes, since,
slights, subtilties, and artifices are permitted by the Laws of Love, we do
publish and declare him free and absolved from the fault which he is charged
with by the artifice of the glass; but in as much as all manner of force and
violence is expressly forbidden by the Laws of Love, and since it is averred
that he has made violent attempts upon the person of her whom he loved, we do
declare him guilty of high Treason, against that great God and his Laws, and
therefore we do doom and condemn him to be thrown down headlong from the Fatal
Rock.

The faces of all the Company were full of great joy, and of great sorrow at
this Sentence; Aglantes, and Silvanire, and their friends, seeing their
marriage was declared according to their wishes, their joys were tryumphant:
on the other side, abundance of Shepherds and Shepherdesses grieved for poor
Tirintes; for he was a very kind and courteous Shepherd, and such an accident
had not happened of a long time.

So as every one was very sorry for him, and blamed Fossinde for her bitter and
malicious accusation. Tirintes himself was the only one who seemed not to be
troubled at it: for he received the Sentence of death with a smiling and
contented countenance; and turning toward Silvanire, Shepherdess, said he unto
her, I hope that now you are contented, and indeed so should I be, if I did but
go out of this world with a pardon from you: Tirintes (said she unto him with
tears in her eyes) if your life were in my power, as well as a pardon, be
assured you should live many years: for I do not only pardon, but pity you; and
shall grieve for you as long as I live. Then Tirintes kneeled down upon the
ground, and most heartily thanked her and said, that he should be more happy in
his punishments, then ever he was in his services.

In the mean time, Fossinde seeing her design did hit according to her wish,
she went unto Tirintes; Shepherd, said she unto him, It joys my soul to see
you reduced unto this point which I have so long and so much desired: and I,
said Tirintes, am also very glad my death will give you so much contentment,
and I shall leave the world without any rancor or malice in my heart. Oh
Tirintes, Tirintes! (said she unto him) you shall know ere it be long, that I
am as free from any malice or rancor as you, and that my own life is not so
dear unto me as yours: alas, all that I have done is only out of the excess of
my love; then addressing her self unto Alcas her Father; Father, said she unto
him, you promised that you would very willingly give me leave to choose my
Husband; most true, answered Alcas, and I will perform it, for I do not approve
of the humor in Fathers to be tyrannical toward their children. Then
addressing her self unto Cloridamantes, and the other Druide. Oh sage and just
Judges (said she unto them) you have according to the Law condemned Tirintes to
die: and by the same Law, I do demand him for my Husband, and by that means,
free him from that punishment, unto which he was condemned.

Upon this all the Assembly shouted, and clapped their hands in sign of joy,
and said with an universal voice, Thanks, thanks. Then did all the friends of
Tirintes run to embrace him, and rejoice with him. Every one commended the good
act of Fossinde: for it was a Law most religiously observed, that if any woman
came to demand a condemned person for her husband, he should be delivered unto
her. Menander and Lerice, only looked but half contented, and could not consent
unto the marriage of Silvanire; but seeing the public joy, and Aglantes upon
his knees with Silvanire, at their feet, their anger began to cool, and they
embraced both Aglantes and Silvanire with a joyful countenance, and confirmed
the Sentence of the Druides. Then all the Assembly rejoiced: and Cloridamantes,
who by the force of the Laws had condemned Tirintes, was very glad of such an
occasion to deliver him; and therefore causing some Chaplets of Flowers to be
brought; he first put two upon the heads of Silvanire and Aglantes; and
afterward turning toward Fossinde, here Shepherdess (said he unto her) take
this which I put upon your head, and I leave the other in your hands; give it
unto Tirintes, for a testimony that you have given him both his life and
Fossinde.

The Shepherdess rendered most humble thanks for the favor, and said, I do take
this which you have given to me, and put it upon the head of Tirintes, and I do
take his, and put it upon my own, in witness that we will never be separated.
And now, since such an universal joy was unexpectedly fallen upon them all, it
was thought fit to go into the Temple, and thank the Gods: And since the
impatience of these two Lovers were very great, it was resolved upon, that they
should then be married, and the rest of the ceremonies be performed afterward,
when they returned to their homes. But Sylvander who could not endure to be
amongst so many joyful and contented persons, after he had received many thanks
from Aglantes and Silvanire, he left the company, and went into the Woods to
lament his own miserable fortune.

Diana and Phillis who dined that day with Astrea to keep Alexis company, being
risen from the Table, and the question being put how they should spend the rest
of the day, they were advertized that a certain stranger was come, who was
exceedingly desirous to see Astrea, so as (said they that did advertize them)
unless you make very great haste away, assure your selves she will be before
you, which if she be, you must resolve upon her company all the day. Alexis who
was extremely afraid of any such diversions; oh God, good Servant, said she,
let us not stay her coming, for we shall not be rid of her all the day; and if
I be in so long a constraint, I shall most infallibly be sicker then I was in
the morning: Astrea laughed to hear her say so: Dear Mistress (said she)
command, and be obeyed: I think it best, answered Alexis, to take our own
habits, and go to meet her: This motion was no sooner made then executed, and
the more speedily, because Diana who conducted them, did make more haste then
usual, because she was exceedingly desirous to see this stranger, who inveighed
so much against men, of whom she had as bad an esteem, though she knew how to
cover it discreetly.

When Florice saw these Shepherdesses afar off, see Dorinde, said she, how
courteous the fair Astrea is, who knowing your coming, prevents you in
civility, and is coming to meet you. I should be ashamed, answered she, that
all those discreet Shepherdesses should take so much pains for me, but I must
confess I have an extreme desire to see them. Since it is so (said Circinea)
and if you would not be overloadned with courtesy, let us go as fast as we can
to meet them, to the end they may know, that if you had known their design,
you would not have put them to that trouble. Upon this, the four strangers
taking hands, they went as fast as they could toward these fair Shepherdesses,
who received them with such free expressions and testimonies of good will, that
Dorinde could not enough admire them, both for their Beauty and their Civility.
Alexis also was not a little in their esteem, who knew how to play the woman so
well, that not one of her actions did belie that name: and because Dorinde
observed that every one did bear a great respect and honor unto the Druide,
she thought it becoming her to do the same; so as addressing her self unto her,
Madam, said she, one of my wishes is accomplished, for I have very long desired
to see Lignon, and all those Beauties about it; and I see heaven is very
favorable to my desires, in letting me see the best first. I confess, said the
Druide, that when you see Astrea, Diana, and Phillis, you have seen the glory
of Lignon, which heaven has favored above all the Rivers in Europe; and there
is none precedes these whom ye see before your eyes. These commendations (said
Astrea) which it pleases the fair Druide to bestow upon us, are testimonies of
that honor which she confers upon us by her love; my companions and I do
receive them upon that account, though they be much above our merit: But fair
Shepherdess, I would not have you deceived by them; lest that belief should
cause you to esteem less of the Shepherdesses of Lignon; for do not think, that
though those you see here have no great matter of Beauty to boast of, that the
rest are the same, assuring my self, that when you see them, you will confess
that they do not deserve contempt: As for us, we beseech you to love us, not in
the quality of fair, but of good, and as those that do highly desire the honor
of your favor, and are ready to pay those duties of Service and Civility unto
you, which by the custom of our Country, and your own merits we are obliged
unto. Astrea (said Dorinde, for I know that is your name by the luster of your
Beauty) I say fair Astrea, I do think the pains of my journey to be highly
recompensed by the very sight of you, and I find my self beyond all measure
satisfied, when I consider your fluent courtesy and civility; but let me tell
you, that I am infinitely ashamed in not being able to requite it. Their
complements had continued longer,, if Florice, who was much offended by the too
much luster of the Sun which shined full upon them, had not interrupted;
wherefore she beseeched the Druide, and the rest of the Shepherdesses, to
honor her so far as to shade themselves under her Cabine, which was close by
the River Lignon, and shaded with several leave-spreading trees; so as the
motion being accepted, they went that way, to spend part of the day under those
shady trees, till the heat of the day was a little over.

Diana remembering the promise which that stranger made, of telling her the
reason of her hatred unto men, and finding her self in a good humor, Fair
Shepherdess (said she after they were set) we have a custom amongst us, that
we esteem all promises to be due debts: we do hold the obligations as firm, and
reckon upon the payment, as certainly as if it were indented and sealed; and
therefore I beseech you, do not think it strange that I should in the presence
of this good company summon you to the payment of that debt which you owe unto
me; and I conceive that besides your promise, the time, and the place, and
every thing does invite you to it. Although (answered Dorinde) I were not
obliged by my promise, yet should I be very ready to pay obedience unto any
thing you shall either command or desire; I am sorry for nothing, but that what
I shall tell you, will not be worth the time that will be spent in hearing: Yet
since it is your command, I had rather fail in obeying you, then in not
satisfying your desires. Then after a while of silence, she began thus.

The History of DORINDE, of PERIANDER, of MERINDOR, and of BELLIMARTES.
IT is with great reason that learned Physicians say, Interior diseases are
most dangerous, and difficult to be cured, because the sight cannot reach them,
they know by conjectures only what they are: The heart, and the most noble
parts, are more easily infected, and sooner seized upon, then those that are
without us. The diseases of the soul, are the same with the diseases of the
body; and those which do proceed from things without us, are much less
dangerous then those which are from within us. I do call those things which are
without us, Riches, the favor of others, health, sickness, and briefly, all
things upon which Fortune has a Sovereign Authority: And I do call those things
which are within us, every thing that does depend upon our own wills, and
within the power of our own souls: For it is but little hurt that Fortune can
do unto one that is resolved, and fully intends to do what they ought in every
thing. But on the contrary, when the Will and the Understanding are infected
and corrupted, every trifle is a torment, and he must look for a cure from the
party from whom his malady proceeds. I speak all these things (most fair and
discreet Shepherdesses) by experience, for I have found them in my self, and to
my cost do know, that a prejudicated understanding does deceive the Will, which
is blind, and misled by every thing which it judges good. But oh God, of all
poisons which does most easily invenome us, there is none more dangerous nor
worse to be avoided, then the treachery of men; for, as if they were our sworn
mortal enemies, they will attempt any thing in the world to venom our souls
with their poison: If we have high spirits, they will fall down upon their
knees, even upon the bare ground, they will honor, reverence, and adore us,
they are our very slaves, they will not live but to obey us, and will not
change their servitude for an Empire: If they meet with a more inferior or
humble soul, what services will they not offer? Into how many shapes will they
transform themselves? What will they not invent to please her? How many Balls
and Treatments will they give? how will they spruce up themselves in variety of
habits? And how careful will they be to render themselves pleasing in the eyes
of those whom they have any designs upon? And why all this art, care and pains
to please, but only to win upon those whom they will afterward deceive, or
rather kill with grief and vexation at their perfidies and treasons? I am sure,
the story which you desire to hear, will make this most apparent unto you,
which I am the more willing to relate, because I may make others more prudent
and wary by my example, and by the knowledge of all subtilties and treasons of
men. Be pleased to know therefore, Madam, and all you Fair and Discreet
Shepherdesses, that the ancient City of Lions was the place of my birth, where
my Ancestors ever held themselves of the prime Rank: the name of my Father is
Arcingentorix, and my Mothers Alcinea; she left me when I was in my Nurses
arms; but my Father with abundance of care did educate me in all the
accomplishments fit for a woman of my quality, as dancing, singing, several
Instruments, and such Ornaments; by which he did so imbellish my youth, that
many of the best Rank did Court me in the way of marriage: but my Father, who
desired to marry me very advantageously, and saw me yet very young, he waved
all motions that were made, to see if any better match would offer it self unto
me: I must confess, that sometimes I was angry at it; and at that time blamed
the Prudence of my Father, which I now commend; now I say, since I know how
miserable that woman is who is a subject unto the servitude of Tyrants; which
are called indeed Husbands by our Fathers, who are in effect the executioners
of men's Tyranny.

The first that cast his eyes upon me, or at least, whom I took any notice of,
was one called Theombres, who since married Florice. I was then of an age so
innocent, as I did believe my self in no fault if I did believe him. But the
clownish behavior of that man (be it spoke without offense unto Florice)
together with my young years, which had not made me capable, but insensible of
such addresses, and the short time he stayed there, did defend me from any
wicked designs he could have upon me; for whether he had already served this
Fair Florice, whom he since married, or that then he began to love her
presently after, I cannot tell; but so it was, that his address served to no
other purpose, but to teach me (if I had made use of it) that all men are
deceivers; and that the most constant amongst them, is like unto a Camelion,
which changes color, according to the objects it looks upon.

Almost at the same time Periander, a young and lovely Cavalier, and owner of
many excellent qualities, free from the vices of custom, which are in all men,
he would make me believe that he was in Love with me. And because his Fathers
house was not far distant from the place where I dwelt, he had all the
convenient opportunities of showing his good will, that he could desire. Indeed
I was very young, and knew not at all what it was to Love; yet his constant
addresses, the time he spent, and the flattery of domestiques, made me believe
he wished me well; my capacity was able to reach no farther: and see how much
children are obliged unto their Parents; and how thankful they ought to be unto
Heaven, when they have such as are Wise and Prudent. If Arci^gentorix had been
too hasty in marrying me, as many Fathers are who desire nothing more then to
be rid of their daughters, he had certainly bestowed me upon Periander; whom
now I see rather then I would have married, I would with my life have pulled my
heart out of my breast.

But my Father out of a Prudent design which he had, was the cause why this
marriage was delayed: many thought it a match very suitable and advantageous for
me, as well in respect of age, as of the nobleness and valor of Periander, but
especial of his estate, which is the main thing most Fathers consider. This
business being spun out to the length, it happened presently after that one
Hylas, a Cavalier, or a Pastor of the Isle of Carmagues in the Province of the
Romans, came accidentally unto Lions.

There is none in the company (said Astrea and interrupted) who does not know
him very well. Dorinde then smiled; since you know him so very well, replied
she, I shall nor need to relate his tricks which he has put upon me. We do
know, said Diana, of his Love unto you: how he put his picture in a glass, and
presented it unto you: and briefly of all his behavior with you and with
Periander until his departure from Lions. I believe (said Dorinde) that he has
been forward enough in blazing his Heroic Acts, but I make a question whether
he was true in his relation. Do not doubt it Cosen (said Florice) for I heard
all he said, and he has not the gift of lying, as he has of inconstancy. Lest
then I should be tedious, (continued Dorinde) I will wave all discourse
concerning him, only will observe, that Hylas is the second person that
deceived me; for Periander who was the second who loved me, he had not yet
completed his treason. But I must needs confess, that of all those who ever
deceived me, I complain least of Hylas, for he protested seriously unto me,
that he would Love me most faithfully as long as his humor continued; but if
that were past, neither Heaven nor Earth had bonds strong enough to hold him:
so as this free and ingenious confession, keeps me from blaming him; and when I
think upon his change, I do only accuse the general fault of men, amongst which
I reckon Hylas the least deceiver of all. But since you know all the passages
betwixt him, Periander, Florice, and my self, I will return to the discourse
where I left. I must tell you, that Theombres carried Florice out of the Town,
and how Cryseide that Fair stranger escaped out of King Gondebauts prison,
assuring my self Madam, that he could tell you no farther; since then he left
the banks of Arar to follow the Fair trans- Alpine, Cryseide, as many say.

Be pleased to know then, that Periander seeing himself alone with me, having
lost the Rival whom he always much feared, he did so devote himself wholly unto
me, at least in show, that his Love was unknown only unto such as would not
know it. As soon as ever I waked every morning, I was sure of a servant from
him to bid me good morrow, and to bring either some flowers, or some rare
fruits of the season: I no sooner set my foot out of doors toward the Temple,
but I found him ready to tender his services unto me: after dinner, no garden
or public rendevous of gallantry was about the Town, but he carried me
thither: after supper, bals never failed either at my house, or some of my
friends, by his procurement: that night was very blustering and stormy, if I
had not music at my window, sometimes voices, sometimes Instruments, sometimes
one sort, another time another: all his Domestiques wore no other Livery but
mine; himself never wore any favor but what he begged from me. To be brief
Madam, all this was not done in a corner, but (as I may say) upon the house
top: he called and professed himself my servant publicly. I must confess that
he did so flatter my young unexperienced youth, as I did comply with him: and
the rather, because my Father considering the merit of this young Cavalier, and
the affection which he expressed unto me, was minded, contrary to his design,
to marry me unto him.

About the same time, there was two Cavaliers who did both cast their eyes upon
me; one was a stranger and called Bellimartes, the other was a neighbor about
the banks of Arar, and his name was Merindor: the first of these came with King
Gondebaut from beyond the Alps, and was a Goth; to show, that be a man born in
any Region wheresoever, yet he cannot be exempt from the fault of his sex, I
mean from being giddy, unconstant, and a deceiver. This Bellimartes was he who
kept Arimant prisoner, the servant, and since the Husband of the unfortunate,
and happy Cryseide, for so I praise the unfortunate and fortunate events, which
she resented during the time of their Loves: and were not the story too long, I
would relate it, for I am confident you would be of the same judgment. You need
not take so much pains (said Astrea) for we know it already, partly from Hylas,
and partly from the Fair Florice. It Is very well, said Dorinde, for thereby you
will better understand the sequel of my relation.

This Bellimartes then, after he had renounced all his pretensions unto
Arimant, as Florice I believe has told you, he addressed himself particularly
unto the King, and put him in memory of all his long services which he had
done, the dangers he had passed, the wounds he had received, and the blood he
had lost, also showed many great scars which he had in several places: then he
beseeched him to consider, that for all these he had got nothing, but the bare
honor of spending in his service both his days and estate: that true it was,
he held this honor at a high price, and would not exchange it for any
recompense he could give: But though this was honorable for Bellimartes; yet
it was not suitable with the grandeur and Majesty of a great King; that it
should be said he had so long and so faithfully served, and served a Master and
received no other gratification, but the empty sound of being called his
servant; this would argue that I did not serve a good Master. Unto these
considerations, he added many others, which so moved the heart of that generous
King, as after he had laid the fault upon himself in never asking any
recompense, to show some effects of his good will, he bestowed upon him the
Regiment of stranger Soldiers, which for the guard of the Town, he entertained
in Lions: an office truly so honorable and so beneficial, as it was a
gratification beyond all his hopes, and by which he did thrive so well, that in
a short time he might without presumption aspire unto the best matches in all
the Country.

All these things fell out whilst I was assiduously courted and served by
Periander. And because Bellimartes had a mind to settle himself in that
Province where he had such a beneficial office, he intended to match himself
so, that he might rather get friends then money for the portion; upon this
ground he cast his eye upon me, and at such a time that I was so much against
him, as I could never since endure the memory of him. At the same time also
Merindor being newly returned from travel, he did unluckily see me at the
marriage of Parthenopea, and from that time began also to court me: so as
Periander found himself more company then he desired. It Is true Merindor did
carry the matter much better, and with more discretion then Bellimartes, who
presuming upon the Kings favor, and the authority which he had in the Town,
did at the very first accost me publicly, as thinking, that though Periander
was more in favor with me, yet the advantages of his fortune would prevail
with Arcingentorix, to make choice of him before Periander.

This address did inflame the affection of Periander more then ever, and he
expressed more Love unto me then before; he was so netled to think that another
should take from him that prey which he had been so long in chase after, that
he thought time to bestow himself. So that he resolved, with my consent, to
make the motion of marriage unto my Father. I must confess that I did consent
unto it, because I did not like Bellimartes; his age and his rough behavior
resembling a man in armor, did make me almost afraid of him. As for Merindor, I
was not yet acquainted with him, for he carried the matter with so much
cautious discretion, as it was hard to know whether he was in earnest or in
jest. Periander then, to lose no time, did motion the marriage unto
Arcingentorix; and at the first overture, submitted himself wholly unto him,
and desired him to write what conditions he pleased; my Father first thanked
him for his good will; and told him, that truly he had yet no thoughts of
marrying me, since my age required no great haste: but yet to make it appear
how much he esteemed of his alliance, he would promise him within a month to
let him know his full resolution. All these things could not be transacted so
secretly, but Bellimartes and Merindor were advertised, and therefore they both
resolved to cross this treaty as much possibly they could; but believing that
Arcingentorix would not marry me against my will, they thought the best way was
to gain me, and therefore they declared themselves more openly then before.

I remember that Merindor in this resolution meeting me one morning in the
Temple, whither Periander conducted me, and went out; he kneeled down close by
me, and said; Did you come hither, Fair Dorinde, to pray unto the Gods, or to
thank them? I did not know how to answer him, because I knew not what he meant;
and therefore after I had looked upon him without giving any answer, I returned
to my prayers again. What means this silence (said he again) is it a testimony
of scorn? or is it because you would be importuned? Neither, said I unto him,
for I do much esteem Merindor, but it is because I do not understand you: for
what do you mean by prayers and thanks? I ask you (said he) whether you came to
pray the Gods that you may marry Periander, or give them thanks, because they
have granted that request before? Neither the one nor the other, (answered I,
and smiled) you are a dissembler, said he, to say so: you are incredulous,
answered I, if you do not believe me. Why? said he, can you deny a thing which
is known unto all? Why? answered I, and turned my head the other way, why do
you ask me if you know, and if you will not believe me? I do know that which
all knows, said he, but I do ask you that which you only can tell me: tell me
therefore upon what consideration do you take this Husband? As a daughter
should take him (answered I) who is given her by her Father. I wish to God
(said he and sighed) that you took him only out of obedience and not will: my
will, answered I, shall be always the will of Arcingentorix: but pray tell me
Merintor, what interest have you in all this that should make you sigh for it?
Well may I sigh, (said he) for that which I shall never cease weeping; upon
this I saw his eyes began to flow with tears: and because he would not as I
think, let me know any more at that time, he went away and spoke not a word,
leaving me fully assured that he did Love me, and that this marriage pierced
him to the very heart: but all this had no operation upon me, because I was
already wholly dedicated unto Periander, and thought that his merits and
affection did oblige me unto it.

The little account that I made of Merindors displeasure, when he went away,
went so near his heart, that being almost out of all hopes of getting my Love,
as long as Periander lived, he was in two or three minds to fight him, and see,
upon which of the two, the lot would fall. As he was deeply in this thought, a
friend of his did meet him, in whom he had great confidence. Euphrosias (for
that was the name of his dear and wise friend) seeing Merindor walk with his
hat pulled over his eyes, looked upon the ground, and his cloak lapped
disorderly about him, walking in the streets, and never looking upon any; he
knew that something troubled his mind: and because he knew that youth and
courage are often apt unto too violent resolutions, which they may repent of
when it is too late, he went unto him, and saluted him: and when he saw that he
did not answer what Merindor (said he and took him by the arm) will you not
speak unto your friends? Merindor hearing this voice, and feeling himself held
by the arm, stopped short, and looked upon Euphrosias as if he were newly
revived out of an ecstasy: and after he had stood a while mute; Good Euphrosias
(said he) pardon this fault which proceeds from a very bad humor which has
seized upon me. I will (answered his friend) upon condition you will tell me
the cause. Though perhaps you would not know it, answered Merindor, yet I
beseech you hear it, for I have need of your counsel in a business which
concerns me as near as my life: but let us go aside lest any should hear us
discourse. Upon this making choice of a private place, he began to tell him the
original of his Love, the progress, and the present condition wherein he was:
afterward he acquainted him with the Love of Bellimartes and Periander: but
when he came to the discourse he had with me in the Temple, and my answers in
favor of Periander, he entered into such a passion, that the Prudent Euphrosias
did see, that the affection which he had unto me, was too great to be diverted
either by reasons or entreaties: and therefore to avoid the two evils which he
foresaw, he thought it most necessary to draw him only from the most dangerous,
which was his hatred unto Periander, and as for the cure of his affection,
there was no way but to refer it unto time: therefore in lieu of any sharp
reprehensions, or any four looks, he smiled upon him, and answered thus; Good
Merindor (said he) tell me upon your faith, if this be all the cause of your
being thus discomposed? How? (said Merindor) is not this enough, since my
affection is such unto Dorinde, that it is a thing most impossible for me to
help it? And do I not see before my face, the man that is the great obstructor
of my happiness? Is there no way, answered his friend, to find a remedy? None,
answered Merindor, that I know, but to take away the life of him, that takes
away from me that happiness without which I cannot live. Oh Merindor! cried out
Euphrosias, you take things at the worst. Tell me, I beseech you; do you think
Dorinde Loves Periander? Think it? said Merindor, nay I were the most
incredulous fool that lives if I were not certain of it. Then (replied his Wise
friend) you must not go the worst way to compass what you desire: for you can
never hope to get the good will of Dorinde by murdering that person whom she
Loves best; your passion does but flatter and deceive you, for by that course
you will make her hate you even to the very death. Certainly, said Merindor,
there is no remedy, if this be not good: Certainly, said Euphrosias, this is
neither good, nor a remedy; but I beseech you tell me, why you think it so
necessary for Periander to die? Because (said he) the Love that Dorinde bears
unto him, is the cause why she does not Love me: If that be it, replied
Euphrosias, make the same reason as well obstruct him, as he obstructs you; I
mean, that she shall not Love Periander because she Loves Merindor. Yes, yes,
said Merindor, you are very kind; but here is the difficulty, how should I make
her love me? Do as Periander does, answered Euphrosias, nay, and better; why
should you think heaven will not be as favorable to you, as any other Cavalier
of your age? But Euphrosias (said he) she does love Periander. So much the
better, answered Euphrosias, it is a sign she is not insensible, nor
invulnerable by the blows of Love: Pray why should you think your services
should not work as happy effects as his? You see Merindor that you do love
Dorinde in such a height, that you cannot retire; resolve with your self to
love her still in such extremity, that it shall invite her unto Love again, or
rather to constrain her unto it. Oh my dear friend, said Merindor, and sighed;
how difficult is it to bring this enterprise to pass! Yet let me tell you,
notwithstanding all I told you before concerning Periander, that I do verily
believe she does not love him; but all she does, is only in obedience unto her
Father. So much the better still (said Euphrosias) for if she does not love
him, you will far sooner win her, then if she were engaged unto any. Oh but if
she do love Periander, (said Merindor) what hopes can I have? Why should not
you hope as well as another, replied Euphrosias? Will not most merit soonest
obtain? Or say that Argument have no validity in it, you must know Merindor,
that the love of women is one of those things that must not be sought after by
the Rules of Reason, and of whom one must never despair; for be most assured,
that there is a certain hour in the day in the which they can deny nothing; And
therefore the answer of the Oracle was good, when a Lover asked what he should
do to overcome the cruelty of his Mistress; The Answer was, Love, be Bold, and
Continue.

With such discourse as this Euphrosias diverted his friend from his design
against Periander, and filled him so full of new hopes, that he began to court
Dorinde with such fresh assaults, as Periander and Bellimartes could not choose
but be jealous; for until then he did not openly declare himself, but thought
himself out of hopes, yet now by reason of the time of my Father's answer unto
Periander, he was the only mote in his eye; and certainly not without reason,
for I seeing my father very inclinable to give me unto him, I thought my self
already so certain to be his wife, that I devoted my self wholly unto him.

Whilst these three were thus striving who should win me, the term which my
Father set for Periander's answer drew on; and he who expected with extreme
impatience the day whereon he should be pronounced happy, that very evening he
failed not to go unto my Father with three of his nearest kindred; As soon as he
came into his presence, he fell down upon his knees, and beseeched him with as
much earnestness as if his life was at stake, that he would be pleased to give
him that answer which he promised. But Sir, said he, if it be not suitable to my
desires, make but a sign, and it shall suffice to be rid of me; for I am most
perfectly resolved to throw my self, and all my desires and designs, into the
bottom of Arar. He accompanied these words with such actions of his hands,
head, and every part of his body, that every one believed they came from his
heart: And my Father, as the rest, being deceived by this opinion, did hold out
his hand to take him up from his knees; Son, said he unto him, for so I will
hereafter call you, rise up, and believe, that if I have any thing which is
dearer then Dorinde, I will give it unto you and your merit; I do here give her
unto you, and pray unto the heavens to make you a most happy pair. Periander
ravished with joy, did kiss the hand of Arcingentorix an hundred times, with so
many demonstrations of Love, as none doubted but that his Love was extreme.

At the same time my Father called for me, and taking my hand, carried me in to
Periander. Daughter (said he) I would have you love this Cavalier, as him that
must be your husband, and unto whom I now do give you, and within these eight
days, I will prepare for your marriage. Upon this Periander advanced, and came
to salute me; and I Sir, said he, do take you for my Lord and Father, and her
for my Wife and Mistress.

Judge, I beseech you Madam, and you wise and fair Shepherdesses, whether such
promises as these so solemnly made, would not make any one believe them
indissolvable? But with shame to all humane kind, you shall hear the perfidie
of all men in general included in this one particular man. These eight days
which Arcingentorix prefixed for a conclusion of the marriage, were variously
employed: For my Father's whole care was in providing all things necessary for
this marriage: All the Neighborhood to show how much they loved and honored
our Family, designed several diversions of Tilting, Masks, Dancings, and such
like.

Bellimartes on the contrary was perpetually whispering into the Kings ear, and
contriving how to break off this marriage. But Merindor, what in sighs and
tears, what in caressing me and my Father, his time was so spent, that he could
hardly sleep: He was continually telling several tales, and foretelling me of
Periander's inconstancy, dissimulation, and perfidie, which since I have found
but too true, and unto which I would not then hearken, thinking it an offense
against the love which he bore unto me, and which I had unto that Deceiver. As
for Periander, his whole care was in caressing me, and treating me with all the
diversions about the Town, and thought upon nothing else, at least in show. For
my part, I must confess I thought my self so obliged to him, that my study was
wholly how to please him. Now, sage Druide, see how heaven does laugh at all
our Designs, and can change them.

During this while, whether it was with too much dancing, or by eating too much
fruit, or rather, as I think, by coming into some infectious place; or to say
better, whether it was the will of heaven by this small sickness to prevent a
greater misery, I cannot tell; but upon the sixth day, I was taken with an
extreme pain in my head, and a Fever so violent, as put me all into a flame,
and continued several days, and still with such a drowsiness upon me, as I
could hardly lift up my eyes: and after it had thus tormented me, one morning
when the Phisicians came to see me, they found me full of red spots, which by
little and little growing bigger, did so become blisters, that I was a horrid
sight to be seen: It was a disease which children are commonly subject unto;
and many other children and young people of my age in the same Town were at the
same time infected as I was.

This malady thus falling out, it prevented all designs and preparations; for I
was so exceedingly tormented, that many thought I would die: Periander at the
first came twice or thrice to see me, and seemed to be extremely displeased
that our marriage should be thus retarded: But as soon as the Small pox
appeared, he would never after so much as set his foot into the house where I
was; he sent indeed sometimes to see how I did, but he was so afraid of me, and
catching the disease, that he would not so much as come near the door.

As long as pain was upon me, I must confess, I did not resent his behavior,
though every one else did think it very strange; but I was so full of pain, as
I never asked what became of him; yet afterward, when the violence was a
little past, I did enquire what became of Periander; and perceiving the little
memory he had of me, I began to think that Merindor spoke truth when he
foretold me of Periander's inconstancy; and yet I could not choose but seek out
for some reasons to excuse him: sometimes I did imagine, that perhaps some
business had carried him out of Lions, and that it grieved him as much as it
did me that he could not hear how I did; otherwhiles I had an opinion, that my
Father had changed his mind, and had forbidden him to see me: sometimes I
thought he was sick, and that none in my house would acquaint me: Briefly, I
turned every stone, and tried all my wits, and all how to deceive my self: But
my malady continuing long, and this perfidious man also continuing in his
neglect, I was but too well assured that his mind was turned.

What do you think Madam, and you fair Shepherdess, the resentment of this
offense might move me unto? At the first, I wept and was silent, and hid my
tears from the sight of every one; But when I heard it the common talk, and
that every one condemned his falseness, it was impossible for me to hide my
resentments any longer.

On the contrary, Merindor, as if my sickness had augmented his affection, he
was continually at my chamber door, asking how I did, and would gladly have
seen me, if they would have permitted him. And as soon as ever he heard all
danger was past, he brought music of several sorts unto my door, to divert
me: and because he knew of Perianders change, I remember, he caused a song to
be sung at my chamber door, which intimated the inconstancy of a Lover. And
because he thought that perhaps I did not understand the words at that
distance, he sent the song in a paper unto me, by a woman that came into my
chamber: yet I was so attentive that I heard and remembered every word. I seemed
not to take any notice of all this, though I had a great resentment of it: but
when I was alone, the thoughts of Perianders neglect and oblivion, made me even
hate his humor: and more, when being out of my bed, and yet durst not go out
of my chamber, because my face was much changed, as is common in that disease;
he did not so much as send to see how I did: now I thought it time to forget
him, as well as he did me; and I thank Heaven for it, I did so exclude him from
my thoughts, that I made him a very stranger unto them: It would be but loss of
time to tell you what reproaches I laid in his dish; how I resolved my self
against him; how sadly I first resented this separation; for the truth is, I
had such confidence in his promised affection, that I thought it impossible to
alter: but now, finding my self deceived, and my disease to be the cause of his
apostasy, I could not complain against him enough, and indeed against my self
for believing him: now did I admire his inconstancy, and for his sake condemn
the fickleness and perfidy of all men whatsoever.

Yet notwithstanding I had sworn a hundred times never to care for him again,
and that though he should return, yet never to look upon him; yet for all this,
I could not choose but ask him by one that I employed, what was the cause of
this so sudden separation? And she who asked him the question, was a woman that
waited upon me, and in whom I had great confidence during all the time of his
addresses unto me. Periander (said she unto him) how comes it to pass that you
never see Dorinde, nor ask what becomes of her? How? Dorinde? (answered he) is
she alive still? Alive (said the woman) why? she is recovered, and ready to
come out of her chamber. Ah Sweetheart, replied Periander, you are much
mistaken, or else does mock me; certainly she is dead: but has left in her
room^, a certain ugly woman, whom for the Love of her they call Dorinde: but
the Fair Dorinde whom I Loved is certainly dead, and I am so sorry for it, as I
will not go and see this Dorinde, lest the memory of the other should give an
occasion of tears. Fie, fie, Periander, (replied the woman much amazed at his
answer) is it not enough to separate your self from her, but you must mock at
her misery? Dorinde, as I told you before, replied he presently, is not in the
world: What? would you have me go and Love her in her grave? And as for her
that is in her room; alas Sweetheart, she is so ugly, that I will leave her to
whom that will. As soon as he had said so, he went away and stayed not for any
answer.

Judge Madam, whether this was to be endured; and yet I must swallow this
bitter pill, and seem, as if I did not taste it. But was it not the height of
cruelty, to strike one that was so deeply wounded before? For first my sickness
had spoiled my face, which was wound enough, without the addition of another
from a person whom I least expected it.

A little while after, my Father came to see me; and not without tears in his
eyes to find me so much changed: which I perceiving, Father, said I unto him,
never afflict your self for the loss of that which could not be long kept: but
rather, I beseech you to rejoice with me, since by the loss of a trifle I am
rescued from an ill fortune. Upon this I told him all that Periander had done
and said, then falling down upon my knees, I beseeched him, that he would not
command me to have any more converse with this perfidious man: Dorinde (said he
and took me up) I promise you I will not; and I command you, not so much as to
name him unto me, who thinks him the most unworthy Cavalier that lives.

Upon this, my Father went away, and left me extremely well satisfied with his
promise. And from hence forward I began to think more of Merindor, then
formerly I had, as thinking that his behavior toward me did oblige me to
prefer him before any other; for though Bellimartes did send often to visit me,
and was very careful in sending all such remedies as were proper for that
disease; yet his humor and disposition was contrary unto mine, so as I could
not for my heart Love him.

In the mean time, I recovered very fast; not but that my face was so blasted,
as I was hardly knowable; and when I looked in a glass, I admired to see my
self: and therefore I still kept the door of my chamber shut very close, to the
end none should enter but such as waited upon me; hoping still that time might
hap^y make some amendment. But Merindor, whose affection to me seemed to be
greater then before, and who never stirred out of my antichamber with several
sorts of music, as I told you before: one day when I was alone with that woman
whom I sent unto Periander, and when the door was but ill shut, he entered in
upon such a sudden, that he was upon his knees before me ere I could see him.
As fortune was, I had a mask upon my face: but I could no way hide my eyes but
with my hands, and they were so blasted, that I was ashamed to show them, for I
had not time to put on my gloves. You may imagine me not a little surprised
when I saw him; I did my ende^vour to get into my Closet, but he kneeled so
before me, and held my knees, that I was not able to rise from my seat: Oh
Merindor (said I unto him) you are exceeding troublesome unto me, and would do
me a great pleasure, if you would think upon me no more then Periander does.
Alas, alas, answered he, do you think to limit the effects of my affection unto
the shallow amity of him whom you named? Ah Madam, pardon me I beseech you, if
I think his offense not so great unto me, as it is unto you Unto me? answered
I; I assure you Merindor, if Perianders offenses trouble you no more then me,
you will never complain against him: for as for my part, I am so far from any
memory of his name, that whatsoever he does cannot offend me But let us talk of
something else I beseech you, and tell me, what makes you so desirous to see me
in this condition wherein I am; for me thinks you should rather shun all
occasions of it, then desire it: upon this question I caused him to rise, and a
chair to be set for him, because I would not suffer him to kneel. Madam,
answered he, the affection of him who loves, will never let him rest till he
have satisfied his curiosity, by seeing her whom he loves and adores; and such
is mine to you: do not imagine, I beseech you that I do love you with any
reserved thoughts to leave off, though you should not be so Fair as you was
before; such a love deserves not the name: and I do esteem rather a treason,
and not to be entertained into any heart that loves well: my affection sets no
other term but eternity, nor no other condition, but to Love Dorinde, as she
is, and as she shall be; for the future, as well as for the present. Now see,
Wise and Fair Druide, how apt one is to judge others by themselves; a very dog
that is burned will fear the fire: yet I, less wise then those animals, after
I had been deluded by the supple language of Periander, could not choose but
give credit* unto the gilded flatteries of Merindor; thinking, that a man well
born, and a Cavalier, ought above other men to be just, and to have his heart
in his tongue: but I confess, that I did partly believe that which I should not
have believed at all; I began to fancy that I might live happily with him: but
to tell you truly, I did it much out of spite against Periander, thinking it a
full revenge, if I gave my self unto another, but never thinking that it was a
revenge against my self: but it was imprudence, which commonly is a consequent
of little experience, did give me this simple counsel, which since has cost me
many a tear, and much torment.

The answer that I gave him was this; Do you think Merindor that any one who
has a design to make themselves loved, will say less then you? I think (said
he) that those who have the same desires which I have, may make use of the same
words. But (said I) if all those who have the same desires, do speak as you do,
and all deceive those who trust them, what assurance can I have in your words?
Periander used them a thousand times, and even deafned me with his candid
language, which was only a gloss upon intended treachery. If my words (replied
Merindor) were not accompanied with some more assured testimonies, I must needs
confess the treachery of Periander, might make you suspect all I say. But, Oh
Dorinde, I hope I am not so unfortunate, but that you have taken notice of my
actions, and how, since the very first day I ever saw you, I have devoted my
self to be wholly yours. It Is true, answered I, and I should be very ungrateful
if I did not acknowledge that your proceeding and behavior does much oblige me;
but with all let me tell you, That I think all men make it their glory to
deceive those who put any trust in them. If so, replied Merindor, then I
protest Madam, that henceforward I will not be a man, the very name shall be
odious unto me, and I will abominate the title, as much as I do that of Vilain
or Traitor. Do you speak this in good earnest, said I unto him? Madam (answered
he) Do you ask this question in good earnest? Is it possible you should still
doubt of Merindors affection? No, no Dorinde, Do not give your eyes, your ears,
your judgment the lie; I am sure they all tell you that Merindor loves you:
had he been prone to change, he might with more reason then Periander, who
received favors a thousand for one. Merindor (said I) I do confess it, and
having observed your affection to me ever since you first saw me, and continued
during all the time of my sickness, I have often said unto my self, what would
he have done if he had found as much good will from me, as I have showed unto
that Deceiver Periander? But this is not enough to assure me that you will not
change; for all men, by the example of one has taught me, that it is Beauty
which they love, and not the person of her who has it; so as when by any
accident this Beauty is gone, their love is immediately gone with it. Oh
Dorinde (said he) you are an unjust Judge, to pronounce sentence against all
men in general, for the offense of one particular man: Do you not see that into
what condition soever your sickness has brought you, yet still I love, nay
even adore you? Perhaps (said I) you may love me yet, because you have not seen
my face, and does not think it so deformed as it is by my sickness. But to cure
you of your disease, I will let you see it, upon condition you will lament my
loss, and afterward leave me at rest to endure my malady alone: Upon this I
pulled off my mask, and showed him my face, which had no resemblance of what it
was before, more then the name of a Face: This I did with design, that he
seeing me, might not love me any longer, and so I should be neither troubled
nor deceived: then if he did continue loving me, I might be assured that my
ugliness would never make him change, it being impossible I should be worse
then I was. I observed that as soon as he saw me, he stood mute, and was much
astonished, and that tears presently after trickled from his eyes, so as he was
not able to speak; but a little after he began thus: I must confess, Madam,
that your disease used you more unkindly then any, unless they saw you, can
imagine; but this alteration cannot change my affection to you, if you think it
does, Madam, you do wrong me: Periander's action is unpardonable; but be
assured, I beseech you, that only death, and not any accident of Fortune
whatsoever, is able to quench those flames which your Virtues and your Merits
have kindled in the heart of Merindor. I do not deny but that it was
your-Beauty which first invited me unto you, which gave me a will to serve you;
but since I have had the honor and happiness to be better acquainted with you,
oh Dorinde, I find more lasting invitations and allurements unto Love, then any
Beauty can be: Your Soul, you Soul Dorinde, your noble and sweet soul is far
fairer then ever was your face; and therefore, as your face first invited me,
your soul will eternally keep me to your service.

I should be too long, Madam, should I relate all the discourse which we had
upon this Subject; and it is fit I bury them in silence, as he did presently
after in oblivion; But so it was, I thought that I had found a man that was not
a Deceiver, and in that belief I contracted amity with him. The way of your
behavior to me (said I unto him) ever since you first saw me, and the
assurance you give me that my face does not affright you, nor lessen your
affection to me, does oblige me to esteem and love you more then I thought I
could any, after such an unworthy falsehood as that of Periander; and if you do
continue, as hitherto you have, assure your self Merindor, that I will love and
esteem you as your merits do oblige me. Oh Dorinde, replied he, I am not
contented with this promise, since your love is to be proportioned according to
my merits, and therefore I am afraid your love will be but a little. No, no,
said I, it may be infinite, and yet but hold proportion with your merits; but
to content you, I do promise, that if you do not Perianderize, I will love you
as much as you can desire.

Merindor having this assurance, he fell upon his knees, took my hand by force,
and though it was covered with marks of my disease, yet he kissed it several
times with such abundance of thanks, as this action gave me more full assurance
of his love, then my words could him of my good will, and I believe, that if my
Father had not come, he would never have ceased his Demonstrations of Affection
and Thanks.

My Father at his entrance smiled, because he either saw him kneeling before
me, or else some of the Domestiques told him. This invited me to tell him all
the passages betwixt us, and to speak very advantagiously in behalf of
Merindor: My discourse and my free expressions were so agreeable unto my
Father, that taking me aside, he asked me whether I did really love that
Cavalier, and whether I thought he loved me; and I answering, that considering
both Perianders behavior and his, I did both love him, and that he loved me.
Since it is so (said he unto me) I like him better then I do Periander: Sir,
said I unto him, you may dispose of me as you please, for I have no will but
yours. We must not be too hasty in any thing (answered he) nor must we slight
them, since he has behaved himself so well, let us entertain him with a few
handsome delays, and resolve upon the matter at more leisure: then turning
toward Merindor, he looked upon him with a kind aspect, thanked him for the
care he had of me in my sickness, and commanded me to bid him welcome, and
honor him as I was obliged.

Since this day, the door was never shut against Merindor; as soon as I was
dressed, he might enter into my chamber at all times without denial: and he, who
let no opportunity slip, was in it from morning till night, with so much show
of affection, that it seemed my deformity did augment it. On the other side,
Bellimartes seeing how this Cavalier had admittance, and thinking the same
might as well be allowed unto him, did send to know whether he might come in or
no: And my Father, since Merindor was permitted, durst not deny him; so as one
afternoon he came to see me; but being advertised of his coming, I put on my
Mask and my Gloves, with a protestation, not to pull them off as long as he
stayed in my chamber.

The discourse of Bellimartes smelt more of a Statesman then a Lover; and
though he saw the sickness had much changed me, yet he seemed not to care; but
within a few days after, he made such addresses unto King Gondebaut, that he
solicited my Father to marry me. Bellimartes being of another Nation, and never
beloved amongst us, my Father desired no alliance with him, but rather with
Merindor, whom he thought to be a man of much merit, and whose estate and
parents were not unknown; therefore he beseeched the King to pardon him, if he
not consent unto the marriage, because I only was the support and comfort of
his age, and to marry me unto a stranger, who had no settled estate in his
Dominions, was not any comfort unto him. He told him, that if I did dis-obey
him, he would desire to punish me no more, then to marry me unto that man; for
I should be as good as banished from him: Moreover, he said, that I was at
sufficient age to make my own choice, and he would never contradict my Will,
since it was a business that made me either happy or miserable all my life; and
therefore he would not by any means force my Will: and for a conclusion, he
beseeched the King to remember the faithful services which he and his Ancestors
had ever done him; and for a recompense of all, that he would do him the favor
not to constrain me unto this. The King, who loved Bellimartes, and intended to
oblige him further by doing this office for him, did answer unto all those
objections which my Father urged, and to every point did give good reasons to
cover that Sovereign power which he intended to use in this business: And as to
that objection, that Bellimartes had no estate in his Dominions, and that he
was a stranger, therefore he should never see me again; he answered, That he
would confer such an estate upon him in his Kingdom, as should take away that
exception; and that Bellimartes did intimate as much in his addresses unto me,
whose Beauty now was not such as could invite him to marry me for any matter of
Love, but reason of State, and to get Alliance in a Country where he was a
stranger: That this resolution would make him more tractable unto me, more
obedient toward him, and more serviceable toward all our kindred, then any
other he could mention unto him. That as to the choice and free liberty of my
Will, which he would leave unto me in this business, that it was great
indiscretion to do so; because youth and wisdom can never be together; and that
being so young as I was, he would commit a great fault, in leaving it to my own
choice; which I could never make but with indiscretion: but on the contrary,
that he was obliged by the very name of a Father to find out a Husband for me,
such a one as might be advantageous, and not to leave it unto me to choose at
random and without judgment. That if they ordained Guardians to such as are
within age; so certainly, marriage which is to last for life, must be
contracted by the approbation and consent of Wise and Prudent persons, who have
the Tuition of any young and unadvised child. That it was generally observed,
few marriages which were made for Love, prove prosperous in the end; and almost
all those that were made by advise, the contrary: and that the authority of
Wise Parents is commonly seconded by all sorts of happiness and felicities.
And as to the services which he and his Ancest^rs had done him, he did make it
appear that he had them in memory, by taking so much pains in marrying me unto
one whom he esteemed and loved: that had he not remembered them, he would have
married him unto some other within his Dominions who was as rich, and as well
allied as I was: but in this action, he thought to acquit himself of those
services which he had received from him and his house. To be brief, he desired
the marriage might be, and if it was not, he had an occasion to take it
unkindly: upon this he left my Father so astonished, that he neither could nor
durst answer him a word.

The authority of a Sovereign Prince, has such a stroke with it in the mind of
loyal subjects, that it strikes dead what resolutions soever was to the
contrary; especially when it comes with a color of reason: for most certain it
is, that subjects ought naturally to obey their Prince; dis-obedience is
against honor, and against great Tautates: in all other things, good excuses
may be used, and cannot be rejected by persons of judgment. But in this, my
Father had no will to bestow me upon this stranger, and had rather have dyed
then to see me in his hands: one while, he had a mind to tell him that he had
already given me unto Merindor, but he was presently off that, because when the
King spoke unto him, he did not tell him so then; other whiles, he resolved to
marry us secretly, assuring himself, that when it was done, Gondebaut could not
break it: but upon a sudden he foresaw so many miseries, that would befall both
him and us, that he altered his opinion; for he knew the Kings anger would
never cool till he was revenged upon us: sometimes his thoughts prompted him to
admit me amongst the Vestals; but when he fancied that, he saw me so reclus'd
and buried before I was dead, he waved that resolution: besides, the Kings
anger would have been as high against him for that, as if he had flatly
dis-obeyed him. Thus not knowing what course to take, he continued many days
so unresolved and uncertain, as it troubled him so much, that he moved pity
from all that saw him.

In the mean time Bellimartes whom the King acquainted with all the
difficulties which my Father objected, he took counsel from a prudent and wise
friend, to gain me with a golden shower, as the Poets say Danae was by Jupiter;
I mean, that though his nature was not over liberal, yet upon this occasion he
should overcome himself, and send rich presents unto me and my Father: for it
was the custom of old people to be covetous, and it was the nature of young
women to be desirous of new dresses, and show themselves brave amongst their
associates. Probably the King was of this opinion; for we were sure that
Bellimartes was not able of himself to bestow such delicate curiosities as he
sent unto me, nor such great and rich presents as he sent unto my Father every
day. Oh how true a saying it is, that stones will strike the Thunderbolt out of
the hand of Jupiter, and that gifts does steal away the liberty of them that
receive them. After Bellimartes had continued this course some twelve or
fifteen days, his presents had more eloquence in them, and more authority then
the King. There was not a woman about me, nor a servant about my Father, but
was so gained, that they talked of nothing but of his merit and of his valor:
all others were not worthy to look upon him; and although he was formerly very
il-favoured, those themselves that were of that judgment, do now cry him up to
the clouds; but that which was the greatest wonder unto me, was to see my
Father my degrees to approve of that which he so much disproved before:
Daughter (said he unto me) this man is not such a Barbarian as we did conceive
him; those that spend their judgment upon one they know not, are much to blame:
for who would not have been deceived, in this man? Whose birth was amongst
Barbarians; whose education was in blood and cruelties, and yet his
conversation and humor is quite otherwise then at first we thought him. For my
part, I think, upon serious consideration, that it were not amiss, to give the
King contentment in this alliance with him: it must needs be very advantageous
unto us, and he may one day advance us above all our Predecessors: again, it is
not good to resist the will of him whom Heaven has commanded us to obey; the
ruin of him who commits the crime is impardonable and infallible: for my part,
I did resist him when I thought the man to be not so good as he is; but now I
know him, I find the King has good reason to admit him into his favor, I see
my error and my simplicity in not obeying him, and in not acknowledging that
happiness which he intends toward us.

Oh Heavens! How little resolution there is in a child's judgment? And how
easily are they swayed by the reasons of those who know how to argue them with
art, they will swallow them like bitter pills which are lapt in honey; I did Love
Merindor, and I had no inclination at all unto Bellimartes, and yet my Fathers
discourse turned me which way he pleased. Truth is, when I was alone, and
remembered Merindors affection, and with what constancy he continued his
addresses during all the noysomness of my sickness; I could not choose but pity
and be exceedingly sorry for him. As soon as this course was resolved upon, my
Father commanded me not to see him so often as I was accustomed: I must confess
I lamented the loss of this Cavalier in whom I found so much affection. But
Bellimartes, who by his presents had blinded the eyes of my Father, was the
cause of my resolution to obey him who had the power over me. Yet being moved
unto compassion, I intended to advertise Merindor, to the end he might betimes
decline any further courtship or addresses to me, and divert himself some other
way.

The next morning therefore when he came to see me, according to his custom, as
soon as I heard that he was at my chamber door, I beseeched my Father, he would
be pleased to give way that he might enter, that I might acquaint him with our
resolutions, to the end he might be no longer deceived; that his constant
courtship, his humble addresses, the hopes which was given him, and his merits
and quality deserved all manner of contentment. My Father did much commend my
design, and to give us the better opportunity of talk; after Merindor was
entered, my Father retired to his own chamber, and left me to say what I would.
Merindor at first seeing this new favor, entered into great hopes, thinking
that my Father retired purposely in favor of him: but when he was gone, he
observed such a hollow kind of behavior in me, as quite dashed his hopes
again; especially when causing him to sit down, I spoke thus unto him

Merindor, your merits, and your good will unto me, does oblige me to honor
and esteem you as much as any Cavalier in the Country, and would most willingly
by any good service, render some testimony of my resentments; which invites me
to put you out of some doubts, which perhaps you have entered into since you see
me so reserved toward you. Know therefore Merindor, that as long as my Father
approved of our marriage, I behaved my self toward you with all the freedom,
that a harmless liberty would permit: but now since that hope is quite taken
away, I thought it would be a great sin, and such a one as deserved the Title
(...) Perfidy, if I should deceive you any longer by such petty caresses, that
are apt to delude young persons who do love: do not think. I beseech you, but
that if it were in my own choice, I would rather choose Merindor to live with
all the days of my life, the^ any other whomsoever; and have the same thoughts
of Arcingentorix: for were it referred unto him, assure your self Merindor,
that he would never look upon any but you. I have ever found him so disposed to
Love and honor you, and has held you in such a high esteem, as doubtless he
would have been extremely well contented, if it had been so designed by the
destinies, that I might have passed away my days with one of so much merit as
you are. But Heaven has decreed it otherwise, and I am not destined to so much
happiness; for you must know (continued I with tears in my eyes) that Gondebaut
does force me to marry Bellimartes, Oh Heavens Dorinde, (said Merindor and
clapped his hands together) will Gondebaut marry you to Bellimartes? Yes, (said
I unto him sadly) and I assure you Arcingentorix and I have done all we can to
prevent it, but find that there is no way to do it but by death. Since there is
that remedy (said he presently) all hopes are not gone, and without saying any
more, or hearing me, he went so suddenly out of my chamber, as made it plain he
intended some violent course. I called him several times, and then run after
him as far as the gates, fearing left in that fury he should do himself some
harm; but all was in vain, for he was gone out of sight upon a sudden, as if he
had wings. My Father who was not far off, hearing me speak so loud, he came to
me, and hearing how this young Cavalier was gone, he feared lest he should make
some attempt upon Bellimartes, and afterward the King cast all the blame upon
us: upon this consideration, he went unto the house of Bellimartes; he let him
understand in as discreet a manner as he could, all the passage betwixt
Merindor and me, that if any ill happened we might be discharged of it.
Bellimartes who was a man of courage, and had all the authority and power in
his own hands, did answer, that the business did not trouble him at all, and
that if Merindor was extravagant, he knew how to tame him.

In the mean time, Merindor transported with extreme passion, did go unto his
chamber, where shutting the door, he began to walk a great pace, so much out of
himself, as he knew not either what he did, or where he was: then after he had
walked several turns, and thinking none could hear, he began to speak with a
loud voice in this manner: Must Dorinde be enjoyed by another, and Merindor sit
tamely and endure it? Can the authority of a Tyrant prevail above all my
services, and most unjustly take that from me which is my due? Is there no
remedy against this wrong, and I with hazard of life and limb not make use of
it? And here making a sudden stop, he began to say, must this depriver of my
happiness, have it to himself at any other rate then the price of my blood and
life? No, no, if I live, he must dye; that is positive: Dorinde was in the
right, when she said there was no remedy but death. But (said he, as much
enraged as at the first) if it be so, why do I stay any longer? And why do I
not put my hand to a work that must inevitably be done? Do it then Merindor
quickly, unless thou had rather turn the sword against thy self.

Merindor thought he had been alone in his chamber; and that there was none to
hear him but walls; but as good luck was, his Wise and most dear friend
Euphrosias, being come a little before to seek him, was said down upon the bed
in expectation of him, and falling a sleep, did not wake till Merindor began to
talk loud; so as seeing him in such a fury, he was desirous to know the caust,
and let him empty his heart by the words which he uttered: knowing very well,
that to stop the overflowing of our souls at the first gush, will make the
deluge bigger; and to oppose fury in the first, does but inflame it the more.
But when he saw him ready to go and execute what he had spoken, he started up,
and took hold of his arm, desiring him to hear him speak: Merindor, not knowing
whether it was a man or a spirit, he was struck with such a fright, that his
fury was a little cooled; but recollecting his spirits, and knowing him to be
his dear friend; Oh my God! said he, Euphrosias, from whence come you? Come,
come, said his prudent friend, let us walk a turn together^ and when you have
answered me to a few questions, I will satisfy your curiosity and wonder* Then
he continued; Is it possible Merindor that the friendship which is betwixt us,
can suffer you to run into such extreme resolutions without imparting them unto
me, and without making use of me? Do you think I do not Love you? Or do you
take me for such an useless thing, that in affairs of this importance I neither
will nor can serve you? Why? (said Merindor) should you use any such language?
Because, said he, I heard all you said, and the dangerous resolution which you
were going to execute without imparting it unto me. Do you think I know not how
the King intends to marry Dorinde unto Bellimartes? And that her Father
consents unto it? Why man, it is all the Town talk, and I came hither to
acquaint you, if you were not acquainted with it before, to the end you might
resolve with your self, not only unto the Kings will, but also unto the will of
God, against which there is no resistance: for Merindor, you must know that
marriages are made in Heaven, and accomplished upon earth. How, how? said
Merindor hastily, do you say that marriages are made in Heaven? There is no
doubt on it, answered Euphrosias, and thereupon it is, that so many unexpected
marriages come to pass. I assure you, if it be so (said Merindor) it may be
said, that as bad a market may be made in Heaven as in Earth; but from this, I
do not conclude that Bellimartes must enjoy Dorinde, and Merindor live; It must
be concluded, replied Euphrosias, that whatsoever the Heavens will ordain for
you, must be done: but tell me Merindor, what is your design? To take away his
life (answered he) that takes away all my contentment. But (said Euphrosias)
What will that advantage you? Oh (said the young Cavalier) revenge is sweet.
Revenge, replied the Wise friend, is indeed very sweet, when it does not make
the offense greater; but if you should kill Bellimartes, the least punishment
you can expect, is banishment from all places where Gondebaut has any power;
and if so, what will become of your Love unto Dorinde? Will not then this
revenge make your offense which you receive, greater? I do not hold him wise,
who to put one of his enemies eyes out, will put out both his own. What then,
said Merindor, must I sit down tamely without resentment, and see Bellimartes
enjoy that which in right ought to be mine? I do not say so, answered
Euphrosias, but on the contrary; but if you will be ruled by me, I hope, we
shall obtain for you, this so much desired Dorinde. Do you think that the King
is so passionate in behalf of Bellimartes, as that he would do you any harm?
No, no, it is only to gratify Bellimartes in a business wherein he does not
think any has any interest but Arcingentorix, and of him the King makes no
account, though he be one of the chief in all the Country, because he is old
and not able to serve him, and on the contrary, Bellimartes is young, and may:
for you must know, that most Princes do with their Subjects, as we do with our
horses, when they are old and unserviceable, then turn them to the cart;
believe it Merindor, Princes put a great difference between those that are
young and able to serve them, and those that are antiquated and cannot. This
consideration moves me to think, that if you did acquaint the King with the
Interest you have in the business, he will consider it: and you shall see, that
though this course should not do any good, yet i^ will not do you any hurt.

The Wise Euphrosias, said all these things before him, not that he believed
they would do any good, or that the King being engaged by his word, would be
taken off it; but his drift only was, to cool a little that angry heat which
was kindled in the soul of Merindor; hoping, that if the first impetuosity were
but a little allayed, he might the more easily afterward persuade him to
reason. And indeed, it came so to pass, that Merindor considering upon what he
had said, and finding some color of probability in it, he began to hearken a
little unto reason: and in conclusion, they did not part until he resolved
absolutely to follow whatsoever Euphrosias did dictate, until such time as all
hopes were lost: and at the same time they determined amongst themselves, to
employ those about the King, whom they thought had most credit with him: this
Wise friend made every thing look with such a face of facility, as wrought much
upon the young man's apprehensions; and he promised unto him several assistances
of great prevalency, though all was only to divert him: for he knew that the
best way to persuade, is to infuse great hopes of that which is much desired.

But Madam, I beseech you hear how Heaven is pleased to play with men, and how
fortune does even what she pleases; when Merindor made addresses to the King,
and humbly beseeched him he would not force Arcingentorix to give his daughter
unto Bellimartes, because of the interest which he had; King Gondebaut
answered, that he did not know of his Interest, when he first engaged himself
in the business: but being now so far engaged, he knew not how to come off,
without much prejudice unto his Authority. So, see how Merindor is blasted in
all his hopes on that side; and Bellimartes so assured to be my Husband, that
the Articles were drawn; and nothing wanted but going to the Temple. Who would
ever think this business should be broken off? But see the black malice, and
extreme per^^dy of men? When all things were ready, and every one in order to
go unto the Temple, a grave Honorable Matron, accompanied with two daughters
and four servants, came to the door of our house, and with much ado got passage
through the crowd of people which flocked thither, she desired to speak with my
Father; and after civil salvation, Sir, (said she unto him, and raised her
voice that all might hear) I come to acquaint you, that my daughter whom I hold
here in my hand, and whose name is Alderina, is the Legitimate wife of
Bellimartes the Visigot; and that four years have passed since he publicly
married her in Gergovia, as all the Druides and Nobles of that Province can
attest, and as I will make appear before the King, at whose feet I am now going
to prostrate my self, in hopes of Justice, and that the Common Right of Nations
will be maintained and observed. Upon this, she made a reverence, and went
straight to the Palace Royal, not without great shouts of the people, when they
heard this news.

Whether Arcingentorix was astonished, judge you; for he was struck into such
an ecstasy, that he was not able to utter one word: but going into the Hall,
where we all were ready to go out, and asking for Bellimartes, Sir, (said he
unto him aloud) do you know a Lady whose name is Alderina? At the word
Alderina, we observed that he changed color: why, (said he) do you ask that
question? Because, (answered my Father) she and her Mother are at the door, and
do let you know, that they are going to the King for Justice against you.
Against me, said he, and why? Because, answered my Father, this Alderina is
your wife, and because you cannot marry another, as long as she is alive. Upon
this, a great noise of astonishment was heard, which was made by all those in
the Hall: and though Bellimartes made a laughing matter of it, and said, it was
not true, nor ought to retard the marriage, yet none of my kindred were of that
opinion, especially my Father, who told him freely, that he had such a belief
in what the woman said, as he would never consent his daughter should marry
him, till this imposture was cleared. Bellimartes who was naturally of a proud
imperious temper, and thought himself supported by the Kings favor; let me
tell you Arcingentorix, said he, that I care neither for you nor your daughter,
and that I do find my self much mistaken in the alliance which I intended to
make with you. My Father, who was generous, and though age hung heavy upon him,
yet could resent the honor of himself and his Ancestors, Bellimartes, said he
unto him, I had rather you should deceive your self then me; and let me tell
you, that I value you far less then you can do my daughter or me. As God would
have it, Bellimartes never heard these last words, for he was gone all in a
rage, and left all the company in a strange confusion. But for his part, he was
in the greatest confusion of all; because his conscience, which is a thousand
witnesses, did convince him of that unworthy act which he would have done. This
hour, I believe, was the happiest of all my life: for certainly if this Lady
had stayed but this hour longer then she did, I had been married unto him: and
most certain it is, this perfidious wretch had a wife, and as we are informed
since, had quitted her, because she was not rich enough: But see here, what the
faith of men is? And how miserable that woman is who trusts them; for this
Alderina had been long courted by him, and with so many passionate expressions
of affection, as it is hardly credible he should forsake her: yet avarice did
since most shamefully overcome his Love. But so it was Madam, that for this
time, I was almost miraculously delivered from a misfortune: for Alderina,
having made her addresses to the King, and convinced Bellimartes, who though he
denied all, yet he was ordained to take her for his Lawful wife; and charged
upon severe penalty, to marry no other, as long as she lived: many did wonder
that Alderina being very fair and handsome, Bellimartes should leave her for me,
whose face was enough to affright him: and when answer was made that he did it
out of covetousness, it was hard to be believed, because of the many rich
presents which he sent unto us, and which since we sent back: but they did not
consider that those gifts, which made him thought liberal, they were not given,
but only lent, which he knew well enough would return back if he married me,
since then all we had was his: so as this so much esteemed liberality, was most
certainly a base and unworthy self ended avarice. Merindor who was going upon
his last, and was fully resolved that when all hope was past, to kill himself,
but yet to send Bellimartes out of the world before him, he was not the last
man that was advertised of this accident; and as if a new life had been given
unto him, he leaped up, clapping his hands together, and blessing the Fates for
this happy fortune: then leaving his chamber, he made all the haste that
possibly he could unto mine, where he expressed himself the most joyful man
alive, and asked an hundred merry questions: He asked me how I did after my
marriage? and whether it was good to be two wives to one Husband; and because I
knew not well whether I should laugh or cry, I said unto him, well, well
Merindor, do not mock at me, perhaps when you are married, you may also find a
wife that has two husbands. If I have (said he) the stronger will drive the
other out of the house; but I fear not any such accident will ever befall me,
unless it be by you. By me? answered I, Nay, Merindor, the resolution which I
have, will free you from that fear; for within these few days, if my Father
will give me leave, I will become of those that are to keep in the Sacred Fire.
How, how? replied he, will you become a Vestal? Yes certainly (said I)
purposely to be rid of men, amongst whom I find nothing but deceit and
p^^fidie. You do wrong me (said he) not to put me out of the general number,
since I am sure you never saw any action, or heard any language from me, which
was derogatory from my vowed affection, or which in any reason could induce you
to put me into that rank: One indeed, replied I, does make no number; but what
do you say of Theombres, of Hylas, of Periander, and of Bellimartes? I say
(answered he) that they deserve not only to be razed out of the rank of men,
but also out of the number of the living: But I say, that all men ought not to
be blamed for them, and of all men, especially Merindor. Oh Madam, give me
leave to tell you, it is most extreme injustice to punish a number of innocents
for a few culpable; and since faults are personal, every person ought to bear
the burden of his own punishment. I must confess Merindor, said I unto him,
that you are in the right, but I am not to be blamed; for having found so much
falsehood and perfidie in all those that ever made any addresses unto me, I had
good reason to fear the same from all others. This Dorinde (said he) is a
second wrong, not inferior to the first; for you rank me in the number of
those who have deceived you, since you cannot exclude me from the number of
those who have made addresses unto you. Hitherto (replied I,) I cannot say I
have been deceived by you; but I cannot tell what you may do upon occasion.

Whilst we were talking thus, my Father came into the chamber, still much moved
at the former accident; and seeing this young Cavalier with me, Come Merindor
(said he unto him) are you not much offended against my Daughter and me, for
the fault which the Kings power caused us to commit? Sir (answered Merindor) I
am more your servant, then to be offended at you; but on the contrary, I thank
the Gods for making the vilany of that wicked man known unto you; though let me
tell you, that if his vilany had been executed, the Vilain should not have
lived an hour after; for I swear by the great God Ifesus, this sword should
have washed away his crime with his own blood, for not one single drop should
have remained: But Sir, thanks be to God that there is no need of such
extremities; and remember I beseech you for the future, that our old Fathers
had good reason to say, That no man ought to rub an herd which he knows not:
And Sir, there are many in this Province whose Ancestors and Estates are known
unto you; and who would think themselves honored and happy in your Alliance:
And if heaven would make me so happy as to obtain that favor, what services
(said he, and kneeled down) would I not pay unto you all my life, and what
love, what duty and affection should not Dorinde receive from me? Dorinde I
say, whom you know I ever loved and honored, what accidents soever happened. The
good old man who knew how affectionate he always appeared, even all the time
of my sickness, and seeing him still continue his passionate expressions, he
did believe him. But, oh Heavens! who might not as well have been deceived as
he? Merindor (said he unto him) speak freely and ingeniously, as you are a
Cavalier; Are you real, or is it only out of your civility and courtship that
you use these expressions? Sir, answered he, I cannot commit an act so unworthy
of the name I bear, as to dissemble or deceive; and therefore I do protest and
swear, that all the words which I have spoke, do proceed from the real thoughts
of my heart, with all sincerity and true meaning, else may Bellinus root me and
my name out from the number of men. If so, replied Arcingentorix, and that it
prove so that Bellimartes has another wife, and that your mother do consent
unto your desires, I do promise you Dorinde for your wife, and I do call the
Gods to be a witness unto the promise which now I make unto you. And I (added
Merindor) do call all the Gods to witness, that I do receive this promise as
the greatest happiness I can desire: for hence forward, I do devote my self
unto you Sir, as my Lord and Father; and unto Dorinde as my Lady and Mistress,
and I do vow and swear unto you both, an affection without end, and perpetual
obedience. Who would have thought, that heard these solemn protestations
expressed which so much freeness, but that they proceeded from his heart? But
alas, so they did: I confess they did proceed from his heart, but it was from
the most wicked, vile, perfidious heart, that ever was in any traitorous and
perjured man: certainly it is enough to express him, to say that he is a man
without any addition of traitorous, or perfidious, or perjured; for I do
believe all others that bre^th upon the face of the earth, are so. Now this
man, according to the nature and custom of all others, went from us in
appearance full of contentment, as full as man could be, and went unto the
Palace to hear more certain news of Alderina and of her marriage: at night he
returned again, and told us that the King having seen the attestations of the
Druids and Nobles of Gergovia, was highly offended against Bellimartes, and had
commanded him to depart his Dominions, and never to come into his presence
again; yet some Grandees about Gondebaut, were in hope to obtain, his Pardon,
when the King his choler was a little over: and so it happened; for a while
after, they were reconciled by the mediation of Alderina her self; who fell
down at the feet of Gondebaut, who pardoned her Husbands fault, upon condition
he would live with her as he ought:

Whilst these things happened, it seems the Gods were pleased to mock Periander,
for the spring coming on, and some remedies which a Physician gave me, did so
restore my complexion and features, that it was much better then before; and
indeed my companions, said she unto the three strangers, I believe you will
confess it better then ever you saw it before: but so it happened, that as my
deformity did chase away Periander from me so my recovery called him back.

I cannot express the joy and contentment of Merindor, when from day to day, he
saw my complexion return: and not being able (as he said) to endure any longer
delay in our marriage, he entreated my Father to give him consent that he might
go unto his Mother for hers, there being nothing else which could hinder it. Oh
Heavens what new protestations did he make to my Father and me when he
departed, I have wondered since a hundred times, that the earth did not open and
swallow him alive.

I should but trouble you, Madam, did I relate the whole series of his actions:
but so it was, that going away, he lost all memory of me, and all his oaths:
about three months after his departure, he sent one of his Brothers unto me
with a Letter, which I will read unto you, for I keep it still about me, to
convince him of his falsehood and perjury: then putting her hand into her
pocket, she pulled out a paper, and read these words:

MERINDORS Letter unto DORINDE:
I Would to God (Fair Dorinde) that I were out of the World, or else, that I
were not the Son of that Woman who is my Mother; or at least, that I were my
Brother: and al to the end, as your most humble servant, that I might obtain
that happiness which I desire: but being as I am, it is not permitted me: the
offer which I make of him, makes it evident unto all, that all marriages are
made in Heaven.

Do you not wonder, discreet and Fair Shepherdesses (said Dorinde) that
Merindor should write such a Letter unto me? For if he had quitted me, one
would have thought in all reason, that he should have done it when I was ugly
and deformed, as Periander did: but that he should with such assiduity abide
the horror of my disease; that he should never care for any deformity in my
face, but even then to court me with such violence and zeal, and then to leave
me when my Beauty was restored, and when I thought nothing could separate us,
but his own will, or rathe levity: this seems to be against the grain of all
reason in the World. And I must needs confess the truth, this action did go so
near unto my heart, that I vowed never hence-forward to trust any man living;
but to fly and shun all such as bore the name, and never to have any more to
do with them. My Father was offended at this as much as I; and therefore
without any further consultation, or heeding any applications that Merindor^
Brother would have made unto me, he sent him back with this sudden and
peremptory answer, that his Daughter was neither for Merindor nor his Brother:
and therefore he intended to dispose of me another way. And because the young
man desired an answer unto his Brothers Letter, with my Fathers leave I
returned this:

DORINDES answer unto MERINDOR:
I Would to God, unfaithful Merindor, that you were not upon the earth, or that
I never had had any eyes to see you; or at the least that I were a man for a
time, and not a woman; and all this to the end, that as your mortal enemy I
might take that revenge of your perfidy, which I desire: but since being as I
am, that is not permitted me, The offer which you make unto me of your Brother,
which I refuse, makes it evident, that the marriage betwixt him and me, is not
made in Heaven; at the least I assure you, shall never be accomplished on Earth.

Now Madam, (continued she) you may observe three of the most horrid
infidelities (to omit the rest) that ever were committed against any woman.
These that I have told you, are enough to make any that have eyes or their
wits, never to trust any that has either the name or the figure of a man: but
hear what torments they caused me to endure; and then I am confident you will
confess that the hatred which I bear unto this animal, man, is grounded upon
most just cause.

Dorinde would have continued, had not the noise of men on horseback,
disturbed them: these Fair Shepherdesses being unaccustomed to see such
assemblies in their Villages, they all ran out of curiosity to the door:
Dorinde and the other strangers did the same; then they saw pass along the
way, which joined almost close to the door of this Cabin, fifteen or sixteen
persons very well mounted, and armed, alter the Burgundian fashion, having
head-pieces upon their heads, Suits of Arms for back and breast, a Javelin in
their right hands, and a Buckler on their left arm. These men marched in order,
and in the head of them was him who conducted them, as might be imagined, both
by the goodness of his Horse, which was much fairer then the rest, and by the
richness of his Armor, which was almost all gilt, and a Plume in his
Headpiece, which made him remarkable above the rest. This Troop marched very
fast, and their Armor and Horses seet made a great noise: as for the men they
talked not loud, though they did hold some discourse which could not any
distance be understood. When they came near unto this Cabin, they cast their
eyes upon these Shepherdesses, which out of curiosity were come to the door,
and seeing them so Fair, they stayed a little, almost ravished to see such Fair
Faces in such rural Cottages. Oh Heavens, cried he that commanded them, is not
yonder Dorinde? She, hearing her self named, and looking him in the face, she
presently remembered that she had seen him very often with King Gondebaut: and
therefore fearing some violence, she retired into the Cabin, to try if she
could hide her self: but he, being more assured by this action that it was she,
did presently alight, and five or six of his companions with him: and entering
very blusteringly amongst these women, they came to the place where Dorinde was
retired; who trembling for fear, and hiding her face with her hands, she looked
as pale as death. Celadon in the dress of Druide, wished now that he had Arms,
to repulse the injury which these strangers seemed to offer unto Dorinde, and
not being able to endure any outrage should be done unto her in his presence,
he first used entreaties and fair language; and seeing them slighted, and
offers made to carry away that trembling woman out of the Cabin, he could not
choose but join hands unto his language, and beyond the strength of a woman,
like man, resist this violence. The Captain and the Soldiers would quickly
have dispatched him, had they believed him to be a man, but thinking him to be
a woman Druide, their respect unto that sex, and the reverence they bore unto
her habit, made them take it into their consideration. All the rest of the
women, seeing this attempt of the Druide, after her example, did their
endeavors to save Dorinde, and perhaps this feeble defense, had held them long
in play, had not the Captain being grown into choler, made a sign unto the
Soldiers, that without any consideration of these women, they should use
force, and carry her away. As Celadon was holding the arms of this man so as he
could not stir, Astrea and Diana were on both sides of Dorinde, and held her by
the arms; but the Soldiers who had received the sign from their Commander,
pushing them both very roughly away, they constrained these Shepherdesses to
let their hold go, and with such violence that Astrea fell to the ground. Who
crying out, and the Druide turning about her head, seeing her so unworthily
used, she grew as furious as any raging Lion, and letting him go whom she held,
and ran upon him who did the affront with such violence, and gave him such a
blow upon the face, as she constrained him to let Dorinde go, who was already
pulled out of the door, and after he had reeled two or three paces, he fell
amongst the horses feet, which trampled him so, as he was not able to do more
harm unto this fair company: the Captain in the mean time being out of the
Druids hands, and seeing they had carried Dorinde out of the place, he went out
also, to see her carried away according to his design: but when he was out, he
saw his companions on foot, and running after her in the fields: for fear made
her so swift, as she seemed to have wings at her heels. At the first, he
laughed, for he confidently believed she would be taken again. But whilst he
was looking and laughing at this chase, for so may the flight of Dorinde be
termed, they saw appear six Cavaliers, who being very well mounted and armed,
came riding the same way. At the first, they rid in file, as Travelers use in
a Journey; but when they saw so many men running after one woman, they drew up
together, and galloped to oppose the violence which they thought would be done
unto her. Yet they could not come in so soon, but Dorinde was first taken; and
because she had no other defense, they saw her fall down upon her knees, hold
up her hands, and make lamentable prayers and supplications to them. The
Soldiers, on the other side, without any compassion, took her, and would have
carried her away: when these Cavaliers came up unto them, they out of pity,
though they knew not Dorinde, opposed this violence; but one of them upon a
sudden casting his eye upon her, did know her: Oh ye crew of villains (said he
unto the Soldiers) and unworthy to bear arms, since you employ them so ill;
cease wronging her whom ye all ought to honor and serve, or else by Heaven
(said he, and drew his sword) I will chastise you according to your merits.
Sir, (answered one of them) King Gondebaut commanded us to do what we have
done, and none ought or can oppose his will. Upon this, not caring for the
menace of the Cavalier, and seeing him so slenderly accompanied, also his
Captain and company coming to his relief, he continued on his way: at which the
Cavalier was so incensed, that he gave him such a blow upon the shoulder, that
for all his Coat of Male, it gave him a deep wound, and being a little distant
from Dorinde, he rid upon him with his horse, and trod him to the ground. In
the mean time, the rest of the Cavaliers advanced against the Captain, and his
Soldiers, who without any expostulations, did assault them very furiously. The
Cavaliers being better armed, and better mounted, and having more courage,
though they were interior in number, yet gave them such a hot salute that the
combat did not last above a quarter of an hour: for the Captain being killed,
the rest were quickly routed, and fled some one way, and some another, as fast
as ever their horses could carry them. This victory was the sooner gotten, by
reason that most of one party was on foot, and were running after their horses,
which were broken loose in the fields. But of these six Cavaliers, two of them
were killed, and one so wounded that he could hardly sit his horse.

Dorinde seeing this unlooked for relief, although she thought she knew the
voice of him who spoke, yet not being sure, because his headpiece covered his
face, she retired as fast as she could in a trembling and panting pace unto her
companions, though not so much affrighted as when she was first seized upon:
But when she was told of the end of the combat, for she was gotten into the
cabin, and that one of the Cavaliers who defended her was much wounded, she
went out of the cabin with watery eyes and cheeks to receive him and help him
all that possibly she could: And because his three companions took off his
helmet to give him Air, as soon as she cast her eye upon him, she knew him to
be Bellimartes; at which she was so surprised, that she knew not whether she
dreamed or waked: But whilst the three Cavaliers were laying him upon the Bed,
and one of them stayed with him, the other two pulled off their helmets, and
kneeled down before her, showing all signs of humble obedience; she all the
while was so surprised at the sight of them, that she could not utter a word;
for the one was Merindor, and the other Periander. Oh heavens! (cried she out
at the last, when she could speak) Oh heavens! Is it possible I should be thus
much obliged unto three men, who have made me hate all men living for their
sakes? Merindor then began first to speak: Oh Dorinde (said he unto her) do not
by your disfavours lessen that contentment which heaven has given us, in
rendering you a testimony that we do love you more then you would be loved by
us. After this, Periander continued, Heaven (fair Dorinde) has made choice of
us, to render you this little service; and believe, that the choice could not
be made of any others, who have vowed so much affection as we: Receive, we most
humbly beseech you, the willingness we have to expose our lives in repulsing
that violence which was offered unto you. I do protest, said Bellimartes, and
turned his head toward her, I shall leave this world the most contented man
that is in it, since I have lost my life in your service; and if you will have
me think my death more welcome then ever was my life, fair Dorinde, Do but only
say, Go in peace Bellimartes.

Dorinde turning her eyes upon Bellimartes, and seeing a mortal paleness in his
face, she only embraced Merindor and Periander, and not having leisure to speak
unto them, she ran unto Bellimartes, who expressed such signs of perfect
contentment, as every one observed an alteration in his eyes and countenance;
but especially when she took his hand, and said unto him; If heaven has
decreed that you must end your days in this relief which your Valor has given
me, be assured Bellimartes, that it shall never be forgotten; and if it be the
pleasure of the Gods, as I shall pray it may, to prolong your life unto my
contentment, be confident that I will never be ungrateful unto Bellimartes.
Madam (said he, and forced himself to speak) to give you my life, which is so
much your due, deserves no recompense: but I beseech you accept also of my
soul, which I do most religiously devote unto you, and will never take it out
of the fair hands of Dorinde: Upon this he would have kissed her hand, but he
wanted strength; for he grew pale and cold, and immediately died in the arms of
that Cavalier who held him in the bed, and whose tears and lamentations made
all beholders pity him.

This last action of Bellimartes did so mollify the heart of Dorinde, that
forgetting the fault which he had committed against her, and reviving the
memory of that affection which by so many addresses he had expressed unto her,
she could not choose but accompany his death with tears of compassion and amity;
an office which she continued long in performing, and had continued longer, if
the company, moved unto pity, had not removed her by force from the Corpse; so
seeing her self constrained to leave him, Adieu Bellimartes (said she unto his
corpse) if thou did think it a happiness to have my love, go contented into
the Elizian fields, and be assured, that thou art happier in thy death then in
thy life. These expressions were accompanied with tears, to testify they were
real, and that he had gotten her love in dying, more then he could have
obtained by living.

Whilst all these things thus passed, a great number of Shepherds in the
neighboring Vilages came running with Pike-staves, and such Arms as they used
in hunting, and some brought Bows and Arrows, such as they used at their
general Assemblies in the Forest of Isoures, and other meetings: so as in a
little time there was a great Army about this little Cabin: Their astonishment
was not a little when they heard of the violence which was offered unto that
fair stranger by the first company, and when they heard of the relief which the
last brought her so opportunely; and their wonder was more yet, when they saw
those marks which the Cavaliers left of their courage and valor. Merindor and
Periander seeing Dorinde in the hands of the Druide and Shepherdesses, they
thought it fit to leave her a little to dry up her tears, whilst in the mean
time they went to pay that office unto their dead companions, which the
survivors were obliged unto; and the more, because Periander had lost a cousin
german, and Merindor a brother, whom they exceedingly loved. Leaving therefore
the other Cavalier with the corpse of Bellimartes, they went out of the cabin,
accompanied with many Shepherds, and went afterward amongst the dead to look
for their kindred: They found them both close by one another; the one was run
through with a Javelin which pierced his heart, and Merindor's brother lay
under his horse with a wound given by a sword through his breast; but as a note
of their valor, four dead enemies did lie about these two, who held their
swords still in their hands, with visages which seemed to threaten as well dead
as alive.

The griefs and lamentation of Merindor and Periander were indeed very great,
and had been greater, if some Druides had not at the same time come thither;
and this great number of people were sent by their authority to appease the
tumult, as upon such occasions they used to do. These Druides understanding the
just and generous defense which those Cavaliers had made in relieving this
stranger; after that they had highly commended them, and in the name of the
Country given them many thanks, they endeavored by all manner of ways to
comfort them, and therefore they desired them to leave their immoderate grief,
and also leave the care of their friends interment unto them; which after many
entreaties they permitted, but not without embracing and kissing their dead
kindred several times, and bidding them their last farewell.

The Druides being advertized that there was yet one of their companions dead
in the next cabin? they went and brought him thither, and there washed their
Corpse in the River Lignon, afterward interred them in the place where the
combat was; and lastly, they raised up monuments of Earth upon their graves,
and decked them with all the rural Art that is imaginable. This Funeral
ceremony was performed with so much honor and order, that Merindor, Periander,
and the Cavalier who was friend unto Bellimartes, had reason in some degree to
lessen their mourning.

Dorinde during all the time of this ceremony, never stirred out of the cabin,
because she had not yet recollected her self, nor was rid of her fears; The
Shepherdesses Astrea, Diana, and Phillis, with the disguised Druide, did keep
Florice, Cercinea, and Palinice company; all whom could not sufficiently wonder
at this unaccustomed accident: And when Periander and Merindor returned to give
an account of that charitable office which they had performed, they, saw a
Shepherd coming, who seemed to be in very great haste; when he was a little
nearer, he was known to be Hylas: Periander no sooner heard him named, but he
cried out; Oh God, said he, is it Hylas of the Isle of Camargues, the best
humored man alive, and the most jolly companion? The very same, answered one of
the Druides that came with them, he has sojourned in this Country several
months; and he found every day so delightful, as I do not think he will ever
leave it. Periander then turning toward Merindor, Brother (said he) I beseech
you go you unto Dorinde, and tell her, if she ask for me, that you left me with
Hylas, I am confident she will be very glad to hear it, for I must needs go and
meet and embrace him as one of my best friends: Upon this, he went a great pace
toward Hylas, who seeing him coming, did not know him, as well because of his
Arms, as because he little expected to find him in that place: Periander held
out his Arms, and embraced him, he not knowing that these caresses came from
Periander. But when he said unto him, Is it possible Hylas that you should be
turned a Shepherd of Forests, and quite forget your good friends? His voice
made him know that face which he had forgotten, and therefore he took him about
the neck and kissed him, and was so transported with joy, that he seemed to be
almost out of himself. Then Periander said unto him, see Hylas whether I have
not good reason to complain against your memory, that does not only forget me
when I am absent but also when I am present; but I am glad to see you, and to
testify how really I love you, I am come to see you, accompanied with one whom
you love the best of any in the world. Periander (answered Hylas) I pray
distinguish what kind of one you speak? It is a man or a woman? For if it be a
man, none can be more welcome unto me then your self, since there is none I love
better then I do Periander; and if it be a woman, then, if it be she I love
best, you have met with Stella, for it is she unto whom I have devoted my self.
What? replied Periander, have you forgotten Dorinde? Dorinde answered Hylas, I
perceive my good friend, that you have forgotten the custom of Hylas; you must
know, that her name has hardly room in my memory: for since I have seen so many
Creysides, so many Madonthes, so many Laonices, so many Phillises, so many
Alexises, and above all one Stella, who dazles my eyes, I tell you the luster
of so many new lights, will not let me see, the obscurities of your City of
Lions.

I perceive (said Periander, and smiled) that you are still the same Hylas,
upon the banks of Lignon, that you were wont to be upon those of Arar. The very
same (said Hylas) but yet, if Dorinde be here, I shall be glad to see her, that
I may know whether my mouth was not in those days out of taste: If you desire
to see her, said Periander, you may go into that Cabin, and find her still
frighted, at an accident which happened: What accident? said Hylas, it is,
answered Periander, that but for Bellimartes, Merindor, and my self, some of
King Gondebauts Soldiers would have carried her away: but we finding her just
in the very nick of time, we made them quit their enterprise; but alas the poor
Bellimartes is dead, with Merindor's Brother, and I have lost a Cosen germane.
How? replied Hylas, have you thus handled King Gondebaut's men? If so, I
beseech you, carry me to Dorinde, for I must of necessity advertise her of some
things which I have heard, and which caused me to come hither in such haste.

They were then close by the Cabin, so as Hylas upon this entered, who seeing
all the Shepherdesses about the stranger, did judge her to be Dorinde; but
faigning not to know her: where is this new Shepherdess, said he, who at her
first coming has stained the purity of our banks with bloody Sacrifices?
Dorinde then knowing Hylas, rose up to salute him, being very glad to meet him
in that place, where she thought she should need all manner of assistance; and
going toward him, is it possible Hylas; said she, that my face should be so
changed, as your eyes should not know her now, whom your heart did formerly
know so well? I believe, answered Hylas, that if my heart were here, it might
answer the questions which you ask, but since it is not, I think there are few
here who can tell what to say unto them. How? said Dorinde, your heart not
here? Who is the thief that stole it? As for any male thieves, replied he, I
know how to keep it well enough from them; but I must confess my bad
influences has submitted me unto some certain Female thieves, against whom I
cannot possibly defend my self: and the worst is, they are of an humor, that
the first thing they seize upon is the heart, so as I can very seldom keep this
little piece of household stuff in my house. I believe, said Dorinde, that when
these Femal thieves do steal it from you, it is not long before you can furnish
your self with another: You are mistaken (said Florice and interrupted) for
those who do steal it, do find it such a bad piece of stuff, that they
presently restore it back again at the next meeting: you are mistaken your
self, said Hylas, and you had better have said, that because it is impossible
two hearts should dwell together, without the stronger driving out the weaker,
those who do steal my heart, are constrained to let theirs come unto me, and
become mine, and stay with me until some other thief do steal it from me to
give me her own; and therefore Dorinde, if you have any occasion for your
heart, which you sent unto me, when you stole mine, ask it of Florice; and you
Florice, ask yours of Cryseide when you see her next: and let Cryseide ask hers
of Madonthe; and if Madonthe will have that back, which I had of hers, let her
look out Laonice: and whosoever has any thing to do with Laonices, they will
find it in Phillis: and you Phillis, if you desire to have yours again to
bestow upon any Shepherd, bid the Fair Druide return it unto you; for as for
hers which I had, it is now in the possession of Stella, who in a happy
exchange, did most courteously give me hers, which I will keep as long as it
pleases me; but Dorinde, said Periander, and interrupted, I beseech you let us
discourse upon these hearts another time when we have more leisure: Hylas comes
to advertise you, that you are not safe in this place, and therefore it is
requisite you hear what he says: you do very well, said Hylas, to put me in
memory of it; for this new Shepherdess, does so put me in mind of what is past,
that I forget the present. Let me tell you therefore that not long since, as I
lay close in a bush expecting a Shepherdess whom I loved, and was to walk that
way with her Flock, I saw four men on hors-back, terribly affrighted, and in
great disorder; and one of them had a great cut upon his hand, which bleeding
extremely, constrained them to alight very near the place where I was; and
having left one to watch whether any followed, the other held the horses, and
the third tore his handkerchief, gathered a little ground-mosse, and applied it
unto the wound to stop the blood; in the mean time I heard one of them say,
that if they made a little more haste, they should meet with the rest of their
company from whom they were parted; and then they would return, and be
revenged, by bringing away that woman whom King Gondebaut so much desired to
have. As soon as they were gone, I met with some Shepherds, who told me partly
what had happened in this place, unto which I came purposely to tell you, that
unless you have a mind to fall into their hands, you must remove from this
place. Oh ye Gods! (cried out Dorinde with tears in her eyes) will not fortune
let me remain at rest, even in these solitary places? Madam, said Periander,
when we came away from Lions, we heard that you were pursued by many of King
Gondebauts guard; and therefore if you will take my advice, you shall seek out
some place of strength for your security: as long as Merindor and I do live, we
will defend you against all the world; but we being but three, with this
Cavalier that is friend unto Bellimartes, our lives may be taken away by a
multitude, and you injured, which is worse then the loss of us. Licydas upon
this, who was come unto this place upon the noise, a little before Hylas.
Madam, said he, we will all of us serve you, against all that shall offer you
any injury; but give me leave to tell you, that to avoid a misfortune, it were
good you were conducted unto Marselles, where your merits would meet with much
honor and respect from all: the great Nymph Amasis, and Galathea, will bid you
welcome, and defend you against all violence.

Every one did much approve of this advice; And because Dorinde was unwilling
to put her self into the hands of these Cavaliers by her self alone, Florice,
Cercinea, Palinice, and Celidea, offered themselves to accompany her, provided
some Shepherds would go with them, because they would not return alone. Hylas,
Lycidas, Thamires, Calidon and Corilas, did present themselves very freely: and
therefore without more delay, after these strangers had bid adieu unto Alexis,
Diana, Astrea, and Phillis, and the rest of the Shepherdesses, they set
forward: the three Cavaliers, mounted and armed as when they came first, kept
at a small distance from the company, in a posture to defend them, if any came
to assault them: and the rest of the Shepherds, helped the Shepherdesses to
walk, whilst Thamires helped his dear Celidea.

Now all the company parted; Astrea, Diana, and Phillis, to accompany Alexis,
went toward the house of Phocion, because it grew very late; and by the way,
admiring the accident that had happened unto this stranger: I assure you, said
Astrea, Dorinde is less beholding unto those that love her, then to those that
do not; why? said Phillis, because, answered she, those that do not love her,
do not deceive her, and those that do, betray her: why good Sister (said Diana)
do you not think that all men are deceivers? Certainly you are deceived if you
think otherwise: for believe it for an infallible truth, that falsehood and
treachery will be in the world as long as there is one man in it. Alexis, who
though in the habit of a woman, yet could not shake off those resentments of a
man which nature had infused; is it possible discreet and Fair Shepherdess,
(said she) that you should think as you speak? Is it possible Madam, answered
Diana, that you should live to this age, and be ignorant of the truth of which
we speak? That men should be so bad as you say they are, said Alexis, and yet I
not know it, is not strange: for my education amongst Druids has been so
retired from all men, that we do hardly know them further then by name: but yet
I cannot imagine that the great Tautates, who is all goodness, would ever give
unto our sex such a bad companion as you represent him. I can answer you no
otherwise (said Diana) but that it is a secret reserved to himself: and if it
be lawful for me to tell you what I think, I believe it is to make us exercise
the virtue of Patience. Oh Sister, said Astrea, I am not of your opinion, and I
believe very few are: Astrea, replied Diana, how were you satisfied with
Celadon? for my part answered Astrea, I had no reason to be ill satisfied with
him you name, no more then you were with Philander: I must needs confess, said
Diana, I had no reason to be dis-satisfied in him, but I believe if he had
lived longer, I might have been, for he was a man: Alexis hearing Celadon
named, began to blush, and not daring to look upon Astrea, she cast her eyes
upon the ground; but when she heard her say that she had no reason to be more
dis-satisfied with Celadon, then Diana was with Philander, she was very
desirous to know what occasions of dis-satisfaction Philander had ever given
her, to the end she might know by that, what it was which his Shepherdess
complained of: and seeing that Diana, did not answer any further, she began:
But discreet Shepherdess (said she unto her) oblige me so far, I beseech you,
as to tell me freely, what dis-satisfaction you received from that Shepherd of
whom you speak. Madam, answered she, the discourse would be too long and
tedious for your ears, and for me to relate. You may if you please, replied
Celadon, epitomize it in so short a method, as will not be a trouble unto
either. Phillis upon this replied for her: Madam, said she, I beseech you,
pardon her from that whole days work, which I assure you would weary her more
then you imagine: I should most willingly satisfy your curiosity, and tell you
what dis-satisfaction Diana received from that Shepherd; but that I know the
bad fortune of Philander, made such a wound in the soul of Diana, as cannot be
touched with never so delicate a hand, but it is so sensible as will grieve
her: but Sister, said she unto Diana, pray tell me, what exceptions have you
against Lycidas? I say, answered Diana, that he is not yet dead nor married,
and that perhaps before either of these come to pass, such things may fall out,
as may give you occasion to rank him in the Catalogue of men. Oh Sister, said
Phillis, who do you foretell such things as cannot choose but infinitely
displease me? and of which there is no appearance? But I see, a palate out of
taste, makes all viands seem bitter. Sister, replied Diana, I know your
meaning; but consider, that he is a man, and consequently a deceiver: and when
Merindor deceived Dorinde, there was no appearance, nor no likelihood he should
do so: and yet you see he did. You must know, that deceipts, are not deceipts,
unless they deceive the expectation of those against whom they are done, and
therefore they must be done so, as there may be no appearance or thought of
them before hand. For my part, said Astrea, who has no interest in these things
you speak of, I ought to be believed before either of you, and therefore
hearken unto my opinion: I do believe, that men are not such deceivers as many
do think them, nor so faithful, as many have opinion they are. Good Servant
(said Alexis) explain this riddle; Mistress, said Astrea, my meaning is, that
some men are deceivers, and some are not; all ought not to be measured by one
and the same ell; and that the virtues and vices of some, ought not to be the
honor, or dis-honour of others: and therefore, those who have cause to
complain against the infidelity of men, ought not to say positively that they
are all deceivers: nor those who have full assurance of the fidelity of some
particular man, must not think, but that another may be unfaithful.

Their Discourse had lasted longer, had they not heard the voice of a Shepherd
singing, whom they presently knew to be Sylvander: and coming a little nearer
the hedge where he sat, they heard him repeat some verses, which intimated
that he was not changed: Diana who was the first that heard him, would have
drawn off the company from hearing any further: but for all that, they would
needs hear him on: and then they heard him break out into these expressions.

Miserable Sylvander (said he with a deep sigh) why do thou drone on this
miserable life, and has such, and so much reason to die? Is it out of hopes of
any better Fortune? Ah fond man, is it not full time to undeceive thy self, at
least, if thou have any consideration, any feeling, or any sensibility of thy
unfortunate life? Thou beginnest now to enter into the fifth luster, since the
miserable day of thy birth; and in so many nights, so many weeks, so many
months, and so many years, can thou name one minute that was not remarkable
for some misfortune or other? I cannot indeed call that hour disastrous in
which I first saw Diana, since in her I saw all the excellencies and perfection
that Nature can give unto mortals: but was not that the time that Fortune took
a greater Empire over me then ever she had before? For if she had any power
over me before, it was only over my poor sheep; and the little stock which I
had, but my soul was free, and exempt from blows and changes: But oh ye Gods!
since I saw this fair, this divinely fair Diana, my soul is a slave, and from
being insensible, is grown so weak and so submiss, that the least Will of this
Shepherdess is a Law unto me, her commands are Oracles, and the least twinkle
of her, commands so absolute, that I would rather choose the worst death, then
disobey the least shadow of her Will: and is not this the very height of
misery, that all my cares, all my services, all my endeavors, and all my
extreme passions should be so many offenses, and so many injuries unto her? If
the Universe, and all that is comprised in it, be ruled and governed by reason,
what reason is there, that I having no design but to do her service with all
manner of affection and fidelity, that she should make no return but hatred and
scorn? Then making a stop, and staying mute a while, he began again: But oh ye
Gods! I do understand this secret, or at the least I think I do; It is to
punish me because I have loved this divine Diana too much, and have preferred
my affection unto her, before that which I owed unto you. But if it be so, give
me leave with all reverence to expostulate a little with you; why did you not
make her with less perfection? For being as she is, it were a sin to love her
less then I do: But well (said he with a profound sigh) do your pleasure, and
if you think good, double and redouble your punishment, for I cannot lessen or
diminish one jot.

Whilst Sylvander was talking thus to himself, Diana had got a good distance
off, and Phillis having no mind to leave her alone, did show her unto Alexis
and Astrea, and whispered them in their ears, that if they intended to stay any
longer, she would go and stay with her; but the Druide and her companion seeing
it was late, they thought it would be to no purpose to stay any longer in that
place, where they could not receive any better satisfaction of this Shepherds
innocence then they had; and therefore stealing off unperceived, they went as
fast as they could to overtake Diana, unto whom they told all that they could
in discharge of Sylvander. But she, seeming as if she cared not, she answered
in such a kind of neglective manner, as if he were not Sylvander they talked
of, or as if she was not Diana whom they talked to.

Alexis admiring the strength of Dianas spirit, knowing very well by experience
how hard a thing it is to resist a domineering passion; I must confess, fair
Shepherdesses (said she) That I could never have met with any women such
absolute Mistisses of themselves, nor men such Lovers, as I see there are about
the banks of Lignon. Why do you say this? said Astrea. Because servant
(answered Alexis) hearing the discourse of Sylvander, and the anguish he
endures, it must be acknowledged that he does love infinitely who can endure
it. And with what coldness Diana does slight it, I must needs confess and say,
that in her alone, passion does cease to be passion, and become seeming reason.
Madam, answered Diana, I beseech you pardon me, if I tell you, That you are
mistaken in both the judgments which you have given: For as to that which
relates unto me, believe it to be a very easy matter to carry it as I do,
having no interest at all in the business, as you think I have: And as to that
which relates unto the Shepherd, be assured, That not only about the Banks of
Lignon, but every place where the name of Love is known, men do study more to
disguise and dissemble their affections, then to render them real and great:
They resemble puffed up bladders, which seem to be something that is big, whilst
they are nothing but empty wind, and the least prick of a pin discovers their
empty imperfections, Sage Shepherdess, replied the Druide, I do believe that
you have more knowledge then I in the humors of those you speak of; but give
me leave to tell you, that Sylvander does love. I do believe it Madam, answered
Diana, but it is Madonthe. I do believe (said Alexis) that Sylvander does love,
and that he does love none but Diana. Then certainly (replied she) Madonthe has
changed her name, and calls her self Diana; and if you will not believe me, I
will refer you unto Laonice. You will find said (said the Druide) in the end,
that there is some secret mystery in the report of Laonice: for if it were so,
that Sylvander did love Madonthe, why should he seem to love you? What benefit
will accrue unto him by disguising it? To blind the eyes, answered she, of the
jealous Thersander: this might be so, replied Alexis, in the time of
Thersander, and when Madonthe was here: but now they are gone, to what purpose
should he so do? Oh Madam, said Diana, did you but know the humors of men,
especially of Sylvander, you would not make such a wonder at it: you must know
that there is not a man under the cope of Heaven, who desires more to give a
good opinion of himself then he; and this is the reason that having made a show
of loving me formerly, he is now ashamed his falsehood should be discovered: all
his passionate expressions and behavior which you see, and think they proceed
from affection, are but tricks and glosses which he uses, out of shame to be
thought a dissembler, and a man of no faith.

If he were ashamed, as you object, said Alexis, that shame would produce
contrary effects: for if he loved Madonthe, he would with all speed fly from
those places where his dissimulation would be known; and doubtless would follow
her whom he loved: for I have heard that he has no relations in this country to
stay him in it, or invite him unto it more then any other place; for he is a
man merely of fortune, and has nothing but what he gets by his industry, which
he may do any where else, as well as about the River Lignon: also, since you
speak of Sylvander's humor, I must tell you, that in this short time I have
known him, and observed his discourse, I find him to be a Shepherd of so free a
Spirit, and of so pure and genuine wit, as I cannot believe any such abominable
vice to be in him, as dissimulation is; and indeed instance me one action of
all his life which argues him of that humor: I have heard by a general report
of all the Country, that he is a very Wise, and Virtuous Shepherd: and is it
probable that one single man should deceive so many eyes which observe his
actions? Assure your self Diana that you are mistaken in your judgment. It Is
true Madam, said Diana, and interrupted, that perhaps I was: but now I am not,
and if one could foresee the future, I never will be in my judgment of
Sylvander, unless my resolution do change very much: Phillis who till then
stood silent to hear the reasons of her companion, seeing now that she replied
not; she began to speak; Sister, (said she unto her, for so she called her) I
have no interest in the business in question, farther then in relation to you,
and I assure my self no more has any here: and therefore you ought to receive
what we say, not as coming from persons who are well wishers of Sylvander, but
as from your good friends, who had rather be deceived themselves, then be any
Instruments that others should deceive you. When you have this belief in us, as
truly you ought to have, you will presently think that when we speak any thing
of this Shepherd, it is not to divert you from any good design you may have,
nor to your prejudice to advantage Sylvander, since he is merely indifferent
unto us; but on the contrary, you know we love you, and would if it were
possible deliver you from an opinion which doubtless, (set as good a face upon
it as you will) will bring you nothing but discontent: Consider Sister, that
every one is blind in their own case, and often, that which they most would
have, is worst for them. Sister, said Diana, I never made the least question or
doubt of your affection to me, nor of that sage Druids, since she was pleased
to say that she loved me, but must needs give credit unto the words of one whom
I think so just; I receive this favor which you are pleased to confer upon me,
with abundance of respect and thanks; assuring you, that both in this and every
thing else, I will always prefer your judgment before my own in all things: but
I beseech you give me leave to tell you withal, that those who are not
concerned in a business, farther then resentment and compassion causes,
commonly they do not consider nor look into the matter so nearly, as those who
must bear all the burden: and to their advice and their counsels, although
they do not proceed from any ill will, but perhaps from much affection, yet may
they be mistaken and be deficient in many things; because the judgment which
they give, cannot be good and solid, unless it be grounded upon most certain
knowledge: and therefore we do commonly say, that every one knows best where his
shoe pinches him, or on which side the pain is most troublesome. But Sister,
said Astrea, things that are dubious, and cannot be well made out, me thinks
should be decided by plurality of voices: for my part, this has been always my
rule, that were I see all are of opinion that such a thing is of a green
color, which seems red unto me, I do infallibly believe, that my eye is
deceived, or else I should think the thing to be of the same color which all
others do: you have an opinion that Sylvander loves Madonthe, and we all say
that there is no such thing, nor any probability of it; why therefore should
not you conform your opinion unto ours? But Sister, replied Diana, I am not
alone; Laonice who has seen the truth, does second me; Laonice, said Astrea, is
subtle enough to say it, with a design of putting you to abundance of pain and
trouble. What profit, said Diana, will accrue unto her by that? The profit,
replied Astrea, which such reap who are delighted in sowing seditious, it is
their pastime and pleasure; and hers may be to see how you will carry it out,
and perhaps to discover, whether it be true that Sylvander does love you, or
you him: good Sister, do not give more credit unto that subtle woman, then you
do unto your dearest friends: the judgment of all those who do know Sylvander,
will be against you; the whole course of that Shepherds life has been such, as
his very enemies cannot lay the least reproach to his charge: Join all these
together, and add thereunto the reasons which we have presented unto you, and
afterward see, whether it be likely, or have any shadow of likelihood, that
the single testimony of Laonice can be true and credible. Furthermore (said
Phillis) I have talked with Sylvander, and he does so peremptorily deny all
that Laonice says, that if Laonice say truly, he is the most detestable
Shepherd in the world. Yet every one does know (added Alexis) that Sylvander is
a man who sears the Gods, and is not ignorant of what is a sin against them; if
he be not ignorant, then he knows how great a sin perjury is: and if he do fear
the Gods, he would never commit it; and therefore I conclude that my judgment
was good, when at the first I affirmed that Sylvander does love you, and that
he loves none else but you. Madam, said Diana, and interrupted, not being able
to endure the continuation of this discourse, neither Sylvander nor I, do
deserve you should take so much pains in talking of us, especially upon a
subject which concerns us so little: for as for him, I believe all his
demonstrations of good will unto me, are only consequents of that wager which
is betwixt Phillis and him: and as for me, I assure you that I did never
receive them but under the notion of that dissimulation, so as the business is
of so small a weight, and we are both so little interested in it, that it is
not worth talking of any further. Oh Madam, cried out Phillis, I protest, she
dissembles, and speaks very far from her thoughts; pardon me Sister, said she
and turned toward Phillis, if I speak the truth, for I cannot endure this
dissimulation. Nay, nay, never blush, said Phillis, nor lay your hand upon your
face to cover it, lest we should see: you know I speak nothing but truth, and
that you do really love Sylvander, also that Sylvander loves you, I am sure you
are not ignorant of it: Alexis and Astrea, began to laugh at the manner of
Phillis in her expressions; and Diana her self could not forbear, although she
endeavored to hide it; and therefore recollecting her self, she answered thus;
I must confess Sister, that I did blush to hear you speak thus, especially
before this great Druide, what opinion do you think she will entertain of me,
who has not had the honor to be known unto her till of late? But Madam (said
she, and turned toward Alexis) do not believe what this Shepherdess does say;
for all is but in jest, and she her self does not think as she speaks.

Alexis would have answered, and so would Phillis, but they were so near
Astreas house, that they were constrained to change discourse, lest Phocion
should hear, whom they saw at the door, and who conducted them in, where supper
was ready upon the table.

During all the time of the repast, nothing was discoursed upon but the
accident of the day; a passage so unaccustomed in that Country, that Phocion
said, in all his time he never heard of the like, unless that of Philander,
when a stranger offered to wrong Diana. Alas, alas! (said she) that indeed was
a day the most disasterous that Lignon had seen of a long time; for since the
death of him and Philidas, I am sure that my contentment has been but a little.
I assure you, said Astrea, fortune will play her game out amongst us humanes
every where, as well in the Country, as in great Cities, and as well in
Cottages, as roo^s of Cedar, and gilded Palaces of Princes: alas Sister, you
observe the (...) day when Philidas died, because in happened upon your occasion:
there is ano^ (...) that has good cause to remember another accident; I have
not forgot that (...) ^hen Celadon drowned himself; for then I lost a Father
and Mother, and am able to say and say truly, that my eyes were never dry
since, as often as I remembered that fatal misfortune. And I, said Alexis, may
say as much, and almost about the same time, at least if reports make a true
calculation. But these sad remembrances are the most cruel enemies we have; and
therefore for my part, knowing them to be so, I shun them as much as possibly I
can: Oh Mistress, said Astrea, It is an easy matter for you to expel such sad
remembrances of things which grieve you, for you have a good Father who loves
you, and helps you out with supplies of comforts; but were you an orphan,
deprived of Father and Mother as I am, I believe you would more deeply resent
the remembrance of such fatal losses: but however, I have most just reason to
be thankful unto Heaven, which after so great a loss has not left me without
some support, in giving me a second Father, unto whom I am obliged in double
bonds of gratitude; but for all that, believe it Mistress, it is a most sad
constraint that separates a child from Father and Mother. Upon this Phocion
began to speak; It is most certain children (said he) for so my age permits me
to call you, that fortune has the same power in all places alike; and that she
is pleased to make her power known as well in Villages, as in great Monarchies.
But it is true also, that as high and lofty Towers are more exposed to the
tearing tempests and blustering winds, then the humble Cottages wherein we
live, so also we do more seldom see any of these bloody consequences of fortune
amongst us: they are much more frequent in great Empires, and proud
Republiques, which the more rest and quiet they have, the fuller they are of
motions and inquietudes, and of greater turbulencies then our poor Villages are
capable of: so as what we esteem a storm, is with them a calm. This was the
main reason why those from whom we are descended, did choose this kind of life,
as the most happy which mortals can make choice of. But for all that, replied
Alexis, I do hear as many complaints and griefs amongst you, as amongst the
greatest Potents upon earth. So children, answered Phocion, do use to cry for
the loss of an apple, as if it were the loss of a great Empire: For my part
(said Diana and interrupted) I do not think sorrows are greater, for having the
greater causes of them; but that is least which is least resented. Most true,
replied Phocion, it is so in regard unto the troubled soul, but not so, if it
be resented, and measured according to the right rules of reason; for then
every thing will be resented and esteemed as it is: and oftentimes when the
passion is ceased, we do laugh at that, at which we cried before; but all our
discourse (said Phocion, seeing them ready to rise from the Table) does teach
us this, that there is no place under the cope of Heaven which is entirely
exempted from the blows of fortune, and that we ought always to stand upon our
guards against them, that when they come to assault us, we may not only resist
them, but also without taking the shadow for the substance, which is commonly
the greater, we may measure them according to reason, and not with any partial
resentments of those blows which we receive, nor with too many tears which
seldom do any good, but with prudence, reason, moderation and patience.

Upon this they arose from the Table; and after some other such Discourse,
bedtime being come, the Druide, and the three Shepherdesses, retired
themselves to their chamber:

On the other side, Dorinde and her companions, with those that conducted them,
went unto Marselles, and endeavored to beguil the length of the way, and the
perplexities of the sad Dorinde, with various and pleasant discourse. But
Hylas, who led her by the arm, and was not much used to give way unto any
melancholy dumps, not being able to endure her silence (for when others talked,
she was mute) I pray good long since Mistress (said he unto her) how long must
this simple silence last? My long since Servant (said she, and smiled) I
beseech you pardon me, for I am in a very naughty humor, and cannot help it.
These dumpish humors (replied he) are allowable in any that have not a Hylas
by them; but in you who has me so near you, it is a fault unpardonable; and
therefore resolve your self to leave one or the other, for sorrow and I cannot
be together. I wish, replied she, that I were in a better mood, and you should
see (...) I desire it; therefore I pray tell me what you would have me do?
Eith^ (...) ^and me, said Hylas, to relate the adventures which have happened
unto me (...) saw you, or else tell me yours; for such and so many various
actions has befallen me, that you cannot hear them but be delighted: I will
promise not to make you any sadder then you are, and commonly it is more
delightful to hear the adventures of others, then to tell their own. No. said
Thamires, and began to speak, it is more expedient that this fair Stranger do
relate unto us the cause of her coming into this Country, then for Hylas to
relate unto us his constant inconstancies, which every one here does know. Oh
good Thamires (said Hylas) indeed you have great reason to twit me with my
inconstancies: Pray tell me when ever any of them did so much hurt as your
obstinate humor called constancy has done? I do not blame you nor your humor
(said Thamires) nor do I commend them, but leave it to the judgment of those
that will take the pains to consider them; I only ask you, wherein did my
obstinate humor called constancy, do you any harm? It is not to me alone
(replied Hylas) that it is obnoxious, but unto all those that are about the
Banks of Lignon, and to all the whole Country of Forests, all whom do resent
the injury you have done them, in spoiling the beauty of this wise woman
(pointing at Celidea) who was one of the greatest ornaments of the Country*
Shepherd (said Celidea, and interrupted him) I do think my self infinitely
happy in that which you think a loss; for by parting with a thing of a poor
trivial value, I have in exchange the greatest tranquillity of Spirit, and as
much contentment of mind, as can possibly be desired. We do not talk of the
tranquillity of your mind, wise Shepherdess, said Hylas, nor of your
contentments, but of that happiness which we have lost by the obstinacy of
Thamires; and if such a chance had happened unto Hylas, perhaps you should become
as fair as ever you was. Is not Dorinde fairer then she was when first I began
to love her? Look upon Florice, Cercinea, Palinice; and did you see Cryseide,
you would say that all those whom I love, are hugely beholding to me; for I
leave them all fairer then I found them: and not like those blasters of Beauty
(for so may all your Thamyreses, your Tyrcises, your Sylvanders, and such like
be called) who never leave any one of those they love, till they have either
made them ugly, or brought them to their graves, as two of you have done, and
you shall see what will become of Diana, before the wilful Sylvander and she
part; you see she is now young, and very fair; and I dare venture the affection
which I have unto Stella, that before he quit her, either he or she are in
their graves; then what will become of those fair eyes, and a hundred alluring
features: Well, well, God keep you from such servants, as will never let those
they love alone till they be dead; nay, even in their very graves they will be
troubling them. Pray see I beseech you, if any that ever I served were used so
indiscreetly: No, no, when I leave them, I leave them in such a condition, as
others are contented to love them after me. Do not think Hylas (answered
Thamires soberly) that this constancy which we do so religiously observe, and
which you do so much inveigh against, is either an humor, or any obstinacy,
but only an earnest desire not to fail in those duties which we owe both unto
our selves and unto those we love; Unto our selves, because alteration of
opinion is to condemn that which we once approved of, and there is nothing more
shameful, nor which shows more defects in a man then that; For if it be
understanding which prefers us before the rest of animals, are not those who
want this understanding no better then beasts without reason? But of all vices,
Inconstancy does most discover and argue that defect; then Hylas, you must of
necessity confess, that none can commit a greater offense, then by showing
themselves wavering and inconstant: For the Will which never consents unto any
thing but what the Judgment tells him is good, choosing another object, does
undeniably argue, that his judgment was deceived either the first or the
second time: And therefore, though there were no other reason but our own
particular reputation, we ought never to consent unto inconstancy, which
renders us most worthy of all scorn and contempt. But further, it a most
unpardonable offense against the person whom we do love; For Hylas, does any
change but when they think they change for the better? And therefore is it not
an injury unto her whom we loved, to leave her for another, since we do as good
as say that the last is the better? Hylas not being able to endure that
Thamires should go any further with this discourse without interruption, he
went nearer him, and looked him in the face, and seeming desirous to look under
his clothes, Shepherd (said he unto him) let me see, if under the habit of
Thamires, Sylvander be not disguised, for methinks I hear him speak in his
tone. Ah Hylas, answered Thamires, your having that opinion, is a sign you
think my arguments to be good; for there is nothing which comes from so
excellent a wit, which ought not to be esteemed so. You are very much mistaken
good Thamires, replied Hylas, for hearing your arguments so shallow and
ill-grounded, I thought them to be his, or he himself which uttered them, and
not Thamires, who is held for a very prudent and wise Shepherd; and to make
good what I say, I will show you how false your reasons are.

You affirm that one ought to continue in his obstinacy of loving one that they
once loved, in two considerations: The one in respect of himself; and the other
in respect of her whom he loves. Ah Thamires! It is an easy matter to you who
are antiquated; for your clothes are not only made after the old mode, but your
opinions are as old, and cut out according to the old Gaulish garb: Good
friend, is there any thing in a man more despisable then silliness and
indiscretion? And is it not the height of indiscretion and silliness, to know
what is happiness, and to court and follow that which will make him miserable?
I beseech you fair and discreet Shepherdesses be judges, and tell me whether
you would not think that husbandman a very fool, that has diverse times found by
experience such a piece of ground is not fit for corn, and will still continue
sowing it with the same seed, and only out of a foolish fear, lest it should be
said that he had no judgment at the first. Ah my good friend Thamires, is it
any thing but gain and profit that gets reputation in these days? And indeed,
if one should enquire of the quality and capacity of any one, be it either as a
servant, or any other ways, Did you ever hear the question asked such a one,
whether he be constant or inconstant? No, no Thamires, but only whether he can
manage well his business, whether he be rich, whether he have good flocks, and
such things as can increase and keep them, not by an obstinate resolution never
to part with them, but by selling and changing them as often as occasion shall
require. Suppose friend, you were upon the Sea, you would quickly be
shipwrack'd if you kept your Sail constant to one wind; no, no, wise men will
turn their sail to all winds. The very same it is in the affairs of the world,
and it is soverain wisdom to change according to occasions. And as to your
assertion, that changing does offend against the person whom one did love; good
Thamires, what do you think of me? Or, whom do you think I am? Is there not
some persons who make bread, and others who eat it? Do not some make clothes,
and others wear them? Why should I not give them the same counsel that I would
take my self? I mean, that as I change them for others, so let them change me
for whom they like better, when they have a mind unto it: But in as much as I
think it is impossible that those whom I once loved should ever meet with a
better, they must even content themselves as well as they can, and consider,
that of all things in the world, some are destined unto happiness, and others
unto misery. Amongst horses, some are for the plow, and some are for the
saddle; amongst dogs, some lie in Ladies laps, and others lick the dripping pan
in the kitchen; and so amongst men, some to be served, and others to serve:
It Is true, their fate is hard, but will they complain of Hylas for it? No, it
is not in me to command him who ordained them that cruel destiny; but if they
will be complaining, it must be for being born under such an unlucky
constellation: and yet I must tell you, that this very offense which you
presuppose, is nothing but imagination: For when a Musician changes notes, does
he change them because he thought those he left to be worse then those he took?
No, no Shepherd, but it was to make his Music better, and more delightful,
which otherwise would be dull and tedious. If a Painter change colors, ^ay
sometimes the very piece it self, is it because he despised the first color?
No, but on the contrary, because he would more enliven it, and shadow the first
color so, that he sets it off with greater luster then at the first: So
Thamires, when we do leave a Shepherdess whom we did love, and take another, it
is not as you think, because we esteem her more then her we left, but only to
follow the rules and dictates of Nature, which reaches us, that it is nothing
but variety which renders the universe delightful. Look upon every thing, even
from the lowest to the highest, and you will find, that nature has engraved
this instinct and this Law, in such characters as cannot be defaced. Tell me
Thamires, when you lie in your bed, do you never turn from one side to another?
If you do, you are inconstant, and shows want of judgment, in choosing the
worse side at the first: when you walk, or dance; why do you change legs, but
rather hop upon the first you began with, if you will be punctual to your first
beginnings? When you speak, why do you not make use still of the same word? Why
do Fiddlers finger more strings then one? And why do they vary into so many
several tunes? I see Shepherd that you laugh at what I say: but believe it, I
have greater reason to laugh at you, when you say, that one is inconstant in
loving several Shepherdesses, or that one offends her whom he leaves.

I must needs confess, said Thamires, that I do laugh at the arguments which
you use to maintain your fickle humor: I believe there is none in the company
but does the like, and perhaps Hylas himself also, if not in his face, yet in
his heart: for it is a very hard matter to forbear upon such a subject: and I
wish Sylvander were here to answer (as it is necessary) unto your Sophistry: I
am glad to hear, replied Hylas, that you call for help; it is a sign you think
your self overcome: but never be ashamed of it, for though Sylvander himself
were here, whom you account your Oracle, yet I am confident he would confess
my victory, and himself submit unto it: Oh Hylas! (said Thamires) you do
mistake the reason why I desired Sylvanders company; it is not because I want
any arguments to answer your assertions, for it is an easy matter unto any
that will take the pains: but it is because that Shepherd is able by his
splendent fancies, and excellent eloquence, to give this fair company better
contentment, then is my dull genius: and yet in his absence, since he who is
silent unto truth, is culpable of a lie; I will briefly answer you, but it
shall be upon a condition, that you give me leave to laugh at what you have
asserted: in the first place, I confess Hylas, that Husbandman to be very
indiscreet; who having found by trial that his ground is not proper for one
seed, will not sow it with another, and change his seed: but Hylas, this does
not prove what you assert; for love ought not to precede the knowledge of the
party loved. The Husbandman had no knowledge at the first of the quality of his
Land, so as he ought not to change his seed till he has found it by experience
and knowledge; and therefore all those consequent arguments which you used, to
change the sail according to the wind, and that it is prudence to know how to
comply with occasions, we do agree with you, that it is indeed high wisdom to
be guided by, and according to the weather; and the reason is, because we
cannot command the wind and the weather as we will: so that Hylas, you must
know, that in things which have dependency upon our selves, and which are in
our own power, it is a shame to change; but on the contrary, in those things
which depend upon the power of another, it is high prudence to know how, and
when to turn and change according to occasion. Now Love, which does depend upon
the will, there is no question, but it is in our power, since God did never
give us any thing which is more absolutely ours, then this will; which has no
matter of chance or fortune in it, as there is in the Sea, or in the Winds. But
truly your instance of Musicians in changing Notes, and Painters in colors, is
a very subtle argument indeed: but good Hylas, do you not know, that their
first designs are to arrive at the end of their works? The Musician he designs
to make good Music, and the Painter to illustrate his work; and by changing
Notes, and using several colors, they both arrive at their first designed end:
most right (said Hylas, and interrupted) and even so I do never change, but
with a design to arrive at the end of my desires. But, replied Thamires, Love
will not allow of that, whose perfection does so much consist in unity, as it
can never be perfect until it attain unto that one which it aims at: and hence
it is that our Druids say, two persons that do love, become one and the same;
which is easily comprehended, since both parties have one and the same will,
and so consequently are one and the same person. As for your arguments of
inconstancy drawn from turning my self in my bed, inferring it to proceed from
want of judgment in not choosing the best side at the first; you must know
Hylas, that the body, which is heavy and subject to weariness, by its own
weight, must ease it self by turning, that both sides may bear the weight
alike: but the soul, which is all spirit, is not subject unto such
inconveniences, and therefore ought not to change: but good Hylas, give me
leave to laugh a little before I answer your argument of walking and speaking;
saying, that those who walk, if they will be constant, must never go but upon
one leg, and hop; or when they speak, never use but one word: I believe Hylas,
if nature had called you to council, when she appointed to every thing their
motions, perhaps you had invented some other way for men to walk, and had made
hopping serve the turn; but since you were not, you cannot call them
inconstant, who walk as nature ordained them, since they can do no otherwise:
and as for matter of speaking, know Hylas, that speaking was given unto men, to
make those who hear them, understand the secret conceptions of their souls: now
do but invent one word, that can make to be understood all that the mind
conceives; and then I will say, we were inconstant if we used any words but
that alone: do you see therefore how shallow all your reasons and arguments
are? Certainly you must needs confess, that they are grounded upon sand, which
is as loose, and fleeting, as your inconstant humor is. But are you not
exceedingly pleasant, in saying, that those whom you quit for others, ought not
to lay the blame upon you, but upon their constellation and their destiny? It
is most true indeed, that they have reason to complain against their malignant
influence, for I think it a very great misfortune unto them that are troubled
with your addresses; but are not you extremely to blame in being the instrument
of this malignant influence? Tell me, I beseech you, is not the gallows upon
which a malefactor is hanged, a horror unto every one, and scorned? Ah my
friend, what are you unto those poor women that are destined unto your
inconstancies, but the gallows where they receive their punishments?

At this all the company laughed a long while, and Hylas also, though it was
against himself; and when he began to reply, he was prevented by Adrastes, who
having met with Doris, did so hang upon her, that she could not be rid of him;
at the first he ran unto her, and kneeled before her; he would have kissed her
feet, and with all humble reverence touched the hem of her garment: but seeing
she went still on, he would not go out of those limits, unto which he was by a
kind of witchcraft confined; he was so bold as to stay her by her gown, and
would have taken her by her arm, which caused her to cry out: and Palemon being
not far off, ran in to help her; but do what Palemon could, Adrastes would not
let his hold go: when he pulled one hand off, Adrastes took hold with the
other: and Adrastes being a big strong man, Palemon would hardly have mastered
him, but for the coming of this company, who advancing toward them, the
Shepherds took hold of Adrastes, and gave Doris time to escape out of his
hands. The state and miserable condition of this poor Shepherd, moved Dorinde
to pity him: and the beauty of Doris made her very desirous to know how the
dissension did arise: Palemon as a very civil and courteous Shepherd, said unto
her, be pleased to know, fair stranger (for so he thought her by her habit)
that this Shepherd and I were both in love with this Shepherdess, and she being
adjudged unto me, he received the sentence so sadly, that he fell mad, and lost
the use of reason. A thousand pities, said Dorinde, for he seems to be a
Shepherd of excellent qualities: were he in the Town where I was born, I
believe, there might be found a remedy for him; for I have seen one cured of
the same disease; and so may he, especially if it be not long since the
misfortune did befall him. It was not above two months since (said Palemon) and
I am so exceedingly sorry for him, that I would do any thing which might be
conducing to his cure* doubtless (said Dorinde) this will; I have had the
experience of it, and the remedy is very easy, is there not a Temple of
Jupiter in this Country? And is there not another near unto it, dedicated unto
the Goddess Minerva? There is many of them, answered Thamires, which they say,
the Romans built; but, as for us, we do never frequent them; because our Druids
teach us, that the Majesty of the Great Tautates is so incomprehensible, that
the whole Universe is only a Temple worthy of his grandeur, which he himself
did build; for such as are built by the impotent hands of men, are too mean for
such a Divinity: and this is the reason why all our Sacrifices are offered in
Sacred Groves, and under no other roof, but the glorious Arch of Heaven. But
that people whom I mentioned, had Sacrificers which served in Temples, and I
think that I have seen such a one in the great City of Marselles: for the
Founder did not only give it his own name, but also planted his Religion there,
and I remember very well, there is also another dedicated unto Minerva, which
as I think joins unto that of Jupiter. If so, said Dorinde, and that you desire
the cure of this poor Shepherd, carry him thither, and I am confident of his
cure: for there needs no more then to drive a nail which has touched his
Pemples into the wall of Jupiters Temple, which is on that side toward the
Temple of Minerva. If that be all (said Palemon) I swear that to morrow I will
neither eat nor drink until I have driven one so far, as it shall hardly be
pulled out, but by breaking the wall. It is not you, replied Dorinde, that
ought to do that ceremony, but it must be the principal person of the place. If
so, (said Palemon) I will fall upon my knees before Amasis, I will beseech her
to do that charitable Act, and I will make a vow, that if this poor Shepherd
recover, I will not deny the first thing that shall be asked of me, be it made
by whom it will. And because Adrastes still followed the company, and the place
which he used to haunt very near, Palemon entreated Doris, that she would
either by prayers, or any other way, to make him follow them unto Marselles,
whither he understood all this good company was going. Doris, to please him,
though much against the grain of her mind, went to that poor Shepherd when she
saw him ready to leave them. Adrastes (said she unto him) will you not go with
me unto my house? He went nearer to her, and after he had looked well upon her,
he answered, to my house do you say, Adrastes and Doris? Yes, replied Doris,
will not Adrastes go with Doris? To which he answered not a word but Doris: and
turning himself about, offered to go away. Doris then calling him by his name,
and he turning toward her, she offered her hand and said unto him; come, come,
Adrastes, do not you love Doris? He looked seriously upon her, and said not a
word; and it would have pitied any one, to see how tears trickled from his
eyes, though he smiled. Doris then made him a second offer of her hand; what
Adrastes (said she) do you not know Doris? Then he answered, Doris; yes, said
she, I am Doris, who entreats Adrastes to go with her unto Marselles. Then
going to her, and taking her under the arm, he said, Marselles, Doris,
Adrastes, Palemon, and never left saying so all the way long: but sometimes did
weep, and sometimes at the very same instant laugh, and would never answer unto
any question, but only the last word of it.

They had already passed over the River Lignon, and left the house of Adamas on
the right hand, when they began to discover Marselles; and because Hylas was
very sorry that he could not know the cause of Dorindes coming into Forests;
it is a hard case (said he) that some foolish accident or other does always
prevent me in my desires; what foolish accident do you complain of, said
Dorinde, which has prevented you in your desires? Two things, answered Hylas, I
do complain of, and they are very different; the one is, that Thamires and I
have talked so long: and the other is, that Adrastes has made us lose that
time which I desired should be spent in hearing what has happened unto you since
last I saw you. If that be al, answered Dorinde, to content you, we shall remedy
it when you please: these promises are easily made, said Hylas, but often fail
in performance; hold me for a person very uncivil, said Dorinde, if I do not
give you satisfaction in a thing which I may with so much ease perform; I
believe you to be civil enough, replied Hylas, but I cannot tell whether your
leisure and your will can permit it: as for matter of will, answered Dorinde,
it shall not stick upon that; and as for leisure, I believe, that at night when
we have nothing else to do, we may have as good an opportunity as can be
desired. But pray, why have you not as great a desire to know the adventures of
Florice, of Palinice, and Cercinea, as well as mine? Is it because you already
know them? There is a hidden mystery in that, answered Hylas, and the truth is,
I do not know them; but I do very much wonder, now I think on it, that I should
never have that desire; then turning toward them, but good (in the days of
old) Mistrisses, tell me, why you did not pay that tribute which was due unto
my curiosity and desire? We do answer, said Florice, that neither you nor we
had any will thereunto; but yet there is a reason which is better, and which
proceeds from a cause more high; for Heaven did forbid us: How, how? said
Hylas, have you such familiar conversation with Heaven? I do not wonder now I
should so retire my self from you, since you are so celestial: you must not now
be loved, but adored as heavenly beauties. Hylas, said Cercinea, you now speak
like unto your self, who being one of those Gallo-Ligurians, which retain
nothing of the ancient Gaulish Religion, but the^ ^^ry name, having received
the Grecian fables for truths: but we, who adore nothing but one only
Tautates, we do not desire to be adored. Oh Cercinea (said Hylas) I perceive
your celestial conversation with Heaven; and your intimate familiarity with
Angels, has made you so divine, that now there is no coming near you: you do
not talk now like Cercinea, but like a Sarronide, an Eubages, a Prophetess, a
celestial Druide. God keep me from loving you, since you are learned; for when
I begin to talk unto you of my affection, in lieu of answering, you will
reprove me for not speaking well: and God knows how extremely ashamed should I
be to receive correction at this age. Then turning toward Florice, but pray
tell me in good earnest (said he) how comes it to pass I should never know the
cause of your coming into this Country? Because (answered Florice) we would not
tell it unto any, being so enjoined by the Oracle, which did forbid us to speak
of it, until a thing come to pass which is not yet happened. Now I do see (said
Hylas) that heaven is better to me then I deserve, since I am not afflicted
with any desires of a thing that would have been long before the effect would
be obtained. But, said Dorinde, why might not I have satisfied this desire, for
I do know all their adventures, almost as well as themselves, and heaven has
not forbidden me to tell them? Were we not so near the place unto which we go,
said Lycidas, I should humbly entreat that you would be pleased to take so much
pains; for I believe there is not a stranger upon the Banks of Lignon, who has
so long concealed the cause of their journey, as these three fair ones have: It
seems said Hylas, that they have extremely offended the Gods. Why? said
Cercinea. Because (answered Hylas) the greatest punishment that heaven can lay
upon a woman, is to be silent. If it be so (answered she) heaven has been very
favorable to us, in giving us occasion to show our selves more then women.

Such discourse as this beguiled the length of the way; and when they were come
to the gates of Marselles, Periander, Merindor, and their companions asked
Dorinde if she intended to do her obeisance unto Amasis that same night; and
where she intended to lodge if she did not. To whom Dorinde answered, that it
was very late, and that all the company was too weary to go so high as the
Castle, which stood upon the top of a steep hill; but yet she knew not where to
lodge elsewhere, having no acquaintance in the place: Lycidas upon this
be-thinking himself; I beseech you (said he) give me leave to go before you
into the Town, and if he whom I hope to find in it be there, I am confident
your reception will not be bad. Dorinde thanked him; and sitting down under a
shade near the Highway, she told him, that she and the company would expect
his return in that place. Upon this Lycidas with the company of Corilas, went
into the Town, and went as fast as they could unto the house of Clindor, the
dear friend of Alcippes, the father of Celadon and Lycidas, This Clindor has
still in memory the affection which he bore unto their father, and since the
death of Alcippes and Celadon, all his good will was placed upon Lycidas, as
all that was left unto him of his dear friend; and therefore as soon as ever he
saw him, he held out his arms of love to embrace him, and showed as much entire
affection, as if he had been his own son. Father, said Lycidas unto him, for so
he called him; if I have been backward in rendering that duty which I owe unto
you, I beseech you lay the blame upon the rural woods, which will hardly permit
their inhabitants to frequent great Cities, without offense unto the Laws of
their solitary lives. Son, said Clindor, I do both excuse and envy you: I
excuse you, because Alcippes did all his life most religiously observe the vow
of his ancestors: and I do envy the happy lives you lead, when I consider the
turbulency and inquietude of ours: But Son, continued he, and embraced him, you
are very heartily welcome, and your companion also; assuring your self, that I
cannot receive any greater contentment, then to see the son of my dear friend
Alcippes well and with me. This assurance Sir, said Lycidas, made me so bold as
to offer your house to a great number of my friends who accompanied me hither,
though I did not know whether it would be thought too great a trouble: Son,
said Clindor with a smiling countenance, those who do come unto my house,
especially under so good a conductor as Lycidas, shall have as much power in it
as my self; the trouble that will be, will be only unto them, but much honor
and contentment unto me: and then hearing who those were whom he brought with
him; I am very sorry said he, that I had no sooner notice: but since they have
surprised me, I hope t^^y will excuse the inconveniences of my house, and the
they are most heartily welcome: Then calling for his son, Leontidas (said he,
for that was his name) go along with your brother, offer this house unto those
strangers to whom he will conduct you, and tell them, that if my age would
permit me, I would have waited upon them my self.

Thus Lycidas with Leontidas went unto the company which expected him, who
after many complements of civility, Leontidas took Dorinde by one arm, and
Hylas took her by the other; when they came to the gates, the guards asked them
who they were, and from whence they came? The three Cavaliers told them their
names, and satisfied their demands; and Leontidas added, that they were going
to the house of Clindor. The guards then cried them mercy, and asked pardon for
their strictness, because it was but according to their duty and commands
received from their superior Officers. Thus they entered, and were conducted
unto the house of Clindor, who received them with so kind a countenance, and
treated them so nobly, as every one admired he should have set his house in
such excellent order as they found it.

In the mean time the sad Sylvander, who after he had left Dorinde and her
company, was retired into the thickest woods, where he could least be seen, and
there past away the rest of the day with his own melancholy and mortal
thoughts, till at night he came to the place where Diana, Alexis, Astrea, and
Phillis found him retired: He did so avoid the sight of every one, that he knew
not what had happened unto Dorinde; for as soon as he saw any, he shunned them
like a savage person. His sad melancholy retained him in this place until it
was night; but when he saw the canopy of heaven spangled with glistering stars,
and thought that none was abroad, he went out; not with any design of
diverting himself, but only to resent his sorrows more apprehensively, and that
his sorrows might the sooner do that which his hand durst not against his life,
lest heaven should be offended if he gave himself a violent death.

This thought did insensibly conduct him unto the place where Phillis delivered
the cruel message from Diana unto him: Oh most fatal place (said he) and most
infamous for the highest piece of injustice that ever was committed upon the
Banks of Lignon: Oh thou most abominable and and odious piece of ground! I do
wonder Heaven does not cause the earth to open, and swallow thee in her deep
Abyss, and never suffer thee to be sooting for any innocent Shepherd to tread
upon again.

Then folding his arms one within another, he continued; But if heaven will
needs pursue me with a perpetual hatred, as it has done ever since that cursed
day on which I was born, why does it not execute and complete its cruel
destinies upon me? Should I wish all places where I have resented the unjust
malignity of its influence to be Abysses; Alas, then all places wherever I
did set my foot, must be swallowed up into the profundity of the earth. Then
coming to the place where he fell into a swoon, he stopped short, and looked
long silently upon it; at last he began again, 'Twas here (said he) where my
disasterous cogitations did muster themselves to overwhelm me; but how comes it
to pass I did endure them and not die? And is not heaven ashamed to see it self
surmounted by the constancy of a mortal? It is not more strange, to see how
obstinate the Destinies are in rendering me miserable, then it is to see the
insensibility of my soul, in supporting their blows. But upon good
consideration I needs must say, that heaven will either try what power it has
in tormenting, or what courage I have in suffering. But fairest Diana, must you
needs be the instrument of so many cruelties? Can your beauty ever consent unto
the ruin of him that adores you? What excuse can you allege for your self?
You are either the partner in this fault, or at least the cause and the
original; for it is as impossible I should love any but Diana, as it is for
Diana to live, and not be the fairest in the whole world; and as long as I
live, the most loved Shepherdess upon earth. But alas, alas, you look for no
excuse where you cannot repent of the fault: or to say better, where repentance
would be a thousand times greater satisfaction, then the wrong.

Then standing a while silent, and the moon shining very clear, he went looking
and staring upon every thing about him, like a man that was distracted, and
hardly knew what it was that he did look upon: at last, the cruel discourse of
Phillis, and the opinion which Diana had of his change, coming into his mind,
he could not choose but cry out: Oh God! Oh Heavens! Is it possible that the
judgment of Diana, which is so sound and quick in all other things, should to
my misery, be thus mistaken? Can she think Madonthe has any power to divert me
from her, and her service? Could that Wise, Prudent, and Solid Shepherdess
believe, that those eyes which have her* can look upon any other eyes but hers?
Have I; Oh Fairest Shepherdess, by any of my actions, given any testimony that
I become a Hylas or an Adrastes? For before I commit such a sin, I must needs
be either one, or both; and I could not be so inconstant unless I were a fool,
or a mad man.

This thought entertained him a long time, and would not let him depart from
that place, he thought to have found that contentment which he had loft: but on
the contrary, he met still with fresh causes of grief; for wandering insensibly
from one thought to another, he began to think upon the sweet beginnings of his
affection, and with what discretion Diana received the first buds of his love,
under the notion of a wager; with what kindness she suffered that plant to take
root, and how prudently she saw it grow up to that grandeur which now is
arrived at. And as concomitants of this thought, he set before his eyes the
pleasant jars of Phillis, the favorable answers of his Shepherdess; and
briefly, all those reasons which he had to hope, that his affection would
thrive, and grow fruitful. Then did he bethink himself of that Bracelet of
hair, which was intended for Phillis, and which he had obtained of Diana, as an
extraordinary favor. He guided his hand to the place where he was wont to wear
it, thinking to have the contentment of a kiss from it: but not finding it, he
looked upon the other arm: but not finding it on either, he was surprised with
so much grief, as not being able to endure the blow of that disaster, he fell
to the ground, and so lay a long time without either motion or speech; but at
last he revived, and concluded that now all hope was gone.

Sylvander had no sooner ceased his complaints, but (as he thought) he heard
some coming toward him; and to know who they were, and also out of fear to be
seen, lest by that means he should be interrupted in his solitary thoughts, he
kept still close, and silent; then did he plainly hear some coming and talking
very loud, but not so as he could understand them at that distance* yet still
keeping silence, and they drawing nearer, he perceived by the help of the Moon,
that they were two men talking together: and when they were close by the place
where Sylvander stood, they stopped a little; then did he hear one of them begin
to sing, and the effect of his song was, That he had more love, then she had
cruelty. He had no sooner done, but the other began; and the substance of his
song was, That he ought to love her for no other end but to love her. Ah
Brother, (said the first, and interrupted the other) you are in the right; for
whosoever does love for any other end but loving only, he does abuse the name
of love, and most unworthily pro^ane that pure and Sacred Divinity. But give me
leave to tell you* that in what you alleged before, concerning the torments
which you and I do suffer, you have as little reason, as I have much, to say,
that there is no torment in the world that is equal unto mine. Brother,
(answered the other with a deep sigh) that love which every one does bear unto
himself, is the cause of that judgment: for when you see me suffer any pain, do
you not resent it more then any stranger would? Doubtless I do (answered the
first) Then Alcander, replied the other, the same reason which makes you resent
my pain more then another, does make you resent your own more then mine: for as
it is natural to love a brother more then a stranger, so it is as natural to
love ones self more then any else: it is love which gives the weight unto all
things which fall under opinion. I do not know Amilcar (said he) how you intend
this? It is true that I am partly in the same belief, and partly not; I mean,
that it is love which does cause resentment of sorrows and joys, and that it
is by it, and its ell, we do measure the greatness or the littleness of all
things: but that every one does love themselves more then some others: Indeed
brother, I must confess, that if this be an effect of nature, then nature has
failed in me: for I do protest and vow, that I do love Circinca, a thousand
times better then I do my self; and it is an easy matter to make this evident,
since I do find in my self toward her, all the effects which a most extreme
love can produce: for first, I had rather any evil should fall upon my self,
then the least upon her: and I desire her contentment infinitely above my own;
there is nothing, be it never so full of difficulty, but I would attempt it, if
there was any hopes it would conduce thereunto: If any thing that pleased me,
displeased her, believe it, Amilcar, I had rather dye then receive it: and if
these be not infallible arguments, that I do love another better then my self,
I know not what are. Brother, replied Amilcar, I do resent the very same
effects of affection unto Palinice, which you do unto Circinea: but oh
Alcander, you are much mistaken if you do conclude thereby, that you do love
Circinea better then your self, or that I do love Palinice, more then I do my
self. For if we will but ingeniously confess, it is the love of our selves that
makes us love them: and as the miser does expose his life for the preservation
of that Gold which he loves; so do we Sacrifice our selves to the pleasure of
those fair ones whom we adore: Fie, fie Brother, replied Alcander, will you
offer such a wrong unto our loves, as to compare them unto a misers love of
Gold? Assure your self brother (said Amilcar soberly) there is no difference
betwixt them, only the love that we do give unto these fair ones, is for a
thing of greater value and merit, and therefore it is more noble and
reasonable: but the very truth is, the original of all loves, is self love:
does not the misers care to preserve his dearly beloved Gold, proceed from the
love of himself, and not his Gold? Doubtless it does; for what cares the gold
into whose hands it falls, since wheresoever it is, it is still Gold as well as
in his hands. Then let us apply this reason unto our selves, and you will find
that it is the love which you hear unto your self, which makes you have all
those cares of Circinea, and all those earnest desires of her contentment:
would you wish her so much happiness, and endeavor to procure it unto her,
upon condition she should extremely love Clorian, and devote her self wholly
unto him, without ever caring for you? But did she love Clorian, replied
Alcander, she would not be so happy as you suppose her. But suppose she should
be as happy (said Amiliar) would you wish her the enjoyment of all those
contentments with Clorian? I see you will not answer, nor have you any reason;
but I will answer for you: it is most certain, that you and I had rather see
the grim face of death, then to see your Circinea happy with Clorian; and I to
see my Palinice, the happy wife of Sileines: and therefore let us both
ingeniously confess, that all the happiness which we do wish unto them, is
but like the love of a Miser to his Gold; that is, for our own particular
interest: though the excess of our passions makes us think the contrary.

Upon this, these strangers continued on their walk, and for a while were
silent. Sylvander who heard them, and thought them to be persons of merit and
understanding had a good mind to be talking with them, had it not been for the
scurvy humor, into which the jealousy of Diana had put him: but considering
this vexing humor, he thought it better to be as he was, then interrupt them:
and therefore, he designed to go away: but as he was going, he saw these
strangers turn back, as men that knew not which way to go; but having found
that walk, would pass away the rest of the night in it. His fears to be seen,
caused him to keep close till they were past, and afterward to fall into the
thick of the Wood. But whether he made some noise, as he couched down, or
whether the Moon shined clearer then it did when they passed by before, I know
not: but Alcander spied him, and showed him to his brother, who stepping
nearer, certainly (said he) it is a Shepherd who is a sleep. Sylvander, who
seeing himself discovered, and who thought that they would not go away before
they made him speak; he thought also that it was better to prevent them: and
therefore, he answered, if I do sleep, then it may be said, that a man may
sleep and not rest; for the miserable condition wherein I am, will not let me
enjoy any: do not think Amilcar (continued he, and rose up) that it is any love
which I bear unto my self, makes me judge my misery unequalled; for should I
judge by passion upon that which relates unto me, it would be rather by hatred
then love, since I am able to say, and say truly, that I never wished any so
much harm as I do unto my self. And though the misery which I endure, be as
much as any mortal man can endure, yet am I so much my own enemy, that my
hatred cannot be satisfied, unless by wishing my miseries multiplied above the
number of all the leaves in this Wood. I must confess, said Amilcar, that if
your condition be as bad as you speak it, all sorrows must submit unto yours.
Oh Amilcar, said Sylvander, it is but too true, and did you but know my wounds,
you would confess it also; but because it would be some kind of comfort to tell
it, I will not give my self so much contentment. It seems (said Alcander) that
the greatness of your misery has driven you into despair, and you know despair
argues but little knowledge, and little courage: I must confess, said the
Shepherd, that my misery is changed into despair, but I do deny that despair,
is always from want of knowledge or courage; for were it not a strange
ignorance to have such extreme misfortunes as I have, and not to know them? And
would it not argue a great defect of courage, and resentment, to stand in such
fear of death, as to wish, living in such misery? This may pass amongst petty
and trivial mischances and miseries, such as are common and ordinary; but
amongst such as are grown to that height, as there is no remedy, nor no cure,
it is a folly, a madness, an argument of a poor low courage, to endure the
shame which cannot be avoided by any way but by being no more, However replied
Alcander, it is an argument of a faint and poor courage, to want a heart that
will endure the blows of an enemy. Most true, replied the Shepherd, but there
is no reason to hope for a thing which there is no hopes to obtain, and
thereupon I say it is, that my misery is desperate; not that I do conclude
thereby, that I will run a sword into my breast to kill my self, or throw my
self head long down a precipice: such an act would argue a defect in courage;
nay worse, it is a great impiety and sin committed against the great Tautates;
for man being the workmanship of his hands, it were a most horrid sin to
destroy what he has made; He, as the Potter with his pot, may do what he will
with us: and we were made to be as he will have us, and not to dispose of our
selves according to our own will; if it be his pleasure we should endure pain
and abundance of misery, we must endure, and not endeavor to cross his will by
any sudden death: but I begin to resent some mittigation of my sadness by this
discourse which I have had, and therefore, because I will not do my miseries so
much wrong, I do conjure you Amilcar, by your love unto Palinice, and you
Alcander, by yours unto Circinea, that you let me go and retire my self into
the most solitary parts of this wood; and in requital I will tell you (that if
you seek for those two fair Shepherdesses) where you may find them; and that
is, where I have often seen them upon the banks of Lignon in the company of the
fair Diana, Astrea, and their companions: upon this, he saluted them, and went
into the Wood as fast as he could, lest he should be followed by these
strangers.

They on the other side ravished to hear such discourse come from a Shepherd,
they were so astonished, as they could not stir a foot after him; But having
held their eyes a while upon the place where he entered into the Wood; Alcander
broke silence first: Brother, said he, did you ever hear such a shepherd? His
habit indeed, said Amilcar does speak him Shepherd, but not his tongue: for my
part said Alcander, I think him to be the good Genius of Lignon who presented
himself unto us in that habit, to show us, that there are some who are in
greater misery then we are. Perhaps, replied Amilcar, I should have been of the
same opinion, if we had been in any Country but Forests, where I have heard
there are so many discreet and well accomplished Shepherds, as the encounter
seems not so strange unto me. If he be a Shepherd, continued Alcander, and the
rest like him, it must needs be confessed that Cities have reason to envy
these Woods and solitary places; but said he, and pointed at a paper which lay
in the place where they first found Sylvander, I do see a thing like a letter,
and perhaps the Moon will give us light to read it. Amilcar upon this took up a
paper which Sylvander accidentally dropped, in which were writ a copy of verses,
importing, That she, she only is worthy of her self. It is certain, said
Alcander, that he is a Shepherd, and not the Genius of this place; but it must
needs be acknowledged that these Woods are extremely happy in having such
guests.

But Alexis in the mean time who lay according to her custom in Astreas
chamber, where Diana and Phillis also lay, she was up as early as the Sun, and
taking the clothes of the fair Astrea, she dressed her self as soon, and with as
little noise as possibly she could: Then she opened the windows, and set a
chair close by the bed, that she might the better contemplate those Beauties
which she adored. Astreas body was half turned toward her bed-fellows, and the
weather being very hot, part of her breast was open, and her right arm hung
carelessly naked over Diana. Alexis having a while contemplated, Alas (said she
in a low voice, lest she should be heard) Ah Alexis! why art not thou
metamorphosed into Diana, or Diana into Alexis? But miserable wretch that thou
art, why such a wish, since Celadon then is to have no share in it? For oh
Alexis! what greater favors can thou receive then thou have: but all will
not do thee any good, because thou do not call Celadon to take a share, which
it seems thou do envy him. But still it cannot be envy, for Alexis, can
thou have any felicity with him, or any happiness without her? No, no,
certainly thou can not: but yet his presence is both terrible, and desirable
unto me? desirable, in that without Celadon I cannot have any perfect
happiness; and terrible* in that he would make me lose all my hopes: when I do
re-enter into my self, I do find that I am a miscellanie of Alexis and Celadon:
and as Celadon I desire to recover that happiness which is ravi^hed from me,
and as Alexis, I fear to lose that which I possess. I am then both Alexis and
Celadon mingled together: but now I know who I am; how should we do to find out
a way to content Celadon, and to satisfy Alexis? Oh there is the work, there
is all the difficulty: this is a place so slippery, that the least treading
awry, is to fall into the horrid abyss of despair. But why should we think
that Astrea wishes ill unto that faithful Celadon, since every time she speaks
of him, she seems to lament the loss of him? But on the other side, why should
we not fear that she does wish him ill, since having commanded him not to see
her till she command, she does not command him, though she see him every hour?

This last consideration touched so to the quick, that tears dropped from his
eyes, and such sighs seconded those tears, that Phillis waked at the wind of
them, who seeing it light day, after she had saluted Alexis, she rose out of
bed in her smock, and went to dress her self by the Druide. Diana all this
while slept so soundly, as the noise which her bedfellow made in rising did
not awake her; but had slept on, if Phillis had not called her sluggard several
times: and speaking very loud, it seems Astrea was in a dream, and waked upon
it; for turning toward Alexis, Ah Celadon (said she with a deep sigh) and
saying no more, she fell asleep again. Diana and Phillis, hearing her name
Celadon, they were very attentive to hear what she would say farther: Alexis,
though surprised at the hearing of himself named, yet he set as good a face
upon the matter as he could possible; and laying his finger upon his mouth,
speak low, (said she) that we may hear what she will say of that Shepherd: but
though they were all silent a long while, and very attentive, yet she spoke no
more; but perceiving that Diana kissed her, she waked, in an opinion that it
was Alexis: Mistress, said she, you are very early, and her eyes being yet not
well open, she kissed her again in that belief: but when she saw it was Diana,
ah Sister, said she, you have deceived me, for I took you for my dear Mistress,
Servant, said the Druide then, I am not so far off, but you may easily repair
that mistake if you please: then leaning toward her, Astrea kissed her, with
as much affection as possibly she could express. Well, well, (said Phillis, who
was dressing her self, and who saw how disdainfully she had repulsed Diana) you
reject the kisses of those lips, which some other perhaps would sooner choose
then yours. Certainly, said Diana, they are out of their wits who makes so bad
a choice. You may say what you please, replied Phillis, but I believe there are
some that are of my opinion, and that is Sylvander, whom I believe you do not
think to be out of his wits, unless it be in one thing; what is that? said
Diana, in loving too much, answered Phillis, for in that indeed he is in the
excess. What Sister, said Diana, all in one song? Will you speak of nothing
but Sylvander, Sylvander still? Are you not weary with naming him so often?
Sister, said Phillis, resolve upon one thing; that I will never let you rest,
until you be reconciled unto him, and he in your favor as formerly he was wont
to be: and I believe it is the part of all your friends to do the like: for if
you should lose that kind Shepherd, I do not think Lignon will ever have his
like: good Sister (said Diana) what you do think of Lycidas, is not he above
him? Lycidas, (replied Phillis, after her accustomed jollity) is good for
nothing but for me; and I should be very sorry any should envy me: but
Sylvander is such a one, as not only you and we, who are ordinarily with him,
but also all this Country, nay perhaps all the Gauls, have an interest in him.
Good Sister, said Diana, shall I be paid out of the public exchequer, for
having a care of him, in whom so many have a share? You ought (answered
Phillis) since you have all the power; and if he miscarry, every one will blame
you; and though he be all yours, yet ought you not to envy, that every one
should receive contentment from that which you have. I am so far from any envy,
answered Diana, that if he be mine, I will give him unto you with all my heart;
and with a promise never to ask him again. Oh most cruel woman, (cried out
Phillis) the Gods will punish you for this ingratitude, and as they usually do,
in the same manner that you offend. And remember this that I now foretell you,
with as much truth as if it came from the mouth of an Oracle. Good Sister,
replied Diana, what is it that you do tell me? that the Gods will punish me for
that which I intend to do? Is it a sin to give you that which is mine? Though I
had not given him unto you, yet still he had been yours; for all that I had,
was long since so. Fie, fie, Diana, replied Phillis, these cruelties that are
covered with a cloak of kindness, are not unknown to the Gods: you cannot so
gild them over, but they will find them to be counterfeit stuf, and consider
that I shall see you weep for it; and when that time comes, I will laugh at
you, for not believing me when I was in the right. Indeed Sister, answered
Diana, very seriously, you are extremely unkind; you should rather provide for
me good store of handkerchiefs before hand, to dry up the tears which I shall
shed.

Thus these two Shepherdesses discoursed whilst they were dressing themselves;
and in the mean time Alexis and Astrea were talking, sometimes giving assurances
of their mutual good will, and otherwhiles kissing each other; sometimes as
women, and otherwhiles as lovers: and therefore Diana seeing Astrea made no
offers of rising out of bed, she turned to Phillis, and said unto her, me
thinks Sister that though you have been something out of charity with me this
morning, yet we may go together and look to our flocks, and return again before
this sluggard rise out of bed. Do not think, answered Phillis, that my anger is
so great as to make me fail in that respect and affection which I do ow unto
her that was my Mistress, and ever shall be so as long as I live. And you Sister
sluggard, said she unto Astrea, since we will not command you any things that
are either impossible or grievous, I pray let us find you in the same place at
our return, where we leave you at our going away, and in the mean time, that
you may have no excuse for your absence, we will take care of your flock: so
bidding them good morrow, they went out of the chamber, and went talking upon
several subjects: and Diana being in a little better opinion of Sylvander, then
she was, she began to be in her good humor again.

Being then going out of Astreas house, Phillis who was silent a while, did
make a stop upon a sudden; and looking upon Diana, Sister, said she unto her,
dare I tell you, what I am thinking upon? Why do you make it a question?
answered Diana, you know our familiarity does not allow us to conceal the least
motion of our souls from each other: I was thinking, said Phillis, upon the
extreme and sudden amity betwixt Astrea and Alexis; and what should be the
cause of it? I have known Astrea long, but I never saw her so apt and forward
to contract amity upon a push, with a stranger, and leave her old, for new
affections: and yet she no sooner saw this Druide, but she loved her extremely,
and in loving her does a little slight the company of Diana and Phillis, who
were wont to be so dear unto her. To which Diana answered, I have had the same
conceptions, Sister, said she; but then considering that Astrea did extremely
love Celadon, and Alexis having so great a resemblance of him, she was quickly
moved to love her, as fancying her to be her dearly beloved Shepherd; you know
she never loved any but only him: as this being her first and only affection,
it is no wonder she should keep it alive in this woman; well (said Phillis)
this reason may pass, as relating unto Astrea, but what do you allege as in
relation to the Druide, who at the very first sight, was so wholly devoted unto
a Shepherdess, that she forgets and forsakes her very Father and kindred, to be
with this Shepherdess, and to wear her clothes; and seems as if she had quite
forgot both Carnutes and all her companions. Unto this, said Diana, no answer
can be made, but that as Alexis has the face of Celadon, so also she has his
heart: and for my part, I believe she has, when I do see her Idolize, after the
same manner that Shepherds use. I assure you, answered Phillis, you phrase it
right, in saying that she does Idolize her, as if she were a Shepherd: have you
observed her actions and behavior when she is with her? I assure you Sister,
that were she trimmed up in man's clothes, I would say, here is a Shepherd.
Sister, replied Diana, you know that Astrea has rare attracts to move love, and
having an affection unto this woman, she renders her all the testimonies of her
good will that she can, we ought not to think it strange that her natural
perfections should become enchantments; we have found it our selves by
experience, and I dare swear that never any loved better, then we loved Astrea;
and I do believe that I cannot love any more then her. But (said Phillis) what
shall we say of Adamas and Leonide, who have left her here upon so slight a
cause, and seem as if they had forgotten her? When Adamas went, answered Diana,
we know she was not well; and when Leonide left her, she went away in haste,
because the Nymph Amasis did send for her, so as she had not leisure to conduct
her unto the house of Adamas: and why, said Phillis, did she not carry her with
her unto Marsell^s, where her Father was? I cannot well answer you unto that
point, said Diana: but I do believe that Adamas would not have her, she being a
Druide, go amongst great companies, but desired rather she should pass the
time away amongst us, and recover of that sickness which so long tormented
her, which was the reason of her coming from Carnutes, whither as I hear say
she is presently to return.

Thus Diana answered unto all the objections in the discourse of Phillis, as
she did in real sincerity think of Alexis; and used such good arguments to
clear her doubts, that she quite removed them. Afterward, they walked unto the
Wood, where they thought to find no Shepherds stirring, because it was very
early; but when they came into a long walk, they saw at the other end a
Shepherd and a Shepherdess, but they could not know whom they were, by reason
of the distance of the place, and shade of trees. These two Shepherdesses
desiring no other company but themselves, their design was to hide themselves
in the Wood, until the other couple was walked past them, and then to continue
on their own intended walk; and therefore finding a thick Bush by the walk
side, they sat themselves down in it with a reserve of silence till they were
past; and therefore they heard them coming when they were at a good distance
off, and because they were something loud in their discourse, they knew by their
voices the one of them to be Ti^ces, and the other Laonice. Yonder is (said
Phillis, in a whisper) the good friend of Sylvander: and rather mine (answered
Diana) for she has acquainted me with that which of all things in the world was
most necessary for me to know. Well Sister, replied Phillis, I hope to see the
day when you will see your error, and then you will take me under the notion
of your good friend: Diana durst not answer, lest they should be heard, because
they were very near: and as they passed, they heard Tircis say, I protest
L^onice, you are the most spiteful woman in the world: Phillis and Sylvander
are not to be blamed, for they were obliged unto all they did, and not by their
own choice, but by the will of the Gods. Tirces, answered she, do you not know
that those who have been beaten with a rod, and cannot be revenged upon them
that beat them, yet they receive some contentment, in throwing the rod into the
fire and burning it? Tircis, by fortune, stopped just at the place where the
two Shepherdesses were hid in a Bush: and admiring at the wickedness of
Laonice; what (said he unto her) do you infer from that? I infer, replied
Laonice, that though I cannot be revenged of the Gods, from whom I have
received this injustice, yet I will be revenged upon the rod wherewith they
have beaten me, which is upon yonder Mistress Minks Phillis. and Mistress Orator
Sylvander: What? do you think I have sojourned so long upon these banks, and
have found out no ways of revenge? You must know, that ever since the day,
that judgment was pronounced, by which I lost all my hopes of you, I have been
pretily well revenged upon Phillis; for I sowed such seeds of sedition betwixt
her and Licidas, as have brought forth the fruits of many a disquiet ^ight unto
them both. What hurt had poor Licidas done, said he, that you should do him so
much displeasure? Since I could not otherwise be revenged upon Phillis,
answered she, he must accuse his own misfortune for it; and you must know, that
rather then want my revenge upon one enemy, I will lose an hundred friends. Oh
Laonice, said Tircis, are you not afraid left the Gods should command the earth
to open, and swallow you up alive? All Is one for that, replied she, and smiled,
there is nothing so sweet as revenge: And as for the Gods, they do not meddle
in such matters as these. It Is true, said Tircis, unless to punish them. Come,
come, replied Laonice, The Gods have reserved the heavens for themselves, and
have left the Earth unto us: Had I gone without this revenge, I had lived
without rest; but now I am a li^^le contented, since I am revenged upon Judge
Phillis, and Orator Sylvander, whose ruin I have wrought as well as he mine.

Tircis went back two or three paces, and folding his arms, stood looking upon
her with admiration, and spoke not a word. At last, he asked her what she had
done unto Sylvander? What have I done? answered she; why I have given him such
a blow, that a Surgeon will hardly salve up his sore; for I see, as good a
face as Diana sets upon it, the pain of it does reach his heart. But, said
Tircis, what do you tell me of pains of heart, or of Diana? I ask you what you
have done unto Sylvander? You are very inquisitive, replied Laonice, and to
satisfy you this is enough, That I am so well satisfied in my revenge, that I
will not now stay a minute longer in this Country where I have received these
two contentments: The one is, the jealousy of Lycidas against Phillis; and the
other, of Diana against Sylvander. But replied Tircis, How can Diana be jealous
of Sylvander, if she do not care for him; and if Sylvander did never look upon
any in the way of Love? Oh Tircis, replied Laonice, if their love or their
hatred would have been advantageous unto you, as they are unto me, you would
have observed them better then you have. You think (said Tircis) that all their
discourses of Love did proceed from affection: But do you not know them to be
only in jest, and caused by a wager betwixt Phillis and him? Ah Shepherd, said
Laonice and smiled, I perceive that you are one of those that believe all that
is reported. But my good friend Tircis, if you had loved me, as well as he
loves her, assure your self he had never been my Judge; and believe it, Diana
loves him as well, as Phillis her Lycidas, nay better, until I did her the good
office of putting her into a little doubt. Content your self with this I have
told you, and that I tell you no more, though I could very much, lest you
should know how to remedy it. The persons who are able to verify the
contrary, are all absent, and will not return of a long time to tell them the
truth: But trust me, I have not omitted any circumstance that might conduce
unto my full revenge, either in the manner, or in the time, or in the persons
that I have alleged. Tircis did let her talk on a long time, and did suffer
her to vomit up all her malice, to the end he might gather something that might
be a remedy against it: But seeing that she would not out with any thing more,
he lost all patience. Go, go you damned witch, said he unto her in a fury, you
fiend of hell, sent hither upon earth to torment humanes; thou do not retain
any thing of a woman but only thy habit, and thy name; having under that shape
the spirit of a Devil: Hence, hence thou horrid Hag, get thee out of this happy
Country, where such malignant monsters must not inhabit: Let thy venomous and
impure heart know, that though thou may escape the justice of men, yet thou
can not of the Gods, whom I most heartily beseech to deliver me out of thy
wretched hands, and from all thy wicked, malicious, and damned devices.

Upon this he turned from her, and went a great pace, the same way he came, and
left Laonice so astonished at his reproofs, which her guilty conscience told
her were true, that she all confusion, stood a while immovable, looking after
him, and speaking not a word; at last, when he was gone out of sight, she went
the other way into the thick of the wood, and would not show her self unto any
in the Country, but went away unto the place from whence she came, being able
to say, that she left none behind her that was sorry for her departure.

Diana and Phillis who were very attentive to the words of Laonice and Tircis,
and who durst hardly brea^h for fear of discovery, when they saw them gone,
they stayed a while looking upon one another, and saying not a word, but were
both of them amazed at this far fetched revenge; Diana joined her hands
together, smiled, and looked at Phillis; who after three or four times biting
her lips, and shaking her head, she clapped both her hands upon Dianas, Sister,
said she unto her, do you see how true all your jealousies and suspicions are?
What do you now think of the poor Shepherds innocence? Where is all that
confidence and belief which you had of this malicious woman? I must confess
(said Diana, and rose up) that without any wrong unto her I may say, never was
wickedness and subtilty equal unto her^. But Sister, (continued she, and
entering into the walk) could any ever imagine this woman should ever take such
great and long pains to be revenged upon poor innocents? For truly Sylvander
and you are both innocent of her displeasure, since you were chosen unto that
office which you did her, by lot and hazard. But suppose that you were
culpable; what have Lycidas and I done, that could give her so great offense?
Did you not hear her say, replied Phillis, that rather then want her revenge
upon one enemy, she would ruin a hundred friends? Good God, said Diana, keep
us from any such friends. Now Diana, replied Phillis, learn from hence, that
all which is said, is not always true, though never so probable: Most true,
answered Diana, for who could avoid believing this piece of wickedness?
Consider, I beseech you, how cunningly she made her relation, and upon what
likely probabilities she grounded it? How subtilely did she take her time when
Madonthe went away, and Sylvander accompanied her? So as every circumstance was
a confirmation of what she had related: Oh Sister, said Phillis, those that
live with such turbulent spirits as these, had need be well advised, I must
confess, said Diana, that I was deceived; but the falsehood was so contrived as
I was not to blame, but on the contrary, had been blamable if I had not been
deceived by it; for I did thereby make it appear that my pure and innocent soul
was free from any such wickedness, so as I could not imagine any such thoughts
could enter into any other. But Diana (said Phillis) what shall we do to poor
Sylvander, whose sorrows may be his death, and who perhaps is looking for some
way to finish his disasterous life? I should be very sorry, answered Diana,
that Sylvander should receive any harm, for I plainly see he is not culpable,
and the first time that I see him, that same hand which gave the wound, shall
cure it.

I pray God, replied Phillis, that despair do not drive him into some desperate
course: No, no, said Diana, Sylvander is not in any such danger; despair will
not easily work upon such a spirit as his. Yet let me tell you, replied
Phillis, that persons of such a cold constitution, as his, when griefs seises
upon them, are apt for strange resolutions. Sister, said Diana, as strong
constitutions when a Fever seises upon them, have fits more violent then those
that are weak, so also can they resist them better, and endure them longer. It
is the same with such strong spirits as that of Sylvander; it is certain, they
are more sensible of pain, but then they are more able to endure and resist it:
However Sister, said Phillis, let not this confidence make him endure any
longer pain: I am confident, said Diana, that we shall see him sometime this
day, and then, he shall not depart without a good remedy, if he be in any such
necessity of it, as you think he is. But in the interim I conceive it best to
take our way toward Astrea and Alexis, and acquaint them with the mornings
adventures. Upon this they made their course toward the house of Astrea, whom
they found still in bed.

For as soon as these two companions were gone out of the chamber, in lieu of
dressing her self, she was talking with Alexis, and showing her such abundance
of good will, that the disguised Druide was hardly able to resist so many
expressions of favor; and the truth is, never was any lover so near delights
without a taste, as Celadon was under the guise of a woman, which he durst not
throw off. This constraint went so against the grain of this disguised Druide,
that she blushed several times, which Astrea perceiving; Mistress, said she, I
am afraid, that you are not well; for I have observed your color to change
several times, I beseech you, use no constraint, for you cannot be in any place
of the world, where you have more power then in this house. Servant, answered
Alexis, I value not the pain, as I do the favor which you do me, in observing
the color in my face: It Is true indeed, I am not well, but it does not much
trouble me, for it is only a dreg of my last great sickness, which I am often
troubled with, but it will be past immediately, and I am sorry that you took
any notice of it. Ah Mistress, replied Astrea, you suffer no pain which is
little unto me, and you do me wrong in concealing it from me, since I might as
your servant have sought out for some remedy. Servant, replied the Druide, I
perceive that you do love Alexis, more then she deserves, but never trouble
your self at her pain, for my body is not in so much disorder as my mind. Your
mind, said Astrea, I beseech you Mistress, what is it that can be a trouble to
it? Does not all things comply even to your very wishes? Have you not a Father
that loves and cherishes you above all his children? Are you not supplied with
every thing your heart can desire? Moreover, are you not esteemed and honored
by all that see you? What then is it that can possibly trouble your mind? You
have forgot one thing, said Alexis, which would be a greater contentment unto
me then all the world, and which I desire to possess before it, which is, that
Astrea will love Alexis: Oh God, answered Astrea, and embraced and kissed
Alexis, it is a sin impardonable, if Mistress you do not think I love you: Yes,
yes, Mistress, I do love you, and love you so, that I wish Heaven may never love
me if I do not, and punish me with eternal torments, when I have the least
thought of any ceasing to love and honor you. Do not say that you do love me,
answered the Druide, but that you do love Alexis. I do not understand (said
Astrea) what you mean by that; but I am sure that if I do love Alexis, it is
not the name; for if you had any other, my love to you will be still the same;
and if you will know what it is that I do love, it is your person, your spirit,
and your merit. Suppose I were not a Druide, replied Alexis, would you love me
then? I would to God. answered Astrea, that without any prejudice to your self,
you were for my contentments sake a Shepherdess of Lignon, for then I should
hope that the equallity which would be betwixt us, would more invite you to
accept of my affection. Suppose also, said Alexis, that I were a Shepherd,
would you still continue the same good will unto me? Unto that (replied Astrea
very soberly) I will answer very freely, that it is absolutely impossible for
me to love you any otherwise then I do. And truly it would not well become me
to love a man so well as I do you; and though it were permitted me, yet I think
that I could not; it is enough that I did love one, and therefore will love no
more men. Alexis was sorry her curiosity had gone so far; but since the Ice was
broke, she would step a little farther. I knew servant (said she unto her) that
it was only Alexis whom you loved, and not her person; for otherwise, if the
Gods should make me become a Shepherd, why should you then cease to love me? If
the Gods should do so, answered Astrea, I should have an occasion to complain
against them for depriving me of all the happiness that I hoped ever to
receive: and from that time, I would bid adieu unto all delights and
contentment. But why should you not still love me, said Alexis, since my body
would be still my body, and my mind and soul, still the same? Alas Mistress,
answered the Shepherdess, what would you have me say? This is all I am able to
say, that it shall never be said, Astrea did love two Shepherds. I beseech you,
dear Mistress. no more of this discourse; for though I know that such a change
cannot be, yet the very imagination of such a thing does freeze my blood to
Ice; and indeed she did begin to look very pale in the face: Which Alexis
seeing, and thinking it not good to drive the nail to the head, she said thus
unto her: Well servant, said she, I will not talk any longer upon this subject,
upon condition you will tell me, what you dreamed this morning when you waked:
with all my heart, answered Astrea, if I can but remember it: but Mistress,
continued she, why do you desire it? Because, answered the Druide, as you were
betwixt sleep and waking, I heard you say, as you turned toward me, in a
pitifully complaining voice, ah Celadon: Mistress, said Astrea, by that word you
put me in memory of part of my dream, which otherwise I should have forgotten;
I dreamed that I was in a grove so thick with trees, briars, and rushes, that I
tore all my clothes; and the obscurity of the place did hinder me from seeing
which way I should pass; at last after much struggling and long labor in vain
to get out of this place, me thought I saw one, whom I did not know by reason
of the darkness; coming toward me, and said, holding her hand before her face,
that if I would follow her, she would help me out of that thorny Labyrinth
wherein I was: After I was helped out, me thought I thanked her for her
assistance, and went following her; and followed her, until both of us were so
wildered, that neither of us could get out of the Wood: At last me-thought that
some one coming betwixt my guide and me to part us, she grasped my hand so
close, and I clung so close unto her, that the other was forced to use all the
strength he had to part us; and at last, he pulled off the hand of her that
guided me. At the same time me-thought I saw a little light, and therefore
desiring to look upon the hand which remained in mine, I found it to be a heart
which panted, until he who had severed me from my guide, returned with a great
knife in his hand, and do what I could, did give the heart such a blow, that it
made me all bloody: The horror of this did make me throw it away upon the
ground; which I had no sooner done, but I saw that the heart was turned into
Celadon; which put me into such a fright, that it caused me to cry out as you
heard me, and then I waked.

This dream, replied Alexis, does certainly signify something; for though most
of them be false, and only impressions of things precedent, which we have
either seen or heard; and sometimes are only vapors arising from a surcharged
stomach or else from the complexion, and according to the good or bad
constitution of the Body: yet this has none of those qualities which dreams use
to have; for they are full of nonsense, and have neither head nor feet: but
this is a composed story, and holds a correspondency in all parts, also it was
in the morning, when vapors from the stomach could work no effects: so as if
you please, I can give you the interpretation of it. I should think my self
much obliged (said Astrea) if you would be pleased to take the pains.

This Wood so full of thorns and obscurity (said Alexis) wherein you were, and
out of which you were so out of all hopes to get out, is the troubles and
perplexities wherein you are; she who appeared and offered her self as a guide
through this labyrinth, represents my self; He which would sever us, is, that I
shall be constrained to return unto Carnutes by Adamas; we must both resist as
much as we can, at the last they will part us, but I shall leave my heart with
you, which you shall take in lieu of Celadons; and in the knowledge of this you
shall live more contentedly then ever you did.

Ah Mistress (said Astrea) I like well the interpretation of my dream, but for
that sad separation; and that indeed I cannot suffer, nor me thinks should you*
Does it not grieve you to part from such a servant as loves you with so much
passionate affection, as she thinks the time of parting to be the time of her
death? As she uttered these words, tears trickled down her fair checks; and
because Alexis looked upon her, and spoke not, she continued: Ah Mistress,
Mistress, will you not afford me one word of comfort? Is it possible you should
ever consent unto any separation? Judge you, replied Alexis, whether I consent
unto it or no, since your dream tells me, that I am to leave my heart with you;
and do you think I would not be where it is? Oh Mistress, replied the
Shepherdess, this is not enough to give me satisfaction; but swear unto me you
will not, by that thing which will most inviolably oblige you unto it. Then it
shall be (replied Alexis) by the affection which I do bear unto the fair
Astrea: Be it by what it will (said Astrea) so it be by an oath inviolable.
Swear unto me, dearest Mistress, that you will never forsake me, and in
retaliation, I will swear unto you by the soul of that person whom I loved
most, and by my affection unto you, and also by all that is sacred, that
neither any opposition of parents, consideration of estate, or any other
respect whatsoever that can be imagined, shall ever be able to separate me from
my dearest Mistress, whom I do embrace (said she, and took her in her arms) and
will never let her go out of my arms, until she has made this oath. Alexis then
embracing her also, Servant (said she) I do swear unto you by the affection
which I bear unto you, which is all I have; I swear unto you by Ifesas,
Bellinus, Tharamis, the great Tautates, and I swear by your self Astrea,
without whom I pray heaven I may never be happy, That neither the authority of
a Father, nor the obedience I owe unto my Superiors, nor any thing under the
cope of heaven, shall ever separate me from fair Astrea. Upon this kissing each
other, to the extreme contentment of Alexis, and incredible satisfaction of
Astrea, they parted nor, till they heard one open the door of the chamber: and
then, lest they should be seen, Alexis sat down in her seat, and Astrea
continued in bed. Then Diana and Phillis entered; and Phillis in a joyful manner
cried victory, victory, we have got the victory: here is this incensed woman
(pointing at Diana) here she is, that confesses all she said, and all she did
was wrong: Sister, said Diana, soft and fair; you go a little too fast and far:
for I do not confess that I was in the wrong, but indeed I say that I was
deceived, and the opinion which I had of that Shepherd was false: but that I
did it in believing what was told me, I am so far from confessing, that I think
I had done ill, if I had done otherwise. But I beseech you Sisters (said
Astrea) exp^nd your words, that this fair Druide and I may rejoice with you: Ah
sluggard, said Phillis, as deep in bed yet as when we left you? Had we two been
in bed still as you are, we had never understood what we do, which you desire
to know: may I not see him to day that I Love best if I do tell you. Then tell
it to me, said Alexis; yes to you I will, said Phillis, because you were the
cause of our rising so soon, and consequently of the encounter which we met
withal, and which only could drive that angry Shepherdess out of that opinion
which she entertained; had we missed this occasion, we had never recovered it,
because she who hatched and brought forth all these traitorous devises, went
away as soon as ever she had (unknown to her self) done this good office unto
Sylvander. Hereupon she related the whole discourse betwixt Laonice and Tircis,
and forgot not a syllable of those things which Laonice spoke, either against
her, or against poor Sylvander.

Here is now, said she, that choleric Diana convinced; she that would not give
credit unto any but Laonice; who thought that she only could speak the truth,
and that poor silly we were all liars: I thank God, said Astrea, for conducting
both you and Diana so opportunely to hear her, and all her treachery; for had
you been separated, I verily believe Diana would not have believed your
reports: nay, though she her self had heard it without a witness, it would have
been a long time before she would have confessed her knowledge. It Is true,
answered Diana, and I thank the goodness of Heaven that has so happily
directed me to the only means that could clear all my doubts. From hence may be
observed (said the Druide) that innocence is never left without a helper, since
the poor and innocent Sylvander has found it when his hopes were most remote.
And see, said Astrea, how good Heaven is, and how sometimes to our consolation
it causes future things to be foretold by persons who speak them in jest, I my
self have found this to be so in this accident; for when I was honored in the
habit of my Mistress; I told Sylvander that within three days he should see an
end of the pain wherein he was, I spoke it only to keep him alive by infusing
this hope, and not that I thought it would come to pass: yet you see, I
foretold the event as truly as if I had received it from the mouth of a God. To
make your predictions true, said Phillis, it is very requisite and full time
you rise out of your bed, that we may go unto the place where Sylvander uses to
be, unless you will carry your bed with you into the wood, where we will go and
desire that Shepherd to bring you your smock. Neither you nor he need to take
that pains, answered Astrea, pray go you unto him, and bring him hither into
this chamber, where he never yet was whilst I was in my bed: Is it possible?
said Alexis, no I assure you, said Astrea, neither he nor any other Shepherd,
and of this I dare take an oath. Never swear, replied Alexis, unless you be
most certainly assured: I believe you do think so, but perhaps you may be
deceived, and what do you know but that there may at this time be one concealed
and hid? You are pleased to jear me; replied Astrea, but believe it Mistress, we
do keep a more reserved distance with the Shepherds of Lignon, then you do
think we do. Sister, said Diana, the time was when I durst have taken such an
oath as that, which if I had, you know I had been forsworn. However, said
Astrea, if you will please to give me a little leisure, I will dress my self
to save Sylvander a labor of coming hither.

Upon this, Alexis rose up and fetched her own clothes unto her dear
Shepherdess, Servant, said she, I would have you take my clothes; be you my
Mistress and call me servant; and when I take them, then I will be the Mistress,
and you the Servant. What will people say, answered Astrea, when they hear me
call you so? They will say, replied Alexis, that it were strange if you should
call me otherwise, I being in the habit of a Shepherdess, and you in a
Druides, and so of me, if I should call you by any other name then Mistress: for
my part, said Astrea, I had rather fail, by obeying you, then not to do as you
command; and to show my obedience: Servant, said she, if you do not help me to
put on this Gown, I assure you I am so ignorant, that I know not where to
begin. Alexis then took Astrea by one hand, did put that into one arm of the
Gown; and then getting upon the bed, did put her other arm into the sleeve of
the Gown, and with so much contentment, or rather rapture, that she knew not
what she did: for this new Druide did so confidently believe her to be a woman,
that she did not hide any thing from her. At the last, she was dressed: and
because it was something late, they left the house, and went all together to bid
Phocion good morrow, who seeing them disguised in this manner, did at the
first, mistake them; but afterward taking better notice of them, he was
extremely delighted at it. But these fair Shepherdesses had such a desire to
put Sylvander out of his pain, that without entertaining any motions of dinner
from Phocion, they all took their leaves of him, and went unto the place where
they hoped to meet Sylvander.

Sylvander, after he had got into the wood to avoid the company of Alcander and
his Brother, went walking and wandering up and down all the night, until it was
break of day; and he by fortune found himself upon the banks of Lignon, where
resting himself, sleep so seized upon his eyes, that the Sun was a good height,
when some dogs of the neighboring Towns running at wolves, did awake him.
Before his mind was thus tormented with these turbulent perplexities, if he had
heard the barking of a dog, he would have been the first of all the Shepherds
in running to preserve either his own or his friends flocks: but now, he
stirred no more then if he had no interest in any flocks; which shows that the
stronger passion makes the soul contemn the weaker. By fortune at the same time
an Officer who used to wait at the Oracle of Mount-Verdune, and who knew
Sylvander, passing by him, and seeing him not stir at the course of the dogs,
he did much wonder at it; and had an opinion that he was not well, because it
was not his custom to sit still upon such an occasion. But coming to him, and
seeing no signs of any sickness in his face, because he dissembled the anguish
of his looks and mind, when he saw him approach: how now Sylvander, said he
unto him, who would have thought you so backward in pursuance of the common
enemy to our flocks? I know not of what enemies you speak, answered Sylvander
soberly, for there are so many sorts of them, that he who undertakes to pursue
them all, has work enough; truly, said the Officer, I know that the Gods do
intend some great and miserable misfortune toward us; and there is not any
more certain sign of a Countries ruin, then when Tautates takes from it great
and eminent persons, by whose counsels and valor it was preserved: and when
the rest are careless of its welfare and defense. And why, said Sylvander, do
you speak these words? Because, answered the Officer, all the victimes which we
Sacrifice, are found so defective, that they do astonish all the Sacrificers;
such misfortunes never happened in my days; I say misfortunes, because it is a
presage of the worst misfortunes that can befall us: and now, at this time, I
see that Sylvander, who was wont to be the most careful man in all the Country,
in the preservation of his estate and flock, is now grown careless, and seems
as if the public loss did no more concern him, then if he had no share in it.
You ought not, replied Sylvander then, to conclude of an augure from my
actions: for first, Heaven would not have them take notice of a person so
miserable as I am: and next, I am worth so little, that it ought not to be
considerable. The Officer then answered; there is an excess, as well in too
much despising, as in too much esteeming ones self: and sometimes as much vanity
and pride in the one as the other; as the Philosopher told him who to show how
much he despised rich and costly habits, did wear an old rotten cloak full of
holes; take heed, said the Philosopher, that your pride do not appear through
the holes of your cloak: and so Sylvander, take heed lest in speaking less
advantagiously of your self then you deserve, you be not chargeable with the
same fault: all that knows Sylvander, knows also his merit, and his capacity,
and what esteem he is in this Country; and therefore to speak against the
opinion of every one, is either, that he would declare himself his own enemy,
or else would give occasion to be commended more: upon this, without any stay
for the Shepherds answer, he went on his way, leaving Sylvander in some sort
ashamed of the esteem which he had of him.

This thought stayed him a while in that place; at last returning unto that
which most touched him to the quick: and considering the inevitable accident
which was fallen upon him that was so innocent, he thought that Heaven was
certainly incensed against him: and that by this correction it would make him
re-enter into the consideration of himself; to the end that submitting himself
unto him from whom all true consolations can come, he might receive that remedy
which he ought to expect only from him. This thought caused him to fall down
presently upon his knees, and holding up his hand to Heaven, he implored aid:
and at the same time resolved to consult with the Oracle of Cleontine; in order
to this design, he passed over the River Lignon, went to Mount-Verdu^^,
consulted with the Oracle, and received this answer:

THE ORACLE.
THy present grief shall quickly cease;
But she who only does thee please,
Paris must marry her: N'ere pretend
To compass thy desired end,
As long as thou have any breath,
But only by Sylvander's death.
When the sad Shepherd received this cruel answer, he stood as immovable, but
not so insensible as a rock; for such was his resentment, that after he had
folded his arms, he fell down, and for a very long time gave no sign of life,
unless by the tears that flowed from his eyes: so that the Vacies and Eubages
there present, were exceedingly moved to compassion; but he answered them all
with silence, turning his eyes only upon him that spoke, but in such a pitiful
manner, that he forced tears from the eyes of all the company. At last, a good
part of the day being past, he went from Mount-Verdune without speaking a word,
and so retired himself into the great wood next the long walk, not with any
other design but to be in that place, where Phillis delivered that cruel
message unto him, thinking that the sight of this place would augment his
grief, and so much the sooner end his miserable life, in which he hoped for no
manner of content.

But by fortune, Alexis, Astrea, Diana, and Phillis, came thither at the same
time, to pass away the heat of the day, according to their custom. Phillis was
the first who spied the Shepherd, and showed him presently unto her companions:
she would have called unto him, but Diana did prevent her, saying, I would not
have him think that I have been jealous, for such a spirit as his would draw no
small consequences from such a thought. What then, said Phillis, would you have
us do? We must and so must you, have compassion upon his pain. True, answered
the Shepherdess, but you must also have compassion upon me; and me thinks it is
not a matter of such small concernment unto me, but it deserves very great
consideration: upon this, she turned toward Astrea and Alexis, who were a
little retired, and propounded unto them the difficulty which she found in the
business. It is a hard case, said Alexis, that one should take so much pains to
conceal truth. What truth Madam, replied Diana, do you speak of? You would not
have Sylvander know that you love him, answered Alexis; and to hide this truth
from him, you are pumping for some tricks and artifices to delude him: is it
not much better to live freely with him, as you see this fair Shepherdess and I
do? Madam, said Diana, you and Astrea are both of one sex, and therefore
allowed. But, said Astrea, what do you think then of Phillis and Lycidas? I do
think Sister, said Diana, that if Belinde my Mother would approve of Sylvanders
marriage and mine, as Artemis does of that between Phillis and Lycidas, perhaps
then I should make no difficulty to do as Phillis does: but knowing that this a
thing impossible, why should I make my good will appear unto this Shepherd? It
would not perhaps avail him any thing at all, but perhaps bring much harm unto
me; for I know that I will never choose a Husband without Belindes consent, and
I am most confident that she will never consent unto a marriage betwixt
Sylvander and me.

Alexis then began to speak; I do not know, said she, of what mind and humor
Belinde is, having never seen her; but I do find Sylvander to be a man so very
well qualified, as I cannot think but if Belinde knew him, she would approve of
this alliance. For a man is to be preferred before estate, I mean such a man as
Sylvander, whose qualities are so highly estimable, as such another is not to
be found in all Gaul. Oh Madam, said Diana, virtue now a days does get but
little credit, if it be not set off with riches: besides this, my Parents will
never consent that I should give my self unto a person that is unknown: one
whose fate is so disasterous, that he himself does not know who was either his
Father, or his Mother, or his Country. This circumstance, replied Astrea, is
very considerable; but as we conclude that a Rose grows upon a Rose-tree, so
may we the same of Sylvander; seeing him so full of excellent perfections, who
can doubt but that he is descended from Excellent and Virtuous Parents? These
conjectures, replied Diana, are very good; but it belongs not unto me, neither
to urge them any farther, nor to deny them: but for my part, I will lay all the
fault upon Phillis. Upon me, replied she, I beseech you wherein am I culpable?
Was is not you, said Diana, and smiled, which did him all the harm in telling
him? This is an excellent good reason indeed, answered Phillis, it was I that
did him all the harm in telling him: pray who did all the harm in putting me
upon it, and giving me a commission for it, nay pressing me unto it? I see,
answered Diana, that it is an easy matter to give a commission, but a very
hard matter to give prudence and discretion to execute it. And good my Lady
Ambassador, who gave you any instructions, to run and tell Sylvander every word
which passion did shake from my tongue? You whose passions were calm, and
judgment free and sound, why did you not stay a little, and give me leave to
consider in cool blood, till the heat of passion was over? Had it not been time
enough now to have delivered him such a message as might have cost him his
life? But you were so hasty, and all upon the spur, to tell him that which
should have been seriously pondered, and considered upon with grave and serious
deliberation, and after you had been many times prayed, entreated, desired
solicited, nay pressed unto: I beseech you tell me, Suppose Sylvander had dyed
upon it; did you think it would have pleased me? Nay, could you think I would
not have hated you all the days of my life? Oh with what prudence and solidity
these offices are to be performed? For could you imagine that you would not be
culpable of all the inconveniences that should ensue upon it? And were not you
worthy to bear all the blame? Astrea and Alexis could not choose but laugh to
hear Phillis thus charged, and to see that she could not answer unto it, and
therefore they condemned her to do whatsoever Diana desired of her. I do assure
you, said Phillis, a very fine Sentence; which yet, in respect of my Judges, I
will obey; but unto what punishment, I beseech you, must I be condemned? Not so
great as your crime, answered Diana, I will only, that when you see Sylvander
next, you shall assure him, that all which you told unto him was only out of
^allary, and that I did never know any thing concerning it: so that he may
think all proceeded from your mouth, and that when I do speak next unto him, I
may treat him as I was wont to do, before the treachery of Laonice. I do assure
you Sister, said Phillis, I did always think you to be very subtle, but never
so subtle as I find you now. No, no, said Alexis, this is no subtilty, but
prudence; for Diana has reason to desire it, and though you had not committed
the fault whereof you are convicted, yet you ought to do as she says. Madam,
answered Phillis, I should be more willing to do it, were I not obliged unto
it; for I am of such an humor, that I had rather give twenty gifts, then pay
one debt.

Whilst they were thus talking, Sylvander all sorrow, and hanging down his
head, came through the wood, till he was just upon the place where these
Shepherdesses were: and by fortune so near, that when he saw them, and would
have turned back, Phillis in obedience to the command upon her* did speak unto
him; Sylvander, Sylvander, said she unto him, do you remember the time when you
put me out of all patience against Lycidas, and made it your delight to make
him jealous? And because he answered not, she continued; If you do remember,
let it be a warning to you for the future, not to offend a woman, for it will
not be long before she be revenged: and if you will not believe it, let me
serve you for an example. I do not know (answered Sylvander very dejectedly)
what you mean: I do mean, replied Phillis, that all the stories which I told
you concerning Diana, and her anger, were things only invented by my self, to
be revenged of you for making Lycidas jealous of me, when he observed the
familiarity which was then betwixt you and me. How (said Sylvander) Diana not
know any thing of all that which you told unto me? Not at all, I assure you,
answered Phillis. Diana hearing her self named, and faigning to be ignorant
what the matter was, she went unto them, and addressing her self unto the
Shepherd, I heard you name me, (said she unto him) I beseech you, what share
have I in your discourse? I am so confounded (said Sylvander) to hear and to
see what I do, as I do think my self to be in a dream. Phillis then breaking
out into a loud laughter, Sister, (said she unto her) you must know from me,
what this Shepherd does know but in part; upon this, she began to relate the
jealousy of Lycidas, the pains she put upon him, and how Sylvander behaved
himself toward her. To be brief, said she, I thought that if I were not
revenged, I should never enjoy any contentment in my life. I knew how Sylvander
^ccompanied Madonthe, and never acquainted you with it: I thought this to be a
fit opportunity for my revenge; and indeed, ask him how he likes it, and
whether he will take so much pains again to vex me any more. But I beseech you,
said Diana, what share have I in all this business? You have had what share I
pleased, answered Phillis: For I made you speak, even what I would, Truly
Sister, said Diana, I am very much obliged to you, for making me to speak when
I never thought upon you. I beseech you Sister, said Phillis, to pardon me, for
I must needs be revenged. Oh Heavens! (cried out Sylvander, recoyling a pace or
two, and folding his arms one within another) Oh ye Gods, is it possible that
Diana should have no hand or knowledge of that message which you told me from
her? No, replied Phillis; she knows not one syllable of it; and that you may
see I say truly, here Sylvander, continued she, and gave him the bracelet which
she took from him, take this again, for I am contented with those tears which
my theft did cost you. Sylvander kneeling down upon the ground, he took it and
kissed it a hundred times: and Diana the better to color her seeming
ignorance: Sister (said she unto her) what is that which you give him? and what
theft do you speak of? Content your self, answered Phillis, that since you had
no hand in the taking it away, there is no reason you should have any in the
restitution. Sylvander was so extremely joyed in receiving the dear bracelet,
as ^rgetting all his sad thoughts, his countenance began to change upon a
sudden: (...) turning unto Phillis* I cannot tell, oh my enemy, said he unto
her, whether I should complain against you, for the harm you have done me in
stealing a thing which I esteemed so infinitely dear; or whether I should think
my self obliged unto you for the favor you have done me in restoring it: For I
cannot say which is the greater, the displeasure I received, or the contentment
which now I have. Astrea then began to speak; Truly Phillis, said she, I cannot
choose but admire at the cunning piece of revenge which you have taken upon this
Shepherd; and I must confess, that I never thought you had a spirit so resolved
upon any ill. Good Sister, said Phillis, why should I not prevent this Shepherd
from putting any future displeasures upon me? Do you not consider that impunity
gives boldness to commit new offenses? Alexis who admired the wit of this
Shepherdess, as well in disguising the business, as inventing the way of it so
suddenly, she concluded that the wit of any man could not possibly be so quick
at invention, nor so sly in dissimulation as the wit of this woman: and from
thence drawing consequences which seemed unto her to be unquestionable. Alas,
alas! (said she in her self) unto what a miserable fate is that lover destined,
who falls into such hands: but Mistress, said Sylvander in the mean time, and
addressed himself unto Diana, will not you be pleased to help me in taking
revenge, since she was very near ridding you of the most faithful servant that
ever lived? Shepherd, answered she, if you will be advised by me, you shall not
have any longer thoughts upon revenge, but rather to make her a friend, since
you see how well she can remember offenses: if her memory be as good at
courtesies, as it is at offenses, answered Sylvander, she may remember that it
was I who composed all differences betwixt Lycidas and her: and you also may
remember that I have done the like for you, answered Phillis: pray consider
that I could have kept you a long time in this torment; whereas I contented my
self only with two or three days: and you are beholding unto me for no less
then your life. It Is true, (answered Sylvander faintly) for I cannot term that
a life which I should have lived: but cruel enemy, did you but consider what
miseries you have caused upon me, I cannot think you would have thought upon
any revenge, but rather have pitied the poor unfortunate Sylvander, who had no
hopes of any contentment, but in his grave. Shepherd, answered Phillis, you may
believe, that for all my revenge, I should have been very sorry that any ill
accident should have happened unto you, especially upon my occasion. Alas, oh my
enemy, replied Sylvander sadly, you are the occasion of my greatest misery,
which is of such a nature that no remedy can cure. Certainly your misery must
be very great, answered Diana, if it be beyond all cure; and yet I will condemn
Phillis to contribute all her endeavors toward it, as thinking her obliged
thereunto; and not only she, but all us, nay all the Country, who certainly are
all very much concerned in the displeasures of so kind a Shepherd. Phillis then
interrupting Sylvander, who would have answered unto these obliging expressions
of Diana. No, no Shepherd, said she, hold your peace; all you can say will do
more hurt then good unto your disease: but Diana, since you think me obliged to
cure the miseries of this Shepherd, be they of what quality they will, I will
promise to cure them, provided always, that you, on your part, will contribute
your endeavors also. Diana smiled, and answered; you must be a very good
Physician, if you cure such desperate diseases. Let it satisfy you, replied
Phillis, that I will do it, so he will tell me his disease. My disease
(answered the Shepherd with tears in his eyes) is incurable by any thing but
death. Without your death, answered Phillis, I will cure you, if you have but
the courage to tell your disease, and Diana a will to apply the remedy. When
you see the greatness of it, (replied the Shepherd) you will be out of all
hopes. Is it possible (said Astrea) that such a man as Sylvander should have
less courage then such a woman as Phillis? The courage which she has, answered
he, proceeds from her ignorance of that which I do but know to well. Let the
proof, bear witness, said Phillis, only tell me your disease, for both the
Physician, and the Physic are ready, Alas, alas! cried he out, there is no
resisting Heaven. This morning being plunged in the abyss of sorrows, which
your dissimulation caused, I went to consult with the Oracle at Mount-Verdune,
which gave me an answer so desperate, as makes me wish the Mountains may fall
upon me, since I must not hope for any contentment amongst the living^ What is
the Oracle? (said Alexis) If you desire to hear it, answered Sylvander, I shall
tell it; and when you have heard it, I am confident, you will pity the
disasterous fate of this unfortunate Shepherd. It is this:

THE ORACLE.
THy present grief shall quickly cease;
But she who only does thee please,
Paris must marry her: N'ere pretend
To compass thy desired end,
As long as thou have any breath,
But only by Sylvander's death.
Oh ye Gods, continued the Shepherd, what hopes for me, since Paris must enjoy
all my desires? And what should I desire, since in my death only, all my
destres are to be accomplished? Oh Diana! (said he and cast himself at her
feet) give me leave to tell you, since you are to be another, that before this
fatal day do dawn, I will pervent it by my death, lest living, I should endure
every hour a thousand torments worse then death. Diana who did love this
Shepherd, as discreet as she was, she could not choose but show her displeasure
at this Oracle, by some tears, which her heart did sent into her eyes, which
Phillis and Astrea observed very well; but she being very wise, did recollect
her self as well as she could. And because this Oracle struck all the company
with silence except Sylvander, who never ceased his complaints, but still
continued them, and went the hand of Diana with his tears, Phillis began to
speak: This Oracle, said she, is indeed very strange; but if it please Diana,
it is absolutely to your advantage. To his advantage? said Diana, yes, said
Sylvander, to my advantage, so far as by my death to take me out of this
misery: No, no, said Phillis, it is clearly in favor of Sylvander if Diana
will. Either I do not understand the words of this Oracle, said Diana, or else*
the words of it, do not at all relate unto my will. But (said Phillis) if they
do relate and depend upon your will, will you let this will consent unto his
cure? Diana made a stop at this, and did not answer, which gave occasion unto
Alexis and Astrea to speak; and addressing themselves unto Diana, they told
her, that if this Oracle had any relation, or dependency upon her will, it was
an argument and will that the Gods did command her to consent: If the Gods
(said Diana) do command me, and Alexis and Astrea desire me, I cannot in all
reason refuse. Will you consent, said Phillis, unto whatsoever the Oracle would
have you? I will, answered Diana, Nay, said Phillis, I will not trust you,
without an Oath; swear therefore, by the God of Lignon, and by the Misleto of
the New-year, that you will consent unto any thing that shall be necessary for
the rendering this Oracle advantageous unto Sylvander* I do, said she, provided
that I may not contribute any thing but my will. Then Sylvander, said Phillis,
rise up; thank Diana for the favor she has done you; and henceforward, esteem
your self the happiest Shepherd of all Lignon: and hearken how the Gods have
pronounced unto you all manner of contentment by this Oracle. As for the first
verse, which tells you that your present pain shall quickly cease, there needs
no better interpretation, then the event which you have already found. As to
the second which seems such a fatal saying unto you, it is delivered in an
ambigious manner, as most Oracles are; the ambiguity rests in this word, Marry,
which has a double sense, and may be taken two ways: first, we usually say,
that a husband does marry his wife: and secondly, we say that the Druide does
marry the husband and the wife; and it is in this last sense it is to be
understood, that Paris must marry Diana: he shall become a Druide like unto his
Father Adamas, and it shall be he who shall marry you together. But (said
Sylvander, and sighed) I must not expect the accomplishment of my desires, but
in Sylvander's death. Ah thou ignorant Shepherd, replied Phillis^ have you not
told us a hundred times, that he does dye in himself, who does perfectly love
another? And therefore the Oracle does advertise you, that you must not expect
the accomplishment of your desires but by the death of Sylvander; that is, by
loving Diana so, as thou shall dye in thy self and become her: Astrea and
Alexis hearing this, doubtless, said they, the Oracle is to be thus
understood, and there wants nothing to make good her promise, but adding her
will. Diana, who perhaps was as well pleased with this interpretation, as
Sylvander could be, though she made it less appear: do you not see (said she)
that I am not concerned at all in the business? Nay, nay, said Phillis, never
deny it, for it is plain that the Oracle refers wholly unto you: do ^u not see
that Sylvander can live in you, and dye in himself, if you will? Love (Sister)
is one of those mysteries which cannot be in a single person: moreover, do you
think that Paris can marry you unto Sylvander unless; you will? Unless you will
give the Gods the lie, and unless you break your Oath, you must make good all
that the Oracle would have you; which is, that you do not only let Sylvander
love you, but also that you love him, so as he may live in you, and you in him.
Ah Sister! (said Diana, and turned a little the other way) no, no, said
Phillis, and took her by the arm, let me hear no more of your ah Sisters, there
is no middle way to be taken; you must either be perjured, or do as I say;
otherwise there is no recovery of this Shepherd. Sister (said Diana, with a
becoming blush, and holding down her eyes) what would you have me do? I would
have you observe the Oath, answered Phillis, which you have sworn, and
promised: what did I promise (said Diana, and smiled) you did swear, answered
Phillis, to do all that was necessary, to make this Oracle advantageous unto
Sylvander. It Is true, said Diana, and what ought I now to do? You must, as I
told you before (replied Phillis) love Sylvander in such a manner, that he may
live in you, and you in him. That (answered she) is above my Oath. No, said
Phillis for amity consists in nothing but the will: Diana, said Alexis, and
Astrea, you must needs give your consent; Well, said Diana, after much
importunity, since you command me, I will: this will, said Phillis, must be a
little better explained; and say, that I will love Sylvander so, that hereafter
as he lives in me, I will live in him. Oh Heavens! said Diana, is not that too
much? Yes, said Sylvander, too much for my merit; not for his merit of
affection, replied Phillis, nor to satisfy the Oracle. Well, said Diana, I
will do all that Alexis, Astrea, and Phillis, would have me; but if it be a
fault, let it be yours, and upon the counsel which you give me; so be it, said
Phillis, but furthermore, I do ordain, that for assurance of your words,
Sylvander by your consent, do kiss your hand, with a protestation never to
depart from your obedience. Sylvander fell down upon his knees, ravished with
too much joy, and was so surprised at this unexpected happiness, that taking
Dianas hand and kissing it, it was a long time before he could speak one
syllable; and looked as if his eyes were dazzled with too much light: this
inexcessive joy did almost take away from him the use of reason; but his
silence and his raptures had more eloquence in them then he had, and
better-spoke the grandeur of his affection then his tongue could: and had it
not been for Alexis and the Shepherdesses who helped him up, he had continued
long in this amorous ecstasy, not knowing so much as what he did. Diana her
self was no less moved, though she set a better gloss upon it: but Phillis, who
observed all this; and helped him to recover: come Sylvander, said she unto
him, must I be still your enemy? Do you see how fully I can revenge those
wrongs that are done unto me? The Shepherd being a little returned to himself,
I must needs confess Phillis, said he unto her, that you are the sweetest enemy
that ever was; and confess also, said she, that I have as much power as the
greatest Gods: for wherein is their power more seen, then in the good and bad
fortune which they give? And have not I, when it pleased me, made you the most
miserable, and then when it pleased me, the most happy man upon earth? What is
it that fortune can do more then I? Good fortune and bad fortune, happiness
and misery, have their dependency upon my will. I must confess, oh puissant
Shepherdess, said Sylvander, that if your power do extend it self over others
as it has over me, Altars will be erected to you. However, repl^^d she, you
cannot deny but that Sylvander ought to adore me. If it were permitted amongst
us (answered the Shepherd and smiled) to adore many Gods, Phillis should
certainly be an adored Deity unto me: but since it is not lawful, and that we
must acknowledge but one God, I hope I shall be excused, if I do not render that
devoir. I am very well contented (said Phillis then) that you do adore but one
Deity in Heaven, and another upon earth: so I shall, replied the Shepherd,
Tautates in Heaven, and Diana upon Earth. Oh most ungrateful wretch, said
Phillis, are you not more beholding unto me, then to Diana? Is not all the
contentments you receive from my hand? I should be most ungrateful indeed,
replied Sylvander, if I did not acknowledge what is due unto you; but I should
be much more ungrateful, did I equal my obligations I ow unto Diana, with those
I ow unto you: for those I do ow unto you, are but consequents of my love to
her; and those which I (...) ow unto her, are no consequents, nor upon any
consideration but love it self, without any relation to you. And therefore
Phillis, undeceive your self in this: all the benefits which you have done me,
I take as coming from her; for otherwise I would not esteem them benefits. I
perceive, replied Phliis, and smiled, that all my labor in obliging you is but
lost, since all my benefits are set upon the score of that Shepherdess. What
would you have me do? said Sylvander; for such is my affection unto Diana, that
I give Heaven no thanks for the life it has given me, unless I may serve and
adore this Divine Diana, unto whom all humane hearts ought to render homage.

Thus did Diana let Sylvander know that she loved him; and ever since this day
she was not shie, nor made any difficulty to live with him, as Astrea was wont
to do with Celadon, and Phillis with Lycidas: so as Sylvander has since
oftentimes said, that he had never been happy, if he had not been first
miserable.

The joy and contentment which might be seen in the eyes and actions of
Sylvander was such, that Astrea and Phillis did extremely admire at it: and the
changing of his complexion and countenance in so short a time, was an
infallible argument unto them of his real affection. As for the disguised
Druide, she measured the grandeur of Sylvanders joy by her own, which she
should have received if under the notion of Celadon, and not of Alexis, Astrea
had been so kind as she was unto her. But when Sylvander observed the change of
habits between Alexis and Astrea; I must confess, said he with wonder, that
Phillis has so infatuated my understanding, as till now I never found my
mistake. Oh Sylvander, said Phillis, assure your self that a woman can deceive
a man a hundred ways when she has a mind unto it, and therefore it concerns
you to keep my friendship very carefully. All the company did fall to laughing,
and they walked along the River Lignon, till they came to the place where
Celadon did cast himself into the water; which Astrea seeing, let us fly, said
she, let us fly away from this fatal place, from which methinks nothing can
come but disasters.

The Druide knew very well that it was the place where she received those cruel
commands, which constrained her to turn her self from Celadon into Alexis: and
it was impossible for her, not to give knowledge of some resentment. But not
being able to imagine that this Shepherdess should call the place fatal for
that cause: and why my dear Servant (said she unto her) do you term this place
of Lignon fatal? Astrea did not answer, but looked upon her, changed color,
and could not choose but sigh. Which Diana perceiving, Madam (said she unto her)
Astrea has good cause to call this place fatal, because she was very near
being drowned there: for she fell into the River, and but for some happy help
which came in opportunely, this Country had for ever lost the fairest
Shepherdess that ever lived in it. I pray tell me (said Alexis) how chanced
that accident? Phillis, who was unwilling Sylvander should take any notice of
Astreas disquiet; Misfortunes (said she) and disasters are not to be talked on
in a time so full of joy as this: but yet, they say, said Sylvander, that the
memory of past miseries does bring contentment, and are pleasing: yes, replied
Astrea, when the miseries which are related, do not make miserable again: but
that for which I give the phrase of fatal unto this place, does never come into
my memory without infinite grief: and see Sylvander whether I have not good
reason for it; for when I fell from that fatal place into the water, poor
Celadon desiring to help me, was drowned: and some cursed reporter carrying the
false news of my death unto my Father and my Mother, they both dyed presently
after, so as I had no sooner bewailed the one, but tears began to overswel my
eyes for the other. Astreas eyes could no longer refrain from tears, and
certainly they had flowed into a torrent, had they not heard a Shepherd
singing, which diverted Astrea, and caused all the company to look that way: As
soon as Diana had turned her self, I am, said she, very much mistaken, if
yonder Shepherd whom we see, and the company which is with him, are not coming
hither to look for me: what moves you unto that thought? said Alexis, I will
tell you (answered she) but let us hear what he sings; and they being very
near, also he singing very loud, they heard him sing, That wheresoever he came,
he found the representation of him and his Mistress. I am not mistaken, said
Diana, as soon as the Shepherd had sung that verse, for the Gods have chosen me
to Judge a difference which is amongst them; yesterday they desired me to
undertake the office, and I promised them to meet them here at this place this
hour; happy I am that we light so opportunely both of the place and the time,
for I swear unto you that I had quite forgot it. By that, Mistress (said
Sylvander) you may draw assurance that it is the will of the Gods you should
take that office upon you, since they have so opportunely conducted you.

Upon this, the strangers were so near, that Diana out of civility went to
salute them; a little after, Alexis, Astrea, and Phillis, did the same: you may
see, said Diana, that I am a person of my word, and have brought all this good
Company* with me, not only out of curiosity to know the cause of your coming to
me, but to help me in the judgment which I am to give unto you. We are much
ashamed, fair and discreet Shepherdess, replied Delphire, that we have made you
stay so long; and we do find our obligations doubled, since we have greater
hopes that our cause will receive a more equitable judgment, by the assistance
of your company of which do not doubt, for all our rest and tranquillity depends
upon what you shall please to ordain amongst us. But, oh just Judge, said
Thomantes, and interrupted, what shall be done unto those that are condemned,
and will not observe the Sentence which you shall doom? This question is not
moved without reason; for I have seen this fair one (pointing at Delphire) so
negligent in the observance of those Laws, which all other humans hold
inviolable, as I have good cause to fear she will not observe what you shall
ordain, if it be against her mind. Oh Thomantes! (said Delphire) this reproach
is insupportable; and were I not in hopes that ere long our just Judge will
revenge all the wrongs which I have received from you, I would demand Justice
upon this injury in particular. You are so accustomed (replied Thomantes) to
complain without a cause, as I do not think it strange you should now do the
like; nor think it a less wonder to hear me speak so openly and freely, having
all my life behaved my self toward you, under the Laws of such a grand
respect, that any complaints were not permitted me in my greatest pain: but now
we are here before our Judge, and it is fit she should know both your
cruelties, and my torments, that she may the better give judgment upon them. I
will not enter or hold any Discourse with you (said Delphire) but will only
hint unto our Judge to observe from your language, that it is the highest
injustice to blind Justice. Only beseech her not to lose any more time in
hearing you, but employ it upon that which she is ordained unto by the Gods.

Whilst Delphire and Thomantes were talking thus, Diana seated her self upon
the ground, and Alexis, Astrea, Phillis, and the rest of the Shepherdesses,
seated themselves in such places where they might best hear this difference
argued: Filintes, and Asphales, with Sylvander, did the same: Now (said Diana)
fair Shepherdess, and you courteous Shepherd, if you desire any thing from me,
let me understand your demands and difference; and in best order thereunto, it
is very fit you make choice of one which knows all the passages betwixt you, to
relate them unto us, and afterward both parties to speak for themselves. Fair
and Wise Shepherdess, said Asphale then, we are four Shepherds and two
Shepherdesses that are interested in the judgment which you are to give, and
therefore if you think it good, Androgenes, said he, and pointed to him, or I,
will relate unto you what concerns Thomantes, Filintes, and Delphire; and
afterward, either Filintes or Thomantes will relate the difference of
Dorissea, Androgenes, and my self: I conceive, answered Diana, that for
brevities sake, it is better that the Shepherdesses make the first relation,
and not the Shepherds, who know too well to answer their reasons: and therefore
Dorissea, I do appoint you unto the office, not only to relate what concerns
Delphire, but also what concerns your self, not questioning but so direct a
Shepherdess will give us true information. Hereupon Dorissea, after a low
reverence, took her place, and after a little time of consideration, she began
thus.

The History of DELPHIRE and DORISSEA.
IF those who have heard tell of jealousy, had but the experience of it as we
have, Oh Wise, and Prudent Shepherdess, doubtless they would all say that it is
a great enemy unto love: and as cold is contrary to heat, so is it directly
contrary to that passion which causes love: for fear i^ the Mother of it, and
consequently it must be cold, but love is always burning, and in a flame. Some
on the contrary do esteem it to be the daughter of Love, and so necessary to
its preservation, that as the water which the Smith throws upon the fire to
make it burn more violent and ardently, so likewise jealousy augments and
makes the flame of love more violent in the souls of Lovers. Had you not
commanded me most Wise Shepherdess, to relate unto you the differences betwixt
Delphire, Thomantes, Asphales, Androgenes, and my self, I would have instanced
some examples to prove what I say, but I assure my self, that in the Discourse
which I shall make unto you, there will appear so many proofs of it, as will
force you to confess with me, that if love can hardly be without jealousy,
jealousy can never be without effacing love.

Be pleased to know then, fair and Wise Shepherdess, that Thomantes being the
only son of his Parents, was brought up with abundance of tender care, by the
Wise Shepherdess Ericanthe his Mother, and by Eleaman his Father: so tender was
their care over him, that they would never suffer him to be out of their
presence, as thinking that as soon as they lost the sight of him, he was lost
for ever. And because Eleaman and Ericanthe were the wealthiest in all our
Town, as well in the great abundance of flocks and pastures, as in the great
number of Shepherds and Shepherdesses, unto whose charge he committed the care
of them, the young Thomantes was brought up in all the qualities and exercises
fit for a Shepherd of his rank, in which for his age, he did so profit himself,
that none in all our coasts could equal him. Being got out of the hands of his
Nurse, an ancient and Wise Pastor was set over him as his Governor; not that
he was thereby excluded from the company of those women, who waited upon his
Mother; for on the contrary he was amongst them till the age of ten or twelve
years, so beloved and caressed by all, as well were they that could love him
most, for besides his being very amiable, and had all the good qualities that
one of his age could have, he was looked upon as the darling and delight of the
Pastor Eleaman, and of the sage Ericanthe their Mistress. But as it commonly
happens at that age, rather by instinct then by election, to love one above
another, the young Thomantes no sooner saw ten years of age, but he showed a
great inclination to love Delphire, who was then brought up with Ericanthe, and
and not above eight or nine years old at that time. Their innocent age, and
their design without design, not being yet instructed in the art of
dissimulation, every one took notice of the particular affection of Thomantes
unto Delphire; whereof Ericanthe was very glad, as well because that
Shepherdess was indeed very handsome, and worthy of love and service; as
because many do think that there is nothing does more awake and enliven youth,
nor rouse it up unto noble designs, then love: doing in this the office of
Steel, which makes a flint to sparkle, that is of it self cold, and without
light. One may easily imagine what kind of infantine affection this was, which
they bore one to the other, for I am confident none can think it above matter
of play for pins, or making presents of cheries, and telling old tales, that
their Nurses taught them in the University of the Nurserie: but so it was, that
these trifling beginnings did sometimes produce great effects, and love was
pleased to raise by degrees these childish inclinations unto great affections:
the Shepherd when he was arrived at his fourteenth year, was able to call
himself old Lover, it being now five or six years since he began the
profession; and yet all this while he was not so good a proficient as to know
that it was love: but afterward, both of them growing every day more learned
then other, they came to understand the Mystery; and then confirming by their
wills what they had done before by hazard, or at least by a blind inclination,
they began to lay the foundation of a real affection.

The c^res of Thomantes were great, how to testify unto Delphire the good will
which he wished unto her: and the modesty of Delphire was no less in a discreet
receiving of it, according to the duty which she owed unto the son of
Ericanthe: so as every one did see the love of this Shepherd, and every one did
commend and esteem the wisdom of the Shepherdess, in carrying her self so even,
and learning no more to one side then to another: I mean, she walked even
betwixt love, and respect, so as one could not know whether her actions
proceeded from affection or from duty: the love of Thomantes was now known unto
all those in the house of Ericanthe: Delphire her self could not doubt it,
before ever the Shepherd did let her understand it by his words: and all his
actions did speak that, which out of a puissant respect, his tongue durst not:
but at last, his affection from day to day growing stronger, it broke those
strings of respect which tied his tongue.

The first time he took the boldness was the day of his birth, which Ericanthe
in thanks to the Gods did every year celebrate upon the day that he was born.

Not far from the sourse of our delightful Lignon, Bleaman and Ericanthe had a
house, which nature had imbellished with all the ornaments that could make it
delightful; it was seated upon a Hill, whose prospect, though a little limited,
by reason of some petty Mountains; yet it was so pleasant, as those that would
take a landscape of delight, might make that their pattern for a situation.
Lignon ran below it with its lovely meanders, as far as the sight could extend;
mead^ws made a most agreeable object to the eye: all one side of the Hill was
covered with a shade of trees quartered in walks, where one might walk and
defy the scortching heat of the day, till they came to the River Lignon:
flowers at all times, and of all colors, do grow in great abundance;
Nightingals making choice of it for their constant habitation, do people it in
such sort, and warble it in their answers of each other, like a world of
Musicians, as if they had forsaken all other places of the Country, to come and
chant it there; to be brief, the place was the delight of all the neighboring
Towns, and commonly had a great concourse of people in it, especially upon
days of solemnity, as this birth day of Thomantes was.

It seems Heaven would let this young Shepherd know, that he had not been born,
but only to live in the service of this fair one; for though he had opportunity
enough to speak unto her, and to let her understand his affection, yet he
stayed till the day of his birth before he would declare it by word, as if he
had said, that the day whereon she received him for her servant, should be the
first day that he did rightly begin to live. It fortuned so, that a little
before, an Uncle unto Delphire dyed, which caused her, according to custom, to
be in a mourning habit. Delphire having an excellent grace in decking and
dressing her self more handsomely then any of the young Shepherdesses in the
Town, she appeared so fair and handsome in that habit of sorrow, as there was no
eye which looked upon her without ravishment and admiration, as well at her
beauty as her sweet civilities: and Thomantes was not so much an admirer as an
adorer, but indeed both; and took such delight in contemplating her actions, as
his eyes had no other objects: he could not satisfy himself with commending
her; sometimes he doted upon her complexion; sometimes upon the symetry and
features of her face; sometimes upon the vivacity of her eyes; sometimes the
coral of her lip; sometimes upon the ivory of her teeth; otherwhiles, he was
wholly taken up, with her stature, garb, and mind: otherwiles with the delicacy
and whiteness of her hand: otherwhiles in the advantage she had above all her
Companions in her dress: so as he concluded that there was nothing under
Heaven, so fair, nor so lovely as Delphire. You make me a relation of history
so new, (answered she and smiled) and so incredible, that for my part, I can
give no credit unto it. I do know very well (replied he) from whence this
incredulity comes; it is because you cannot see your self: for if Heaven had
done you that favor, I do not think you such an enemy to truth, as to say I am
not in the right. I have seen my self several times in fountains of water,
replied she, and in several glasses: but I could never find what you out of
flattery are pleased to tell me. Oh Delphire, answered he, how imperfect are
those representations, and what infinite wrong they do unto your beauty? Do you
think those dead and senseless things are able to represent you? You I say, who
are the very life and joy of all those that have the happiness to see you: if
you have a mind to see your self as you are, be pleased to take a living
mirror of my presenting unto you; and I assure myself, that if you will daign
to cast your eye upon it, you will there find in your self more beauties then
any tongue can tell: what is that, said the Shepherdess, which you call a
living mirror? My heart, answered he. Oh Thomantes (said she) how false and
deceitful are all such mirrours? For as one cannot see in them what one would,
but only what those deluding mirrours please to represent; so there is no
assurance or credit to be given to their representations, because they are only
such as the passion of the soul does bid them. I do believe (answered he) that
the heart does represent nothing but what is in the soul, and therefore you may
see in mine, Delphire in her perfect beauty, because you are so imprinted in my
soul, as nothing can be more perfectly represented. Thomantes (said she) what a
liar you are, and how you jear me, and would laugh at me, if I had so little
wit as to believe you? There is nothing so shameful to a person of honor,
answered he, as to be surprised in a lie: you need not fear that shame (replied
she) for you know that none can look into your heart to convince you. Actions
(answered he) are they that open the doors of a heart; and you see that all
mine do testify unto you, how Thomantes does love Delphire, and that he does
never look with the eyes of love upon any other beauty but hers; and I do make
this declaration unto you upon my birthday, to testify that I believe Heaven
gave me life only to employ it in loving and serving you; which I do vow to do,
with so much affection and fidelity, that I am forced to call my self your most
devoted servant.

Thomantes added unto these many other expressions, which (for brevities sake)
I omit, and which Delphire did not interrupt; because, though she had a quick
wit, and sound judgment, yet was she so surprised, that she could not answer:
for the respect which she bore unto him as the Son of Ericanthe, the good will
which she already had unto him as Thomantes, the virtues and affections which
she found in him, and her fears to fail in her duty, did hold her in a suspense
of resolution, and therefore Thomantes, after a while of silence in expectation
of her answer, and when he saw she remained still mute, he continued thus: I
perceive, fairest Delphire, that your silence does menace me; and that those
hopes which the sweetness of your eye does promise me, are not very certain:
but on the contrary the augure which I might take from that black habit which
you wear, does but too truly portend my ruin. Upon this, he changed color,
and his words did die in his mouth; and though he did offer several times to
fall again into his discourse, yet he was so confused at her returning no
answer, that he could not speak.

Delphire then, to ease him from any longer pain, she said unto him: The words
Thomantes which I heard you utter, are very like unto those which most
Shepherds do commonly use unto Shepherdesses; and I will believe they were
spoken more out of custom, then with any design: yet the respect which I do ow
unto you, and the honor which you do me in discoursing with me, does oblige me
to esteem them, as coming from so kind a Shepherd, whom I will always esteem
and honor as I ought, and as he deserves: and because she would not have this
discourse continue any longer, or go any further at this time, she went away
unto her Companions.

Be, oh sage Shepherdess, pleased to know, that a long time before, Filintes
who is that Shepherd whom you see next unto Delphire, and who is a near kinsman
unto Thomantes, was become a servant unto that same Shepherdess, and being
older then he, he had also more boldness to declare himself so. But some urgent
affairs constraining him to leave our Town, and to take a long voyage; it seems
Heaven would favor the design of Thomantes, in taking from him this rival, who
was no small mote in his eye.

Filintes then departed, full of love and full of sorrow, and about twelve or
thirteen months after, returned with the same love he carried away, unless
perhaps increased and grown bigger as his body was. But at his departure he had
an opinion that he had some advantage of Thomantes, yet found at his return,
what a mortal enemy absence is unto Love: for he found the design of his rival
so thriven, and his own so blasted, as any but himself, would have lost all
hopes. Yet his generous courage would not shrink at any difficulties, and
therefore resolved a second defeat: at his return then, he renewed his
addresses; added new supplications to his old prayers; and seconded his old
services with new ones. Briefly, he was so assiduous, and did so importune her,
that though he could not win any thing upon the resolved mind of Delphire, yet
he raised most extreme suspicions and strong jealousies in the soul of
Thomantes. For though Delphire did prefer Thomantes, yet the true love of that
Shepherd, would not let him be in rest, knowing very well, that love works
wonders, and does miracles. And from hence did proceed so many disquiets, and
so many torments, which these two Shepherds have caused unto each other.

And yet, although their loves were very great, and the violence of their
affections did daily increase; yet for all this, the friendship and amity that
was betwixt them did not alter: a quality which was highly estimable in
Filintes, who was least loved; and whose humor was naturally splenetique: and
yet who could submit himself unto the laws of reason. The advantage of
Thomantes was great, having the authority of Eleaman, and principally of
Ericanthe, to back him: and yet the encouragement of Filintes was not a little,
having a sister, brought up also with Ericanthe, who had a very great
prevalency with Delphire: and indeed, it was unto her, to whom Filintes did
commonly make his complaints. At last it fell out, that this Shepherd, after he
had observed upon several occasions how this Shepherdess preferred Thomantes
before him, and after he had made all the complaints he could, seeing that he
received nothing but fresh testimonies of his being not loved, and being out of
all hope and patience, he resolved to make a retreat, and draw off from a siege
which would disgrace him if continued. So seeking for an opportunity of
speaking to her; at last finding her in a place where none could hear, he gave
her this language: You know Delphire how I have loved you; and I say you know
it, for your excellent and pregnant wit cannot choose but clearly see it in all
my actions, ever since you can remember me: you know also, that coldness, nor
your disdains, nor my too long absence, could ever divert my affection, nor in
the least degree diminish it. But now being pressed, or rather oppressed by
those scorns and injuries which I daily receive from you, I come to tell you,
that finding them insupportable, I must quit the name of servant unto Delphire,
and that which neither any time nor absence, nor your rigours could do, your
scorn, which is insupportable to my spirit, does move me unto a just spleen.
Delphire without the least disquiet, and almost glad of this his resolution,
did answer him extreme carelessly; I never thought, nor desired, Filintes, that
you had any mind unto that Title which now you quit; and it is a thing so very
indifferent unto me, that if you think there is any one amongst my Companions,
that deserves it, I shall advise you to love and serve her.

This cold answer, and the careless manner of giving it, did still more offend
the courage of Filintes, and this was the reason why he went away with a
lowering brow, which sufficiently showed his ill satisfaction. But spleen, being
a passion which blinds the judgment, he thought that no way was better to be
revenged upon Delphire, then to divert the affection of Thomantes from her. And
as some do hope to accomplish all they desire, and imagine all things seasible
will come to pass, so he had a conceit, that he could persuade him to
withdraw. In order to this design he went unto him; and after he had taken him
aside, Brother, (said he unto him, for so Eleaman would have them call each
other, though they were only Cosens) I come to entreat a favor from you, you
ought not to deny me, because I ask it out of the abundance of my affection,
and because it is as much to your advantage as mine. Brother, answered
Thomantes, you may well think that any thing which will give you contentment, I
will certainly do with as good a will as you can desire it. Then promise me,
said Filintes, that you will do it; for unless you be obliged by your promise,
you will at the first start back, and make some difficulty. I will not promise
any thing, replied Thomantes, till I know what it is; and you need not fear
that any difficulties can make me start from doing all I can to give you
contentment. A long dispute being betwixt them hereupon; at last, Filintes,
seeing he could not oblige him by his promise, he resolved to tell him what the
business was; Brother, said he unto him, I desire you, as the greatest
obligation you can put upon me, that you would quit Delphire, or at least seem
as if you did for a time; pride has huffed her into so much insolence, as if
she continue a little longer, she will render her self insupportable; she
thinks all men in the world were made only for her: does she not pretend that
all those respects and devoirs, which you and I out of our free wills do render
unto her, are due by obligation? And does she not demand them as a tribute, to
draw all those she sees, after our example, into her possession? She tryumps,
and is become all scorn, both toward you and toward me: yet would I gladly
know upon what ground she does it. But Brother, assure your self, the more she
sees we withdraw from her, the nearer she will draw to us; it is good to love,
but not to be slaves: I have heard say, that women do always make much of men,
till they be assured they love them; but then they treat them no better then
slaves: come, come, Brother, oblige me so far as to retire, as I am resolved to
do; and you shall see her with all her scorn, and indifferency, brought a loop
lower. Thomantes in a smiling manner, Brother, said he unto him, I am sorry you
should ask me a thing which is impossible. For I do desire as much as I do my
own life, to give you all full contentment; but assure your self Filintes, that
let Delphire treat me which way she pleases, I can do no other but endure it
without murmur: I have no power to withdraw my self from that servitude in
which she holds me: and for my part, I do think, all that see her, are in
reason obliged to serve and adore her: for judging others by my self, I think
it to be a great deffect in judgment, not to end their days in such a sweet
servitude. Fie, fie, Thomantes, said Filintes, are you not ashamed of such an
unworthy resolution? Good Brother; answered Thomantes, the stone is already
thrown, there is no recalling it, I am so resolved upon it, that if I should
find in my self the least will to the contrary, I should die with shame: but
Filintes, said he, pray tell me, what is your design? To live, said he, like a
man of spirit and courage, and not a slave: I can endure any thing but scorn;
but that, I must confess, is intolerable unto me. Perhaps, said Thomantes,
when I am more wise, I shall take up the same resolution; but as I am, there is
no hopes of it.

Thus ended the discourse betwixt these two Shepherds; but the event will make
you laugh: Filintes, seeing he could not divert Thomantes from his resolution,
as if he had quite forgot all that he had said unto him, or unto Delphire, he
ran as fast as ever he could unto her, and beseeched her with all manner of
prayers and supplications to forget and forgive all that he had said; and then
he addressed himself unto his Sister to intercide for him and make his peace:
Delphire could not choose but smile; well, said she, Filintes I am contented;
upon condition that you will not believe, you have obliged me more by your
return, then by your going away.

Delphire had no sooner said so, but Thomantes entered, who seeing this
reconcilement, and hearing what Filintes said, was so amazed that he asked
Delphire and Filintes, whether what he saw was not a dream: no, no, said
Filintes, it is real; but imagine that I do as slaves use, who endeavor to
break their chains but cannot. But when Thomantes did relate unto Delphire in
private, the request which Filintes made unto him, you may imagine whether that
Shepherdess was not ravished at two such sudden, and such different motions.

During the time that these two Shepherds lived thus, I returned from the banks
of Argent, a little Rivolet, which runs into the great River of Loire: and at
the same time Asphales, (the Shepherd whom you see with Filintes, and his
younger Brother) took up an humor of courting me, rather I believe, because it
should not be said, that he was the only one in all our Town who did not love,
then for any other end. Now Asphales being almost always in the company of his
Brother Filintes, as his friend, or perhaps as well wisher unto Delphire; we
were almost always together. I observed that Asphales was long before he could
bring himself to any certainty, and knew not upon which of my Companions he
should bestow himself, imitating a Be which flies upon several flowers before
she fixes upon any: for sometimes he would be for Delphire, another time upon
Filise, one while upon Eritrea, and another upon me: But at last, after he had
turned and returned, sometimes to one, and sometimes to another, he fixed upon
me, or at least seemed so.

I must confess, that if I had been in a mind to entertain any, Asphales had
not been disagreeable to me; for though he be present, yet I must needs say,
that it was hard to meet with a Shepherd of more taking qualities then he was
owner of; agile in all manner of exercises, handsome in his habit, quick and
nimble in his discourse, kind toward Shepherdesses, civil toward Shepherds,
affable with his familiars, and so complaisant toward all, as it was
impossible to be weary of his company: and withal (interrupted he) one that of
all the company Dorissea loves least. Dorissea (answered she and smiled) is not
resolved to love all that are amiable. Then continuing her discourse; Now this
Shepherd (said she) though I told him freely my mind, and that he ought not to
spend his time about a business from which he could expect no contentment, yet
he still continued obstinate, and hoped, that time perhaps which overcomes all
things, might in the end melt my resolution, and alter my Will; He neglected no
opportunities of testifying his extreme affection unto me: and because I was at
all hours in Ericanthes house, out of my amity to Delphire, he was at all hours
also talking to me: for being Nephew unto the sage Pastor Eleaman, he never
stirred out of the house, but was continually there, in as much freedom as in
his own; so as I had been deaf, if I had not heard him say an hundred times in
a day that he loved me; and that he desired no greater happiness in the world,
then that I would love him: his constant continuance of this, made me think
that indeed he did love me: And this opinion obtained so much from him against
my resolution, to permit his continuance; but still after such a reserved
manner, as he could not be contented with it: He said, that this permitting him
to love me, did as good as signify nothing, and would never oblige me to love
him again: I told him, that this was all I could permit; only that he should
keep his affection to me so secret, and especially this permission which I gave
him, that if any came to know it, I would hold it for revoked: That he should
never desire any thing from me, which might in the least manner offend my
honor; and above all, that I should not be troubled with any letters from him;
and many other such like articles, unto which he consented, knowing, (as I
think) that the refusal of them would rather prejudice then advantage him. But
of all these, none went so much against the grain as the last, which exempted
me from receiving any letters; for (said he) if it should be my misfortune to
be at a distance from you, how should I know how to let you know how I do, or
you me? Very well, answered I; for suppose I should receive your letters, can
you hope or think that would send you mine? So that as to that point, the
Letters which I receive will not avail you any thing, and as for hearing from
you, truly I am so little inquisitive, that the labor would be but lost in
sending them to me.

But replied he, do you not value the contentment that I should receive in
holding correspondency with you in this manner? and in rendering you an account
of my life? I shall know all this, said I, at your return. But in the mean
time, said he; in the mean time, answered I, I will be contented to know you
love me still, as you have promised: for have you not told me that your life
should be always such as I pleased? What then, replied he, must I never hope
that you will write unto me? No, said I, and more then that, never hope that I
will receive any Letters from you. This severity, replied he, is too great, and
I protest, said he, half angry, that do what you can, I will send you some
Letters: and I protest, said I, that I will never look in them.

The reason why he was so earnest in this, was because he knew that ere long he
was to be absent from me: for his Father was to send him upon some important
business into the Province of the Romans. And indeed within a few days after,
he came unto me the saddest foul that ever was seen, and looked like a prisoner
going to be hanged. Dorissea, (said he unto me, as soon as he could speak
unheard by any) ah Dorissea! this is the last day I have to live, unless you
have some pity upon Asphales: I seeing his face so changed, and his color
quite gone, I must confess, I had some apprehensions of some harm he would do
himself, and was so kind as to resent his sadness: but when I asked him, why he
spoke so? and understood that it was only the journey which he was to take, I
could not choose but smile. Do you laugh, said he, at that which my heart weeps?
Oh most cruel woman! if Heaven do not revenge me upon you, I shall not think it
just. I do not laugh at your journey, said I unto him, for since it displeases
you, it shall not be pleasing unto me; but I laugh at the dispute which we had
some few days since, because it seems you foresaw your departure: could I
hope, answered he, that you would never be pleased at any thing which
displeases me, I should depart the most happy man, that ever was constrained
to be absent from her whom he adores. If you understand my words aright (said
I) you may go with assurance that what displeases you, shall not be pleasing
unto me; and how, said he, would you have me understand them? My meaning is,
replied I, that whatsoever displeases you, so I have no interest in it, but
only for the love of you, shall never please me. Then, continued he, because
you have no interest in my departure, and because it displeases me, you are
also sorry for it: would you Asphales, said I unto him, and smiled, that I
should conclude as you do? I cannot tell what I would have, answered he
dejectedly, unless it be death, since you will not suffer me to write unto you
in my absence.

At the least I am sure, replied I, that I will not receive any of your
Letters. Are you still in that obstinate humor? (said he half angry) and
making a sign unto him by nodding my head, that it was so. Then I swear, said
he, by the affection which I bear unto you, that you shall receive them in
spite of your teeth; and because I assured him, no, we laid a wager of it,
which he said he was sure to win.

Our discourse had continued long upon this subject, and had continued longer,
if his Father, who intended he should depart the next morning betimes, had not
sent two or three times for him: he went then to his Father, from whom he
received all instructions necessary for his voyage: and when he was ready to
depart, he called to him an old Shepherd, who had served him from his infancy:
the Shepherds name was Alindre, a discreet and subtle man, and one who loved
Asphales exceedingly: Asphales took him into his chamber, and the door being
shut, he acquainted him with his affection unto me, with his sorrows to depart
from me, and the extreme contentment it would be to write unto me; and because
it was a business which he desired should be kept secret, he had made choice of
him amongst all the rest of his friends, to do him the office of delivering his
Letters. Alindre who desired nothing more then to please Asphale in all things,
did tell him that in this and all other his commands, neither his affection nor
fidelity should fail: Asphale upon this embracing him; dear friend, said he
unto him, I ever had that belief in you; and therefore, as the thing, which of
all the world is most dear unto me; I put this into your hands, conjuring you
to find a way as soon as I am gone, that she may see this letter: and be sure,
you use all your ingenuity and care in the delivery of it. The difficulty
(answered Alindre) will not be great; for being so familiar with Eleaman as I
am, I can watch my time when she goes to see Delphire, whom they say she loves
extremely, and ten to one but once in a day I shall find a fit opportunity to
give it unto her: Oh friend (said Asphales) do you think she will receive it
so? No, no, friend, I would have her take it and read it, before she knows that
it comes from me, otherwise she is of so cross a humor, that she will not
take it; for she has protested and sworn that she would not: and because I do
infinitely desire to show her that my affection has more industry and ingenuity
to arrive at my desires, then she has cruelty to hinder me; I do conjure you,
my dear friend Alindres, to use all the wit and ingenuity you have in this
business; I know you have wit enough, and I know you love me, so as if you will
but make it your studied business, she is not able to defend her self against
your stratagems.

To be brief, fair Shepherdess, Alindres took upon him the charge of two
Letters, and promised that since it was a business which he desired with so
much passion, assuredly either one or both of them should be read by that cruel
hearted woman.

Asphales departed with this assurance; and Alindres in the interim more
desirous to keep his promise then perhaps Asphales was; after he had long
consulted with himself upon the matter, he resolved upon this slight.

Eritrea, who was a very wise and discreet Shepherdess, and in some sort my
kinswoman, did make it her particular profession to love me above all others in
the Town; Alindres who knew very well what good will this woman bore unto me,
and that though she had a very good wit, yet she never employed it in such
trifles as are commonly used upon such occasions, he cast his eye upon her, and
designed to make her give me the first Letter; and the rather, because he had a
great familiarity with her long before. He went to see her therefore, several
times, and talked with her upon every thing, but only that subject which
chiefly brought him to her house: at last, he turned and winded his answers and
questions so, that he made her self to enquire and ask of Asphales: Ah me (said
he, and seemed as if he had forgot to tell her something) my memory it seems is
admirable good, for I came hither purposely upon a business which I had quite
forgotten, if you had not put me into remembrance of it by naming Asphales.
Then she pressing him to tell her what it was, he began to whisper as if it were
a business of confidence and trust, and said thus unto her; you know Eritrea
that I am a servant unto Asphales, and should be very sorry either to do or say
any thing that might displease him: but in this which I would have you to know,
I think I do not any thing against his service; nay on the contrary, I am
confident that when his Spirit is free from that passion which now possesses
him, he will thank me as for the best piece of service I could do him: and
therefore I beseech you, and conjure you to keep it extremely secret, until he
be grown wiser then now he is. And Eritrea having promised, and sworn that she
would, I believe (continued the subtle Alindres) you are not ignorant of the
extreme affection which he bears unto Dorisea, for it is so apparent, that any
who have eyes may see it. Eritrea upon this shrugged her shoulders, and seemed
to be very sorry for it; and then he, continued, God only knows what Lectures I
have read unto him about it, and how often I have hinted unto him the
inconveniences and sorrows that would ensue upon it, as well in relation to
Dorissea, whom if he love as he says he does, he ought to have some care of
her honor and reputation; as also in relation to the offense it would be unto
Dorisseas kindred, in which Asphales own Father will have a share in respect of
the ancient amity that has been betwixt their two Families: but all these
arguments and remonstrances were light, and served to no use but to make him
more close and retired from me ever since, then from any other: and I to
content him seem to take no notice of it, but keeps my self out of his way as
much as possibly I can. Now at his departure, he was not contented to speak his
mind unto Dorissea, for I know he was with her two hours together, before he
went; but also has writ Letters unto her, and left them in the hands of a
Shepherd whom I know very well, who promised to give them unto her; but this
careless and ill advised Shepherd, in lieu of performing his promise. I mean
giving them unto Dorissea, or burning them, or at the least keeping them
secret, he left them loosly lying upon his table; and yesterday as I went to
see him, upon business which I had with him, I saw them lying upon the back of
his chimney, where trivial Letters use to be thrown, and God knows who saw them
as well as I: Now knowing what affection you had unto Dorissea, what relation
of kindred there was betwixt you, I thought good to acquaint you, to the end
you might use some means to get them out of his hands and burn them: for I am
confident the discretion wherewith they were writ was no more then that
wherewith they were kept: and I believe that if they could be seen, there would
be something found which concerns the reputation of this wise woman who is in
no fault.

Eritrea who hearkened very attentively unto this Shepherd, who was more subtle
then her self: Oh Alindres, (said she and shoak him by the hand) I am
exceedingly obliged unto you for your care of Dorissea: she is indeed the best
friend I have, and I dare swear she is innocent in this business: but all this
is nothing unless you tell me more, and help me to get these Letters out of
that Shepherds hands; The Shepherd, said he, you know very well, his name is
Atis, he who has the whole management of Asphales affairs; but I dare not
venture to take them: for if ever this lover should come to know it, he would
never pardon the theft. Then pausing a while, he continued: yet I have a Son
who has wit enough, and may do it if he will; for being but a boy, less notice
will be taken of him then of me; and though he should be seen when he takes
them, they would not suspect it out of any design: and if you will, I will set
him a work: Eritrea who longed extremely to have it done, Oh good Alindres,
said she, let it be done withal expepedition, lest some should be before you;
and I assure you Dorissea and I will not be ungrateful: How, said the crafty
Alindres, I beseech you Eritrea, let not me be so much as named in the
business; for if Asphales should ever come to know it, he would never look upon
me again with a good eye: Well, replied she, I will not tell her, but will satisfy
the debt my self. Alindres who had already instructed his Son in the business,
who though young, yet was his Fathers own Son in subtilty; he sent for him
immediately, and in the presence of Eritrea asked him, whether he had so much
courage as to take the Letters which lay in the chimney of Atis, so slily as
none should perceive him. Yes, said he, or any thing you command me: go then,
said the Father, and if you be taken in the fact, be sure you do not say that I
commanded you. Upon this the boy offered to go, but Eritrea called him back, to
promise him something in case he brought them, purposely to encourage him the
more; but he answered, no Eritrea, I had rather die then play the theft upon
any consideration then the command of my Father: then he seemed to go about his
business; but his Father having given him one of the Letters before; it was
not long before he returned, but yet measured his time just according to the
distance of places: Father (said he, and gave him the Letter) if there had been
a dozen more I could have brought them al, but I found only this: and what is
become of the other? said the Father, I know not, answered the boy, perhaps
some took it away: tell me truly, said the Father, did you not want courage to
take it? If you will pardon me, said the boy, I will tell you truly; and when the
promise was made, when I came first into the chamber, said he, I found none in
it, but as soon as I had taken one Letter, I put it in my hat, and was reaching
at the other, one came into the room, took it from me, and threw it into the
fire. Eritrea then* to excuse him, It is no matter my little friend, said she,
since it is burned, I am as well contented as if you had brought it. Oh
Shepherd, said she, I am infinitely joyed the business has thriven thus well,
and that none has seen these Letters. And because Alindres saw she was
impatient til she was alone, he bad her adieu, gave her the Letter, and
conjured silence.

Alindres was no sooner out of her house, but she came to mine; as fortune was,
the house was full of strangers, who came to see my Father, and therefore she
knew not how to give me this Letter, nor acquaint me with the good office which
she had done for me; but I observed that something did disquiet her mind, though
could not imagine what it was: at last, I went to her, and took my opportunity
to ask her if she had any news to tell me? I am infinitely desirous, said she,
to talk with you, and it concerns you, that it be as soon as conveniently you
can. You may well think (sage Shepherdess) that this was enough to swell me
with curiosity. I rid my self therefore as soon as I could conveniently from
all the Company, and carried her into a closet; and I had no sooner shut the
door, but she said unto me, ah my dear Cosen, how careful have I been to
recover this paper, out of a place where it could not be any advantage to you;
upon this, she gave me the Letter, and said unto me, here dear Cosen, read it,
and when you have done, I will tell you the whole story. I who had never seen
the hand of Asphales, could not know the character, nor ever had the least
thought of the wager which I had laid with him; and to tell you truly, I never
believed that this young Spirit would ever have thought upon it: I opened it
therefore, not imagining what it was, and found in it these words.

ASPHALES Letter unto DORISSEA.
IT is Love which made me find out this way, to continue unto you the
assurances of my fidelity: you see it is in vain to strive against him, since
there is nothing so difficult, but he can surmount it. Be contented then, Fair
Dorissea, that as by his means I have won our Wager, so by my extreme
affection, I may change that courage, which makes you insensible of my passions.

I am not able to express (oh Fair and Wise Shepherdess) my amazement at the
reading of this Letter, which by mentioning the Wager, made me know from whence
it came. Believe it, my astonishment was extreme, and I believe Eritreas was no
less, when embracing her I cried out, oh my Cosen! what have you done? He who
gave this Letter unto you was too subtle and crafty for us: How? How? (said she
and went back a pace) what subtilty and craft do you mean? for I protest Cosen,
I never took more care nor pains in my life, then in getting them out of the
hands of those who had them; and then not giving me leisure to speak: nay, nay,
said she, I am in very good earnest; assure your self there was need of craft
and subtilty to get it out of the place where it was; and continuing her
Discourse, she told all the whole story of what she had done, so freely and
innocently, that I could not choose but laugh heartily: at which she began to be
half angry, thinking I did her abundance of wrong in not believing her; and
because I knew that it was out of her good will unto me, Cosen (said I unto
her) I am much obliged unto you for the pains which you have taken: but assure
your self, that if I have offended you, Asphales ought to make you
satisfaction: for you have helped him to win a Wager which he had laid with me;
and then I told her the whole passage, and consequently made her understand the
subtilty of Alindres; at which she was so surprised, that the poor woman could
not sufficiently admire the treachery.

I have told you these things, Fair and Wise Shepherdess, to let you
understand how Asphales, Thomantes, and Filintes, behaved themselves toward
Delphire and me; and upon what grounds we might pretend that they ought not to
engage themselves any where else, and yet, be pleased to hear what happened
afterward.

Thomantes, had ingratiated himself so far into my Companions favor, that his
rival had good reason to think him better looked then upon himself Yet
Delphire, who could not any way approve of these splenatique passions in
Filintes, she would sometimes be jesting and laughing with him. During which
time, the sixth day of the month came on; a day as you know, dedicated to the
gathering of the Misleto: and by fortune those that went to seek it in our
Sacred Groves, did find it in that part which was nearest our Town: this was
the reason, that not only we, but all our neighbors came to rejoice with us,
and to congratulate our good fortune: for into what place soever Heaven sent
this Sacred Misleto, it brought with it always abundance of prosperity.

Every one therefore prepared themselves, according to the custom, to honor
the day; and to perform those exercises which were intended; as running,
wrestling, throwing the bar, and shooting: the young Shepherds spruced up
themselves in all their gaiety and gallantry: Filintes desiring to be very
fine, he begged a favor of Delphire, which she denied with the best excuses
she could find: but he, who was bold enough, and thought that the greatest
pleasure in love was, as in hunting, to take what one pursues by force, he put
his hand about the Shepherdesses neck, and took out of her head a flower made
of silk, which the Sister of that Shepherd had pinned there. Delphire, who
thought it better to let him take it thus before all the company, then in
private, after two or three times asking: well, said she, what the sister gave
me, the Brother takes from me, but Filintes went away unto his Sister to get it
fastened to his hat; it chanced that Thomantes was there; who knowing the
flower, and thinking that Delphire had bestowed it upon him with her free
consent, he fell into such a jealousy, that a fever seized upon him, and that
in so violent a degree, that it constrained him to keep his bed.

This sudden sickness set the sage Shepherdess Ericanthe off the humor of
any rejoicing, so as the bravery of Filintes was spoiled for this time: for
Eleaman having the whole authority of the Town, deferred the solemnity: and
because Ericanthe was desirous that we should go and visit Thomantes,
especially Delphire, she desired me to go with her: and when we came to his
chamber door, we heard him talking very loud: so as being told that he was all
alone by himself, we went as softly as we could to hear what he said; and being
very near, we heard him make extreme complaints, as if he had received some
strange injury, offered unto the fidelity of his Love; and perhaps he had
continued longer in his lamentations, if Delphire had (...) (purposely as I
think) made a noise; being unwilling I should hear any more: but she kept a
great bustle at the door, and as if it had been against her will, oh what a
noise do I make (said she) It is no matter, said I, seeming to take no notice
of it; upon this, opening the door, we entered into the chamber, We found him
indeed, in a very bad condition: for besides the violence of his fever, which
much perplexed him, we saw his face all tears, which his jealous fancy had
fetched from his heart. This sight, though he wiped his eyes as well as he
could, might very well move my companion: for I protest it moved me to much
pity, not knowing what the matter was, yet doubting that it was against her
that he complained; so as looking upon her, my very eyes invited her to give
the Shepherd some comfort. And she with abundance of modesty and discretion,
went to his bedside: Alas Thomantes! (said she unto him) how long must our
sorrows last, in grieving at your sickness? The Shepherd then raising himself
up, as desirous to thank us for the favor which we did him in the visit. I am
but too well in being sick, answered he, since such fair Shepherdesses daign to
have a care of me. But Thomantes (said I unto him) if your sickness continue,
you will cause small joy for the Sacred Misleto. Such an unfortunate Shepherd
as Thomantes, answered he, can never hinder the joys of so many fair
Shepherdesses, especially such as are so free, in their favors, as they care
not if all the the world do see them. Delphire till now never thought that the
complaints and sickness of this Shepherd proceeded from the flower which
Filintes took from her, and was very glad that she had found it out, to the end
she might undeceive him: but not being willing that I should understand any
thing of this difference, she seemed as if she did not apprehend it, but turned
her Discourse into expressions of Ericanthes sorrows for his sickness, and how
much all the house was troubled at it: and afterward told him, how every one
were preparing themselves for the exercises and pastimes of the day, and wanted
assistants: briefly she told him all that she could to cheer him up, and to
undeceive him in the opinion which he was in that she favored Filintes more
then him; yet so cautiously, that I could not judge that she had any interest
in those favors she spoke of. And because I was not ignorant that this
Shepherd did love her, and knew how Lovers loved privacy, I walked up and, down
the chamber, looking upon every thing in it, and seemed very busy in my own
thoughts, and all purposely to give them the better opportunities of private
talk. Delphire, who was very desirous to undeceive him, and to lose no time,
lest any should come in to interrupt, she bowed her self nearer him: Is it
possible Thomantes (said she unto him in a low voice, and with a smiling eye)
that you should be jealous? Is it possible Delphire (answered he) that you
should be so kind unto Filintes as you are? and that I loving you as I do,
should not be as much in your favor as he? Upon this, the Shepherdess could
not hold from laughing: Oh Heavens Shepherdess, said he, do you laugh at my
misery? What hopes can I have ever to be happy? Truly (said she) I do laugh at
a thing which you your self would laugh at with me, if you knew the truth: How?
replied he, do you think I can laugh to see one whom I would have to love me,
love another? and that I should see Filintes with my own eyes trimmed up in
your favors, and not die with despair? Oh Delphire, if you think so of me, you
do more offend me by that thought then by the favor which you have given him:
for in your favoring of him more then me, you do only intimate that I should
yield unto him in happiness; but by this thought you do as good as tell me that
you have an ill opinion of my love, which is an offense so unjust, as is not to
be endured, Thomantes, Thomantes, said she unto him, never let it trouble you,
but set your heart at rest, and be assured that in this I have not offended
either against you, or your love unto me: that which you call a Favor, was a
theft, a violent robbery, against which I could not defend my self; so many
several witnesses are of it, that I need not insist upon any farther clearing
of my self; for my chamber was full of Shepherds and Shepherdesses; from whom,
if you will not believe me, you may know the truth.

Now since it is thus, as most truly it is, have I not good reason to laugh:
No, no, Thomantes, as long as you behave your self toward me as you do, I
shall have more regard of your satisfaction then you imagine: and if this were
a place fit to chide in, I should chide you for having so bad an opinion of
that good will which I bore unto you: but since I believe your displeasure
proceeded only from your affection, I will take it as an argument of that amity
which you have promised unto me. Oh Heavens (said the Shepherd and kissed her
hand) how near are extreme contentments in love, and extreme discontents, unto
one another? This Declaration restores that life, which my opinion would have
ravished from me. But dearest Delphire, may I without offense beg one favor
from you, whith would complete my happiness? Tell me what it is, answered the
Shepherdess, and if it be a thing which depends upon me, you shall see how much
I desire your satisfaction. I most heartily beseech you, said he, nay I conjure
you, even by your self, which is the dearest thing in the world unto me, that
you would get back this flower, for I am not able to see it in the hands of
this ravisher, without a most strange alteration, I promise you Thomantes,
answered she, that as well for your satisfaction as my own, I will do all I
can, and you shall know it.

She left him with this assurance, for many Shepherds and Shepherdesses came in
and hindered them from farther Discourse. This visit had a better operation upon
this Lover, then all the Physic which should have been given unto him: for the
next morning, he left his sickness in his bed, and found himself in perfect
health.

But Delphire not forgetting the Shepherds request, she no sooner saw Filintes,
but she used her best rethorique to procure the flower, pretending that she
would keep it for her sake who gave it: Filintes, who did not repent of the
robbery which he had committed, Do you think Delphire (said he) that I value
this which I have got by lawful war, no more, then to part from it without a
ransom; what ransom said she, do you require? Some of those knots, answered he,
or those ribands which you wear. I have none to give you, answered she; nor I
any to restore, answered he, but am very sorry that I robbed you of no more:
what more, said she, would you have taken? Your heart, answered he: as for that
piece of thievery, answered she, I should never have required restitution; but
the flower which you have is much better, and I wonder you should have any
satisfaction in retaining any thing against ones will. What? (said Filintes) is
it against your will that I wear it? Me thinks, answered she, my desires of
having it again should intimate as much; Then he desired me to lend him a pair
of Sissers; which I did, not knowing what he would do with them; and then he
took off his hat, and cut the flower in a hundred pieces, and threw them into
the fire: then (said he unto me) Here take your Sissers, and I thank you, for
they have helped to revenge me against the displeasure which was conceived
against me: then he rose up in an angry mood, and it was a long time before he
would speak unto her; but it was excellent sport to see them together: for he
could not forbear from being where she was, and often twit her in a splenatique
way, still addressing his speech to a third person; and Delphire paid him back
again in the same coin, with so much delight to all that heard them; that
whenever they two were together, every one flocked unto them to hear the
quirks which they put upon each other.

This divorce lasted until the day when the Misleto was to be gathered: and
that day he came unto her very early, Delphire (said he unto her) is the heat
of your choler now past? My choler, answered she, never began against you, but
perhaps you mean your own. It may be so, replied he and smiled, for since I
have nothing but what is yours, my anger is yours. If you mean it so, said
Delphire, I fear you do mis-reckon your self, for I know not who can make any
thing mine, unless I will. Delphire, replied he, there are some things which
we have by force: Is it not commonly said, such a one has a fever; such a one
has the hatred of every one; and such a one has abundance of misery, and yet I
am confident they would not have them: would you have me, replied Delphire, to
have your anger in that way? Not only my anger, said he, but also my soul, my
heart, my affection, and my all: but Filintes, answered Delphire, take heed you
do not draw a conclusion from hence, which will put you into your splenatique
mood again. What can you allege, said he, which can give me any such occasion?
God defend me, replied the Shepherdess from the thought of it; but if you will
give me leave, I will tell you, that such things as are forced upon one, do
also make one strive with all their power to be rid of them; so as if that
which I have of yours be of this quality, consider with your self what
conclusion may be drawn from thence. Oh most cruel and disdainful Shepherdess,
said he, can you vent nothing but arguments of your scorn and ill affection of
me? I was in hopes this morning to have obtained a favor from you, that I
might have flourished in it under the notion of your Shepherd, but now I find
my hopes are all blasted, and that you scorn and slight me more then ever. You
are mistaken Shepherd, said Delphire, I never scorned any thing that had
relation unto you; no, I do honor both you and your family: but I was forced
to answer unto your assertions which you used unto me. I shall quickly know,
replied he, whether you speak truth; for if you do not scorn, I should be known
this day as your Shepherd; pray give me that knot which is upon your head, in
testimony of your good will. I am afraid, said she, lest you should cut it in
pieces, as you did the flower which you took from me. Perhaps it might run the
same fortune (said he) if you would take it away from me. You need not doubt,
replied she, but if you should ravish it from me, as you did the flower, I
should do the same. What would you think, replied Filintes, if I should not let
you rest all this day, until I have that knot? Upon this, he put forth his hand
to take it; but the Shepherdess being aware of him, recoyled, and went unto
Ericanthe; but still he followed her, and importuned her for this knot. No, no,
Filintes, (said Delphire) you shall not have it, unless Ericanthe command me. I
will not receive it, replied he, upon Ericanthes command: no, no, ungrateful
Delphire, deceive not your self, I desire no favors from you, but such as
proceed from your free and good will: I would have them to be gifts of Love,
and not tributes of obedience; upon this, he went away in a fretting fume. And
fortune was so averse unto him all that day, as he received no contentment from
any thing he took in hand.

On the contrary, Thomantes, continuing his courtship of this Shepherdess,
without the least complaint or murmr; every action about this proud Beauty,
made Filintes jealous, who seeing him so patient, and judging of things
according to his own humor, he could not imagine any one should endure the
cruelties of her whom he loved with so much silence, unless he was tied unto it
by some great obligation; so as he concluded very advantagiously for his rival.
This opinion did torment him so extremely, that one day when he was almost out
of his wits, he went unto the Shepherdess; and though it was long since he had
spoke unto her, yet at the very first sight he accosted her with this language:
resolve with your self to see one of these three things come presently to
pass. For either I must change, or you must change, or I must die. The
Shepherdess returned him this faint answer: for me to change, is a thing
impossible; that you should die, would grieve me; and for you to change, is of
less importance unto me, and depends wholly upon your own will. Oh Heavens
(cried he out) is all this cruelty to be endured? and yet I must love this
insensible woman. Upon this, he pulled his hat over his eyes, and went away,
more transported with choler then ever he was: But as his Spirit was quickly
hot, so it was quickly cool for when he was in his greatest fury, if Delphire
did but speak one word unto him, he was appeased, and seemed as if he had no
memory of those offenses and wrongs at which he was angry.

All things thus far went well with Thomantes, so as he might well think
himself one of the happiest Shepherds about Lignon; and I believe Asphales
might have said as much, had he not been absent, for he could not have seen any
Shepherd so much in my favor as himself: but since that jealousies, and by
consequence inquietudes have so ravelled their souls, as I believe they enjoy
but a little rest, and we but a little more: Thus, Wise Shepherdess, this is
the cause which has brought us hither before you, according to the answer of
the Oracle.

Asphales, as I told you, before was absent; and Thomantes was constrained
almost by the same destiny to be absent from Delphire, and also to go into the
same Province of the Romans, where Asphales was already. Perhaps I should be
too tedious in relating all the Discourse of this Shepherd, and all his laments
a little before his departure: but so it was, that he gave unto this
Shepherdess of possible assurances of a constant, and lasting affection; his
expressions came from him with such an emphasis, as if his heart had been in
his tongue, and those that would not believe them, had been as incredulous, as
that false Shepherd who uttered them was perfidious, and who afterward was
quite wafted away with inconstancy.

He departed with the prayers and sorrows of all that he left behind him. And
because Eleaman the Wise Pastor would needs out of his affection see him take
horse, and was not ignorant of the good will which his Son bore unto this
Shepherdess, when he saw him a little gone, he turned toward her, and in a
jesting manner said, he is gone, and none of these fair Maids lament him: and
because as he spoke those words, he had his eyes upon Delphire, she smiled;
which was observed by many, and afterward when Filintes returned, for he
accompanied Thomantes a little way, and was told of this: Oh most cruel,
hard-harted, and insensible woman, said he, can Heaven suffer so much
injustice? Does all the services which Thomantes has rendered unto you, merit no
more then to laugh at him when he goes away, and when he goes away with so much
sorrow to part from you? But the best conceit was, he was really offended at
the injury which he thought she had done unto his rival. And to see the humor
of this young Shepherd: as long as Thomantes was absent, there was not a day
wherein he did not put Delphire in memory of him. And at any time when he did
her any trivial service; I wish, said he, that this were put upon the score of
Thomantes. But that which is hardly credible, is, when Thomantes was present,
Filintes vexed himself, and fainted at every syllable which Delphire uttered:
but when he was absent, he took all well, and was as patient, as if nothing
could move him.

Thomantes who was absent, and longed to hear how Delphire did, was presently
acquainted how Filintes was changed in his humor. This news began to gripe him
a little at the heart: and as fortune would have it, he and Asphales meeting in
a strange Country, they contracted (as it is usual) a more intimate familiarity
then ever they had before: so as always one of them was receiving news how
squares went at home. As ill luck was, those who writ unto Asphales did send
him sometimes such news concerning Delphire, as they fancied: and those who gave
intelligence unto Thomantes, did write of me according to their opinions, not
knowing what great familiarity there was betwixt them. They who took all for
truths, and did believe what was written. Unto Asphales was written, that
Filintes had so gained the heart of Delphire, as now there was no room for
Thomantes. And unto Thomantes they sent word, that since his departure,
Androgenes was so in love with me, as that I had no eyes but to look upon him;
so as these two poor Shepherds, when perhaps they had most cause to be
contented, they thought they had most cause to complain against us. They
counseled and consulted together; and I am sure not without sometimes talking
of our changing humors. In conclusion, both of them having hasted, or rather
hudled up their business, that they might the sooner look homeward, we heard of
their return: Ericanthe expected her Son with such impatiency, that she went as
far as the Town of Boen to meet him: Delphire that day was not well, and
therefore intended not to stir out of her chamber. Filintes not being able to
endure that Thomantes should receive such a displeasure, he came to pray and
beseech her by all means, that she would keep Ericanthe company upon this
occasion, which he assured her would be very well taken, and that for his part
he would take it for a very particular obligation; and was so very importunate
in his desires, and supplications, as at last, he obtained that which none else
could: But when Thomantes heard from Delphire her self, that the favor which
he received was by the intercession of Filintes, he grew extremely jealous at
it: and upon this reason, he set himself ever since to observe and watch the
actions of Filintes and Delphire more narrowly. And so much the rather, because
his rival was grown very familiar with all the Shepherdesses, which stung
Thomantes to the heart; for he could not imagine that this familiarity could
proceed from any thing but Love, and not out of habitude: yet at the first he
seemed to take no notice, but dissembled his passion as discreetly as possibly
he could.

Asphales also, whose head was full of that news which was written unto
Thomantes, concerning the affection between Androgenes and me, he also made a
fair show, and set himself to be a spy over our actions, out of which he drew
no consequences to my advantage. I know not how it came to pass: but I being at
that time in Ericanthes chamber, where there was a great number of Shepherds
and Shepherdesses, Androgenes desired to talk with me, as it is usual at such
assemblies, for every one to address themselves unto such as they have
familiarity withal, rather then unto strangers: but because I took notice that
Asphales observed us, being unwilling to give him any occasion of discontent, I
turned another way, and would not speak unto him; and see how one is sometimes
deceived in their design: this action being observed by Asphales, it made him
suspect all that he saw not, and think that all was true which had been written
concerning Androgenes and me: and the worst was; Androgenes observing how I
declined speaking unto him in consideration of Asphales, he never sought for
any opportunity of speaking unto me during all that Assembly; but there being a
great Looking-glass upon the table, which was fixed to the wall, this discreet
Shepherd did cast his eyes into it; and as fortune was, I looked into it at the
same time: Androgenes shrugged his shoulders, as if he complained of my
behavior to him, and I not utterly to disoblige him, did wink upon him with
one eye, which perhaps was some contentment to him: but I protest, it was only
out of desire to hide the odd humor of Asphales: but as ill suck would have
it; he took notice of all these signs, and supposing thereby that there was
some close correspondency betwixt us, he was so netled, that he went out of the
house, and was not seen all night.

Perhaps you will think it strange, discreet Shepherdess, that Thomantes and
Asphales, who at their departures had such small shares in our good will,
should at their returns pretend so absolutely unto them: but you must know,
that they obtained our affections during their absence, more then whilst they
were continually with us; for when they were amongst us, and served us, we
supposed they did it because they saw no greater beauties then our selves: but
when we heard that after they had seen the world, and in it many beauties
superior unto ours, and yet kept themselves constant unto us, we esteemed their
affections at a higher rate, so as by our Letters to them, they knew that their
absence obtained that which their presence had denied them.

This was the reason that the least favor which we showed unto others, seeming
unto them a taking away their dues, they could not endure we should so much as
look upon any but them. If we chanced to cast the least glance of an eye upon
any one, then these Shepherds; or rather these Tyrants, were ready to fly in
our faces, and would oblige us to such a constraint as was intolerable: but
because Delphire and I did not like to be banished from all the world, we
continued our conversation, not only with Filintes and Androgenes, but also
with any others that addressed themselves unto us; the number of which was not
small; and behaved our selves toward them as was fitting, lest we should give
occasion unto any of speaking ill of us; which they did take so ill, that after
they had called a counsel amongst them two, as if they were to govern and
direct us, they resolved to put a face of coldness, and afterward to seem as
if they loved some others. But not knowing whom to choose for such a business,
they would only seem to stand as Neuters and be indifferent; and for a
conclusion, they came at last unto down right incivility, for so may their
behaviors unto us be termed, since they did not only leave off addresses and
courting us as they were wont; but when they met us at any time in Ericanthes
chamber, or any where else, they would not so much as look upon us. If at any
time we found them in a place where it was impossible for them to turn away
their eyes from us, it was with so much scorn, and they rendered their salutes
in such a disdainful manner, as was not civil.

This strange way of behavior and proceeding, caused every one to take notice
of it, and almost all that heard of it, did tax them with inconstancy and
levity: but they on the contrary, maintained that they were the same they were
always wont to be, that they had not changed, but loved us and honored us, as
much as ever they did; that it was business which they were constrained to
follow, concerning the estate which belonged to their family, which did divert
them, and hinder them from employing all their time in those trivial services
which they were wont to render. Delphire and I must confess, oh sage Diana,
that after we had several times talked together, (for our fortunes were the
same, and required the same remedies) we resolved, to take all manner of
excuses from these two wavering minds, by retiring our selves from all those
who might give them the least umbrage; and to do it the more handsomely, we took
this occasion.

Eleaman and Ericanthe took great delight in seeing Comedies acted by those in
their own house: and Delphire, as she that had the best wit, had commonly one
of the best parts: It happened that Delphire in the play was to tell a Shepherd
that he was never to hope for any thing in her affection: by chance she spied
Filintes very near the Theater harkning and admiring her action; and conceiving
him to be the greatest cause of jealousy in Thomantes, when she was to speak
unto the Shepherd in the Comedy, she turned her self directly to Filintes, and
as if he had hoar a part in the play, and said thus unto him; I do swear unto
thee Shepherd, that I can and will sooner die a hundred deaths, then love thee:
cease all thy hopes, trouble me no more with thy love, for Shepherd I do hate
thee.

The face of Delphire being turned toward Filintes, and her eyes and gestures
addressed unto him, was a cause, that not only the poor Shepherd knew her
meaning, but also Thomantes, and almost all the Spectators, which caused all
eyes to be cast upon him, who durst not before all that company let his anger
appear.

A few days after, when we were upon the banks of the Crystal River of
Lignon, and as we were passing away the time upon the Sands by the River side;
Asphales, Androgenes, and many other Shepherds and Shepherdesses, were all
about me: and I writ upon the Sand, I LOVE: Androgenes looking over my
shoulder, and seeing what I had writ upon the Sand, is it I (said he, and
smiled) for whom you writ that word? Yes, answered I, and I observed that
Asphales blushed when I spoke that word: but do you understand, continued I,
what it signifies? I do understand the word, answered he, perhaps not the
meaning of the writer, answered I, for I mean that the Love which I bear unto
you, is like the writing which you see, (and trod upon it with my foot) and
which you shall never see again. Asphales, and all that heard me, fell into
such extreme laughter, which perhaps surprised Androgenes, as much as what I
said unto him.

One would think, sage Shepherdesses, that these two actions of Delphire and
me, should have contented these two stubborn Lovers, if at the least, this term
Lovers, be not too good for them; but on the contrary, they still continued
their high humors, and whenever they came into company, they presently began
to sing their invective songs against us, upbraiding us with inconstancy.

Now, sage Shepherdess, we both of us resolved to have no more to do with them,
but become as very strangers, as if we had never seen them; and to the end none
should think we cast them off by reason of any new affections, we retired our
selves at the same time from all manner of conversation, not upon a sudden,
lest it should be thought strange: but see, fair and Wise Shepherdess, how
those who upbraided us with inconstancy, are inconstant themselves; we had not
lived above two months in this cold restraint, but as if our Ice, by a contrary
operation had re-kindled fire in their souls, they come and cast themselves at
our feet with all manner of submission and prayers; but I know not whether I
should say, with the same importunities they used before. Filintes, and
Androgenes, were the first who opposed them at their return; saying, that their
inconstancy was too great and gross, ever to be entertained or endured; and
that if such Weathercock minds were not punished by some eminent corrections,
there would be no faith or loyalty amongst Shepherds. We whose humors were
well enough disposed never to entertain them again, did easily consent unto the
opinion of Filintes, and Androgenes. And in this resolution, as often as Asphales
and Thomantes came to us, we laid their inconstancy before them; and they on
the contrary, to show that no cause is so bad but will find some maintainers,
they used all the arguments and reasons they could, to justify themselves,
affirming that they were not inconstant, and asked what inconstancy was, and
within what terms and limits it was confined, when it was made a rule, or
rather a Law, and then maintained that they did never break that Law. This
dispute went so far, that in the end, being wearied with their importunate
prayers, we all resolved together to address our self unto the Oracle for a
decision of the controversy; by whose answer we were sent unto you, fair and
Wise Shepherdess; from whom we wait for a just judgment, to deliver us all from
burdens, that are too heavy to be endured.

Dorissea thus ended her Discourse, and after an humble reverence, she returned
unto her place, to vvait for what the Shepherdess Diana would ordain; who
after she had asked the opinion of Alexis, Astrea, Phillis, Sylvander, and some
others, she ordained, that Thomantes and Asphales should deliver their reasons,
by which they would maintain, that they were not inconstant, and Thomantes
spoke thus, in behalf of them both.

The Speech of THOMANTES.
WE do see, and know very well, oh most just Judge! that it was upon great
reason you ordained Asphales and me to deliver unto you those reasons by which
we may clear our innocence, and wipe off those aspersions, which the malice of
our accusers had cast upon us; for otherwise it is impossible any humane
understanding should come to the knowledge of the truth, which is now put into
doubt: the artifice of those who have done the wrong is great, and they have so
gilded over rotten reasons with flourishing arguments of eloquence, as it is a
very hard matter to see the simple and pure face of truth, but by the
oppositions and answers of those that are oppressed.

We do see, and know also very well, that we who have hitherto made it our
whole business, profession, and study, to love well, and not to speak well, are
by the rigor of those whom we have served, driven to defend our selves by
words. It is a very hard matter for us to speak well, that which we have so
perfectly and so religiously observed; in as much as none ought to meddle in
that mystery and trade which they have not learned, and of which they have not
made profession: and, oh our just Judge, is it not very hard, that we who have
made it our whole profession to love well, and not to speak well, should now be
driven to that which is not our profession, and to use words to verify our
actions, to which we referred all our eloquence and rethorique. This
consideration makes us extremely doubt the issue of this enterprise, knowing
very well, that we have to do with persons, who quite contrary unto us, have
more studied to speak well without loving, then love well without speaking: now
all the arms which we are to use, are only words, which being their own, and in
which they are exercised and skilful, most certainly they know better how to
use them then we; and therefore have a very great advantage of us, unless our
just Judge by her prudence, and soundness of judgment, do balance the sincerity
of our naked reasons, against the gilded glosses, and well speaking of our
adversaries: and upon this confidence, we take the boldness to present our
reasons plainly unto you, and as briefly as possibly we can.

But when all is well considered, what kind of accusations, (oh my friend
Asphales) are those which they charge upon us? Had they blamed us for loving
too much; had they accused us of being transported with too much violent
affection: had they said that, we go beyond the limits of Love; had they
complained that the excess of our passion makes us troublesome, or
insupportable in our continual addresses, these accusations, might perhaps have
had some shadow of likelihood; and we should have found a hard task to
discharge our selves of such objections. But that they should accuse us that we
should not Love those whom none can look upon, without adoration! Is not this,
to mock us, and those (if I may say so) that hear them? Can they say Asphales
does not love, whose affection surmounted so long an absence? If absence be
called the Death of Love, what should one say of that Love which is not dead
after so long an absence, but that certainly it is immortal? Immortal then is
the love of Asphales unto Dorissea; Immortal is that of Thomantes unto the fair
Delphire, who have not only resisted absence, but also the rigours of that fair
one, which perhaps had been insupportable unto any other: length of time, which
they say ruins and rots the most lasting thing, never shook his constancy; no
nor any monsters of difficulties which he met with, nay even impossibilities,
were not able to stop him in his designed course: Oh Gods! who does not know
that Thomantes has loved the fair Delphire even in her Cradle? at an age when
she was not capable (if I may say so) of knowing either to love, or cause love?
And can it be imagined that Thomantes should now fall off, and not love her,
when her eyes enflames all that they daign to look upon, and cast their rays
on? Who can have seen this Thomantes overcome all the rigours and scorns of
Delphire; abide the length of time; surmount all difficulties, and believe that
the same Thomantes should not love her, when this fair Monster of Beauty seemed
pliable to his will and desires? Truly these accusations are as far from any
common sense, as they are from reason and truth; and there is no other answer
to be given unto them, but this, that there is no disputing against those that
will deny principles: and no more ought I against those persons who make these
oppositions, who yet do fill Heaven and Earth with their complaints against us,
and will by force have us confess that we do not love them.

They will needs take upon them to know what we do, better then we our selves:
Love is an act of the will; and is there any so clear sighted, as can see my
will better then my self? But as humane nature is more apt to believe the bad
then the good, so should we but once tell Delphire and Dorissea, that we do not
love them, oh how presently would they believe us? But if we should tell them,
and tell them again, a thousand and a thousand times that we do infinitely love
them, they would presently say it was not true. Why should you not believe us
in the one as well as in the other? But we (and it is no small argument of that
love which you deny to be in us) if you once tell us that you do love us, we
presently believe it, and never make the least doubt of the truth; and from
whence proceeds this easy faith and belief? Even from love; from love I say,
which makes us believe, that truth as well as all other virtues is in the
person loved, so consequently in you. But these fair ones would never confess
that we loved them, but always denied it, and now they tax us with
inconstancy. This last injury (my dear Asphales) is an argument for us, for
from their own opinion must be concluded, that we do love them now; for they
confess that we did not love them heretofore, and by saying that we are
inconstant, they say, that we do love now: in this sense, fair Shepherdesses,
we should agree with you, were it not that Love (who forced this truth from
your own mouths against your wills) will not let us confess, that we did not
love you before: but on the contrary, we do say, and maintain, that we did love
you, and do love you, and ever shall love you: and that never was affection
more perfect then the affection of Asphales and Thomantes.

Now the main argument they have against our affection, is, that our actions
have not given sufficient testimonies, that we love them: Consider, (oh most
just Judge) consider I beseech you, upon what a sandy foundation this charge is
built, and how quickly it will fall to the ground: when our actions and
behaviors to them were all fire, and full of impatiencies, then they charged
us that we did not love them; when we saw this way would not prevail, nor
persuade them to believe the truth of our affections, we had recourse unto the
contrary: we put on a garb of coldness, and became all patience; but they
forgetting the judgment they had before given, do now accuse us of want of love
more sharply then before. What should we do, if to our misfortune two
contraries do work the same effect upon their unjust souls: if neither heat nor
cold will testify our Love, what can we do? Yet these considerations, or
rather contradictions, do put us unto abundance of pains: not that they who do
see and weigh every thing with a sound judgment, can ever enter into any doubt
of us: but since there are more of those who are inclined to judge ill of
others, then of those who hold an even scale of judgment, it must ensue, that
the greater part of men will blame us: and which is worst of all, or which is
indeed insupportable, these fair ones may nourish a stinister opinion of us in
their souls, although we never courted any thing with more desires, then to
persuade them of the contrary: and therefore though we know very well that we
ought in all other things to yield unto them; yet in this, we are constrained
to contradict them, and bring the matter unto the judgment of another; which we
would not have to be taken as any defect of love or respect, but rather for
excess, and height of affection, which transports us beyond all rules of duty.
In this excess, we have several times desired, that since they do charge us
with inconstancy, they would first agree that heretofore we did love them, and
afterward that they would prescribe unto us those limits in which a Lover
ought to keep himself within compass of this constancy, to the end one may
judge, as by a straight rule, whether the line be right, and come no nearer one
side then another; and so, oh our just Judge, it may appear whether we be
inconstant or no. The Gods are they who have sent us unto you; and the Gods are
they will inspire you with a spirit of right judgment. But in the mean time we
do require and conjure the God of Love, to take away all incredulity out of the
souls of these fair ones, which makes them condemn our actions, which truly if
they were different from what they were wont to be, it was not out of any
alteration of will, but urgent affairs which was the cause, and which hindered
us from paying the tribute of those trivial services we were wont to render,
and in which we could not employ our time without much prejudice unto our
estates. Has not all seasons their proper actions; does not nature teach us,
that flowers are proper for the spring, and fruits for summer; if trees should
bloom all the year, they would bloom in vain; and why should not the same be
said of us? If we should be always bearing those little flowers, which are
proper and natural at the beginning of Love, we should not produce so much
fruit in the summer of Love, but should in a manner derogate from the Law of
Nature. But perhaps, that which induces them to this opinion, is the more
familiar conversation which we have with others, then we were wont to have; and
that this conversation proceeds from some Love we bear unto those we are
familiar with all: truly if a Lover ought to be a salvage person, and without
communication, I must confess, they have reason; but since the name of Lover
does not signify any Wild Man, or Wolf, or Tiger, or Barbarian, we see no
reason or ground they have for their opinions.

All these doubts, and all these judgments which they have conceived of our
affections, must receive a decision from you, sage Shepherdess; we mean those
doubts and judgments which they have in dis-advantage of our affection: for of
all other things whereof they blame and accuse us, as we are Asphales and
Thomantes, we dare not so much as whisper the least complaint against them; but
will with all reverence and respect suffer what they please: but when they
accuse us as we are Lovers, then we are forced to open our mouths, not to
accuse or complain against them, but to sigh, as those do whom excessive pain
torments above their strength: otherwise we could say; that when they charge us
with inconstancy, they themselves are the cause of our change, and should seek
out for some reasons to excuse it: and should urge that so many services paid
and received, did not deserve, that Filintes, during the absence of Thomantes,
should be entertained in his place; nor Androgenes in the room of Asphales:
that the favors which both those received during our absence, would afford us
ample matter and cause to accuse them: that the news which was writ unto us
from all sides, was enough to make us believe it. And because they say that a
woman neither can nor ought to hinder any from loving them; so it be with all
requisite discretion, respect and honor: we ask your judgment, oh our most
just Judge, upon these four questions; first, whether she who permits many to
love and serve her, do keep her self within compass of the Laws of Constancy?
Secondly, if this plurality of Lovers be allowed unto women, whether may it not
be as well allowed unto men? Thirdly, whether the Laws of Constancy do ordain
that a Lover should fly the sight of all other Shepherdesses? And lastly, what
are the terms and limits of this Constancy, so much talked of by all, and so
little known unto any: and all this, to the end that these fair Shepherdesses
may know whether or no we be true and faithful Lovers, and not be offended, if
our affections cannot endure such injuries should be offered unto them. In all
these things, oh most just Judge, we desire and expect your judgment.

Thus ended Thomantes; and after he had made an humble reverence, Diana
appointed Delphire to answer unto what Thomantes had said, if she had any
exceptions against it; then Delphire began thus.

The answer of Delphire unto Thomantes.
WE think it not strange (fair and discreet Shepherdess) to hear such abundance
of windy words, from the mouth of Thomantes, as well in his own behalf, as in
that of Asphales: for he that does love truly, cannot speak what he resents;
and it seems by the rule of contraries, that he who loves but a little, will
never be weary of talking: do but observe with what a torrent of words he
argues, not with reasons, but with dis-reasons, if I may coin the word. And
though upon the same consideration (I mean, because Dorissea, and I, do not
love) I could with the same fluency of tongue make a long opposition of their
arguments, yet I will not, as well because that were to abuse the patience of
our Judge, and all that hear me; as because all their arguments are grounded
upon such simple foundations, and glossed over with such thin covers, as the
falsity of them are easily seen: and truly seen so clearly, that I should not
think them worth an answer, were it not in obedience unto the command of our
just Judge.

To begin then, What do you mean Thomantes, by all this talk of your affection?
You who says you are accustomed to Love without speaking, as we are to
speaking without love? What do you mean, I say, since you do confess that if
Dorissea and I do but say once that we love you, you will believe us for ever?
Ah Shepherd, since we have been so accustomed to speaking, what do you complain
of? Why are you not both satisfied? To what purpose did you make addresses to
the Oracle, and trouble this Assembly with so many words, since we have been so
accustomed to speaking it? But, oh just Judge, I perceive the strength and
subtilty of his argument; he dares not directly say, that we are accustomed to
speaking it; but only, that we are accustomed, as much to say that we love, and
yet do not love, as they are to love, and yet not speaking it; and because that
they have not been accustomed to love, it consequently follows that neither
have we been accustomed to speaking it: and in this sense they are in the
right; for it is very hard to speak of a thing which they do not know, witness
all the discourse of Thomantes, in which there are not more words then
contradictions. But to give them some satisfaction, let us confess that they
cannot speak well upon this subject, because if they loved heretofore, as they
say they did, they loved without speaking it, and that now they do not love,
they are yet constrained to speak: well, we will allow this; and now Thomantes
and Asphales, are you contented? You may be, at least since you are allowed
what you ask; but what is all this to our difference? Nothing at all; nor is it
any proof that they do love us: for it might perhaps be available, if men, I
mean men of their age, did guide themselves by reason, then one might infer
from hence something of what they say: but for them, who do all things at
hazard, out of humors, and nothing according to the right rules of reason,
what can one infer from hence, but that then their humor was such and now is
quite different? But, say they, why should they then take so much pains? To
which we answer, who can find the reason of that which has no reason? I say, it
was either out of obstinacy, or to deceive, or out of ambition of the name of a
Lover without any effects, or out of some worse, or more pernicious design.
What reason can be expected from persons that are unreasonable? But (say they)
we do know, that we do love: is there any that knows our own wills and minds
better then our selves? Oh most, just Judge, there is no question but others
may know them better; can any judge aright whose Spirits are prepossessed with
passion? What likelihood is there that these Shepherds can give any sound
judgment upon a thing that concerns themselves. But we who are without
passion, and are unconcerned in any thing which concerns them, we judge
soundly. As for example; cannot those that see Adrastes, better judge of his
madness then himself? And to show that they (...) know what they would have,
nor what they do; do they not wish and unw^^^ the very same things, in one
minute? O Gods! (cry they out) that humane nature should be apter to believe
the bad sooner then the good: certainly they mean, the natures of men, and
particularly of Thomantes and Asphales: as for our parts, we neither believe
nor unbelieve, but what is fit so to be; and to show that it is so, we do
confess unto you, that if you tell us you do not love us, we do believe it;
for commonly every one believes what they desire. Moreover we do know by
experience, that you cannot love: when you tell us that you do love us, we do
not believe it, because we know all men are liars, which is a mystery in Love
which we are ignorant in, and cannot do it. But all your actions do belie your
words. And when you tell us any thing to your own advantage, we give no credit
thereunto, for we know that you use to flatter your selves: when it is to your
disadvantage, we do believe it, knowing very well that then it is true: and
therefore you may see that our belief is grounded upon reason, and that which
you say of u^ is untrue.

But, oh just Judge, here is a fine piece of ostentation: the Love, say they,
which is in us, does make us believe, that you speak true: and Thomantes, if
you believe so, why are you not assured that I do not love Filintes, nor
Dorissea, Androgenes, since we have so often told you so? But to relate all
their contradictions would be too tedious; I will briefly answer unto those
objections which have weight in them; it must needs be (said they) that if we
did not love you heretofore, and now you call us inconstant, you do as much as
say, that we do love you: Shepherds, without setting our thoughts, either of
love or hatred, we called you inconstants; as much to say that you had changed
your lives; and in that your inconstancy is indubitable: and that which we do
charge you withal, you do not deny before all this Assembly, so as we are not
obliged to prove a thing which is not put in doubt; and you never needed to
excuse the change with that shallow argument which you alleged, that having
used all actions of fire, and finding we did not believe them to be sparks of
Love, you had recourse unto actions of Ice; for besides that this argument is
most ridiculous, there is no necessity of alleging it, since you do know very
well in your own souls, that all these flames and fires whereof you speak, are
merely imaginary, and only to gloss over your Discourse. And it is no wonder at
all that we should not believe them, since they are but only flourishes, and
seeming* as if you did love us. And is there any doubt of it, since for all
your Ice and cold fits, you have made addresses, and courted others before our
faces. Is not the voice of the people, the voice of God? Would you have us give
our own eyes, and our own ears, the lie, and not believe when every one says
it, and when we see it by your actions? We never courted any (say they) but
only out of a desire to persuade them: ah Shepherd, you have confessed the
truth without a rack; it is very true Shepherd, you did never court any, but to
persuade us that you did love us; but it was to persuade only, and not to love
us: Alas we knew this ambition in you long since, and if we did not, yet now we
do; and it is better to be late wise then never.

But what a most delicate excuse they have to cover their changing? If our
actions and behaviors (say they) were different from what they were wont to
be, it was because multitude of business and urgent occasions did divert us:
Then Thomantes, if you any time came unto me, it seems it was only because you
had nothing else to do, and know not how to trifle away your time any where
else: oh how much am I beholding to you? Am I not infinitely indebted, and can
never come off without some great recompense? But, most just Judge, I beseech
you look upon these Fathers of great families, who have the whole charge of all
the estate and house upon their shoulders? How? their house? Nay of all the
communaltie, or rather of the whole Republique of the Gauls: oh Heavens! how
great are their employments? And what a sin it were against the public good
to disturb them, or make them lose one minute of time? Indeed, you Fathers of
families without children, and Senators without any business, we do agree with
you, that you could not employ the time which you spent in those trivial
courtships, as you call them since those munits were so precious, and useful to
the public, better then you did; but did you not employ that time with us
which you spent in the particular conversations, and familiarities which you
had with other Shepherdesses? Why did you come to us when you had nothing else
to do? Why should we receive you when all other company excluded you? For had
it not been so, we should never have seen you. If you be so full of business,
let Love alone: for Love is a Deity so great, that it is an injury unto him to
offer that time unto him which remains after the service of the other Gods: he
requires the first offerings and the best of things, and if any remain, then
offer unto the other Dieties: do you think he will be contented with the refuse
and dregs of devotion? And out of this Discourse you may gather Thomantes, that
it is true, as to others, every season has its proper actions, but not to Love;
for in Loves Garden, Trees do Bloom and bear fruit all at once. Do you not see,
that Love makes the young, as wise as the old; and old ones as very fools as
the young? You may see that there is no distinction of ages with him, but all
of an age; did you never observe that the most tender Flowers of Love, are most
sweet fruits? For what are hopes but flowers, and hopes excel all other
contentments, which one can have out of Loves Garden. Oh Thomantes! ignorant in
Love Thomantes; know that the Fruits of Love are Flowers, and his Flowers,
Fruits: for there is always contentment in hopes, and hopes are renewed by
contentments; and therefore it is that the Orange-tree is given for an Emblem
of Love, because it bears his fruit and his flower together.

You see most just Judge, how little these prtended Lovers do know what Love
is; and they have good reason to desire you would let them understand what
constancy is; for being so ignorant in Love, it is no wonder they should be
also ignorant in it; andyet, as ignorant as they are, they will maintain that
they forsooth, have observed all the Laws of Constancy to a tittle, though if
they be constant, it is by chance and hazard, not out of any resolution or
design. But if they were convented before the severe Throne of Love, and were
asked who gave them permission to call themselves Lovers, and assume unto
themselves a title so honorable, not knowing the least duties of a right
Lover, what could they expect but a most severe punishment for usurping a name
so much above their merit?

Now as it is ordinary for those that are guilty of any vice, to desire that
all others may be of the same die, to the end they themselves may not be
upbraided, they propound four doubts, aiming by the first, to tax us; by the
second to excuse themselves; and by the two last, to be instructed in what they
are very ignorant. We should return them such an answer, as they deserve, were
it not unto you, our Judge, that they address their queries, and in which we
beseech you, to inform them; not out of any hopes to amend them for the future,
but to let every one see, how far they are out of the right way. And in as much
as a great blunder is made about some letters which were written unto them, we
beseech you, oh our Judge, to command that those Letters may be produced; for
by their own confession they were written only upon common fame, and not as
known truths: what then? must every thing, that is taken up in the streets be
believed as true? Oh Thomantes! if such reports may pass for truths, I could
tell you strange tales of your new affections, unto several other
Shepherdesses; but being only common fame, I let them pass without belief; and
was not this example sufficient for you to do the like. And whereas you say
that one ought to think nothing but virtue to be in the person loved; can I
think that you do love me, since you do thus upbraid me with levity and
inconstancy?

Thus most just Judge, you have heard the Requests which these two Shepherds
have made unto you: and to the end it may not be said, that there was ever upon
the banks of Lignon any Shepherds so ignorant in Love as these; we do add our
Request also, that they may be forbidden to usurp unto themselves the
honorable name of Lover, of which they are so much unworthy; and for a
punishment of their crimes which they have committed against us, that they may
b^ forbidden ever to have the names of Dorissea or Delphire in their memories:
and that contenting themselves with having so long abused us, they may
hereafter make their addresses some other way, and practice upon others those
sapient instructions, which you in your wisdom shall give unto them.

Thus Delphire ended, and after a low congie to the Judge, she seated her self
in her place, in expectation of Dianas judgment. An universal humming was heard
amongst all that heard her: some approved, and others dis-approved of her
reasons; but all in general admired the excellency of her wit, and the modesty
wherewith she spoke: and because Diana thought that none had any thing else to
say, she began to ask the opinion of the Shepherds and Shepherdesses in
private, when Filintes and Androgenes stood up, beseeching that before judgment
they might be heard, because they were as much interested in the business as
any. Diana then sitting down again in her place, commanded Filintes to speak
for them both; and when the murmr was ceased, he began thus.

The Speech of FILINTES.
JF the greater Lovers be the worst speakers, as that fair Shepherdess assures
us they are, then think it not strange, most Wise Judge, if according to that
maxim, Filintes say but little of his love unto Delphire, nor of Androgentes
unto Dorissea; let not defect of language redound unto our disadvantage, since
from the parties themselves you hear, that we have loved Delphire and Dorissea
with so much affection and fidelity, as that they never found any failer in us,
nor any remarkable fault. For my part, I began to love Delphire before
Thomantes had any eyes to look upon her: and Androgenes served Dorissea, when
Asphales by his inconstancy showed himself weary of that glorious service. This
first affection like to the eldest son, deserves the greatest portion: and this
last of Androgenes, as a survivor and a worthy successor deserves the estate;
and though one of us was the first, and the other the last, yet both of us have
ever since we began lived in such great observance and respect, that we have
patiently born all those favors, which before our eyes were done unto these
two inconstant weather-cocks. I must needs confess that spleen has sometimes
made me conceive some impressions of anger, and made me murmr against those
hard rigours, which that fair one made me suffer: but let her self say if she
can, whether in my greatest fury, I expressed any action which was not all
love? As soon as ever she cast her eye upon me, I returned immediately unto my
duty; and what can this signify, but that my affection was stronger then her
rigor? And Androgenes seeing Dorissea prefer Asphales before him, he continued
still with so much discretion and fidelity, as is a most strong argument that
nothing could divert him from this love and faithful service. They say that the
dropping of water by continuance of time will wear the hardest marble, and will
not a most constantly continued service have as great an influence upon the
marble of an insensible heart? Must we be they who must continually serve
without any recompense? Must we sow the ground, and reap no Corn? Will love be
ungrateful only unto us? And can they be niggardly unto us alone who have
served with most fidelity? Judge, what reason or what Justice is in this?
Androgenes and I have oftentimes comforted our selves with thought, when
without reason we saw these two Weather-cocks obtain recompenses in lieu of
those punishments which they deserved, that we must think to fight and strive
before we must look to overcome, and groan a long time under pain and travel
before we triumph: but now we must confess that two things do extremely
astonish us; the one is to see these two inconstants, triumph before they
traveled: and the other is, that we cannot overcome the rigor of these cruel
ones, after so much travail, and so long a combat: and nothing does strike us
into so much admiration, as the pretensions (not to say presumptions) that
Thomantes and Asphales have to hope, nay ask as their dues, to be loved by
these two fair ones; for if ever love had any cause to revenge the wrongs which
are done unto him, it is against them they ought to let drive all the arrows of
his justice, and make them exemplary unto all such as abuse the name of Lovers.
I am astonished Thomantes, that after you had so many favors from Delphire,
the least of which was enough to fix the heart of Mercury; that yet, as if they
had never been done unto you, you should be full of mistrusts, full of
reproaches, and never satisfied: I cannot choose but admire Asphales, that when
you went away, you went and was not loved; and that when you returned, you
should be in full possession of Dorisseas favor: was it not strange, that
meeting her eyes, and Androgenes in a glass, you should forget so many favors
received, which could not be merited by you, nor any person in the world? But
the greatest wonder of all is, that after you both had committed such high
crimes, crimes which in Love are impardonable, you should still dare to ask and
pretend unto the same favors, and the same graces which you had so
ungratefully disdained. I am even ravished with admiration to see you dispute
with them, and question who is in the wrong; but the wonder of all wonders is,
that you durst be so impudently bold as to enquire of the Oracle, and to see
with what confidence you present your selves before a Judge to demand justice.
For if justice be done unto you, what less can you expect, then to be banished
from all places within the Dominions of Love; or rather condemned unto all
punishments that ungrateful wretches do deserve. These, oh just Judge, are the
faithful Lovers, who after they were even loadned with favors and graces, did
not only ungratefully fall off from those services, in which they ought to have
continued until death; but have even scorned those whom they ought to have
adored; nay more, they came unto that height of ingratitude as to scandal them,
and contrive infamous Libels and Songs against them: can you ever think that
these fair ones will ever endure to look upon you again without blushes! O ye
good Gods, in what an age do we live? Must those that sin and wrong innocents
not only escape punishments, but pretend unto recompenses, and rewards? Fie,
fie, unfaithful Lovers; leave it unto Androgenes and Filintes, to ask for
recompenses and rewards, for it is only we, that by the Laws of Love deserve
them: and we do protest here before all this Company, that if Thomantes and
Asphales be not punished for their ingratitudes and infidelities; and if on the
contrary Filintes and Androgenes do not receive recompense and wages for their
affection and fidelity, then there is no hope that within the Dominions of
Love, any wrong or crime will ever be punished, or any benefit or virtue
rewarded, since these highest degrees of sinners do pass unpunished: and we
without recompense or reward.

When Filintes had done, and set down, Asphales and Dorissea would have
answered for themselves; but Diana answered, That sufficient information had
been given already on all sides: and therefore, she took Alexis, Astrea,
Phillis, and Sylvander a part, and asked their opinions concerning the
difference betwixt these Shepherds and Shepherdesses: at last, she returned
again to her place, and pronounced this judgment.

The Judgment of DIANA.
LOve, as all things in the universe are, is preserved and perfected by motion
and contrariety: and in as much as this motion cannot work upon things that are
in themselves solid and stable without some exterior Agent, the motion and
agitation which can preserve and perfect Love, which is of it self firm and
stable, and requires another mover, and it is often times moved by jealousy;
the daughter indeed of Love: but a bastard, not legitimate, and yet almost
inseparable. We do see also that it is from jealousy all these trivial
quarrels and petty dissentions do arise; which by the sages are called
Renewings of Love: but yet it is to be understood, it ought to be the Mother,
but no long the Nurse: for if she suffer them to suck of her milk too long in
lieu of trivial quarrels, and petty dissentions, they will be changed into
great divorces, and dangerous hatreds, which in the end will most undoubtedly
smother Love.

Now this difference before us, betwixt Delphire and Dorissea on the one part;
Thomantes and Asphales on another; and Filintes and Androgenes on another part,
does demonstrate these several sorts of dissentions and divorces. For betwixt
Filintes and Delphire, appears only those petty and indeed amorous dissentions,
from which Loves takes a pleasing and acceptable strength and increase. Betwixt
Thomantes and Asphales, toward Delphire and Dorissea, appears nothing but
these disunions and dissentions, too long nourished by the milk of an obstinate
jealousy, by which, if Love be not quite smothered, yet it is in the agonies
of death, and gaspes for breath: On the contrary, one may see in Androgenes a
patient sufferance, which may be suspected of a little Love, without his
perseverance, and continuing to love her.

These things being long debated, and seriously considered by us, unto whom the
charge is committed by the voice of the Oracle, We do declare that Thomantes
and Asphales have transgressed against the Laws of Love, and against that duty
which they owed unto the name of Lovers, in nourishing so long these
dissentions by their inconsiderate jealousies. That Filintes and Androgenes on
the contrary, have in all their actions showed a most exact observance of all
those duties requisite in real Lovers. And in as much as impunity of crimes,
and good actions unrewarded, are causes of ruin in all Estates and
Republiques; We do ordain, by virtue of the power which is given unto us, that
all those services which unto this day Thomantes and Asphales have rendered
under the notion of Lovers and Servants, unto Delphire and Dorissea, and that
all the pains and inquietudes, which they have suffered in loving them, be
taken as null, and as if they had never been; not pretending unto any recompense
or gratification for the future. And on the contrary, we do ordain, that the
services which Filintis and Androgenes have rendered unto Delphire and Dorissea,
and all the pains, patience, and inquietudes, which they have suffered in
loving and courting them, shall remain in force and validity, and serve them
for the future, as of right they ought. Yet notwithstanding, since repentance
does almost by force exact a pardon, We do ordain, that if Thomantes and
Asphales, do really repent of their crimes, and would love and serve Delphire
and Dorissea a new, they shall be obliged to receive and entertain them as new
Servants and Lovers, who from this day forward do begin to serve them, and to
show their merits. And as to the four queries, which were put by Thomantes and
Asphales, we do say by way of answer unto the first, That a Shepherdess may
without any offense unto constancy, suffer and permit, but not seek nor desire,
to be served and courted by many. Unto the second. That this plurality of
servants not sought to nor desired, but suffered only, does not allow a Lover
to have many Mistrisses, unless (which is not likely) they be such as are only
suffered, and not desired nor courted. Unto the third, That both the he and the
she Lover, ought to live amongst all, but unto one only; imitating in this fair
fruit upon a tree, which is looked upon and admired by many, but tasted only by
one mouth. As to the last, that he does go beyond the limits of constancy, that
does any thing which may offend the person loved.

And to the end that for the future, such an ignominious ignorance amongst
Shepherds, may not be upon the banks of the River Lignon. We do will and
ordain, that the aforesaid questions and resolutions be written by Sylvander,
under the Table of the Laws of Love, to the end they may be seen in the Temple
of the Goddess Astrea.

FINIS.

