THE Country-Man's GUIDE: OR Plain Directions FOR Ordering, Curing, Breeding*
Choice, Use, And Feeding,
Of Horses, Cows, Sheep, Hoggs, etc.

Adorned with Sculptures, showing the proper places in the Bodies of the said
several, Beasts, where the said Distempers do usually happen.

Published for the Public Good, by W.W.

LONDON, Printed for S. Lee, Stationer, over against the Post Office in
Lombard Street. 1679.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving been importuned by diverse of my Country-friends to publish the ensuing
Rules and Directions, for the better ordering and curing of most sorts of
Cattle of their Distempers and Maladies, that so the whole Kingdom might
receive a general Benefit thereby; I have at length taken upon me so to do,
though not with a little Regret, as being very sensible how ill Entertainment
this small Manual may receive from the hands of some particular persons, who (I
doubt not) will not spare spending their censorious Judgments concerning it, to
the depression of it, as much as in them lies. But in regard it is not likely
any may do so, without being obliged thereto by their own private Interest and
Advantage, and never any thing comprehending the whole of this having been
before published at so small a price.

I shall not therefore wholly wave this my good design to my Country, seeing
there is no other reason for it, than that this little Book may be prejudicial
to the Monopoly that some Horse-Doctors have contracted to themselves, but
proceed as cheerfully as I can therein, for the best advantage to my
Countrymen. The Book consists of diverse Choice Observations and Experiences of
diverse skilful English men. The whole is made very easy to the apprehension of
the Reader by the Table preceding the Book, wherein every Disease is figured,
and answers the Figures in the Cuts placed against the Table. And is further
illustrated and found out by the Alphabetical Table at the end of this Book.
That this small Endeavor therefore may answer the Design it was intended for,
is the only Desire of

The Readers Hearty Well-wisher W.W.


The Country man's directory showing the several places in the body of a Horse
where the seaverall diseases usual happ^


A Table of several Diseases incident to Horses; with a Relation to the Printed
Cut or Portraiture of a Horse in the First Page of this Book.
1 THE Headache, Staggers, or Madness. 2 Mad, or Raging Love 3 Coldness, or
Chilness in the Head. 4 Rhume, Catarh, Glanders, or Running of the Nose. 5 Pin
in the Eye. 6 Web in the Eye. 7 Watring of the Eyes. 8 Pain in the Eye. 9 Sore
or Wounded Eyes. 10 Eye-Scars. 11 Worms in the Nose. 12 Toothache. 13 Canker in
the Mouth or Tongue 14 Want of Palate. 15 Fever or Plague. 16 Squinacy, or
Swelling in the Throat. 17 Waxing-Kernel, Struma, Choking, or the Strangles.
18 Distemper of the Neck. 19 Galled Neck. 20 Crick in the Neck. 21 Distempers
of the Lungs. 22 Short-windedness, or Pursiveness. 23 Cough. 24 Ulcers, or
Aposthumes of the Breast. 25 Faintness. 26 Overheated. 27 Ague. 28 Venomous
Creatures swallowed. 29 Stomach or Appetite lost. 30 Henn-dung swallowed. 31
Cholick, or Griping in the Gutts. 32 Belly-Ach. 33 Obstruction in the
Arse-Gutt. 34 Falling of the Fundament. 35 Worms. 36 Flux, or Looseness of the
Belly. 37 Bloody Flux. 38 The Yellow-Jaundise. 39 Stopping of Urine. 40
Difficulty in making Water. 41 Strangury. 42 Wolf, or over-growing of the
Flesh. 43 Rupture prevented. 44 Rupture cured. 45 Biting of the Spider-Mouse*
46 Swelling of the Codds. 47 Warts. 48 Chaps in the Feet. 49 Old Wounds, or
Swelling in the Back. 50 Bruised-Back. 51 Galled-Back. 52 Biting of Flies. 53
To drive away the Flies. 54 Stiffness in the Joints. 55 Broken-Loyns. 56
Swelling of the Flanks. 57 Scabby or Mangy. 58 Wrecking of the Sinews. 59
Swelling of the Knees. 60 Knees cleft and broken. 61 Over-growing of the
Knee-pan. 62 Farcions, Farcy or Leprosy of the Legs or elsewhere. 63 Chops
between the Joints and Legs. 64 String-hall. 65 Mallender. 66 Spavin. 67 Biting
of a Mad-Dog. 68 Biting of Water-Snakes. 69 Ring-bone. 70 Fistula. 71
Over-growing of the Hoof. 72 Figg. 73 Foundred. 74 Pricked with a Nail. 75
Limping oe Halting. 76 The Shee-Wolf, or Boyls and Knobs on the Foot. 77
Scratches. 78 Overreaching.
INTRODUCTION: OR, General Instructions FOR THE Breeding, Ordering, or Managing
of Horses, etc.
I Shall begin with the Horse in the first place, as being a Creature useful
for Peasants, serviceable for Princes, Noblemen, Prelates; and in general, to
all states and conditions of men: In a word, as being such a Beast, as has not
its like, considering its Beauty, Courage, Use, Convenience and Advantage.

The patient Carter that loves his Beasts, seldom or never strikes them; but
uses them so to the sound of his Whip, that they are ruled by his Voice and
Call; Nor does he force them to draw or labor beyond their ability. In the
morning he currieth them cheerfully; General ordering of Horses.
and, in the Summer, sometimes in the afternoon. He waters them not, but in
due time, after they have rested. In the Summer, he often washes their feet
with cold water, and sometimes with wine, or the Lees of wine, to strengthen
them; and also with Piss, when they are weary and tired with labor; and at
night, carefully stops their feet with dung: And in case they be overheated,
Overheated
or have no stomach to eat, then he washes their mouth with Vinegar and Salt*
and gives them neither Hay nor Fodder, Oats nor Straw, but what is pure and
clean: Nor does he permit them to be unshod or unnailed. He takes care also
that the Harness, Saddles, Collers, Bridles, or any other necessary implement
be not broken, torn or spoiled. He ought also to be skilful in sewing with
wax-thread, and to stuff the Pannels and Saddles with Flocks. The Carter ought
to be skilled in making Saddles, etc.
In short, he ought to understand the Art of the Harness-maker, Sadler, and of
the Farrier; and in order thereunto he must always have about him his Knapsack
or Budget (and the Waggoner ought to have some convenient place or Box in his
Cart or Wagon, wherein he may put his Instruments and Iron-work, to make the
Horses necessaries for their shooing.

He must also carefully observe what is wanting, or what is out of order; as,
if any any of his Horses limpeth, he must observe which foot is affected, and
where the pain lies; and sometimes he stops the foot pained, with dung. He must
also well observe when the Beasts get new Hoofs, and in the Lent let the horn
grow out. And if they have a hot mouth, insomuch that they cough, then he must
cover them. And if they have got the Rheum, or Catharrine laboring (occasioned
by Rain and bad weather) then he causes them to eat Fenigreek, or Annise mixed
with their food: And when they begin to grow old, and to change apparently, he
will consider the love which the Horses bear one to another, and accordingly he
will place them in the stable, which every morning in the Summer ought to be
made clean; The Stable to be kept clean.
so that no Dung remain therein, and every evening fresh Straw put in. He must
also take care, if his Horses grow thin, or lean, to make them fat again, with
Beans boiled in Water, and Oats mingled with them, or Beans boiled with Barley,
Panick, and mixed with Bean-flower, or Meal, and a little Salt. He ought also
to sleep in the stable, in order to prevent the danger of their sickness,
breaking loose, biting or kicking one another. He must be very careful of
putting his Light in the Stable, that no ill accident of Fire or damage may
happen thereby. He ought also to be careful in keeping and putting all his
Materials in a readiness till the next morning, that when he goes to Plough,
and puts out his Horses, nothing may be wanting. If he has any Mares, he must
place them by themselves, or put them in another Plough or Cart. In case any of
his Horses fall sick, or be any ways hurt or wounded, then he must separate
him from the other Horses, and let him stand by himself.

In case a Horse has any Disease, the best diligence ought to be used, and
that with speed, according to the degrees of the Distemper; and if he will not
endure to be rid, How to manage a Horse.
or will not pass in or through any way or passage, then you must hang a little
stone in his Ear; but if that will not help, then blind fold him, or put fire
under his Tail, or something that may prick him: and if he will not endure
that, then you must hang on his head a stone with a hole in it, when you have
mounted him; and when he begins to stand up an end, strike him with a little
Rod or Whip upon the fore-leggs; and in case he lies down* then hinder him with
blows and threatenings: and if he be headstrong, Headstrong.
make a small piece of Line fast to his Stones, which must be so long as to
come between the fore-leggs, in the hand of the Rider, to be held by him, to
pull and jerk, when the Horse is not willing to go forwards; for by these means
he may be broke off his headstrong tricks, and be made constantly to keep his
way. If it be a Gelding, Gelding.
then strike him upon the Buttocks with a long stick, which is drawn out of the
fire, and burnt on the end: or strike him with a rod or Swtich between the
Ears. In case the Horse be difficult to shoe, and hard and troublesome to keep
in the stable, then put in one, or in both his Ears a round Stone, and shut the
Ears with both hands, and by this means he will become as tame as a Lamb. It is
also the duty of the Carter too, carefully to rule his Stone-horses and Mares,
that no mischance may befall them. And, though it is frequent to drive Horses at
some particular times into green Meadows, and pure Marsh-ground, yet the
Marsh-ground makes their hoofs and sight to grow tender, and causes them to get
water in their feet. Therefore I should think it would be better to let them
feed upon the Mountains, which are continually moist, and not always dry; and
such as are not woody places, and are clear from stumps of Trees. Difference in
the manner of breeding Mares and Stone-horses
Upon which ground there grows rather fine and sweet, than long, course, and
hard grass. But, although the Mare be not so stout and merry as the
Stone-horse, nevertheless, she does exceed him in running, and holds it longer,
and is not so chargeable to keep as the Stone-horse. For she does not eat any
good Hay, being for the most part contented with the Meadows, that are good
enough for her all the year long. It Is true, that in the Winter, when the Snow
lies upon the ground, and when much Rain falls, you are obliged to put her into
the Stable; and give her good Hay; and you must observe in Summertime, to keep
her well provided with good Grass, and clear Waters, but never upon Mountains,
which are too rough and sharp for her; First, Because she has but bad feeding
there. Secondly, Because those that are big with Foal, ought not to climb up
the Mountains, by reason they cannot go up without great labor, nor come down
again without danger of aborting or mischieving themselves.

You ought not to permit the Mare to be covered by the Stone-horse, but every
second year, if you would keep a good generation; and this not at any other
time but about the middle of March, that the Mare may in the same season of the
year in which she was covered, feed her Colt with fine and young Grass after
May. For at the end of eleven or twelve months the Colt is brought forth.
Besides, then their Milk increases the faster, which occasions the bringing of
the better Colts, and such as prove according to your desire. When the
Stone-horse stays so long before he covers the Mare, he is much stronger, and
full of mature, and not thin running seed. Besides, he then covers the Mare
with greater desire, and so engenders greater, stouter, and stronger Colts.

To know when a Mare desires to be covered.
You must know, that the Mare is hot, and desires to be covered when she has
not any whitish slime upon her nature, and when her nature is more swollen,
than it uses to be, and then she is more hot than ordinary, and eats not so
much as before. And then you may set the Stone-Horse by her twice a day, to
wit, in the evening, and in the morning before you water her; and this no
longer then 10 days, which being past, in case she desires the Stone-Horse no
more, as being full, then set her alone, and lead the Stone-Horse away, that he
may not hinder her from conceiving her by his hot and fiery humors.

Age of a Stone-horse that covers a Mare, and of a Mare when she ought to be
covered.
The Stone-Horse which is to cover the Mare, ought to be above three years old,
and is fit for it till his twentieth year. Though, the Mare may be covered when
she is two years old, and she may in her third year bring up her Colt, and feed
it well. But after she is ten years old, she is not so serviceable in that
kind; for, such Horses as are broughr sorth by a cold Mare, are not courageous,
but dull and heavy. The Stone-horse ought to be well fed toward the time that
he is to cover the Mare, against which time you must make him fat with barley,
Fitches and pease, that he may the better satisfy the Mare. For the more merry
and stronger he is in covering the Mare, the stronger Colts he will engender.
If he is not stout nor merry, then rub the nature of the Mare with a new and
clean sponge, and rub the Mouth of the Stone-horse therewith. In case the Mare
will not suffer the Stone-horse, then bruise a Sea-Onion, and rub her nature
therewith, and that will heat her.

Colts of such Color as you fancy.
If you will have the Colt of such Color as you fancy, place before the eye of
the Mare, or throw over the Mare a Coverture of such color as you desire, when
she is covered by the Horse.

The Quality of a Mare to be covered.
The Mare, which you desire may have a good generation of Colts, must not be
under two years old nor above ten or twelve years, considering that being of a
colder temper than the Horse, she is also weaker; she ought also to be handsome
of body and pleasant to behold. The rump and the back broad, well fed, and such
an one as has not labored long.

Mares that are full, not to be put to labor.
when she is Big she must be fed, and not put to labor, nor be left in the
cold, but in the Stable while it rains, to the end, she may go her full time
without danger.

How to order a Mare that has Cast.
In case the Mare casts her Colt before the time, then you must pound Oak-fern,
and give it her to drink (mingled with lukewarm water) through a horn; but if
she has cast well, you may touch the Colt with your hand gently, but a small
pressure or blow will hurt and bruise it. As soon as she has foaled in the
Stable, you must comfort her with a potion of lukewarm water mixed with Salt and
Flower, giving it to her in the evening and morning (at least) for the space of
three days. Next, you must give her good Hay and Grain sufficient and keep her
clean with strowing, that she may afterward rest at Leisure. For this
Entertainment affords Flesh to the Colts and makes them strong.

Marks of a good Colt.
A good Colt, Horse, or Stone-horse, is known by big bones, a good shape, a
little head, and so dry or lean, that he has scarce any thing but skin and
bones; that has little sharp and straight Ears; great, swelling, black, and
clean Eyes; very large Nostrils; thin and lean cheeks; the mouth split alike on
both sides; the Neck somewhat long and arch-like; thin about the head, a short,
broad back; the Main curled, thick and long, hanging down on the right side, a
broad Breast, standing out before, and full of Muscles, great Shoulders, round
in the Sides, double Back, close tite Belly; the Stones eaven and small, broad
and sunk, or depressed members, a long Tail, with thick and curled Hair;
bigg-boned legs, which are also dry, lean, and not laden with flesh, but long
and straight; round and little knees, not turned inwards; rough and round
buttocks, big and long thighs, full of brawns and muscles, black hoof, hollow,
round, and somewhat raised toward the knuckles, and of a small Crown. In a
word, such an one as is joyful, quick, pleasant, and neither vicious nor sick,
(for such are obedient and proper for labor) such as is not stubborn,
affrighted, greedy, nor lazy in eating, that does not dung much, nor lie down
in the water. Moreover, that your Horse be of a Bay-colour, dark-red,
dapple-gray, or pale-colour, (which is the best token of a strong or stout
Horse.) And finally, to speak of the virtue and handsomeness of a Horse, he
ought to have the Eyes, Ligaments and Limbs of an Ox, the strength and feet of
a Mule* the hoofs and thighs of an Ass, the throat and neck of a Wolf, the ears
and tail of a Fox, the breast and main of a woman, the courage of a Lion, the
sight and agility of a Serpent, the pace of a Cat, the swiftness of a Hare* the
s^p or tread high, the trotting from the gallop easy and pleasant; light (...)
running, quick and nimble in leaping, and docible at the hand.

The Age of a Horse.
The Countryman ought also to have skill in knowing the Age of the Horse* that
he may let him work according to his strength: The Age of the Horse is
discerned by his feet and hoofs, but most especially by his Teeth.

The Teeth of the Horse.
The Horse has commonly eight and twenty Teeth, although Aristotle speaks of
thirty: he begins to get Teeth the first three months, and at the end of the
year he has above and below on each side six Teeth. After thirty months two
alter above, and two below; and within three years and an half he gets on each
side four Teeth more. When he is four years old the Dog teeth fall out, and in
their places come other Teeth. Before the sixth year, the great Cheek-teeth or
Eye-teeth fall out; and within the sixth year others grow in their room. The
same sixth year he has all his Teeth, which are altogether made hollow; but
after that time you cannot easily discern how old the Horse is: In or about the
Twelfth year you may perceive a strange unusual blackness in the teeth, and
observe, that the older an Horse is, the longer his teeth grow, except
sometimes when by overhard scrawnching or biting they shorten more and more. In
the tenth year the Temples of the head, begin to sink and grow hollow;
sometimes the Eyebrows also grow gray, and then the Horse shows in his
forehead a sad and sorrowful Countenance, hangs down his head, is heavy; has
pale Eyes, and gray hair in many other places; and this happens ordinarily to
those of a Bay Color, and Chestnut Brown, and such as come nearest to black.
The speckled becomes white, the white turns to dapple-gray, and sometimes a
brownish color. He has also many wrincles on the upper Lipp, according to the
number of which usually the years of the Horses age are counted.

The Curing of Diseases in Horses.
Further, it concerns the Country man to be careful of the Health of his
Horses, which may live at least till Twenty years of age and do good service
all the while. If he finds them in good health, though lean, he is to give
them kiln dried Wheat, or twice as much bruised or pounded Barley. He ought to
rub them well over every day, in regard it does them much more good to be often
rubbed and handled then to eat much.

Lean-Horse.
Besides, a lean Horse may be made fat with little Kidney-Beans boiled, mingled
with Oats; But if the Horse be so weak that he cannot swallow it down, then you
must strengthen and comfort him with a good deal of the yolk of Eggs, and
sugar, which he must swallow down. Besides which, Lukewarm water mingled with
salt and Flower of Barley being given to the Horse in the morning and at night,
is an excellent thing to make him very fatt. Likewise it is very good to give
the Horse four times a day a little Panick or Rice, mingled with Bean-Flower
and salt* that he may not vomit up again which he takes.

THE Country-Man's GUIDE.
I. Headache, Staggers, and Madness
THE great Headache, and Madness of a Horse, is cured by continual rubing of
Ladies-mark and Semel (a kind of Bread so called) Lettuce-blades cut small, and
fresh Straw mingled with it. You must also let him bleed out of the vein of the
brains, or the temples, or of both, and put him in a dark and low Stable. The
signs of his having a pain in the head, you may observe by the water which
drops from him, by the slack hanging of his Ears; and that his neck and head is
heavy, and hanging downwards.

II. Mad, or Raging Love.
It falls out sometimes, that the Mares are vexed with a kind of Madness, viz.
when they see their shape in beholding themselves in the water and grow so
amorous thereof, that they forget to eat and to drink, and dry up with inward
heat. The marks of this Madness, are, that they run along the Roads, as if they
were pricked with Spurs, often looking about, as if they did desire and seek
something. They recover of this Sickness, being led again to the water; for
when they behold therein, how ill-favored they be, they forget the first shape
which they did behold in the water.

III. Coldness, or Chilness in the Head.
A Horse which has got a Cold, or Chilness, is cured by drinking the warm blood
of a Pigg, boiled with Wine or Mastick, and Wine-root boiled with Honey, or
common Oil, with Pepper. He gets this Distemper when he is put in a cold place,
being hot and sweating; insomuch that the sinews shrink, and the skin grows
hard; therefore you are to place such a Horse in a very hot place, well covered
with a warm coverture, which reaches to the ground; and you are to lay under
his belly seven or eight great hot stones, and to quench them oftentimes with
warm water; and this heat will cause him to sweat, and cure the Distemper or
Glanders, etc.

IV. Rheum, Catharre, Glanders, or Running of the Nose.
Against the Rheum or Catharre, etc. take Operment and Brimstone beaten
together, throw them upon burning coals, and let the smoke enter into the
nostrils of the horse, to the end that the stiff humors which are in the
brains, may dissolve and distill down.

V. Pin in the Eye.
The Pin in the Eye you must lift up with an Ivory-Needle, and then cut it
clear off with a pair of small Cissars: or take Powder of a green Agedeste, or
Rats-bane, and lay it upon the Eye, that it may eat the Nail.

VI. Webb in the Eye.
Against the Webb in the Eye, or Running Eyes, the best Remedy is an Eye-water
made of the Juice of Bittony, pounded in a wooden Mortar, or the Juice of
Housleek, or the blade of the herb Celendine, pounded in a Mortar, and laid
thereupon with cold Water, or rather with Wine, after you have let the horse
blood in the vein of the Eye affected. These means you must continue to use
many days in the morning, and at night. You may also blow into the Eye,
through a Quill, the powder of the grate of the Fish called Sepia, or whole
seed of the herb Rocket; or lay thereupon the Ear of a little Lamb, until it
has by its virtue taken away the flesh, and cleansed it; or the powder of the
yolk of an Egg, and Salt burnt together, and put into the Eye: or the powder of
Sal-Armoniack, Myrrh, Saffron, and scraping of the grates of Sepia.

VI. Watring of the Eyes.
Watering Eyes are cured by a Medicine made of Frankincense, Myrrh, Starch, and
White-honey: or with a head lace made of Frankincense and Mastick, bruised
small, and rubbed with the white of an Egg, and laid upon the forehead; which
being left thereupon a considerable time, the Eyes will weep no more. Then you
must take off the band or head-lace, with warm Water and Oil beaten together.

VIII. Pain in the Eye.
All pains of the Eyes are healed, if you chafe or anoint them with the Juice of
Lambs-tongue and Honey mixed together.

IX. Sore or Wounded Eyes.
Sore or Wounded Eyes are healed, by laying upon them a Poultess of the crum of
Bread, moistened in fresh Water, or roasted, or of boiled Bread soaked in
White Wind. But in case this will not help, then you must open the head or
chief vein.

X. Eye-Scarrs, or Wounds.
The Scarrs or Wounds of the Eyes are healed with Fasting-spittle and Salt, if
often anointed therewith: or by bruised grates of Sepia, and melted Salt: or by
bruised seed of wild Parsnips, being spread over the Eyes in a Linen Cloth.

XI. Flying Worm.
Against the Flying-Worm, or Worms in the Nose; you are to open the vein in the
temples of the head; make a deep hole under the throat with an hot Iron; put a
Tent therein, and lay Flax thereupon, which is made wet in the white of Eggs,
and let him thus stand resting in the Stable for three days.

XII. Toothache
The Colt has many times pains in his Teeth and Gums, when he begins first to
get Teeth, and then you must soak in strong Vinegar, the best Chalk that you
can get, and rub the cheeks therewith outwardly; and especially in that place
where he feels the pain.

XIII. Canker; or little Bubbles or Swellings of the Tongue.
The Canker in the Mouth, or under the Tongue, which hinders the horse from
eating, because the Tongue is swollen, may be cured by causing him to eat Pease
and Beans, or the husks or shells of the same; for by the eating of them the
Botch or Swelling goes away. But in case this Distemper comes again, then it
must be drawn out of the hollowness of the Palate, and then be cut off
dexterously with a pair of Cissars near to the Palate.

XIV. Falling, or want of the Palate.
Against the Falling of the Palate of the Mouth; take the flesh away with a thin
little Iron so far, that the humors may run out by degrees: next rub and
cleanse the Palate with Syrop of Roses mixed with the Juice of Lemon, and toasted
Cheese.

XV. Fever.
The horse gets a Fever generally when he is suddenly watered after he has
wrought very hard, which is almost like to the swelling in the Neck, or the
King's Evil: for the same happens as well to Beasts as to Men, by the great
coldness of the Water, when the Throat is enflamed or heated, whereby the horse
loses his Stomach and Rest, and his Ears become cold. Then you may immediately
find remedy against this in this manner: Lay the Ear between the Neck and the
Chine of the horse, and cut open the hardness, which is like a white Sinew, the
lengthwaies with a Lancet; take this white flesh off, and put therein a Linen
cloth, which is made wet in the White of Eggs, and cover the horse immediately
with a horse-cloth, leading him backward and forward, till his Ears grow warm
again; and give him a potion made of Water, Salt and Flower: After he has
eaten some good Hay, let him rest three days, to foment the place, with things
belonging thereto, for to stir the humors; and afterward lay thereupon a
Poultess of these things following.

Bird lime three ounces, Barley-flower a convenient quantity; being boiled
together so long in Red Wine, to the grosness or consistency of a Poultess: And
when the matter or filth is gathered together, and is ready to break out, then
you must prick it; and when the matter is run out, put into the hollowness the
lint or scrapings of Linen, made wet in Water, Oil and Salt. This Sickness
must be cured immediately; for if it continue long, then there is not any hope
of recovery.

XVI. Squinacy, Or Swelling in the Throat.
The Swelling in the Throat, or Squinacy, otherwise pain in the Throat, and
swelling of the Tongue, requires first, letting of blood on the vein under the
Tongue, or of the Palate; and next, a fomenting of the whole Mouth and Tongue,
with warm Water; next, an anointment of the Gall of a Bull, or of Salt, and
Wine-Stone, pounded in Wine-Vinegar. The potion you must make in manner
following. Take Anniseeds, one ounce. Old Oil, two pound. Red-Wine, half a
pint. Fat Figgs, of each nine.


Let it be all together soaked well, and make a Decoction thereof, into which
you must put rubbed Saltpetre, and Salt a convenient quantity; strain it, and
make it a potion.

Which you are to pour into the Throat of the horse twice a day, to wit, in the
morning, and at night about a pint. Next, you must give him to eat, green
Barley, or Barley-flower, with which you must mingle Saltpetre; if you let the
horse bleed, it must be done in the Palate of the mouth.

XVII. Waxen Kernels, Struma, Choking or Strangling.
The Waxen Kernel, Struma, or Choking, which is engendered under the throat of
the horse, and falls down from a cold brain, you are to prick him under the
throat; next to cover his head with a linen cloth, and to rub often with
sweet-butter the whole throat, especially the place where the swellings lie.

XVIII. Distemper of the Neck.
Against the Distemper of the Neck, pierce the flesh in five places on both
sides of the throat with an hot Iron, as sharp as an Awl; put into each hole an
Hoggs-bristle, and let the same stick therein for a whole fortnight.

XIX. Galled Neck.
When the Neck or the Back is galled, by the pressing of the Saddle, then you
ought to lay upon the wound the leaves of black (Brionia.)

XX. Crick in the Neck.
Against the Crick in the Neck, wash the place with lukewarm Wine, next lay
some Tow of Flax dipped in the White of an Egg.

XXI. Distemper of the Lungs.
Against the Distemper of the Lungs, take a Snake, cut off the head and tail,
the rest cut into small pieces, and roast it on a spit; gather together the fat
or grease, that drops from the same, and use it against the Distemper.

XXII. Pursiness, or Short windness.
The Pursie, or Short-winded horse, to wit, which cannot well take his breath;
and though he is spurred and struck, he will not go on, but coughs very much,
drawing his breath painfully: Nay, in eating also he does not cease from
coughing. This Distemper is very hard to be cured. It is true, as long as the
Distemper is new, and occasioned by dust of a dust-raising wind, or by eating
any uncleanness in his forage, there is some remedy against this Distemper, to
wit, the letting of Blood on the Shoulders, and by chafing or anointing the
horse on the breast, and the back with the warm blood of the Beast, mingled
with Wine and Oil of Elephant; when you have continued that five days
together, then the five following days, you must let him fetch through the
Nostrils, Lie mingled with Oil: Next, give him to drink this potion, which is
made out of the following kinds.

Take Roast Mustard Seed. Living Brimstone. Paradise-corn; of each a like
convenient quantity, being pounded small, and boiled together in Metheglin to a
Decoction.
Or make a thick Composition thereof, and of that you must cause him every day
to take as much as the bigness of a Walnut, with thick Red-wine, which is very
good and excellent; or make a potion of the following things.

Take Galingal. Ginger. Clove, or July-flowers. Cummin. Fennil. Eggs. Saffron,
a little mingled with Wine; of all take a convenient quantity for a potion.
And pour it into the mouth of the horse, holding his head up high, that he may
swallow it down the more easily, without permitting him to let his head fall
down, at least for the space of a good half hour, to the end, that the potion
may run through all his guts; Next give him green grass; or reed, or willow
leaves to eat to qualify the heat of the potion, but the horse must in the mean
time eat nothing half a day before, or afterward. Next, lead the horse gently
backwards and forwards with the halter: or mount upon him, and ride him gently,
to the end, that he may not vomit up the potion. This is a means to heal a
horse that is pursy and short-winded, if the distemper is not too old; but if
it be an old evil, then you may help it with brand-marks, and by cutting up the
nostrills, for the heat of the fire, will hinder this shortness of breath, and
cause the breath the better to enter in and to issue through the nostrills;
give him also often times grapes to eat, and sweet wine to drink. Moreover,
there is another excellent remedy, (to wit) a potion made of Agaricus and
Fenugreek soaked in red wine: or the blood of a little dog, which is not above
ten days old, the same being given the horse to drink: or the root of wild
Cucumbers, and Gall Nuts, pounded with Honey-water, and making a potion thereof.

XXIII. Cough.
The Cough is occasioned by many reasons; sometimes it proceeds from the lungs,
and other parts of the body therabouts; and sometimes out of other inward, and
most low members, which have the operations; there is not any thing better
against this distemper, then the snipping or cutting of the nostrills of the
beast. And in case, that he does not mend, then you ought to pour into his
throat a good draught of this following potion.

Take Fenigreek and Flax-seed, of each a measure, Gum-Dragon, Frankincense,
Myrrha, Sugar.
The Bran of small Pease, or Fitches, of each an ounce, being all together
bruised small and sifted.

Lay it a soaking a whole night in warm water.

And the next day you must give the horse to drink thereof, according as has
been said; this you must continue, adding thereunto Oil of Roses, until he is
well recovered; some lay five whole Eggs a mollifying for a whole night in
strong Vinegar, and the next morning, when they observe that the shell is
become soft, they cause the horse to swallow it down. Farther, you ought never
to bleed the beast in any place whatsoever; but you must at the same time
continue to give him Gum Dragon with sweet Oil.

XXIV. Ulcers, or Aposthumes of the Breast.
The Ulcers or Aposthumes of the breast cause horses to die immediately;
therefore as soon as the waxing Kernel of the breast swells up, you must draw
out the swelling without ceasing: but in case a vein breaks thereby, then you
are to tie both ends together with a Silk thread, for the greater the swelling
grows the more matter or filth it will gather together, and hasten his death.

XXV. Faintness.
Against the faintness and pain of the heart, it is good to keep the horse very
warm and to give him this potion.

Take Herb Mercury a pound. Gum-Dragon 4 ounces. Myrrh 2 ounces. Bruised
Melilot 1 ounce. Saffron half an ounce.
Fine Frankincense a convenient quantity, all together pounded and mixed to a
powder.

Which you are to keep for use, and at each time take Oil of Roses, two
Cruises; Water, half a pint; of the aforesaid powder two good spoonfulls;
Honey, two spoonfulls for a potion.

This potion must be used for some days, until the horse begins to mend.

XXVI. Over heated.
You must give to the horse, that is heated, in the winter, (through an horn)
the following potion.

Take Red-wine, half a pint. Oil, three ounces. But in the Summer, Take Red
wine, half a pint. Oil, two ounces, for a potion.
XXVII. The Ague.
You may know (amongst other tokens) that a horse has the ague, when he can
not make water, his Ears Cold hanging and stinking:

The Ague of an horse is cured by letting him bleed on the vein, which is found
in the calf or thick part of the leg, 4 fingers or thereabouts under the
buttocks, or else you may let him blood on the vein of the neck, and if you
observe, that a potion is necessary, then you must squeeze juice out of an
handful of Purslain, and mix it with Gum-Dragon, fine Frankincense, and some
few Damask-roses, which give him to drink with a little Metheglin, or
Honey-water.

XXVIII. Venomous Creatures swallowed down.
In case the horse in eating Hay or grass, has swallowed down any venomous
beast, as a Spider, a certain kind of Lizard, Earth Spider, Snale, or
Dirt-Grubber, (Buprestis) then you must make him run, until he sweats, next you
must bleed him on the Palate, and let him swallow down the blood; You must give
him to eat boiled Beans.

XXIX. Lost Appetite or Stomach.
If he has lost his Stomach, wash his mouth with Vinegar and Salt, and give
him no Forage, nor Oats, Hay, Chaff, or Straw, but what is good.

XXX. Hen-Dung Swallowed.
If the horse has accidently swallowed down the dung of an Hen, which brings
Gripings of the Guts, then you are to use this following Medicine.

Take Dried Ladys-Mark, 2 ounces. Honey and Wine, a convenient quantity for a
potion.
Give him this to drink, and then lead him backwards and forwards until his
belly begins to make a noise and rumble, and then he is clear from his
Malady.

XXXI. Cholick, or Griping in the Guts.
Against the Cholick or griping in the guts.

Take Black Pepper, two ounces. The Juice and the Root of Jews-Ear. Parsley.
Fenicle. Marjoram, of each an ounce. Sage, half an ounce. Live-Honey, about 2
quarts.
Boil it, scum it well, and make it of the bigness of an Haslenut, to little
cakes*

Which you must give the horse to drink with good wine about half a pint.

And on that day, when he has the Cholick, then take Fennil-seed three or four
spoonsfull, and with a convenient quantity of wine, you shall presently give it
to the horse to drink, and then cover him and make him sweat well.

XXXII. Pain in the Belly.
Against the Griping, or pain in the Belly; you shall take tame, or wild
Rhue-seed, pound it very small, and with warm Wine make a potion thereof; you
may also put therein Cumin and Fennil-seed, of each alike quantity; next keep
the horse warm, and well covered, in a close place; but before you give him
this potion, you must mount upon him, and ride him (to and fro) rather along
high places, than upon eaven ground: And when he is in the Stable again, then
cover him with a good woollen cloth; and if he grows cold again, then you must
anoint his fundament with Oil, until it is heated, and breaks wind. Farther, it
would do well also, to put a Rod which is thick enough, and half a foot long
into his fundament, well anointed with common Oil, and made fast to the trunk
of the fundament that it cannot go out, and then mount upon the horse, and ride
him to and fro. You must also give him to eat that which is of a warm nature,
and let him drink Water, boiled with Cumin and Fennil-seed, of each a like
quantity, adding thereunto Wheaten-meal a sufficient quantity, and in a close
place keep him warm and well covered.

XXXIII. Obstruction or Oppilation.
The Obstruction or Oppilation is cured by potions and clysters: the potion
must be thus: give him daily powder of wild Rhue, with the seed, soaked in good
Red Wine. Or Take Anise-seed, and the Juice of Poppeys, and Flower-de-luce
Root, a convenient quantity: This all together being well pounded and beaten
small, you must add some Sugar Candy. Red-Wine, half an ounce. Oil of Olives,
of each three ounces for a potion.


This you must give him at three times, for three days one after another. Or a
Glister made after this manner.

Take Marshmallows. and Cashe, 2 ounces. Juice of flower-de-luce a convenient
quantity adding thereunto Oil of Bay Berries. Wine and Rhue, of each 3 ounces.
Pigeon-Dung. Saltpeter, of each an ounce for a Clyster.
After the Clyster is applied, you must lead the Beast gently to and fro. Some
Horse-Coursers have found this following receipt to be good in this Distemper.

Take Honey, nine spoonfulls. Pepper-Corns, nine. Hares-Dung, a sufficient
quantity, adding thereunto a Decoctum of Fitches; or Red-Colworts, as much as
is requisite for a portion.
XXXIV. Falling of the Fundament.
If the Fundament be fallen, take fine bruised Salt, spread it upon the
hinder-gut, and put it between the Rupture; next take a piece of Bacon, and put
it therein, in the form of a stick, pell, and lay thereupon Mask, or Mallows,
until it is healed.

XXXV. Worms.
Against the Worms, give the horse to drink Water, in which Rye has been
boiled; or with some Brimstone amongst Bread; or burnt Ashes of the wood of
Olive Tree: Or take powder of dry Wormwood; with the seed, raw Lupinum of each
an equal quantity; being all together mingled in white Wine for a potion.

For to give it to the horse at three several times. After these three days,
you must make a Clister of these following things.

Take of Wormwood and Rhue a convenient quantity. Adding thereunto two
Ox-Galls, straining them. Alloes, one ounce; For a Clister.
XXXVI. Flux, or Looseness of the Belly.
Against the Flux, or Looseness of the Belly, there a is very good certain
potion made of powder of Gall-nuts, with white Wine and Starch mingled
together: Or, in case that the Looseness is occasioned by Cold, then give the
horse to eat sops soaked in Red-wine, and Rose Water. Farther, anoint his Loins
and Belly with Claret Wine, Oil, and a little Salt mixed.

XXXVII. Bloody Flux.
Against the Bloody Flux, which is occasioned by the Forage, let the horse
bleed on the vein of the shoulder; next, make a Decoction of Wheat, with
unsalted Grease, and powder of dry Granado's skales; strain it, and make a
potion thereof, and give the horse thereof to drink every morning, and let him
not work all the time. Likewise, you must make a Plaster to lay upon the back,
and on the Loins, of a Thousand-knot, (an herb so called) Bolus, and the Blood
of the sick Beast, with strong Vinegar, or course Claret mixed therewith.

XXXVIII. Jaundise.
In the Jaundise, this following potion is a special Remedy.

Take Tares; and the seed of Ladies-mark, one pound.

Let it boil together with Hops and good Honey, a sufficient quantity well
stirred and mingled together for a potion.

Give him of this to drink for eight days together, every day half a pint.

XXXIX. Stoppage of Urine.
In case the horse cannot make water, which appears by the swelling of the
Bladder, and round about the Yard, then you must give him to drink a Pottage
made of these following Ingredients.

Take one pint of White Wind. The White of ten Eggs mixed with Pushed Garlic a
convenient quantity.
Or the Juice of red Cabbage, or Coleworts, mingled with White Wind. In the
mean time you are to withhold from him all Oats and Barley, and to feed him
with Hay only, and such herbs as are convenient, according to the season of the
year, if you can get them. Farther, it will be good to put into the sheat,
through which the Piss passes, a remedy or Physic made of Honey that is
boiled with Sugar, or a living Fly, Louse, or Wood-louse; or a little piece of
Frankincense, and to lay upon the (...) and reins, Oil mingled with Wine; or to
anoint the Yard with pounded Wormwood boiled in Vinegar; and also to pour a
pail of cold water upon his Stones. These means are good, when the Piss has
burnt the aforesaid parts.

XL. Difficulty in making Water.
Against difficulty in making of water, it is an approved Remedy, to take five
or nine Spanish-Flyes, that are whole, wraping them up in a Linen Cloth, which
you must bind fast on the thighs of the horse, and happen what will, you must
let it lie thereupon a long while, for that promotes the Urin; but you must
have a care that you do not give it to the horse to drink, when it is beaten to
powder, nor in Clysters. It is good also to rub his Stones with a Decoction of
an herb called Cresses, or Nose-smart, Pellitory of the wall, and Garlic.

XLI. Strangury.
Against the Strangury, or difficulty in making water, look before Sect. 39. of
the inability of making water.

XLII. Wolf, or over growing of the Flesh.
Against the She-wolf, the growing and over-growing of the Flesh, which grows
under the belly of the horse, you are to cut the place, and to prick it with a
Lancet, and next to anoint it in the morning, and at night, with an ointment of
white Mallows (Dialthea.)

XLIII. Rupture prevented.
Against Bursteness or Rupture, Farriers say that there is not any better
remedy* than this following.

Take Ashes of Vine-branches or Olives, seven ounces. Oil of Olives. Honey. The
Juice of Plantain, of each three ounces. Fresh Butter. Rhue, of each one ounce.
Onion bruised or pounded with white Wine, or Decoction of Cicero, a convenient
quantity mingled.
Which will serve to give the horse at three diverse times, on three several
days together.

XLIV. Rupture cured.
If the horse is burst or broken by being over-laden, and too much burdened,
then lay upon his Loins a Plaster which is made of these following Ingredients.

Take Pitch. Powder of Bolus. Sanguis Draconis. Mastick, fine Frankincense, of
each an ounce for a Plaster.
You must lay the plaster hot upon the sore part, and let it lie thereupon,
until it falls it self, when you touch it, for then the horse is well again.

XLV. Biting of the Spider-mouse.
The Spider-mouse (Mus Francus) oftentimes by his biting kills an horse. It is
a Creature as big in body as a mouse, of Color like a little weasel, of a long
back, and of a short tail, it takes especially hold of the Stones, and makes
four small wounds; Thus to cure the venomous biting, you must immediately pour
into the nostrils of the horse, bruised or pounded laurel or Bay-leaf, with
water, and lay upon the biting or wounded place pounded cumin and garlic, but
if it swells, then you must foment the piace with pickle or with a Decoction
of Myrrh, and spread thereupon powder of burnt barley, or shells of Pomgranat.
Look also in the 23 chapter of the Ox or Cow.

XLVI. Swollen Codds.
Against the swelling of the Cods, make a Poltis of strong white wine vinegar
and Salt, anoint therewith the Stones twice a day.

XLVII. Warts in the feet.
Against the hard Knobs or Warts on the feet by much going, lay thereupon green
Cabbage or Coleworts, with old grease or suet of hoggs, and mount on the horse,
ride him gently, and the physic will penetrate and heal the part affected.

LXVIII. Chaps in the Feet.
The Chaps in the feet are cured, by burning the same, with a round hot iron at
the ends: for this burning hinders the Chap from growing bigger. Next you must
anoint them with Bacon, washed in diverse waters* or with Oil of Bay Berries
mixed with Vinegar, Mastick, Frankincense, and the yoalk of an Egg.

XLIX. Of old Swellings.
Against hard and old Swellings, make an Ointment of these things following.

Take Rosin, and Wax, of each a pound. Ammoniack, and black Pitch, of each half
a pound. Galbanum, two ounces of common Oil, a sufficient quantity, which being
mingled altogether, make it to a Searcloth, and lay it on the part grieved.
L. Bruised Back.
When the horse is hurt on the back by the Saddle, or otherwise, open it first,
and lay thereupon for three days together tow or Flax dipped in the white of
Eggs; but if the pace is swollen and hardened, then you may cure it with Colewort,
Pellitory, Wormwood, Bear-foot, or Southernwood bruised and boiled together
with fresh or unsalted Grease, and laid upon the wounded place.

LI. Galled-Back.
Against a Galled Back.

Take two Onions, boil them in water for a Decoction.

This you are to put as hot as the horse can suffer it, upon the sore part, and
all the swelling will go away in one night. Or otherwise: Take beaten Salt,
mingled with Vinegar and yoalks of Eggs, and therewith anoint it: or wash the
place with white Wine Vinegar, and lay thereupon fine Lime mingled with Honey,
continuing these remedies so long till the flesh is grown again; and the bones
are covered therewith again; and that the hair may grow again, bruise burnt
shells of Hasle-nuts, and mingle them with Oil, and anoint the place therewith.

LII. Biting of Flies.
To preserve horses (in hot weather) from the biting of the Flies, you must rub
their hair with the juice of Courd-blisters.

LIII. To drive away the Flies.
You may also drive away the Flies from the ulceration, if you lay thereupon
Pitch and Oil, or Grease mingled and melted together, and spread thereupon
Pease-flower.

LIVE. Stiffness in the Joints.
When a horse has either strained or stiffened his joints, he may be cured
with the same remedy, which is mentioned before in the healing or curing of
Faintness. Sect. 25.

LV. Broken Loins.
Against broken Loins, and straining of the same; see what has been said in
reference to the cure of the bloody Flux. Sect. 37.

LVI Swelling of the Flank.
When the horse is sick, his Rump and whole body being swollen, by eating of bad
Oats or Hay, you must make him this potion.

Take the innermost stomach-skins of three Chickens, let them be well dried in
an Oven; break them to pieces, and add thereto fine powder of Frankincense, one
ounce; Pepper, half an ounce; Honey, four spoonfuls, with half a pint of
lukewarm Wine mingled for a potion.

Let the horse drink this to mollify his belly, give him through a pipe that
is somewhat thick and long, a Clyster of the Decoction of the herb mercury,
Pellitory, and other mollifying herbs adding thereunto Honey, Oil Sage, and
Salt. This done, anoint the belly with Oil, let the horse be rubbed behind by
two men with a round staf or cudgel, then mount upon him, and let him trot
gently a long while, not only until he be rid of his Clyster, but also of his
dung, and then he will soon recover again and be freed from his pain.

LVII. Scabby, or Mangy.
Against the Scab, you must let him bleed out of the Limbs that are convenient
for that, and near the place, where the evil lies. It will be necessary to
purge the horse with powder of will Cucumber-roots, mixed with Saltpeter and
given the horse with wine through a horn: this Physic being oftentimes taken,
purges away the bad humors; for an outward Physic or Remedy, take Sulphur
vivum, or living Brimstone, Tar and Jews-Gum (Asphaltum) break and mingle these
matters in fresh-boiled Butter: with this ointment you must oftentimes let him
be anointed all over the body, in the greatest heat of the Sun, except you will
rather use this following Medicine.

Take Rosin-Pitch. Bird lime; or Cum, of each four ounces. Strong Vinegar,
about a pint, mingle it well together, to an ointment; with Man's Urine and
lukewarm water.
Adding thereunto Fresh or unsalted Grease; and Old Oil, of each three ounces;
make it to an ointment or a Searcloth.


LVIII. Sinew-struck.
Sinew-struck, is when the knees or joints be wrenched, or out of joint by
running in a desert place; and that the horse has set his foot wrong upon the
ground; and this is cured with an ointment, made of these following Ingredients.

Take Hoggs-grease or Suet, 4 ounces. Fenigreek. Flax-seed, of each one ounce.
Boil this together, until it is much lessened, and grown thick for an ointment.

If you should think it to be better first to wash the horse all over or to
foment him with piss and lukewarm water, and then chafe him with a chafing
ointment: the juice of Coliander-seed, adding thereto Vinegar and Tar and Wax
is an excellent remedy against this evil. And forget not that you chafe and
smear him always against the lying of the hair.

Besides, there is another special remedy against this, to wit, first to curry
the scabby place til it bleeds, and next to wash it with a Lie of the following
Ingredients.

Take Ashes of Ashen-Tree, 3 ounces, Beans 2 ounces Lime 1 ounce, not boiled
but soaked to a Lie, wash the place therewith.

After the washing, you must chafe the place with an ointment, made of Allom,
Coalts-foot, Hellebore, Quicksilver, Brim-stone and Hog's Grease, or Suet.

LIX. Swollen Knees.
Against swollen knees.

Take burnt Copper, half a pound. Bolus (Synople) a conv. quantity* Salt, a
little, melted in a pint of strong Vinegar.
LX. Cleft and Wounded Knees.
When the Knees are cleft and wounded.

Take common Oil. Flax-seed.
Burnt Rye-straw (of each a sufficient quantity) mingle it together to an
ointment; and to anoint the wound therewith in the morning, and at night, till
it is healed.

LXI. Overgrowing of the Knee pan.
Against the overgrown bone, or the over-growing of the knee-pan, you must
first cut off the hair; and lay thereupon bruised and boiled roots of white
Mallows, next put a plaster thereupon made of Mallow-roots, Mustard Seed and
Oxe-dung being altogether boiled in vinegar.

LXII. Farcions, or Leprosy of the Legs.
For to cure the Leprosy of the Legs, you must first cut off the hair, and
then for four days continually, in the morning, and at night chafe the place
with Juniper-Oil; In the mean time, the horse must not be rid to the water,
before the hair is is grown again, Besides it may be cured by a long and
oblique burning of an hot Iron.

Another way to heal this evil, is to take roots of white Thistle cut in small
slices and being given to the horse, to eat amongst his oats he will without
doubt be well and recover again within a fortnight or three weeks at least.
This means is very easy, and so much the more because the horse eats it
heartily.

LXIII. Chaps between the Joints and Legs.
Against the Chaps, which appear between the joints of the legs and the claws
of the feet; you must cut off the hair, and wash the place with wine, next
chafe it with an ointment made of soot of a chimney, and spanish green, bruized
and boiled together, at last adding thereto lime, as much as is requisite, but
if the chaps be too deep, then burn them.

LXIV. String-halt.
The String-halt is thus healed* Cut the skin; after the length of the hair,
and according to the bigness of the wound, lay a little Cloth thereupon dipped
in wine, and spread thereupon powder of Spanish-green, until they be

LXV. Mallender.
The Mallender must after the hair is cut off, be washed with a Decoction of
Mallows, Sheep-grease, and Brimstone, and then the relick or remainder to be
laid thereupon: when it is taken off again, you must make an ointment of, of
this following.

Take Gum-Arabick. Turpentine. New Wax, of each a like quantity, mingled
together a convenient quantity to an ointment.
LXVI. Spavin.
Against the spavins appearing within the knee-ham, you must let the great vein
of the thigh swell up, and to tap blood out of the same, burn it in the length
and breadth, and heal, in such manner as hereafter will be said concerning the
overgrowing of the hoof of an horse.

LXVII. Biting of a Mad Dog.
Against the biting of a mad Dog, this is an excellent remedy, At least before
the 9 days, Take Henbane-seed burnt and mingled with old Hog's Grease, and laid
upon the biting, or the same being bruised mixed with old wine and and given the
horse to drink. Like-wise Eglantine or sweet briar root pounded small, and
spread over the wound, or given to drink with good old wine. Likewise
Elder-berry or seed or Juice of Elder-leaves, or of Ash-tree.

LXVIII. Biting of a Water-Snake.
Against the biting of water-snakes, Take a living Cock split asunder in the
midst of the belly, and lay it warm upon the wound, And then immediately you
must give the horse a potion of strong Wine yellow Lilly powder and salt: or
roots, leaves and fruits of wild vine burnt to ashes, and apply it with good
white Wine, or take immediately a kind of wild Bugloss which is called Echium,
squeeze a pint of Juice thereout. After it is aspersed with white Wine or
Carduus Benedictus water, in case you see that the leaves give not Juice
enough, then pour what you have into the mouth of the horse, next take the
pressings out of which the Juice is pressed, and put it and bind it upon and
about the biting.

LXIX. Ringbone.
If your horse have the Ringbone wash it with strong Vinegar, then spread
thereupon very fine powder of Opement Arsenicum, and unquenched Lime, being
burnt together in a pot to ashes.

LXX. Fistula.
Against a Fistula, make use of the last medicine, burn it, and put therein a
remedy of unslack'd Lime, until the crust falls out.

LXXI. Overgrowing of the Hoofs.
Against the overgrowing of the hoofs burn it and cut it length-ways and
side-ways, and put thereupon a Poultess pap of fresh Cow Dung, fried over the
fire with Oil; lay this once thereupon and order then the horse in like manner,
as has been before directed for the healing of overgrowing bones, Sect. 61.

LXXII. Figg.
Against the fig* you must cut the horn of the foot, so far, till there be
convenient room, between the hoof and the fig, then lay thereupon a sponge, tie
it fast, until the form of the remainder of the fig, be eaten away.

LXXIII. Founders.
Against the Founders, or overgrowing of the hoof, called by French Javard.

Take Old Onions. Cabbage or Coleworts blister. Garlic and pepper, of each a
convenient quantity for a plaster or Poultess, and lay it thereupon.
LXXIV. Pricking with a Nail.
When the horse is pricked with a nail, then you must draw out the nail, and
cleanse and wash the Ulcer or wound, and drop thereinto melted brimstone, or
fill it with an ointment made of the following ingredients.

Take Honey. Oil. Grease. Turpentine. Wax, and (Salt of each a sufficient
quantity, being melted all together to an ointment.
And when it is very hot, dip some cotton therein: or lay upon the wounded
place within in the nail of the foot, leaves of Wool-blade rubbed or beaten
between two stones. But if the pricking of the nail is one or two days old,
then you must hold the foot of the horse in salted warm water, and bind upon
the foot a plaster made of bread or crumbs of bread, Hog's Grease, and Salt
water, or small buised salt and strong vinegar; or powder of gall, Mastick, or
Myrtle, next put the horse shoe on again, and fill the whole hole of the, foot
with Hoggs grease (letting it drop therein and thereupon) and let it be shut up
as is necessary; and let the horse be shod again, likewise fill the place of
the nail with pitch, and chafe it oftentimes with hog's grease as before.

Now to keep the hoof in its strength lay upon it a plaster of boiled Mallows,
bruised and mingled with Honey and crumbs of bread, put in the hole of the foot
the herb Salendine, and Shepherds-Purse, and thereupon bind the dung of the
same horse.

LXXV. Limping or Halting.
In case the horse limps or halteth, because the Sinews are shrunk.

Take Rhue. Bird-lime, of each a pound. Copperas. White-lead of each half a
pound make thereof an ointment.
LXXVI. The Wolf, or Boils and Knobs of the Foot.
Against the Shee-wolf, or Boils or Knobs on the foot; you must open them when
you see they are full of matter, and then lay upon the Sore or Ulcer a plaster
of Goose-dung, Wine, White Wind Vinegar and Salt; having great care that there
do not remain any bad matter in the bottom.

LXXVII. Scabbiness, Scurviness, or Kibe-heels.
Against the Scabbiness or Scurviness, which is called Scratches on the heel;
take off the skin, and chafe the place with an ointment of the following
Ingredients.

Take Vinegar. Rhenish Turpentine. New Wax. Rhue of each. boil it together to
an ointment.
LXXVIII. Over-stepping.
In case the horse steping over with his hinder feet, hurts his forefeet, then
you must cut off the hair of the wounded place, rub it with Salt, and bind
thereupon a plate of Lead; afterward take it off, and wash the place with Wine.

The Country man's directory showing the several places in the body of an Ox or
Cow where the several diseases usually happen


A TABLE of several DISEASES incident to the OX or COW, With relation to the
Printed Cut or Portraiture of an Ox in the 65 Page of this BOOK.
1. DIseases in the Horn, or Wearied Horns. 2. Scaled Horns. 3. Split Horns. 4.
Broken Horns. 5. Hairs standing upright. 6. Lice or Tickets. 7. Scab, Itch, or
Mange. 8. Eating Sore in the Neck. 9. Aposthumes. 10. Boils or Mattering
Ulcers. 11. Hide-bound on the Legs. 12. Hide-bound on the Ribs. 13. Bewitched.
14. Headache, or Pain in the Head. 15. Humor or Rheum. 16. Swollen Eyes. 17.
Weeping Eyes. 18. Running Eyes. 19. Sharp Tears. 20. Mattering Eyes. 21. Dark
Eyes. 22. Nail of the Eyes. 23. Spots or Webs in the Eyes. 24. White on the
Eye. 25. Wart upon the Eyelids. 26. Falling of the Palate, or Swollen
Palate. 27. Cleft or Split Tongue. 28. Knobs under the Tongue. 29. Carnils
under the Tongue. 30. Swelling in the Throat. 31. To prevent Imposthumes in the
Neck. 32. The Neck Bruised. 33. The Neck deprived of Skin. 34. The Neck
deprived of Hair. 35. Hardened Neck. 36. Swollen Neck. 37. Shoulder out of
Joint. 38. Crumpled or Shrunken Shoulder. 39. Disease in the Lungs. 40. The
same. 41. Cough. 42. Difficult Taking of Breath. 43. Slow or Lasie. 44.
Weariness. 45. Ague. 46. Beating of the Heart. 47. Stomach lost. 48.
Horse-leech Swallowed down. 49. Swallowing of Grubs. 50. Dublone. 51. Pain of
the Belly. 52. Griping in the Guts (Cholick.) 53. Obstruction, or Opilation.
54. Looseness and Bloody Flux. 55. Spoiled Arse-Guts. 56. Pain of the Loins. 57.
Pain of the Reins, Inflammation. 58. Inflammation of Muscles. 59. Pissing of
Blood. 60. Vnableness of making Water. 61. Stone of the Bladder. 62. Stone of
the Yard. 63. Hardened Yard. 64. Swollen Cods. 65. Limping or Lame. 66. Leg out
of Joint, or Wrinched. 67. Broken Leg. 68. Biting of Serpents. 69. Stinging of
the Hornet. 70. Kibe on the Heel. 71. Swollen Foot. 72. Crumped Foot. 73. Foot
out of Joint, or Wrinch^ Foot. 74. Wounded Foot. 75. Wounded Claw. 76. Broken
Claw. 77. Loose Claw. 78. Claw fallen off.
Of the Cow and Calf.
TOuching the Cow and Calf, it is to be noted in the first place, That the Cow
ought not to be suffered to come to the Bull before she is in her third year,
and not longer: For if you let her be covered before, she will not be able to
grow to her full Strength and Bigness, but will bring forth small and weak
Calves. Likewise, If you let her be covered after twelve years, the Calf will
not be so strong nor so well made. The most proper times for the Cow to be
covered in, The Cow when to be covered.
are May and Hay time, when the Herb is in its best force and vigor. For at
this time generally she desires the Bull most; which you may observe, when the
Claws of her Feet are swollen, and also by her continual Lowing. If the Cow is
covered about this time, she will cast her C^ about ten Months afterward;
abo^ which time the new Grass will coming forth, which will renew h^ Milk; and
tend to the better nourishing of the Calf. That the Cow man the better
conceive, you must lea^ her lean to the Bull, though on the contrary, the Bull
ought at the sam^ time to be fat and well knuckled, o^ full of joints. The Bull
also ought t^ be rather long than tall, of red Hair^ broad Shoulders, thick
Bones, small Body (yet round) broad Breast, short Head, broad Forehead, black
Eyes short Horns, long and rough Tail In case the Cow will not admit the Bull,
or that the Bull desires her not* you may create them an appetite, by holding
before their Nostrils burnt Harts-tail, or by using another mixture, which we
shall take notice of in chap. 28. concerning the Horse. During the time that
the Cow is full, you must keep her from leaping over Ditches, and from running
through Hedges or Bushes of Thorns or Briars: Besides, you must keep her a
while in the Cow-house before she casts, with good Fodder, without milking her
at any time; for the Milk which she then gives is not good, but becomes as hard
as a Stone. You must take special care to give her very clear Water, which she
loves as much as a Horse loves muddy thick Water (for you must observe by the
way, that ^tis a token of a good Horse when he stirs the Water with his
Fore-foot) before he drinks.

Of the Calf.
NOw concerning the young Calf; You must leave it by the Cow after she has cast
with a good strewing of fresh Straw, renewing it often for five or six days
together, at which time you may remove the Calf to another place, and carry it
to the Cow from time to time to suck. But if you find that the Calf will not
suck; but bubbles with the Teat, not being able to draw Milk, you must look
under the Tongue, and if you find there a whitish fleshly substance growing
over the Tongue, much like to the Pip, you must cut it off without wounding the
Tongue, with small well cutting Cissers, and wash the place with Water and
Salt, and well bruised Garlic broken, which always prevents the Death of the
Calf, without which remedy the Calf often dies of this Distemper.

You ought also to be very careful in driving away the Lice which trouble the
Calf and hinder his growth, as does the Scabs, which is occasioned thereby,
which may be easily discerned when the Skin wrinkles. These two Distempers are
cured by anointing the Calf with Butter, and will wholly be prevented, if you
rub the Calf twice a day with a handful of Straw, and do not suffer his Piss to
lie under him. And you must be sure to keep him with fresh Strewing, keeping
his Dung from him.

When to geld a Calf.
THe Calf must be gelt in the morning before he goes into the field, and before
he is two years old, and not later; for this is the best time for his growing
large. When the Calf is gelt, you must give him Hay chopped or cut small, mingled
with Bread, until he gets his former appetite. You ought not to geld him in the
extremity of hot or cold weather, The Gelding of a Calf.
or in the decrease of the Moon.

Marks of a good Cow.
AS for the Cow, she ought to be of a middle size, viz. long of bigness, broad
rump, black Hair, or speckled, or with white and black spots; the Winde-pipe
great and hanging down, of a great Belly, broad Forehead, Marks of a Cow.
black and great Eyes, the Horns not short nor thin, but even and black, rough
Ears, hollow Cheekbone, great Mouth, open and dropping Nostrils, hanging down
Lips, long thick Neck, broad Shoulders, with a long Tail to her Heels; small
short, and even Claws on the Feet: broad Breast, great and long Teats.

Concerning the Ox.
THe Ox Is inclined to as many Distempers as the Horse; and to preserve him
from the most common Distempers, the Ancients did purge him at the end of each
season of the year, Of the Ox.
for three days together; some with Lupin and Berries of Cyprus pounded
together, and soaked one night under the blew Heaven, in Spring Water: Others
with Drugs, according to the custom and diversity of the Countries.

You may understand that he is Sick when he eats nothing, although he has much
fine Fodder lying before him. There is nothing better thus to cleanse the most
inward parts and to purge him, than to let him often eat the remainder of
Olives, out of which the Oil has been pressed.

All kind of Sicknesses.
As Soon then as you see the Ox to be Sick, of what sickness soever it be, then
you must give him the following Purge made of Sea-onion, Rhamnus and Common
Salt boiled in Water, and make it lukewarm with the same Water. But you must
neither give him to eat nor to drink, before this Purge has done its
oporation. But to preserve him the whole year along from Sickness, you must
give him in the beginning of the Spring, of the Summer, Harvest, and the
Winter, a potion made of Leaves of Capers and Cypess soaked in Water, and let
it stand one night a soaking in a pot, and continue this for three mornings.

All sorts of Pain.
Against all outward pain, wheresoever it be in the Body, which disables the
Beast from going or acting with ease, you must foment the place, and lay
thereupon a Poltis of Cammomlie, Flax-seed, and the Hetb Melilot.

1. Wearied Horns.
If the Horns of the Ox are wearied by drawing, then to comfort them, is by
force to make the Horn fast in its place, and next anoint it, as also the
uppermost parts of the Head, for five or six days together, with an Ointment of
bruised Cumin, Turpentine, Honey, and Bolus Armenius, being all together
mingled and boiled. Next you must wash the Horn with a Decoctum of Wine,
wherein a good deal of Sage and Lavender has been boiled.

2. Scaled Horns Or, 3. Split Horns.
In case the Horn is scaled, then you must foment it first with Vinegar, Salt,
and Oil, mixed together; and next lay thereupon old melted Hogs Grease or Suet,
and new Pitch, or annoit him with this on the wounded place for five or six
days, and then the Horn will grow soft, and the Clefts will go away.

4. Broken Horn.
In case his Horn is broken, then take Turpentine 6 Ounces, Gum Arabic one
Ounce; boil this to an Ointment, and rub with this the Horn round about for ten
or twelve days together, which time being expired, bruise Common Bolus, mingled
with the White of Eggs, and spread it upon the Tow or Flax, and lay it upon the
wounded place, and let it lie thereupon for three days together: Thus when the
Tow begins to dry, then take it off, and spread in the place bruised Sage, and
the Horn will be healed.

5. Hair standing upright.
When the Hair of the Ox or Cow stands upright over the whole Body, and he is
not so merry as he uses to be, but of a sad look, his Neck hanging downwards,
his Mouth foamy, having a heavy gate, the Backbone and also the whole Back
stiff, eating without Stomach, and chewing but little. This Sickness may be
cured in the beginning, but being inveterate, it can in no wise, or at least
very seldom be helped. For which cure take Sea-Onion, or Wild-Onion, and cut
small Roots of Mellons bruised, of each three Ounces, course Salt three
handfuls, let it be soaked in a pot of strong Wine, or in Vinegar, to a potion.
Of this you may give the Ox or Cow every day half a pint.

6. Lice or Ticks.
Against Lice or Ticks, you must use a Decoctum of wild Olives and Salt, and
take away the little Blisters which he has under his Tongue.

7. The Scab, Itch or Mange.
The Scab, Itch, or Mange, is cured with Common Oil, and Oil of Olives mingled
together, or take Oxe-Gall, the Powder of living Brimstone, Myrrh, Oil, and
Vinegar, with some Plum-Allum, being rubbed small and mingled together. Or chafe
him with his Piss, with old Salt-butter, with Turpentine, or with White Rozen
melted in White Wine.

8. Eating Sore in the Neck.
Against an Eating Sore; or (Scab) rub him with bruised Garlic, with Powder of
Brimstone and Vinegar, with broken Gall-nuts, or with White Andoren, mixed with
Soot.

9. Aposthumes or Sores.
In case he has Aposthumes or Sores, then you must anoint them with bruised
Mallow in White Wine; also upon the Sore parts, unless there be great reason to
the contrary: It is likewise very good to lay small bruised Powder of
Gall-nuts; likewise the Juice of Andoren is very good in this case, being mixed
with the Soot of an Oven.

10. Boils or Mattering Ulcers.
Boils or Ulcers are made ripe with Leaven, Lilly-root, with Sea-Onion and
Vinegar, letting him blood and cleansing him with his warm Piss, putting
therein Wicks dipped in Tar; all which spread upon a Linen Cloth which has lain
in the Grease of Goats or of Oxen, and lay it to the part affected.

11. Hide-bound on the Legs.
If the Skin sticks to the Bones, then you must foment it, either with Wine
alone, or such as is mixed with Oil.

12. Hide-bound on the Ribs.
In case he is too lean, that the Skin seems to cleave to the Ribs, then foment
his Hide, against the grain of the Hair, with Wine and Oil in a warm place, or
in the Sun; next anoint him with the Dregs of Wine and Hogs Suet, being mixed
together into an Ointment.

13. Bewitched.
The Ox and Cow is often bewitched, as well as the Horse, the signs of this
are, that he is melancholy, grows dry and lean; therefore you shall give him
in through the Nostrils Jews Gum Brimstone, Juniper Berries, being all together
soaked and broken in warm Water.

14. Headache.
Against Headache, bruise Garlic in Wine, and let him draw that up through the
Nostrils, next foment the whole Head with a decoctum of Laurel, Lavender,
Mariblam, or Margelins Nuts, and Rue Blisters sodden in Wine.

15. Humor or Rheum.
When he contracts any Humor or Rheum, because of superfluity of Phlegm or
Snot, which is apparent when his Eyes run, and that he has no Stomach, and lets
his Ears hang down, then wash his Mouth with Rhue bruised in White Wine, or rub
his Mouth with Garlic and small beaten Salt, and wash it next with Wine: Some
cleanse these Flegms with bruised Laurel-leaves, and the Rinds of
Granat-Apples; others put into his Nostrils Myrrh and Wine.

16. Swollen Eyes.
Against swollen Eyes, put upon them a Plaster of Wheaten-meal, mixed with
Honey, or Honey-water. But if they are swollen with Humor or Rheum; then let
him blood under the Tongue, and pour into him well cleansed Juice of Ladies
Mark, Sage and Savin, or against bad swollen Eyes, make an Eye-water of bruised
Wheat mingled with Honey-water.

17. Weeping Eyes.
Against Weeping Eyes and Moistness, that drops upon his Cheeks, take Pap of
Wheaten-meal, and make thereof a Plaster for to lay upon the Eyes. Against
this Distemper also Wild Parsnips being bruised with Stalk and Root together,
and mixed with Honey for to anoint the Eyes therewith, is very effectual.

18. Running Eyes.
Against Running Eyes, blow into them fine bruised Copperas, or Vitriol and
Thutia.

19. Sharp Tears.
Against Sharp Tears (Epiphorae) of the Eyes, that is, that the Ox has but
his half Sight; whether it be in one or in both Eyes, you must let him blood
under the Eyes, and the Sight will be bettered; but you must continually drop
Honey into his Eyes, until he is perfectly cured.

20. Mattering Eyes.
Against Eyes that Matter like a Wound, which happens by continual Humor,
which fall down from the Brains, take Saffron and fine Frankincense, of each
two ounces, Myrrh one ounce, break it in Rain Water, and mingle it to an
Eye-water.

21. Dark and Cloudy Eyes.
In case he has a Dark and Cloudy Eye, then blow into it fine Powder of
Cinnamon, Sugar Candy, and of dried Bones.

22. Shales or Nail of the Eyes.
Against the Shales or Nail of the Eyes, you must make him an Eye-Water of
Stone-salt (Sal Armoniack) soaked in Honey; or anoint also the Eyes with a
mixture of Oil of Olives and Pitch, being well incorporated, to prevent the
danger of Flies which are apt to come about the Honey.

23. Spots or Webs in the Eyes.
Against Spots or Webs in the Eyes, which is nothing but a superfluity, which
through great Cold or long continuance, grows upon the Eyes, in which there is
a Humor, which is called Waterish; upon which swimmeth one, which is somewhat
Glassie. To cure this Distemper, take Ardtvel and pound it long in a Wooden
Mortar, and anoint the Eyes with the Juice which comes out from it. But if you
cannot get that, then take the Leaves and Berries of Straw-berries, and make
thereof Juice as before: Continue with one of these Remedies in the Morning and
at the Evening for many days together, then the Spots shall decrease and go
away. And observe that you do instead of Water take Wine thereto, it would be
better and more convenient.

24. White on the Eyes.
Against the White on the Eyes, put a Plaster thereupon of Crystal Salt (Sal
Gemmae) and Mastick pounded small, and mixed on the Eyes together with Honey,
continuing the same often times.

25. Warts upon the Eyelids.
In case he has Warts upon the Eyelids, then foment the place with the Gall
of any Beast whatsoever, or (which is better) cut the Warts off with a pair of
Cissers, or take them off with a Thread tied on stiff; next anoint the place
with Alloes, Vinegar, and Gall, boiled together.

26. Swollen Palate, or Falling of the Palate.
If the Palate is swollen, then you must open it immediately with a Lancet, or
red-hot Iron, to the end that the corrupted Blood may run out; next give him
some Herbs, and often Hay to eat: but if it is so swollen, that he loses his
stomach and his taste, and is often sick, then you must open the Vein of the
Palate, and not give him any thing to eat but Garlic which is peelled,
bruised, and soaked with Leaves or other Green, until he recovereth.

27. Split Tongue.
If the Tongue is split beneath, then anoint the cleft twice a day with an
Ointment of Alloes, Rock-Allum, and Honey of Roses, being mixed together. Next
wash it with Wine, wherein Sage and other drying Herbs are boiled.

28. Knobs under the Tongue.
If the Ox has a little Knob which is fleshy under the Tongue, then you must
cut it off, and next rub the place with Salt and Garlic pounded together, then
wash his Mouth with Wine, and with little Tongs take gently away the small
Worms which begin to come under the Tongue.

29. Carnils under the Tongue.
In case he has Carnils under his Tongue, and is much swollen, then open it
with a fiery-hot Iron, or sharp Lancet, next rub it with Salt and Oil, until
the bad humor is run out, at last give him to eat some young Herbs.

30. Swollen Almonds.
Against the swelling of the Throat, which is occasioned by a Cold Brain, cover
the Head with some Coverture, and rub oftentimes the whole Throat with fresh
Butter.

31. To prevent Imposthumes in the Neck.
If the Neck is swollen, and you are afraid of a Swelling with Matter and
Filth, then open it with a red hot Iron, and put into the hole the Root of
Hogs-bread, of Nettles, renewing oftentimes the same; it is very necessary in
this case, that you give him to drink a good Cruce full of a Decoctum of
Italian...... and let him bleed.

32. Bruised Neck.
If the Neck is hurt, swollen, and hanging down, then let him blood at one of
his Ears; but if it is in the midst of both Ears, lay upon the Swelling a
Plaster of melted Ox marrow, and Cocks-Grease, of each half an Ounce in
Oyland Tar, or melted Pitch, and rub the Swollen parts with the Sword of Bacon,
whereon there is not any Fat, and is of a Barrow Hog, being warmed a little,
continuing it five or six mornings together.

33. Neck deprived of Skin.
If his Neck be deprived of Skin, put upon it a Plaster of Oxe-marrow, taken
out of the Thigh-bones, Rue and the Grease of a Buck, and Hogs-suet, of each an
ounce, being melted and mixed together.

34. Neck deprived of Hair.
If his Neck is deprived of Hair, and bare, then anoint the place with this
following Ointment, take Honey six Ounces, Mastick four Ounces, boil them
together to an Ointment.

35. Hardened Neck.
If his Neck is hardened, let him stand some days without laboring, in the
mean time you must anoint the hard place with an Ointment of Butter, Oil,
Bacon, and new Wax, of each an ounce, being melted and mixed together.

36. Swollen Neck.
If his Neck be Swollen, then make him an Ointment of Alaud-roots, that are
pounded and boiled in raw Honey Bucks or Sheep-Rue, Hogs-suet, new Wax; anoint
the Neck with this three times a day; in the morning, at noon* and at night.

37. Shoulders out of Joint.
If the Shoulders be disjoynted, or out of Joint, then put the Bones again in
their place, and bind them fast with Tablets of light Wood.

38. Crumpled Shoulders.
If his Shoulder is crumpled, then you must blood him on the hinder foot, on
the far side, but if they are both shrunk in, then you must blood him on both
Legs.

39. Distemper in the Lungs.
The Distemper in the Lungs is such a mortal Distemper, as well to the Oxen as
to the Kine, that there is not any Remedy against it, but that you wash the
Manger, out of which they have eaten, with hot water and well-scenting Herbs,
before you tie the others thereunto, which in the mean time must be kept in an
other Stable. They get this Sickness by eating bad Herbs and corrupted Hay; and
through great superfluity of Blood; but for the most part by Horse-piss,
especicially when you keep the Cow-house Clowsie. Therefore you should neither
let Horses nor Mares come into the Cow-house; but Asses may, and do much good;
for the Breath of the Asses keeps them from Distempers in the Lungs.

40. Lung-Sickness.
Against the Lung-sickness give him the Juice of Liquorish with sweet Wine, or
put into his Ears the Root of Hazle-tree.

41. Cough.
Against the Cough, let him drink a decoctum of Hysop, and eat Liquoris^ Roots,
being bruised with clean Wheat Some make them drink seven days together a
decoctum of....

The Cough of the Oxen must as diligently be cured, as the Cough of the Horses;
and you must not let the same last long, or grow too cold; the best way is, to
seek remedy against in the beginning: Therefore you mu^ power into his mouth,
through a Hor^ or otherwise, an half Measure of Barle^ Flower, and an whole Egg
without Shill, being boiled in a Can of Wine or take Poppies bruised in warm
Water with dried Bean-meal, that is broken to shales, or very small pieces; an^
Meal of Pease, being all well mingle together; and give them that to eat early
in the morning.

Old Cough.
Against an old Cough, the following Remedy is very good, Take dry of fresh
Hysop, two hands full, boil them in common Water (as much as is necessary)
strain it* and add to it two thirds of Starch; mingle it together and give it
to the Beast. You may also mix with it Hysop Water, a Decoctum of Hysop and
Mint. Against the same Distemper is good also the Juice of Liquorish, being
well squeezed out, and given the Beast with Oil of Olives. Nay, the Cough will
never be grown so old but it may be cured and driven away with the Roots of
Liquorish well cleansed and washed, given in a Decoctum with Wheaten-meal. The
same virtue have also the small Pease, or little Fitches, being given him to
eat or being set before him with Honey-water, when he Coughs most.

42. Difficulty of fetching Breath.
Against difficulty of fetching Breath, put through his Ear, or the great Skin
of his Throat, the Herb called Black Hellebore or Lions Paw.

43. Heavy and Lazy.
If he is Lazy, then give him every month bruised Fitches, soaked in the Water
which he drinks.

44. Weariness.
To preserve him from growing weary too soon, you must rub his Horns with
Turpentine and Oil mingled together: But have a care that you do not rub him
with this on the Mouth or Nostrils, for those parts will be offended therewith.

45. Ague.
Against the Ague, which the Beast gets in hot Weather, which appears by
melancholy, swollen Eyes, and extraordinary Heat, and is perceived by the
touching of the Hide; you must open the Vein of the Forehead or of the Ears,
and give him cool Nourishment, as Lettice, and other such Herbs, and give him
cool Water to drink.

Against another kind of Ague (which you may know by his great Disquiet or want
of Rest) trembling over the whole Body; through the great Heat in the midst of
his Forehead, and about the root of his Horns, and by his Ears also, by his
hot Mouth, and his excessive Sweat, by his little eating and licking, and
drawing of a dry Tongue; by the heaviness or melancholy of the Head, cunning
and half-shut Eyes, his Mouth very moist and full of Slabber, long fetching of
Breath, nevertheless with great pain, and often turning.) On the first day that
you are aware of the Sickness, let him fast the whole day; the next day you
shall let him bleed a little under his Tail: five days afterward you must
nourish him with a Decoctum made of Burs, Oil, and Pickle. You must proffer him
(...) ways before all other, green or moist Food, viz. small tops of Lettice
and other young Sprouts, which you know will please the Beast. VVash him also
three times a day in the Mouth with a Sponge, that is made wet in Vinegar; next
you shall give him three times very cold Water to drink, and let him not seed
in the pasture till the Ague has left him.

46. Beating of the Heart.
In case he is troubled with Beating of the Heart, and a desire to vomit, then
rub him in the Mouth with Garlic, or bruised Leeks, and let him also swallow
them down, either alone or with a pint of Wine; especially against the Griping
in the Guts (Chollick) and rumbling of the Belly (according as we shall show in
its due place) Sect. 52.

In case he has lost his Stomach, you must give him raw Eggs, beaten with Honey
and Salt, mingled with his Fodder, or give him in his drink Andoren bruised
small with Oil and Wine, or bruise the Leaves of Parsley..... Sage, and Rue;
and give him this to drink with White Wine.

47. Stomach Lost.
For to excite him to a Stomach, when he has lost his Taste, by great weariness
and heat, rub his Tongue and the Palate of his Mouth with Vinegar and Salt.

48. Horse-leech, swallowed down.
In case he has swallowed down an Horse-leech in drinking, which hangs yet in
his Throat, then let him lie down, and pour into his Mouth warm Oil; but if it
is sunk down in his Stomach, then give him some Vinegar through a Horn.

49. Venomous Grubs swallowed.
If the Oxen, Kine or Horses, feeding in the Pasture, have swallowed down
little Grubs, which lie under the Herbs, and are called by the Latins
Buprestis, of which they sometimes swell up, burst and die, then the Oxe-keeper
must let them presently drink Cows-milk, or a Decoctum of dry Figs, or of Dates
boiled in Wine; and give them sharp and strong Clisters.

50. Swelling and puffing up.
The Oxen swell and blow up when they have eaten too much Grass, especially
when the Dew lies thereupon; then you must take a Horn which is bored through
both sides, anoint it with common Oil, and put it three or four fingers deep
into his Fundament, and next lead him backwards and forwards, until he farteth,
leaving the Horn in his Fundament; and rub his Belly with a flat piece of Wood.

51. Pain of the Belly.
Against Pain of the Belly, give them Tracle or Mithridate, to be drunk in
Wine, and the next day after let him blood under the Tongue and Nostrils, or
give him a Decoctum of Camomil and Rue pounded small, letting them stand and
rest, at least for the space of seven or eight days; or take Turpentine four
Ounces, mingled with a little Salt, which is an excellent Remedy in this
Sickness, letting the Beast swallow it down in the form of a Bolus, Pills or
Potions.

52. Cholick.
Against the Griping or stinging of the Guts (Colic) and rumbling of the
Belly, which is known when he sighs and stretches his Neck, Legs, or Belly, or
that he lies down and rises often again, and cannot stay in one place; this
evil is occasioned by weariness, more in the Lent than in any other season: in
this Sickness you must let him walk, being covered with a Woollen Cloth, and rub
him in the Mouth with Garlic or bruised Onion, and let him swallow down the
same either with a pint of Wine, or alone; some add thereunto Oil of Mace, and
give him Alum and Red Cabidge, being soaked in Wine with Mirrh, and take away
the Flesh round about the Claws of the Feet* and prick him in the Tail, that he
bleedeth.

53. Opilation or Obstruction.
In case he is opilated or obstructed, then to open him the Belly and the
hinder parts, which are obstructed, you must give him to drink in the morning
two ounces of powdered Alloes with lukewarm Water; or take -- Hiera two
ounces, Alloes one ounce mingled: Or else you may, as a very excellent Remedy,
give the sick Beast many times the remainder of Olives, out of which the Oil is
pressed.

54. Looseness of Bloody Flux.
Against the Looseness which he gets by the eating of some Herbs, or other like
things, which are hard to digest; you must keep him at first two or three days
from Grass; and in the mean time lay before him the Blisters of
Wild-Olive-trees, Horse-tail, Way-hroad, or Plantain, and sometimes the Berries
of Nightshade; in the mean time you must not give him much to drink, and for
the most part no drink at all; keeping him some days from Eating any other
thing, but the Leaves of Young Orega and Pursly, and let him not drink more
than three Bowls of Water a day, wherein young Sprouts of Laurel Leaves have
been soaked. But if a greater Looseness seizes upon him, even to the
Bloody Flux, then keep him four or five days without Meat and Drink; and give
him Raison-Kernels soaked in red Wine, or Gall-nuts and Mirtle-berries, soaked
with old Cheese in thick Wine. But the most excellent Remedy is to burn him in
the midst of his Forehead.

55. Spoiled Arse-gut.
If the Arse Gut be spoiled, take three ounces of Turpentine, and let it be put
into his Fundament by a little Boy, who has a thin and long Arm; and let him be
well cleansed within. This you must continue five or six days; Hogs-suet is
also good instead of Turpentine, for to anoint or to smear him therewith.

56. Paia of the Loins.
Against the Pain of the Loins, which many times troubles the Oxen, make this
following Pap: Take Flower of -- Cole-worts-seed, of each three handfuls;
bruise it together, and mingle it with cold Water to a Pap, and then put it
upon the place where the Pain is: You may also take Cypress Blisters without
Stalks, three handfuls; and proceed therewith as before, adding thereto in the
bruising of it, strong Vinegar; or if there is any hardness by, take Rosin, or
that which is harder, Grecian Pitch (Colophoniae three ounces; let it melt by
the heat of the Fire, and when it is well hot, then add thereto Barley of Meal
a convenient quantity; let it boil together to a Poltis, and lay it well warm
upon the Rump, unto the Reins or the (Loins.)

57. Pains of the Reins Inflammation.
You may perceive that the Ox has pain in his Reins, when in Kacking or doing
his Easement from behind, he cannot set his Feet on those parts according to
his will, but stumbleth aside; when he does not lift up his Tail but lets it
hang, when his Piss stinks much, and all the Course is stopped and interrupted
behind. If he has an Inflammation and Pisses as red as Blood, when it continues
and increases, then there is little Remedy to be had against it; yet if it is
but colored a little reddish, then there is some hope of recovery; in this
Sickness you shall let him blood out of the hinder Veins, or Mother-vein, which
you find a long the side about the Reins. For his dirnking give him the Juice
of Garlic with lukewarm Water, or else with his own Piss.

58. Inflammation of the Brawns or Muscle.
Against the Inflammation of the Brawns, as well inwardly as outwardly, which
proceed from the Rump and Loins, by falling upon hard and Stony places, and
getting Bruises: Let the Ox which is fallen, not go far from his place, as
soon as he is come into the Stable; and wash the parts affected with cold
Water, next use an Ointment and Sear-cloths, made of Oil and Wax, which must
not be too hot. The tokens of this Distemper are, that the Loins (the Reins)
grow hard outwardly; the Stones lessen and go in so that you can but see them
very little, that he cannot well move his Thigh, and that he can hardly rise
when he lies.

59. Pissing of Blood.
The Ox Pisseth Blood when he is overheated or too cold, or because he has
eaten bad Herbs during the Summer, especially when the Dew cleaves yet thereon:
The cure against this is, that you give him neither Wanor any other Liquor, but
that you give him a potion made of these following Ingredients: Take
Sea-Oinion, Hemp seed, of each three ounces bruised together, and add thereto
Treacle one ounce, being all together boiled in two pints of White Wine; at
last adding thereunto Saffron two ounces to a potion, and this pour into the
Mouth of the Ox; Or give him against Pissing of Blood the Juice of Lambs
Tongue with good Oil, next take the Powder of Wild-Gourds (Coloquints) and
Wine-stone, mingled in Red Wine, and the White of Eggs, pouring the same into
him through an Horn. And if you do not stop the Pissing of Blood, then he will
die thereof within four and twenty hours.

60. Vnableness of Pissing.
In case he can hardly Piss, then you shall let him Blood on the Vein of the
Bladder, and next give him a draught of Honey, Oil, and White Wine, being
boiled together; and this you must continue three mornings one after another.

61. Stone of the Bladder.
If he has the Stone of the Bladder, take Sea-fenicle two ounces, Cloves a
quarter of an ounce, Pepper one ounce and a half, being altogether bruised and
mingled with lukewarm Water to a Potion. But if the Stone, when this is
continued some days, does not fall out, then it must be cut out.

62. Stone in the Yard.
In case he has the Stone in the Yard, then throw the Ox down immediately,
hold the Yard with Tongs a little higher than where the Stone lies, open the
Yard on the side and take out the Stone; next heal the Wound again with
Turpentine, washed four times in Horse-tail-water.

63. Hardened Yard.
If the Yard be hardened, then smear it twice a day with an Ointment of bruised
White Mallow-roots and fresh Butter.

64. Swollen Cods.
If his Cods are swollen, by what cause soever it be, then anoint them in the
morning and at night with unsalted Hogs-suet, or foment them with strong
Vinegar, in which fine Chalk and Oxen-dung have been soaked* They hold it for a
Natural Remedy, that the Gall of a Dog heals the Swollen Cods of an Ox,
being often anointed therewith.

65. Limping or Halting.
If he Limps and Halts, because of Cold, which he has suffered on the Feet,
then wash them with his Piss, which is made warm; but if it proceed from the
superfluity of Blood, which in the bending of the Joints is sunk upon the Feet,
then you must divide (or resolve it) by rubbing or chafing, and by drawing
Blood by cupping; but if upon this it will not go away, you must cleave the
Claw of the Foot at the end unto the Flesh: and thus let it run out: and bind
the Joints round about with a Leather-purse, that no Matter may come thereunto
until it is cured.

In case he limps by having strained a Vein, then you must anoint his Foot
with Oil and Salt; if it be occasioned by a swelling of the Knee, then foment
it with warm Vinegar, or with a Decoctum of Barley and Flux-seed: But howsoever
it happens, you must burn it, and lay thereupon fresh Butter, washed in Water
and Vinegar; and at last make an Ointment of Salt-butter and Goats suet or
Grease. If it comes by a Splinter, or by a knock against a piece of Wood or
Stone, then bathe the place with warm Piss, and lay thereupon Oil, old Grease*
and Tar melted together. Nothing preserves him better from Limping, than to
wash his Feet with cold Water, when they are disjoyonted, and then to rub them
with old Grease.

66. Leg-out of Joint.
If his Leg is out of Joint or wrinched, put it in again, and when you have
smeared it with Hog's Grease, bind it fast with Straw.

67. Broken Legs.
For to put it in again (if broken) you must draw with Cords the uttermost
parts of the same on both sides perpendicularly, that so the disjoynted Leg may
be again put together and joined as before; this being done; you must untie the
Cords, and bind round about it Tow of Flax, that is made wet in a mixed on of
the White of Eggs, Bolus Armenius, and Sanguis Draconis; next bind it so fast,
that it may be joined together again: above the binding you must lay Tow of
Flax made wet in Wine, for to strengthen and corroborate the Sinews; at last,
that the uppermost and undermost parts of the broken Leg may not be hardened,
or get any ill fashion or form, as well by the binding up of the Wound, as by
the Chop or Cleft of the Leg; you must anoint both parts with the following
Ointment, viz. Butter, Oil, Turpentine, of each one ounce mingled to an
Ointment.

68. Biting of Serpents.
In case he has been bit by an Earth-spider, Serpent or by a mad Dog, then
smear the Wound with Scorpion-Oyl, or Soap, which has lain in Vinegar, and wash
him with a Decoctum of great Burs, or with old Pickle.

70. Stinging of Horse-flies or Hornets.
Against the stinging of Horse-flies and Wasps, rub him with Lead-Ointment or
Salve (Cerays) being soaked in Water, and moisten the place where he feeds, to
drive away the Horse-flies, with a Decoctum of Wormwood, chare him with the
same Decoctum; but if he is stung, then cleanse the place with his own spit.

70. Kibe on the Heel.
If he gets a Kibe on the Heel by great Cold, and by having wrou^ in such
places as are full of Snow or Frozen, and sometimes after the Thawing also, and
because that the Joints of the Foot have not been well washed overnight with
Piss and bound up with Dung, then the Heel gets an Ulcer, and seems as it would
go off, and leave its place; and then there follows an Inflammation, which after
the Ulcer very much troubles the Ox in going forth: Now you must chop small
that part with little Lancets, and kindle a small Fire of Fuel upon the chopped
part, and put thereupon a soft Rose-salve, or a defensive of Water Vinegar,
being bound up and tied about with Straw. When the Crust (or the bad Flesh) is
fallen out, then you must stew the place warm with Vinegar and Piss, and lay
thereupon a Pap or Plaster of Melilot, or cold Hogs-suet.

71. Swollen Foot.
If his Foot is swollen, then make a Pap of Elder Blisters and Hogs grease mixed
together and boiled.

72. Crumpled or stiffned Foot.
If his Foot is crumpled or stiffned, then take the Roots of white Poppeys and
Mallows (together one pound) boil them in water, as much as is enough, pound
them and strain them through a Sive; add to this Hog's Grease half a pound and
strong Wine three Bowls. Let it boil again, until the Grease is melted, adding
thereto Flax-seed four ounces well broken and pounded, and let it boil at last,
until the Wine is sodden away to a Pap, and put the one half part of this Pap
upon the Foot, and let it lie thereupon for three days, and then the remainder
also three days together.

73. Wrinched Foot.
If he has wrinched the Foot, then boil Honey and Hog's Grease in White Wine;
lay this Plaster upon the Foot, and let it lie thereupon for three days.

74. Wounded Foot.
In case he has wounded his Foot by a Thorn, Glass, or Nail, or any such other
sharp thing, then cut the Claw off from the Foot, as near the Wound as it is
possible; let drop therein very hot Turpentine and Oil, and then plaster the
whole Foot with Honey and fresh Grease melted together.

75. Claw of the Foot wounded.
If the Claw of the Foot is wounded by a Stone or Iron, then cut it to the
deepest part of the Wound with the Cissers of a Farrier, and let drop therein
very hot a Salve of old Hog's Grease and Bucks-rue, being melted together, and
put thereinto Tents of Tow of Flax.

76. Claw of the Foot scaled or broke.
If the Claw of his Foot is scaled or broken, then take Honey, Turpentine. New
Wax, of each one ounce to a Salve, and put that round about the Claw for
fifteen days together, which time being expired, add to the former Salve these
following Ingredients. Take Alloe, Hepaticum, Honey of Roses, Buck Alum, of
each half an ounce to an Oinment, and cover with this the whole Foot, after
that you have fomented it with Wine, with which Honey has been mingled.

77. Loose Claw.
If the Claw of his Foot becomes loose, then you must at first cure it with the
aforesaid Salve against Scaled Claws, Sect. 76. until it grows something
fast; next you must stew the whole Foot five or six days, every day three times
with the following Ingredients: Take Honey, unquenched Lime, of each seven
ounces, Vinegar or Wine a convenient quantity.

78. Foot-claw fallen off.
If his Foot-claw is fallen of, then make a Salve of this following: Take
Honey, Turpentine, New Wax, of each one Ounce, and anoint therewith the Nail
of the Foot fifteen days, next wash it with lukewarm Wine, which has been
boiled with Honey, and put a Plaster thereupon made of these following things:
Take Alloes, Alum bruised, Honey of Roses, of each half an ounce, to a
Plaster.

There is also one Distemper more, which is incident to Oxen, etc. not taken
notice of in the Table or Cut, or Portraicture of a Cow; which is called, The
Hip-gout, take Cow Dung, laid under Ashes in Cabbidge or Vine-leaves, and made
hot, and it will drive away the pain of the Hip-gout, being laid upon it in the
form of a Plaster. If this be roasted in Vinegar, it brings the bad Sores
about the Chin and Throat to Distillation; and being fried with Cammomile
flowers, Melilots, and black Briers in a Pan, it drives away the Swelling of
the Privities.

The Country man's Guide showing the several places in the body of a sheep
where diseases usually happen


The TABLE.
1. Headache. 2. Giddiness. 3. Loss of Cud. 4. Diseases in the Eyes. 5. Ague in
Lambs. 6. Ague in Sheep. 7. Rheum and Catarrhe. 8. Diseases of the Teeth. 9.
Aposthumes or Ulcers. 10. Boils. 11. Boils or Scabs under the Chin of Lambs.
12. Pursiness or short-winded. 13. Rot or Plague. 14. St. Anthony's Fire. 15.
Scab or Itch. 16. Diseases in the Lungs. 17. Cough. 18. Swallowing of a
Venomous Creature. 19. Swelling of the Belly. 20. Lame in the Claws. 21.
Maggots, Lice, or Ticks. 22. Broken or bruised Joints.
Introduction.
I Shall not particularize the many advantages which arise trom Sheep, as the
Wool, Flesh, Pelt, Dung, and many others; therefore in the first place, the
Countryman ought to get a good Breeder, and to buy Sheep for his store, that
may be in all particulars answerable to his Business, which I need not here
relate.

Marks of a good Yew.
The best Yews have generally a great Body, a long Neck, long Wool, oright and
shining like Silk, having a great Belly, and covered with Wool* and having
great Paps, great Eyes with long Legs, and a long Tail.

Marks of a good Ram.
The best sort of Rams are high and long of Body, great Belly, well covered
with Wool, long and thick Tail, the Forehead broad and thick with Hair, the
Eyes black, covered round about with much Wool, great Cods, broad Loins, great
Ears, covered with Wool; the whole Fleece of one Color, well Horned; the
Tongue and the Palate all White; for if the Tongue or undermost part of the
Tongue should be black or speckled, notwithstanding his Body is all White, yet
the Color of the Lambs which he produces will be Speckled, Gray, or Black, and
therefore less esteemed for profit: It is better that the Ram has Horns than
not, for the Ram that has no Horns, is as a Man disarmed, and is not so
valiant to fight, nor so hot after the Yew.

When a Yew ought to be covered.
The Yew ought to be covered when she is two years old, and she will bring
forth good Lambs until she is seven; but a Yew that is covered before she is
two years old brings forth weak Fruit; but if it happen that a Yew is with
Lamb before she be two years, then you ought to sell the Lamb; and the most
convenient time to dispose of it is in the Month of October, that the Yew
(which bears five months) may bring forth her Lamb in the Spring or Lent, at
which time she will find Grass sufficient to nouris her Lambs.

Salt Water to drink.
Farther, you must give the Yews some few days before they be covered by the
Ram, Salt Water to drink, and they will the better keep their Seed, and the Ram
shall grow the more fiery and vehement.

The way to have such Lambs as you please*
If you would have your Yews bring forth Ram-Lambs, then you must put the Ram
to the Yew in dry Weather, and observe to drive the Yew toward the blowing of
the North Wind, that when they are feeding toward the North, they may take Ram;
but if you will have Yew-Lambs, then you must let them feed toward the South
Wind, and let them be covered.

To know what colored Lambs a Yew will bring forth.
When the Yew is big, in case her Tongue is black, its a sign that she will
bring forth a black Lamb; and if her Tongue be white, she will bring forth a
white Lamb; but if the Tongue be speckled, then she will bring forth a speckled
Lamb.

Of Sickness in Sheep.
The Sheep are inclined to many Distempers, as Scabs or Scurveyness, Cough, and
the Red Water, which proceed from an exceeding Pain in the Head, and also the
Plague: The three last Distempers are incurable; insomuch, as if any Sheep be
sick with either of the said three Distempers, (...) occasions infections in
the rest, thereof many of them die; all such scknesses are occasioned by eating
of bad Herbs, or by drinking of bad Water or standing Puddles or Pools in the
Fields; or because the places which they feed on, are wet and moist by frequent
Showers and bad Weather; by which means they undoubtedly fall sick in six weeks
time.

Here follows an account of all the Distempers incident to Sheep.

1. The Headache.
If your Sheep are troubled with the Headache and Staggers, which is occasioned
by Surfeits, the best Remedy is, to take Asafettida, and dissolve it in a
spoonful of White Wine, or bruise the Juice out of Sage and give it to the
Sheep.

2. Giddiness.
Giddiness in the Head befalls Sheep most commonly in the Dog Days, insomuch,
as it makes them turn about and leap; and in case you touch their Forehead or
Feet, you will find that they burn exceedingly. Against this Sickness you must
let them blood in the middle of the Nose with a piece of Horn made sharp for
that purpose, thrust up as high as you can possible; which will cause the Sheep
presently to fall into a sound, and immediately they will come again to
themselves. This being applied, they will either be immediately well of this
Distemper, or die very speedily; yet more do recover than die. Some Shepherds
have tried the letting of Blood in the Temples of the Head, losing their Blood
by little and little, which has proved very successful afterward, giving them
a spoonful of Brandy mixed with Mithridate.

3. Loss of Cud.
Take Leaven and Salt, and mix them with Clay, and the Piss of a lusty young
Man, and let him swallow it, and that will recover him.

4. Diseases in the Eyes.
Make an Eye-water of Eve Eyebright and Horse-leech, and wash their Eyes
therewith, or beat Wormwood with the Milk of a Yew, and mix it with Rose Water.

5. Ague in Lambs.
If a young Lamb have an Ague, or other Sickness, then you must give it to
drink the Milk of its Dam, mingled with as much water.

6. Ague in Sheep.
When Sheep have an Ague, you must blood them on the Heels, between the two
Claws of the Feet, or on the Ear, and keep them a good while from Water: the
best remedy for to cure them of the Ague, is to boil in Spring Water and Wine,
the Stomach of a Ram, and give the distempered Sheep the Broth to drink.

7. Rheum or Catarrhe.
The Sheep gets Humors and Rheums in the Dog days, by the great Heat of the
Sun; for prevention of which, the Shepherd in such hot seasons ought to drive
his Flock in the Fore-noon toward the West, and in the Afternoon toward the
East; for it is a great matter that the Heads of the Sheep, as they are feeding,
be turned against the Sun; which in the beginning of the Dog Days is often
times the cause of this Distemper*

8. Diseases in the Teeth.
For Diseases in the Teeth, let the Sheep blood in the Gum, or Vein of the
upper Lip, and rub his Teeth with old Leaven and Sage.

9. Aposthumes or Ulcers.
In case the Sheep has any Mattering Aposthume or Ulcer, then you must prick
it with a Lance, and put into the Wound Salt burnt in a Fire-shovel, rubbed
small and mingled with melted Pitch.

10. Boils.
You may cure Boils with Alum, Sulphur, Vinegar, and Brimstone, mixed together;
or with burnt Gall-nuts, being mixed with Wine and laid upon the Sore.

11. Boils or Scabs under the Skin of Lambs.
The Lamb many times gets Scabs under the Chin, by eating of Herbs when the Dew
lies upon them; the Remedy against which is to take Hysop and Salt, of each an
ounce, well bruised together, and with this you must anoint the Palate of the
Mouth and Tongue; then wash the Boil with Vinegar, and afterward chafe it with
Tar and Grease.

12. Pursiness or short-winded.
The Rheum or Catarrhe of the Sheep, as well as of the Horse, sticks so fast to
the Lungs that it cannot be removed with Bleeding, nor with a Potion; and if
this Sickness continue, the best Remedy is, that the Sheep be kept without Food
for a day or two; likewise it is convenient that whatever Hay or Fodder has
been eaten among, the Sheep, while one that has been sick has been amongst
them, the Oughts thereof be taken clean away; for such Sheep get the same
sickness, by eating after them that are sick. Some say that for this sickness
it is good to hang about the Neck of the Sheep a living Toad, put in a little
bag of Linen; and to let it hang nine days: Others say that it is good to
bruise Lock and Noble Sage together, and make a Potion thereof with very strong
Vinegar: Others pour in their Mouths a spoonful of Brandy with Mithridate; but
there is but little help for this Distemper, for they often die after several
Medicines have been given to them; because the Lungs are quite dried up with a
continual Coughing: There is no better Remedy against this Distemper than for
to throw them upon their Backs in a stinking unclean Gutter.

13. Rot or Plague.
Against the Plague there is no other Remedy for Beast than for Man; but for to
keep them from this Distemper, the best way is, often to give them Melilot,
Scitisers, Wild Polly, or Wild Balsom.

But to prevent the Rot in those Sheep that are not tainted by that Infection,
you must give them Salt mingled with Brimstone in a Fire-shovel, which will
purge them and preserve them from this Contagion.

14. St. Anthony 's Fire.
The Fire of St. Anthony, is by the Shepherd called Wildfire, very difficult
to cure, and there is no other Remedy to use in this Distemper than to bathe
the Sheep with She-Goats-milk; but my Advice is to separate the first Sheep
that has this Distemper from the Flock, that the rest be not infected.

15. Scab or Itch.
Against Scabbiness or Scurveyness in Sheep, you must make a Salve of these
following Ingredients: Take Brimstone, Cyprus Roots, of each three ounces,
which you must incorporate with Camphire and White Rosin, Wax a convenient
quantity; after that you have anointed the scabby or scurvey Sheep, three
nights one after another, then wash it with Lie, Seawater, or Pickel, and the
Sheep will be well.

16. Diseases in the Lungs.
If your Sheep be distempered in the Lungs, you must give him Coltsfoot, Sage,
and Pursland, mixed with Metheglin, or a spoonful or two of Mithridate in White
Wine, or a head of Garlic mixed with Vinegar.

17. Cough.
Against the Cough, you must give the Sheep to drink in the morning out of a
little Horn, Oil of sweet Almonds, mixed with White Wine, being made lukewarm;
also let the Sheep eat the Herb Coltsfoot, if the Cough come in the spring;
but if it be in any other season, then you may give him some bruised Fenugrick,
with some Cummin-seed.

18. Swallowing of a Venomous Creature.
In case the Sheep swallow down an Horse-leech, or any other Venomous Creature,
you must pour into his Throat strong Vinegar warmed, or Oil.

19. Swelling of the Belly.
There is an Herb which is called a Thousand Buttons, and the Herb Centory is
very unwholesome for Sheep, whereof if they eat, the whole Belly swells up,
voiding a thick and stinking humor; then the best Remedy is to let them blood
presently under the Tail, near the Buttock, or on the Vein of the uppermost Lip.

20. Lame in the Claws.
In case the Sheep becomes Lame, because its Claws are grown weak, by having
stood too long in his own Dung, and that it cannot go, then you must cut off the
end of the Nail affected, or Claw of the Foot affected, and lay thereupon
unslacked Lime with a Cloth, leaving it but one day thereupon, and the next day
lay Spanish Green thereupon; laying it on by turns, until the Claw be healed.

21. Maggots, Lice, or Ticks.
The same Remedy is good also for a Sheep that has Maggots, Lice, or Ticks, as
for a Sheep that has the Scab or Itch, as you will find in the 15th Receipt
for Sheep.

22. Broken or Bruised Joints.
For Broken or Bruised Joints, give the Sheep a Drink made of Bettony, Mugwort,
and Multowes, of each a spoonful of the Juice, and anoint the Wound with black
Soap, or mix Bird-lime with Tallow, and lay a hot Plaster on the Wound.

The Country-mans Guide, containing the Direction for the Breed, Ordering, and
Curing of all Distempers in Swine.
1. Headache or Sleepy-evil. 2. The Pox in Swine. 3. Eating of Yarro. 4.
Diseases in the Eyes. 5. Ague or Fever. 6. Measles prevented. 7. Rheum or
Catarrhe. 8. To prevent Vomiting. 9. Measles Cured. 10. Plague, or Diseases in
the Milt. 11. Swelling in the Neck or Throat. 12. Aposthumes or Swellings in
the Throat. 13. Imposthumes in the Body. 14. Diseases in the Gall. 15. To kill
Lice or Ticks. 16. Thirst prevented. 17. To prevent Greediness. 18. For a great
Cough or Cold. 19. Belly-Ach. 20. Lameness in the Foot. 21. Flux in Swine. 22.
Broken Legs or Joints.
^e Country man's Guide showing the several places in the body of a Hog where
diseases usually happen


Introduction.
HAving before treated of the more Tamer sort of Cattle, I shall now likewise
treat of Swine, as being the most unruly, and the most hurtful in his kind, of
any common Beast; but nevertheless very much desired, because it yields sweet
Flesh, whilst they are young, and for his Bacon, when salted; as being the most
serviceable: and not to omit the advantage of the Hide, Bristles, and Grease.

Therefore it is requisite in all those places where there is a great number of
Swine kept, that there is a Man allowed for no other Employment then to keep
the Swine, and carefully to preserve them from danger that may befall them; or
that they may not injure the Cornfieldsd, in which they are kept, and to take
care of the weaned Piggs.

The Husbandman must take care for such Food that is convenient for Swine, as
Acrons, Nuts, Haws, and all such as the Swine usually eat. It Is good that you
provide entertainment against the Hogs come out of the Field, at the usual
time; for by so doing you shall make them return to their Owner without running
astray: which certainly you may do by a due providing of Meat for them at a set
time.

Marks of a good Bore.
The Bore is esteemed the best that is short and broad, his Mouth drawing
upwards and long, having a broad and thick Breast, broad Shoulders, short and
great Thighs, white of Color, and in a word the broadest and most four square,
and of a full Body, having thick Bristles on his Back, is the best Bore.

Marks of a good Sow.
The best Sows are such as are longest of Body, with a hanging Belly of broad
Buttocks and long Ribs, of a little Head and short Legs, white Hair.

The time of a Sow being covered.
Let not the Sow be covered before she is above one year old, and the Bore that
covers her must be three or four years old; but after the fifth year you must
geld him for to feed him for Brawn or Bacon. The best time to cover a Sow is,
from the Increase until the Full Moon; after the Full Moon it is not good. The
best time in the year is to let the Sow take the Bore at Candlemass, that the
Piggs may be strong in the Harvest time: The Winter Piggs are more hard to
bring up, and not so natural as the others that are Pigg'd in Summer. A Sow may
rear Eighteen Piggs if she has so many Paps.

The best time to Geld Pigs, and to Splay the Sow.
THe best time to geld, is when they are a Year old, and not older; when the
Moon is in the Decrease, in the beginning of Spring, or in the Fall of the
Leaf, when its moderate Weather* in case you cut them when they are little, I
confess that the Bacon will be the sweeter, but they will not make so large
Swine; therefore you may use your discretion to cut them from Four to Six
Month's, or to a Year.

To make a Hog Fat.
THe Hogs that you intend to Fatten for Bacon, ought always to be set up in a
particular Stye, and the darker the Stye is, the better, provided there be but
so much light as to see to give them meat; there needs not so much care of them
as other Swine; but that their Stye be made clean, and that they have food at
all times lying before them in their Troughs: They are not to be brought from
one place to another, though they have no Motion, and not able to move
themselves. Their is diverse manner of Food, according to the Custom of the
Country, yet the best and most substantial Feeding is of dry Pease and Beans,
though its common in many enclosed Countries to Feed a Swine exceeding full
with Whay, and many practice that way, only giving them a Bushel of Pease or
Beans to har^en the Fat. In some Countries they ^eed after other manner, which
for brevi^y sake I shall omit; knowing that the Ingenious Countryman knows
what way is best for is ends in that matter.

Sickness in Swine.
1. THey are also subject to many Distempers, and you may know that the Hog is
sick, when he lets hang his Ears, and that he is duller and heavier than he is
wont to be, having little or no Stomach to his Meat; but the certain way, if
none of these Symptoms appear, is to draw out of his back a handful of
Bristles against the growth of the Hair, and in case that the Root of the
Bristles be white and clean, then the Hog is sound and in good health: but if
that they are bloody, or spotted, then he his sick.

1. Headache, or Sleepy-Evil.
For the Headache or Sleepy-evil, you shall let the Swine blood under the
Tongue, and give him Lettice Leaves to eat, or give them Water wherein Stone
Cropel is steeped.

2. The Pox in Swine.
The Pox is cured by giving him Mithridate in Metheglin, or by drinking the
warm Blood of a Lamb; or give him Common Oil with Pepper.

3. Eating of Yarro.
In case the Swine has eaten mad Chervile, Millfoile, or Yarro, called in
Latin, Cheliophilon; then give him to drink a good quantity of Water wherein
Wild Cowcombers are boiled, leting it stand before you give it him till it is
but lukewarm; and that will vomit him.

4. Diseases in the Eyes.
Are Cured with the Juice of Bittany, or Horse Leeke, or the Blades of
Sallendine beaten in a Mortar, and laid upon the Eyes, mixed with Wine or the
Powder of Sepia blown into the eyes, or dry the Yolk of an Egg to powder, and
blow it into the Eyes.

5. Ague or Fever.
Against the Ague, let the Hog blood in the Tail.

6. Measles prevented.
The Hog is especially subject to Measles, it proceeds from Gluttony and
over-eating; now there is three especial signs of Measles, viz. If you bebehold
under his tongue small black Blisters, or that he cannot stand on his hinder
legs, or that his Bristles be bloody, as aforesaid; this distemper is prevented
by carefulness in the feeding, and that they go into the Field, in the open Air.

7. Rheum or Catarrhe.
Rheum or Catarrhe are cured by Bons Brimstone in a Fire-shovel, and letting
the smoke up the Nose, or rub the Swines Mouth with Garlic bruised with Salt
or bruised Laurel Leaves.

8. To prevent Vomiting.
You shall let him stand fasting, set up in some obscure place one day and
night, that he may consume the superfluous Moisture, and recover again to his
former Appetite: Some have prescribed Medicines, but the most experienced thing
this way is the best.

9. Measles Cured.
Let the Hogs that are Measled, oftentimes wallow in a Bath, in Seawater; and
for lack of Seawater let the Owner make a Bath of Water well boiled and
salted; and put it into a convenient place where the Hog may wallow therein;
and mingle with his meat bruised Garlic, and give him the Rhine of Grapes or
Goosberries, or give him Roles of Leaven with his Meat.

10. Plague or Disease in the Milt.
Swine are much inclined to the Plague and swelling of the Milt, which very
often seizes such unclean Bodies, because they eat foul and unclean Meats. The
best Cure for this Malady, is to give them Honey Combs, and whatever proceeds
from Bees.

11. Swelling of the Neck.
Against Rheum or Swellings in the Neck, the best Remedy is to let the Swine
blood under the Tongue.

12. Aposthume or Swelling in the Throat.
Against Aposthumes or Swelling of the Throat, mix the fine Flower of Wheat
with Salt, and rub the Sore therewith.

13. Imposthumes in the Body.
See the 12 Chap. of the Swine.

14. Diseases of the Gall.
The overflowing of the Gall, in many times a Disease that befalls Swine: the
best Remedy is to give them Saffron mixed with Metheglin, or Honey and White
Wine; let the Swine drink half a pint.

15. To kill Lice or Ticks.
Take Linseed Oil and Salt, mix them together, and rub the Swine all over
therewith, and it will free him from Vermin.

16. To prevent Thirst.
Swine are subject to a Thirst whereof some have died, which most frequently
happen in the Dog Days: the best that you can do for them, is to drive them to
some sweet River, where they may lie down and bathe themselves.

17. A great Cough or Cold.
The Cough in Swine is cured by giving them Coltsfoot and Lingwort boiled in
Metheglin, or take half a pound of Honey, and a quarter of a pound of
Liquorish, boil them in a gallon of Water till half be consumed, and let the
Swine drink it lukewarm, or give the Swine Gum Dragon and sweet Oil.

18. Belly-ach.
The Belly-ach is cured by giving the Swine Black Pepper boiled in Me^heglin,
or take three spoonfuls of Fennile-seed mixed with White Wine, and give it the
sick Swine, letting him swill.

19. Lameness.
If the Swine be Lame, so that it be ulcerated, then drop into Wine Turpentine
and Oil very hot, or take Honey and fresh Grease, and spread them on a Plaster
of Leather, and lay it on the Wound.

21. Flux.
For the Flux or Looseness in Swine, give them to drink Vinegar and Milk mixed
together, and give them to eat Gall Nuts pounded and mixed with Starch and Wine
Vinegar.

22. Broken Legs or Joints.
To cure Broken Legs or Joints, anoint the place with Sheep-suet, and bind up
the Broken Legs or Joints with Straw; or anoint it with the following
Ointment, sweet Butter, Oil, Turpentine, of each an ounce, mix them to an
Ointment.

An Alphabetical TABLE of the Diseases in Horses, and their Cure.
A
AGue of a Horse 15 Headache 17 Aposthumes 33 Toothache. 23 Ague 35
B
Belly-ach 38 Bloody Flux 43 Biting of the Spider Mouse. 47 Bruised Back 49
Back galled. 50 Biting of Flies 51 Broken Loins 51 Biting of a Mad Dog 58
Biting of a Water-snake 59
C.
Colts of what Color you will 9 Coldness or Chilness 18 Catarrhe 19 Canker 23
Cough 32 Chollick 37 Chaps in the Feet 49 Chaps between the Joints and Legs 56
D
Difference in Breeding Mares and Stone-Horses 6 Difficulty in making Water
E
Pain in the Eyes 21 Web in the Eyes 20 Watering Eyes 21 Pin in the Eyes 20
Wounded Eyes 22 Eye Scars 22
F
Fever 24 Faintness 34 Fundament fallen 41 Flux 42 Flies droven away 51
Fashions 46 Fistula's 60 Fidge 60 Hound-red 61
G
Glanders 19 Griping of the Guts 37
H
Overheated 35 Hen Dung swallowed 37
I
Jaundice 43
K
Knees swollen 55 Knees wounded 55 Knees overgrown 55 Kibe Heels 63
L
Lean Horse made Fat Disease in the Lungs 28 Looseness 42 Leprosy 56 Lame 63
M
To manage a Horse 4 Headstrong 4 When a Mare has a desire to go to Horse 8
Marks of a good Colt 11 Madness 11 Mad Love 18 Mangy 52 Mallender 57
N
Distemper in the Neck 27 Galled Neck 28 Crick in the Neck 28
O
Ordering of Horses 1 Overheated 1 Ordering a Mare that has a Fool 11
Obstructions 39 Opilations 39 Old Swellings 49 Over-growing of the Hooff 60
Over-stepping 64
P
Want of Pallat 24 Pricked in Shooing 61
R
Rheum 19 Running of the Nose 19 Rupture prevented 46 Rupture cured 47 Ring
Bone 59
S
Staggers 17 Swelling of the Throat 26 Squincy 26 Struma 27 Strangling 27
Stomach lost 36 Stoppage of Urine 44 Strangury 45 Swelling of the Cods 48
Swelling of the Flanks 41 Scabby 52 Sinew-struck 53 String-halt 57 Spavin 58
Sirachis
T
The time that a Mare may be covered 7, 8, 10
V
Ulcer 33 A Venomous Creature swallowed 36
U
A flying Worm 22 Waxen Kernils 27 Wind short 29 Worms 41 Woolfe 46 Warts on
the Feet 48 Woolfe or Boil on the Foot 63
Y
The Yalloes 43
Reader,
I Have only given you an Alphabetical Table of the Diseases in that part which
treats of Horses, and the other part which treats of Cows, Sheep, and Hogs,
has a complete Table foregoing the particular Medicines.

ERRATA.
PAge 16 line 10. r. much feeding, p. 31 l. 10 r. Aristolochia; p. 92 l. 4 r.
Barefoot; p. 101 l. 15 r. Popes, etc.


