A DISCOVERY OF THE REBELS.

LUKE 19. from v. 12. to 28. As for those mine enemies that would not that I
should reign over them, bring them and slay them before me.

By J. V. Prisoner.

Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1643.

A DISCOVERY OF THE REBELS.
LUKE 19. from v. 12. to 28. 12 He said therefore, A certain noble man went
into a far country, to receive for himself a Kingdom, and to return.

13 And he called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and said
unto them, Traffic till I come.

14 But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, we will
not have this man to reign over us.

15 And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the
Kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom he
had given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by
trading.

16 Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy pound has gained ten pounds.

17 And he said unto him, Well, thou good servant; because thou have been
faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities.

18 And the second came, saying, Lord, thy pound has gained five ponds.

19 And he said likewise to him, Be thou also over five cities.

20 And another came, saying, Lord, Behold here is thy pound which I have kept
laid up in a napkin:

21 For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man: thou take up that
thou layedst not down, and reapest that thou did not sow.

22 And he says unto him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou
wicked servant: Thou knew that I was an austere man, taking up that I laid
not down, and reaping that I did not sow:

23 Wherefore then gave not thou my money into the bank, that at my coming
I might have required mine own with usury?

24 And he said unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and give it
to him that has ten pounds.

25 And they said unto him, Lord, he has ten pounds.

26 For I said unto you, That unto every one which has, shall be given, and
from him that has not, even that he has shall be taken away from him.

27 But those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither and slay them before me.


Theologia symbolica non est argumentativa.
PArabolicall Divinity, as the school says, is not argumentative, yet from
the Aliquid.
scope of the parable, and from collation of other places, are deduced A
paribus, imparibus, similibus, etc.
forcible arguments, and in an explicate similitude, there is a verity both in
the (...).
proposition and reddition, though it be a feigned similitude, and because
parables leave a greater impression, therefore our Savior opens his mouth in
parables, in Matthew. 13. 1. etc. are seven parables touching the Kingdom of
God, and this parable wherein my Text falls concerns a King and his Subjects,
which is the great business now in hand; and therefore this Text is a word in
season; for the understanding whereof, I shall consider, First his birth, he
was of a Sir. (...) Arab. (...)
noble Family, as a King should be, so says Chron. 10.
Ecclesiastes, Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles,
by a lineall long succession, for he is a Father of the Country, and his
Subjects are to him as Children: The mystical sense is touching Christ, who is
King of kings, who thought it no robbery to be equal to God, yet took upon
him the form of a Servant, even of the worst of servants, for he was sold as a
slave, he (...), Philip. 2.
emptied all the Noble blood out of his veins, to teach the Nobles humility,
and that the same mind should be in us, 2 Phil. 6. 7. etc.
as was in the Lord Jesus, that nothing be done out of vain glory or
contention, but in lowliness of mind, to esteem others better then our
selves. Secondly, the Voyage of this King into a far Country: Kings have
occasions urgent to withdraw them from their Royal Cities of residence, and so
Christ; the King of Sion is gone to Heaven, from whence we expect our Savior
Christ. Thirdly, the end of his Voyage, Sir. (...) Arab. to recover it. (...)
to take to himself a Kingdom, and to return; to turn about his Kingdom to
himself, it seems his Subjects had rebelled, and he takes his journey to
reduce his straggling sheep to the fold, his Subjects to their due obedience,
so Christ Psalm. 110. 1.
sits on Gods right hand, and he must reign, till he have put down all his
enemies, and by him Prove. 8. 1 Cor. 15.
Kings reign; and as Christ is gone to lead captive the Psalm. 68.
rebellious, so it is warrantable for Kings Debellare superbos.
to subdue the proud, and then to return to the royal City again; and so
Christ the great Potentate, shall return at the day of Judgment; the signs
whereof in Heaven are, Matthew. 24.
the darkning of Sun, Moon and Stars; and on Earth, Luke 21.
affliction by sword and famine; perplexity of the people, raging like the
waves of the Sea; and desparation of men, their hearts (...).
failing them for fear of ensuing troubles: and are not these signs in our
days to teach us to watch and pray, that we may be counted worthy to escape,
and to stand before the Son of man? Fourthly, the Kings royal bounty to his
domestic servants and officers, he gives among them ten pounds, or ten Matthew.
25.
Talents, and it is the manner of Kings to recompense the service of his
domestic Servants above others, witness Sejanus the favorite; and in Israel,
diverse Princes saw the Kings face, and found favor above others; so Christ our
sovereign lord, disperseth his gifts liberally; and these are the Talents to
his servants: (...).
Let us then be wise and faithful stewards of the manifold grace of God,
Theophyl.
especially his Ministers, to give (...), Luke 12.
the portion of food in due season to the household of God; Blessed is that
servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing, he shall make him
ruler of all his substance. Sixthly, the employment of the Kings bounty, some
of them were faithful to their Lord and Master, and steadfast to him, to engage
their estates in the maintenance of his cause and one, that is, few of them
were covetous and Neutralists, that hid his money in a napkin, laid it up in
treasures, and would afford no help to His Majesty; so Christ has many idle
servants, that hide the gifts that he has given them. Seventhly, Arab. (...)
the rebellion of the Citizens of the Metropolitan City against the King;
first, they hated him, there is the root; secondly, they sent Messages of
contempt after he was gone from the City, Caetus urbis, a Common Council.
as Rebels usually do; thirdly, they protested against him, Sir. Arab. (...)
that they would not have this man reign over them, and they say This man, or
this fellow, in disgrace, as if he were no King of a long royal descent: The
causes seem to be three; first, the Kings absence, and far distance from his
royal City, whereby the Citizens were impoverished, by the decay of their
Trades; secondly, envy, because of his bounty to his Courtiers and daily
Ministers; thirdly, jealousy, or distrust in the King, because he preferred
not them, as well as others, less deserving in their opinion: so the City
Jerusalem hated Christ without a cause, and would not have him reign over
them, out of envy and causlesse jealousies. Eighthly, an exaction of account of
his domestic Servants and Officers, and as the manner of Kings is, rewards the
faithful and industrious in his service, and punishes the disloyal; after
the subduing of the Rebels, he makes one governor of ten Sir. (...)
fortified Cities, another over five, who had no rule at all before, a great
encouragement to his faithful servants, (in what low degree soever) that fear
God, and honor his sacred Majesty; so Christ the great King, at the great day,
will call every man to give an account of the Luk, 16. 1.
gifts bestowed on him, how they are improved. Ninthly, the legal process
against his daily Servants and Citizens; and this is contained in my Text,
wherein first, I shall speak of their persons, secondly their crimes, thirdly
their doom, bring them and slay them before me, amplified by modus patiendi,
manner of suffering, before me. 1. The Delinquents are of two sorts, Domestic
Servants, or Great Officers, that deny to assist their Master against the
Rebellion of the Citizens, but out of avarice, hide their money gotten in his
service, these like the wicked and slothful servants, lose their places and
goods, which are given to more deserving men; If a King have but one of these
evil Ministers, it were sufferable; but when many of these shall appear and
complain, that the King is a hard master, an oppressor, and exact our, to
reap where he had not sown, and to take more then his due; what King can
bear it? If they durst not appear in the Kings cause, for fear of the
rebellious Citizens, why did they not give his money to Luke 19.
the Exchangers? Why did they not give the Kings due to others for his
advantage? Let such temporizing servants know, that the King in his return,
after he has recovered and settled his Kingdom, will judge them out of their
own mouth; for if he were a hard master in the beginning of the Rebellion,
much more will he be to them of his own house, when he has chastised the
Rebels: the wrath of a King is as the roaring of a Lion; Be afraid then evil
servant, and by seasonable submission seek his grace and favor. David the
King was more grieved with Achitophels Rebellion, then all the rest* insomuch
as he cries out, Psalm. 55. 6. 7. etc.
Fearfulness and trembling has taken hold upon me, and horror has covered
me; the horror of sackcloth, instead of princely robes; He said, Oh that I
had the (...)
wing of a Dove to fly away; he had the quill of a Dove, wherewith he Abben
Ezra in locum.
wrote this book, and he wishes but one wing: for Idem Ab.
they that observe experiments, write, that a Dove wearyed, will fly with one
wing: and he adds, I would remove far away, Heb. (...).
wandering, not knowing whither; what is the cause of all this? the conspiracy
of Achitophel, Chald. Paraph. (...)
It was thou, O Achitophel, a man of my rank; he was a privy Counselor, the
Kings Cousin, and so in the Kings In eorum numero nosmet reputantes, Justinian.
rank, he was a guide to the King, and of the same Religion, for Psalm. 55.
they took sweet council together, and went into the house of God with a
pompous train. This was so heinous a crime, that the spirit of God, by the pen
of David, pronounces this fearful imprecation against him, Let death seize
upon him, and let him go down quick into Hell, for he has profaned his
covenant, and oath of Allegiance to his sacred Majesty, not that any private
man may use such direful imprecations; yet it shows how worthy of such
punishment, is a servant of the King that becomes a Traitor: so likewise in
Psalm. 41. David speaks against this Achitophel, who insulted over the King in
his affliction, saying, (...) Heb.
A thing of Beliall, that is, a devouring mischief cleaves to him; and now
that he is fallen from his honor, he shall never rise again: The man of his
peace, who did eat of his bread; for Achitophel was a Courtier, and had a
table in Court, and yet lift up his heel against his master, to affront him to
his face, Heb. (...) insidias struxit.
and lay in wait for him to take and destroy him; But his sacred Majesty gives
himself to prayer, saying, O Lord have mercy on me, raise me up, and I shall
recompense him; for though a private person may not avenge himself, yet a King
for the honor of God (whose anointed he is, whose Vicegerent he is on earth,
(...) Chrysostom, in Genes. in regimine homo est Dei Imago.
and his image representing the one Divisum imperium cum love Caesar habet.
celestial Monarch) ought to be avenged on Rebels, especially his domestic
servants and officers, that deal trecherously as Achitophel did, to apply it
mystically to Christ our King, he had also one domestic servant, that was a
Traitor and a Devil, who did eat Sic antiqui hunc locum exponunt.
of his bread, and lift up his heel against him, who was of the same rank and
profession, and (...). John 12.
the steward of his house, and this Traitor drew away many others of Christ's
Disciples after him, so that they were John 6.
scandalized, and walked no more with him; Let us beware of such treacherous
Hypocrisy, considering the woeful end of Judas.

The second sort of delinquents are his Citizens, his enemies that would not
have him to reign over them: But who are these?

First, such as will not give him the honor of a King, to be supreme over all
in all; for they say the King is an ordinance of man, and therefore may by man
be removed, their Sermons, Pamphlets, and Speeches are full of such and worse
invectives against supremacy. In 1 Pet. 2. 13. it is written, Be subject to
every (...), so Romans 8. (...), every creature. Grec.
humane Creature, in the Syrian, be subject (...) Sir.
to all the sons of men, and who are these sons of men? not all in
general, but in particular; The King as supreme: Therefore the King is the
highest of men, and yet but a humane creature, as it is in the Greek, not a
God, nor a creature Angelical; Then he next commands to be subject to Judges
that are sent by him, for the Senators of the Grand Sanhedrim are called by him
to consult De quibusdam arduis.
of difficult matters, and the King as supreme, reserves to himself Le Roy
S'auvisera.
a further advise; so the Emperor, of whom Saint Peter speaks, was supreme
above the Senate, and Moses (who was Deuteronomy. 33.
king in Jesurun) was above all the Captains of thousands, of hundreds, of
fiftyes, of tens; though the Abben Ezra in Exodus 18.
Captains had a thousand Ministers under him, as Abben Ezra expounds the place
in Exodus 18. 25. and in all hard matters there was an appeal to Moses the
King; and Saint Paul's appeal to Caesar was justified by Festus and Agrippa.
Acts 25.
And in Deuteronomy. 17. he says, If the matter be too hard for thee, thou shall go
to the place which the Lord shall choose, (where the high council sat) and
whosoever shall not hearken to the Priest, or Judge, shall dye, If they say,
that Moses was a Prophet, and the Priest had an infallible Urim: I answer, The
Judge is also named, who was no Prophet, but the King, for the Kings of Judah
judged the people, as David and Solomon. And Hezekiah, who was no Prophet, but
a King, not anointed, but by succession, was above the Grand Council of
Elders, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. he set Judges, he appointed the heads of the Fathers
of the high Sanhedrin, wherein the high Priest was for the matters of God and
the Church, and the ruler of the house of Judah, the Lord Chancellor was the
mouth of the King, touching the kings, and for the Law and Liberty of the
Subject, the Judges and heads of the Fathers, Lo here the three Estates in the
Grand Sanhedrin, The King, the Priests, the Elders which were the Heads and the
Commons. And is there not a kind of Monarchy in households from the very
beginning? was not Adam the greatest Monarch made Chrysostom. ^ Genes. 1.
in Gods Image to rule the whole World? Genes. 1. And therefore successively
are called the sons of God, Genes. 6. 1. as ruling under God, and kings are
called Exodus 22.
Gods,

Indeed, Nimrod began to be a mighty hunter upon earth, that is, a Tyrant, to
kill men like beasts, but Monarchy was from the beginning, and Lycurgus the
Lawgiver of the Lacedaemonians saw this, therefore he set up a Monarchy; for
about five hundred years, and touching that time Lacedaemon was the Queen of
Greece, but after they forsook his Government became a handmayd to all; and
when one asked Lycurgus why he did not erect a Democracy or popular State, he
answered, do thou (...). Plutarch. in Lycurgo.
first set up a popular Government in thine own house.

Before the Flood and after, in the purest times, was but one Ruler in a house,
who was also for the most part a Prophet (not always) as Genesis 23. (...) Heb.
(...)
Abraham was a Prince of God; so that he who does not honor the king as
supreme over all, would have no king reign over him; for Monarchy is of the
law of nature: and Inde Imperator unde and homo. Tertull.
he that made him a man, made him a king.

Secondly, such as will not pay custom and tribute royal, would have no king,
Romans 13. Sir. (...) of (...). statura.
for this cause you pay tribute, for they are the ministers of God, that
subsist by these very things, they are the royal revenue and livelihood, how
shall he live as a king, if he be robbed of his tribute? We read the manner,
or Heb. (...) Kimchi etc.
right of the kingdom, 1 Samuel 8. 11. and this was written in a book, that the
people might read the kings rights, 1. Sam. 10. and it was in the kings power
to make any man free from that tribute, etc. they were obliged, so Saul
promised to make his R. David. Ralbag.
Fathers house free in Israel, that should kill Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. and David
and Solomon took that as their right, in 1. Sam. 8. 11. Absalom had fifty men
to run before him, David made of Israel Captains of thousands and of fifties,
and Princes of his husbandry of his Vines, etc. 1 Chr. 27. 25. and 28. 1. (...)
R. David.
It is true, a king could not take away the body or ground of fields and
vineyards, but, in flagranti bello, in time of sudden and violent War, for
the food of his servants that went to battle, he might take the fruits for
that time; so he might in that extreme necessity take the Tenth of their
fruits and cattle, not the Tenth of men's estates, when nothing is to be found,
nor to maintain a civil but foreign War; for there is in most places
neither earing nor harvest, during an intestine War, witness the desolations
of Germany: Therefore they assume more then regal power that will exact the
Tenth part, or half so much to maintain an unnatural War, and of those
that have no profit by their Trades, nor increase of the Fields, so much as to
maintain their own Families with food and raiment. Besides this Tenth part
was according to the Laws of the kingdom, and with the peoples consent, for
the book was written for them by Samuel, to which they consented when the
first king was set over them, and said God save the King, so described to them;
but what shall we say when inferior to kings shall usurp above kings by force
to take away the tenth part of their estates, is not this extortion and robbery?

Thirdly, such as will not yield obedience Active and Passive to a King would
have no King; The Active is plainly enjoined in the fifth Commandment, Honor
thy Father, but the King is the Father of the Country, as Augustus was styled
by the Senate: And for Passive obedience, we have the general consent of
scripture and all sound antiquity till Knox his days, who in resisting the
regal power simbolizeth with the Jesuitical faction, preces and lachrymae,
prayers and tears says Ambrose were the Christians weapons against the
Barbarous Goths, whereby many of them were converted. Chrysostom writes to
Cyriacus, if the Empress scourge, imprison, saw me in sunder, slay me with the
sword, or drown me, I shall patiently suffer it. Ambrose Romans 13.
says, Rulers are no terror to good works; for good men suffer cheerfully.
Tertullian says, by humane fire the divine sect is not maintained: By
suffering, Christ and his Apostles published the Gospel; not by force of Arms,
as earthly Rulers Matthew. 12. He shall make no proclamation in the streets to
compel, the bruised reed shall he not break, so far is he from force, and
yet shall he bring victory to his truth. St. Peter says, Servants be obedient
to the perverse masters, yea to Idolaters, for this Passive obedience is
thank-worthy, when for ^ Pet. 3.
conscience to God, ye suffer, as Christ left you an example; if Servants, then
Subjects much more ought to suffer and not resist Princes, Nazianzen, and
Horat. Reges in ipsos, imperium est Iovis.
though Tyrants and Idolaters; for the fury of Julian was repressed by the
tears of Christians, therefore in Deuteronomy. 13. it is said, If thy brother, and
son of thy mother, thy son or daughter, the wife of thy bosom, or thy
friend whom thou love as thy own soul, shall secretly entise thee, saying,
Come let us serve other gods, Thou shall not pity him, Thou shall stone him
with stones; he speaks here of inferiors, not of superiors, much less of
Kings, that war should be levied against them, if they be Idolaters.

Fourthly, They that war or fight against the Lords Anointed, would have no
King reign over them, as Jeroboam 1 Kings 11.
servant of Solomon, who lift up his hand against the King, pretending the
liberty of the subject was infringed by the King, because he had built Millo,
which was a public place for the high Kimch.
Council to convene therein, and the King had turned it to his own use, and
had made up the breaches of the city of David, as if he meant to tyrannize, and
imprison them therein; but for all his pretenses, he was a Rebel, and Israel
(...)
rebelled with him, and all his successors were sons of Belial, in 1 Kings
12.
Ralbages judgment. 2 Samuel 24. R. Levi. Exaltavit. Kimch.
In Psalm. 105. it is said, Touch not mine anointed, that is, my magnified,
exalted servants, It is meant of Abraham, who was a mighty Prince, Genesis 23. and
of Isaac, who was more mighty then King Abimelech, Genesis 26. It cannot be meant
of a real nation, which none of the Kings of the house of David had R. David.
but the first, (except in case of division.) Besides, Cyrus is called Gods
anointed, and the King of Tire is the Ezech. 27.
anointed Cherub, by reason of their exaltation, and no otherwise. But there
are that fight against the King by words as well as deeds, so Balal son of
Zippor Joshua 24.
sought with Israel by the hiring of Balaam to curse them, for otherwise Kimch.
Judge. 11.
he fought not at all against them, as Jepthah says: But let those blasphemous
tongues know, A bird of the Air shall tell the matter, and that which has
wings shall carry the voice. Eccles 10. ult.
O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn the glory of the King into shame!
Psalm. 4.
Is it fit to say to Kings, Ye are wicked, or to Princes, ye are ungodly? Job.
34. Et Cyrill. in Johan. lib. 12.


Fifthly, Neutralists would have no King reign over them: first, because they
that are not with Christ are against him, so they that are not with the King
are against him, they that Revel. 3.
are neither hot nor cold, God will spew out of his mouth. Secondly,
Neutralists are in Scripture termed sons of Belial, that is, a (...) and (...)
unprofitable servants, that desert the cause of their King, 1 Samuel 10. There
followed Saul (the first King, though a Tyrant) a Band of men of Heb. (...)
valor, unity and wealth, whose heart God had Heb. (...)
smitten and humbled to yield obedience, but the sons of Belial were Neuters,
and despised him, saying, How shall this man save us? and brought him no
present, to aid him in the stablishment of his Kingdom: What shall we then
think of these that are so far from giving him of their own, that they rob
the King of his due, their conscience is feared with a hot iron, and harder
then the rock which Moses smote, and rivers ran in dry places. Thirdly, All
Israel and Judah with a perfect heart helped David to the Kingdom, there were
no Neutralists, 1 Chronicles. 12. ^. There came to David when he was shut up for
fear of Saul, twenty three men of valor, Commanders. Then of Gad eleven men,
whose faces were as the faces of Lions, and they were swifter then the Roes
upon the mountains, the least of them was captain of a hundred, and the
greatest over a thousand, and in 1 Chronicles. 12. 20. Multitudes came daily to the
King, till it was a great host, as the host of God. 1. Of the Tribe of Judah,
the Royal Tribe were Nobles, and Courtiers, 2. Of the Levits, Jehoiada was
ruler of the Aronits, all the Aronits, the true seed of Aaron, were for the
King, not the Ieroboamits, that is, the spurious Priests of the lowest of the
people. Thirdly, Councillors of War and of State, of the Tribe of Issachar,
that had understanding in the times, to know what Israel ought to do.
Fourthly, Merchant adventurers of the Tribe of Genesis 49. Rejoice, O Zebulun, in
thy going out, and Issachar in thy tents.
Zebulon. Fifthly, Lesser Merchants of oil and wine of the Tribe of Asher.
Sixthly, Artificers and Husbandmen of the Tribe of Kuben, etc. All these came
to the King, not to betrary him, but to help him, these suffered in the
maintenance of his Royal rights.

Fourthly, what shall I say more to draw all men from neutrality, I set before
you this day cursing and blessing, Judge. 5. Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel
of the Lord, in cursing curse the inhabitants thereof, because they went not to
the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord (...) Heb.
with the mighty: first, the help of the Lord was the help of Barak and
Deborah, who was the Judge or supreme Ruler in Israel; and, as the Kimchi etc.
Judge. 4.
Hebrews write, Barak was husband of Deborah, the wife of Lappidoth, or Barak,
for Barak and Lappidoth are the same sense in the Hebrew: (...) gubernatores.
Jerusalem was subdued long before by Joshua, and by Judah, Judge. 1.
Meroz is the Metropolis, the city Jerusalem, for none of Judah (who were
near) came to help the King in this battle. Now the Angel of the Lord, that
is, R. Isay.
Barak Gods messenger, or the Angel by the mouth of Deborah the prophetess,
three times curses (in the original) the inhabitants of Meroz for Neutrality,
because they came not as volunteers, Heb. (...)
of themselves without invitation. Secondly, To help the Lord, that is, the
Lords anointed, namely the Judge in those days, he does not say the Grand
Senate. Thirdly, (...)
With the mighty, for the King had in his army mighty men of valor; therefore
not out of fear, but misprision, they came not forth: Observe here a
difference, he curses Meroz, but not the other Tribes; he wonders at them: The
chief city he curses, but at the country he admireth, Out of Ephraim was the
root of them, Joshua and the rich men of Ephraim opposed Amalek, Politicians of
Benjamin were for the Judge, Lawgivers or Judges came from Machir, and Judge. 5.
from Zebulun they that handle the pen of the scribe, that is, Merchants or
Secretaries, or Clarks in offices. The King himself went before his army on
foot, But for the divisions of Ruben were great thoughts of heart, and great
impressions and searchings of heart, wise men wondered why Ruben was absent, and
did not help the Lord. Ruben was simple, Genesis 49.
unstable as water, and so his posterity, and such as seek popular applause, or
love the world, had rather with Ruben abide among sheepfolds, to hear the
bleatings of the flocks, then the Alarm of war. O Ruben, why have thou
divided thy self from thy brethren, and not assisted the King with the Royal
Tribe, Patriae quis exul, se quoque sugit. Horat, Judge. 5.
the Levits, the Merchants, the Scribes, the Rich? are thy sheep more dear to
thee then Christ's flock, and the sheep of the great shepherd? Why did our
brother Gilead abide over Jordan, parted by a River easily passable? and why
did Dan fly away, and abide in ships of the sea to save himself from civil
war by land? Why did Asher abide on the sea shore, and fortify himself
against the King in his breaches? Blessed be Zebulun and Napthali, the people
that jeoparded their lives for our Barak in the high places of the field, when
the Motu, lumine, influxu. The River Kishon swelled by influence of the stars
(as the Sea by the influence of the Moon) and swept them all away, when Israel
passed therein as in the Red sea. Ralbag.
stars in their courses fought against Sisera, and the Angels fought from
heaven. Blessed above women shall Jael the wise of Heber the Kenite be. Blessed
are all those who by word, or pen, or hand, have helped the King against the
Rebels: Nobles that are clothed in white linen, and ride on white asses, Judge.
5. shall celebrate their praises, Judges that sit in judgment shall magnify
them, for among weapons of war Laws are silent. All travelers in the high
paths shall speak, Glory to God on high, Judge. 5.
(for in civil war, the high ways ceased, and travelers passed through by
paths, Villages cease, and war is in the gates.) Lo the blessing of God and
all good men, high and low are upon the helpers of God and the King, therefore
ye sons of men, if ye would avoid the curse, and inherit the blessing, leave
Neutrality, and show your selves men for God and the King, especially you the
inhabitants of the Metropolitan city Meroz. Thus I have finished the literal
sense.

The mystical sense concerns the King of kings whom we must admit to reign
over us, to whom we must pay Tribute, in Matthew. 25.
releiving his members, to give honor to the King of kings Christ Jesus as
supreme, to yield obedience to his Commandments, and to abhor Neutrality,
to be zealous, and repent of Lukewarmnesse, to shake off the yoke of sin, and
to receive upon us the yoke of Christ. And thus much of the crimes laid to the
charge of these servants.

Now I come to their doom, Bring them, and slay them before me. The just
reward of a Traitor is death, as appears in the examples of Ioab and Shimei, 1
King. 2. Thou know what Joab the son of Zerviah did to me. Some say, in
Midras, Kimchi.
revealing his letters about Uriah, or rather in threatening to turn the hearts
of his people from him, saying, As the Lord lives, not one shall stay with
thee, yet for this David on his deathbed charge his son to bring his hoary
head with sorrow to the Grave: So likewise Shimei, who cursed David with a
bitter curse. If these were sons of death that threatened, and reviled the King;
how much more such as plot mischief against him, and do steal away, like
Absalom, the hearts of the kings subjects from him, Bring them and Arab. (...)
Sacrifice them, as a good and acceptable service to God.
slay them, and the modus patiendi, Before me, for the greater shame, and
example to others, that all Israel may hear and fear, and do no more so
wickedly: Let us fear the destruction from God and the king, and yield such
subjection as belongs unto them both, that we may fly from the wrath of the
king here, and the wrath of Jesus Christ (by whom kings reign) hereafter: To
whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for ever and
ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
THE GREAT ANTICHRIST.

2 TIMOTHY 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Know this, that in the last days shall come
perilous times, etc.

By J. V. Prisoner.

Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1643.

THE GREAT ANTICHRIST.
2 TIMOTHY 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1. Know this, that in the last days shall come
perilous times.

2. For men shall be lovers of their own selves; covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy.

3. Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good.

4. Traiterous, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God.

5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such
turn away.


IN the last days the Scripture foretells the coming and continuance of The
Antichrist, o (...), 1 Ioh. 2. 18.
the great Antichrist, the man of sin, whose members were many petite
Antichrists, that is, the forerunning heretics, for in them the (...) 2 Thessalonians.
2. 7.
mystery of iniquity wrought in Saint Paul's time, who said, Ye know what
withholdeth that he should he revaeled in his time, that is, the Roman (...)
Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
Ethnic Empire, which when it was removed, then came in that Antichrist. The
Persians succeeded the Chaldeans, the Grecians subdued the Persians, the Romans
followed the Grecians, and after the Roman Monarchy ceased in Augustulus, the
Hesperian Caesar, Revel. 8. Nauclerus,
the Star Absynthites that fell from Heaven, about the year 666. Magdeburg.
Centurists, Baronius, Annal. circa 666. An.
Constans the Emperor gave the government of the City of Rome to the Pope.
Then was Antichrist the bestia bicornis, the beast with two horns, his Revel.
13.
Ecclesiastical and Temporal power, whereas before he had only the
Spiritual power to be Universalis Papa, supreme over all; so then Antichrist
has continued above a thousand years, by consent of the foresaid writers; Yet
Andreas and Arethas upon the Cap. 11. 7.
Apocalypse, with other Fathers, seem to hold that Antichrist shall continue
but three years and a half, which is true in a sense, for his three last
years shall be most grievous to the persecuted Saints, such Dan. 12. 1, 2.
Revel. 11. 7, 8.
tribulation as never was, in mockings scourging, bonds, imprisonments, war,
bloodshed, and he shall not suffer their bodies to be buried. These are the
perilous times spoken of in this Text, therefore have I made so large a
preface to it, wherein observe; first, a precept to get knowledge, know this;
secondly, the subject, this in general, but in particular it is a prophecy of
the perils of the last times; thirdly, the adjunct, in the last days;
fourthly, the causes, 1. Opinions, 2ly. Vices of men here particularized.

1. For the first observe in general, Knowledge is a precious thing, Eccles.
12.
The preacher was wise, and still taught the people Knowledge; all men
naturally desire to know, knowledge of the Ancients is commended in Scripture;
David cites a Proverb of the Ancients, 1 Samuel 24. 13.
As says the Proverb of the Ancient, (...) David. Kimch.
of the first that made it, Wickedness shall go forth from the wicked; His
sin goes forth from him Kimchi in locum. R. Solomon, R. David. ibid.
willingly, and his punishment goes after it, his ruin comes from himself. S:
Paul thrice cites the Poets which were Syrian in Acts 17. (...) Arab. (...)
Prophets among the Heathen.

First, against Idolatry, Acts 17. (...) wise men.
We are his offspring, therefore the Godhead is not like the work of man's
hand that has neither reason, sense, or life.

Secondly, against Atheism denying the immorality of the Soul, 1 Cor. 15. Let
us eat and drink for tomorrow we shall dye, be not deceived, evil
communication corrupts good manners.

Thirdly, against Lying and Epicurisme, Titus 1. (...).
the Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellyes; Three main
articles are confirmed by humane learning, but there are in those days
ignorant sectaries that oppose all learning, pretending inspiration by the Holy
Ghost, as the Gnostikes of old, yet it was the commendation of Timothy, Epiphan.
that of a child he knew the Arab. (...) the holy books. (...) 2 Timothy 3. 15.
holy letters, But why should I trouble your ears with invectives against r
these? I leave them to meditate on three Proverbs, (...). 2 Pet. 2.
A wise man contending with a fool, whether be rage, or laugh, he has no
rest: A fool is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a
reason: Bray a fool in a mortar, and his foolishness will not depart from him.

2. I proceed to the subject, which is a prophecy of perilous times. This day
is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, animus meminisse horret, My heart
trembles at this, and is removed out of his place, but you must know it, and
therefore I must speak it, these are the perilous times or (...). Sir. (...)
Arab. (...) grievous times.
difficult, all men are in such straits that they know not how to deliver
themselves, as Israel between the red Sea and the Egyptians; secondly, hard
times, wherein men want food to eat, and raiment to put on, all men cry out, O
tempora, O mores, oh hard times, and evil conditions of men! We have heard of
Germany and Ireland, and would not believe, now we see and feel; thirdly,
cruel times, the Son dishonours his Father, the Father rises up against his
Son to put him to death, Brother robbs and kills his Brother. This Civil
War in the judgment of the Scelus fraternae necis. Remi in via Remoria Romae:
Horat. Surs and ipsa Roma viribus ruit.
Heathen is the punishment of rapine and fratricidy; fourthly, inexorable Te
saepe vocanti duram, difficilis mane Horat. id est, inexorabilis.
times, they are for War when we petition for Peace: woe to me that I dwell
with them that hate peace, and breath out slaughters, whose teeth are as
spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword, Lord deliver me from
those four generations of the last times, Prove. 30. 11. There is a generation
that curses his Father, and does not bless his Mother, do not the Martialists
of these times think it zeal to kill Father and Mother in this cause? There
is a generation pure in their own eyes, and not purged from their filthiness,
Who are these but the impure Hypocrites in my Text, There is a generation, How
lofty are their eyes, and their eyelids are lifted up? are not these the proud
Pharisees? There is a generation, their teeth are as swords that cry out,
War, War, and no Peace, that devour the poor and needy by rapine and
imprisonment, against reason and common rights.

I come now to the causes of these evil time, which are two: First, the
Opinions. Secondly, the Vices of men, here mentioned, not reduced to the head
of profaneness, but Hypocrisy? The Hypocrites reign, and the people are
ensnared, Job. 34. Antichrist is the great Hypocrite, Heretics and Sectaries
of these times are limbs of Antichrist, and make up Revel. 17. (...) est
confusio, a (...) Genes. 11. 9.
Babel the Great, which is the confusion of all sects.

First, for their opinions, it is said in my Text, They are lovers of
themselves, of their own wills and Sir. (...) Arab. (...)
opinions, for the time shall come, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4. 3. that men
will not endure sound doctrine; enquire out of these two Epistles, and the
Epistle to the Romans, and we shall find what sound doctrine is. First, the
doctrine of prayer for Kings, 1 Timothy 2. 1. I exhort first of all that prayers
be made for Kings, but certain Brownists of these times will not pray for the
King, but revile him in their prayers. Secondly, the doctrine against 1 Timothy 2.
12.
Women Preachers, I suffer not a Woman to teach, nor to usurp authority, but
says Isay, Isay 3. 12.
Women rule over you. Thirdly, the doctrine of obedience to 1 Timothy 6. 1.
superiors; but now Servants run away from their Masters without their
consent, and rise up against them in the public cause; do these induce sound
doctrine? Rom 1.
Fourthly, the doctrine of justification by faith, which Pelagians of old, and
the Papists now deny. Fifthly, sanctification, Romans 6. 1. which Gnostikes and
Nicolaitans formerly, now Familists and Antinomians deny. Sixthly, the doctrine
of predestination without foresight, Romans 9. 1. which Papists and Arminians
oppose. Seventhly, the doctrine of subjection to Kings, though they be Heathens
and Tyrants, which Epiphan.
Gnostikes of old, and now Anabaptists and Brownists oppose, they can live
without a King, though Saint Paul says, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be
subject, but these men think they have no souls, because they would have no
King in Israel, that they may do that which is right in their own eyes, Judges
21. ult. The Christians of Rome paid tribute and custom to Nero and Trajan
Tyrants, but these rob the King of his due, and yet they say pro Rege; they say
Kings of old were anointed, therefore the people was subject as to Gods
ordinance, but now it is not so: To which I answer R. David. Kimchi.
with the Jew, no King the son of a King was anointed, except in case of
division about the right, as Solomon when Adoniah would be King, but the
Kingdom came by succession, as every man's inheritance descends from his
fathers. Again they say, The Kings of Jury made no such covenant as our Kings
do; I answer with the same Jew, the contrary appears in the example of Ioash
and Iehoiada, who made a covenant between the King and the people, and though
Ioash were an Apostate and a Tyrant, yet the Traitors and murderers of the
King were cut off by his son that reigned after him* the King and Kings son
will never forget to punish Traitors, as appears in the example of David 1
King. 2. 8. Kimchi, Ra^i Ralbag.
on his death bed, who forgot not Shimeie's curse.

Moreover they say, a King is a humane creature, and therefore may be removed
by man: I answer, He is an ordinance humane, that is, taken out of Men, not
from Angels, yet by Gods appointment he is Supreme, (...), 1 Pet. 2. 13.
1 Pet. 2. 13. and all inferiors are appointed by him; but the supreme
powers, as Kings and Emperors are Sir. (...)
appointed of God, Roman. 13. 1. The Jews had a Grand Council of seventy one
Elders, Numb. 11. Gather to me seventy men of the Elders, and Moses who was
King was above them all, (...) Talmud Sanhed. Perek. 1. The lesser Sanhedrin
was of two hundred and thirty sometimes: they go not forth to war, nor gather
the Council of the Tribes, (...) but by the Grand Council of seventy one.
They judge not the King at all, (...) he goes not forth of his Palace to
mourn for the dead, etc. in Deuteronomy. 17. thou shall set a King over thee, the
King then is supreme; they ride not on his Horse, nor sit on his Throne to
rule, yet the book of the Law is with him when he goes to war, or sits in
judgment. There were three companies of Judges in Jerusalem, at the door of
the mount of the House, in the Court, and in a paved Chamber, where the Grand
Council sat of seventy, and the King, from whence was no appeal, Deuteronomy. 17.
Talmud Sanhed, Perek. 11. Lastly, the doctrine of indifferent things they
cannot endure, no Ceremonies, but their own inventions, yet the primitive
Christians, though differing in Ceremonies of meats and days, lived in mutual
charity, Romans 14. 1. 2. The use of this is already made by the blessed Apostle,
Romans 16. 17. I beseech you brethren mark them that cause divisions and (...).
Arab. (...) that is, Divisions to separate from the Church, of (...) to break
off.
scandalls (to make many stumble and fall) contrary to the sound doctrine ye
have received, and avoid them, for they serve not the Lord Jesus, (as they
pretend) but their own bellyes* what care they if they can eat and drink,
and fare deliciously every day, if flocks or herds of poor men's be driven
away, and they undone forever? and by fair words, they deceive the hearts of
the simple, not of the wise, who see plainly their hypocrisy, but like
Absalom, they steal away the hearts of the Kings well-minded Subjects by lies:
But I would have you, says Saint Paul, simple in evil, and wise in that which
is good, to hold fast the points of sound doctrine forenamed, and the God of
peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly; Chrysostom. Theod.
who is Satan? but he that will not endure sound doctrine, as is plain by the
coherence, who is all for War and blood? but the God of peace shall subdue
these Satan's, and bruise them to powder, and that shortly; this God of peace be
with you that hold fast the doctrine ye have received, and follow not such as
heap to themselves teachers like waves of the Sea, tossed with every wind of
doctrine, and they heap up 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. Sic Arab. (...) and Sir. Chrysostom.
(...) Ralbag. in 2 Samuel 20. 25.
to themselves, they have their peculiar teachers; one of Paul, another of
Apollo, of Cephas, etc. a great presumption in these men; David had Ira the
Jairite for his Priest, and Kings and Nobles have theirs, and now there must be
a parity, all the Vulgar sort must have their teachers, according to their own
lusts, and private humors having itching and restless ears, weary of hearing
the truth, and therefore they turn to fables, wherein they still itch after
novelties. This is the first cause of these perilous times* The opinions of
men. I come now to their vices.

4. Their selfwill in those ways, they are lovers of their (...) a (...) 2
Kings 10. 15. st vobis placuerit. Idem. R. David
own wills, Genesis 49. 5. like Simeon and Levi, they are brethren in evil,
instruments of cruelty are in their habitations, or their (...) a Graeco (...)
R. Solomo. Heb.
Swords are instruments of cruelty to shed blood under the cloak of Religion,
as Sectaries do; Into their secret council my soul come thou not, if my body
be forced and my goods, yet in (...)
their association my heart be thou not united, for in their wrath they killed
a man, one man of ten thousand, the Prince of the Land; and however this ONE be
yet alive by miracle, yet many noble Lords and Gentlemen have perished, and bin
taken, neither have these men rested here, but in their rage have dug down,
(not a Wall) but Walls of Cities, and fortified Towns; and not only Heb.
(...) Heb. (...) est murus and bos. R. David. R. Levi. R. Sol.
houghed Oxen, but slain them, and driven away Sheep and Oxen, robbing and
spoiling, and all this in their (...)
selfwill; these two brethren were dissuaded by the other ten, but they were
selfwilled, and would slay without pity; so I am persuaded there are ten for
two in this City and Kingdom for Peace, but when they speak thereof the two
are for War, for they are selfwilled, and delight in blood, a (...)
and in their delight dig down walls, and kill men and beasts, eradicate
men, their wives and children, and turn them out of doors, because they are
for peace, and these two* Simeon and Levi, will have no Accommodation. Cursed
(says the old Father) be their wrath, for it is fierce, and their fury bitter
in the end, and in Judge. 21. 3. Israel wept aloud and bitterly, Alas! a Tribe
is lost this day, and I am afraid without a speedy peace, not one of ten, but
all our twelve Tribes will be lost; I will (says the old Patriarch) divide
them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, Simeon had no portion, but Cities
scattered here and there R. David, Abben Ezra, Ralbag. in Genes. 49.
throughout the Tribe of Judah, and Levi had forty eight Cities out of the
other Tribes, that so they might never associate any more to shed blood; and
what can be expected of a selfwilled association and war, but dispersion; the
part that prevails will root out the other with a final As in Ireland.
extermination of familyes, and whether will ye fly ye Simeonites? and as
for Levi, alas! he is vanished already; thus much for Selfwill, which is the
first of the vices that cause such perilous times.

Secondly Covetousness, which is as all the rest here mentioned, a bosom sin
of the Hypocrites, when the Pharisees heard that Christ preached against the
service of Sir. ab (...) Confidit. Luke 16.
Mammon, and confidence in riches, they derided him, for they were covetous;
This love of money is the root of all evil, of the evil of sin, as Apostasy;
of the evil of punishment, as perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Love of money makes
children fight against parents, subjects against their Sovereign; hope of
money brings forth murders, rapine, and extortion, but thou, O man of God,
(...) Oecum. Plutarch. in Curio.
O Christian, fly these things; the Roman Curious refused the Samnites Gold,
and was content with a dinner of herbs, an earthen dish, and a wooden stool, 2 Timothy 6.
If we have food and raiment, let us be therewith content.

The third vice is Pride, whose daughter is vainglorious boasting, for their
pride I shall produc but one Parable against Luke 18. 9, 10.
those that trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and what pride is
like this pride, to magnify themselves, and despise others? they thank God
they are not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, nor as the poor Publican,
they boast as the Infidels, Jews, and Pharisees; the Publican went home
justified to his house rather then they: And Publicanes and Harlots shall enter
into the Kingdom of God before them.

Fourthly, Disobedience to Parents, and Blasphemy, these two I join together;
for reviling of superiors is blasphemy, whether you take Parents naturally,
(for against such they unnaturally fight) or politickly for Masters, against
whom Servants rise up at this time to kill them and Subjects against their
Sovereign, though like (...) pro and contra.
Antichrist, they pretend to be for Christ when they are against him; Augustus
Caesar was called Pater atque princeps Horat.
Father and Prince, and therefore they that are disobedient to their Kings, are
also to their Sir. (...)
Parents, or superiors, men set over them, Romans 13. 1. forecited, Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers, the supreme powers then were Emperors,
not Consuls and Senators, (as the States of Venice, Luca, Holland which were
then ceased, for there were seven heads of the Beast, or Revel. 17. 10, 11, 12.
Arab. (...) seven Kings of the earth. Julian. and August. lib. 5. de Civ. Dei.
seven kinds of government, whereof the two last were Emperors and Popes; the
five first were fallen, the sixth of Emperors was in Saint John's time, and in
Saint Paul's, and to this Saint Paul commands subjection, tribute, and custom,
except they say that Saint Paul prophesies in this chapter of a new government
to be erected, Chysost. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
which is not yet, and how it shall then concern the Romans let them show:
(...). Arab. (...)
For the last and seventh head or King of the Romans is the Papacy, to which I
think they will profess no subjection at all, if they have any conscience of
their oath; but it is objected, these Kings were Tyrants, therefore no duty
belongs to them; the answer is in Nebuchadnezzar, whom likewise they hold to be
a tyrant, yet Israel is commanded to serve him, Jerem. 27. 6. I have given all
these Countries to Nebuchadnezzar, and they shall serve him. And Zedekias,
because he broke his oath of subjection, was exoculated as a just recompense on
his own head. Ios. Antiq. lib. 18.
The Galileans stood for liberty with Judas, Acts 5. and denied tribute to
Caesar, and therefore Pilate mingled their blood with their sacrifice.

Fifthly, (...) Sir. sic Arab. (...)
these Hypocrites are unthankful, either they deny kindness which they have
received, or will not acknowledge it, or not requite it, they are the worst of
all men that have enjoyed the Gospel of peace and plenty above eighty years,
as long as ever Israel enjoyed in Moses days, Judge. 3. 30.
Ehuds, David's, and Solomon's, and yet are unthankful, murmurers at their
portion, complainers of the times, Oh foolish people, and Deuteronomy. 32.
unwise, ask thy Fathers and they shall teach thee; thy Elders, and they shall
declare unto thee the wonderful Reformation in this Nation, the slavish
Invasion by Water, the Hellish Gunpowdertreason by Fire, and how God has
brought thee through fire and water, (wherein thou could not live) into a
moist place, wherein thou have lived so many years in plenty, but Jesurun has
waxed fat and kicked, and for ingratitude is justly with a Civil War
consumed.

Sixthly, Unholy, or (...) Sir. a (...) vexare, 1 Samuel 14. and David Kimchi in
Psalm. 1. 1.
unquiet, and restless are the Hypocrites, they are all for War, and accuse
Petitioners for Peace of a Carilinarian conspiracy; it is God that (...) Sir. a
(...) vexare, 1 Samuel 14. and David Kimchi in Psalm. 1. 1.
creates peace, man cannot do it; it is as hard a work as the Creation, Our
Isay. 57. 3. and ult. Rudis indigestaque moies.
Land is without form and void, darkness is on the face of the deep, nothing
is but confusion in our Church and State, it is the spirit of the Lord that
moves on the face of these dark waters, saying, Let there be light, and there
was light, this light that God creates is peace; secondly, this peace is a
fruit, a fruit of the spirit, Love, Joy, Galath. 5.
and Peace, but whence comes Iam. 4. 1, 2.
war and fightings? from the spirit of malice and envy; thirdly, it is said a
fruit of the lips of the messengers of peace. How beautiful on the mountains
are the feet of those into whose lips grace and peace is poured; Psalm. 45.
fourthly, Heb. (...) Isay 57. 19. Kimchi. Rasi Chaldey.
God creates a double peace, Peace, peace national and personal, which cannot
be without truth, but there are restless men, whose sins torment their
conscience, and love no peace; the Text says, They are Cum He^ indicativ (...)
Kimchi.
the wicked, emphatically remarkable wicked men, these Hypocrites revile others
as wicked, when themselves are by the spirit of God styled the most wicked,
that disturb the National peace, and trouble our Israel by killing and
stealing; They are like the troubled Sea that cannot rest, Raging waves of the
Sea, foming out their own shame, whose waters rage continually, and cast up
mire and dirt into the Royal face, both by word and writing. Woe to these
Sectaries of Cain, who loved blood and slew his brother, and was called (...),
Basil.
the first Disciple of the Devil; Abel was a Shepherd and a man of peace, and
he slew him, John 1. 3.
because his works were righteous; These covetous hypocrites run greedily after
the error of Balaam, who would have cursed and defied Israel for reward, and
they shall perish in the gainsaying of Core, who rose up and rebelled against
Moses the Deuteronomy. 33.
King, and against Aharon, who was the Priest of the Lord, so these endure
neither God, the King, or any Ministers, but of the lowest of the people. To
conclude with Isay 57. ult.
Isay, There is no peace says my God with the wicked; these wicked will have
no peace; for then all is lost, which they have spent in war; their restless
disposition appears in all the ensuing particulars; they are
Covenant-breakers, Falseaccusers, Traitors, heady, high minded, etc. of each
word, and so an end.

Seventhly, Theoph.
they are Covenant-breakers, they have made a covenant with the King, and taken
the oath of Allegiance, but this oath they regard not, they have their Pope to
dispense with it: Chald. (...)
Achitophel made a Covenant with David, but broke his Covenant, and therefore
is accursed in Psalm. 55. 21. He has profaned his Covenant* Zedechias rebelled
against Nebuchadnezzar the King, (who was a Tyrant also, as they say) when he
had made him swear by God, and hardened his neck, so that the wrath of God came
upon them, and there was no healing, 2 Chronicles. 36. 12. King Solomon charge all
Subjects to obey the Kings commandment, and that in respect of the oath of
God, Eccles. 8. 2, 3. but these urge the Kings oath, legibus quas vulgus
elegerit, but themselves keep no oath. Besides, these men make Covenants with
the Subjects of the King, and the same day like Fides non servanda haereticis.
Jesuits break the same, their Jesuiticall faction, like Antichristians,
dispenses with the oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and their subscription
was forced, and therefore they revolt: Deus bone! is there any Religion in
these? no Heathen story is able to parallel their sophistication. In 2 Samuel
23. 1. there was a Famine three years for Saul and his bloody house, because
he slew the Gibeonites the reason was, because of the oath of the Rulers
(though R. David.
taken out of error,) Jos. 9. 14. and 19.
to avoid Ra^oag. R. Isay.
the scandal of the Nations, and the seeming, not real profanation of the
name of God; but these Hypocrites are Truce Breakers, and hold it lawful so to
do.

Eighthly, they are without natural affection, witness their zeal in killing
and spoiling of Fathers, Sons, Brethren, Sisters, Kindred, etc. but of this
before.

Ninthly, they are false-accusers, in Greek (...) Sir.
Psalm. 120. 1, 2.
Devils, in Syrian Hypocritical mockers at feasts, that like the Devil their
father, tell lies for morsells, (...)
Psalm. 35. 15. In my affliction they rejoiced, the abjects, viler then the
earth, they rent me with their teeth, and ceased not, they print, preach,
speak lies against the Lords anointed (as David was) every day. 2 Kings 10.
15, 16. and 28. 29. 30.
Lord deliver him from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.

Tenthly, Chrysostom.
Incontinent, what shall I say of their incontinency, both in the concupiscible
and irascible, no penalty is now inflicted, and it is a shame to speak of the
things done of them in secret.

Eleventhly, these Hypocrites are fierce: Let Jehu speak for them all, Come,
see my zeal, says he to Jonadab, he killed the King and Queen, and seventy
sons of the royal Progeny, all his kindred, and Priests, Heb. (...)
and destroyed Baal out of Israel; he would have no peace, What peace as long
as the whordomes of thy mother Jezebel, and her witchcrafts are so many, his
Zeal was all for truth, (as he said) so the Sectaryes and others are all for
truth, and no peace while Jezebel lives, their driving is like the driving of
Jehu the son of Nimshi, for they drivefuriously, or madly, but when by war
and blood they have obtained peace, Austin. Ierom.
I wish they set not up a worse Idol, then they have put down, as Iehu their
father did, Baal was Mars the planet, Ralbag, or Jupiter Belus, which Iehu
destroyed, and set up the The Calf was Serapis the Egyptian God, and there
they learned Idolatry, Vitulus ex vacca fulmine icta, genitus, quae rursus non
parit, (...), a god worthy of the Egyptians says Cambyses in Herodot.
Calves, a far worse Idol, and made the common people Priests; so I wish
that these set not up, as they begin, the meanest of the people, and drive out
the sons of Levi as Iehu did.

Twelfthly, they are haters of good, that is, moderate men, who are not carried
with their turbulent zeal, by which many a good Ionadab is deceived, and their
hatred is irreconciliable to eradication of their familyes, expulsion of their
wives and children, and banishment from Country and friends, because they
cannot endure to see them, or hear of them, and this to a political creature
is worse then death, in Joel 2. what have you to do with me, O Tire and
Sydon, who have taken my silver and gold, and brought them to your palaces, and
the children of Judah ye have sold to the Grecians to remove them far from
their border: and do not these haters of good men send their brethren far
away from their houses, lands, and friends, that they may seize on their
inheritance; But thus says the Lord to you Cains, behold I will raise them
from the place whither you have sent them, and return your recompense on your
own heads, and I will sell your sons and your daughters to the sons of
Judah, and they shall send them to the Sabeans, to a nation afar off, for
Jehovah has spoken it.

Thirteenth, they are (...).
Traitors, fathers betraying children, and children betraying Proles lupi.
Tigridisquesilvas petat, Feras and inter quaerat assinem sibi.
fathers to the death, the offspring of the Wolf and Tiger, and the wild
beasts their kindred, breaking the bonds of society between man and man, and
delivering men up to Magistrates and Rulers, for a word, and that in secret,
our Savior prophesyed of these Traitors, Luke 21. 16. Your fathers, and
brethren, and kinsmen, and friends, shall betray you to death: do we not see
this in these days of Civil war, a father will not spare his child, a child
will kill his father in battle, and if he cannot so kill him, he will betray
him to death, by discovering his secrets, or by false accusation, under
pretense of justice; But the greatest Travtours are such as fight against the
King, and they pretend all this is for the King, Principem occisum loqui malum
fuisse, vel tyrannum dicere est. Tragicus. O dictu scelus summus dominio, major
exemplo fuit. Pax descendit, assimilis Iovi Aurato in ulnas imbri.
though his own person have been in imminent danger more then once: these are
they that call darkness light, and light darkness, evil good, and good
evil, the use of this is made by Isay the Prophet, say not a confederacy to
whom this people shall say a confederacy, neither fear their fear, but fear
Isay 8. ^^
God, and meddle not with Traitors that curse their God and their King, and
look upward, for as it follows, they are proud and heady, and their counsels
shall be carried headlong.

Fourteenth, these Hypocrites are hasty in all their consultations, without
deliberation they pretended Reformation must be done in a day, not considering
the diverse gradations of a Reformation; Josiahs wonderful Reformation was of
the continuance of three hundred years, the reigns of Asa, Iosaphat,
Iehoiada, Iotham, Hezekiah, Manasseth, Josiah, and then also was Festina lent.
but fainedly, and not with the whole heart, and for punishment of Delinquents
they are too hasty; have they never read of Ier. 3. 10. Zephan. 1.
David what he said of the sons of Zerviah, Ye are too hard for me? he
would, but could not punish these two great Delinquents, except he had involved
his whole Kingdom in a Civil war, as is now done; lastly, they are too
hasty in their hostility; have they not read that Israel Judges 20.
Habak. 1. 16.
lost forty thousand in two days in a Civil war through too much
hastiness, and precipitancy, not consulting with the Lord? and surely in this
respect, these men have cause rather of mourning then rejoicing.

Fifteenth, these are lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God; whence come
these wars and fightings, James 4. 1.
do they not from their lusts and pleasures that war in their members? their
pride, ambition, popularity, avarice, for hereby their portion (who were
beggarly) is made fat, (...) Dan. 11.
and their meat pleasant, they live by war, therefore they barn incense to
their net, and sacrifice to their dragge. They cry nothing but war and blood,
dig they cannot, and to beg they are ashamed, therefore they resolve to
kill, steal, rob, rifle, or do any villainy to satisfy their lusts, which
they love more then God.

Sixteenth, They have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, they
have a (...).
portraiture, picture or delineation of godliness, but no life at all therein;
Consider the particulars, they Matthew. 6. 1.
give alms, but it is to be seen of men, they make long prayers, but to be
heard of men, they fast, but (...).
disgrace their faces, appearing as sad when they are not: what is this but a
picture of godliness without life? it was never known from the beginning of
the world, that a dead beast was offered in sacrifice to God, but the
Hypocrites present dead sacrifices to God. Again, in their Sabbaths is a show
of godliness, but no life, for they say, Amos 8.
When will the Sabbaths be gone? and like the Pharisees their viperous
progenitors, abuse the letter of the Sabbath against doing good; they sit John
9. etc. Matthew. 12. 1. Luke 13. Matthew. 23. 1, 3.
in Moses chair to teach, and to judge others according to the Law, but do
the contrary, and break all Laws; they make long prayers to devour Widows
houses, (...) Rasi. R. David.
they enlarge their phylacteryes of the hand and head, there is the letter, but
no power; their heads are full of mischievous devices, and their hands are full
of blood, They 2 Timothy 3. 7.
are ever hearing and learning, there is the shadow, but are never able to come
to the knowledge of the truth; there is no power, except it be over silly women,
as the Apostle here says, These Hypocrites 2 Timothy 3. 6.
intrude into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sins, and led
about with diverse lusts. This time is a plain interpretation of this
Prophecy. Another power they have got likewise, by the show of godliness, it
is against the King, like Janis and Jambres, the two Sorcerers of Egypt; that
resisted Moses who was Deuteronomy. 33. ^. (...) Ralbag. Abben Ezra.
King in Jesurun: These sorcerers were Hypocrites, for their miracles were but
glisterings, and delusions of the eyes; The use of all this is,

First, our Savior says, Luke 12. 1, 2.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy. Hereby we are
most like the Devil, who transformes himself into an Angel of light, and
hereby we become limbs of Antichrist, the first borne of the Devil, who is
the great Hypocrite, Revel. 13.
That has two horns like a Lamb, but speaks like a Dragon.

The second use, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
From such Hypocrites turn away, so says Saint Paul, avoid their society, for
they are selfopinionated, selfwilled, greedy of money, proud, unnatural,
truce breakers, fals-accusers, traitors, heady, fierce, unthankful, Procus
populi.
popular, unquiet, haters of all moderate men, lovers of lusts and pleasures,
and deceiving the world by a form of godliness, so that they believe
Rebellion to be Zeal, and Treason to be Religion; Depart from me, ye
Hypocrites, ye bloudthirsty men. The Lord give us grace to depart from them
here, lest we have Matthew. 12. 51.
our part with these Hypocrites hereafter in the lowest Dungeon of Gehenna,
from which good Lord deliver us by Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and
holy Spirit, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

