Public Sorrovv A Remedy for ENGLANDS MALADY.

Being an Explanation of the fourteenth verse of the first Chapter of the
Prophet Joel.

By Ellis Weycoe, M. A.

Weep for your selves, Luke 23.28. Be Afflicted, and Mourn, and Weep, let
your Laughter be turned into Mourning, and your Joy into Heaviness, James 4.9.
Blessed are they that Mourn, for they shall be Comforted, Matthew. 5.4.
GATESHEAD. Printed by Stephen Bulkley, 1657.

To his very much beloved Friends and Neighbors, the Inhabitants of the Town
of Bridlington, and the Key; and to all the Parishioners thereunto belonging,
Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God the Father, etc.
Christian and endeared Friends,
Upon that Edict of the first of January 1655. prohibiting Sequestered and
Ejected Ministers from Pulpit, and all other employments (though I verily
believe, that his Highness and Council chiefly aimed at the muzling of the
Mouths of such turbulent Spirits, and Martial Ministers, as are no sooner
claspt in their Pulpits, but presently Proclaym War, in stead of Preaching
Peace; Sedition, in stead of Obedience; and Confusion in stead of Order;
without the least intent of prejudice to such as were quiet and peaceable in
Israel; and not hearing as yet of any limitation) being (amongst many others)
by force thereof, not only disused from officiating in Public, but likewise
debarred of all ways and means, through which, by my costly Education, I might
have procured some reasonable competency for my self, and the many depending
wholly upon me; I have had leisure enough to bewail both mine own and others
miseries. And after not a few melancholy Cogitations, finding my self an
Achan, a great troubler of this poor Church and People; and seeing mine, as
much (if not far more) then others sins to be the only cause of all our woes;
I set my self to find out some Remedy for distressed Englands Malady: Hereupon
I sometimes Mournfully, yet willingly, sat down by the Banks of Babylon,
there making Sorrow my Souls Solace, finding indeed no greater joy in my
heaviness, then in Sorrow for sin: Sometimes I walked abroad into the pleasant
Meadows, green Fields, and fresh Pastures of holy Scriptures, there to seek
and sinde some sour Herbs, and of the tartest relish, and some Flowers of
the darkest hew, and strongest scent, that their sad complexion might best
please the weeping Eyes of a pensive Heart, and their bitter smell might best
affect the distasted Pallat of a sin sick-sorrowfull Soul. Of both which
sorts, I found the Psalms, Ezekiel, Hosea, Joel, Nehomiah, and the Lamentaions
of Jeremy well stored, and thick Planted; and gathering some of them, such as I
thought for my purpose. I then took a turn into the delightsome Gardens of
holy Writ, to seek out some sweet flowers of comfort; and finding plenty, I
cropped some few, to mix with the other, that the ones sweetness, might
something alay the others tartness. And though thus full furnished, yet
distrusting my own Skill and Judgment in so great a Cure of such a dangerous
and deadly Disease; I went to View the Receipts of far more Able, Wise, and
Learned spiritual Physicians, and from them extracted the best directions;
which together, with my own weak Meditations, I mixed with all the other
Ingredients; and having first washed them well in the waters of Marah, have of
all these severals or simples, made up such a Compound, as I hope will be a
good Preservative against the Infectious poison of sin, and a good Salve for
Englands present Sore. And upon some thoughts, that if this Medicine were good
for my self, it might, by Gods blessing, be comfortable to others also:
Considering also, that a Book perhaps may speak, when an Author may not; not
harboring the least thoughts of Vainglory, or Popular Applause; I resolved
with my self to make my Meditations Public, like our Sorrows. And not knowing
how to do it any other way, I took this occasion of manifesting my dearest
affections, and best wishes, to you, amongst whom I had my first Breathing, and
have lived so long, as that none, better then your selves, are able to give
evidence both of my former conversation, and present condition. It may be
(mean and plain as it is) it may conduce to the benefit of many; but my
principal intent in it, was the zeal I have to your Souls, the salvation of
which, I shall ever most heartily pray for. Accept therefore I beseech you of
these my poor Endeavors, and make use of this Physic I have prepared for you:
But give me leave to give you some Directions in the taking of it; You must
Chew it, Swallow it, and Digest it, not throwing it up so soon as you have
received it, for then it will do you no good; but if you can keep it in the
Stomach of your Souls, you will find it to be such a Violent Purge, and working
Vomit, as will force you to Cast or Spue up all the Poison of Sin. If you think
it be toe much to swallowow all at once, you may divide it, at you please, into
several Potions; yet, I think, the whole will be but three easy Mornings
Draughts for your Souls; however, leave it not in the half, though you take
longer time to Drink and Digest it all, and then I doubt not, but as it bath
been to me, so it may be to you that takes it, somewhat useful and helpful;
And if any of you find ease, or get help by this Public Sorrow, the only
Physic for a sin burdened Soul; then Praise God, and Pray for,

The unworthy Servant of the Lord, Ellis Weycoe.

To the Sin-sick Reader.
Mat. 9 12.
THey that be whole, says our Savior, need not a Physician, but they that are
sick. This Physic I have here prepared for thee, is made up of bitter
Potions, and sour Druggs; which, taken according to the Direction in the
Epistle Dedicatory, will Purge corrupt Humors, scour away the filthiness of
sin, and bring health and happiness to thy sin-sick soul. The several
Ingredients, at the first, I intermixed and framed into this Compound, only
for my own use, and have had from them the Operation I desired; namely, they
have made many irksome hours the less tedious to me, and much heaviness to
sit a great deal the lighter upon me: It was far from my thoughts ever to
trouble the too much oppressed Press, I am so conscious of my own weakness,
as I cannot but blush in secret, that ever I was prevailed with to make my
self thus open. I know not how my scribled Papers chanced to come to the view
of some Persons of Judgment, by whom I have been not entreated only, but very
much importuned also, to make this Treatise like the title of it, Public. They
set upon me with some Arguments which I could not gainsay; truth is, they have
overcome me, and made me at last (though most unwillingly) willing to expose my
self to the Interpretation of this Censorious Age. Good Reader, my Public
Sorrow has long laid hid by me in the womb of obscurity, but is now after
nine Months delivered to the Light; if it prove fruitful or useful to thee
or any other it will be an ample compensation to my poor Labors. That great
and good Physician of our Souls, Christ Jesus bless it to thee, is the humble
request of his, and in him,

Thy Servant, Ellis Weycoe.

The Contents.
HOw the Church of England ever observed Fasts, and Holy Days, Fol. 3. The
Prince or Governor, may appoint a Fast, Fol. 3. Princes or Governors are to
be Obeyed in their Commands, Fol. 3. Four Cautions to be observed in keeping a
Fast, Fol. 4. How to keep every day holy day, Fol. 4. God is never angry but
for sin, Fol. 6. Sin is the cause of all misery, Fol. 7. 8. 9. 10. Mourners
marked, and thereby preserved, Fol. 12. Souls sorrow, Fol. 16. Better to deal
with God by Tears then Words, Fol. 17. The Antiquity of Fasting, Fol. 20.
Four Rules to be observed in Fasting, Fol. 22. Who must give to the Poor, how
much, in what manner, and to whom they must give, Fol. 28. Christ's School, a
School for all sorts, Fol. 31. The Kingdom of Christ admits of no distinction,
Fol. 36. The best place of Refuge to fly unto in time of war, or any
Calamity, Fol. 39. Five Rules to be observed in Gods public wor^^i^ and
service, Fol. 44. Three Rules that sit us for a right behavior in Gods House,
Fol. 46. Three Rules to bind us to the good-behaviour; before we come to
Hear, at the time of Hearing, and after we have Heard the Word, Fol. 47. Our
Hearing of the Word must be accompanied with four concurring Circumstances,
Fol. 54. Prayer the Art of Arts that adornes a Christian, Fol. 56. Godly sorrow
and affliction, the best remedy in any sorrow and affliction, Fol. 59. The
greatest affliction which should touch our Hearts, is the Churches affliction,
Fol. 66. We must never make an end of Mourning, till God make an end of
Afflicting, Fol. 71. 72. No distress whatsoever can hinder Gods people from
praying, Fol. 78. The Knowledge of Gods power and mercy, is the only cause of
bringing Christians into his presence, and of moving them to call upon him in
their miseries. Fol. 83. Men can never truly seek God by Prayer, till they
know, understand, and apply his Name, Fol. 83. 84. We must not only Pray, but
Cry, Fol. 94. Good Suitors always good Speeders, Fol. 44. 95. Three Rules to
be observed if we expect help from God in distress, Fol. 96. 97.
Joel 1. Chap. 14. Verse. Sanctify a Fast, call a solemn Assembly, gather the
Elders, and all the Inhabitants of the Land into the House of the Lord your
God, and cry unto the Lord.


THe wisest Preacher of a mortal Man, and of immortal memory that ever was,
or shall be inspired with the spirit of God, says, That there is a time to
Weep as well as to Laugh, a time to Mourn as well as to Dance: And surely,
seeing every Man and Woman under their own Vines and Figtrees, have a long time
satiated themselves with Laughing and Dancing, or making merry with their
Friends; doubtless now, these sad and cloudy times are the times that call for
Weeping and Mourning, for Baldness and girding with sackcloth, For has not
God shot diverse of his Arrows, and have not some Bullers fallen from his
Warning pieces? which Arrows and Bullets, poisoned with the Pestilence, have
not many years ago hit and slain some People, not only in and about out
Mother Cities, but elsewhere in the spacious Countries. Who perceives not how
the destroying Angel has of late unsheathed his Sword, and brandished it over
us of this Nation of England? Who knows not, how in respect of those unhappy
differences amongst us, War thundered in our trembling Countries lap, the Sword
devoured the Grace of England, and became drunk with the Blood of Natives;
Rovel. 6.4.
The red Horse, with him that sat thereon, to whom was given power to take
Peace from the Earth, and a great Sword, still prancing and trampling in our
streets, both at Noonday and at Midnight? Now though the sinful Sons and
Daughters of men have and still do lie nevertheless sleeping in their
sensualities, yet, the vigilant Watchmen of our English Israel, our late Royal
Kings in their several Reigns and Governments, observing Gods begun
Jadgements, and further threatened Punishments, usually Proclaimed Easts in the
times of common calamity. And his Highness, (under whose protection and
government we now live) has set a part many days of Humiliation, appointing
us a place of refuge, or sacred Sanctuary to fly unto, Prove. 18.10.
that strong Tower, that right Arc, or little Zoar, unto which the righteous
run, and are preserved, even unto the House of the Lord our God, carried
thither with the feet of Prayer; there, with all fervency, to Pray for the
preventing and diverting of Gods further furious hand against us, crying unto
the Lord to spare this Land, to spare this People, to spare us from the Sword,
to spare us from the Famine, and from all his sore Judgments which our sins
most justly have deserved; for which purpose the Trumpet has been often blown
in this our Sion, the Fast Proclaimed and the Assembly gathered, according to
this of Joel, Sanctify a Fast, call a solemn Assembly, gather the Elders, and
all the Inhabitants of the Land into the House of the Lord your God, and cry
unto the Lord.

This Fountain might divide it self into several Streams; but waving
unnecessary Fractions, I shall confine my Discourse to these two Heads: 1. A
duty enjoined, Sactifie a Fast. 2. A method, or order prescribed for the
solemn performance of it, Call a solemn Assembly, gather the Elders, etc.


Duty enjoined.
1. The duty enjoined, A duty no less necessary then seasonable, For, as St.
Augustine observes, Before the fall there needed but one glorifying of God,
that was, by giving of thanks; But now since the fall, by reason of our many
backslidings, there must be also, Sacrificium tribulati cordis, the Sacrifice
of a troubled Spirit, for the mortifying of this flesh of ours, which by being
too much pamperd by us, has been so rebellious against God.

I shall pass by the first, the duty enjoined, or Fast proclaimed; my
meditations intending to fix upon nothing but that which shall afford sit
matter for mourning, though the Proclamation it self being always occasioned
either upon begun Judgments, or threatened Punishments, might give just cause
to hoise up sail in a Sea of sorrows, but delighting only in that
heartbreaking, and yet well pleasing pensiveness; and therefore hastening to
that Ocean o^ sorrow in the exit, or end of the verse, sighing, sobbing,
crying; I will but salute the Fast enjoined, and stay but a while to bewail
these miserable times into which we are fallen, which being the last, must
needs be the worst, wherein so many are carried away with the several blasts
of vain Doctrine, from Gods true Religion, to these follies and fancies,
whereby they do not only wound Christ's mystieall Body, but also dismember it
in the Commonweal, making so many Factions as there are Functions in the
Church, so many fancies as men, and as many opinions as fancies; and to that
height of impiety some are arrived, as that being Christ's Freemen, they ought
not to be subject to any, but are set free by Christ from the observation of
Fasts or Feasts appointed by the Prince or Governor, and not submitting to the
Government under which they live, will hold fast their liberty purchased by
Christ, though the appointment of them by the Governor be only for the
assembly of Gods people, and that upon special occasions, for the exercises of
the Word and Prayer, without placing the worship of God, or any force of
Religion in the observation of them, or without any opinion of holiness, in
those days, more then other days. And thus the Church of England did ever
observe Holidays, Fasts, or Feasts, and no otherwise; and yet did not fore go
their liberty purchased by Christ. I might give way to my Discourse in this,
and enlarge it to a Volume, but I had rather mourn for this kind of people (the
only troublers of our English Israel) then meddle with them: But to you that
are peaceable in Israel, willingly submitting your selves to the Government
under which God has placed you, and that for Conscience sake; know you, that
it is lawful for the Dominator or Governor to appoint a Fast, or day of
Hamillation, and you are bound to obey.

For the lawfulness of their Edicts, I need not stand at all upon it; it has
ever been used by Princes of all Ages, for which I might produce clouds of
witnesses, but search you the Scriptures, and trace all the Kings.

For our obedience to their commands, know, that we are bound to obey them in
their absolute commands so far forth as they are warranted by the Word of God:
And for this, let that praecept of St. Paul serve for all; Romans 13.1. 1 Pet.
2.13.14.
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers; and if every soul, then no
man is free. And again, Submit your selves to all manner of Ordinance of man,
for the Lord sake, whother it be unto the King, as unto the Superior; or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent of him: So that people that obey not the
wholesome Laws of the Magistrate, sin greatly; and if any refuse to be ordered
by them, Romans 13.2
they resist the Ordinance of God, and are specially threatened, that they shall
receive to themselves damnation.

And thus have I showed you, That Princes, or Governors may in the time of
War, or other Judgment, enjoyne us a Fast, and Proclaim a solemn assembly,
to the end we may testify our Humiliation, and better attend on the exercises
of the Word and Prayer, and that we are to obey them; but withal, in keeping
of a Fast, let these cautions be observed.

1. That our Fasting be void of superstition, and that we place no worship of
God in it, but hold it only as an help to further us in the duties of Religion.

2. That we have no opinion of merit by it, that thereby we merit forgiveness
of sins, increase of grace, or the like.

3. That we hold it not of absolute necessity.

4. Lastly, That it be without, breach of the rule of charity, either hurting
our selves, or making us thereby unfit for good duties, or giving offense to
others, such as are weak in knowledge, causing them to call our Christian
liberty into question; rather Informing them, that the Magistrate has power to
enjoin, and we are bound to obey, who by his Authority does not take away the
use of the things we abstain from, but only orders and moderates the same.

The like may be said for Feasts, days of Thanksgiving, or holy days; but I
pass them: only I could wish, That every one of you would keep every day a
Christian Feast, even every day holy day, which you may do, by purposing every
day to avoid all and every sin, and by setting your selves every hour of the
day in the sight of God, and walking, as before him, carefully and
conscionably, in all good duties; and so doing you shall keep a good
Conscience, and that the wife man tells us, Prev. 15, 15.
is a continual feast, even every day holy day.

And now being fully resolved. That the King or Governor may Lawfully enjoin
us a Public Fast in the time of extremity, or any common calamity whereby we
may testify our Humiliation with out the least opinion of meriting
forgiveness of our sins (the causes of all our miseries) and that he may
Proclaim a solemn assembly; and that we are to obey, not with any opinion of
holiness in the time; but that the appointed day is for the assembly and holy
convocation of Gods people, for the exercise of the Word and Prayer. Let us all
then, as at all times, so especially upon these days of Humiliation set a
part, turn unto the Lord our God, with fasting, weeping, and mourning, and cry
unto the Lord to spare this Nation, and command his destroying Angel to sheath
his Sword, and cease from punishing, that there may be no more complaining, no
more leading into captivity. Let us implore Gods gracious power, to withdraw
his angry moved hand against us; and let us beg of the God of mercy, to stay
his further dreadful vengeance, and threatened punishments, from any further
displaying horror throughout all our Nation. And for that purpose* Let us run
to our place of refuge, the House of the Lord, upon the feet of Prayer, and
there cry unto the Lord to spare this Land, to spare this People, to spare, us
from the Sword, etc.

The occa^ion, or cause of the fast.
The next is, the occasion, or cause of this Fast, and that, if you please to
look into the verses foregoing the Text, you will find to be a great Plague of
Famine for the space of no less thou four years; Ver. 20.11.12.13.
Their field wasted, the^^ (...) mourning, their corn destroyed, their vines
dried up, their oil (...) their harvest perished, all the trees of the field
withered, and joy withered away from the Sons of Men So that just cause had
they to lament, and howl, and lie in sackc^o^h and ashes; nay, in dust and
ashes. But should I prosecute my weak apprehensions in this, I should but draw
the Treatise beyond a just extent: Let it suffice, That their Land was russeted
with a bloodlesse Famine, a dreary punishment, Heavens curse, and the engine of
destruction; which does bring terror to mortals, death to all things; and
therefore good cause had they, to call a solemn assembly, to sanctify a Fast,
to gather the Elders, and all the Inhabitants of the Land into the house of the
Lord their God, and there cry unto the Lord.

And as theirs was Famine; so, the cause of our solemn assemblies, or days of
Humiliation (for some years bypast) has been War, and the worst of Wars, a
civil War, our Land unnaturally embroyled in her own blood, and not long ago,
could have presented you even in the midst of her own bowels, with whole
heaps of slain: This Land of England, that for many Ages continued the happiest
Nation on the habitable Earth, under the gracious our Government of many famous
Princes; and we of our times cannot deny, but we have enjoyed the highest
blessings that either Heaven could give, or the Earth receive, the fruition of
the Gospel, which then settled a firm Peace, and which Peace occasioned a full
plenty to us, a then thriving, and I think, a well-contented people; insomuch,
that this Land then became the Earths Paradise, and the Worlds Wonder, or
rather, Envy; Now alas! the Nurcery of all Sects, and of late years, the Stage
of Blood, the Theater of War, having had her Peace violated, her Plenty
wasted, and her People discontented; and though now (thanks be to God) we hear
not the rattling of Drums the clashing of Armor, the neighing of Horses, the
sounding of Trumpets, the thundering of Guns, or the roaring of Cannons; yet it
is to be feared, the Lord is still up in Arms against us, his hand is
stretched out still; else, what means these reports of Wars vast slaughters,
and murders on the Seas? our Merchants and Traders spoiled their Goods
Plundered, their Ships burnt, sunk, or taken; and themselves in their own
defense, either flain, or carried away Captives: So that all this little while,
or few years we seemed to enjoy a Pe^ce, every man again satiating himself
under his own vine and firtree, was so far from a true Peace with God; as that
rather, it forms it was but a Truce for a time, (God expecting our amendment)
which being expired, and we still continuing in our sins, the Lord is again up
in Arms for further revenge against us. And what is the reason that the Lord is
still thus incensed against this Land, and people of England? Surely it is
against the nature of God to be continually chiding, and scourging, and
whipping, and wounding; for the Lord our God has no other Bowels, then the
Bowels of compassion; no other Riches, then the riches of his mercy; nay, the
unlimited extent of Gods gracious mercy and goodness, is beyond all imaginable
proportions. How coms then his favors to be turned into frowns, his mercies
into displeasures? Why? Surely if you will but trace the Seriptures, you shall
never find God angry, but for fin; nor grievously angry, but for grievous fin;
so that the fins of this Nation must needs be mounting, towering fins, sins of
the highest elevation; and its the height of our sins that has always brought
down the weight of his judgments upon us; and the eart ropes of our sins, have
hurried down his vengeance: So that if we will but reflect upon our selves, we
shall find within our selves the cause of all our sufferings, Plagues,
punishments, and Woes; our sins being the occasion of all our evils, and the
cause of all our miseries, undermining our souls, and drawing destruction after
them, and of all things else most hurtful unto us. St. Paul confirms this,
saying, 1 Cor. 11.30.
For this cause many are weak and sick amongst you, and many sleep. And this
was the reason, why the Disciples questioned their Master, saying, John 9.2.
Quis peccavit? Who did sin, this man, or his Parents? Celidonius was born
blind, and our Savior Christ going out of the Temple, seeking to shun those
stones which they intended to throw at him; he cast his eye upon this poor
blind man: for the eye of divine pity is ever fixed upon poverty; and it is
the privilege of humane misery, to have the eye of divine pity to look down
upon it, and to favor the same; so that he healed him at once both in body and
soul: The History is no less large, then pleasing; you may read it at your
leisures. Now the Disciples having whispered amongst themselves touching this
man's misfortune (well knowing that sin what the occasion of all evil) they
asked our Savior, Quis peccavit? what sin and? wherein they went wisely to
work, in attributing punishment in the general to sin. One treating of those
tears which our Savior shed at Lazarus his death says, That he did not
bewail his Burial, for he know how happy he was in being out of the World;
but the occasion, sin; He thought upon Adams Apple, that had been the cause
of so much hurt; and this was it that made him to weep; and this his weeping
was, as if he should have said, What a deal of sorrow has this one act of
disobedience in him brought upon all Mankind, and consequently upon me, who
must bear the burden of his, and their offense: O sin, how dear will thou cost
both men, and me! Trace but the Scripture, and you shall not find any one thing
so often repeated there as, That sin is the cause of our miseries. How often
does the word of God paint out the foulness, and grievousnesse of sin, and the
hurt that coms thereby? making fin the very center of all possible infelicity
and misfortune that can befall a man. Sin was it that made our Savior, a Man
full of sorrow, when he took upon him the Person of an Offender, turning the
most favorable countenance of the most pitiful Father, into frowns and
florce displeasure against his only begotten, and dearly beloved Son,
discharging upon him the tempest of his wrath, and made him, of all other men,
the most miserable. So that we may conclude, Sin to be the cause of all our
harm, and that all possible ill that can be imagined, is to be reduced unto it,
as to its Center. Make a muster of all the enemies of man, as Death, the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and not any one of them; nay, not all of them
together, have the least power to hurt us, without sin; And therefore in our
Lords Prayer silencing all other our enemies; only we beg of God, that he
would free us from sin. But deliver us from evil; which, although some do
understand it to be spoken of the Devil; yet (as St. Aug. says) He can but
bark, he cannot bite, only Sin is able to do both. And Anselme says, That
he had rather fry without sin in the flames of Hell, then with sin enjoy
Heaven. He might well say so in regard of Hell; for although that one drop of
the water of Paradise might be sufficient to quench the slames of Hell; yet
shall it not be able to wash away the foulness of sin. The Prophet desired of
God, 1 Kings 19.4.
that he might dye under the Juniper tree, and yet he would not be rid of his
life by Jezabel, in regard of the sin that tyraunicall Queen should have
committed; (...) that, even in his mortal enemy, so great an ill seems
intolerable to him. And though sin be so great an evil; yet to this so great
an hurt, may be added another that is far greater; and that is, Obstinacy in
sin, never to be cured. Job painting out this evil, says. That the sinner
takes pleasure therein, and that it seems sweet unto him; it is as pellets
of sugar under his tongue; he first delights in the company of sin; then he
marries himself unto sin, and leaves her not, till death them depart. Thus sin
creeps into the heart by steps and degrees, till at last, it sinks him down
to the bottom of Hell: But woe is pronovnced to that sinful Nation, to that
people that are laden with iniquity; Isay 5.18.
Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cord of vanity, and sin, as with cart
ropes. For God is a severe punishe^ of sin and his wrath fails not to come and
seize on those that so^^ pillows underneath their sins. Ephesians. 5.6
So St. Paul, Let no man deceive y^^ with vain words, for, for such things
comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Was it not sin that
brought the curs^ upon Adam, and all his Posterity? his Apple proves his
poyson^ 1 Samuel 23, 28.
Saul for his disobedience, was turned out of his Kingdom. What (...) the ruin
and destruction of Countres, and Cities, but the sins (...) the People? 2 Samuel
24, 15.
David's sins, and his Pride, was the death of seventy thousand in an instant;
there the people perishes for the sin of the Prince. I could tell you of a
Prince that perished for the sins of the people, whose like was no King before
him, neither after him arose there any like him: You may find him your selves.
2 King. 23 25, 26.
Like unto him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the
Law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him Notwithstanding the
Lord turned not from the fierceness of his wrath, wherewith he was angry
against Judah etc. 2 Kings 22, 2.
Josiah a good King, one, whose like was not before him; Josiah who did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord; yet Josiah must be slain. Thus you
see when iniquity has played her part, vengeance will leap upon the stage.
What was the reason why Gods hand was stretched over this Land, why the Sword
devoured, and the people perished; but the sins of the Nation? And was there
ever more sinning, or ever less remorse for sin? What is this world but the
region of sin, a Sea of filthinesie; and whilst men are bewitched with the
delight thereof, how, like Swine do they wallow in the filthy mire and puddle
of their sins? It may be their bodies are curiously decked, and shining; but
alas they have nasty and abominable souls. Is not our Land still full of
Achans, looking upon the Wedge of Gold, Ios. 7, 21.
or Babylonish Garment? How is the beauty of Bathsheba able to entice the
greatest number? Gehazi will still post after Naaman for rich presents; 2 Samuel
11, 12.
but the leprosy follows him close at his heels, vengeance attends him near.
Was there ever more Drinking, Swearing, Stealing, Lying, Envying etc. and since
our sins thus cry for vengeance, what wonder is it that the Lord is still up in
arms against us? O then put away your swinish drunkenness, your profane
swearing, your brutish fleshlinesse, your devilish lying and deceiving, your
hellish covetousness, your savage eruelty, and all your other notorieties; and
frame the whole course of your lives according to the rules of Temperance,
Chastity, Truth, Righteousness, and holiness; and so though our souls be yet
all staind with sinue, they may in time become cleerer and whiter then snow.
Let as all, with a spiritual eye, behold the things of the world separate from
their seeming beauty, and so we shall not be bewitched therewith. Let us
consider Gold and Silver, not as glistring and shining, but as dross and dung;
yea, as poisonous, through a curse incorporated herewith-all, if our hearts be
insected with the love thereof, or by any unlawful means we do seek after it;
Let us consider the beauty of the fairest woman, as vanity; or as a piece of
painted clay; or as a stale set for the taking of silly fools: And lastly, Let
us consider all other pleasing things, as Drinking, Banqueting, Gaming, Playing
etc. as the very stinging of a Scorpion, which gives incredible delight for
the present, but is by and by turned into tormenting and deadly pangs, till the
man thus stung, perishes. And therefore since sin is thus hurtful, let it
be as hateful unto us, and let us hereafter strive as resolutely against sin,
as we have formerly served cheerfully under it. Let us hate all sins, of all
suits, and keep our selves from all spot of sin; 1 These. 5, 22.
And with St. Paul, Abstain from all appearance of evil. Jude, ver. 23.
And with Jude, Hate the very garment spotted with the flesh. In a word, Let us
avoid all sins, and have nothing to do with these filthy inmates, that are
daily plotting and contriving to set the whole tenement on fire, and are good
for nothing, but to bring rottenness into our bones and bowels. And let us not
defer to turn from sin, nor delay till the Morning, but take warning by the
foolish Virgins, for to morrow (for ought we know) may be the midnight of
Christ's call, when if we be found wallowing in the mire of our sins, and
stinking puddles of our iniquities, how can we hope or expect to be taken as
associates to so glorious a Bridegroom? And thus having found the cause of our
sufferings to be in our selves, let us lament for our sins, that have brought
upon us a burden so heavy, the only way to re-infavour us again with our
justly offended God: And for that purpose, I shall endeavor my self to the
utmost of my skill, to clothe every one of you with a livery of sorrow, which
is the next in the Text, the assembly called must be solemn; Call an assembly.

First part of the method, or order.
Jerusalem the largest map of misery that ever eye beheld, having been often
threatened, often battered, and her visitation growing nearer and greater then
before; Salem being to become a tributary City, Lam. 1.4.
Jerusalem a solitary widow, the ways of Sion to mourn, her streets to be
empty, her gates desolate, her feasts unfrequented, her Priests to sigh, and
her Virgins to be afflicted, she her self the object of this sight, and
subject of this sorrow, Lam. 1.2.
to weep day and night, and the tears to run down her cheeks continually, her
plagues growing mighty, because her sins were waxen many; many committing them,
few mourning for them. Ezekiel. 9.2.5.6.
The Lord now sends six to destroy this City, commanding them to spare none,
nor take no pity, but to destroy young and old, Maids, Children, and Women;
yet to touch none that had the Mark: and what this mark is, you may see in
the fourth verse, Sighing, sobbing, crying for the abominations, weeping and
mourning for the wickedness that is committed: there you shall find a public
Notary sent to take the list of mourners, their sorrow is their safety their
lamentation the cause of their preservation; for, for our comforts, mercy has
her lodgings taken up in every Town, in every City, in every Country; be Gods
judgments never so great, mercy cannot, mercy will not be excluded; the Saints
are always privileged men, they have special in munities, an Arc a Goshen,
a Zoar, a City of Refuge shall be ever prepared. Mat. 5. to the 12.
The meek, the merciful, the Peacemaker, the persecuted the poor in spirit,
the pure in heart, and those that hunger annd thirst for righteousness, all
these shall be blessed; and not only these, but mourners shall have a part.
Psalm. 125.5.
The godly may sow in tears but shall reap in joy; thousands shall fall before
them, and ten thousands at their right hand, but the plague shall not come nigh
them.

Our English Sion (while those unhappy differences, and woeful divisions
continued amongst us) was like Jerusalem, the very map of misery; the Sword
devoured, the people perished, our sons butcherd, our young men slain, our
Goods plunderd, our Lands sequestered, and our bodies Catived; our plagues then
grew mighty, because our sins were waxen many; the most committing them, few
mourning for them: and it is still to be feared, though we have thus sinned,
and have thus been punished, that there was never more sinning, nor never less
remorse for sin; and if again the Lord should still be incensed, and up in
arms against us; what strength were there in us (who are but stubble) to stand
before such a consuming Fire: And therefore to prevent Gods further revenge,
and threatened punishments, since you have seen in Ezekiel, that tears are the
preservatives of the living (for not a sigh is sent out, but is heard in
Heaven, not a tear but is kept nor a groan, but it coms before God) let us
sigh and cry for all the abominations of the times let us weep for the sins of
the Nation, let us lament for out sins, the cause of all our sufferings, and
we; let sorrow now cloth us, and mourning cloud us; let our Foreheads be
marked with a downright solemn mourning; the Assembly called must be solemn,
Call a solemn Assembly.

The word solemn, which is as much as serious, sad, and heavy, me thinks may
well contain furniture for the times of mourning, and having never more cause,
I wish I might robe you with the garment of heaviness: The Text Proclaims a
solemn assembly, and wills you to mourn for the sins of the Land; the word
solemn, me thinks, wills us all to lay aside our wanton, superfluous, and
supercilious sales of Pride, and put on sables, mourning habiliments, I mean,
heavy, sad, and solemn countenances outwardly, to testify our sorrow inwardly;
because the Lord has turned his favors into frowns; He that formerly clothed
us with Beauty, did again cloth us with Leprosy; He that formerly clothed us
with Health and Happiness, did again, in stead of a Garment, give us a Rent,
and plagued us with the Sword, and other deadly poisonous, and Infectious
Diseases.

Will you look a little into the rifling of a Wardrobe in Isaiah, the Inventory
you will find taken in the third chapter, from the 18. ver. to the end of the
23. The bravery of their ornaments, and chains, and bracelets, and mufflers,
and bonnets, and tablets, and earerings, and rings, and ornaments of the legs;
and changeable sults of apparel, and mantles, and wimples, and crisping pins,
and glasses, and boods, etc. But the destruction of all this Foeminine
Furniture, you shall find in the next verses, from the 24. to the end. It shall
come to pass that in stead of a sweet smell, there shall be a stink; in stead
of a girdle, a rent: in stead of well set hair, baldness; and in stead of a
stomacher, a girding with sackcloth; and burning in stead of beauty. The gates
shall lament and mourn.

The story shows what our state was (God grant we have not cause again to
say, is) for, so we sinned, so we were plagued; and, me thinks, should be
sufficient to stir up all the powers, and passions of sorrow in every one of
us; this, me thinks, should be sufficient to set open those ci^terns of our
souls, that rivers of tears may flow from our heartbreaking, yet well-pleasing
pensiveness; for the nature of grief does utterly exile all objects of
pleasure; and when true sorrow sits her down in a stupid, and a stupendous
manner, and calls for Heaven above to weep with her, the Earth beneath to
lament, the Rocks to cleave, the Mountains to Echo forth groans, and the
Rivers to run with tears of grief, the Israelites did not more loath, then
such sorrow as this does delight to sit down on the banks of Babylon; her
Music is Lachrymae, or Doloroso; she is as Rachel in her hard labor, she no
sooner conceives, but is delivered; and no sooner delivered, but conceives
again; her throbs and throws almost divide her soul from her self, but that
her solace being in division, that which kills others, keeps her alive;
emptiness in the bowels, blackness on the back, round about spectacles of
misery, all circumstances to make sorrow greater then her self. Surely our
cause was, and is great, sin being the cause of our misery, Let then our
tears be many; let us put on the garments of lamentation; let mourning be the
mark of our Foreheads; let our hearts be heavy, our bodies faint, our looks
sad, and our countenance solemn; and especially upon our Fast days, or days
of Humiliation; let us all go mourning to the House of the Lord our God, with
garments rent, and with sackcloth clothed; Let the Bride go forth of her
chamber; Let the Priests weep between the Porch and the Altar; Nay, howl ye
poor Firr-trees, and let the House of David mourn; and let all the Inhabitants
of the land mourn, and weep, and lament; and let our lamentation be as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo: And let the land bewail
every Family apart; Let weeping be in all the ends of our Nation, and
complaining in the streess of every City; Town, and Country, crying in the
chambers of every house, Woe, and alas, Woe unto us that we have sinned. Nay,
let all the Orders and Companies of every several holy convocation throughout
this Land of England, from the Ruler to the Subject, from the Priest to the
People, from the Honorable Counselor to him that draws Water, from the Men
of gray years to the young Child and Suckling, all plentifully water their
Cheeks with Tears. Let sighs be their ordinary Language to our offended God,
and cry unto the Lord to spare us from the Sword etc. Our occasion is just, our
cause is good, for our sins are great, and our God is incensed, and therefore
solemnity expects it, Call a solemn Assembly.

Obj. But perhaps some will say, What needs all this ado? what needs this sad
behavior, or solemn Assembly? Does not God sea the heart? and if our bearts
can but bleed in sorrow for sin, What need our eyes weep, our tongues lament,
our countenances be sad, or our whole behavior solemn?

Ans. The reason is, (though I might give you several, yet being in have, take
this one for all, as the maine) Because the Lord our God, is Lord as well of
Body, as of Soul; and as well of Soul, as of Body: And therefore in
performing any service unto him, he expects-both in his Service and Worship, as
in Prayer, our Knees must be bended to him, in sign of our humility; our Eyes,
our Hands, our Hearts, and all must be listed up unto him, in sign of our
confidence. So in lamenting our sins. Let our Eyes weep, our Breasts sigh, our
Tongues complain, our whole Body faint, and our Soul languish: see Mary
weeping, Peter weeping, and Jeremy never making an end of weeping for the sins
of his people. Besides these outward circumstanees do most lively express our
inward sorrows: Down, down then with all the signs and sales of Vanity, and in
true sorrow and humility, humble your selves before God, and cry unto the Lord
saying, praying, Enter not O Lord into judgment with thy servants, for in thy
sight no flesh shall be justified. Keep us O God from the cursed custom of
sinning, and from the direful executioners of vengeance; especially from the
Sword, Good Lord deliver us.

Call a solemn Assembly. It was an ordinary custom in any common calamity, to
rent their garments, put on sackcloth, and mourn in ashes. When the Israelites
found want of the favor of God, they put off their wonted Garments; as in
Genesis, in Amos, in Job, in Jonah may be found: But not to stay at all upon
the renting of garments, and clothing with sackeloth, nor to dwell any longer
upon sad behaviors, heavy countenances, or solemn Assemblies; I Will only wish
you observe, how that the sorrow and sadness of spirit, draws the Body, and
all the abiliments of the Body, into the participation, and manifestation of
grief; and indeed, how is it possible, that our countenance should testify
gladness, when our hearts are heavy. And though I grant, that it is not
needful now to use such shadows in the light of the Gospel, which has brought
us greater liberty: So that whenever you read, or hear of Isay 22.12.
Weeping, Mourning, Baldness, or girding with Sackcloth, repentance by these
signs, are but thereby noted out unto us; for Repentance neither consists in
sackcloth, nor ashes, nor in any external thing, but only in the heart: Those
who do in good earnest Repent, and are displeased with themselves, they hate
their sins, and are touched to the quick with such a sense and feeling of
sorrow, that they abhor and detest themselves, and their life past; and by
these outward signs, they give testimony of their inward sorrow; so that
humbling themselves before God, they therewithal show testimony of that
displeasure they had conceived in themselves before men; so that indeed, the
signs alone are nothing, and the Ceremonies are indifferent; neither have we
any Commandment to put on sackcloth, or to pluck off our hair; but the
occasion of this Discourse, and naming of these Signs and Ceremonies, is, That
I might the better prevail with you all, willingly, and in good earnest, to
put the truth of these signs in practice; namely, to have an unsaigned
displeasure with your selves, that you have so displeased your God; confess
your sins, your rebellions, your offenses, and that with a broken heart, and
sorrowful soul, with an intent to lead a new life; and hereafter, as
resolutely to strive against sin, as we have formerly served cheerfully under
it; for if we judge not our selves worthy of punishment, we cannot come into
favor with God: And therefore, as the poor Malefactor bows down his face, and
clothes himself in vile and base raiment, to move the heart of the Judge; so
ought we, to run in all humility to Gods mercy, in our Lord Jesus Christ, with
unfaigned testimonies of our inward Repentance; for conversion begins at the
heart: So the Prophet Joel. Rent your hearts, and not your garments; And
therefore to leave the signs, to pass by the ceremonies, and close up all in
our mourning weeds, our heavy countenances, sad behaviors, and solemn
assemblies; let us be sure to cloth mourning minds, and truly sorrowful
souls. Augustine is said to weep a shower of tears. Ambrose, a flood of
tears. And I am sure Jeremy wished for a Fountain of tears. Certain it is, that
none of us can condole so much as we ought, for our sins are many, and Gods
plagues are mighty: and therefore a deluge of tears were little enough to bear
the Ark of our sorrow for our sins. I have thus far brought you sorrowing
toward this deluge, this sea, this fountain of sorrow; let us still follow on
with paces of lamentation, and sorrowful remembrances of our sins, which have
forced the Lord to his Armoury, and to put on the garments of Vengeance against
us. And for that purpose, I shall endeavor to robe your selves with mourning
garments, and cloth them with the inward sackcloth of sorrow, that your hearts
thus rent, and torn to pieces with godly grief, you may cry more earnestly to
the God of mercy, to spare this Land, and not add to our afflictions, least
those that have evil will at our English Sion, rejoice and triumph at our
present miseries.

Souls sorrow, outward grief.
The word Solemn, shows that our outward sorrow should testify our inward
grief; so that, that which went before, was but the Sign; we now come to the
Truth. For our part, we pronounce not renting of clothes only, without the
putting on of other robes; not so much wishing you to put on sackcloth, as to
put on Christ. Ind^i^e, is the voice of Scripture; not Scindite; Put on, not
Rent off; the Original being from that of St. Paul, Put on the Lord Jesus
Christ; which will be the better performed, if you please to acquaint your
selves with this inward mourning; not Scindite Vestimenta; but Scindite Corda:
Rent not your clothes but rent your hearts. And it was not without much
reason. that Solomon gives council, To go to the house of mourning; Est enim
illie benedictio, there is performed that blessing which Christ promises: Mat.
5.4.
A blessing is promised no where to mirth, but to Mourning: our Savior has
annexed this reward. And surely, the keeping under of the soul, is much
available to all religious and devout offices: and I am sure, there ought to be
sorrow in every soul. The whole course of our Saviors life, was spent in
solitary sorrow; and doubtless, the cause of his sufferings being in us, our
Sins; we had need, all the days of our Pilgrimage, lament for our sins, that
brought upon our Jesus a burden so heavy; insomuch, that not Jeremy only, but
all Mankind, may Write lamentations: So that, Non finire, sed semper reservare
lachrymas debemus; We had need never make an end of mourning never end our
sorrows for Sin; intermit them we may, but stil^ let us keep our acquaintance
with them. That of Hierome, (...) confess is true, Detestandae sunt illae
lachrymae, quae non habe^^ modum; Mourning without measure is a Hell upon
Earth: Yet again, Detestandi sunt qui carent lachrymis; they are to be detested
that have no measure of this heavenly Manna; but happy were we, if we could for
ever continue our mourning for Sin, and for the abominations of the Land. God
has already given us the cup of his wrath to drink off, and we have tasted
deeply of the cup of his displeasure; we have seen affliction in the rod of
indignation: this Land has presented us with sad spactacles, whole heaps of
slain. O how should the remembrance of our late sufferings, set open again the
Fountains and Floodgates of sorrow that rivers of tears might flow from our
pensive hearts! And if the Lord shall again be incensed, by reason of our sins,
which are as many, and great as ever; what can we expect, but having already
begun to taste of the bitter cup of his wrath and displeasure, he will force us
the next time, to drink it down to the dregs? But since that groans and sorrow
for Sin, is the only way to appease Gods wrath, being far better to deal with
him by tears, then by words; and seeing there is no sorrow to that of the
soul, though the eyes of the body should wax blind with weeping, Let us shower
down rivers of tears, let us plentifully water our cheeks with tears, and sigh,
and sob, and weep, and howl, and cry unto the Lord to spare us from the Sword;
and let this our lamentation and mourning be coram, not clam, not only
privately, but openly, especially upon our Fast days, or days of Humiliation;
for as solemnity expects it, so antiquity prescribes it, the Assembly called
must be solemn, Call a solemn Assembly.

Obj. But perhaps some will say, God expects not this inward and outward sorrow
in his service, this heartbreaking, and body-fainting, our eyes weeping, and
our souls languishing; for God wills, that we show our selves glad and
cheerful when we serve him. Aaron was sad for the death of his Sons; and
Moses reprehending him, because he had not eaten that day of the Sacriifice; he
told him, Levit. 10.19.20.
Quomodo potui comedere, aut placere Deo in ceremoniis mente lugubri? How could
I eat, or please God in the ceremonies with a mourufull mind? and the text
says, that Moses rested satisfied. The Stars being called by their Creator to
give their light, they are said to do it, Cum judicate, with delight, or
cheerfully. When we serve the Lord, we are bidden to serve him with alacrity:
Mat. 6.17
When we fast, the Word bids us, Anoint our heads, that we seem not to men to
fast; Unge Caput tunm. But the fast here enjoined, and the Assembly called,
must be solemn. How stands this together, the Scripture bids us both be merry
and mourn in the Service of God?

Ans. The answer may well be this, That all our felicity consisting in sorrow
for sin, we may very well be merry to see our selves sad: Green Wood being
put upon the Fire, both weeps and burns; a deep Valley is clear on the one
side, and cloudy on the other; and man's breast is sad in one part, and joyful
in another. (...). 7. (...)
St. Paul specifies two sorts of sorrow; one which grows from God; the other
from the World: that gives life, this death. And furely that soul that sorrows
for his Sins, gives glory unto God. It was commanded in Leviticus, that they
should celebrate with great solemnity a day of expiation; (...) 23.27. etc.
Et affligetis animas vestras; and ye shall afflict your souls. It seems not
to sound well, that men should make a great Feast, with afflicting their
souls: but for Gods Friend, no Feast ought to be accounted so great, as to
offer unto him a sorrowful and a contrite heart; for as there is nothing more
sad then Sin, so is there nothing so cheerful, as to bewail it. All our
dishonest actions are but carnests laid down for grief; for Vice is ever an
infallible forerunner of wretchedness; and all our unwarrantable aberrations
end at last, either in anguish, or confusion: for Sin, on the best condition,
brings but sorrow with it; and for Sin without sorrow, is provided Hell. Then
down to your Knees, and desire of God that he would give you a taste of the
sweetness of tears, and your souls once tasting the sweetness of tears, will
not leave them for a world; for tears are the delight of a penitent; and there
is no true joy, but in sorrow for Sin. So that all our felicity consisting in
sorrow for our sins, we may very well be merry, to see our selves sad; and if
our sorrow cannot move men to godliness, yet it is forcible to move God to
mercy: The broken heart, for grief of sin, and love of righteousness,
(however the world despise it) the Lord will not despise it; yea, it is the
sacrifice of God, acceptable to him in Christ Jesus. Therefore says one,
August.
Lachrymae sunt cordis sanguis; Tears are the hearts blood: And, Lachrymarum
preces utiliores sunt quam sermonum; The prayers of tears are far more
profitable then those of words. Saint Chrysostom says, That our sins are set
down in the table book of Gods memory, but tears are the sponge which blot
them out again. In a word, those tears that slow from a broken heart, are
that salt brine that will eure your wounds, cheer your souls, ease your
consciences, and please your God; they take away all raw humors, and make us
savoury meat for the Lord: nay more, they subdue the Invincible, and binds the
Omnipotent; so St. Hierome, Oration Deum leuit, lachryma cogit; who would not
then mourn for sin, and grieve, because they cannot grieve enough? and be
earnest with God, in St. Augustins expression, Domine da mihi gratiam
lachrymarum, Lord give me the grace of tears. Then weep for your selves, and
weep for others, weep for the sins of the times, for the abominations of the
Land, and cry unto the Lord.

The text I took up for your use of purpose in these sad times and God grant it
may be as profitable unto you, as I Am sure its fit for these sorrowful
seasons; and though I wish no end to your mourning, yet having led you thus
far, sorrowing for your sins, and the sins of the times; let us look back a
little upon the Fast enjoined; which having done, I shall again take you by the
hand, and lead you into the house of mourning, the place appointed, the House
of the Lord your God, and so go along by the banks of Babylon, to the end or
exit of the verse, where we shall meet with nothing but lachryma, and suspicia,
Tears, sighs, sobs, sorrows, deploration, lamentation, fit meditations for our
sorrowful souls; for the end does hold a correspondency with the beginning,
Cry unto the Lord.

Sanctify a fast.
Against some Virtues, some Emulators have not stuck to speak; but against
Fasting, no man ever opened his mouth. Mahomet himself, never denied the
nobleness of Fasting; but rather so much commended it, that our Fastings
should be ashamed to stand in competition with theirs. And I find such forcible
Arguments upon this point, that, me thinks, its but a superfluous labor to
advise whether it be to be done, or no. Its but superfluous to advise a man
that is sick, to observe a diet; so its as needless a thing, to command a man
to Fast, who from the beginning of the world took a surfeit of eating. Ninive
was saved by Fasting. And Joel, me thinks, proposes the like means, when he
cries unto the people, Convertimini ad me in jejunio, Turn unto me in Fasting,
etc.

The antiquity of fasting.
For the antiquity of Fasting, we find, That when the Law of Grace was first
published through the world, Fasting was Proclaimed. John came neither eating
nor drinking. And the first step of our Saviors penance for our sins, was
Fasting; in token that our first hurt came by Eating. The first Law that God
gave man after that he had Created him, was, Genesis 2.17.
That he should not Eat of the tree of Knowledge of good and evil: wherein two
things were to be noted; the one, That man in this so great an happiness,
should not forget that he had a Lord and Master. The other had an eye to the
repairing of his future fault, and that man might understand that he should in
Fasting find a remedy for that hurt which came unto him by Eating. And as a
wise Physician feeling the sick man's Pulse, finds out his ill disposition, and
perceiving that his sickness grew from that ill ripened Fruit, which even to
this day is not yet fully digested, did prescribe this Recipe, as a Medicine to
cure this our Malady; to the end, that as a man did Eat to sickness, so he
might Fast to health: And as Gluttony did banish us from Paradise, so Fasting
might recall us thither again. So that not Fasting was the cause of all evils,
sin, as you have it before, was the cause of all our misery. Now, out not
Fasting, I mean not abstaining from the forbidden Fruit, was the sin; so that
all those evils that are now in the world, are in recompense of that wrong
which was done in Paradise unto Fasting. And not only our first Parents
smarted for it, but all their Posterity even to this day; and if any thing help
this surfeit, it must be Fasting. The Prodigal cries out, Fame perco, I dye by
hunger; whereupon this presently follows, Surgam, ibo ad Patrem meum, I will
arise, and go to my Father; It was Fasting and Hunger there you see, that
restored him presently to his former estate. So that if our ancient lost
liberty could possibly be repaired, it were no ways better to be recovered,
then by Fasting; and if by Fasting, the ship of this our life takes in no
water; and without it, is overwhelmed and drowned. Let us lay the whole lading
of all our ill, or good, upon our Fasting. Saint Ambrose proves, That while
Fasting continued in the World, God did still better, and enrich it with new
things: The first day he Created the Light; the second, Heaven; the third,
Earth; the fourth, Sun, Moon, and Stars; the fifth, the Fishes of the Sea,
and the fowls of the Air; and though he gave them his blessing, yet he did
not say unto them that they should Eat. The sixth, Beasts of the field, and
Man, and giving them license to Eat, the Works of God, and the perfections of
the World, were ended; wherein God gave man, as it were, a Watchword, that
Eating would be his undoing. And as St. Chrysostom has it, If in that so
happy an estate, Fasting was so necessary, what shall it be in this miserable
condition of ours? Saint John's Disciples said unto Christ, Master, Why do we
and the Pharisees Fast, and thy Disciples Fast not? He answered, While the
Bridegroom is present, the Children are not to weep; but the time shall come
wherein they shall not have him with them, and then they shall Fast and Mourn:
The presence of our Savior, and the enjoying of his most sweet company, did
bridle their appetites, and keep their souls in subjection; but in his
absence, he infers, that this must he done by Fasting. I might stay to tell
you of miraculous effects by Fasting, in Niniveh, in Moses, in Elias, in
Daniel, in Easter, in the Mothers of Sampson, and Samuel, in Judith in others:
and how David with Fasting, covered the faults of his whole life. Sola gula
peccavit (says Saint-Bernard) sola jeju^et, and sufficit: Only Gluttony
offended, let Grutteny only Fast, and it suffices; not that the Virtue
consists wholly in abstaining from Meat, for our Savior Fa^^ed, but when he
was oppressed, with Hunger, he did Eat. And the like may every good Christian
do; yet a man may deny that to desire, which he may grant to necessity. So
that, Carnis curam ne feceritis in desider^is: Let the cockering of your Flesh
be no part of your desire: but the maine, or principal Fasting is, to Fast
from sin, to which the other Fasting is but only a preparative. So that all
this Discourse touching Fasting, is but superfluous, having such forcible
Arguments to move us thereunto. I rather therefore think better to advise you
how it ought to be done, and that without trespassing at all against my own
ease, you your selves may sufficiently see, in that of Saint Paul to the
Corinthians, Sive comedatis, sive bibatis, sive quid aliud facitis, omnia in
gloriam Dei facite: 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat, or drink, do all to the glory of God. Which that ye may the
better do, in your Fasting observe these four particulars.

1. That we must not only do good, but shun evil: let us not be like those
Hypocrites, whom the wind of vain glory robbed of all the good they did: we are
but dust; and the Gospel bids us beware of Wind, Mat. 6.16.
that we be not carried away therewith; this vain ostentation of man, hanging
our Consciences upon other men's lips: but for our parts, we must not only do
good, but shun evil.

2. We must acknowledge, That our Fastings and good works, are more from God,
then our selves; Non possumns cogitare aliquid ex nobis: Of our selves we
cannot so much as think a good thought. Man's poverty is so great, that he
cannot so much as come to a good thought, and therefore may not make
Merchandise of that wealth which is none of his own: but God is so free in the
works of Virtue, and so bountiful, That being at all the charge himself, he
gives thee all the gain; only he wills, that thou give the glory unto him,
and take the profit to thy self. That workman shall do ill, who having built
a house with another man's purse, should go about to set up his own Arms upon
the Frontispiece. Justinian made a Law, That no Master workman should set up
his name within the body of that Building which he made out of another cost.
Christ sets thee on work, and wills thee to Fast, to Pray, to give Alms; but
who is at the cost of this so good and great a work? God: thou have all thy
materials from him, the building is his, it is his Purse that pays for all;
give then the Glory and the Honor to him: Gloriam meam alteri non dabo: I will
not give my Glory to another; content thou thy self with Heaven, which is
promised unto thee, if thou do well, which is a sufficient reward for any
service thou caust do.

3. Beware of Hypocrisy in Fasting. Fasting, Praying, and giving of Alms,
done only for Gods sake, is of that great price and estimation, that it is ill
employed on any other then God; and for that, God weighes all things in his
hand, as in a balance, and knows the weight of every good work, and the true
value thereof; it grieves him that they should do these good things for so
vile and base a price, and is sorry to see thee so foolish, and poor a
Merchant, that thou will part with that which is as much worth as Heaven to
thee, for that which is less then Earth; namely, that the World should only
say, thou have Fasted. Why do thou thus crucify thy flesh? why debar thy
belly of food? why being ready to dye for hunger, do thou not eat? why
liftest thou up thine eyes to Heaven, for so poor a thing, as to win applause
upon Earth? Those works says Job, that are done for God, are Gold; but done
for the World, are Dirt; they lay up this their treasure in the Tongues and
Eyes of men, which is a Chest that has neither Lock nor Key unto it.

4. Fasting is a Plaster for our wounds, a Medicine for our Griefs, a Salve
for our Sins, and a Defense against Gods Wrath; but you must take heed that you
do not make this Plaster, Poison; this medicine, sickness; this salve, a
sore; and this defense, your destruction: for where God has a Church, there
the Devil will have a Chapel; and where he throws in Seed, there the other
will sow Tares. 1 King. 21
Naboth, a Subject of King Ahabs had a Vineyard in Samaria, near unto the Kings
Palace; the King had a mind unto it: Naboth will not part with it; the King
grows sad, refuses his meat: Iesubel comes to see him, makes a jest of it;
takes Pen in Hand, dispatches a Ticket to the Governors of that City, sealed
with the Kings Seal, to Proclaim a Fast, subornes two Witnesses to swear,
That they heard Naboth blaspheme God and the King: innocent Naboth is stoned to
death, and his goods confiscated. In which action, there are two things worthy
our consideration; The one, That the circumstance of blaspheming God and the
King upon a solemn day of Fast, was so grievous, that of force he must be
condemned to dye for it, in so great veneration was Fasting in those days. The
other, That it served as a cloak for the taking away of the Vineyard, and for
the falsifying of Witnesses, and injustice in the Judges: Who should have then
seen the people to Fast, would have thought it had been done out of Zeal, Gods
Honor, and a desire to do him service: but it was merely a trick of the
Devils, which he had plotted with himself; he threw poison upon virtue,
seeking to draw evil out of good. We must therefore beware, least these our
good actions receive not hurt by evil intentions, And therefore, far be it
from among any of you, that upon these solemn days of Fasting, there should
lurk under the sable habit of a monrner, any false hearted, or hypocritical
masker; for it is to be feared, that among many in this Land of ours, even upon
our solemn days of Humiliation, masking might be found in mourning. But the
Fast that God requires, you may see in Isaiah 58.5.6.7. Is it such a Fast that
I have chosen? that a man should afflict his soul for a day, and hang down
his head like a bulrush, and lie down in sackcloth and ashes. Will thou call
this a Fasting or an acceptable day unto the Lord? Here the Prophet shows,
That God neither approves, nor condemns Fasting in it self, further then when
it is applied to the right end. So that here is the abuse in Fasting, when men
put holiness in it, and in either, despising or neglecting true godliness,
they think that the bodily exercise alone fussiceth; but he protests, That this
is not acceptable to him, to see one continue a day without meat, and to go
sorrowfully with his head hanging down like a bulrush, and lying down in
sackcloth and ashes: he taxes these superstitious gestures, wherein Hypocrites
are wont to place a kind of holiness; not that he condemns these external
rites, but rebukes these Hypocrites for separating the truth from the signs.
And in the next Verses, he tells you what kind^ of Fast it is that God likes
and allows of, Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of
wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free,
and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and
that thou bring the poor that wander into thy house? When thou see the naked,
that thou cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Here the
Prophet shows first, what the Lord chiefly and principally requires in our
Fast. Secondly, by what means our services may be acceptable before him. And
thirdly* How those ought to be fitted and prepared that mean to Fast: In a
word, you may see here wherein the true offices of Piety, (which are
principally commanded of God) consist; namely, in comsorting the poor, and
oppressed. We may likewise see here the duties God allows of in Fasting, what
makes our fasts allowed of, approved, and acceptable unto God: namely when
together with Fasting, Charity is joined with it: The Fast that God has
chosen, is to loose the bands of wickedness: Some expound it, the wicked
thoughts wherewith men are bound and entangled. And it may pass for current;
for the principal Fasting, is to Fast from sin. But it seems Isaiah meant
otherwise; namely, That Hypocrites are very cruel and merciless toward the
poor, and lay very heavy yokes upon them; he calls that Knots, or Bands, which
we commonly term Oppressions; to which that agrees which is added, to take
off the heavy burdens, under the weight whereof, the poor and needy groan,
and are in a manner overwhelmed therewith. The Prophet, me thinks, would bring
us to this principle, namely, That our Consciences may be pure and sound, and
that we exercise our selves in showing brotherly kindness one to another; for
if this order be duly observed, then Fasting added thereto, will be pleasing
and acceptable to the Lord. The Fast that God has chosen is, To deal thy
bread to the hungry, to cloth the naked, etc. For as in the observing of a Fast
(as you had before) we must not only do good, but shun evil; so we must not
only abstain from doing wrong to the poor, from laying heavy yokes and knots
upon them; but we must show our selves liberal and lowly toward the
afflicted, and such as stand in need of our help. For there are two parts of
equity and justice; first, That we offer no man any wrong. Secondly, That we
employ our riches and goods toward the maintenance of them that are in want
and necessity, and these two parts must be joined together; for it is not
enough to abstain from violent courses, unless therewithal we show mercy in
releeving our poor brethrens wants: Neither is it sufficient to succor one, if
you rob from some to bestow upon others; for we must not releeve our neighbors
wants by Thefts and Pillages; and if thou have committed any injustice,
cruelty, or extortion, though ought not to make amends by calling, in God to
thee, as if thou would make him partner with thee of thy spoils: It is
necessary then you see, that these two parts of equity and justice by joined
together, if we would have God to approve and allow of our Charity. First, We
must offer no man wrong. Secondly, We must employ our riches and goods toward
the maintena^^e of them that are in want; we must, together with abstain^ng
from violent courses, show mercy, in releeving our poor brethrens wants. Do
thou fast? then deal thy bread to the hungry, for this the fast that God has
chosen; and indeed, true Religion stands chiefly in Charity to the poor.
James 1.27.
To visit the Fatherless and Widow; for love is set forth in sundry places, as
the chiese of all graces; especially in the first of the Corintians, the
thirteenth, to the end of the Chapter. Now where there are no acts of Charity,
no giving of Alms to the poor, there can be no love, 1 John 3.17.
as Saint John largely proves, Almesdeeds therefore, to feed the hungry, to
cloth the naked; to distribute and give of our goods to the poor, is greatly
required both in the Old and New Testament. Deuteronomy. 15.7.8.
Moses charge the people of Israel often, To give, and to lend freely to
their poor brethren. Psalm 112.5.
David describes the righteous man by this, That he is mereifull, and
distributeth, and scatters abroad. P^ov. 19.17.
Solomon makes the Lord his Debtor that gives to the poor, saying, He that
gives to the poor, lends to the Lord. Isa. 58.7.
And Isaiah bids, to bring the poor wandering into thine house, and to break thy
bread to the hungry. Mat. 5.7, etc.
See Christ blessing the mereifull and commanding to give to him that asks,
and not to turn away from the pool that would borrow, and acknowledges the
receipt of whatsoevel is given to the poor, as if it were given unto himself;
Mat. 25.35.
For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat: naked, and ye clothed me, etc. And to
move us hereunto; first, Let us consider, that it is Gods command, of whose
gift it is that we enjoy any thing. Secondly, The poor be our brethren; yea,
our own flesh: Isay 58.7.
then hido not thy face from thine own flesh. Its inhumanity, me thinks, to
disdain and despise those in whom we are forced to acknowledge our own Image;
for howsoever the rich may account of the poor, the poor by nature is as good
as the rich, the rich are no better then they* they are all alike by nature. So
Nehemiah, Nehem. 5.5.
Our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, and our sons as their sons, and
though they be brought in subjection, they and their children, their lands and
their vineyards; yet here is their happiness, the Lord is their portion, and
Heaven their Inheritance. Lazarus shall pass from the Paws of Dogs, to the
Hands of Angels; from the Porch of a Tyrant, to the Bosom of Abraham. Thirdly.
Let the rich help the poor, and the poor will help the rich. But perhaps some
will say, We stand no need of Beggars help; yes sure, thou stand in need of
their Prayers, and pity has ever a Prayer for him that stands in need of it.
Let the rich then releeve the poor, and the poor will pray for the rich; for
this is the reason why God made some men rich, and some men poor; he made the
rich men his sons and heirs here upon Earth, to the end, that their younger
brethren, the poor, might have their secure sustenance; and he made the poor
men heirs of Heaven, that the rich might have there their secure happiness:
So that the rich by rel^eving the poor, and the poor by praying for the rich,
might both, by Gods favor, have equal portions in Heaven. God made some rich,
and some poor, that the abundance of the rich might supply the wants of the
poor, and the abundance of the poor supply the wants of the rich, and so their
for might be alike. Take it in the Apostles words, 2 Cor. 8.14.
Vt vestra abandantia, that your abundance may supply their want, and their
abundance may be for your want, that there way be equallity. Saint Chrysostom
says, That God did not create the rich to relieve the poor, but the poor, that
the rich might not be barren of good works; and if the Clouds be full, they
will pour forth rain upon the Earth: the rich man must be like a Cloud, if he
have abundance, let him distribute it liberally. Fourthly, To give to the poor,
is a means to thrive the better, because thus we obtain Gods blessing to the
doubling and multiplying of what we give; for pity was ever profitable to them
that used it. Cast thy bread upon the Waters, after a few days thou shall find
it: Give to the poor, and though it seem to be as a thing ventured at Sea, yet
it shall bring the profit, even such profit as is beyond esteem, unspeakable
joy, and a Kingdom without a change.

And here it may be enquired, since we must give to the poor, first, Who ought
to give. Secondly, How much. Thirdly, To whom. And fourthly, In what manner.

For the first, Who ought to give; My answer is, That every one who is not a
receiver of Alms, ought to be a giver of Alms. It is true indeed, That this
duty is first, and chiefly commended to the rich, 1 Timothy 6.17.18. 1 John 3.17.
Luke 12.33. 2 Cor. 8.14. But our Lord Jesus Christ goes further, and
commands, That if a man have two Coats, to give to him that has none, and he
that has meat, to do likewise, Luke 3.11.

Touching the second. How much we must give; and for this, I find no certain
direction any where set down, but only, 2 Cor. 9.6
That we should give liberally; Eccles. 11.2
and give a portion to six and to seven; Mat. 5, 42 1 Cor. 16.2.
and to give to him that aske^h; and every man as God has blessed him.

Touching the third, To whom we must give; Lusty rogues of either Sex only
excepted, who either must work, 2 These. 3, 10.
or else let them not eat: due Correction is more necessary to give to such (if
they ask) then Bread. Ecclesiasticus 12. Gal. 6, 10.
But these persons excepted, the answer shall be, Give to him that asks; Do
good to all, but especially to those that be of the household of faith; The
Fatherless, the Widows, the helpless persons, the Aged, Halt, and Blind, and
all that are in want, or needful, are commended to your Charity.

Obj. But perhaps some will object and say, Would you have us to give to all
that ask? we know, that the poor near us are so bad, and wicked; and
ill-condition'd, that it is no Alms to give to them. And as for wanderers, the
Statute, prohibits it; and besides, being strangers to us, we cannot tell
whether it be Charity or no to give unto them?

A^s. These excuses of thine, are no better then fig leaves. I tell thee, thou
must do good to all; and if any be so bad, together with your Almes-giving,
give them admonition, and exhort them to reform. And as for strange Beggars,
in whom indeed you may be deceived, yet your Alms shall be no whit the less
acceptable that you give them, seeing they ask as Christ's poor Members, and in
the name of poor and helpless persons; And he that gives to a Prophet in the
name of a Prophet, shall not lose a Prophets reward: but they shall be sure to
bear the burden of their dissimulation, whereby they invade the Inheritance
of the poor, to the robbing and despoyling them of a great part thereof.

Touching the fourth, In what manner Alms ought to be given. The answer is,
They must be given cheerfully, and without all vainglory, and opinion of
merit, and only of that which is our own, and that in due season, or due time.
First, cheerfully, For God loves a cheerful giver; He that gives grudgingly,
as it were out of constraint, does indeed the thing commanded; but because he
does it not with an heart, it is no more accepted of, then Prayer made with the
Lips, when the Heart is away. Secondly, without Vain glory, We must give, not
desiring to have our Charity taken notice of by others; for so the Pharisees
gave Alms to be seen, and praised of men; of whom it was said, That they had
their reward. Thirdly, Without all opinion of Merit; Alms must be given in
humility, we acknowledging this to be our duty, as a Steward is bound in duty
to give to every one his Portion; for we are but Stewards under God of that
which we have; our Goods are a Portion committed to our trust, to use according
to his will, as the Talents in the Patable. Now God, by whose allowance we have
these Portions, appoints us to use them so, as the poor, may have comsort of
them: and thus, in the persons of the poor, we render unto God some part of his
own again, for Christ accepts it as done unto him. Pourthly, We must give of
that which is our own only, not of what we have unjustly gotten; for, as is
showed in the Example of Z^cheus, things unjustly gotten, must first be
restored, and then Alms are to be given; for in giving stolen goods, or such
as be gotten by oppression, or deceit, man makes God a party in the theft, or
wrong, which he has committed; when as indeed he is so far from this, that he
expostulateth with such for coming into his House; saying, Will you lie,
steal, commit adultery, and come and worship in this House, etc. The just God
will not, in the person of the poor, accept of any thing unjustly gotten.
Fifthly and lastly, We must give in due time, or due season; For the blessed man
is like to a Tree, Psalm. 1.3.
that brings forth fruit in due season. Gal. 6.10.
And, whilst we have time, says the Apostle, let us do good to all. Some
rely upon a last Will and Testament, thinking to be accepted in their giving
then, when they must needs depart with all that they have. To give, when a man
can keep his goods no longer, is no better, then to break off from any sin,
when he can no more commit it. But for such as have neglocted this duty in
their life, let them humble themselves; and rather then not at all, give
liberally at their Death; and so happily, as the Lord shall see the heart
truly affected with penitency, they may be accepted in their giving then. Thus
you see, how Charity is a principal point of true Religion. And if any shall
allege, That their goods are their own, and therefore see no reason ( like
churlish Nabal) to make that common, which God has given to their particular
use? I answer, That thy goods do indeed appertain unto thee; but upon
condition, that thou dealest one part thereof to the hungry and thirsty; for
thou art but a Steward: and sure, the hungry are defrauded of their right,
unless their wants be supplied. And this is one thing that sanctifies the
Fast. Another thing is Prayer; for Fasting is but the handmaid of Prayer; but
of this when we come to the period of the Text, Cry unto the Lord.

Thus having upon second thoughts, (though contrary to the Rules of Art) looked
a little back upon the duty enjoined, the first part of my Text. I now come to
the second circumstance of the second part, which I called; The Method, or
Order prescribed; of which the first being this, Call a solemn Assembly. The
next is, Gather the Elders, and all the Inhabitants of the Land.

Wherein is to be observed, The generality of this Fast. In the Verse
foregoing the Text, you see a command laid only upon some private persons,
the Priests, and the Ministers, they are to howl and lament: but private
mournings is not sufficing for Public Sorrows; there must be an epidemicall
lamentation by a solemn Assembly. And this Assembly must not be thin, vel duo,
vel nemo, as the saying is, a small Congregation to serve God; but it must be
populous, and full, made up of a multitude, Gather the Elders, and all the
Inhabitants of the Land. Hence, let this be the point; Christ's School, is a
School for all sorts; not only the Elders, but all the Inhabitants. Mat.
13.29.30.
Let the tares (says our Savior) grow with the wheat, it may be they may
wither and dye ere Harvest: the meaning is, That it may be they may dye to sin.
Witness the Jayler, who over night was scourging; ere morning, wishing and
anointing the wounds of the Apostles. Witness Zacheus, who of a pilling and
powling Publican, and a grinder of the faces of the poor, presently became a
merciful refresher of their bowels. Witness many others, etc.

Every man's life is a Way, wherein, without intermission, he walks from the
Womb to the Grave; Ab utero ad Sepulchrum ambulamus omnes; and this is the way
which Joshua calls, the way of all flesh. But in this way there is a great
difference, for some are upright in it, and those are declared to be such, as
walk in the way of godliness to glorification. Others turn aside after the
crooked ways of sin, and those walk on unto perdition; they go singing, and
in a moment tumble into Hell. Now the Lord our God, that would not the death of
a sinner, calls all to Repentance, whilst we, not feeling those privy nips,
and perilous wounds, that sin impaires our souls withal, do swim in the
fullest delights, that invention can procure us, and our souls cleaving to the
midst of our mirth, our way but beguyles us; and for not minding our Voyage, in
stead of arriving at our wished for Haven, we are sucked into the gulf ere ever
we are aw re; so that we had need labor for a Reformation, by the wholesome
Information of the Word; and Christ's School, being a School for all sorts, we
had need all become Scholars in the School of Christ, both young and old, and
old as well as young.

First, young men; for the age of youth is indeed the age of right reformation;
Bend a tree while it is but a twig, and it will ply which way you will have it;
but let it alone until it be a sturdy Oak, there is then no dealing with it.
Even so, settle the soul once upon the lees of sinful lust, and custom in
sinning proves another nature, and in the end becomes inflexible, incorrigible.
Let a man through his youth set his face against Heaven, and blaspheme Gods
Religion; it shall be as easy for the Blackamoore to change his hue, or the
Leopard his spots, as for that man that has been always accustomed to evil,
ever to learn to do well: I do not say imp^ssible, for I know that it is the
easiest thing in the world with God to enrich a sinner with his grace; and
therefore we dispute not his power, nor his mercy. Not his power, for God can
in an instant make of a sinner a Saint. Not his mercy, for Gods mercy knows no
bounds nor limits. But it is not easy for that sinner that has been always
accustomed to do evil, ever to learn to do well; for, you know, the curse is
commonly passed out against those who have been so long fruitless; Mat. 21.19.
Never fruit grow on thee henceforth neither in this World, nor in the World to
come; reap they shall, bring forth they shall not; but they shall reap the
fruit of Judgment, the fruit of punishment; other fruit they shall never bring
forth, dead Trees, cut off from the land of the living; dead Branches, cut off
from the Tree of Life. And indeed, what can that ground expect that brings
forth nothing but thorns and briars, Heb. 6.8.
but that the end of it should be to be burned? So that though ye rejoice in
your youth, O ye young men, yet remember you must come to Judgment. And sure
it is but an evil and woeful division, when young years are given to Satan,
and old age to the Lord. Its the first fruits that God requires; And you may
find Saint John writing to Young men, as well as to Elders; 1 John 2.12 13.
to Children, as well as to Fathers. And Solomon advises the young man, Eccles
12.1
To remember his Creator in the days of his youth. And David, Psalm. 119 9
to redress his ways: For indeed, the age of youth is the very Harvest and
Summer, in which whosoever sleeps, is the son of confusion; but he that
gathers is the child of wisdom. Pro. 10.5.
It is with grace, as it is with grafts, there must be a time of in-setting,
and a time of out-growing, and both these must be seasonable before fruit can
be expected; so that seed must be sown in youth, which must come up in age; For
nip a blossom in the Spring, and where is the hope of its Autumn? And indeed,
where Satan can make youth unprofitable, little good nay, much spiritual
beggary may be expected in all the other ages of that man's life. Again, Call
thy ways to remembrance while thou art young, that thy Conscience may be at
peace when thou art aged; for assure thy self that the vanitles of youth will
vex the heart for many years after. Psalm. 25.7.
See David Praying against the sins of his youth, and not without a bitter
sense and sting of them. Psalm. 25.7. Ie^. 13.16.
It was the voice of Ephraim, I was ashamed yea, confounded, because I did
bear the roproach of my youth; for though for the present a man may be
senseless of his grossest sins; yet God will waken his Conscience at last, and
make the very thought of his iniquities as bitter, as ever the practice of them
was pleasant; the thought of them will fill him with trouble of Conscience, and
bring him not only to doubt of his effectual calling to Grace, but almost to
a despair of his salvation. And if he would be fenced against all these
afterclaps, the time is now wherein he may prevent such afflictions, by bearing
Gods yoke in his youth: Now is the time wherein he should take notice of that
great bundle of folly which is naturally bound up in his heart. But alas! No
age so much stops its ears, as this age of youth, charm the charmer never so
wisely: For whereas young men should live as Nazarites, consecrated to the
Lord; they rather live like men that have vowed, and dedicated themselves to
the service of Satan, loathing or seorning to become Scholars in the School
of Christ, which indeed is most effectual to cure the disordered affections of
youth: But those that would be Trees of Righteousness, and known to be of the
Lords own Planting, laden especially in their age with the fruits of the
Spirit, must in their youth, timely bud, timely blossom, and timely bear;
that so their whole lives may be a fruitful course, whereby God may be
glorified, others edified, and themselves receive in the end a more full
consolation.

Secondly, as young men, so old as well as young, must be Scholars in the
School of Christ; for though its true, that the age of youth, of all ages, is
most subject to the dangerous diseases of inordinate lusts: yet there is no age
without its blemishes, not the hoary hair without its errors, David, so often
as he considered his ways, found always something that needed redress; and
there is none so well renewed in this life, but they may find something in
themselves that needs further reformation. Who can say, he has in such sort
cleansed his Heart, as that he need not make it more clean? Certainly, when
sins are lopt, they grow again; when they are chased away, they may turn
again, and the fire of sin being quenched, it kindles again; so that we had
need often lop our superfluous affections; if it be possible, always. For let
a man tell the truth as he finds it, and I dare say, he finds always something
in himself needing reformation. So that Old, as well as Young, should come to
this School. For surely, its a double shame and sin for an old man to be of an
unclean life, or to be ignorant of the Word, having lived till his head be
gray, without making any progress at all in the knowledge of godliness. The
nearer we draw unto the Land of Canaan, the further off should we be from the
delights of Egypt; otherwise it will come to pass, in Gods righteous
Judgment, that when in regard of our long journey, we are come to the very
borders of that good Land, we shall be put back again, with those earnall
Israelites, and never suffered to enter into it. O miserable condition of that
man, whose body is declining to the Grave, but his spirit has never learned to
ascend to him that gave it: he come (as I said) to the very borders of Canaan,
I mean, to the very point of time wherein Gods Children make their happy
transmigration; but by reason of his sins, he is thrust back again, and never
suffered to enter, when he should dye and ascend to the blessed fellowship of
God, the Father of Lights: he dies indeed, but descends to the pit of utter
darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. What a woeful case then is
it, that men should be thus sold under sin; nay, even spend and wear out
themselves in plotting and contriving who should get themselves surest and
deepest in? How are even the hearts of the Ancient, whose Faces Age has
wrickled, carried away, to seek abundance, desiring only to become Heirs of
the World, never seeking God, nor his Kingdom, for their Portion? And though
this service of profit seen somewhat more sweet and easy then the service of
righteousness; yet when this Master comes with his wages, then tell me what
becoms of the lovers of the World, more then of the lovers of God? 2 Pet. 2.13.
surely they shall not fail to receive the wages of unrighteousness. O
miserable service! nay, it is to be feared, that many of our glistering saints,
our glorious professors, who would be admired for their holiness, are too much
bewitched with the sorcery of this sin: But let them know, whosoever they be,
that for all their outward varnish, and fair flourishes of devotion, and shows
of seeming holiness; who, as if sanctity were engaged only to their service;
being sick of a Noli me tangere, touch me not, I am more holy then thou, that
their sins of hypocrisy, and covetousness, will blemish even the best things
they have received, and darken the best duties they attempt: For indeed, a rare
professor is that man, that can avoid an Earthly mind in Earthly matters; and
while he lays up on Earth, has a free mind to treasure in Heaven. O that we
could consider how these hateful poisonous sins make us even justly odious to
our God; and therefore let us labor to see the poison of our own nature; and
seeing it, strive to bewail it: And for that purpose, let Young and Old, and
Old at well as Young, all become Students in the School of Christ; for true
Knowledge is that which works Godliness. Moses himself, who was learned in
all the learning of the Egyptians, must study to seek the Lord with an inward
affection. And though David had more understanding then his teachers; yet he
earnestly desires, to be further taught of the Lord his God; for the treasures
of manifold wisdom locked up in the Word, are so rich; that no man can
attain to such measure of Knowledge, but still he has need to learn more:
The Angels themselves are but Scholars in this School; and because thou art
Old, will thou scorn to learn with Angels? The very best, considering his
ways, may find something in him to be amended. The Doctors and Masters of
Israel, were but Fools in Christ's esteem. The young man that thought so goodly
of himself, was ignorant of the way to Heaven, and would learn of our
Savior, how, or what to do, to inherit Eternal Life. The Wisest of Men,
seeks for Wisdom. And the Princely Prophet, begs Understanding. Let then high
and low, rich and poor, old and young, all, run to that Fountain from whence
those Waters of Knowledge flow in abundance; for Christ's School is a School
for all sorts; Not only the Elders, but all the Inhabitants of the Land.

From the generality of this Convocation, another Point may be this, That the
Kingdom of Christ admits of no distinction, neither Prince, nor Peasant, for
they are both his Subjects, both the work of his hands. His Vineyard admits of
all sorts of Laborers, from the Morning till the Evening; nay, to the very
last Hour, the gates of mercy stand open for all; and Gods call is general,
Come unto me all you that travel, and are heavy laden, etc. He calls not only
the King, but the Subject; not only the Lord, but the Slave; He calls the
Poor, the Servant, Mat. 9.13
and they receive the Gospel: Nay, Christ came to call sinners to repentance,
without exception, even Publicans and Sinners. The God whom we serve, is no
excepter of persons; and the Kingdom of Christ admits of no distinction. Its
true indeed, there was a difference held, and a wall of partition was set up
between Jew and Gentile, between People and People. Before the Flood were the
Sons of God, and the Sons of Men: After the Flood, before the Law, there was
the Promised Seed, and the Seed of the Flesh: after the Law, before Christ, was
held the distinction of Jew and Gentile: With the former, God made his
Covenant, them he took into his teaching, and passed by the other: To them
pertained the Adoption, the Glory, the Covenant, the giving of the Law, the
Service of God, the Oracles, the Promises; These had his Tempe, his Prophets,
ordinary and extraordinary. This difference David meants of, in those words, He
showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel: But he
dealt not so with every Nation, neither have they known his ways, Psalm.
147.19.20. But now in this last Age of the World, this Covenant of Grace and
Life, is made common to all People; every man is now called to Repentance, and
invited to come and drink of Christ's blood by Faith; the partition wall is now
broken down, the Veil is rent, the gates of mercy wide opened, and that
Mystery which was kept seeret from the beginning of the World, is Published to
all. The consideration whereof, should stir us up to an exceeding rejoicing, in
that, Isay 54.1.2.
The barren and desolate has now more children then the Married Wife: that the
place of the tents of the Church is thus enlarged, and the Curtains of her
habitation thus spread out; so that the Dogs and Whelps may now clap their
hands for joy that they are received into pity, and that the wings of Gods
mercy are stretched out over them: The poor believer, the thrall, the servant,
the base in the world, may cheer up their hearts, that even they whom men so
despised, are now so effectually called, to see the Grace and Salvation of God.
He that parhaps is but a servant to some mean man here upon Earth, is a free
Citizen in the Heavenly Jerusalem; he that has never a foot here below, is
become a great purchaser above. Here is no complaint that the Prodigal Son is
entertained, and the serviceable Son neglected. The Eunuch need not now
complain and say, I am a dry tree. Nor the Son of the stranger. Isay 56.3.
The Lord has surely separated me from his people: but whosoever cleave^h unto
the Lord to love the Lord, and serve him, to them he will give a name better
then of Sons and Daughters, even an everlasting name, that shall never be put
out: Thus you see. That the general promises of the Gospel, are Published and
offered to all, without exception, bond and free, Publican and sinner,
strangers and forreighners, are now Comites Sanctorum, fellow Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God: so that our sins need not hinder us from
approaching to the Throns of Grace, if we can but come to the Lord Jesus upon
the Feet of Faith and Repentance, heavens gates are as wide as ever, and the
call as universal as ever; Not only the Elders, but all the Inhabitants of
the Land. So we step on to the third Circumstance, in the Method or Order of
keeping this Fast; the place of refuge, or Sacred Sanctuary, the House of the
Lord your God.

I must now, like a faithful Steward in my Masters house, take by the hand all
you the weary Sons and Daughters of the everliving God, and lead you into the
Kings Wine-sellers, there to refresh and stay you with the Flagons of his Wine,
to comfort you with his Apples, to strengthen you with his hidden Manna, and to
make you merry with that Milk and Honey which our so dearly loving Husband
Christ Jesus has provided for us, to sustain us that we faint not through
those manifold temptations which encumpasse us in this barren Wilderness,
namely, into this right Arc, or little Zoar, The House of the Lord your God.

The whole College of the bodily Physicians, and the Prince of them, that Wise
and Learned Galen prescribes for the time of Plague, that of all Remedies to
prevent the contagion, the best is, To fly, and shun the infected and corrupted
Air, and to depart unto a wholesome and purer Air; and that with these three
Rales, Cito, Long, Tarde; To depart speedily, far off, and return slowly.
And as this is Physically prescribed, so it has been as diligently practiced
by all sorts of men: But because by the corruption of our Nature (which is more
then the corruption of the Air) we suffer our selves as with maine sale to be
carried away from the Creator to the Creatures, fixing all our senses more upon
the Aeriall corruption, then upon the inward cause of the contagion, the Plague
of our sins, and rottenness of our bones and bowels, which we carry within our
selves, and are more careful to depart into the Country then unto the Lord, as
if by the swiftness of our Feet, we could outrun him who Rides upon the
Wings of the Cherubims, which often causes, that the Lords Pursuivant does
often Arrest us in the purer Air, as well in the Country, as in the City.

In the time of Famine, the best Remedy is, To fly from places of scarcity, to
places of more plenty. And this was practiced by Joseph's Brethren, Genesis 42.5.
who went into Egypt to buy Food; but because of their sins, trouble came upon
them in their very first journey thither; and though after that they were
nourished, Ver. 21.
and had Possessions in the best of the Land; yet were they at last kept under
with burdens, and by cruelty caused to serve; insomuch, Exodus 1.11.
that the Egyptians made them weary of their lives by sore labor in Clay and
Brick, and in all work of the Field with all manner of Bondage which they
cruelly laid upon them.

In the time of War, The best way to preserve our goods from spoil, and our
selves from Captivity is, To fly to the best and strongest Garrisons; and this
was as diligently practiced by us in the time of the late Wars in this unhappy
Land; but that proved so poor a safeguard, as that which was there preserved for
a time, quickly became a Prey to others. And since in the storms of misery all
these are such poor shelters; I will therefore prescribe you a better flight in
the time of Plague, or Famine, or War, or any other common calamity, then
that of Galen, or that of Jacobs Son, or that of our English; namely. To the
name Jehovah, that Tower Royal; or as Solomon calls it, strong Tower, Prove.
18.10.
The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous runs unto it, and is
preserved; even the House of the Lord our God. And this was David's practice in
the time of Plague. 2 Samuel 24.25
Hezekiahs practice in the time of War: And here, the Prophets direction in
the time of Famine, 2 Kings 19.1.
Gather the Elders, and all the Inhabitants of the Land into the Honse of the
Lord your God.

And now, that I may the better instruct you in this journey to this House, I
will branch the description of this House into these three several parts,
which will store us with clusters of singular Meditations. First, the Name of
this Place, its an House, and therefore a shelter against all storms and
tempests. Secondly, The property of this Place, its the House of the Lord, and
therefore able to defend us against all assaults and violence. Thirdly, the
safenesse of this Place, the owner is our God, God is our Father, and such a
Father as will not shut the door against his children, that in time of
extremity fly to him for security. So that in coming to this place, Exodus
24.6. Psalm. 103.3.
we come to the Lord our God, strong, merciful, and gracious, flow to anger,
and abundant in goodness and truth. We come to the Lord our God, the supreme
Physician of our souls, who heals all our iniquities. Psalm. 62 1.2.
We come to the Lord our God, to whom power belongs, and whose alone is
salvation. Who would not then run to this Place, this House, this Tower Royal
in the time of War, Plague, Famine, Sicknesses, Diseases, or any Calamity, or
Misery? O ye Righteous souls that thirst, or may thirst, by reason of the heat
of the Plague, or at least by reason of the heat of the Plague of sin, fly
unto this place; Here be the waters of comfort, here are wells enough to be
drawn off to cool the heat of a thirsting soul: This is the Place which God
has Proclaimed to the World, That if the heavy laden will but come he will
ease them; if the thirsty will but come, he will refresh them. O ye Righteous
souls, who in the time of War, are in continual fear and danger of your
bodies imprisoning, of your goods plundering, of your sons butchering, of your
daughters deflouring, and of the pouring forth of your blood like water upon
the ground; and not only the perpetual enslaving of you, and your posterity,
but that which is worst of all, the violating of your Consciences by Oaths and
Engagements, at the will of the Conqueror, fly unto this House; here be the
Arms and Armory of the strong men, and when you cry, your Enemies shall turn
back. O ye Righteous souls, who in the time of Famine are ready to dye for
hunger, having pale and bloodlesse Faces, lanke and lean bodies,
hunger-starved carcasses, and in this extremity know not what to do; run to
this Flace, this House, the Master whereof can feed an Elias by Ravens; A
Daniell in Dungeons; And the Widow and her Son with a Cruse of Oil that never
wastes: and here shall ye be sure to find satning food for your souls. In a
word, In any calamity, in all straights and miseries whatsoever, fly to this
Place, this House of the Lord your God. And in all kinds of distress, let us
approach this Throne of Grace; let us enter these Gates and Courts with joy;
let our Prayers come unto him in his holy Temple; and let us all, like David,
be glad when men say, Come lot us go to the House of the Lord; for there is
salve for every sore, there is medicine for every dise ase, and there is
comfort at all assayes. In this world we are as Pilgrims, having here no
continuing City; and while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord; in which Pilgrimage, many are the troubles of the Righteous; and if they
fly to this sacred Sanctuary, and there cry unto the Lord, the Lord delivers
them out of all. And to hearren you hereunto, know for your comforts, That the
Lord whom you serve, is not like to the Princes and Rulers of the Earth, who
desire not to be molested with requests from their distressed Subjects; but its
joy to the Almighty, and he takes pleasure to hear their supplications, and is
most glad when they ask, or beg of him the best things. What a comfort is this
then to all afflicted souls, in the heat and height of their afflictions, and
depth of their miseries, to have a place of refuge, and a place of refreshment,
and preservation to run unto, and there refresh their wearied members, and
supplicate the God of Glory, and the God of all Consolation.

But now, though we have a place of safety to fly unto in the time of trouble
and danger; yet a man may mistake his way thither and then, never a whit the
nearer: And therefore, least we should err in our way to this place, the Lord
himself has given us a constant guide, and card of directi^n to lead us
thereunto, even the witness of his holy Word, W^itten, and Sealed, that can
never deceive us, but is as a fiery pillar unto us in the dark desert of this
World, to show us the way to that Heavenly Canaan; It is a lantern to our
feet, and a light to our paths: let then our loins be girded, and let us bear
in our hands this shining light. But yet, though we have a place to fly to in
trouble, and likewise, a guide to direct us the way; yet a man (especially in
misery) would not willingly go to a place, where he has neither title, nor
right, nor interest, nor friend, nor acquaintance, where he may expect, if not
shutting the door upon him, yet, at least, poor entertainment, and miserable
comforters. Now to hearten us against these fears, the Text tells us, That we
are of the same Family, or Household, for the Master, or Lord of this house, is
our God, so that it is, as it were, our own; for it is usual for Children, or
servants, to call their Fathers or Masters house wherein they live, our House,
and there we shall find our best acquaintance, and our choicest friends, even
God, our Father; Christ, our Brother; and the holy Ghost, our Comforter. But
still, though we have a secure place of refuge to fly unto in danger, and a
guide to direct us that we err not in our way, and good right and Interest
thereunto, being of the same Family, and Friends, and acquaintance there also;
yet being infected with the Plague of sin, and laden with iniquity, we may
fear that we shall not be received; for those in whose souls the Plague of
sin does reign, however they may come into the society of the Church yet
cannot be admitted to the Throne of Grace; And therefore to the end our sins
should neither dishearten, nor hinder us; know, That the Lord our God has
given us Christ the Righteous, to cover our unrighteousnesso, so that as pure
and clean we might come unto him; He has put on us the Lord Jesus Christ,
Romans 13.14.
that being adorned with his righteousness and holiness, as lacob was with
the goodly garments of his elder Brother Esau, we might with confidence betake
our selves to this Asylum, and in the name of Christ, might go to the name of
Iohovah; and in his name, the Subject has as much right to go, as the King;
the People, as the Priest; the Slave, as the Lord; the Servant, as the Master;
and the infected, as the sound; for Christ prays with us all as our Brother;
he prays for us all as our High Priest; and he is prayed unto by us all, as our
Lord; he alone is the Eye wherewith we see the Father, the Hand to offer up our
Prayers unto him, the Mouth to speak unto him; and therefore let us go unto
him, by virtue of this right, that he is the Lord our God, and we of his Family
and Household.

But for all this, though we have a House to go unto, and want not a guide,
and be of the same Family, and stored with Acquaintance, and adorned with our
Elder Brothers Righteousness; yet, if we be lame, or have not Feet to carry us
thither, we are but like the Creeple at the Poole, obnoxious to all hindrances.
And therefore, though the Feet of the Flesh be sufficient to carry us to the
Church; yet we must have other Feet, even spiritual Legs, before we can come
to this House; namely, the Feet of Faith and Prayer: Faith is the first Foot; 2
Cor. 1.24.
for if by Faith we stand, by Faith we may also go to the Lord, who is
faithful; and how could we go unto him by the Foot of Prayer, if we did not
believe in him? Romans 10.^^
For how shall they call on him, in whom they have not belceved?

The second Foot is Prayer, which is so swift a Foot, as that it dispatcheth in
an instant all the way betwixt Heaven and Earth, and as a fiery Chariot mounts
into the presence of the Almighty to implore his assistance; and though we live
here in this vale of misery, so far off from our Fathers House; yet being
furnished with these two spiritual Feet, we may in a moment ascend up thither,
and there recreate our wearied spirits; though we live in this world, as in a
wast desert, if we be in want of any thing, with these spiritual Fees we may
run to our Fathers House, and there provide our selves. If the Lord has east
us down upon our bed of sickness, that we cannot use the Feet of our bodies;
yet he has given us those other Feet of Faith and Prayer to use in flead of
them. Hezekiah being sick of the Plague, 1 Kings 20.2.
could not use the Feet of his Body; but with the Feet of the Spirit, he went
unto this place. Jonah was locked up in Prison in the belly of the Whale, yet by
the virtue of these Feet, out of the depth he ascended to the holy Temple of
Jehovah. But notwithstanding all this though we know we have a House to go
unto, and no hinderance in the way, nor difficulty in the passage, nor want a
guide to direct us, and have good right to the place, and friends and
acquaintance to entertain us, and robes to adorn us, and feet to carry us
thither; yet if we know not how to behave our selves when we come there, though
we come as suitors, we shall be but bad speeders. And therefore the next shall
be, to teach you how to demeanc your selves in this House of the Lord your God.
And for this purpose, I shall for your sakes, endeavor my self to bind you
all to such good behavior in Gods House, as becomes the glory of his public
service and presence; for the godly Christian ought with all care to lay before
him the rules that tie him to a comely composure and carryage in the House of
God; and to strive to fashion his nature and practice so, as may become the
Majesty of his Public Worship: for there be diverse things which in a special
manner must be looked unto in performing these public duties: And to this end,
I shall give you some few Rules, which if you please to observe, you shall not
only be good Suitors, but good Speeders also.

First, All, of all sorts, must come and appear publicly before the Lord, to
do him homage and service, Vi^ unita fortior, the more, the better; not only
the Elders, but all the Iuhabitants of the Land. This you may see in
Deutoronomy 31.11.12.13. where you shall find, That all Israel were to come to
appear before the Lord their God in the place which he should choose, men
women, and children, and the stranger within their gates, that they might
hear, and learn, and fear the Lord their God, and keep and observe the words
of his Law: none exempted, all must come.

Secondly, We must come with all possible reverence, and look to our feet when
we enter into the House of God, and strive to show before all men our most
careful respect to God and his holy Ordinances; for God will be sanctified by
them that come near him, and he looks for it at our hands, by our reverent
behavior, to be glorified before all the people. See it your selves, in the
tenth of Leviticus, and the third: And Ecclesiastes the fifth, and first; and
be persuaded to show a most holy and reverent fear of Gods name, and presence;
So that Princely Prophet. I will come into thine House in the multitude of thy
mercies: and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple, Psalm. 5.7.

Thirdly, We must come with a great deal of Zeal: In all public duties that
of David should be true of us, The Zeal of Gods House should eat us up Psalm
69.9. And this singular Zeal we should show these six ways.

1. By loving Gods House above all other places in the world, our heart, should
be fired in us in that respect; that we may truly say with the Psalmist, Psalm.
26.8
O how I love thy house! I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the
place where thine honour-dwelleth.

2. By resolutely purposing to resort to Gods House with joy and gladness,
notwithstanding the scorns and oppositions of worldly men. O that we were of
David's mind, glad, when men say, Come, let us go into the House of the Lord,
Psalm. 122.1.

3. By stirring up others with all importunity to go with us to worship God in
Sion. The mountain of the House of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of
the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all Nations shall flow
unto it: (the word flow, declaring the zeal of the Children of God when they
are called.) And many people shall go and say, Come, let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for the Law shall go forth of Zion,
and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isay 2.2.3.

4. By making have to Gods worship, going to the House of the Lord with the
first, and with willing hearts, with an holy thirst after the means, flocking
and flying thither as the Clouds, or as so many Doves to their Windows. Up,
let us go and pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of Hosts, Zachar. 8.21.
And the Psalmist, Thy people shall come willingly at the time of assembling
thine army in holy beauty; from the womb of the morning, thou have the dew of
thy youth, Psalm. 110.3.

5. By forwardness and cheerfulness in contributing toward the maintenance
of Gods House and service in the means thereof.

6. By grieving heartily, because other men neglect and contemn the House of
God: The Zeal of Gods Children ought to be such, when they see his Word
slighted, as that they should be like David, whose Eyes gusht out with Rivers
of Water, because men keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119.136.

Fourthly, We should in all public Duties, serve God with one consent, and one
heart; There should appear in Gods servants a wonderful desire of unanimity
and concord, that when they speak to God, it may be as the voice of one man;
when the Lord speaks to them, they should hear with one Ear: It is a
mavelous glory in Religion, when people can come to this, to serve the Lord
with one shoulder; Let us all call upon the name of the Lord, Zeph. 3.9.
and serve him with one consent, or as it were with one shoulder.

Fifthly, and lastly, look upon the fifty second Psalm, eighth and ninth
verses; and from thence we may gather three other Rules which in a special
manner fit us for a decent behavior in Gods House.

1. We should always be as green Olive Trees in the House of the Lord; But I
shall be like a green Olive tree in the House of God: For howsoever it go with
men in the world, yet when we come before the Lord, our hearts should rejoice
and revive, and our spirits be fresh and cheerful, and our affections should
be healed of all the cares and distempers that were in them before. Gods
Ordinances should have such a power over us as to make a sudden fresh spring
of desires and holy thoughts in us; there is that power in the Ordinances of
God to effect this, if the fault be not in us, I mean, when these Ordinances
are exercised in the power and life of them. Let us then rejoice to have a
place among the servants of God, that we may grow in the knowledge of
godliness, and be like green Olive Trees in the House of God.

2. We must trust in the mercy of God, For I trusted in the mercy of God for
ever and ever, bringing an heart ready to beleev^ every good Word of God; and
resolving, that if the Lord will speak comfortably to his servants, we will not
dishonor his consolations through carelessness and unbeleefe, but receive them
with all our hearts, and establish our selves in the safe keeping of his good
word; Let us trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever.

3. We must resolve to be thankful, I will always praise thee for that thou
have done. Let us be thankful with all earnestness for all experiences of
Gods presence and goodness toward us in the means, vowing with David, to
praise him for ever for them; and if the Lord do withold hi^ power and
presence for a time, so as we feel not the effectualnesse of his Ordinances,
yet we should resolve, without distemper, to wait upon the Lord, and observe
him, according to the seasons of his grace, and always praise him for that he
has done.

Thus having hitherto endeavored to tie you all to such good behavior in the
House of the Lord in all your public service and worship of God, as shall
become the glory of his presence, wishing that these my weak and unskilful
labors might woo some more excellent Wits and more skillful Pens, to better
this Discourse, so needful to be sounded in our Ears in these unhappy and
unmannerly times, wherein so many come so saweily, and irreverently into the
presence of the God of glory, never once considering with Jacob, How dreadful
is this Place, and that this is no other but the House of God. I shall now
likewise endeavor to tie you all to the good-behaviour in your hearing of the
Word of God; for which, these three directions will order you aright; whereof
some will bind us to the good-behaviour before we come to hear, some at the
time of hearing, and some after we have heard.

1. Before we come to hear, We must bring with us two things. First, A
resolution to deny our own wits, reasons, opinions, and conceits, and empty our
heads of all persuasion of our own skill, to judge of the things of God, being
ready to believe and think in all things, as God shall teach us out of his
Word; 1 Cor. 3.18.
We must be fools, that we may be wise, humbling our selves at his very feet to
receive his law. Deuteronomy. 33.3.
They are humbled at thy feet to receive thy words. Secondly, We must bring
with us a meek and quiet spirit, a mind quieted from passions and
perturbations, and at rest from the turmoiling cares of this world. The Word is
able to do great things in us, if we receive it with meekness; Wherefore lay
apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with
meekness the ingrafted Word, which is able to save your souls, James 1.21.

2. At the time of hearing, two things are to be observed. First, We must
hearken without distraction, we must hear as it were for our lives; we must
incline our Ears, and shake off all impediments arising from our own
drowsinesse, or vain thoughts, or distracting objects; Incline your Ears, and
come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live, Isay 53.3. For indeed, the
Preaching of the Word saves the soul; it is able to make the soul immortal,
if it be once ingrafted in us. For this cause, the Word is called, 1 Pet 1.23.
Incorruptible Seed, that endures for ever, because it makes us incorruptible
and happy for ever; for he that has his soul saved, lives for evermore. Now
would you be sharers in this unspeakable blessedness? the Word must then be
ingrafted in your hearts, this heavenly plant of the Word must be set into your
understandings and affections; for when a man hears the Word with
understanding, it enters into the heart, as the impe into the stock; and when
with love and affection he imbraceth it, it is closed about, that it may grow
and prosper therein; but this Word cannot be ingrafted in our hearts, except
the heart first be cleansed; sin must be put out, that the Word may be
ingrafted in; the filthiness of sin, and all the sprouts of malice, must be
put away: of harsh, hasty, and churlish; we must become meek, mild, Mat.
18.2.3.
and gentle. The Disciples must become like little Children; that is, they must
put away those evil affections of Envy, Pride, deceit etc. which grow upon
them with years; otherwise, they should but follow, and hear their Master in
vain, the Word could not be ingrafted in them to save their souls. You may
see the Prophet Isaiah reproving the Jews, Isa. 1.16.
That they came to holy duties in their sins. So that first of all, there must
be a putting away the evil of their doings; and then, a coming together to
hear the Lord to their comfort. No wise man will sow his Corn, or plant his
delicate Fruit Trees, but will have the briars and thorns first taken away,
and whatsoever filthy stuff may hinder the prospering of his seed, and
thriving of his plants: He will not pour Wine or Milk into filthy Vessels;
Every man cleares his Table books of the old writing, when he intends to put in
any new matter. Now the Word of God is seed, the Preaching of it is a
Planting, it is Wine and Milk, and a writing in the table of men's hearts; all
filthiness of sin therefore must be removed, this ground must be cleared from
the briars of Anger, Hatred, etc. that the Word may be Planted in; we must,
like the Disciples, and the first Christians, leave off all, that we may attend
the Word of God; we must put away worldly things, which cause pollution in the
heart; we must be like Zacheus, Luke 19.8.
who that he might hear Christ to his salvation, put away Extortion, Bribery,
and Oppression; Or like the believing Ephesians, Acts 19.19
who put away their curious Arts; Or like Saul, Acts 9.4.
who ceased from going on in his persecuting course, that he might hear Christ
speaking unto him. And thus the Word is able to make our souls Immortal; for
it is a great deceit, to think to retain our sins still, and yet to hear the
Word unto salvation: And if so, then what shall become of those men, that set
down their resolution to continue in theirsins for a season, and are resolved
to trade in Drunkenness, Whoredom, Covetousness, etc? surely there can be no
ground in such men's hearts for the Word of God to grow up to the saving of
their souls; the seed may happily be sown amongst them, but it cannot possibly
enter to do them good.

Obj. But it may be objected, That if the Word cannot profit any, but such as
put away all sin, it cannot then profit any man that hears, seeing no man can
so put away his sins as that his ground may be clear?

Ans. The Answer is this, That every godly person does clear the ground of his
heart from all sin, so as that he is not pleased with any sin, but he hates it,
and himself for committing it: he strives against it, and he is daily grieved,
and poures forth his supplications for the pardon of it? You may look for this
at your leisures upon the first of Saint John, the third and third, and fifth,
and eighteenth; and he that will not once put his helping hand to the removing
of his sins, that he may make room for the Word of God to be grafted in him,
need never look for any comfortable event of his hearing; but having thus
shaken off all impediments, all distracting objects, and harkening unto the
Word without disturbance, hearing, as it were, for our lives; thus hear, and
your souls shall live.

Secondly, We must prove all things, and keep that which is good, we must
heat with judgment, and hearken for our selves; its ordinary with most men to
hear for others, and not for themselves: but we must have a special care to
look to that Doctrine which in particular concerns us, to lay that up in our
hearts, and apply it effectually; and this is a rule of singular thrift in
godliness, if we do mark what sin in us the Lord reproves, or what comfort
is especially fitted to our hearts, or what direction does chiefly concern us;
and he has an honest memory that will be sure to keep these things, though he
forget all the rest; but he has a wretched memory, and heart too, that forgets
these things, though he could repeat all the Sermon verbatim.

3. After we have heard, two things likewise must be done; First, we must by
Meditation labor to make those things we have heard, and which concerns us,
fast, that they slip not out of our minds; and we must take heed, that neither
the Devil steal away the good seed, nor our own hearts, through negligence,
lose it, the Word being let into the heart, must setledly continue, and not be
broken off by the wild beasts of vain speeches and cogitations, nor blown out
by the gusts of strong winds of Satan's temptations, or of his Instruments,
that will immediately after we have heard the word, be offering other objects,
for our minds to be taken up withal. Psalm. 1.2.
The blessed man does not only Read, but Meditates upon the Word; David hid
the word in his heart, even as he that has bought a Pearl of incomparable
worth hides it: And as the Husbandman, having cast his Seed into the ground,
harrowes it in; so this Heavenly Plant of the word must be set into the
understanding and affections, it must enter into the heart (as before is said)
like the Impe into the Stock, and being embraced, and closed about with love
and affections, it then thrives, and grows, and prospers. David is a notable
example for this, how often does he express his affections to the word, in his
119. Psalm? And Saint Paul professed, Romans 7.22
the Law to have been his delight, as it is indeed o^ every blessed man; for
the hearing of the word is not sufficient; neither is it sufficient to keep
those things we have heard for an hour, but it ought to be our delight, and
our daily work; we should always be thinking and ruminating of what we have
heard, till there be a sure impression of the word in our hearts. Let then
every one of us gage our souls, and try, and see whether we find our selves
to be such, as to whom the word is thus powerful to save our souls, that we
go not on upon false grounds in our hopes, about this unspeakable blessedness.

Does thy heart cleave before the word Preached, through trembling and terror,
in respect of thy sins, and the sins of others? Is it ingrafted in thee? Does
it enter into thy understanding? and is it closed about with a most earnest
love and affection? Does it remain with thee, after the hearing of it, by
serious Meditation? and does it grow? and is it vigorous in thy life,
over-topping all superfluous branches of sin? then thou may truly comfort
thy self, it shall undoubtedly be thy salvation. But if thine heart be
hardened, and not to be moved before the word; if thy understanding be so
blinded, as that thou have no apprehension of that which is taught; if thy
affections be so benumbed, as that thou art without all love unto it; if thou
give way to worldly and vain discourses, works, or sports, after thou have
heard, insomuch, that all departs out of thy memory again so soon as thou
have received it; if all teaching be neglected, and thou swimmest in the
stream of thine own corruptions; then look not up to the joys of Heaven, for
no part of them belongs unto thee: for though Food being eaten is able to save
the life; and Apparel put on, to keep the body warm; and a Treasure
possessed, to enrich a man; yet he that Feeds not, shall be Famisht with
Hunger; he that goes Naked, shall be pinched with Cold; and he that has
wealth, and will not use it, is but a poor miserable man: so he that makes no
better use of the word, which is the only satning Food of his Soul, his Soul
shall be hunger-starved, and perish, notwithstanding all his hearing. And this
is the case of most men in these times, wherein sin, and the neglect of
Ordinances, has gotten such an head, through a long continued custom, that
though the heardest Oak is cloven with wedges, and the flintiest Stone made
hollow with continual dropping of water; yet there is not one heart, amongst
many, penetrated by the Word: and if there be any trembling sometime, as it
was with Felix, when Paul Preached, it is but for the present, the word is not
retained, but flown from, as it was by him; so that there can be no growth of
this Heavenly suckle in these men's lives; but branches of sin will be so
luxuriant, that the word will be far over-topt by them, and kept perpetually
at under. And therefore, whosoever does desire the word to be saved thereby,
let him tremble at it, and yet embrace it; let him prepare his heart better to
entertain it; let him stir up the spirit of his mind to understand it; let
him not lose such precious seed, for want of harrowing in, by due Meditation;
and let him cherish it in his inward thoughts continually, that it may grow,
and prosper, and more show it self in his speeches, actions, and company, then
those bryar-like sprouts of his own natural corruptions.

Secondly, we must see to it, that we be doers of the word, as well as hearers;
we must not only know, but observe and do; for Knowledge without Practice,
will avail nothing; and so much of the truth as is put into practice, is sure
for ever, the rest may be lost; and it is a singular help to a Christian, to
set upon his obedience while the Doctrine is yet fresh in his mind; for delay
will compass him about with many difficulties, and he will want those inward
incitations that might stir up his heart with power and strength to obey: And
that this is the duty of every man, as well to do, as to hear; James 1.22.
Romans 2.6.
see that in Saint James, Now ye hear these things, blessed are ye if ye do
them. And Saint Paul says, That every man shall be judged, not by his hearing,
but by his doing, by his works; Then up and be doing, every one of you, whilst
time and strength permits; for not only that Fig Tree which had no Fruit, was
accursed; but that Tree likewise which brought not forth good Fruit, was to be
hewn down, and cast into the Fire, Luke 3.9. And those who have not fed the
poor, and clothed the naked, etc. will be bidden, Depart ye oursed into
everlasting fire, (Mat. 25.41.) Then what shall become of those shadows and
Ciphers among Christians, who place their Religion only in hearing? surely
they want all substance of grace, and being put into the Balance, as
Belshazzar was, they shall certainly be found too light, when the rewarding of
every one shall be according to his works; then can they expect nothing but
tribulation and anguish, which shall be to every soul that does evil. And it
is to be feared, if inquisition were made, more then our common sort might be
taxed for this neglect in doing, even some of those, who pretend a great deal
of Zeal to the Word, and are frequent and attentive hearers, and will run to
Meetings, and make glorious shows of Devotion, giving Religion a thousand good
words; but for this duty of doing, procul absit they have no heart unto it,
Covetousness still prevails in them; and some of them, who would be thought,
rare Professors, can perhaps sometimes be content to drink a draught of
stolen Waters, as well as others, making Religion a pretext only, the more
covertly to wallow in the mire of their sins; but such Kind of Professors, what
Zeal soever they may show to the world, are but Painted Christians, beautiful
only outward; and woe unto them that are such, for notwithstanding all their
glistering shows, they are but whited Sepulchers, and comely out sides; not
like unto Christ's Spouse, all glorious within, but full of rottenness, and
corruption. But as for you, be you both hearers, and doers; alter you the
course of your lives, break off your sins, shake off the bands of Satan,
dissolve the Clouds of your iniquities, fly wickedness, shun evil, do well,
do good, and aspire to such perfection in doing the will of your God, as that
you may not only cease from evil, but fill your lives with good works; and
thus shall you be blessed, ipso facto, in the very deed; for he that does the
Word, is blessed; he is no longer under the Curse, a Vassal of wrath, and a
Child of perdition; but blessed with Gods favor and love, and in the certain
way to that unspeakable happiness that shall hereafter be revealed: But he
that heateth the Word, and does it not, deceives himself, cheats and cousens
his own soul, and is but a forgetful Fool, a very Child, and no Man; he
dallieth with the Word, as a Babe with a Looking glass, beholding it not for
any end, but to sport it self therewith, never intending any thing about the
Face to rectify it, or to set it in order. Saint John does divide the whole
world into two sorts of Persons; Qui ex Deo est non peccat; Qui peccat ex
Diabolo est: The Children of God, and the Children of the Devil; the one hears
Gods Word, the other hears it not: He that is of God, hears Gods Word; John
8.47.
Ye therefore hear it not, because ye are not of God: And to be hearers of the
Word of God, is a great pledge or testification that we are the Children of
God; especially our hearing of Gods word, being accompanied with these four
concurring Circumstances.

The first is, Audire, to hear the word; Blessed are they that hear the Word
of God: this is the first step; and he that does not put a Foot forward to
this, he is not to be accounted a Child of God.

The second is, Audire cum frequentia, to hear the word frequently, and often:
The Earth that is extraordinary dry, and scorched with heat; the drops of water
which it receives, it turns into Toads. So he that seldom frequents
Sermons, it is to be scared, they work little good upon him, if not turn to
his hurt. For the word of God is the Souls sustenance, and being Ministered
slowly, it is no marvel if the Soul not only grow lean, but fall into a
Consumption.

The third is, Audire cum attentione, to hear diligently, and with attention,
freeing the Soul from all worldly encumbrances; for as the Eye cannot jointly,
and at once, behold both Heaven and Earth; so the Soul cannot attentively at
one and the same time, behold the things of the world, and of God. If any Man
love the World, the love of the Father abides not in him. When a great and
principal River is divided into many rivolets, or little streams, so much the
lesle water will every one of them have: The like succeeds with that Heart,
which is divided into many cares and desires; Foolish and noysime lusts, drown
men in destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. And Solomon says, When thou
sit with a Prince, observe what is before thee: And put a Knife to thy
throat, if thou be a man given to appetite, Prove. 23.1.2. A Christian
sitting at the King of Heavens Table, is, the hearing of his Word, this is that
board to which wisdom inviteth us, where the Bread of wholesome Doctrine is
set before us, which strengthens our hearts; and the wine of Grace, which
cheereth and comfort our Souls; at which Table, whosoever shall come to
sit, must consider with attention that which is set before him, casting out of
his mind all other worldly things. Those Ministers that were employed for the
apprehending of our Savior Christ, finding him Preaching to the People, they
hearkened unto him with that earnest and diligent attention, that they had quite
forgot to put in execution, that which was given them in charge by the
Pharisees: And being demanded by them, why did ye not bring him along with you?
they returned this Answer, Never man spoke like this man. The glorious Doctor
Saint Augustine, before that he had unwinded himself out of the error of the
Manichees, he went on purpose to hear Saint Ambrose, but not with any
intention to give any credit to his Doctrine, but only to please his Ears
with the Elegancy of his Phrase; and being ravished with the sweetness of his
expressions, had his Heart taken as well as his Ear, his attention supplied
the fault of his intention; this was that putting of a Knife to the throat. The
Apostle Saint Paul goes a little further, and calls Gods word not only
Cultrum, but Gladium, not a Knife, but a Sword, Take unto thee the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God, that thy Soul be not distracted with the
troublesome businesses of this world, freeing it from all worldly cares and
molestations.

The fourth is, Audire cum conservatione, to hear with a retention, and to lay
up the Word in our Hearts, to lock it up in the closet of our Souls; and so,
Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it. The Physician
despaires of that Patients Stomach, that cannot keep its meat, but throws it
up, as soon as it receives it. So he that hears a Sermon, should retire
himself into his Chamber, and there imprint it in his memory. Many take no
pleasure in Flowers, or care any further for them, then to look upon them, to
smell at them, and to have them in their Hands while they are sweet and fresh,
and lovely, and then throw them by; but the Be draws from them both honey and
was: So, many hears Sermons for pleasure, for delicacy of words, for gravity
of Sentences, and for gracefulness in the delivery; but this is but to make a
Nosegay to smell at for a while, and presently to cast it away; but we must
hear with retention, we must seal it up in the coffers of our Remembrance;
For blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it.

And now, having learnt how to behave our selves in the House of the Lord our
God, in his Public Service and Worship, and particularly how to comport our
selves in the Hearing of the Word, both to our Comfort, and Profit; We come now
to the greatest, and the most excellent service that God requires of us, and
that is Prayer, which is that very Art of Arts that adornes a Christian. And
David says, That the holiness of the Temple, consisted in the Prayers, which
then had their force there. And here you see, That the Assembly gathered into
the House of the Lord, (their exercise there) is, Sighing, Sobbing, Praying,
Crying; Cry unto the Lord. And to this, the Angels whet on our diligence; and
the Lord himself, by Prayer, permits us familiarly to pour out our hearts
before him; for Prayer is nothing else but an opening of our hearts in the
presence of God, and the best remedy we have to releeve our cares, anguishes,
miseries, oppressions, and troubles, is, to lay them all up in his bosom; Cast
thy burden upon the Lord, says David, and he shall nourish thee: And
therefore, whenever we feel our selves deprived o^ Gods benefits toward us,
whenever we find a want, or (...) with holding of Gods wonted favor and
mercy from us, by reason of our sins; whenever the height of our sins,
brings down the weight of Gods Judgment upon us, whether it be by Plague,
Famine, War, or any other calamity, let us run to this House, and importune
the God of glory, and compassion, for this is the only business of this Fast,
and of this Solemn Meeting; which brings us to the last Circumstance in the
Method, or Order, And cry unto the Lord.

Good cause had all this People to figh, and weep, and cry continually, for
their Land was russeted with a bloodlesse Famine: And for us of this Land,
Lamen. 2.1. etc.
How has the Lord darkened the Daughter of Zion in his wrath and has cast
down the beauty of Israel and remembered not his footstool in the day of his
wrath! He has cut off in his fierce wrath all the herne of Israel; he has
drawn back his right hand, and a Fire was kindled in Jacob, which devoured
round about; he has bent his Bow like an Enemy, his right kand was stretched
out as an Adversary; He has despised in the indignation of his wrath, the King
and the Priest. So that well may we take up a lamentation, such as was not in
the days of our Fathers; for alas, no lamentation can proportion our
affliction, so that a Deluge of Tears, is little enough for the Ocean of our
miseries. Let then sorrow be our individual companion, with this we begun,
with this let us end; nay, never let us make an end of mourning for the
abominations of this Land; and let us all learn that last lesson of our
Savior, to weep for our selves, to weep for our sins. And for this cause, I
shall still lead you on with paces of lamentation to the House of mourning,
where we are to cry unto the Lord.

We will stay no longer to look upon the behavior of this People, whose tears
did not only run down like a River Day and Night; but their very Hearts
cried unto the Lord They poured forth their Hearts like Water before the face
of the Lord; they lifted up their Hands toward him for the lives of their
young Children, that fainted for hunger in the Corners of all their Streets;
the services they brought unto the Lord were not only Prayers, but Tears;
they did not only Pray, but Cry. And since we have so sinned, and have been so
punished, does it not now concern us? and is it not now high time for us to
betake our selves unto this Sanctuary of Prayer? nay, what manner of Prayers
should we now send up to Heaven? surely not such, as most what we use to make,
such cold, and frigid ones, as if they were only for fashion sake, and as if
there were an indifferency in us, whether or no they found acceptance from the
Lord; and People that are in the fiery Furnace of affliction, under the torrid
Zone of Heavens indignation, to be so lukewarm; nay, so very cold in their
Devotions; what does this argue, but either desperation, that their praying is
to no purpose; or else mindlesnesse under the heavy hand of God? whereas there
is no better means for the removing of this Hand, then Prayer: For what sin
does, Prayer undoeth, especially fervent Prayer. Therefore the sins of our
Nation being so great, and loud, as that the cry of them has brought down
such horrible Vengeance upon us; who can tell whether the cry of humble Prayer
unto God for mercy, may not yet enter into his Eats; For this reason, Let us
cry unto the Lord.

And as we must thus imitate their behavior in misery; so the next is, their
Remedy, which likewise mu^^ be ours; They cast their burden upon the Lord,
knowing full well, that he was able to help them, being the Lord; and as
willing, as able, because their God. In treating of which, the utmost of my
intent shall be, to divide such shares of sorrow among you, as that your very
souls may be even cut asunder w^thin you; being indeed, your only remedy in
trouble, and the only way to appease your angry God; for the broken and
contrite heart, he will not despise. And therefore, let us sigh, and weep, and
cry unto the Lord.

As the cause of this Peoples misery, was Famine; so their case, in regard of
any Earthly succor that could be expected, was helpless, and remediless; For
the Heavens were become as Brass, and the Earth as Iron unto them, the Lord
their God, who comprehends all in his Fist, had withheld from them the bottles
of Heaven, and stopped the spouts of Rain; now being ready to dye with hunger,
they mingle their Bread with weeping, seeking to relieve themselves by tears
and groans; And cry unto the Lord. Hence the Point is this.

Obs.
That godly sorrow, and holy affliction, is the best remedy in any sorrow and
affliction, whether it be from Men, from Satan, or from God himself; whether
it be in Body, Estate, Name, Mind, or soul of a Man; whether it be on
particular Persons, or on our Selves, or on our Friends, or those that are
about us, or on the whole Land, as on Church, or Common wealth; This is the
most sovereign Remedy in all distress, and extremity whatsoever; this inward
godly grief, is a salve for every sore, and a plaster for every wound: To
Weep, and Cry, and pour out our Hearts before God, is the course that this
people here took, and that which we must take in the like, or any other
ealamity: and according to the measure of the affliction, and as it is more
public, or private, so must be the measure of our lamentation. To this, there
is a promise made in Isaiah, Isa 61.1.2.3.
That when our Hands cannot help our selves, nor our Tongues prevail with
others; yet then we may relieve our selves by our Prayers unto God; for in that
place the Lord undertaketh, that Mourners shall be comforted.

And there is great cause why God should so deal with such kind of Persons.
For first, He is full of pity and compassion; and therefore the Prophet Joel,
bids us, Joel 2.13.
Rent our Hearts, and not our Garments: that is, bring inward sorrow, that may
crush and break the Heart, and then turn unto the Lord; which if we do, we
shall be sure of relief; because the Lord is merciful (says he) and our God
is ready to forgive. When we see our Children weeping, mourning, and consessing
their faults, we cannot but have our bowels of compassion carning toward them;
what shall we then think of God? He is our Father, we are his Children, and be
is far more merciful then we can be, for he has no other bowels, then the
bowels of compassion; and therefore when we Mourn in an holy manner, certainly
he will arise, and have mercy upon us; he cannot slay, when he sees our Eyes
full of Tears, and our Hearts full of sorrow, for the sighs and groans of his
people will not let him have rest in Heaven.

Secondly, This godly mourning must needs be a special remedy in all manner of
afflictions, because it makes our Prayers very forcible; it sets an edge upon
our Petitions, and makes us pray heartily, servently, and strongly When Jacob
wept in his Prayer, Hos. 12 4.
it was so effectual, that he prevayled. When Gods people joined together to
pour forth buckets full of Tears drawn from the bottom of their Hearts
before the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.6.
they were marvellously helped; for the great measure of their Tears, made
their supplication more servent. And therefore when our Savior was about the
principal point of his Mediatorship: then did he gather strength unto himself
by this means, He did offer up Prayers with strong crying and tears unto him
that was able to save him from death, Heb. 5.7.

Thirdly, This godly sorrow must needs be very effectual, because it is
exceeding forcible against sin; for when sorrow comes into the Heart, sin goes
out, it will not lodge there, unless it be cockered, and much made of. When
every one laments his iniquity, and mourns over Christ Jesus, whom by his
sins he has pierced, then there is a Fountain opened to wash us all from
our sins, that have made a wicked separation betwixt us and our God. And seeing
then that this godly sorrow is a means to make God pity us and to make us call
earnestly upon him, and to expel sin, which might hinder us from prevayling
with him, it must needs follow That of all remedies in time of distress, this
is the best and surest.

Since sorrow is our only safery, and the best and surest remedy in distress;
Let us a little reflect upon our selves and miseries and apply this sovereign
Balm to all our wounds. There are many afflictions abroad at Sea, Ships taken,
Merchants spoiled, goods seized, Mariners imprisoned; many at home, in our
Towns, nay, in our own Families, as losses, erosses, sicknesses, diseases,
parting with friends, discontents; nay, there are many things amiss in our
own Hearts, and here is medicine for every one of our maladies. Let us then
get it, and use it, and all arguments and helps that may continue and increase
it. Thus the Ninevites, when Jonah threatened destruction against their City
within forty days; they humbled, and abased themselves and fell to mourning,
and used Fasting to help it forward; and to further them to this remorse and
grief for their great and heinous transgressions: they had grieved the Lord by
their iniquities, and therefore now they would grieve themselves with
contrition for them, and neglect no means to further them in the work of
humiliation; Jonah 3.5, 6, 7, 8.
They Proclaim a Fast, they put on Sackcloth from the greatest to the least;
they neither eat nor drink; they cry mightily unto God, and every man turns
from his evil way and from the wickedness that is in their hands: And when
God saw that they turned from their evil ways, than God repented of the evil
that he said he would do unto them, and he did it not. And since we of this
Nation have seen and felt affliction, and justly may fear danger to be near us
still; let us betake our selves to this mourning: if we refuse to do it, and
shall continue to be hard-hearted; suppose the devouring, bloodletting Sword
should come again into our Land; suppose the Plague like a laden sponge
should come flying through our Towns and Countries, sprinkling poison
wheresoever she comes; suppose pale, meager Famine should come, which is the
very Engine of destruction, and brings terror to mortals, death to all
things: Are not we likely to he taken away with any of these, and to have, not
our bodies only, but our souls in danger also, and that, of Gods wrath and
everlasting displeasure? Let us therefore seek to have our hearts mollified by
this excellent means, and for this end the better to move us; let us consider
of the blessings which God has been pleased plentifully to pour down upon
this people, as they did in the day of their humiliation, Nehem. 9.
of whom Nehemiah makes mention. Let us likewise seriously recount how many
mercies we have enjoyed, and how much they have been abused; how many
afflictions we have felt, and how little we have been betterd; how many
deliverances we have had, and yet how careless, nay, how rebellious we have
been, notwithstanding them all. Let us weigh with our selves, what hurt our
sins have done unto us; how many good things they have turned from us, and how
many evils they have pulled upon us; and above all, let us remember what a
huge weight, and multitude of miseries, they have brought upon our Savior;
namely, debasement, and humiliation, exchange of the greatest glory, for the
greatest infamy, sorrows and sufferings, assaults and temptations, the heavy
burden of our guiltiness, and the grievous punishment due for our deserts,
the rage and violence of most malicious men, and the wrath and displeasure of
the most righteous God, torments of Body and terrors of soul, and death it
self, a painful death, a shameful death, and a cursed death. And because
commonly sad spectacles call sorrow before it come; let us look back again
upon that severe whip of Gods Justice, the late Scourge of these three Lands;
and imagine you see your Children flame before your Eyes, ones Head off,
another Arm, a third crying unto you, and the little one hanging upon you,
and then tell me, if it be not hgh time to weep and mourn with them of Ziglag,
whose fowls were grieved, and they wept, till they could weep no more, every
man for his Sons, and for his Daughters, 1 Samuel 30.4.6. But especially to
lament for our sins of all things else most hurtful to man, undermining our
souls, and drawing destruction after them, unsheathing Gods Sword, and
violently forcing him to his Armory, to put on the Garments of vengeance, as
Isaiah speaks. And as thus the Ca^tropes of our sins have hurried down Gods
Judgments upon us, and have cried to God for vengeance; so now, let our
miseries cry unto him for mercy; and let us implore Gods gracious power, and
that with an howling lamentation, to stay his further threatened (and justly
merited) punishments, from any more displaying horror throughout our Nation:
And for this purpose, let us weep, and sob, and sigh, and cry mightily unto the
Lord our God: And the more sorrow, the better for us, for such moisture will
dissolve the clouds of our iniquities; and the more showers of grief fall from
our Eyes and Hearts, the cleerer and fairer will the ways of our Hearts be for
the feet of the Lord to walk in. Let us then sollow the Apostles council,
James 4.9
Suffer affliction, sorrow, and weep: And if any thing keep us from this
mourning, away with it; Let our laughter be turned into mourning, and our joy
into heaviness; for we cannot cast down our selves so low, but God will raise
us up again. Seeing then sorrow is the only Antidote and Sovereign Remedy
for all our poisonous Diseases; let there be weeping, and crying in every
Town, in every Street, in every House, in every Chamber, Cry unto the Lord.

Obj. But perhaps some will say, Is Godly grief a Salve for all So^es a Remedy
for all Diseases: Suppose War, as lately it did, should again thunder in
this Land? Surely, to weep, and lament in the time of War, is no sign of
Manhood; it rather argues that Men are faint-hearted, want courage and
fortitude; so that this wringing and wayling, is altogether unbeseeming the
person of a Man of Valor: let us therefore trust in God, and be stout, and of
a good courage, and never mourn for the matter?

Ans. Does it argue want of Courage, to lament for sin? It r^ther argues want
of Faith, not to lament for sin. What do you think of Jacob, was he a
Coward? you cannot say so of him; for the holy Ghost gives him this
commendation, That he had strength and courage not only to prevayle against
men, but with the Angel of the Covenant. (Gen 32.28.) And his conflict was, he
Wept, and Prayed. So that that which we think weakness, the Scripture calls
strength; For by his strength he had power with God, (Hosea 12.2.4) What do
you think of David, was he a Coward? there is none, I think, will so disgrace
that worthy and renowned Captain of the Lord of Hosts: And yet he himself in
his Psalms, often makes mention of his Tears, and says, Psalm. 6.6.
That he watered his couch with his tears: And that his Eyes did gush out with
Rivers of tears. What will ye say to all Gods People, of whom it is said,
Zach. 12.11.
That they should mourn as they did for Josiah, in the Valley of Hadadrimmon?
and as one mourns for his Firstborn, the only Heir and hope of the
Family, Will you condemn all Gods people for a generation of Cowards? nay,
this is so far from bewraying any want of Courage, that we may boldly say,
That when men are fullest of such Tears, then are they fullest of Fortitude.
What shall we think of the Lord Jesus Christ, had he no Heart? was he
destitute of Courage? that could not possibly be: And yet, when he was to
exercise the fullness of his Power, to undertake such a work, as no creature
durst attempt; when he was to offer up himself to his Father, as a Sacrifice
for the fins of the World; when he was to encounter the Lords wrath, and his
justice; the Devil, Death, Hell, and Damnation, and all the Powers of
Darkness, that same time, Heb. 5.7.
he Wept, and that abundantly: And I hope none will say, that then our Saviors
strength failed him, notwithstanding his bitter Tears and Cries. Surely those
that do not weep when there is cause, they are without Heart, and utterly void
of true Valor, and subject to mavelous fears, and violent distempers, which
arise from a base mind. For what is the reason they are so afraid of Death? but
because they have not mourned for their sins, and so removed the sting of
Death, which if they had done, they would then triumph over Death; and say with
Saint Paul O Death where is thy sting? (1 Cor. 15.55.) their heart^ would then
stand fast, as the strong mountains, and not b^ afraid of any evil tidings, No
not of the Pestilence th^^ walks in the dark; nor of the Plague that
destroys (...) noonday, Psalm. 91.6.

Again, Since sorrow is our only safety. This makes exceedingly for the
comfort of those that are Mourners in Sion; they are in favor with God, and
out of the reach of all danger, so that nothing can befall them for hurt.
Blessed are they that mourn, says Christ, for they shall be comforted, Matthew.
5.4. More happy is the poor man that weeps for his sin, then the greatest
Potentate that rejoices in abundance.

And though we have cause enough of sorrow, if we should flay to look into the
Calendar of these days, and see and find the sins of this Land to be
aspiring sins; to see Drinking, Cheating, Whoring, Swearing, as common as
Breathing; which though they may be wincked at by the Eyes of Men; yet are they
crying in the Ears of God. But to pass by these, and likewise Covetousness,
Oppression, whose Houses filled by cruelty and deceit, Extortion of the Rich,
Wantonness of some, and Profaneness of all, enough to sit every Pious soul in
Mourning, for the miseries of England: And to look only upon the woeful
divisions amongst us touching matters of Religion, not meddling at all with that
remnant of Baal, I mean, our Papists; though me thinks, its strange, that
after so long Preaching of the Gospel, there should be still such as inundation
of Popery; nor with our hollow hearted bypoerites; nor with the Atheists of our
times, who neither seek the Lord, nor enquire after him. Let us only look upon
our new Apostates, and see what numberless numbers are carried away from true
Religion to Fancies: yet I reckon these Separists to be ours, however they may
be somewhat Sunburned, Tand, and Tackt with private Opinions, (though I hope
the cloth is sound, they yet hold fast the Foundation;) but run through the
Streets of every Town, and you shall scarce meet with two of one Opinion, and
yet all would be thought Religions, and admired for Holiness; by which means,
the seamelesse Coat of Christ is miserably rent and torn, and too many (God
grant they prove not irreparable) divisions are in this poor Reuben. O how
should thoughts of these things open the very sluices of sorrow, and cause
Tears to trickle down all cheeks, that the Children should take delight in
the Mothers ruin, and Rays of the glorious Gospel should suffer such dismal
Eclipses by the strange and unheard of interpositions of those that would be
deemed the only Professors and lovers of it: For surely there can be no
greater cause of lamentation, then the miseries and calamities of Gods poor
distressed Church and People. Hence the Point shall be this.

That the greatest affliction that should touch the Hearts of Gods People,
should be the affliction of his Church and People; this of all others goes
nearest the Hearts of the Saints. For this, see Ieremies Lamentation, for the
judgments of God on his Church, and on Jerusalem his own City, and for the
misery and calamity that lay upon the whole State; see them thus bewayling
their heavy ease; Lament. 3.48 49. etc.
Mine Eye casts out Rivers of Water, for the destruction of the Daughter of
my People: Mine Eye droppeth without stay and cease not; Mine Eye breaks my
Heart, because of all the Daughters of my City. For when Gods Inheritance was
spoiled, some put to the Sword others led Captive, the Temple of God rized, and
the exercises of Religion abolished; this was it that wrought upon Jeremiah,
and made him to grieve, and break forth into these wishes, O that my Head were
full of Water, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and
Night, for the Slain of the Daughter of my People. (Ierem. 9.1.) as if he
could not have his fill, nor weep enough for the desolations of Zion and the
miserable overthrow thereof, which he foresaw. And this was it that went near
the Heart of good Nehemiah, who being in great prosperity, Nehe. 1 4.
Cup-hearer to the mightiest Monarch in the World, and in special favor with
him; yet for the affliction and reproach wherein the Church of God was, he
conceived such inward sorrow, Nehem. 2.1.2.
That be was sad in the Kings preserce. which was a thing, that he must, and
would have forborne, if possibly he could. Moses goes further, He does not
only Mourn, but is content to lay down his prosperity, and to expose his
Estate to a manifest overthrow so that he might help forward the deliverance of
the afflicted Israelites, and save them from the hands of their Oppressors:
H^b. 11.24.25.
For he knew he could not be in favor with Pharaoh, if he should join with
them, whom he so cruelly handled; But he chose rather to suffer affliction with
the People of God, then to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter. Esther
seems to go somewhat beyond him, for she resolves with her self (for the
cause of the Jews, who were all appointed to slaughter) to adventure her life
in going to the King in their behalf; I will go, says she, though it be
contrary to the Law, and if I perish, I perish, Esther 4.16. and God blessed
her boldness with an happy success; she saw the deliverance of her People,
and the confusion of her Enemies. But our Lord Jesus Christ goes beyond them
all, for when he was in supreme excellency, he was so affected with the
woeful case of his Elect, into which they had brought themselves by their own
rebellions against him; that he humbled himself, Phil. 2.6.7.
and tooks on him the form of a Servant, and submitted himself to many
sorrows, disgraces, and sufferings; not only while he lived, but principally
at his Death, that so he might deliver his People from the wrath to come, and
from Eternal Death, which they had deserved and must have otherwise endured:
But for proof, enough; if you will have Reasons, take these three.

First, There is great Reason why the affliction of the Church, and People of
God should so affect us; In regard of the Communion that is betwixt God and
them: For they are called the Lords Flock, his chief Treasure under Heaven,
his Firstborn, yea, the very Apple of his Eye; and therefore being so dear
unto the Lord, they should be dear unto us; and we should have a tender care
over them, and mourn in our hearts for any evil that befalls them, as Jeremy
did, That the Lords Flock should go into Captivity.

Secondly, There is great Reason why the affection of the Church should so
affect us. In regard of the Communion that is betwixt them and us; for we are
their members, and nearer then bodily members: And surely we should have
greater care of the whole Church, then of our selves, because it more concerns
Gods glory; and yet in caring for them, we care for our selves too, and in
laboring to prevent their afflictions, we prevent our own, and in weeping for
others miseries, we get Armor of proof that will keep off misery from our
selves. And that there is no danger in thus doing for the servants of God, may
appear in Exodus; one would have thought that there had been some great
mischief toward Moses and Aaron, when they must fetch out of Egypt such a
People, from such a King, not only by Petition, but by command, and
threatening, If he would not let them go; one would have imagined that Pharah,
a proud man, would never have endured this at their hands; and yet, if ye will
trace them, though you may find them in peril, yet you shall find them of all
others the most safe.

Thirdly, There is great Reason, why the affliction of the Church should so
affect us, and must needs so work upon our Hearts, because of the insultations
and triumphs of the wicked against them, when they cry out, Where is now their
God? And this was it which Moses did urge to move God to spare his People, when
he threatened to destroy them for their Idolatry, Exodus 32.11.12.
He entreats God to remember his great name, and to spare them, least the
Egyptians should say That he had brought them out maliciously to flay them in
the Mountains, and to consume them from the Earth, or that he was not able to
bring them into the Land of Canaan. This is it that go, to the Heart of the
Faithful, when they hear profane Persons reviling the Host of the Living
God: O these are they (say they) that stand so much for the exercises of
Religion; and for comeliness of Order in the Church, do we not see that their
exercises of Religion are abolisht? and that they themselves, some out off by
the Sword, some Exiled, and the most of them pitifully pinched with poverty
and necessity? These, and the like dospightfull and bitter speeches, do wound
the very Hearts of such as love Gods glory, and desire the prosperity of his
Saints, and so cause them much to bewail the tribulation of the Church.

Seeing that the greatest Afflictions which should touch the Hearts of Gods
People, is the affliction of the Church. First, Then all careless Persons are
to be reproved, who, so it go well with themselves, regard not the Church at
all, let it sink or swim, all is one to them, so they may be free from danger,
and sit quiet in their own Houses, whatsoever becomes of others, they regard
not; They Drink Wine in Bowls; but no Man is sorry for the afflictions of
Joseph (Amos 6.6.) This was a great fault in the late times of our unhappy
Wars, when the Sword devoured, and many Christians were taken away, and
smitten down on every side; yet the most of us did Eat, and Drink, and were
Merry, as if all things then went well with us: The fault is little amended in
these days; for though we know that many of our Brethren are in Exile, some
Imprisoned, others in Disgrace, many in Penury and want, and perhaps men of
far better Parts then our selves; yet if we can but satiate our selves under
out own Vines and Fig Trees, it matters not what becomes of others, never once
troubled at other Men's miseries; but this argues strange insidelity, and is
such a sin, as the Lord will pursue even unto Death, if it be not reformed.
See the threatening of the Prophet Isaiah, In that day, (says he) did the Lord
God of Hosts call unto weeping, and Mourning to Baldness, and girding with
Sackcloth. But behold Joy and Gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep,
Eating Flesh, and Drinking Wine; Eating and Drinking, for to morrow we shall
dye. And it was declared in the Ears of the Lord of Hosts. (but what follows
thereupon?) surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you tist ye dye,
says the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 22.12.13.14. We had need then redress such
things as are so dangerous to the whole Land.

Secondly, There is a greater fault then this; For many do not only walk
securely in the affliction of their Brethren, but desire the continuance and
increase of it, in hope that they shall enlarge their Possessions, and better
their Estates by other men's harms; but surely those who have but a glimpse of
Christianity in them, would rather wish the welfare of others, then desire
and thirst to live upon their spoils.

Thirdly, There are a sort which are worse then these, who come justly under
this reproof; and such are they as long for stirs, and mutinies, and
insurrections; of this sort are they, who under any Government of Church or
State, Cry, Down with Magistrates, and down with Preachers. Of this sort
likewise are those who cry ou^ of too much P^enty, as a stop to their greedy
desire of Gain; and of this sort also are they that murmur and repine at the
Rich, and multiply speeches of coffeehouse, because Wealth (say they) is
unequally shisted, and therefore desire that Tumults may arise, that they may
get provision from such as fall into their Hands; but these have bloody Hearts.

Fourthly, There are yet worse then these, who do not only wish for such
troubles on Church and Commonwealth before they come; but rejoice at them when
they are come: and when others Eyes are full of Tears, their Mouths are full
of Laughter. As Jeremy charge the Moabites, Jer. 48.26.27.
He magnified himself against the Lord: Moab shall wallow in his vomit, and he
also shall be in derision. For did not thou deride. Israel, as though be
had been found among thieves? for when thou speak of him, thou art moved
This was there manner of dealing, and this is the property of all such wicked
Moabites, they cannot speak of the calamities of the Faithful, but they are
wonderful affected with joy; these have cruel hearts, and shall be met
withal as Moab was.

Fifthly, There are a fort that are still worse then these, who not only
rejoyee at the troubles, but at the fins of those shat are religionsly
affected; and if they slip, through infirmity, and fall into any sin, they are
as glad, as if they had go ten a Kingdom, and came home in triumph.

Lastly, There is a sixth sort that are worse then all these, one higher degree
then any I named yet; which is, When men are so sarre from grieving, that it
goes ill with Gods servants, that if they be somewhat amiss, they will make
them worse, and help forward their misery; and for this end, incense and
mis-informe such against them, as they know will inflict punishments upon them;
and all these several sorts have of late been, and still are, Thorns in our
Eyes, and Pricks in our sides, billows and brands of Sedition; and few there
are but have shared in some of these common calamities. O that all these
several sorts and companies, were become strangers to our Land; but I pass
them, as fellows not worth any longer saluting.

The second is an Use of Comfort; For if the afflictions of the Church, of all
other afflictions, go n^erest the Hearts of Gods Children; Then surely this is
for great comfort unto them that can mourn for the Calamities of the Church;
For this is a notable testimony, that they are feeling members, and have in
them the life of Christianity, when others troubles are theirs, others losses
theirs, others reproaches theirs, others sufferings theirs, and when any
distresses, and straits of others are made theirs. And they that thus lament
for Sion, shall be comforted with Sion; God has promised them singular
consolation, it is their Portion and they may confidently expect it.

But it may be demanded, If Sorrow be our only safely, and best Remedy in
misery and trouble; How long must we continue our humiliation, our sorrow, our
mourning, our crying?

The Answer shall be this, Never cease mourning, till God cease afflicting;
never make an end of crying, till God make an end of punishing; never cease
Humiliation, till God give Consolation When the Lord ministers unto us
occasion of Grief, let us never cease until he again revive our Hearts; we
must not begin in the Spirit, and end in the Flesh; but having a good entrance,
we must go on with our work, and bring it to perfection; and if God give us
an heart to mourn, set to it, and never give over, till he set us free. Hence
the Point shall he this.

That we should never make an end of Mourning and Weeping, till God make an end
of afflicting and scourging. For this, Look upon Jeremy, and see him never
making an end of Weeping; Mine Eye (says he) droppeth without stay, and
cease not, till the Lord look down and behold from Heaven. Mine Eye
breaks my heart, Lam. 3.49 etc. And so he exhorts the People; Let tears
run down like a River Day and Night, take thee no rest, neither let the
Apple of thine Eye cease. Arise, Cry in the Night, in the beginning of the
Watches, pour out thine Hear like Water before the Face of the Lord, Lam.
2.18.19. But for Proof, enough.

If you will have Examples for this continued forrow and mourning, Then first
take theirs who are mentioned in Nehemiah, Who Wept at the Hearing of the Law,
till they were bid to rejoice. Neh. 8 9.
It was a notable commendation of that People, that they would not leave off,
till they had warrant to leave off. The next shall be Mordecai, who when Queen
Esther sent him Garments to Clothe him, and would have his Sackcloth to be
taken from him, he would not receive them, Esther 4.4
but humbled himself so long, till he was assured of deliverance. The third
shall be Jacob, Who would never let go his hold, Genesis 32.26. Hos. 11.4.
but still wrastled with the Angel, and continued weeping and praying, till he
obtained a blessing. The last shall be the Weman of Canaan, who stuck so close
to her business and was so importunate with Christ for her Daughter, Matthew.
15.22. etc.
and would never desist, nor let her Suit fall, till she had prevailed with our
Savior. I might produce you a cloud of witnesses; but these shall serve. (...)
worldly helps, the deeper distresses we be in, the least comfort they will
afford us: so in Spiritual helps, the greater extremities we be in, the more
comfort will they minister unto us; when we are helpless and hopeless, then
Faith works wonders, and never shows forth it self so mightily, and
powerfully, as when it works alone. Wealth, Strength, Friends, and all other
outward things, and worldly comforts, (when miseries lie heavy upon us, and we
begin to cast an Eye to them, expecting some relief and comfort from them)
will but deal with us, as the High Priests did with Judas; when all went well
with him, then they hugged him, and who but Judas, they then made show of all
favor and friendship toward him; but when in the horror and anguish of his
soul, he makes his moan unto them, Mat. 27.45.
Crying out, that be had sinned, betraying Innocent blood; they then set him
packing with a cutting, and uncomfortable answer, What is that to us? And such
cold comfort shall we receive from any Earthly props and supports whereon we
rest, and stay our Hearts; when we have most need of them, they will stand us
least in stead: So that we may truly say of them, as Job did of his Friends,
Miserable comforters are ye all, Job 16.2. But as for those that live by Faith
in Christ Jesus, they are underlayed with better props and supporters then the
world can afford; for when they have none other to deliver them, they can
deliver themselves by Prayers, by tears, by sighs, by cries, and by calling
upon Gods name, out of the lowest Dungeon.

And if no distress, no breaking, no crushing can hinder Gods People from
Praying and Crying? Then first, This may serve to show us the difference
betwixt the wicked, and the godly, in times of outward or inward affliction,
when they drink both of the same Cup, and are plunged into the same miscries.
Cast a wicked man into a Dungeon, and lay him full low, where he can meet with
no worldly help; and what course will he take? You shall see, that either he
will blaspheme God, and bite his Tongue for madness, Rev. 18.15.
as they that are spoken of in the Revelations; or, else he will grow
desperate, and make away with himself, as Judas, Achitophel, and other
monsters have done: But let a godly man be laid as fast and low in the same
Dungeon, and he will be full of joy, when the other is full of desperate
grief, and sing Psalms, and pour forth many Prayers and mighty Cries in
stead of the others imprecation; and blasphemous speeches. Take one example for
all, Peter and Judas had both dealt unfaithfully (though in a far different
degree and manner) with their Lord and Master, and were both brought into great
perplexity; but Peter goes out, confesses his fault, weeps bitterly, and
gains exceedingly by it: Judas on the other side, sorroweth desperately, and
speedily dispatcheth himself; whereby does manifestly appear the different
carriage of the Faithful, and of Insidels when they are both overbarthened
with sorrows and miseries.

Secondly, Can no distress, no crushing, nor breaking, hinder Gods People from
Praying and Crying? This is for singular comfort unto the Children and servants
of God, that no cross can befall them to hinder their Prayers, or stop the
passage of their cries from the Ears of the Almighty, but all shall quicken
and inflame the spirit of Prayer in them: surely the issue of their trouble
must needs be good, when it is watered with Tears, and sanctified with
requests; if they can wait till their harvest come, such a seed-time must needs
bring them a plentiful and blessed crop of comfort. And therefore, if you have
the holy Ghost in your Souls, and Prayer in your Hearts; if you have Tears in
your Eyes, and sighs in your Breasts, then bless God for so good an inside,
for its your present help in trouble, its your meat in Famine, your
preservative in Plague, your strength in War, your help in Affliction, and
your comfort at all assayes; therefore in all distress, fly unto God, end in
Prayer, and cry unto the Lord.

And no wonder if these people in the time of Famine, fly unto God, in this
their woeful, wretched, and miserable estate, when all outward and worldly
comforts fail them, and lay their burden upon him, because they knew that he
was able to feed and help them (though the cisternes of the world were grown
dry) being the Lord; and as willing, as able, being their God. For the majesty
of God is so glorious, that it would make them fly from him, and his essence is
so incomprehensible, that it is a light that none can have access unto, and an
huge Sea, that will drown such as will adventure to wade into it; but the
Knowledge of Gods sufficiency and power to help, and of his mercy and free
favor, whereby he is ready and willing to help, that's it that encourages them
to come before the Lord, and call upon his Name with strong cries, and earnest
requests, with sighs, and sobs, and groans, and cry unto the Lord.

Whence the point is this, That the knowledge of Gods power and mercy, is the
only cause that brings Christians into Gods presence, and makes them call upon
him in trouble. When they are plunged in misery, in distress, then God shall
be sure of their custom and company, like these people here, who when all
their hopes were perished, then they run to God, and cast all upon him, whom
they knew was able to bring Water out of the Flint, as well as out of the
River; and Bread out of the Clouds, as well as out of the Barn. Canaan they
knew could not maintain them without Gods blessing; and with it, a barren
Wilderness could; and therefore to him they fly, and cry, They cry unto the
Lord.

For this, look only upon Psalm the ninth, and tenth Verse, where the Prophet
shows how they come to seek unto God: They that know thy name will trust in
thee, for thou never faylest them that seek thee. How come they to seek God?
They first trust in God, by the Knowledge of Gods Name; which name is, the
Lord, strong, gracious, and merciful, and till men come to know this Name,
they can never come to trust in God, nor to seek God, but by the right
understanding and applying of the Name of God. Nothing in distress can hinder
them from crying unto the Lord, because they know that there is no evil; but
in his name they may have an Antidote against it; no fore, but there they shall
have a salve to cure it; no disease, but there they shall have a remedy to help
it; no wound, but there they shall have a Plaster to heal it; no sickness,
but there they shall have a cordial to comfort it, and Physic to recover it;
no doubt, but there they shall find a refolution for it, nor no good thing, but
there they may get a certainty of obtaining it. And therefore to hearten you in
all assayes, in all distresses, miseries, and calamities whatsoever, to fly to
this Name, which will be like an Ointment poured forth to fill and delight the
hearts of the Faithful with the odor of it. And though I cannot give you a
definition of the Lord your God, yet take that description of the name of God,
notably and comfortably set down to my hand in Exodus, where you may hear the
Lord himself Proclayming his Name in these ten several properties, Exodus
34.6.7.
The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and
abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sins, and not making the wicked innocent, visiting
the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, and upon the Childrens Children,
unto the third and fourth Generation. Then what misery, what trouble, what
distress, what affliction, what calamity can hind^r us from coming to the
Lord upon the Feet of Faith and Prayer, to cry unto the Lord.

1. Are you laid in the low Dungeon of misery, as Iona^ was, in the Dungeon of
Hell, in the bottom of the Sea, in the belly of the Whale? Are your Enemies
mighty, your sufferings many, and your oppressions and pressures heavy? then
cry unto the Lord, for he is the Lord, strong, all power is in him, and from
him, and for him: he is the mighty God, and he does not only use his might for
our Salvation, but for our Enemies destruction. If then your troubles be great,
and your Enemies mighty? be not dismayed, your God is greater and mightier to
help you out of them, then they are to hold you still in them; and he rides
upon the Heavens, full of Majesty, and full of ability to deliver you, and to
set you free from the strongest bonds of affliction. Come but once to know Gods
all-sufficient Power, then no affliction or trial shall make you faint; The
least affliction, if God support us not in it. will be too strong for us; but
the greatest, nay, the rushing in of all at once upon us, if this strong God be
on our side, shall not be able to hurt u^ or daunt us; and therefore, when our
Hands cannot help us, nor our Tongues prevail with unreasonable men, let us
fly unto this strong Tower, the Lord our God, And cry unto the Lord.

2 And now least any poor afflicted soul, hearing of Gods Power, should say, I
know that God is strong and powerful, but what is that to me? it may be, he
may use his power to my overthrow. Nay, says the Lord, God is merciful, as
well as powerful: and therefore why should any be discouraged by misery, since
misery is the very object of mercy, and the Eye of Divine pity is ever fixed
upon it? For the God whom we serve has no other riches then the riches of his
mercy. And this was the argument that David so often used, Psalm. 6.2.3.4.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am weak ^ O Lord heal me, for my bones are
vexed; my soul is also sore troubled; but Lord how long will thou delay?
Returns, O Lord, deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake. And in another
Psalm, Psalm. 86.1.
Incline thine Ear, O Lord, and hear me, for I am poor and needy. And if we
come but crying unto him, our very misery will be sufficient to work upon him
for mercy: so that he will be ready to entertain us, like the Father of the
Prodigal, with an Vnde plangis? why weepest thou my Son? ^^k. 15.20
I will clothe thee with the best Raiment, and put my Gold Ring upon thy
finger, and thy Fare shall be the daintiest morsel: nay, he will like that
Father of the Prodigal, stand ready to receive us with his arms u^foulded to
^mbrace us; with his hands open, to invite us with gifts with his head inclined
to afford us the kiss of peace, and show forth his love unto us upon every
occasion, as the Prophet Hosea testifies, Hos. 14.4.
saying, In thee the Fatherless shall find mercy. Let us then lift up our
souls, and cry continually in all straits, and troubles to this God of mercy,
for the Lord our God is good, and gracious, and merciful, and of great
kindness unto all them that call upon him, Then cry unto the Lord.

3. But least that any poor soul should be disheartened, as unworthy to cry
for mercy, by reason of his own corruptions, and spots, and stains, and
leprosy of sin; The next, to hearten and encourage him is, That the Lord, as
he is strong and merciful, so he is gracious, that is, loving, and showing
mercy without any merit. Art thou not worthy of mercy? Have thou not deserved
the least favor at Gods hand? what of that? God tells thee for thy comfort,
that he is gracious. The Lord our God is so gracious, as that he will not tarry
till we deserve favor, nor till we be worthy of mercy; but even while we are
unworthy, will freely show forth his goodness and mercy toward us. How worthy
was Saul, Acts 9 1.
when he was even breathing ou^ threatening and slaughter against the Disciples
of the Lord! And therefore it is said of Abraham, Romans 4.5.
That he believed in him that justifies the ungodly; noting thereby, that
sin cannot hinder Gods favor from offenders, but that through Faith they
shall be justified, and made as innocent in Gods account, as if they had never
offended at all: Then let us not, when we are in distress, be discouraged, or
dismayed; by reason of the soulenesse of our sins; but let us go^ to the
Lord, and come but penitently, and he will show himself gracious,
notwithstanding them all; Then cry unto the Lord.

4. But still the wounded soul perhaps may say, Alas, I have provoked God to
wrath, I have incensed him, and justly drawn his heavy hand upon me by my
sins; and therefore, though the Lord be gracious, with what comfort or hope can
such a sinful wretch as I go to cry to that God I have so hainously offended?
Have thou provoked and offended thy God? yet let not that dismay nor hinder
the^, but go, cry unto the Lord, for he tells thee himself, That he is slow
to anger, that is, long ere he be provoked. Witness the cries of Sodom, which
pierced the Ears of the Almighty; yet so loath was God to shower down Fire
and Brimstone; as that he expostulates the matter, as if he had bin jealous of
his own Ears, and answers with an Ego vadam, and videbo; I will go down and
see whether they have done altogether according to the cry that is come unto
me. And thus, as he is hard to be provoked, making as though he saw not our
sins, because he would have us to amend; so, when he is provoked, he is as
easy to be appeased. And this is seen in Mary Magdalene (a notorious sinner)
in the City of Iernsalem, who was grown so shameless, as that the whole City
suffered in regard of the bad report that went of her; yet she no sooner stands
at his Feet behind him weeping; but Christ presently tells Simon, Luke 7.38.
that many sins are forgiven her. For we can no sooner fall out with our sins,
but God falls in with us. An Earthly Father will not take every advantage
against his Child; and when the Child is grieved that he has committed a great
fault, good Parents are easily satisfied. The Lord our God pi^tieth us, as a
Father his Children; and whenever we kindle his wrath against us, one Tear
of true Repentance, will quench all the Flame thereof. And to this David gives
sufficient testimony, saying, Psalm. 103.8.9.
The Lord is slow to anger, and of great kindness, he will not always chide,
nor keep his anger for ever. And this he himself found by good experience, for
when after many mercies received he had grievously provoked the Lord in that
matter of Vriah, and did not repent, but still lay in his sin; insomuch, as God
was angry with him: David no sooner begins to make confession of his sin, but
God forthwith tells him by the Prophet, 2 Samuel 12.13.
That he had put away his sin: so that the Lord was more ready to offer him
pardon, then he was to ask it. And therefore, since the Lord is slow to anger,
and easy to be entreated; let not our sins (though never so many) hinder us
from Crying to the Lord.

5. But still some poor soul perhaps may say, It Is true indeed, I know there is
no fault on Gods part, he is slow to anger, and easy to be entreated; But what
am I the better, when I cannot fit my self to seek for mercy as I ought to
do? Alas, I am weak, and full of infirmities, I come far short every way, I
cannot Pray as I ought, my Prayers are few, and cold, and weak; I cannot keep
Gods Word, my memory is frail and slippery, etc. What of all this? let no
weakness nor infirmities dismay thee, for the Lord himself tells thee in the
next place, that he is abundant in goodness, or abundant in kindness; and it
is the property of kindness to take small things in good worth, and to pass
by infirmities and weakness, and to be easy to be entreated; he will not
break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax; if we can but once come
to be humble in heart, though we cannot attain to that measure of
sanctification, as others have; nor pour out our Souls in Prayer as we
should: yet God will take all in good part; he that will reward a Cup of cold
Wate^, he will reward a cold Prayer, for God looks not for perfection from poor
weak creatures, that are full of imperfection; And therefore since he is
abundant in kindness, let not our infirmities and weakness hinder us from
crying unto the Lord.

6. But the poor afflicted soul may perhaps still say, Though the Lord be
abundant in goodness and kindness; yet how shall I know that this goodness
and kindness of God shall be performed unto me; for I have Prayed, and Cried
and waited long and yet am never the nearer: so that though he be good, and yet
not good to me; kind, and yet not kind to me, what am I the better? Have thou
Prayed; and Cried, and waited and has not God seemed to regard, nor answered
thy requests, in releeving thy wants, easing thy torments, removing thy
pressures? etc. yet Cry still, and in the Lords due time thou shall be sure of
relief; for he never promises, but he performs, if we persevere without
fainting; And so he himself tells thee in the next place, that he is abundant
in truth; As he never threatens any thing, but he executes it; so he never
promises any thing, but he performs it. You may believe him without an Oath:
But I have sworn by my holiness, says God, that I will not forsake David;
And never any yet could charge him with breach of promise; has he promised,
and shall he not perform? Then cheer up your hearts, and pluck up your
spirits, your God has promised, Psalm. 34.10.
that those that fear him, shall want nothing that is good. Again, he has
promised, Psalm. 50.15.
That if we call upon him in the day of trouble, he will not only hear, but
deliver. And who ever did so, and found not according to his expectation? Then
why should not we rest upon his promise? has the Mouth of the Lord spoken it
and shall he not do it? for take away his Truth, and take away his God head.
What then? though in these hard times, our money is gone our goods gone, our
lands and possessions gone, our liberty gone, our Friends gone, and all our
outward slayes be gone: But is Gods truth gone? Has he not promised to provide
for us when we are poor, as well as when we are rich; when we are in sickness,
as well as when we are in health? Has not he said, Heb. 13.5.
I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee? Did not he provide for us in our
Infancy? and shall we not trust him in our Age? Let every man in all trouble
and distress, confidently, and humbly say, Heb. 13.6.
The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what Man can do unto me. We have his
promise to hear, and help, and not to leave and forsake; but to deliver, when
we call upon him: And since his promise is passed, he will perform it; for he
is abundant in truth. And therefore, let us cry unto the Lord.

7. But the poor sin burdened soul, may perhaps still say, What though the
Lord be abundant in truth, and never promises, but does perform? What Is all
this to me, whose soul must needs be loathsome unto him, being all spotted
with sin, wallowing in the puddle of iniquity, and that with consent, and
delight to? For this, go look upon Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.
and others, whose souls thou shall find as filthy and loathsome as thine; but
when once they fell to bathe, and wash them in the River of Repentance, and to
swell and rinse them in a Jordan of sorrow; then see how God dealt with them,
and be not dismayed, though thy sins be of the deepest tincture, for there is
mercy in store for thee: And so he himself tells thee in the next place, That
he is a God reserving mercy for thousands; giving us to understand thereby,
that he has Floods of mercy for all that stand in need of it. Never went any
to God for mercy, but he found mercy, if he sought in Faith, as God bids him;
for he has mercy in store for thousands. With Earthly Kings, he that coms not
first, speeds worst: but it is not so with the King of Heaven, he has
sufficient for those that come to him last, as well as for those that come to
him first; his Fountain is never dry, the wellspring of his mercy continually
Flows, he can comfort thousands, as well as one person, and yet his store not
be lessened one whit. Surely there are many thousands in Heaven, that were once
as bad as we are; and yet now they are in a Paradise of rest; they are now gone
from misery, to mercy; from a wretched life, to a far better being, and quite
out of the reach of all sin, and sorrow. Then who would not come to such a
Physician as has wrought so perfect a cure upon so many, and that of free
cost, and never suffered any one to miscarry that was willing to be his
Patient? Men did lie at the Poole of Bethesda many Years, expecting to be
healed; we need not lie so long at the gates of Heaven for the outing of our
souls; but we are sure to be perfectly helped, when we are truly humbled, and
fitted for help. And therefore, let not our sins discourage us, seeing there is
mercy in store, our God being a God reserving mercy for thousands, nor hinder
us from coming to that God of mercy, whose mercy knows no limits, And cry unto
the Lord.

8. But still the poor afflicted soul over-laden with sin, perhaps may say, I
know that God is a God of mercy, and has mercy in store for thousands; But
alas, my sins sink me, my miseries do not so much trouble me, as my sins,
which are many and grievous, and sins of the largest magnitude, and of long
continuance: With what face then, or hopes, dare I come, and cry unto the Lord?
For that, courage Christian, thou whose soul is thus wounded with sin; for
had thou all the sins and sores that might be, thou need not be
disheartened from coming unto the Lord, seeing he himself tells thee in the
next place, that he is a God forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; and if
he should not show himself to be such a God toward the militant Church, he
should lose both his name, and his people at once; but he pardons all these
kinds of sin, he pardons iniquity, that is, original sin, and the perverseness
of our nature, that cleaves so fast unto us; he pardons transgression, that is,
sins of rebellion and presumption; and he pardons sin, that is, sins of
custom, and such as are grown to an habit; and if any one be weary of this
burden, God will give him a speedy dispatch, the heavy laden, if they come
unto him, le will ease them. And this a man may boldly claim at Gods hand, and
entreat him to be God, for that he could not be, unless he should perform
this for us: And therefore, though nothing trouble thee so much as thy sins,
and though they be never so many, great, and grievous, and of long continuance;
nay, though thou were more leprous then Gehezi, more unclean then Magdaleue,
and more blind in soul then ever Bartimcus was in body; yet courage sinner,
and remember that thy God, is a God forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin,
and therefore down on thy Knees, and sall to thy Prayers, And cry unto the Lord.

9. But for all this that has been said of Gods goodness toward his chosen;
the poor afflicted soul may perhaps object (as unbelief is full of
objections) and say, Alas, we see how wicked men prosper, hold up their heads,
and flourish in the world; they have their Barues full, and Cubbords full, and
Chests full, and all things go with them according to their hearts desire:
whereas Gods Children sink, and are trampled under foot, the Righteous are
wrouged, and the Church overrun by the ungodly of the World? Nay, says God,
in the next place, let not that trouble nor dishearten thee, For I am a God
that holds not the wicked innocent; let them take their swing, and make havoc
for a time, God may spare them long, yet will visit them at the last; Nahum
1.2.3.
For God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, even the Lord of anger; the Lord
will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his enemies:
The Lord is slow to anger, but he is great in power, and will not surely clear
the wicked. Hab. 1.12.
And as Habakkuk says, He has ordained them for judgment, and established
them for correction. Whereas those that are his, he corrects but for a time;
but his anger never asswageth toward the reprobate, though for a long time he
defer. And therefore grudge not to see the wicked flourish like a green
Bay Tree, for a time; pass but by a little and upon your return, his place
will not be found, for God holds not the wicked innocent. But for you, though
you be afflicted here, you shall be comforted hereafter; for, through many
afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: This is the Kings
highway to happiness and there is not a Saint in Heaven, but has led this
way, and beaten this path before us; For Stones cannot be squared for
Pallaceworke, without the stroke of the Hammar; and we must be content to
endure the strokes of Gods Hammar of afflictions, that we may be polished, and
squared, and made lively Stones fit to be laid in the Heavenly Jerusalem. What
matters it then, to see Dives here flant it in Purple, and fare deliciously
every day when at last, he must be tormented in flames; while hunger-starved
Lazarus, though afflicted here, yet his comfort is hereafter, and is
transported from the Porch of a Tyrant, to the Bosom of Abraham. Besides,
though God uses many ways to bring us home unto him, yet none more then
affliction. It was Hunger that drove the Prodigal home to his Father; And
surely nothing so opens the Eyes of the soul, as misery and trouble. O how
correction opens those Eyes, which prosperity kept shut! O how often does the
paining of the Body, work the saving of the Soul! O how often do missortunes
like the Rungs in Jacobs Ladder, serve to mount out souls up to Heaven! Let
God then wound us, so he will but heal us; let him strik our Bodies with
sickness, with sores, with restraint, so he will but with these wounds heal
out Souls. Let come what will come so it but chase us to God, drive us home to
his House, end in Prayer, and make us cry unto the Lord.

10. But still the afflicted soul goes on, and says, Though God tell us
that he holds not the wicked iunocent, and will not surely clear them, but
ordains them for judgment, and reserves them for correction; yet we daily see,
that they do not only flourish here in this world, but go to their graves in
peace, and are not (to any outward appearance) in trouble like other men. Well,
says God, in the tenth, or last place, Say they do, yet will I meet with them
in their Children, and punish their sins in their posterity, Visiting the
iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, and upon their Childrens Children,
unto the third and fourth Generation; they shall be sure to taste of the bitter
Cup of Gods wrath here, as their Fathers do in Hell. Thus, if this name of
God, in these ten several properties, were but rightly understood and applied,
were it but as ointment poured out and spread upon our hearts, there is nothing
in distress, nothing in trouble, nothing in misery could hinder us from crying
to the Lord, considering he is strong mereifull, gracious, abundant in
goodness and truth, and forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin, etc. But
without any further enlargement, upon these proparties, in their several
particulars, I will only clap them altogether, and make Application, and so
hasten you again to the House of Mourning, to cry unto the Lord.

Is the Lord thus strong, and merciful, and gracious? etc. then why should a
Christian trouble himself at any thing that befalls him here? Has he crafty
enemies? let him go cry to the Lord for direction, his wisdom is infinitely
beyond their policy. Has he strong enemies? let him go cry to the Lord, he is
mightier and stronger then they all. In a word, has he any outward affliction,
or inward corruption that does annoy or trouble him? let him go cry to the
Lord, and have recourse to his God and there he shall find remedy for all; nay,
whatsoever man's ease be, if he hut seek the Lord, he shall have help. Psalm.
145.18.19.
So says that Princely Prophet. God is near to all that call upon him, yea, to
all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear
him; he also will hear their cry, and will save them. And though their hearts
be so oppressed, that they can utter no words, that's no matter. God will have
respect to their very desires; and surely their tears speak highest, and their
sighs cry loudest in the Ears of God. Let us then groan for a broken heart,
and sigh, and fob, and weep, and cry, Cry unto the Lord.

Thus having done with this peoples behavior in the time of Famine; and
likewise with the Remedy they used, they east their burden upon the Lord: as
also with the Motives inducing them thereunto, because he is able, being the
Lord, and willing because their God. Let us now close up all in our mourning
garments, and robing our souls with the inward sackcloth of sorrow, not only
Pray, but Weep; nor Weep alone, but Cry, Cry unto the Lord. From whence the
Point is this.

They who would not have God to shut his ears against their Prayers, must be
sure that they not only Pray, but Cry; and that their Petitions proceed from a
broken heart, and an humble spirit. For till the heart be even pulled in pieces
by godly sorrow, and rent in sunder with godly grief, sin and lust will not
out, and then there can be no acceptance looked for from God, either of us, or
of our services. The sacrifice of God (says David) Psalm. 51.17.
is a sorrowful spirit, a broken, and a contrite heart, O God thou will not
despise. Mar. 7.35
And therefore did Christ groan in his Spirit, when he Prayed for that poor
man in the Gospel. So did Hannah, sigh and weep sore, 1 Samuel 1.15.
and poured out her soul before God. And there is good reason to move us to
labor thus to be inwardly touched; for till we have a sense and feeling of our
wants, we may well speak, but we can never Pray; till the heart be pained with
sin, its impossible it should be fervent for the pardon of it. He that has no
feeling of poverty, cannot earnestly entreat for a supply of his necessities.
He that has no feeling of his sickness, can never be an instant suitor for
the means of health. So he that has no feeling of his spiritual poverty, can
never covetously hunt after those true treasures, which only enrich his soul
to all eternity And he that has no sense of his sin-sick soul, can never seek
to that true Physician, who only can apply Physic to his bleeding heart, and
sin-sick burdened soul.

This serves for the reproof of those, that come with drowsy verbal Prayers,
those that come with words of course to entreat God to pardon their sins, and
strengthen their Faith; but never pour out their souls before God, but only
spend a little breath, and they speed accordingly; for their cold Prayers,
bring but cold success: And this is true, not only of the wicked, but even of
the godly. Psalm. 32.3.4.5.
David roared and cried, but was never the better, till he confessed his sin,
and was inwardly grieved for the same; and then, both sin and punishment were
removed at once. Therefore let us strive with the Lord in our Prayers, and
Supplications, laboring for this fighing and crying, this inward sorrow which
is so needful; that doing as this people did in the time of Famine, we may
speed, as they did, in this time of our calamity. For thus says he that is
high and excellent, he that inhabiteth eternity, Isa. 57.15.
whose name is, the Holy one; I dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to give life to them that are
of a contrite heart. And the longer we wayt and cry, the greater measure of
comfort we shall have, and the longer it shall tarry with us: And therefore,
since servency in Prayer is so requisite, let us not only Pray, but Cry, Cry
unto the Lord.

And for our comforts, we shall find God as ready to hear, as we are to cry;
and if we send up our Petitions unto him, with sighs and groans, he will send
down speedy, and comfortable help unto us, and we shall be sure of good
success, even above that we can ask or think: As it is in the Lamentations,
Lamt. 3.5. etc.
Thou have heard my Voice, thou drewest near in the day that I called upon
thee. Whether we desire the suppression of our enemies, or subduing of our own
corruptions, or whatsoever else, we shall be sure to speed well; God will draw
near unto us by his merciful presence, and with gracious deliverance, if we
draw near unto him in our miseries and afflictions. So says our Savior, Mat.
7.8.
Whosoever asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened. Let us then knock at Gods presence
Chamber-doore, and though we be never so mean, never so contemptible, we shall
have no repulse; For he will fulfill the desires of those that fear him, he
will also hear their cry: their sins, though never so many in number, or
gross in nature, cannot hinder Gods favor: Witness the Israelites, who lived
many years without the true God: 2 Chronicles. 13.
yet whosoever returned in his misery, and sought God, he was found of him.
Another example of Gods goodness in this regard, we have in Jonah, who though,
for his Rebellion, he was cast into the Sea; yet God heard him out of the belly
of the fish, and set him upon the dry land again. A third shall be that
notorious Thief, who had spent all his life in the Devils service; yet no
sooner cries, Lord remember me; Luke 22.42.43.
but Christ, (not once casting him in the teeth with his sins) gives him this
good, and quick, and comfortable dispatch. To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. The last for this, shall be Manasses, who had been a most weefull and
miserable sinner; 2 Chronicles. 33.
yet, When he cried to the Lord in his distress, he heard him, set him free,
and restored him to his Kingdom. Here then is comfort for every distressed
soul, let us but call upon the name of our God, and then help and comfort is
at hand; for God is near to all that call upon him in truth, though it be not
with such strength of Faith as we should; yet if we seek him, he will be found
of us, and he limits us not to time, conditions, or things; but we may look for
help at all times, in all straits, and in all things; and when we have most
need, then we shall be sure of the best help: But now, if we would be certain
of this comsort, we must observe these three Rules.

Job 11.14.
First, We must put all wickedness out of our hearts, and out of our hands; we
must humble our selves, and turn from our wicked ways; we must remove our
sins, and then God will remove our crosses. James 4.8
So Saint James exhorts, Purge your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts
ye double minded: And this is it we must do, if we will have God to draw near
unto us: for God will not dwell in an heart defiled with sin, he will turn both
eyes and ears from us, if we continue in our evil ways; because that when our
Tongues cry for mercy, then our Sins cry for vengeance: and though we cannot
come to him without iniquity, yet we may come to him without the love and
liking of iniquity, we may come with shame and sorrow for our iniquity, and
then our sins neither hinder our Prayers, nor stop, or keep back Gods favor
from us.

Secondly, We must seek God according to all his means, as we find in the
Canticles, Cant. 3.1.2. etc.
Who when the Church had lost Christ, that is, the feeling of his love, and the
sense of that Communion which formerly she had with him; she then uses all
private and public means, and at length comes to conserence with Gods
servants (which few will do, till they be driven to it of necessity) and then
having waited a while, she finds him whom her soul loves. The same must be
our practice; if one medicine will not serve the turn, use another; Pray, Fast,
Meditate, Confer, and then at last the Lord will be found in mercy; but as we
are slack in using any of the means, so shall we fail in our comfortable
expectation of favor from God.

Thirdly, We must use the means diligently, and in good earnest; for if we have
a base account of Gods mercies, its just that we should go without them.
James. 5.16.
The Prayer of the righteous avayleth much; but upon this condition, Psalm.
72.12.
if it be fervent. God delivers the poor when he cries; but if they would
have hearing, there must be crying. God poures forth Floods of grace, but upon
whom? The Prophet tells us, Isay 44.3.
Only on the thirsty ground. God fills the hungry with good things; but they
must be hungry; they must be such as feel themselves pincht and starved with
spiritual famine. Luke. 1.53.
Christ was sent to Preach the acceptable year, but not to the mighty and
States of the world. To whom then? even to Prisoners, and Captives, that is, to
such as could grieve and mourn for their Captivity. Hence is it, that a number
read, and hear, and pray, and yet prevail not; because they do it so
drowsily, and carelessly, the Lord desers to help them, because they are not fit
for help; because they do not strive and wrestle in their Prayers. Let us
therefore use all the means with constancy and carfulness, and then we shall
obtain our hearts desire, even above that we can ask or think; for if we would
not have God to shut his ears to our Prayers, we must not only Pray, but Cry.
Let us then (having first washed our hearts and hands from unrepented sins) go
unto the Lord, and cry unto him to give us the assurance of eternal life, and
the joy of the holy Ghost, and then come life or death, it matters not much;
for though our name, and liberty, and riches, and all, be taken away from us,
yet we shall be settled in the assurance of an happy issue out of all our
straits and difficulties, for the Lord our God will maintain our cause against
all those that strive with us, and will stand on our part, and fight against
those that fight against us; according to that of the Prophet Isaiah, He
watches over them night and day and waters them every moment; and he will
contend with them, Isa. 27.3.
that contend against his people; and so either free them from their
oppressions and miseries; or else, (which is best of all) take them to
himself; where they shall be sure to have joy without sadness, pleasure
without pain, wealth without want, health without sickness, life without
death, and a Kingdom without a change. The consideration whereof, me thinks,
should strike terror into the hearts of those that are injurious unto the
servants of God: they may be bold where the hedge is low; every Dwarf will
adventure to leap over there; but let them know, that God is a wall of fire
about those that are his, and he will maintain the right of his children; and
therefore it must needs at last go ill with such, as list up themselves against
them. Lam. 3.58
O Lord thou have maintained the cause of my soul; there is our stay: Let us
be sure we have a good cause, and lay it before Gods judgment seat; and then,
though we be overborne, God will not be overborne, but he will stand on our
side even he that loves goodness, and hates wickedness, and will be avenged
on those that bend themselves and their endeavors to do mischief unto his
people. Lam. 3.59
Again, all our wrongs are known unto God; O Lord thou have seen my wrong;
nothing is done, spoken or imagined against any of Gods Children, but God takes
knowledge of it; there is not one practice, slander, or devise of cruel wolves
against the sheep of Christ; but God sees it, and marks it, and it belongs
unto him to judge the cause of his servants, Revel. 20.12.
and to reward every one according to their works; He must and will give them
full pay, and for that end keeps all upon just and due record; so that as the
works of the righteous shall stand for them, so shall the works of the wicked
he written in great Capital Letters against them, that all the world may take
notice of them at the last day. How may we then cheer up our hearts in all
distress? for howsoever our Adversaries be busy and watchful to plot and
procure our hurt; yet they cannot be so vigilent for our hurt, as God is
watchful for our good; and therefore we may be sure to have an happy issue out
of all our troubles if so be we can but make our moan to God, and wait
patiently for his mercy. And though God knows our griefs and oppressions
before hand, and purposes to destroy our enemies; yet would he have us to
prefer our Bill of complaint, and go on in our suite against them, and still
cry unto the Lord. Neither is this to be restrained only to corporal
adversaries, but it holds much more strongly for spiritual enemies. Say a man
be surcharged with sin and Satan, who play the Tyrants over him, his soul
being even scorched with the flames of Hell; let him but bemoane his Case
before the Lord, and it will be a marvellovs ease unto him: Therefore in all
such extremities likewise, let God be our refuge and Tower-Royall, let us cast
all our cares and sorrows upon him, who is both able and willing to bear them,
and in due season will both free us from them, and in the end make us gainers
by them, if we cry unto the Lord.

To come to the close. In the first of the Chronicles, 1 Chronicles. 4.9.10.
Jabez the son of Ashur, is said to be more honorable then all his brethren;
the reason is, because his Mother bare him in sorrow, and his name is a name of
sorrow; and it is there said, That Jabez called upon the God of Israel to be
delivered from evil, and the Lord (says the Text) heard him, and granted the
thing that he asked. And is the Lord so ready to hear, and willing to grant?
how then comes it to pass, that we who have been so severely scourged with the
whip of Gods indignation, after all these years of sufferings, of punishments,
and of divisions amongst us, the hand of the Lord should be stretched out
still? for though, thanks be to God, we are no way disquieted with any sound of
war, nor alarmes to Battle in our Nation; yet, the reformation of Religion,
which was one main thing intended at the beginning of our unhappy differences,
and as hopefully expected, and prayed, and sought for, has been hitherto so
eclipsed, as that whereas before there were different opinions amongst us, (as
indeed there was never Church without the wrinkles of division) so now men are
grown to such variety of conceits about Gods service, as that we have almost as
many religions as men; insomuch, that we who should have all one God to our
Father, all one Church to our Mother all one Christ Jesus to our elder Brother,
are so far from unity, amity; and unanimity amongst our selves, in respect of
these woeful divisions, as that opinions must either be suffered to take wall
of Scripture, and substance give way to circumstance, which God sorbid; or
else, as branches, we cannot grow together; nor, as members, agree together;
nor, as brethren, love and live together; nor, as Christ's Sheep, Feed and Fold
together. And what is the reason that after all this while we are not yet
helped, but Religion, in stead of being reformed, must still receive new and
more wounds then before? Surely the cause is this, Because we have not so
mourned as we ought in these our common calamities, for the sins of the times
and for the abominations of the Land; because we have not sighed and groaned
heartily for the sins that cleave to our souls; otherwise God would have been
as ready to hear, as we to cry; for good suitors are always good speeders:
but it seems we have howled upon our Beds, as the Lord himself complains in
Hosea, Hos. 7.14.
And though these rents in our Church be sufficient of themselves to open the
floud-gates of sorrow, and clothe all our dejected souls with the garments of
heaviness, and liveries of mourning; yet there are other miseries and
troubles, (though not fit to stand in competition with these) that lie so sadly
upon us, as might well fill our eyes with tears, our breasts with sighs. To
name them were superfluous; what ear heart not of troubles, and losses, and
crosses on Land, and on Sea, at home, and abroad? and where is any mourning for
the afflictions of Joseph? where are our tears that should cry aloud, and
pierce the ears of the Almighty? surely we have not so mourned as we ought to
have done. It is a Prodigy to see Fountains dried up in Winter, but far more
prodigious must it needs be, to see our eyes, hearts, breasts, and all, dry, in
these so many winters of our common miseries, and these long continued storms
of our afflictions. I know there is few or none of us, but will sigh at the
loss of his goods by enemies, at the parting with his estate, at the
Imprisoning of his Person, at the banishing of himself and friends from their
native homes, there is none of these but seems to take away the very life of
our souls from us; and yet few of us sigh for our own, or other men's sins, the
cause of all our woe. But surely all causes, rather then effects, are to be
lamented; sin is the cause, loss, but the effect: And though it is true, that
reason does inform, and affection does enforce a kind of lamentation, weeping,
and mourning for the loss of goods, liberty, or friends, etc. yet grace does
commend, and God does command another fighing, sobbing, crying, both for our
own, and national sins; for nature does teach us to weep for natural causes;
but grace for spiritual: and if the least of our bosom sins be fire in the
hand, and a serpent in the heart; how much more then are common sins to be
lamented, being the unfruitful thorns that choke the good seed of virtue and
grace? And yet it is to be feared, if inquiry were made, that many would be
sound in this great and still continued misery, whose mouths, in stead of
prayers and cries, belch and breath out nothing but the unsavory speeches of
the soul, corrupting not the company only, but the very Air in which they
breathe; whose eyes, in stead of tears, are the open windows to let in whole
loads of sin into their minds; whose ears, in stead of receiving and conveying
the good Word of God to their souls, are the doors of their own destruction;
whose breasts, in stead of sighs, are the very storehouse of corruption; nay,
were inquisition made, it is to be feared, that many of us would be found in
these our public maladies (though the times have long called to mourning)
scarce to have laid aside our public sins, not parting with our ordinary
impieties in these extraordinary judgments. Good Vriah refused to take his
honest ease, 2 Samuel 11.11.
while the Arc, and Israel, and Judah abode in tents. I pray God none of us
have presumed to take unhonest courses, since our miseries have bin so great,
our plagues so mighty, Gods judgments so weighty, and our danger so eminent.
Let then all of us show our selves by an holy mourning, that we are so far from
participating in such men's sins, and in the wickedness of the world, as that
in consideration hereof we may be found not only sighing, but weeping, and
bemoaning the increase of iniquity, and deploring the sins of our Nation. And
no doubt but many might be found amongst us, who sometimes send out a natural
sigh or sob, in regard of some outward thing; as in regard of shame, and
punishment, in regard of wants and distresses, or in regard of the hand of God
upon them by sickness, pain, sores, or the like; Exodus 8.8
as Pharaoh did, when the hand of God was on him, then he cried, I have sinned,
and take away this plague; but he never cried, take away the hardness of mine
heart, and the cursednesse of my nature. Nay more, perhaps some may be found
who sometimes sigh and groan for some actual sin, when they feel it pressing
and lying heavy upon their Consciences; yet these men but groan as the bruit
beast does, that is pressed with some heavy burden; but they fetch not their
sighs from under that corruption that cleaves to their Hearts; so they groan
not with their Hearts soundly, when they sigh for their Sins. But if we would
have true comfort in sighing and groaning for Sin, we must down to the root of
all Sins in our selves, and fetch our sighs from under that corruption that
cleaves inwardly to our souls, and that's the sighing of a Child of God; and
such loud-tongued scalding Sighs, and salt brinish tears, flowing from the
Heartbreaking of a Sin-burthened soul, will be both pleasing to God, and
yield comfort to us. Let us then sigh and groan heartily for those Sins which
are so deeply ingrafted in us; let us weep for our selves, let us weep for
others; let every remembrance of Sin, both our own and others, make fresh
bleeding wounds in our Hearts: Let sorrow clothe us, let mourning cloud us, let
weeping be in every corner; let nothing be heard in our streets but the Voice
of wayling, and while our miseries are smarting, and our calamities lasting,
let nothing remain to the godly but sorrow and weeping, that so we may escape
unhurt, in the devastation of the wicked; for the Saints are always
privileged men, their sorrow is their safety, their lamentation the cause of
their preservation: So in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 9.4 etc.
mourners shall be marked, Set a Mark, says God upon the Foreheads of them
that Mourn and Cry for all the abominations of the Land, and by this Mark
shall be preserved. Examples to all Posterity, and Saints hereafter in Eternal
Glory

And thus having clothed you in the Garments of heaviness, and robed your
souls with the sable livery of Mourning; I cannot, I suppose, leave you in a
better habit, then that of Sorrow; nor in a better Posture, then that of
Humiliation; nor in a better Place, then the House of the Lord your God; where
if you Cry earnestly, no doubt but he will hear graciously. And so let
Lamentation Seal up our Discourse.

Lord Hear our Prayer, and let our Cry come unto thee: AMEN.

FINIS.

