A LETTER FROM ROME To a Friend IN LONDON, Relation to the Jesuits Executed,
and those that are to be Executed in the Countries.
Sir,
WIthout other Apollogie, I had the happiness to receive yours: of the 5th
Instant, wherein I find the Jesuits last Speeches have made some impressions
upon the minds of some friends of yours; I take it from that passage in your
Letter, that you could (...) I would send you a short and plain account of that
discourse I once had ^ith you in London, about the reasons and grounds that
made Jesuits and Pa^ generally so desperate, to call God and Angels to witness,
and take it up^^^ their Salvation at their Executions, that they are as
innocent as the Child (...) born, when nothing is plainer then that they are
really guilty of those Crimes they then deny.

If I forget nor, the discourse was particularly occasioned by that Letter
published in print, to the Right Honorable the Earl of Essex; concerning John
(...) at ^ory, a Papist, condemned for Burglary at L^nt Assizes, 1672. by (...)
Her^ in Dublin; He was executed denying the fact, but the rope breaking (...),
confessed himself guilty of the fact he denied before, and that he (...) ^^on
from a Priest, who bid him never doubt his salvation, if he did not discover
his Confederates: adding this reason to it, that the fact was not admitted
against Gods people the Papists.

Afterward we had some digressions about the Lies, Perjuries and
Equivocations, and dying oaths of Father Garnet the provincial of the Jesuit,
Tresham, Treshmond and other Jesuits executed for the Gunpowder treason, whose
measures undoubtedly, Father Whitebread, Gavan, Harcote, Turner, Fenwick, and
Langhorn have exactly followed in this present Plot.

Sir, Were your friends here in Rome, they would be quickly convinced; the
Priests and people here trouble themselves no farther then to get Indulgences
to sin, pardons, undergo pennances, obtain absolutions, or either to say Masses
for the dead or pray to them, Religion here consists in these, Heaven and
Purgatory they seem sure of, none seem to be in danger of Hell, because the
Priests can keep them out. If not, the whole Church will engage for it for
Money.

Whatever this Church of Rome has been formerly, it is supplied now with doting
Pope, Cardinals, and Jesuits, who are only Statesmen and Politicians, in the
disguise of Churchmen, for in truth here is no guise or appearance of Religion
at all.

Not only here in Rome, but in all other Popish Dominions, Ruffians, and
Assassines are hired for a small matter to stab, poison, or murder any person,
who presently run to the Priests who will absolve and protect them; and for
money pray for the Soul of the murdered, that it may not go to hell, these are
charitable.

But not to detain you longer, from having your wish, the main ground I
insisted upon was their ignorance of the scriptures; for if that chief end of
their learned Churchmen were to withdraw men from the love and study of the
Scriptures, it is an invincible demonstration, that the Scriptures are not
their rule in living or dying, but they confide in the traditions of men.

That it may be manifest, what vallue the Scriptures are with the Church of
Rome, these following instances Collected from the Books of their learned
Guides will confirm, then judge whether the present Roman Catholic Religion,
be of God or Man, etc.

When Brentius, Objected in the Confession of Wittenberge, that one Her^^^ a
learned Papist, had not been ashamed to say in public, that the Scriptures
were of no greater Estimation then Aesops Fables: but for the Testimony of the
Church, this position pleased Cardinal Hosius so well, that he defended Herman,
and commended his Speech, for says Hosius who was a Bishop also, The Scriptures
would be of as little authority, but as the Church owns them; most of their
eminent Writers since Luther, are of the same Opinion.

Melchior Canus, in his 7th. Chapter of his places of Divinity, terms the
Scriptures dumb and deaf judges, and that the Pope by his prerogative may
reject them.

Pope Leo the 10th. will not be behind hand with Canus, for discoursing with
Cardinal Bembus about the Gospel, in contempt said, how profitable has this
Fable of Christ been to us in Rome.

Hosius in his 4th. Book against Brentius, affirms that the Scriptures when
alleged by Papists is the Word of God; but when Protestants allege it is the
express word of the devil.

As they have Printed here in Rome, etc. that there is no Plot, that there was
never such a Man as Sir Edmunbury Godfrey, only a story raised from the Town in
Norfolk, called St. Edmunds-bury, so they deal by the Scriptures, making the
simple people here believe, that the Religion of the Protestants in England
lies in Rags and Beasts skins; because our Bibles are bound up in Leather.

The same Cardinal in his triple Dialogue, and Cardinal Cusanus in his second
Epistle to the Bohemians, Without blushing tells us, that if any one has the
Exposition of the Church of Rome, though he understand it not, (but be written
for them as the Jesuits last Speeches,) nay though he do not know whether it be
agreeable to the Scripture or his own mind; (as Hills paper found in his
pocket at Execution,) yet he has the very word of God, which will save him; but
that you may better understand the Cardinals meanings, They both agree that the
Scriptures are to be expounded by this Church, according to their present
occasion, and that Obedience is to be yielded, to that interpretation with
questioning, as an Ox or Ass obeys his Master, and so dye like beasts.

Now whether Father Garnet, and his associates have not left an exact copy, for
his successor Father Whitebread, and his accomplices lately executed, or for
Mr. Langhorn or any other Popish Traitor to follow; is left to the thoughts of
your friends, for they have heard it.

Father Garnet, being asked before the Lords Commissioners in the Tower,
whether Hall the Jesuit and he had any conference together; he swore upon his
Salvation, seconding it with Imprecations and Oaths, that he did not
Equivocate, then denied again and again, that he had no discourse with Hall,
afterward when he knew that Hall had confessed it, Garnet owned he had
offended, if Equivocation did not help him.

He swore upon Oath, he had neither writ nor sent to Tresmond the Jesuit, which
he knew to be false, his own Letters being intercepted, they disproved him.

Tresham one of the Powder Treason Traitors, did confess, that Garnet did know
of the Treason, but yet three or four hours before his death, by his wifes
Importunity, he set it down in his own hand writing, with an Oath and
protestation upon his salvation, that he had not seen Garnet in sixteen years
before at least, and so dyed denying his first Confession; not long after his
Oath and protestation proved false, besides Garnet himself confessed, that he
had seen Tresham many times within that space.

Whereupon being demanded, what he thought of Treshams dying Oath and
protestation, Garnet gave his opinion under his own hand, that it was lawful
to imitate Treshams equivocating at the very point of death; with some reasons
for it, that it was lawful in Life time, upon some necessity, or to free a
friend from danger, and since lawful in life, then as lawful in a dying man,
Causabon, ibid. page 202.

Much more is upon Record of this Garnet, who used to write his answers and
denials with his own hand: for the same reason the five Jesuits and Langhorn
has had their speeches written, that they might not be liable to
misconstruction.

In all this Father Garnet, acted and wrote nothing contrary to the sense of
the Roman Catholic Writers: but Father Gavan in affirming only Marians was for
a little King killing; this contradicts hundreds of their Authors, who expressly
write upon King-killing; that the whole papal World are the ^suits advocates,
and trust their own souls with them, and the Education of their Sons: Father
Gavan forgot that France, Venice, and other parts has expelled the Jesuits, for
their Conspiracys or Murders.

Protestants may be so Charitable to think men that are Christians as the
Papists are, durst not die denying the truth at the last moment of mortallity,
but the premise, considered, they will find cause to conclude otherwise.

True, there is great cause to pity the people deluded by these Priests, poor
souls they scarce know more of the Bible, then what their Priests tell them,
that it is an Heretical book only in use with the Protestants which they call
Heretics. However to stop the mouths of some of their people, they have a
Bible but of the Popes own making,

It Is most certain, the Priests Orders and Absolutions are of more Authority
with such ignorant people then the Scriptures, which is confirmed by Mr. Prance
in his narrative, who affirms he would have dyed and have denied the Murder of
Sir Edmund-Bury Godfry, if he had had the absolution of a Priest, then he had
held himself as innocent as the Child unborn.

Not only the people but the priests also are generally a ignorant of the true
Scriptures. Luther and others have affirmed of themselves, that they have been
Popish priests many years, and never read so much as a leaf of the Bible, the
Popes Canons being all their Scriptures; One Canon was thus, that if the Popes
should lead themselves and others to Hell by heaps, yet none must be so
presumptuous to ask them why they do so.

Paulus Emilius in his 7 books affirms, that the Pope suffered the Ambassadors
of Cicilia, to prostrate themselves before him, and say unto him, O thou which
take away the sins of the whole World have mercy upon us: no wonder then,
that those that really believe in the Pope, and the Priests absolutions, should
die and think themselves happy, as Langhorn, and other Traitors, to be whipped,
and sent with the Popes pass into the other World,

Sir, I fear I have been too tedious, but consider it is my care to omit
nothing that may serve you or satisfy your friends, by this Letter from your
Friend,

Rome, June 10. 79. Stilo Novo. T. W.

FINIS.

