A SERMON PREACHED UPON The XXXth. of January S. V. 1684/5. AT PARIS In the
Chapel of the Right Honorable the Lord Vicount PRESTON, His MAJESTY'S Envoy
Extraordinary in the Court OF FRANCE.

LONDON, Printed for Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1685.

TO The Right Honorable RICHARD LORD VICOVNT PRESTON, His Majesty's Envoy
Extraordinary in the Court OF FRANCE.
My Lord,
HAd I no other consideration in the publishing of this Discourse, than to make
an open acknowledgment of my duty to your Lordship, (and not be silent at a
time when the Applauses of the most indifferent Persons declare their
satisfaction at your continuance of that character, which none can better
sustain, nor has any ever born it with greater Honor and Fidelity, than all
men must confess your Lordship to have done it) I should think it sufficient to
outweigh all those Censures, which perhaps may pass, with security enough, both
upon me and It.

[It was not to be doubted, but that a Prince so Wise to understand, so
Gracious to reward the services of the meanest of his Subjects, would have a
particular regard to a Merit and Loyalty great as your Lordship's; and not so
soon part with a Minister, whom he knows to have been such, as others promise
they will be. It is the Vanity of most men to speak great things, it is your
Lordship's Honor that you do them: And I may without danger of any censure,
but your own, truly say, That in a Station which affords, if any other, trials
and opportunities to exercise the highest abilities, you have exceeded not only
your own Promises, but even our Hopes, and given us an Assurance that there is
nothing now remaining that can equal the greatness of your Mind.

Permit me, my Lord, to render this short testimony to your Virtues, so far
from flattery, that those who know your Lordship, will confess it to be hardly
the truth; and if you please pardon my presumption in this address, I believe
as unexpected to your Lordship, as I can justly say it was undesigned by me.]

But, my Lord, it has been thought fit to give your Lordship this satisfaction,
that whilst you are rendering your Obedience to his Majesty's Commands in
England, we have not been less careful, both to show our selves, and to exhort
others to be as firm to their Loyalty here: and since we could not have the
Honor of your presence to complete the utmost Solemnity of this Day amongst
us, by this Address at least to join you in our service, and return our
acknowledgments for that Opportunity we have had under your protection, to
remember the captivity of Zion in a strange Land.

The only thing that might justly have deterred me from this attempt, was the
meanness of the performance, did I not consider that Saints and Martyrs (like
that God before whom they stand) are not so much taken with the Elegant
composures of their Votaries, as with their Piety and Sincerity; and accept him
who brings an honest heart, rather than an accurate Discourse to their Memories.

And this, my Lord, were the Sermon it self silent, yet the Honor I have to
belong to your Lordship, would undoubtedly confirm to as many as have ever
known your character. May your Lordship long have the happiness to continue
your services to his Sacred Majesty and the Royal Family, and increase every
day those applauses that are so justly paid to your great Virtues; whilst I
still endeavor by all the duties of my employ, more and more to deserve that
Title I most desire, of being, with all humble duty and respect,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most faithful and most devoted Chaplain and Servant,
W. W. ECCL.

JOE^. II. 15, 16, 17. Blow the Trumpet in Zion, sanctify a Fast, call a
solemn Assembly. Gather the People: sanctify the Congregation: assemble the
Elders: gather the Children, and those that suck the Breasts: let the
Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet. Let the
Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and
let them say, Spare thy People, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to
reproach; that the Heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say
among the People, Where is their God?
SO contrary is the mournful Appearance of this day, to those Triumphs and
rejoycings wherewith our Primitive Predecessors were wont to celebrate the
Memories of their Martyrs, that either the Spirit of Christianity seems very
much decayed in Us, or something must be thought to have been defective in that
Saint, whose death we thus Lament, instead of magnifying his Conflicts, and
glorying in his Victory.

Indeed had we only to commemorate the Merits of the Martyr, the Innocence and
Piety wherein he lived, and the Constancy and Magnanimity with which he died,
these funeral Obsequies would be very unbecoming the Solemnity of out
Remembrance: and we might esteem it a Crime to let our Hymns and our Praises
fall any thing short of the most celebrated Festivals of the Saints of old;
when both the Excellence of the Cause, and the Resolution of the Person, and
the Barbarity of his Sufferings, so far exceeded the most of theirs.

And this Perhaps the Generations to come may think themselves obliged to do:
But alas! the return of this day brings with it another, and sadder
Remembrance to us; and when our Tongues would speak the Glories of this Martyr,
our Consciences confound us with horror to consider, that we our selves were
his Persecutors.

Had the death he suffered been the Sin of some other hand, had an Infidel
Nation risen up against him, or had the Chance of War cut him off in our own,
we might have regretted the loss of so Royal a defender, but should soon have
turned our Sorrow into Joy, and have giving him a name Superior to the
chiefest of those Hero's that Fabulous Antiquity can boast of. But that we who
were obliged by all the ties of God and man to obey him, should destroy that
life, for which we ought not to have refused any Hazard of our own; that we who
were certainly his Subjects, and who pretend to be Christians too, should
violate all the rights of Majesty; trample under foot all the Commands of that
Gospel, by which we are called; and imbrue our hands in Royal and Innocent
Blood, after so barbarous a manner, that no Antiquity can afford a Parrallel;
This raises those Clouds that obscure so bright a day; and instead of appearing
at his Monument with Songs of Eucharist for his Victory, calls us here, between
the Porch and the Altar, to confess our own sins.

Spare thy People, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to reproach; that the
Heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the People,
Where is their God?

And here, would to God the Sincerity of our Repentance might in some degree,
answer the heinousness of our sin. That out Piety this day, might as
effectually contribute to the appeasing, as the Violence committed on it has
too fatally concurred to the kindling Gods anger against Us. That as our
Church, so far from being involved in the Guilt, that she partook in all his
Sufferings, has nevertheless provided, by an annual return of this day, to
remember that sin, which neither We, nor our Posterity, shall ever be able
sufficiently to lament; so may We as sincerely observe, as she has piously
established the Fast; and speak at least our detestation of the Sin, if we
cannot atone the greatness of the Guilt.

It is not necessary that I should enter on any curious Enquiry into the
Occasion of this Prophecy, to apply it to our present assembling at this time:
that which may be seen of it at the first View is sufficient to approve my
choice, That the Jews by their sins had provoked God's Anger against them, and
had already felt in great measure his Punishments too. The Famine consumed
them; the drought burnt up their Ground; the remainder of their increase the
Worm and the Caterpillar consumed. In a word, they were brought down to the
very Brink of Destruction, and had only remaining this solemn manner of
repentance, to appease his Anger, and to prevent their ruin.

I hope there is no one so little sensible of those Evils, our own Nation has
labored under, that I need enter on a Remembrance so fresh and so ungrateful.
The Wounds are scarce yet closed, which our own hands have given us; and the
repose we even now enjoy, seems rather an Interval lent us by Heaven to see if
we will yet repent, than any firm and established Peace. Our fears have again
been awaked at new Attempts, and we have had but too just Cause to apprehend,
if not Joel's Famine of Bread; yet what is infinitely worse, Amos's Famine of
the Word among us: let us therefore as we have transcribed the Example of these
Jews, both in our Sins and in our Punishments, so take now the advice of the
Prophet, as spoken to our selves; it may be yet to redress and to secure all.

Blow the Trumpet in Sion: sanctify a Fast, etc.

Our Text naturally resolves its self into these three heads of discourse, and
every one so proper to our present Consideration, that I shall not be able to
pass by any.

First: the Nature of that Fast, which the Prophet here proposes to be observed
by us; Blow the Trumpet in Sion: call a solemn Assembly.

Secondly: the manner how we ought to prepare for it; Sanctify the Fast.

Thirdly: The Method of celebrating of it; Let the Priests, the Ministers of
the Lord, Weep between the Porcb and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy
People, O Lord.

I begin with the first of these;

I. The Nature of that Fast, which the Prophet here proposes to be observed by
us; Blow the Trumpet in Sion: call a solemn Assembly.

So exactly correspondent is the Establishment of this Holy day to the
Prescription of our Text, that it might almost be imagined, that our Church had
taken not only the Authority of the Prophet to establish the Fast, but even the
particulars of his advice for her direction how to do it.

If first we consider the Original of this Fast; Ours, as well as His, is
established by Public Authority. The Trumpet has sounded from Zion, Number. 10. 2.
and the Voice of it is gone out into all the Corners of our Israel. It Is our
Obedience to this call that draws us from our Closets to the Congregation, and
makes our mourning now as public and solemn, as both our own Piety, and the
sad occasion, would otherwise have rendered it great and sincere.

Secondly, for the Extent of it, Ours, as well as His, is Universal: no
Quality, no Sex no age exempt: Not the Bridegoom excepted in the days of his
Feasting; nor the Bride to accomplish the Week of her rejoicing. Genesis 29. 2^
From the Elders of our Tribes, to the least Child in our Houses, all are
called to this Fast, and it is to be hoped that every one will be as ready to
obey their Call, as our Governors have been careful to proclaim it to us.

Lastly; for the Uniformity and Solemnity of this Fast, we have our form too
prescribed wherein to keep it; And though our Offering be more large, and
extended to those particulars, which our sins have occasioned, yet is the Sum
of all the very same, which the Holy Prophet commanded the Priests, the
Ministers of the Lord, to weep between the Porch and the Altar; and say, Spare
thy People, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to reproach; that the Heathen
should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the People, Where is
their God?

Such is the Parallel of this day, with the Pattern of that Fast which the
Prophet Joel prescribed in our Text; and sure nothing could have been more
applicable to the Circumstances of our own.

First, for the Authority of its Establishment; What could have been imagined
more proper to appease the anger of Heaven for Faults committed by an usurped
and pretended Power, than so solemn a Repentance prescribed by the lawful and
true one? Long had the Trumpet been blown to War and to Rebellion; the Church
become militant; and our Pulpits, instead of setting forth the Gospel of Peace,
spoke nothing but Wars, and Seditions, and Tumults to the People. It became us
certainly at last to sound it to some other blast; and remember, that God had
appointed the Priests a more proper use of the Trumpet, Number. 10. 3, 7.
to assemble the Congregation to serve the Lord, than always to give the Alarm
to the Battle to destroy their Enemies. v. 9.
This public Testimony of Sorrow, was the only Act that could have been
opposed to the Iniquity of those Ordinances, that so many years involved us in
ruin and Confusion. And our Courts of Justice, in which such numbers of Loyal
and Innocent Persons have heretofore been condemned, though they can never make
us a Satisfaction equal to their Crimes, yet seem at least in the Establishment
of this day, to speak their Repentance for it: and by the Authority they have
given to this public Sorrow, would appear not only to beg it of Us, but even
to entreat us to intercede with Heaven too for their forgiveness.

Secondly, for the universality of this Fast; what less could have been done,
than when all the Nation were involved in the Guilt, to join them all in the
Repentance for it? I shall not need to say, that they were our pretended
Representatives at least that were the Authors of this Murder, and that they
did it too in the name of the People of England. And however so notorious was
the Violence, that not only the open Royalist, but even many of their own
Faction, secretly regretted the Villainy they committed; yet still, so many
consented to it; of the rest, so many did nothing, or at least not so much as
they might, and ought to have opposed it; and even those who most attempted to
prevent it, yet by their sins and their Impieties, fought so much more
powerfully against their Sovereign, than all their Arms could do to promote his
Cause, that even They may too much be charged as the Authors of our Misery; and
so all of us seem to have conspired to have made the Crime of this day, in the
utmost Propriety of the Phrase, a National Sin.

Lastly; for the Form prescribed, wherein to speak forth our Sorrow and to
implore our pardon; as it was the Piety of our Governors, that with one Voice,
as well as one heart, we should all join in this great Rogation; so may it
appear too no improper manner for the Solemnity of this day above all others,
that the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, should by the Uniformity of a set
and well composed Liturgy, at one for the Rudeness and irreverence, I wish I
could not say for the rash and almost blasphemous Offerings of those
uncommissioned Teachers; who by the unpremeditated Nonsense of their Prayers,
no less profaned the Honor of God, than by the Pulpit Wildfire of their
Sermons, they ruined both the Peace of his Church, and the Majesty of his
Anointed.

And now when such has been the Piety of our Governors, to establish the Fast,
and our own engagements are so great to join in the Observation; 'twill be time
for us next to consider, how we are to do it; that as they have Blown the
Trumpet in Zion, so may we provide to sanctify the Fast.

This therefore brings me to the Second part of this discourse,

II. The manner how we ought to prepare for it; Sanctify the Congregation, etc.

The Word in the Original, which our Text twice renders to Sanctify, Jos. 3.
5. 7, 13 etc.
in its own Nature seems to signify no more than to Prepare: And in that great
Passage of Exodus XIX. Exodus 19.
When God commands Moses to sanctify the People against the third day, that he
intended to come down among them upon Mount Sinai, v. 10. V. 10.
we find by the Execution of his Commission, that it implied only a solemn
declaration that they should be ready to meet the Lord, V. 14, 15.
v. 14, 15. And Moses, went down from the Mount, and sanctified the People, and
said, Be ready against the third day.

And the same no doubt was the design of the Prophet Joel in this place, where
addressing himself, as is plain, to the Elders of the Jews, to them to whom the
Authority belonged, to Blow the Trumpet in Zion: call a solemn Assembly, i. e.
to appoint the Fast, that they should Sanctify the Congregation. His meaning
must be, that they should command the People to be ready against the day of the
Solemnity to lay aside all other business, Levit. 23. 28, 30.
and attend the Service of the Lord in the Congregation.

But though this therefore be the literal import of this phrase; and perhaps
all that was required of them to whom the Prophet spoke, the rulers and
Governors of the People; yet both the design of this Warning, and the
particular explication of the Expression, almost always understood of that
special sort of Preparation, Exodus 29. v. 33, 36, 37, etc.
which consisted in cleansing and purifying themselves, call upon us, not only
to be ready to assemble our selves on the day of the Fast, but so to prepare
our selves too, that we may be fit for the Celebration.

It was the great care of God Almighty under the Law, that upon all such solemn
Assembling as this; the People should be Sanctified before they came to the
Congregation, and then at least be free from any present guilt, when they met
to implore the Forgiveness of their past sins.

Hence we find what strict charges they had to purify themselves, Number. 11. 18.
to wash or to change their Clothes, Exodus 19. 14, 15.
to abstain even from lawful pleasures in which there might only seem to be a
Pollution; Genes. 35. 2.
and when this was done, Number. 19.
what care the Priests took to sanctify the Congregation, i. e. to reconcile
the People, by their solemn forms of Expiation to God.

And sure our care to prepare our selves ought to be no less, because we are
now no longer under the pedagogy of these Ceremonies. Ver. 13.
And if the Prophet Joel here requires it, even of the Jews themselves, that
they should, though not omit the other, yet rather be careful to make that
preparation of a spiritual Holiness, which these shadows typified; we certainly
much more must resolve at this time to lay aside every accursed thing, and rent
our hearts and not our garments, and turn unto the Lord our God.

So that here then it will be our business diligently to reflect, how we are
prepared this day to sanctify the Fast.

Have we seriously repented of those sins that once provoked the Justice of
Heaven to appear, as on this day, to our Confusion; and which, if our Piety
does nothing to prevent it, will again return to our greater desolation?

Is there any one amongst us, that by the malignity of his Nature, the
desperateness of his Fortunes, or a misguided Zeal, has been actually concerned
in this great guilt, or otherwise partaken in the crime of it, by assisting, or
encouraging, or even approving the doing it? Is there any one now present, who
though unconcerned in that black Parricide, is yet involved in any of those
Principles that led to it? Has assisted, approved, or encouraged those new
Rebels, the Progeny of the same Old Cause, that have again so lately
endeavored to crown the Son with the like glory their ancestors did the
Father? Let me beseech them either to sanctify the fast with us, or not to
join in the Celebration: Let them here sacrifice this day all such villainous
thoughts, these practices, and these principles: Let them offer up all those
interests and resentments, that ever have, or ever may involve them in so great
Impiety. And having thus washed their cloths, by a Repentance for what is past,
Let them to complete the Sanctification, here engage themselves for the time to
come, actually to join in the contrary duties of Loyalty and Obedience to their
King; resolving evermore to disown all such Men and such Principles, as shall
ever hereafter endeavor to engage them in the like detestable Conspiracies.

Without this all our Fasting and humiliation will stand us in little stead;
our Assemblies, Isai. 1. 13.
even this solemn meeting will be so far from appeasing, that it will kindle
God's anger to a yet higher degree against us. In vain shall we cry every man
to his God, Jon. 1. 5.
whilst such Jonases are embarked in the same Cause with us. But let us cast
out the man for whose sake all these Evils are come upon us; Let us examine
ours souls that no accursed thing may remain in them; Jos. 7. 13.
then shall the Storms of our Civil Confusions cease, when we have sacrificed
these Enemies to Heaven and our own Peace: Religion and Loyalty shall revive
amongst us; our Country shall again flourish as a City that is at Unity within
it self; Psalm. 122. 3. 7.
Peace shall be within our Walls, and Righteousness within our Palaces; 4.
Then shall the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, and shall worship in his
House with a holy [and united] Worship. The Throne of Judgment shall be
established; v. 5.
even the Throne of the House of David for Ever and Ever.

Thus shall we render this great Solemnity truly such a Fast as the Lord has
chosen; Our weeping and our mourning shall come up before him as the Incense,
acceptable in his sight: he will receive our Confessions with Favor, and
mercy, and answer our requests with Peace and security.

I shall say no more to the Second particular, The Preparation with which we
ought to sanctify the Fast: Our last Business now to be considered, is,

III. Being thus prepared, How we ought to keep the Fast.

And for this it is certainly impossible to pursue any better method, than that
form of Confession the Prophet Joel has here proposed to the Jews; viz. To
implore the favor and mercies of Heaven.

1. For the forgiveness of this great sin: Spare thy People, O Lord.

2. That our miseries may never be turned by the Application of wicked men;
either,

1. To the Scandal of God's People: And give not thine Heritage to reproach: Or,

2. To the ruin of our Church or State: That the Heathen should rule over them:
Or,

3. Finally, To the Reproach of God's Providence: Wherefore should they say
among the People, Where is their God?

1. We must implore the Favors and mercy of Heaven for the forgiveness of this
great sin: Spare thy people, O Lord.

And here we are arrived at the proper business of this day; to implore the
pardon of a crime which my soul trembles to remember, and which I should doubt
had exceeded the power of any Repentance to expiate, had not the Apostles left
us an Example, by exhorting the Jews to labor for a forgiveness even of their
crucifying the Lord of Glory.

For indeed, What floods of tears can ever be sufficient to wash off the stain
of so much Innocent and Royal Blood, as our late civil confusions have brought
upon us? Is it possible for our sorrow ever to equal those Violences and
Oppressions, those Ruins and Devastations, the Murders, the Sacrileges, those
Sins which our Eyes have seen, and which it may be our Hands have acted? How
shall I recount the most flourishing of States brought to Desolation? A Church,
the Envy and Hatred of Hell, the Delight of its Friends, and Terror of its
Enemies; So pure and orthodox its Canons and Confession, so learned the Pens,
so exemplary the Lives of its Professors, and when the fiery trial came on, so
firm and constant their Sufferings, that the most Primitive Christians could
not have desired any thing more conformable to their own Piety; persecuted,
profaned, thrown down by Enthusiastic Zeal, and a thorough Reformation: In a
word, a King, so Primitive too, that He seemed to have revived some
Constantine, or Theodosius, or Marcian again among us; so just and brave, that
he was worthy to have ruled, though he had not been born to Empire: Cut off by
the villainy of his own Subjects; a Martyr to his Religion, a Sacrifice to his
Country, and the Everlasting reproach as well as guilt of both.

This is but a light description of that sin, which we are here assembled to
commemorate and to lament; and I must beg leave to add yet more; For however it
will easily be imagined that all this wickedness could not be accomplished but
through innumerable Crimes, which neither can any tongue express, nor any
thoughts conceive, yet such unusual Villainies then acted us; which Antiquity
never knew, nor will Posterity believe; that we might well be esteemed to fail
in that duty which this Fast requires, should we not make some more solemn and
particular remembrance of them.

Through what treachery did our Anointed first fall into their nets? When those
perfidious men, to whose trust he had committed his Sacred Person, contrary to
all the Laws of Nature and Nations as themselves, whilst not yet Villains
enough to commit so black a treachery, confessed contrary to all the sentiments
of Honor, and dictates of Religion, sold him into the hands of his Enemies,
who even then designed his destruction? With a supplication indeed for his
security, but such as a Popish Inquisitor uses when he delivers the poor
Heretic to the secular power, entreats for a life, which he both desires may
not, and which he infallibly knows shall not be granted.

And accordingly, How soon did all things conspire to his destruction? When the
violence of the Faction broke off those Treaties that had almost restored us to
our peace: The lower House, that had usurped the power of the Government it
self before, now becomes its self reformed; And to accomplish a Villainy, which
an ordinary Malignant's conscience was not thought proof enough to go through
with, only a few confiding men were to be trusted with so desperate a design; A
Court of Justice was erected, and Majesty arraigned to answer for treason
committed against his own Rebels.

How shall I recount the wickedness of their process? A trial only to make the
condemnation the more grievous for being the more solemn and public. In which
their King was not allowed that liberty of defense which every ordinary Subject
claims as his right, and which they themselves enjoyed, for this notorious,
this undeniable Conspiracy: Nay in which their President durst plainly tell his
Sacred Majesty, That he was now in a Court where reason was not to be heard.

With what Noise and Insults was all the action carried on? When the clamours
of the people for Justice first, and then for Execution, was the only voice
that was heard in our Streets: And as if with our Loyalty all sense both of
Religion and Humanity had been lost too, Some spit in his Royal Face as he past
by; Others pressed upon Him with the smoke of their Tabaco, for which they knew
he had a particular aversion, and even threw their Pipes in his way: The least
expression of Reverence to Him, was punished with all the Violence a populer
fury could execute; And One, who, more compassionate than the rest, only wished
him well, was killed upon the place for his unseasonable piety.

When at last the fatal Sentence was pronounced; How hardly were they brought
to allow him any Assistance to prepare him for his death? His prayers
continually disturbed by the Rudeness of those Guards that intruded upon his
most secret retirements: His last thoughts diverted with Propositions to save
his Life, which they knew neither Honor nor Conscience would permit him to
receive. What Shouts, what Acclamations, when the cruel stroke was given that
finished the Tragedy? How greedily did they thirst after his Blood, when some
plunged their hands into his wound; Others dipped their staves in it. The very
block on which he rested his Sacred Head cut in pieces, that every one might
satisfy his cruelty with some memorial of their villainy; and even the very
boards and Earth Stained with his blood, distributed as a mark whereby to
triumph over his fall.

And here one would have expected a conclusion of their guilt, and that they
should at least have desisted to pursue him now he was dead, and no longer in a
condition to oppose their designs. But alas! their malice extended beyond his
Execution; and as they had condemned him for a Malefactor; so they resolved he
should not even in his burial be honored as a King. How small was the expense
they prescribed for his Interment: with what Privacy was it transacted; and He
who had been the most Zealous defender of the rights and Ceremonies of the
Church in his life, not allowed the least usage of them at his Funeral now he
was dead.

And here then, let our own Consciences speak; or if we fear they may be too
partial, let the Censures of the World tell us; Was there ever Villainy like
unto this guilt with which it pleased God to punish the sins of his People? Let
us search the Records of Antiquity, Let us ask of the Generations that are
past, and Let us ask from one end of the Heaven even to the other, if ever any
thing was committed amongst them that can parallel this impiety. That a
Christian Kingdom should break through all those bonds of duty and obedience,
which the more righteous Heathens have reverenced as Sacred and Inviolable.
That so many Oaths, and Vows, repeated with that Frequency, taken with that
Solemnity, should all be insufficient to preserve our Fidelity. That Religion
and Reformation, two things, than which none can be more excellent in
themselves, nor are any more easily and more dangerously abused, should be able
to cheat us into Wickedness, which the barbarous Scythians never heard of, and
which when it was told them they were scandalized at the report. Lastly, that
not only the Honor of God should be pretended for the Motive, but even his
Assistance be desired, and even affirmed to have been received in the execution
of all this great sin. This is that circumstance which raises our crime to the
highest pitch of guilt, and makes us even afraid to look up to Heaven for the
pardon of this sin, whose assistance we have so often, and so impudently
implored to the commission of it.

Yet since it has pleased God to draw us at last out of the blindness our fury
had involved us in, let us take this blessing for our Earnest, that he has not
yet totally forsaken us, but as He has delivered us from the Evil, so if even
now we return unto him, He will free us from the guilt too of our Sins. Only
let our Repentance be as sincere, as our Crimes have been provoking; Joel 2. 14.
Who can tell but he may yet repent, return, and leave a blessing behind him?

But it is not only this pardon, which we are this day to implore at his Hands:
Our Text carries us on to yet other Petitions; that being justified before God,
we may also prepare the way to take off the reproach of Man, and clear our
selves in the sight of both together. This brings me to the second part of the
Holy Prophet's prayer, Give not thine Heritage to reproach.

2. That this great Sin may never turn, by the Application of wicked Men, to
the Scandal and Reproach of us or our Religion.

How necessary this part of the Petition is to us, I could wish the public
declarations of the whole World did not too loudly speak. The Monuments are
still extant rhat show us, how we were become a Scandal and a Proverb to all
the Nations round about us. Nay that nothing might be wanting to illustrate the
Horror of this Villainy, it scandalized even our own selves too; and those
very Factions, that brought their King to his ruin, by the secret Orders of
Heaven, themselves lamented his fall, and confessed the Impiety. How loudly did
his praises now sound from those Pulpits, that had bid defiance to Him and his
Party heretofore? The Covenant its self was taught to change its Voice, and
from a Band of Rebellion to destroy the Government, was shown to be a League of
Loyalty to preserve the King.

Scandalous no doubt was the sin, and that villainy detestable indeed to all
good Men, which thus forcibly staggered the Consciences of these Separatists,
by Nature formed, by Principle bred up to Faction, and now by above eight years
practice, one might have thought sufficiently instructed in Rebellion, not to
startle at a guilt they had themselves so Zealously pursued. And how shall We
escape the common reproach, who have been so unhappily united in a Country and
Society, that has produced such Monsters? Blessed be God who has left us a Mark
of distinction to prevent so great a Slander: And amidst all our regret for the
fatal Villainy of this day, we cannot but joy and glory in this, that not any
of our Church was involved in this guilt, or ever possibly can be in the like.

Let the Actions of our Predecessors speak our Innocence for what is past.
Their sufferings are as known, as the Violence of their Enemies has been
notorious. Their Loyal writings, in the midst of a prosperous Rebellion, still
show us, not only the Righteousness of their Cause, but even their readiness to
assert it in defiance of danger. And our own assembling at this time, to detest
the Principles, no less than to bewail the Practices, of those Conspiratours,
declares that we are not at all degenerate, but still maintain the same
Opposition to that Faction, who under the Cloak of Reformation, have
scandalized the very name of Protestant, and by a sad Experience taught us,
that Kings may be proscribed in other places besides Rome, and that a Fanatic
has as strong an Arm to lift up against a Prince's life, as the stoutest Jesuit
or Jacobin can boast of.

Let our Principles be examined; Let the most accurate Inquisition pass upon
our writings; Let the Solemnity of our Piety for the death of our late
Sovereign, and the firmness, we have again had opportunity too much to show, of
our Zeal and Loyalty to our present King: And if all this be not sufficient,
Let the malice of those Men who acted this Villainy, that in those days
involved the Church in the ruin of its* Defender, and has again endeavored
once more to put down Her that they might come the more advantageously to
strike at Him; Let these show that we have no part nor Inheritance with them:
Only that as the Royal Martyr of this day, not only commanded his Son with his
last breath to forgive them, but Himself prayed for their conversion; so will
we never cease as faithfully to execute his Will, as that Son has done it; and
with the same Piety that he has pardoned the Fact, beseech God to bring them to
Repentance too for it.

These are our Prayers, such our affections toward them; May the God of Heaven
answer our Requests, and give us at last both the Satisfaction and the Security
of beholding their Conversion. But if the greatness of Their sins prevent the
Effect we so much desire of our present Offerings, we must then beg leave to go
on with Our Text, to another address to secure our selves; The third particular
now to be spoken to, And give not thine Heritage to reproach, that the Heathen
should rule over Them.

3. That our own sins at least, may never bring us to the like ruin, either of
our Church or State; nor Evermore permit these men, as they have heretofore
done, to prevail against us.

And this too is a Petition no less proper to our present Circumstances, than
the preceding requests have been but too applicable to the memory of our past
Evils. Our sins, which called down that last Vengeance upon us, are still as
heinous and universal to provoke a new one. Our Divisions are yet greater; and
and that fertile Brood of Factions, which that unnatural War produced, and
which no Country or Antiquity ever heard of before, still continue more
fatally, and more dangerously to distract us.

We have again seen the Government divided against it self: The People have
been blown up into a new Ferment; The Bishops and Councillors have again been
Resolved to be Popishly affected; Nay, the very Militia has been once more
attempted, and they were no doubt Confiding men too into whose hands it should
have again been put. And when all this would not do, New designs have been laid
to seize that Government by Violence, they could not gain by Petition. How was
his Sacred Majesty almost caught in their traps? The destruction so well laid,
that it had been impossible to have escaped it; and Providence was forced to
act almost a Miracle to prevent it.

And now when our danger has again so nigh overtaken us, certainly He must be
very unsensible of the former Evils, that can think Himself unconcerned at such
a time as this, to pray against the Future. Let the Miseries that we suffered,
and the sins that were committed in those days, when the Heathen, i. e. these
Enemies to our Church and State, ruled over us, be remembered: Was there Ever
Sorrow like unto our Sorrow, Lam. 1. 12.
wherewith the Lord afflicted us in those days of his fierce Anger? I have
before given you some general Prospect of our Calamities at this time, and your
own Knowledge will save me the regret of repeating to you any more. Lam. 1. 1.
How did our Cities become Solitary, that were full of people? Our Country,
Once great among the Nations, How did she become Tributary, even to her own
Vassals? Our King, the Anointed of the Lord, fell by their hand; Our Princes
were led into Captivity; Our Churches, the Places of our Assemblies, were
profaned; Lam. 2. 6.
The solemn Feasts and days, were forgotten in our Zion, and God in the
Indignation of his anger, despised both the King and the Priest.

And all this we have had but too great cause to fear, may again return upon
us. Yet since it has pleased the Almighty to stop the Vengeance, and command
the destroying Angel to suspend the Blow, if not to sheath his Sword, and give
us still longer respite to repent, and secure our selves; Let the Consideration
of this danger provoke us not to neglect the Opportunity. Let our Repentance at
this time be so sincere, that it may not only obtain our pardon for Past
Offenses, but prevail with Heaven to prevent our Impending dangers. Let us no
more give our Enemies this advantage against us, Exodus 33. 15.
to force the Almighty to withdraw his presence from amongst us, and leave us
again to engage them upon equal Terms: But let our lives and our prayers both
join in the Request, to save and to defend us, Spare thy People, O Lord, and
give not thine Heritage to reproach; that the Heathen should rule over them:
wherefore should they say among the People, Where is there God?

This is the last Consideration, which the Method of our Text now calls us to
conclude with.

4. That neither the miseries we have suffered, nor the dangers and confusions
we yet labor under, may by the Censures of wicked men ever turn to the
reproach of God's Providence, any more than of our own Church or Cause.
Wherefore should they say among the People, Where is their God?

It is not to be doubted but that this sarcastick Exprobration was that
reproach, which Joel had before prayed that God would not suffer his Heritage
to be exposed to. Deuteronomy. 28.
He had promised in his Law to supply them with plenty of Food, and to bless
their Victuals with Increase: That their houses should be full of all manner of
store; Psalm. 65. 13.
their Fields also should stand so thick with Corn, that they should laugh and
sing. Well therefore might they fear the reproach of the Heathen, when instead
of this plenty, they should be forced to go and seek for necessary nourishment
of them, whom they excluded from these promises; who no doubt would be forward
enough to make a Byword of them, and insult over their pretenses, as if their
God either could not, or would not relieve them. Is this the People that has
the Lord for their God? Joel. 1. 16. 7.
Behold, Is not the meat cut off before their Eyes? Their Vine laid waste? and
the Branches of their figtree made white? Their seed is rotten under their
clods, 17.
their Garners are made desolate, the Barns broken down, because the corn is
withered. Joel 1. 18.
How do the beasts groan because they have no pasture? for the rivers of Water
are dried up, and the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness. Where
is now their God to pity them? And where is the Lord to be jealous for his
Inheritance?

This was their Reproach, the Scandal of themselves, and their Religion, which
the Prophet so much feared, and so earnestly exhorted them to pray against: and
would to God we our selves this day had not too great cause to fear the like.
Witness, O ye pious and excellent Souls, what scornings and reviling to your
selves and your Religion did ye then bear, when being forced from that plenty
and tranquillity you once enjoyed; you become scattered abroad among the
Heathenand underwent their reproaches, more grievous and sensible than all the
other miseries and calamities of your cruel exile!

But what need I look back to the times that are past when our own continue to
afford us so plain an Application. How far both our late calamities, and our
present destractions have given occasion to the Enemy to triumph in our
misfortunes, as if they were not only the mark of our own sins, but even an
argument of the common illness of our Cause too, this alone may be sufficient
to show, that the Romanists not only hope from them, to see this Ferment one
day settle among us into down right Popery again; but even at this day make
this the great, and indeed it must be confessed the strongest, prejudice
against the Reformation, that since we have thrown off our Obedience to that
Church, we have run so many and different ways of Error, and are yet at such
distance from one another, as plainly show there is no truth nor certainty to
be found for us, but only in our return to them again.

I shall not here enquire into the Goodness of the Consequence, but must needs
say I could wish, there were not too much Truth and scandal in the Premises:
And who can tell whether, since any lesser Judgments have been ineffectual to
reclaim us, God may not at last punish us with this Blindness, and whilst we
refuse to submit to the easy and lawful power of his Church and his Anointed,
bring us once more under the intolerable Yoke of that usurped authority, from
whose Slavery both our Country and our Consciences are now so happily asserted.

This I am sure we have too much deserved, and may therefore justly have but
too great Cause to fear. Only my hope is, that whatever our own demerits are,
yet the Innocence of our Church shall still provoke God's providence to defend
her: And that our deliverance, as at this time, from our Enemies, shall always
disappoint such fatal expectations, and convince them, that though we have
sinned, yet are we his People; That he chastises us as Children, not punishes
us as his Enemies; and is still our God, though angry and provoked.

How great is the demonstration of his mercy and loving kindness, that we even
now continue a Church and People, as at this day? What Miracles did he work to
turn again the Captivity of our Zion, Psalm. 126. 1.
and deliver both us and our King from those Usurpers that so long had
triumphed over both? Has not the Almighty shown himself in our defense, who but
so lately has delivered us both from Popish and Fanatic Conspiracies? Let them
ask where is their God, that have not known by what singular and unexspected
means these designs were both Discovered and Disappointed? And though it
pleases God still to leave these men like the Canaanites in the Land, to try,
and to prove us, and which indeed but too much fulfill their character of being
scourges to our sides, Jos. 23. 13.
and thorns in our Eyes: Yet has he set bounds to their designs, which they
have not been able to pass, and which we trust they never shall exceed, to
ruin and destroy us.

Yet since both our peace and security are still in such danger through their
rage and their devices; Let us endeavor not less by our Piety than our
Policies, to countermine them. Let us engage the Assistance of Heaven by the
excellency of our Lives, as well as the justice of our Cause, to oppose their
attempts: Let us exceed them as much in the Sincerity of our Righteousness, as
they have done all others in the outward Pretenses and Hypocrisy of theirs.
Let us keep this day the fast which the Lord has chosen; to break the bonds of
wickedness; to have pity on the distressed; and to execute judgment and
justice in the gates. Joel. 2. 12.
Let us turn unto the Lord our God with all our hearts, with weeping, and with
fasting, and with mourning; and let us rent our hearts, and not our garments,
and let us say,

Spare thy People, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to reproach; that the
Heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the people,
Where is their God?

Then will the Lord be jealous for his People, Joel. 2. 18.
and awake for his Inheritance: Isa. 1. 26, 27.
He will restore us our Judges as at the first, and our Councillors as at the
beginning. Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with
righteousness: They shall be ashamed and confounded that seek her destruction:
but for his Church and his Anointed, they shall be preserved for evermore.

Which God of his Infinite mercy grant, for his dear Son Jesus Christ's Sake.
Amen.
Books sold by Moses Pit at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.
In FOLIO.
BIble for Churches with Cronology and an Index. The English Atlas Vol. 1st.
containing the description of the North Pole, as also Muscovy, Poland, Sweden
and Denmark. The Second Vol. of the Atlas containing half the Empire of
Germany. The third Vol. containing the other half of the Empire of Germany. The
fourth Vol. containing the 17 Provinces. Catalogus Impressorum Librorum
Bibliothecae Bodleianae in Acad. Oxon. Historia Universitatis Oxoniensis duobus
voluminibus comprehensa. Autore Antonio a Wood. Marmora Oxoniensa, ex
Arundelianis, Seldenianis, aliisque conflata, etc. cum notis Lydiati and
aliorum. Per Humph. Prideaux. Iamblicus Chalcidensis de Mysteriis Aegyptiorum,
Graec. Lat. Interpret T. Gale. A short view of the late troubles in England
from the year 1637. to 1660 by Sir William Dugdale Knight. Garter King of Arms
(This book was presented the Queen's Majesty by the University of Cambridge
when they entertained the King and Queen in the Year 1681). Gaulteri Charletoni
M. D. Onomosticon Zoicon, Editio secunda, priori long auctior. Websters
display of Witchcraft, wherein is affirmed that there are many sorts of
deceivers and Imposters. 1677. Theses Theologicae variis Temporibus in Academia
Sedanensi editae, and ad disputandum proprositae. Authore Ludovico le Blanc,
verbi Divini Ministro and Theologiae professore. In quibus exponitur sententia
Doctorum Ecclesiae Romanae, and Protestantium. 1675. Price 20 s. Taverneirs
travels into Persia, the East Indies, Tounquin, etc. Vol. 2.
In QUARTO.
SEveral English Bibles with the Liturgy, Apocrypha, singing Psalms and
Cronology. Common Prayer-Books. Theophilus and Philodoxus, 4 controversial
dialogues, of Prayer in an unknown tongue. The half Communion. The worshipping
of Images. The Invocation of Saints. By Gilb. Cole D. D. Historia Jacobitarum
in Aegyto, Lybia, Nubia, Aethiopia tota, and part Cypri insulae habitantium.
Per Jos. Abudacnum. A view and survey of the dangerous errors to Church and
State in Mr. Hobbs his Book, entitled Leviathan. By Edward, E. of Clarendon.
Votum pro pace Christiana. Autore An. Sall. D. D. History of Tithes, by John
Seldom. London, 1618. Dr. Pell's introduction to Algebra. 7. s. Dr. Wallis
Opera Mechanica. 22 s. Jer. Horrocii. Angl. Opusc. Astron. 1673.
In OCTAVO.
THO. Lydiati Canones Chronologici, nec non series summorum Magistratuum and
Triumphorum Romanorum.
FINIS.

