A PROPOSAL to Ease the Subject, and to Restore the Credit of the Nation; so
that within Six Months, Bank-Bills and Tallies will be as Current as ever they
were, and the Want of Money Supplied.
Humbly Offered to the Consideration of the Honorable House of Commons, By W.
V.
It Is as needless to demonstrate, that nothing will Restore Paper-Credit,
except a Bill promising Ten Pound is worth so much in the esteem of all Persons
to whom there is a Tender thereof in Payment, as that Paper-Credit is absolutely
necessary to support Trade, and relieve the Kingdom under its present
Exigencies. However impossible the former be accounted, it is humbly conceived
the following Proposal will effectually and easily do it.

It is supposed Ten Millions are now Owing by Tallies.
Leaving 50 per Cent. (which is the one Moiety of the whole) to remain at the
same Interest, and as at present they are: Let the other 50 per Cent. be paid
in Ten Years, in the Manner following: Viz.

Yearly Rates of Interest, Numbers of Years, Principal, Yearly paid from the
Principal, Interest Yearly paid, l. l. l. s. d. At 10 per Cent. 1 50 5 5 Ditto
2 45 5 4 10 Ditto 3 40 5 4 Ditto 4 35 5 3 10 Ditto 5 30 5 3 At 5 per Cent. 6 25
5 1 5 Ditto 7 20 5 1 Ditto 8 15 5 15 Ditto 9 10 5 10 Ditto 10 5 5 5 50 l. 23 l.
15 s.

For the first five Years 10 per Cent. of the Principal,with 10 per Cent.
Interest per Ann. and for the last 5 Years 10 per Cent. of the Principal, with
5 per Cent. Interest; and for this there shall be delivered Parchment Bills of
Credit for 10 l. in each Bill, or any other Sum carrying Interest in manner
above specified. Let a Fund be settled by Parliament in such a manner as to
prevent all jealousy of its Alienation to any other Use, and of a Value more
than merely sufficient to pay off the Five Millions of Bills of Credit, with
the designed Interest, in the said Term of Ten Years; the Yearly Surplus may be
applied to make up any other Deficiencies, after this End is answered.

It is necessary to mention what will contribute to the Reputation of these
Bills, and then of the common Benefit of them.

For the Reputation of the Bills.
I. The Certainty and Unalienableness of the Fund appropriated to the Payment
of the said Bills.

II. There are many eminent Traders that have already engaged, under their
Hands, to Accept the said Bills in all Payments; and numbers more than have
promised to do the same, if desired.

III. When Tallies are turned into Ten Pound Bills of Credit, as aforesaid,
lest any Person should (after all these Public Advantages) scruple to Receive
the said Bills, there are Persons of good Estates that will, within Six Months,
publish and declare where there shall be a sufficient Sum of Money provided to
give out in Exchange for all their Bills, and to the full Value (the Six Months
Interest only excepted) provided they shall not be Taxed for the said Money.

IV. Bank Bills, and Million Lottery Tickets, or New Milled Money, may exactly
be Counterfeited; but there is a Way also invented to make these Bills of
Credit so, that it will be impossible for any Person to Counterfeit them.

The Benefit of these Bills.
I. Whereas now the Nation pays, for every 50 Pound, Principal and Interest, at
8 per Cent. in 10 Years 90 Pound. Hereby we pay off Principal and Interest,
with -- 73 l. 15 s. And so we save, in 10 Years, in every 50 Pound -- 16 l. 05
s. Whereby we plainly see how great a Benefit this will be to the Subjects: For
325000 Pound will be saved in every Million in 10 Years, and we have the
Advantage of Trading with the Whole; for these Bills will supply the want of
Coin, and answer all the Uses of it; whereby the Discouragement our Traders and
others are at present under, will be removed; and without which, the Ready Cash
of the Nation is insufficient to support our Trade.

II. This eases the Nation, and there is no occasion to make an Act, That
those Bills shall pass Current in Payment. For it is the Opinion of many
Eminent Traders, That so soon as these Proposals are Read and Approved of by
this Honorable House, before the Act is Past, the Discount upon Tallies and
Bank Bills will fall; and when the Act is Past, and Tallies turned into Bills
of Credit, although there should be no Money provided to exchange the said
Bills, as aforesaid, they will be as Current, and more desirable than Ready
Money, as may be made appear by many that have and are willing to set their
Hands to the Proposal.

III. All the remaining Tallies not included in these proposed Bills, will
become reputable, seeing one Moiety is taken out, whereby the Yearly Payment of
those remaining will be easier, the Prospect of such Payments more encouraging;
yea, this certain Payment of one half, will insensibly gain an Esteem of all
Public Securities.

IV. Many will prefer these Bills to Ready Money, and buy them, because of the
Interest growing daily thereupon; the Easiness of their Carriage, Safety in
Possessing them, Prevention of the Trouble of Counting, and Loss by False
Money. But the Advantages are so obvious, as well as great and many, that a
Hint is sufficient to all Men of Thought.

V. The ruinous Trade of Buying and Selling of Bank Bills and Tallies will be
at an end; Taxes easily paid; the Bank, and all them who by the Bad Money, or
otherwise, have their Estates lodged in the Exchequer, be relieved, who are now
disabled from paying their Debts, and managing their Trade, unless they sell
their Tallies by a Discount of 30, 40, or 50 per Cent. which would be the utter
ruin of the greatest Number; and without selling them, they serve to no use,
either to the Public or themselves: For it is not 8 per Cent. Interest that
will support Traders Families, or manage their Trade, as we daily see by the
Failing of many who have Stocks in those Tallies.

It may also be added, That there may be more than 10 per Cent. allowed for
some of the first Years, and less in the following, either with little Addition
or Diminution in the Payment of the Interest, as appears by these Two different
Schemes: Yearly Rates of Interest, Numbers of Years, Principal, Yearly paid
from the Principal, Interest Yearly paid, l. l. l. s. d. At 10 per Cent. 1 50 5
5 Ditto 2 45 5 4 10 At 7 and per C. 3 40 5 3 Ditto 4 35 5 2 12 6 Ditto 5 30 5 2
5 Ditto 6 25 5 1 17 6 Ditto 7 20 5 1 10 Ditto 8 15 5 1 2 6 Ditto 9 10 5 15
Ditto 10 5 5 7 6 50 l. 23 l. Yearly Rates of Interest, Interest Yearly paid, l.
s. d. At 15 per Cent. 7 10 At 12 and per C. 5 12 6 At 10 per C. 4 At 7 and per
C. 2 12 6 At 5 per C. 1 10 Ditto 1 5 Ditto 1 Ditto 15 Ditto 10 Ditto 5 25 l.

And several other ways this may be adjusted, the Years and Rates of Principal
and Interest, which may also be varied as shall be thought fit.

And by either of these Ways, it is humbly conceived, the Credit of the Nation
will certainly be restored very speedily, and all things well settled, to the
Satisfaction and Safety of His Majesty, and all his Subjects; and Trade made to
flourish as much as ever.

It Is apparent, that without this, or some such other Expedient, we shall lose
most of the Trade of the Nation, to the utter ruin of the Subjects, and
chiefly poor Workmen, that will be famished for want of Bread.

There are several Ways beneficial to the Nation, to enable the Subjects to pay
Taxes, and to raise as much Money as our Occasions shall require, to carry on
the War with Vigor, until it is brought to an Honorable Peace, without
burthening the Subjects, as also to pay off the Debts of the Nation to
Satisfaction, all with less Charge than what has been done heretofore, and to
make Money plenty: Which the Proposer is willing to declare to those that will
endeavor to Ease those Grievances.


