A SPEECH Spoken by Sr. THOMAS WROTH KNIGHT, In the Honorable House of
COMMONS: Upon his delivery of a Petition from the Knights, Gentlemen, and
Freeholders of the County of Somerset.

February, 25. 1642.

Together with the Petition of the said County then delivered.

LONDON, Printed for H. S. 1642.

A SPEECH spoken by Sir THOMAS WROTH Knight, in the Honorable House of Commons
upon his delivery of a Petition from the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders,
of the County of Somerset, February, 25. 1641.
Mr. Speaker,
THe High and Glorious Assembly of the three Estates in Parliament, has a
near Resemblance to the Day of Judgment; for in Parliament we are called to
Account for our Actions both Good and Evil; here we hear the Voice of Ite
and Venite; From this Venite, the Knights, Gentlemen and Freeholders of the
County of Somerser have been encouraged to entrust Us humbly to present their
Petition to this Honorable House. It coms not attended with a numerous or
multitudinous Troop, but guarded with some thousand of Hands to attest their
approbation and assent. By reason of our Remoteness, diverse other Countries
have had the Honor to presede Ours in the like Expressions of Loyalty and
Duty, which Precedence may much disadvantage our Cordial Intentions, if this
House be not candid.

Mr. Speaker, It is our humble Supplication to this great Senate in behalf of
them that sent us and our selves, that neither the paucity of our Attendance,
nor the circumstance of time in the exhibiting this Petition, may make It or Us
invalid or unacceptable, since we have Hearts and Hands as zealous and ready to
maintain whatsoever is contained in our Petition, as any of the preceding
Countries.

The Laborers who entered into the Work at the shutting in of the Day,
received as much Wages as those that came early. It is the earnest desire of
our Hearts that this Honorable and prudent Council would vouchsafe Us such
wages (Gratious-Acceptance) and that our Petition may be honored with a
Reading.

Sr, I have but one thing more in charge; Whilst this Petition was ambulatory
in our Country for Hands, that renowned Act concerning Bishops and others in
Holy-Orders, never to be forgotten, and ever to be memoriz'd with thankfulness
to God, his Majesty, the Peers and Commons, passed, to the unspeakeable
content of all the well-affected Christians of this Kingdom; For which, I am
commanded to give this Honorable House all humble and hearty thanks. And Mr.
Speaker, might it be lawful in humility to speak my own thoughts, when the
Bill of Pluralities (the next great work toward the blessed Reformation) is
perfected, I will then say, Lord, now let thy servant depart this World in
peace, for mine eye has seen the great Salvation thou art beginning to work
for England.

God bless England.

