WIT for MONEY: OR, POET STUTTER. A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Smith, Johnson, and Poet
Stutter.

Containing Reflections on some late Plays; and particularly, on Love for
Money, or, The Boarding-School.

-- Good Satyr's no Abuse --
Mr. Durfey -- Epil. to Love for Money. Wit -- is now used like a common Slave,
Both by those that have none, as well as those that have.
Tho. Durfey, Gent. Epil. to Trick for Trick. LONDON: Printed for S. Burgis.
1691.

TO Mr. T hos. D urfey. Sir CRITIC CATCALL sends Greeting.
YOU have shown your self so Penitent after the Poetical Correction you
received from me, that to retaliate (tho late) the Honor you did me in choosing
me for your Patron, I return you Epistle for Epistle, and make you the Patron
of the following Dialogue: It reflects on a certain Namesake and Country man of
yours, and some Plays of his lately Launched out; but that is all one, since it
may turn to as good an account to you as some of yours; and your own practice
of sacrificing your friends, to your own, and the Town's Jests, justifies it.

Indeed, I must confess, it is a sad Age we live in, since the applause of the
Town, from Exalted Box, to more Exalted upper Gallery, the routing the
Jacobites, stilling the Critics, and drowning their Hisses, by the loud
repeated Claps of the lusty fisted Champions of your Party, able to have
drowned those of Thunder it self, and all the Kitts and Fiddles of your
Antagonists of the nimble Craft; I say, it is a sad Age seriously, since all
this cannot secure a man from censure, or a Play from being taken to pieces,
which altogether made so pretty a figure: it is as uncharitable as the exposing
the false Hair, Teeth, Calves, Eyes, and Eyebrows, etc. of our antiquated
Beaux and Ladies.

Such is the malice of some prying envious Persons, not having the fear of
Satyrists before their Eyes, that they most feloniously, barbarously, and
wickedly, like Rival Women, search for, nay, make and find faults in others, as
industriously as they seek to hide their own But what shall I say to it? Alas!
it is the general custom of you Authors, (the more's the pity) like Mastives you
bark at, claw and worry one another, whilst others cry hollow, and heartily
laugh at you for your pains. Other Societies protect and shoulder one another,
but you, like so many Game Cocks turned loose together, fall foul of the next
you meet: Or to speak more Poetically, like Cadmus's Soldiers, cut and slash
your fellows without mercy. Is there no means to stop this fury? From the
Cobbler that mends your Shoes, to the rich Goldsmith that keeps your (...),
there are Halls for their Corporations in London; it is pity yours in Beotia is
not removed a little nearer, or that your Master Apollo does not send from
Parnassus some Deputy to govern you here, that being once united, as much as
you are divided, the Trade (for by your leave, it is now a Trade as much as
those I Named) may flourish, and the Proverb be a Liar, which bars Poets from
becoming Aldermen. This would be very necessary at present that the
Indisposition of the Laureat is like to spill as much Blood as Ink among you;
for from the Modern Play-writers, to the high toppers of the Profession, I
expect to find you all at Daggers drawing; should he be so civil to you to
leave us in haste (I hope he will not) to make a visit to his Brothers Terence,
and Ben Johnson, in the Elizian Fields.

The Author of this Mushroom hopes all this will atone for his presumption; he
desired me to recommend it to you to have it made into a Play, and hopes you
may prove as prevailing a Patron, as your Party was to get yours a Name, and a
third day, and hinder it from sinking under the weight of those who did not
like it: some of whom were something saucy, and used these words out of a Play
of a certain Poet, who before the Poll Acts, used to write himself T. D.
Gentleman: That, should we not sometimes dive into the secrets of Wit, and
reprove mistakes, these Rascally Poets would grow Insolent; we should be
perpetually tormented with Lampoons. It was hard in them to reverse the saying
upon its Author, tho amongst Authors, it is no more than the reflections of
Lawyers against one another at the Bar. It helps to make you famous, and I am
much mistaken, if some of you would not be as thankful for a severe Criticism
in Print, as for a Copy of Verses in praise of your Works.

Had my Author attached your friend in his worst Plays, he could have had a
cheaper Victory, and the other a greater Overthrow; but he has done as those
Generals who slight little weak Towns to set down before the Capital City;
which may please the Party concerned, as much as it would the Governor of the
Town to see it attacked on the strongest side. I need not then Apologize to any
of the Fraternity for my friends Observations on that score, but rather to the
Town, for telling them it is dark at Midnight, that cracked Skulls are not
found, and that some Writers Vpper-rooms are unfurnished. This undigested
product of a few spare hours, is as needless to some Critics, as a Treatise of
the bulk of the Book of Martyrs, to prove that Maevius was a bad Poet, or a
Lecture of War to a great Commander. But tho they do not want to inform their
Judgments, they may something to make chem merry, when they have as little to
do as my friend when he writ it; had he been Master of leisure enough to have
revised it, it would have appeared in a better Dress, and have had less
roughness in the Style, and perhaps more in the Satyr. The smoothness of your
Pen may Redress the first, and if you think he has been too mild in the other,
which I must confess was at my Request, let me know it, and you will have no
cause to complain to my knowledge, this being at the best but a Rough-draught
or the Sketch of his Poet. I think there is enough drawn to discover who sat
for it, and tho the finishing strokes being wanting, it may well be said that
the Picture is somewhat unlike; I dare say it is after the way of our Modern
Painters, and of you Freeholders of Parnassus, in the Panegyricks of your
Patrons, and consequently not for the worse, my friend having used yours more
kindly than your Abdicated Brother Bays has been, and made him speak a
Language he has no cause to be ashamed of, tho perhaps he himself may.

I hope the Name of Stutter will no more offend than that of Weesilion, Poet
Belly, Lady Stroddle, Coopee, etc. which bear your Stamp, but if you think that
of Balladwright or Maggot properer, you may new Nickname that worthy Person,
my friend not designing it as a mock upon any infirmity of speech (a thing to
be pitied) but as a distinguishing mark of his Hero, who Stutters more in sense
yet than in Elocution.

The Plot he leaves to you, who have such a Collection of yours and other men's
in your head, your Invention seldom coming so short of your Imagination, but
that the supply of a good memory makes you amends: He knows you can as little
want the addition of Songs and Dances to adorn it, as a Scholar newly returned
from the University, his Tropes and Figures, or a Girl just Ween'd from the
Boarding-School her Mennet or Rigodoon.

Here I should enlarge upon your Merits, your Indefatigable Writing, in spite
of all discouragements, the substance of your Wit, the Ingenuity of your
Conversation, your generosity in the profuse and continual distribution of your
Songs, the mildness of your Satyrs, the solidity of your Burlesque, the
niceness of your Politics, your care in obliging both Parties with your Poems:
But above all, the fluidity of your Style, and your Laborious Industry in
tacking together pieces and remnants of Plots and Humors, and making them your
own for the diversion of those who had never seen them, in the state of their
first Creation. But all this were fitter from your own Pen, and I hope you will
not be so far wanting to your self, as not to oblige us with it one day, since
no other Pen yet ever dared undertake it; tho I must confess, such Salutes
amongst Authors, are as unnecessary as between Men of War at Sea, it is but
wasting Powder which may be put to a more profitable use, therefore they may
better be reserved for the future Epistle to the Patron of this Embryo; and who
knows (between you and I) but it may hook in 20 Guinea's, if you Cull your man
right.

And now I think it high time to take my leave, for 1 perceive my Epistle is
swelled to a bulk, and it only belongs to such as can Wiredraw them to the
purpose, to hold us at the Door as long as they please, for in an unknown
Scribbler it is as unmannerly as a Chambermaids Chat, when you are impatient to
be admitted into her Mistresses Bedchamber. For my part, I generally pass them
over as some do Greek when they don't understand it, with a Transeat Graecum
est, they being as little to the purpose as the Prologues to some of our Plays;
but lest I be task'd with the fault of those, who with multiplicity of words
blame others overtalk, I have done, and according to the form of Letters, rest

Your most Humble and Obliged Servant, Critic Catcall.

Wit for Money: OR, Poet STUTTER. A DIALOGUE.
Smith, Johnson, and Poet Stutter. Smith. PRithee, Frank, give me leave to
retire, I have a mind to Read this Afternoon.


Johnson. Indeed, Jack, you shall read men then -- I wanted company and came to
look for you, or any honest fellow, to spend it comfortably.


Smith. A good design, but hard to be compassed, my friend, this Season, when
the best part of both Sexes having taken the Field, a Man of Sense, or a Woman
of Fashion, are as hard to be met here, as a Soldier in time of Action, or a
Country Attorney out of Term time.


Johnson. But yet I hope the Spring has not swept the Town so clean of good
Company, but the Gleanings may serve you and I that are sharp set.


Smith. Faith, that is to be doubted of, except like Platonicks, the pleasures
of the Mind make the whole Feast; for at this present hour I cannot tell what
may make up the Regalio -- therefore I must center my happiness in my Closet.


Johnson. What think you of a Bottle -- for I Am resolved not to part with you.


Smith. As I think of Company, that which is good is hard to be met with, for I
had rather sit with half a score Shopkeepers smoking and talking of Trade; or
as many Country Petty foggers putting of Cases, than be condemned to drink my
Bottle of most of the Stum'd mixtures which your Blue-Apron'd Retailers sell us
so dear -- besides two as they says no company.


Johnson. Let Us to the Coffee-House then, we may meet a third man, or hear the
News.


Smith. That is to say, Lies in abundance; be plagued with the foolish
Reflections and Inferences, which Grave Block-heads make about this or that;
hear them take a Town, or relieve it in their Cockle-brains; or descant two
hours upon the Wagers, have been won or lost lately about Mons: Or what is
worse, by Herding among them, be taken for one of our (would be) Politicians;
that Medley of Folly, Laziness and Knavery, who are continually in a ferment.


Johnson. Ay, those whose Pregnant Heads seem like the Mountains, so very big
of great Notions, when after the pangs they and their foolish Hearers labor
under, a poor silly Mouse is the Delivery.


Smith. No, I had rather sit out a whole long dull Tragedy, or a second part of
the Three Dukes of Dunstable.


Johnson. And that were a torment not to be endured -- but now you talk of
Plays, what thing you of going there now?


Smith. They do not Act to day; besides if they did, it is odds but it is some
silly new one doomed to death, like a monstrous Birth, as soon as it has seen
the light, and which, tho shouldered and propt up by a powerful party, to get
the Author a third day, must fall of it self after, to live in the Booksellers
Shop, at the mercy of the Worms, for want of other Critics, to gnaw it


Johnson. I wonder those fooleries dare appear in print.


Smith. Oh Sir! as long as Scribblers can find Booksellers to buy them, and
they Fools to read 'em, they need not care, what the wiser part will say, they
are Case-harden'd, and you need not expect them to leave Writing, till they
leave dull Flattery, Whores their Jilting, Lawyers refuse bribes, or the House
to act their Plays, as I believe they will for the future, lest all others, tho
good, fall into disrepute; and the House be as empty at a new good Play in
Winter, as it is at a bad one in the Long Vacation.


Johnson. But there are good old Plays, which like Stock-Horses, must bear the
dead weight and charge of the others.


Smith. Ay, and there is need they should; but the Town of late, have like true
Libertines, shunned Faces and Plays once seen, whether good or bad, and served
them all alike; but there is hopes they will Recant, and after their roving fit,
they may be more constant; for to be tired with change, is the first step
toward the settling our affections; and since when we have been but one Week
in the Country, we find so much the want of the Playhouse, that the very
Strowlers are then welcome to us. I dare say, the Town can no more be without
Plays, than a brisk young Widow without a Husband or a Gallant.


Johnson. Let Us go to the Booksellers, and see what new Books are sprung up
since last Night.


Smith. With all my heart: but methinks thou make Mushrooms of them: If some
Reverend Author, or Waspish Satyrist heard thee, thou would be in danger of a
lash in his next Weeks Pamphlet.


Johnson. Authors and Satyrists do you call them? Scribblers, Libellers, and
Lampooners, are more suitable Epithets for many of them; and for my part, I
oftener take up their Papers to pick out their Nonsense, and laugh at it, than
to find any thing worthy observation.


Smith. Oh, I have found out another use for them; formerly I could not sleep,
tho I desired it; but having bought a Book called The Moralist, I began to read
it one Night, having no other by my Bed side, when even Opium could not
purchase me sleep, and before I had read two Pages, I slept so fast, that I
found the next Morning my Candle in the Socket, and the Book in the Chamber Pot.


Johnson. And a very fit place for it, and all such dull, insipid, heavy,
unweildy sustain.


Smith. I am not of your mind, when it may save a Man Half a-Crown in Opium. I
want to buy another.


Johnson. You need not have that again, it is but getting the Weesil Trap'd, the
Triannal Mayor, Collin's Walk, Butlers Ghost; (and a very Ghost indeed it is)
alias: The fourth part of Hudibras, and half a score Plays, by the same hand,
cum multis aliis, of others, and they will have the same effect to a Miracle;
Experto creed Roberto.


Smith. Why, how came you to remember what all the World has forgot? --


Johnson. But the Booksellers you should have added -- for I believe there is
not Ten Men in the Nation, besides the Author, Bookseller, Printer and
Corrector, e're read them through. To tell you the truth, as Mr. Dryden
sacrifices a Bussy d' Ambois to the memory of Ben Johnson, I sacrifice one of
these yearly to the memory of Shakespeare, Butler, and Oldham; but this is a
Booksellers -- go in --


Smith. Where is the last Momus Ridens?


Johnson. Here it is -- the Author has left off, and when the Bookseller is as
weary of Printing, as the Town of buying a Penny Lampoon, it is high time for
the Author, after the recruit of a third day, to leave you, without taking
leave, and like the Fox, to cry the Grapes are sour, when his Pegasus a tip
Toes, cannot reach at the sweet Copy Money. Momus Ridens N. 20.



Smith. reads. We want but an Union to make them all Fools,
And bid the starved Armies to Baise nos Culs.
Like the Kings of Brentford, the Author makes his Momus speak French, but with
this difference, that it does not much show his breeding.


Johnson. Oh! yes, it is very pretty: Why, to bid the French kiss his A -- se
must needs be very taking. For fear they should forget it, he has bid them do
it three or four times -- But is not this very pretty, speaking of the French
King -- His Wars have already exhausted such Charge,
Their Gentry for Dinner scarce get a brown George.



Smith. As for their Gentry doubtless some of them are poor enough; but as for
exhausted such Charge, I cannot tell how to make sense of it.


Johnson. Nor he, nor any Man I Am sure; do you think he minds Grammar? He
forgot it, or never learnt it at School. And as for Exhausted such charge, he
has been at such a charge of Wit, that his stock is Exhausted; and that is the
reason he has left off -- and let us leave him off too --


Smith. Prithee who is the Author of it?


Johnson. Poet Stutter.


Smith. Then I don't wonder it is such -- Why, he cannot Write --


Johnson. What do you mean? He was Prentice to a Scriviner.


Smith. I mean, he cannot write sense.


Johnson. Therefore he is the fitter to Write such things; they only seem
calculated for the Meridian of the City Coffee-Houses, where sense is as great
a stranger as amongst the true bred Teagues, or the Bethlemitish Collegians;
who yet sometimes will drop you a Witticism by chance. One while he rails at
the Priests, another at the French, laughs at the Irish; and in the whole,
banters all, and the work's done. They are all alike, from the first to the
last; I would confine him to Scotch Songs, I mean such of them as our Gay
People of both Sexes call Scotch, though they want as much the Dialect, as the
sense of some of that Country.


Smith. Prithee why?


Johnson. Because, as I said, he much wanting sense, is the fitter to write
them, it being an essential part of them to have none; and the more, since his
faculty of Singing renders him the more capable to fit a Horse to a Saddle;
that is, words to a Tune.


Smith. Oh, yes, he is not a little proud of that: I believe that in the Elizian
Fields, he will hardly give the Wall to Horace, or any of the Lyrick Poets. He
contradicts his Notion of Musicians, and gives his noted Omnibus hoc vitium the
Lie, tho no man verifies it more than himself. Indeed, he is a Tolerable Echo,
his only quality is a Voice.


Johnson. That made a Modern Wit say of him, in a late Preface, That a Man of
sense would not do Penance in his Company, without the amends of his Singing.


Smith. I have read it -- But what is here, the very book you spoke of -- The
Moralist?


Johnson. I Will buy it -- I see it is a continuation of the Weesils, tho the
Author has left the style of Reynard the Fox; to whose humor, and the malice
and dangerous Notions of his first Libel, he ought, I think, to attribute its
Reception with some people, as much as his Under-Brothers of the Scribbling
Herd, the Sale of their Parabolizing Bears, Puppies and Magpies.


Enter Poet Stutter. Stutter. Gentlemen, your most humble Servant.


Johnson. Oh! your Servant, Mr. Stutter, I was just a going to buy a piece of
Poetry here, it is the Moralist, is it worth reading?


Smith. As much as any thing you have seen since Sir William Davenant's
Rational Sceptick, it overthrows all the Doctor's Vindications, and levels all
the Parson's Arguments; the Hind and Panther talked like Parrots to this. Let
me see -- There are more Notions than the case does need.
Mor.
It Is true, much more than any one will read;
Unless he will sit six hours to doze and pore,
And be as wise just as he was before:
For, in opinion almost all the Nation
Agree, it never was writ for confutation;
But, for the profit, as the sale begins,
To make your Court --



Johnson. Ay, Ay, Let me tell you this passage falls very heavy upon some body
that shall be nameless -- aside -- his very self -- to him again -- It Is the
very quintessence of Hobbs and Seneca, and beyond Waller for smoothness. No
scrutinous Casuist ever solved a knotty point more clearly, nor wheadling Town
Jilt use more flowing words to her amorous Cully.


Stutter. Ay, considering the subject, I think it is well enough: The
Now-Laureat never writ such a thing in his Life.


Johnson. No, I dare swear he never did -- aside -- Nor any one that has a
grain of Wit. The dull Coxcomb swallows flattery by wholesale, faster than a
half starved Fleet Street plyer does Sack and Biscuit. -- Prithee dear Poetry
who writ it? --


Stutter. An honest Moralist, I faith, that shall be nameless; you or I, for
ought I know.


Johnson. Then you pretend to Morality; but how does it agree with it, to come
on a Man that has a thousand Aggressors already, and never meddled with you;
and what is more, is guilty of no other fault than you, that is, to have
altered his principle -- Morality teaches us to use others, as we would be used
our selves: What now if some one or other should stick to your skirts and
expose you as much?


Stutter. I fear it little, my Emblem is the Thistle, Nemo me impune lacesset,
'twould do me and my books a kindness, and like the Sun after an Eclipse, I
should appear the more glorious.


Johnson. A very pretty Simile, and much to the purpose, for Phoebus the God of
Poetry, is the Sun.


Smith. Ay -- but there is this difference, that the Sun has 12 Houses, but our
little Phoebus here has not one. But my friend, how came you to write the
Weesil Trap'd after the Weesils? And if I am not mistaken, the Tryennial Mayor,
as well as the Moralist. Methinks their principles differ as much as a
Lay-Elder and a Lawn Sleeve, or Poet Stutter in the two last Reigns, and Poet
Stutter in this.


Stutter. Oh! you wrong me, I never changed my Religion.


Smith. That may well be, because perhaps you never had any; but for your
principles, I am sure you have altered them more in two years, than the Tailors
have the fashions since the Restoration -- but that is no newer thing to some
of your profession, than to a true Courtier in times of change --


Johnson. Prithee don't be too severe, but remember all Trades must live. Why
should not a Writer sell to both parties his Wit for Money, as well as a
Vintner his Claret, or a Town Woman her favors? What if a man will exalt a
Weesil, and Trap him afterward, rail at the Clergy in one place, and commend
them in another, side with the Grumblers in one thing, then lash them in the
next, Write Trimming Songs and Panegyricks on the City Magistrates in this
Reign, and wish them Shamm'd, Kicked and Damned, in the last: Blame Doctors for
Writing Pro and Con, yet do it one Week after another. It does not signify a
farthing (from whence it comes,) it is like Music, the different and thwarting
parts set one another off. Do you think Rats and Weesils, Moralizing Atheists,
dull Panegyricks, worse than Lampoons and Lampoons, more glorious to those they
are meant to, than Panegyricks by those hands? Songs, Ballads, Drolls and
Farces, signify a pin on either side? No, to mind those things, is the business
of those that have none; and tho the Authors of those mighty trifles strut it
like Turky-cocks, and think themselves wronged for want of a Laurel to rear
their Blockheads, dignify their Nonsense, and hide their Ignorance; the wiser
part let them go on, and write on still as the worst of punishments, and the
best of rewards, for their teeming Noddles, while like Aesop's fly on the
Camels head, they think themselves men of mighty weight, as if they were the
Primum Mobile of State Affairs, and every Revolution the Influence of their
Verse, tho, like Town Jilts, it is Money they Respect, and every Party may be
served alike, and laughed at in their hearts; this I mean of our Ambidexters
only.


Stutter. Pray Mr. -- a -- spare your self the pains to be my Advocate; on my
word, tho you plead briskly, you will not deserve a Fee at my hands; do but
hear my Lord Roscommon, he mitigates the matter much more. I pity, from my
Soul, unhappy Men,
Compelled by need to prostitute their Pen;
Who, Lawyer like, must either starve or plead,
And follow right or wrong, where Guinea's lead.
But because you are Men of Honor and Sense, I shall not think an hour ill
bestowed to argue the matter a little farther with you; this place is too
public, nor has it been without some sweat I have heard you and refrained my
self: If you please, we will adjourn to the Tavern, and with a sober Bottle
renew the Argument, Wine is a Friend to the Muses.


Johnson. I believe so, and wonder why Poets are said to drink of the Fountain
Hippocrene.


Smith. Oh! Sir, it is to show that all their thoughts must be clear as
Crystal, their words flow easy, their design be natural, their matter
innocent, not able to intoxicate our Reason as Wine, Wine you know alters men,
it makes the old young, the sad merry, the poor rich, the coward stout, the
weak strong, enlivens the face, advises the wise -- and also makes him mad; I
believe many of our Plays have been written in Claret --


Stutter. Come, let us go -- and take a Dose of it, since as you say it is a
Pannacea, a cure for all Evils, and the Gentleman U^her to Mirth and Happiness.
On my word, your Notion is not amiss (and by the way I Will not forget it) I will
only give this Sheet to the Bookseller, and wait on you if you will tell me where.


Smith. Don't go, we shall be Tongue-kill'd with his stuff.


Johnson. Prithee come, 'twill be variety for once; besides we'll make him Sing
-- Let it be quickly then at the Cross-keys.


Stutter. There Is such a noise there always, the Pit on my first day, or
Billings-gate it self, might pass for quiet places to it. --


Smith. Nay, one of your Similes will serve, for I think the Playhouse was a
Billings-gate then.


Johnson. Name your Tavern then.


Stutter. Let it be the Rose, I am sure of a Glass of the best there. --


Johnson. Agreed -- you will follow.


Stutter. Presently.


Smith. I wonder how he ventures to the Tavern with us, seeing how we have used
him already; I should as soon have believed he would have come at a Lords
Mayors Feast to Sing his Joy to Great Caesar, or, London's Loyalty.


Johnson. He is a better Courtier than you imagine, and will endeavor to make
you Neuter if he cannot win you to his Party; not unlike the Jesuits, who
purchase all the Books are writ against them, that they may not be read by
other people; or like those, who Fee some Lawyers not so much to use them, as
to hinder them from Pleading for their Adversaries.


Smith. It can be no easy matter to reconcile me to the Pro's and Cons of such
Mercenary Pens, they bring the whole Body Politic of Poetry into disgrace and
contempt, like Drawcansir, they spare neither Friend nor Foe, provided there be
something to be got by it; and as the Whores give Love for Money, they as
meanly expose Wit for Money, till Punk and Scribbler grow as loathed and common
one as the other. The Law has provided a House of Correction for the one, and
since Satyr is too mild to lash the others, it is pity there is not some other
means used to silence them, that the better Pens, and the Men of honester
Principles, may no longer suffer for the faults of those; and when these
Torrents and Inundations of the spurious, muddy, mingled stuff of those
Dabblers, which now drowns the Town, is drained, Wit and Merit need not be
ashamed to appear abroad, but flow in their Natural Channel.


Johnson. Faith you are in the right.


Smith. Well, I am sorry we have engaged our selves with this fellow, it were
better to hear another Rehearsal of Bays, or another reading of his City Mouse
and Country Mouse.


Johnson. Prithee do not be disheartened, we will have rare sport.


Smith. It will be dear bought if you have any; it were a better bargain to
hear Merry Andrew's Insipid Jokes, in hopes of a Jest every half hour, Court an
affected senseless Musician for a Song, or humor an old peevish Relation on
the prospect of a Legacy.


Johnson. Why, thou art more Splenatick than a Mathematician disturbed in his
Calculations, or a Poet whose Play has been Damned before his third Day. Thou
art a mere Usurer of thy Conversation, thou will not lend thine without a large
Interest of Wit. Come, Jack, your stock is large, be a little more lavish on it,
to him it is Charity, he lives upon the scraps of such as you, and you need not
grudge to see the Brats of your Brains fathered by another.


Smith. Nor those of my Body, Frank, tho I should hate to see them ill dressed
or distorted, and such I guess his Education will make any ones, when the best
fancy or plot Midwifd by him into the World, will either be crippled, or at the
best look like a Child half starved at Nurse.


Johnson. Do you take him for such an ill Tailor that he cannot dress any Wit
as it ought to be?


Smith. Even so, witness his laying violent hands on Shakespeare and Fletcher,
whose Plays he has altered so much for the worse, like the Persecutors of Old,
killing their living Beauties by joining them to his dead lameless Deformities.


Johnson. Oh! if there be Poetical Justice to be had in the Elezian Fields, how
he will be mauled, and if in this World, he were served like Aesops Jay, and
every Bird should claim their feathers, how Naked he would be.


Smith. Not so naked neither, he is Voluminous enough with the Leaves of his
Books; like another Adam to cover his nakedness, and tho most of our Authors
might well call their Books picked Sentences, select Lines, Collections of fine
things, and Miscellanies of other men's thoughts, should one, Chemist like,
separate the different Metals of which their compound is made up, there would
remain of their own a great deal of substantial, weighty, solid --


Johnson. Lead, you mean.


Smith. Matter.


Johnson. Then pray no more of that matter, we have discanted but too much on
it already, let us talk of something else till our Poet after come, you will be
sure of a belly full of it then.


Smith. Let Us talk of what you will; though, let me tell you, I would have my
friend, like an Ingenious Preacher, extract a good Doctrine out of a barren
Text. But here he comes.


Stutter. Gentlemen, I hope I have made my word good; I love to be as punctual
to my friends, as --


Smith. An Author to his Bookseller, when he is to pay him his Copy Money; a
passionate Lover to his first assignation, or a moneyless Parasite to my Lords
Hour of setting down to Dinner, or --


Stutter. The Sun to his appointed setting -- and there I was before you. But
what News do you hear, Gentlemen? --


Johnson. They say the Armies --


Stutter. Oh! I did not ask about Warlike News: But News from Wits
Commonwealth. What new Lampoon has the Vogue? What Songs now fill the Air?
What Satyr bites the Town? Or, to speak more largely, What new Play puts the
Critics to their old Talent of finding fault? Or Jacobite like, biting their
Fingers for want of power to bite others.


Johnson. Why, Tom, I should have expected such questions from thee, as little
as from a Court Lady what is the fashion, a Seaman how is the Wind, or a Watchman
what is a Clock -- What Song, What Lampoon, What Satyr, Or what Play, in short,
can please the Town, but what is Coined in your Mint? I can go no where, but
like Air, you are still to be found. From Wapping to Tuttlefields, from
Southwark to Shoreditch, you fill the Nations mouth. The trudging Carman
whistles your harmonious Poetry to his Horse, the Glass Coach Beau whispers
them to his as senceless Nymph, the grumbling Jacobite mutters them in Corners
to his Abdicated Brethren, the Coffee-house Bard, his Nose Sadled with
Spectacles, pores over your Comical Remarks, as much as on the no less
divertive Observator. Your Ballads, when half asleep, from the Street, in a
high Base and a low Treble, wish me a good rest when I can catch it. The
Cookmaid and Scullion listen to them, and the very Coachmen ingratiates himself
to the antiquated Chambermaid with them. They will not escape the quiet
Nursery, for there they Rock Baby asleep. In Guild Hall, some of the Anti-New
Raparees exalt them up to the very Hustins, and from the Philistine Goliath, now
make you their third Giant. I see them on every Post, and shoals of them at
every Booksellers, and must for a while have abdicated the Playhouse, had I
not as much Complaisance for them as I have had for some of the foregoing
Comical Entertainments.


Stutter. Sir, I hope you make that difference between their Plays and mine,
which the success of the one and the other claim: My Play may live to bear the
charge of theirs, and clear a brace of 1000 l. to the House.


Smith. Oh, Sir, I never judge of things by their success, The Emperor of the
Moon, and other trifles, could brag of that if it were allowable.


Stutter. What, Sir, compare my Play to The Emperor of the Moon, when it makes
the Laurel shake on one's head, and another despair of it again --


Smith. If one of the two you mean despairs of the Laurel, it is what cannot be
helped, but if it shake on the others Head, I believe it is when he laughs at
some men's presumptions, though I Am no Man's Champion, win it and wear it, Tom,
when you have writ as many good Plays as they, and your Tory ones are forgot;
perhaps you may be in a better way -- though by the way I Would advise you to write
no more --


Stutter. How, Sir, write no more! What ca -- ca -- can you mean by this? --
speak -- Zoons --


Smith. Oh, Sir, if you are so furious, speak by your self.


Johnson. Prithee, Tom, hear him, he is no Foe to you, and to my knowledge
brought a good party to clap swingingly on your first day; which, by the way,
was no small advantage to the Play.


Stutter. Oh, Sir, I had a powerful party against me, though I would not give a
farthing for a Play that cannot stem the tide of a Faction; but what can be
your reasons, Mr. Smith, for my leaving off Writing? --


Smith. Why, Sir, in the first place; like the Sun, to which you compared your
self just now, this must be your Meridian, and when things are at their
highest, the next step is to decline. To deal more plainly with you, the Town
deserves not to be obliged by you, though you could soar higher than Mr. Phoebus
himself. I remember that in your Dedication to the Fond Husband, you assure
your Patron it is your Own, though some are pleased to doubt the contrary; and it
grieves me to tell you, Mr. Stutter, they cannot think this last yours neither,
but rather that it was given you by some Person of Quality, who more modest yet
than Virgil, let us you enjoy the Honor and Profit of it, without issuing out a
Sic nos non Vobis.


Stutter. Not mine! Then, Sir, let me tell you, I have friends that know
better, and I challenge any of the Critics, though my constant and inveterate
Enemies, to tell me of one single thing in the Plot, or Conversation of it, but
what is Genuine, my own, and no Man's else. As for Plot, Sir, I Will not yield it
to any Poet or Politician; and there is my Plotting Sisters for one, which I Will
match with any Play in Europe: Either She would if she could, Squire of
Alsatia, Soldiers Fortune; or any other --


Smith. So you may indeed, the putting out of Candles, changing of Gowns;
Tables and Traps are well enough imagined.


Stutter. Well enough -- ay, and so they are; but pray what do they say
besides? -- Let me know all.


Smith. I will -- They say that most of what takes in your new Play, is gay
Farce, the rest is sad, whining, heavy Love; the one too brisk, the other too
dull, and both in Extremes. Some say, that like the Italian Painter, who killed
his friend the better to draw the Agonies of a dying Man, you have sacrificed
your Hospitable Acquaintance at the Boarding-Schools, to the improving the
Characters of your Play.


Stutter. Indeed, I have some Acquaintance there, but they may rather than
complain, thank me for not exposing them more -- I could have made the thing
look with a worse face.


Smith. That is -- those whom you have lamed, of a Leg or an Arm, may thank you
for not killing them quite; but to go on, they say the best of the Plot is
stolen.


Stutter. I steal a Plot -- give me patience --


Smith. Out of a Play of Mrs. Behns, called The City Heiress; that the humor
and discourse between Iilt-all and Amorous, are much the same as between
Wilding, and Diana his kept Mistress, whom he tells his Uncle is an Heiress, to
get Money of him, when afterward she, like your Iilt, proving false to
Wilding, marrys his Uncle, who finds himself at last cheated with a Whore
instead of an Heiress.


Johnson. Pray, Mr. Stutter, is not this something like your Plot?


Stutter. Zoones, it is much like it, I must confess, but Wits jump -- I vow I
had forgot it, but it does not signify a rush, the Town has forgot that long
ago. ( aside.) Pray Heaven some other malicious prying Book-monger may not find
it out -- Besides, 'twill never be acted again, 'twas one of the Tory Plays,
which will not do now the tide's turned.


Smith. No more than your Royalist, Sir Barnaby Whigg, and the rest of your
Court Plays, where Passive Obedience and Ius Divinum, are asserted as
Infallible Doctrines, and all Sins venial but desire of Liberty.


Johnson. Oh don't blame the Royalist, if it were but for the sake of that
Devout Gentleman, who duly every morning came to Worship the Royal Oak, with as
much Devotion as the Pilgrims at Loretto.


Stutter. For Gods sake, Gentlemen, no more of it, they were little things
writ, and suitable with the times, which I and my Brothers may be somewhat
ashamed of in these --


Smith. I believe it is that throws you as much upon the extremes, as if nothing
could atone but the Counterpart, witness the Lady Addleplot, which tho her
part is so short that it is hardly worth the dressing him that acts it, claws
it off so smartly, that it put some in mind of your Renegadoes, who ever prove
severer Taskmasters, than your natural Musselmen, and the worse Turks of the
two --


Stutter. Well, let 'em take it among them that think themselves concerned; as
for my new Play, I Am sure it is good, and bar this thing in the City Heiress,
which by the by, I would pray you to keep to your selves, it is all my own, and
like the File, it may defy the Teeth of the Criticizing Snakes; they may hiss
and bite, but like true Steel, 'twill wear out their Tongues and Teeth: I am
sure they cannot have the Impudence to say otherwise.


Smith. Oh but they have, Mr. Stutter, they are even so impudent as to say --


Stutter. Wh -- wh -- why what the Devil can they say?


Smith. They say that the Kid-napping of the Heiress to the East Indies in your
Play, looks very much like some such thing in Sir Hercules Buffoon, that your
Sir Rowland Rakehell has the Knavery of Seldom, with the humor and
profaneness of Sir Hercules; and your Ramps are like Innocentia, one of the
Heiresses there. And that the List which the Lady Addleplot reads of their
party, is the same thing almost with that which the Irish Priest reads in the
Amorous Bigott, and though the words are somewhat different, the humor is the
same.


Johnson. What! more discoveries: What say you to this, little Stutter, Guilty
or not Guilty?


Stutter. Why, Sir, in the first place, I say I never took a hint from any man;
in the next, that those Characters you mentioned are like mine, I utterly deny
--


Johnson aside. With the confidence of an Actor, the sincerity of a Poet, and
the truth of an Irish Evidence.


Stutter. Faces you know may be alike, but for all that they are not the same;
what has Sir Rowland to do with Sir Hercules? Or my Ramps with his Ramps? --
Besides their Dress, and the main drift of the Action, is quite another thing.


Smith. That may be, and yet the Character may be borrowed, for in Humors and
Characters, it happens as with those German Pictures, where a Man or a Woman
are drawn so, that a dozen different dresses painted on Izing-glass may suit to
the same face; and so it may be said the humor is still the same, tho you
dress it another way; it has the same looks though it be disguised; as your
French man is, for though you have made him a Jacobite French man, yet he is
but a French man still, and such a French man as no Beau will ever be fond of
aping; so that after so many excellent Masters from whom you have drawn your
Copy, and who have tired their Pens, and then the Town on that subject, it is to
be admired you have not drawn him better; and as for crying up his King, we had
enough of that in Bury-Fair. Indeed the merry (not to say the unthinking) part
of the Audience were well pleased with him, and always will; the enmity between
the Nations giving a relish to the Part, even in Bartholomew-Fair, tho had he,
who acted the part like a good Fiddle, been well tuned, he would have made
better Music.


Stutter. Sure the Town will not be so barbarous as to deny me the drawing a
French man right --


Johnson. 'Twere hard they should; I have heard you say your Father was one.
Though I Have heard a friend of mine say, you speak French worse than your
Frenchman English.


Smith. aside. No wonder then if he sings and saunters about so much, dresses
like them, and talks as much. Let me see, he has a French Face, lean and dun:
all the true Cast. Hark you, little Stutter, did not you draw it for your self?
Come, confess amongst friends --


Stutter. Zoons -- ca -- ca -- ca -- can any man have patience to hear all
this? Gentlemen, here is my Club --


Johnson. Pox, don't be angry Tom, he is but in jest. Come, here is to ye, some of
you Writers are as high after your third days, as your Whores with settlements,
as you said. Dear Stutter, prithee let us be merry; put up your Money, we know
you have some -- Why! there is no arguing with you, your Wit runs out in a
passion like Bottle Ale in the Dog days.


Stutter. 'Sblood! 'twould make even patience mad. But come, Sir, you that are
so critical; can you make any more objections?


Smith. Not a word, Sir; I hate a noise, and regard your health and mine: though
let me tell you, that those who refuse to hear of their faults, will remain in
them, and be Company only for fools and flatterers; If they be real to know
them is a means to mend, and if they* be not, our sober arguing may undeceive
those who before thought us in an Error.


Stutter. There you are right, but to have the honor of inventing my
Characters and Humors taken from me, is such a thing, as I am sure no author
can bear; the name of Plagiary is more odious to me than that of Whore to a
virtuous Woman, or the imputation of Cowardice to a Man of Honor.


Johnson. Ay, and the taking your Plots and Humors from you, a greater grief
than the ravishing from a kind Mother her dear beloved Daughter; though I
confess, some people said that your Nicompoop is just the very Image of Biscuit
in Epsom-Wells, who is a quiet humble civil City Cuckold, governed and beaten
by his Wife, whom he very much fears, loves, and is proud of: She too calls him
Nicompoop and fumbler; he courts her Gallant to go to her, begs leave to go
play at Bowls, gets fuddled, and is alike reprimanded; so that they said, you
may well bragg in your Epilogue that your Cuckolds Character is not ill drawn,
when you had so good an Original to copy after. But I believe it is not so.


Stutter. Some Critics have no mercy; because they cannot take from me the
humors between my dear Granadeer and his Son, What does one of them behind the
Scenes the other day, but say it is Foreign from the main action, and has no more
dependence on it, than the Scene between Prince Prettiman and Tom Thimble in
the Rehearsal has to the Two Kings of Brentford. And in short that I might as
well have given him a Mother and have a dozen Children, and a Father to the
Frenchman, and to Amorous, and to every one of them, and have made as many
more Walks, or Plays in a Play, as there are Acts and Scenes in this. --


Johnson. Why 'faith that was unkind, they had as good say that Topknots and
Cravat-strings are not necessary garniture. --


Smith. For my part I judge them to be no more necessary than Shoulder-knots
and Feathers, of which Fantastic mode, Heaven be praised, the Town is
reformed; and I wish those unuseful digressions on our Stage, like overgrown
branches, were lop'd off too.


Johnson. Then you may cut off half the Plays of some of our Authors, much
fuller of digressions, indeed, then some of our modern Rhetorical Sermons*
Come, Bays was not so much out when he said, What Is your Plot but to bring in
fine things. Let your lean, envious Student, who like the Architect will have a
rule to work by, and go by the Compass and Plummet, show us a better Play of
his own if he can; here, my little Friend, here is to thee, and a good success
to thy next.


Stutter. Now I vow you're obliging.


Johnson. And so you will be, dear Stutter, if you will give us a Song.


Stutter. I vow to gad I cannot sing; your Friend here, Mr. What-d'ye-call-him,
has put me so out of order. --


Smith. 'Prithee, Mr. Stutter, take what I told you the right way, you would
not be flattered, would you? but prithee a Song. --


Stutter. Oh Sir, Incense is odious to me; besides I deserve none.


Smith. Come, come, we know what you deserve, now you are unjust and wrong your
self, but pray take no notice of what I said, 'twas only a lusus verborum. I
love arguing to my heart.


Johnson. Ay, sometimes he and I will argue it for an hour or two.


Smith. Wits disputing, like knives, grind and sharpen one another edge.


Stutter. A very quaint simile. -- Aside -- And that shall be my own. You have
a World of them Mr. Smith, for my part I don't overload my Plays with Wit: Plot
and Humor are my Provinces. Tho I think they have been worse used by ill Pens,
than Hungary by the Tartars.


Smith. It Is pity they have been so depopulated: But prithee give us a Song.


Stutter. Indeed I cannot now: a Man cannot sing at all times. Reads. My answer
to my Brother Horace's omnibus hoc vitium, And that which Tunes the Cobbler
Tunes us all.


Smith. What tunes the Cobbler? --


Stutter. Why, a merry Heart.


Johnson. Well, prithee let the Cobbler alone, and give us a Song.


Stutter. Stay, I Will begin it all, there is not above 100 verses, I have it by
Heart, it is my darling, -- If this strange Vice in all good Singers were.


Smith. For God's sake a Song. --


Stutter. Well, I Will skip some -- I soon perceived when I his version met,
'Twas more from prejudice than judgment writ.
-- Aside -- I perceive too by your own confession, that you make use of his
version to converse with him.


Johnson. Gad I will side to your Brother Horace if you don't sing presently.


Stutter. Well, but hear my verses first.


Smith. We have read them, and will have a Song first.


Stutter. But my Verses --


Johnson. We'll hear 50 of your Verses for every Song you will Sing us; that is
very fair.


Stutter. No -- that is too little; I have a new Poem to desire your advice in,
you are men of Wit; but I Will have 150 Verses for every Song.


Smith. I vow that is too hard, you have no conscience; but pass for threescore.


Stutter. Have you seen an Ode I translated from the Greek of Anacreon in my
last collection?


Johnson. No; but pray let us have a Scotch Song, dear Tom, I know thou art a
Devil at them.


Stutter. Oh, Sir, I will not thank the Town for giving me the pre-eminence
over all my Contempo -- po -- po -- raries in Lyricks; envy it self will give
me that, though it is a Talent even Horace the great Lyrick Poet wanted, or I am
mistaken.


Smith. Pray Mr. Stutter, seeing you understand Greek, which by the way I am
glad of, for your sake, the unkind Town saying you do not understand Latin,
oblige me to explain this passage in Euripides: (...)
(...) --



Stutter. Let me see the Book Sir -- Pox of this Heathen Greek, it has not the
Latin on the other side, though if it had 'twould be much one to me. To himself.


Smith. Well, how do you render that in English?


Stutter. Why? I thought you were for a Scotch Song -- and I have -- fa la la
la.


Smith. But the Greek Verse first. (aside.) I Will confound him.


Stutter. What do you make of it, let us see?


Smith. I do not understand it very well, it talks of Lethe, Oblivion.


Stutter, Gad, so it may, and I believe I have drank of Lethe's Lake, for I
have quite forgot it. Pox of this Greek, it is only fit for Pedants, and as
unbecoming a Gentleman as Pedlars French.


Smith. You mistake sure, Mr. Stutter: Euripides, Sophocles, Aristophanes, and
the other Greek Authors, were ever esteemed the Fountains of Dramatick Poetry.


Stutter. For my part, I neither mind them nor Aristotle, or Longinus, my dear
Horace does my business.


Smith apart. For which you may thank the Translators.


Stutter. Tho understand him and his Rules, and follow them never so strict,
you may miss the way to please the Town, and your Play be hissed off by the
Critics, for all your Rules, In Faith. For my part, I am of Terence's mind,
since it is our business to please the Court and Town, and have a large
Audience. Let Us write so as to please them and the Major party. That has been
my Rule, and I have found it successful, and I Will not leave it for all the
Musty Ancients, till I find one more profitable: But you shall have a Song.


Johnson. Had it not been to be rid of this Greek, he would not have Sung this
hour.


Stutter. I reckon I have made some 7953 Songs, 2250 Ballads, and 1956 Catches,
besides Madrigals, Odes, and other Lyrick Copies of Verses ad infinitum. Are
you for a new one? I seldom am a day without making one or two.


Johnson. What you like best your self, Tom, good Songs are ever new to me.


Stutter. Abroad as I was walking upon a Summers day,
There I met with a Beggar Woman clothed all in Gray:
Her Clothes they were so torn, you might have seen her skin,
She was the first that taught me to see the Golin,
Ah! see the Golin my Jo, see the Golin.
17th page of Trick for Trick.
She took her Bearn up, and wrapped it weel in Clothes,
And then she takes a Golin and stick between her Toes,
And ever as the Lurden cried or made any din,
She shook her foot and cried my Jo, see the Golin;
Ah! see the Golin my Jo, see the Golin.

Smith. A very pretty Tune indeed.


Stutter. But how do you like the words? To praise the Tune only, is commending
a frame, and saying nothing of the picture.


Johnson. Oh the words are singular; odd -- odd, mighty pretty odd words.


Stutter. Ay, that see the Golin, my Jo, see the Golin: Gad, I wonder how I
come by all these pretty things: I have a world of them.


Johnson. Who but your self would have had such a pretty thought, my Jo, see
the Golin?


Stutter. Ay, that Golin, it seems there is nothing in it.


Johnson. Oh, but you are mistaken, it is worth a whole Epick Poem.


Stutter. That Golin -- Sir, you do me honor; tho let me tell you, I had
rather be the Author of that Golin than of Absalom and Achitophel.


Johnson. So had I, tho I look upon it as the best Poem we have had these 20
years.


Stutter. Oh: I perceive you have not read mine on a late Duke's going to
America; I Will read it to you, it is not above 300 lines.


Johnson. 'Sdeath, he is at again -- aside. -- Prithee first let me admire that
Ring on thy Finger, if it be right it is worth 50 pounds. Ah, Rogue, I never saw
you wear it before to day, nor that fine Watch; why those are substantial
movables.


Smith apart. Yes, and may pawn for half their cost in the long Vacation. Why
friend, you have laid out half your third day on that, I believe you have a
mind like Bias, one of the Sages of Greece, to say upon occasion, Omnia Mecum
Porto.


Stutter apart. Now would I give any thing to know his meaning.


Smith apart. He is angry, I Will turn it off, perhaps he does not understand it.
I would say, you carry all good things along with you.


Johnson. Prithee let him display his Jewels and be fine. to Smith. 'twill make
him the more ridiculous; what if like Monsieur Ragou, he has a mind to lay out
his whole stock in Ribonds? Indeed, it is a lovely Ring, dear Stutter, let me
see it.


Stuttter. A Tribute to the Muses; the grateful Offering of a kind admirer of
my Works.


Johnson. I Will say that for Tom, that tho some of the Men look upon him by the
wrong end of the prospect, and the Critics for his Satyrs would use him worse
than his Eldest Brother Orpheus was by the Women, yet the kinder Sex take a
truer view of his merits. And tho Dragon grows old, yet he keeps up among them,
a Song for Cinthia, another for Cloe, are worth Jewels and Gold, and many times
better things.


Smith. That Is a pretty Trade, I must confess, and much like the Barters with
the Indians, an exchange of Toys for precious Stones.


Stutter. By your leave, I reckon my Toys as good as theirs, and if I receive
their precious Stones, I seldom fail to return the gratitude in the same kind.


Johnson. Ah, Wag! there you are before Bays for a dry Bob, and I can but
admire how ingeniously they are spread in thy Play; some of them are
Master-strokes of that kind, for that and good honest Atheistical Songs,
andabusing the Black-coat as thou call'st it, thou bear away the Laurel.


Stutter. Oh, I am for things that are out of the way, and you shall no more
see any thing of mine without something in it, that is stinging or odd; than a
Sermon without Quotations, a Tragedy without Bombast, and an Almanac without
Lies.


Johnson. Nay, I Will say that for thee, that tho some envious Wits say you are a
Drone, thou art as Waspish as the best of them, and if they cannot perceive thy
Wit, it is because it is so very fine, that it is very hard to be seen, tho I
should esteem it as much the more for being so, as a Machine in an Opera for
moving with a subtle Wire.


Stutter. Now you talk of Ladies, let us have their Health; the little Rogues
are so fond of me.


Johnson. Why do you not secure some one of them, though it were but a Lady
Dowager, her Jointure would be better than a Patrimony on Parnassus.


Stutter. Oh, I love to live at large, and the pleasure of the Chase many times
exceeds that of the Quarry; besides, I vow, I can never talk of for better for
worse, but they desire me to Sing the other Song. Gad, I believe they are afraid
'twould spoil my Voice, and that the Town should lose the benefit of my
Writing; and they use me as your Lords do their old Servants, whom they never
prefer, for fear of losing their good Service. Besides, I have always kept too
many Irons at work, and like a Greyhound coursing two Hares at once, I have had
always the ill luck to miss both -- but I intend to pursue close some one of
them, I have half a dozen in my eye, and one of them will do, fa la la fa la.


Smith. I Will say that for him, he is as fond of talking of them, -- aside -- as
of his last Song, or Copy of Verses. Prithee sing the other Song.


Stutter. Make your Honors Miss, Tholl -- loll -- loll.
Now to me Child --

Smith. Oh, prithee Tom, let us have another, I heard the Ballad-singers at it
in the Streets already.


Stutter. A Man would almost forswear making any thing public, that Rascally
Tribe Invades it presently, and murders it as much as a bad Irish Actor a good
part. I think my Songs are like my Mistresses, fated when they go from me to be
common, but I Will have an Action against him who Printed that without my leave.


Smith. Thy leave Tom? Why, I have heard the Tune, and most of the Words, these
two years; my Dancing Master told me who first made them, but I have forgot it.


Stutter. Well, who ever made that Whim first, if he can Dance no better than
he Writes, he shall never cut a good Caper: I am sure I added and altered much,
besides the relish at the end of each Stanza, and then few people know it. But
how did you like my Letter with the Loaf and Butter, was not that pretty? Ah ah
ah.


Smith. Ay, very pretty, 'thas made me laugh twenty years ago at School, tho I
must confess, you have improved it as much as Bussy Dambois by your late
alterations and amendments.


Stuter. Ay, what a wretched thing it was before I mended it; it is pity Tragedy
does nor take in this Age, or else 'twould overtop your All for Love, Oedipus,
etc. But how did you like the humor of the Dance of Spirits?


Smith. Oh, 'twas very necessary to inform the Audience of the Pistolling
Bussy; I perceive you are not in that of Mr. Bays's Opinion, tho you love to
elevate, you hate to surprise.


Stutter. What think you of the Comical part of the Play? That was all my own I
assure you.


Johnson. I believe so; it is as diverting and natural as any thing you ever
writ, principally the Fencing Masters with the Bedstaffs: All that is good in
the Play must be yours, and what is bad Chapmans.


Stutter. Ay, I think the Comical part is very well brought in, and much to the
purpose, tho I asked one his Opinion of it, and the ignorant fool told me 'twas
pretty Farce: Ah ah ah.


Smith. But pray, what did you bring the Fencing Master and the Steward upon
the Stage for?


Stutter. Why to talk together and Fence, what should I bring them there for
else?


Smith. I do not perceive your drift in it, for they never appear afterward;
and I think a Scene between Monsieur and Dambois, about the killing the King
his brother, well wrought, and some others to prepare the events (which are
brought in abruptly) and to avoid dull Narrations had been more to the purpose;
it makes those that are Judges say, that were it not for Mr. M -- fords
excellent acting, which is the Soul of the Play, it would have been still-born.
And to speak in your style, it now has a World of spots, and could have been a
World without spots, and have had nothing to do with Heavens strait Axle-tree,
and the World of Fustian you have either made or left in it. I have heard of
the World turned into a withdrawing Room, but never till now of Heaven made a
Coach with its Axle-tree. Some Critics are as angry with you for that, as the
Dissenters with Queen Bess, for the Relics of Ceremonies.


Stutter. Being in haste, I overlookt some of the old stuff, and could not well
avoid it, for had I taken it all out, there had remained nothing old in the
Play but the Name, and I had done like the fellow who bought him a new outside
to his Lining, and a new Lining to his outside; tho I as much hate to wear an
Authors old Socks, as to sing another words, a fault you will seldom find me
guilty of. There is a great deal of Art in altering a Play for the better, and
you may almost as soon make an old face look young again; but I think no old
Author ever suffered much under my hands.


Johnson. But the Audience did -- aside -- Oh, no: one would think you had
bathed them in that Fountain which turns decrepit Age to sprightly Youth: for
when they have been as it were Bedridden, and confined in Closets to the Dead
Letter half an Age, you bring them on the Stage Singing and Dancing like mad;
and like you, as full of Bell Air, and as spruce, as if they were just shot out
of a Bow from Paris, and so Rhetorical, that in a series of Complemental
Phrases, Verborum Ambagibus, we are lost in amazement, before we can reach the
middle of your Periods; you have found out the Transfusion of Wit and Style, I
think, better than the Physicians have done that of the blood.


Stutter. Oh! those things cost me nothing, my Genius lies that way, but the
Toil lies in Teaching the Actors, in Martialling them right, and bringing them
on; it is a sad drudgery, one must as it were clap them on the back, and spit in
their mouths, to encourage them, tho they are marring a good thing, and
murdering a Part: I Teach them like Parrots, tho to deal plainly with you, I
am afraid some of them most ungratefully, laugh at me behind my back, and are
so used to counterfeit upon the Stage, that they can no more leave it off when
they are from it, than an Irishman his Accent, a thorough-pac'd swearer his
Oaths, and your Yea and Nay Quaking Friend, his Cant and Formality. I believe
it is they have possessed the Town with the Report of my want of Wit; they
Interlope in our Trade as you know. Now should I speak any witty thing to them,
it may be; as they have good memories, they would at Night set it down to deck
their Plays, or treat every company they come into with it, and so make any
fine thing common presently, and unfit to be used by me when I have company
that deserves it; for, like a hidden store, I reserve them for my friends, and
always one finer than all the rest at parting, like a Grace-cup, to leave a
good relish of my sense when I am gone, as I observe that a good round Jest at
the end of a Scene, commands a Clap. Indeed, those things, like Coronation
Robes, are more for state than use, and must not be worn thredbare --


Johnson. So that sometimes, my friend, you take as much pains to hide your
Wit, as you do at others to show it.


Stutter. And with good reason too, when I am with the Players. Gad, tho it
were but before the Candle-snuffer, I dare not utter one good word -- who can
tell but he has a Play upon the stocks, and ready to be Launched next Term.


Johnson. Come, say no more of it, I am sure they have done you a great deal of
Justice, and I know some of them that deserve your esteem; you must do like
that King who would not remember the wrongs done him when a Duke. And so the
Author of Love for Money, must forget the dejected and wronged Duke of
Dunstable.


Smith. But pray, by the by, why from one Gentleman of Fletcher's, did you make
three Dukes? Methinks it seemed too great an Imposition on the sense of the
Audience.


Johnson. Why? Bays gave you two Kings of Brentford, and three Dukes, I think,
was more surprising.


Stutter. I thank you, Mr. Johnson, for hitting my true meaning; that was a
good Play! but those Scenes of Basset, which gave offense to a very great Lady,
were the Ruin of it, tho nothing could be prettier. And that with a great deal
more, is my own: but now that Lady is gone, I will have it revived before I
oblige the Stage with another Play.


Johnson. So you may, as well as Bussy Dambois, and with as much Justice have
the Banditti too; I believe the one will take as much as the other.


Stutter. Now you make me sigh when you speak of the Banditti, that poor Play
fell a sacrifice to the Critics, they envy me because I think my self as good
as they, as in reason I am, and perhaps better too. They Martyrized my Play to
pull down my Reputation, which began to eclipse that of the most Celebrated
Dramatick Authors; but I think I fitted them in my Epistle Dedicatory to the
Foreman of my Partial Jury, Sir Critic Cat-call; you have read it without
doubt.


Ionhson. Ay, ay, you puzzled them I Am sure, with your Visible and Invisible
Patrons, and gave them three or four sheets of Complements and VVitticisms they
could not understand, nor have the the patience to read, without taking Snuff.


Stutter. They had better never have meddled with me, I stung them to the quick,
and had I had no more Wit than they, I had had more Duels to fight than any
desperate Bravo, or quarrelsome Gamester, e're fought or bragged of in their
Lives.


Johnson. How did you put them off then?


Stutter. Very easily I'saith: I told them that if Fighting was their Province,
Writing was mine. That I invaded no men's proprieties, but if they would attack
me at my own Weapon, I was ready to give them the satisfaction of an Author,
draw my Pen in the Quarrel, and give them dash for dash, but that I had too
great a veneration for the Ladies, to endanger any thing they were pleased to
set a value on. And in short, at any thing else I begged their pardon, and was
their humble servant -- And this, with abdicating the Coffee-house, and
exchanging their Company, for the Society of the more sober and tractable
Gentlemen of the Country and City, quasht the business. Tho now I dare appear;
and tho a Star of the first magnitude shines so bright among you, that even in
its eclipse I feared, before, 'twould shine brighter than I. Now I think my
Boarding-School may make as great a blaze as his Spanish Friar.


Smith. Have a care young Phaeton, Comets may blaze a while, as you, after a
Famous Author have observed, but the unctious matter being spent, they must
return to their first obscurity.


Stutter. My stock will blaze when others snuffs are out; a Rising Star is
worth two setting Suns: And now that in the style of my Siege of Memphis,
opportunity reaches forth her silver hairs and bids me hold. By dint of merit,
I Will the Laurel snatch;
I Will not for it is reversion tamely Watch,
It Is fading green I Will instantly revive,
Drones shall not eat the Honey of the Hive:
To Court I Will hye, and claim it as my due,
Outdo them all; nay, even my self outdo:
I Will Write and Sing, and Write, till it will do.
Nay, rather than I Will leave my Cause in the Lurch, I Will -- I Will -- I Will --

[Scratches his Head.]
Smith. Fast, seem Godly, Pray, and go to Church -- the Rhyme will be left in
the lurch else. This was a smart fit of Rhyming if it had but held out; I see
you have your Poetical Concordance in your head pretty ready. Prithee what
Rhimes to Jehovah, Chimny, Month, or to Scurvy?


Stutter. Scurvy -- humph -- Scurvy -- Stay -- Pox, that is a Scurvy Rhyme, and
a Scurvy question now: The nearest to it, is a very good friend of mines Name,
that begins with a D --


Smith. Who is a Scurvy Rhymer. -- aside.


Stutter. But waving that; I Will not be afraid of old worn-out Rivals,
Impavidum ferient ruinae, as I remember Monsieur Lavardin said of his Holiness
Pope Innocent XI. in whose praise I writ a Poem -- A pox on it, you have put me
out, and spoiled my Rapture.


Smith. He has his bits of Latin as ready as a Spanish Monk his Breviary, tho
neither of them understand a word on it but by Translations. Aside.


Johnson. Well, go on and prosper, Tom, you would be sure of success, were we
ruled by Laws such as those of the Kingdom of the Moon; which, by the way, I
think as well imagined as those of Sir Tho. Moore's Utopia. They say that there
old men honor and serve the young, as being in body and mind fitter for the
service of their Country. 'Gad, I believe you had fared very well in that
World, their Language being all Music, and their Money all Verse.


Smith. But the Music must be good, and the Verse bear the Hall-mark, for like
the late Brass Irish Coin, it does not go for what Fools may take it, but for
its real value; and one Stanza of Spencer's there, may outweigh a whole
Quarles, or a Verse of Hudibras, a Cart-load of his Ghosts.


Stutter. Sir, I have grafted of twig upon him, which I have called his Ghost,
and for all your opinion, I believe that if any man has come to his height,
it is I have done it; no Author ever exploded my Works, nor writ against them so
as to come to particulars, which is no small pride and comfort to me, since the
most celebrated Pens have been often carp'd at, and examined, even in the best
of their Works; and Indictments of Poetical Thefts, Murders and Treasons drawn
against them. No man was ever yet so bold as to answer me, so that sometimes I
have been forced to answer my self, when my hand was in. I believe they have
looked on my Poetry, as Armies on those Towns they dare not Besiege; I have had
now and then a Bomb thrown at me, but tho surrounded with Enemies, none of them
ever presumed beyond a Blocade, for had they made a formal attack, they had
certainly lost by it, and been repulsed worse than the Turks were at Vienna.


Johnson. Without doubt it would have been a longer Siege than that of Troy,
Candia, or Ostend, and their only way to reduce you would have been by famine;
for then being starved for want of sense, you could not have held out. The
flying squadrons of your Songs formed into bodies of light Horse, your Ballads
into Dragoons, your Lampoons into Horse Granadeers, and Catches into
Volonteers, would have made work with them: Your Libertine and smutty Copies of
Verses, had been your Enfans perdus, the Burlesque Poems led the Van, your
Comedies had made your main body of Foot joined with the book you writ in
praise of Archers, to darken the Sky with its Arrows, and all those Plays you
have altered had been Auxiliaries, whilst you at the head of your
Boarding-School, mounted on a Weesil, with an Owl for your Emblem displayed in
your Standard, a Life Guard of Scotch Songs, your Satyrs for your Artillery,
the Siege of Memphis bringing up the rear, and your Odes and other Poems in the
body of Reserve, would have made altogether so bold, spruce, and numerous an
Army, that Xerxes, Darius, or the Madianites, never mustered the like, and he
must have been more than a Leonidas, an Alexander, or a Gideon, that dared
encounter you.


Stutter. Very prettily applied, Mr. Johnson; I protest had you been General of
an Army, you could not have done it better. What think you of it, Mr. Smith;
you say nothing? People may talk now of Sir John Suckling, Waller and Denham,
for Writing well, 'twas easy for them, who never writ above an Eighteen penny
book; but had they writ as much as I, 'ga^ it had been worth speaking of. Ah!
Mr. Smith, do you think now, any Author dare encounter me, and take my Works to
pieces?


Smith. No, faith Sir: De nihilo nihil dicitur, I think it would be as needless
as Sir Nicholas Gimcracks dissection of a Cock Lobster, or the answering all
the impertinent questions sent to the Athenian Mercury* and now, Sir, I have
answered yours


Stutter. You have Sir -- But what is to pay, Boy, call my man -- Ga -- ga --
gad -- Damn ye, run you Dog* His Boy comes i^ Sirrah, get me a Chair; 's^ud and
Guns, ma -- ma -- make have*


Exit Boy Johnson. A pretty Boy this; how long have you kept him Tom*


Stutter. Kept him Sir: Zoons, is that a proper question to a Gentleman


Smith. It Is since his last Play; he has been invisible since the three Dukes
of Dunstable.


Stutter. Hell and Furies! What Is to pay? Here Is money; farewell*


Johnson. Prithee stay and put up your money, there is nothing to pay. Exit
Stutter. -- Thou would be very unfit to make a Courtier* Mr. Smith, thou have
as little Complaisance as Manly in the Plain-dealer, or Stamford in the
Impertinents; thou art a mere Heraclitus, what diverts others puts thee out of
humor.


Smith. Who can be otherwise, and hear the insipid sayings, vain thoughts, and
ridiculous boasts of a conceited, touchy, illiterate, pragmatical Nothing, who
seldom writes a line, but either dullness, false thought, or something amiss,
appears in it, and searce says one thing but may be better said; to hear
another stutter half an hour for a good word, were a pleasure to this, but to
hear him stutter Nonsense is unsufferable.


Johnson. For my part, I cannot repent the having thrown away a little idle
time in so facetious and odd a Conversation, a daily course of this would soon
bring a surfeit, but a small touch E^^passant, may be as much indulged as a
meal of Roots and fruit, when either we want better Dainties, or their constant
use has rendered them unpallatable; and when time is as heavy on my hands as it
was when we met, I so little repent the expense of it now, that I may lay out
as much more in chewing the Cud, and committing to Paper what we have said. And
tho what has been already Printed, between us and Bays, be indeed as much
above this as he is above Stutter, yet this may, perhaps, give as much
satisfaction to the Reader, since a Spanish Frior, (...) an All for Love, have
nor always had as good an Audience as a Love for Money.


FINIS.

