PHARMACEVTICE RATIONALIS: OR, THE OPERATIONS OF MEDICINES IN Humane Bodies.

The Second Part. With Copper Plates describing the several Parts treated of in
this Volume.

By THO. WILLIS, M.D. and Sedley Professor in the University of OXFORD.

Caduceus surmounted by Pegasus and cornucopiae

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, Charles Harper, and John Leigh, Booksellers
in Fleet Street, 1679.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SInce first I began to consider the Operations of Medicines in humane Bodies,
and their manner of working, and for some time meditating upon the entire
Subject, at length published an Essay of the Rational Curatory part; I became
affected with so vehement a desire of farther prosecuting that Speculation,
that in all spare hours, (to wit as frequently as I might be vacant from my
practice) I could hardly intend or admit thoughts of any other thing: And that
not so much that I might please others, as by often turning in my mind, and
writing my Meditations of this Subject, I might be better instructed to
prescribe to my Patients. For certainly the not duly weighing the Reasons by
which Medicines operate, renders all Physic to be Empirical, and to be
governed rather by Chance or Fortune than by Advice; and it frequently comes to
pass, that a Medicine rashly administered, is but casting a Die for a man's Life.
Wherefore, that I might satisfy my self, and practice Physic (as is usually
said) with a safe Conscience, it pleased me to bestow more labor in the search
of the true Reasons of physical Energies and Efficacies. And because in this
Treatise, we chiefly consider Medicines, respecting certain private parts or
Regions of the body, and their proper Diseases, therefore we have endeavored
in the first place to perform these three things; viz. First that a most
accurate Anatomical Description might be given of the parts, (if not already
extant) whose distempers and remedies are treated of, as to the Fabric and
uses of all their Vessels. Wherefore, turning over the Breast and Lungs, and
most diligently viewing their inward recesses and apartments, what thing soever
observable either the Ancients or Moderns have published about these, and
whatsoever further by Knife or Microscope we have detected, we have here set
forth. In which task, as formerly in some others of the same nature more
exactly done, I must confess I owe much to the sedulous labor of my most
learned Friend Dr. Edmund King, and to his most dexterous Dissections. And
really I esteem it so necessary to lay the History of the parts, as a
foundation to our Rational Curatory Method, that without it I did believe the
whole Superstructure would be merely fantastical and altogether unstable, or
at least unprofitable. For surely, either to practice Physic, or demonstrate
its Operations on humane Bodies, without an exact knowledge of the parts and
passages, on which, and by which they work, would seem equally absurd, as if a
Philosopher ignorant of Mechanical affairs, should go about to unfold and
explicate the Artifice and cunning Workmanship of a Clock moving of it self,
according to the Theory of Natural Motion delivered by Aristotle. Wherefore we
have viewed with most exact diligence, in the first place, the Subjects of
Physic, or the places of Operation in our Bodies, as the Circuit in which we
are to move. Then secondly we have not been less solicitous, that according to
the Phenomenon of all parts lately detected by Anatomical observation, the true
and real Hypotheses of Diseases should be built, whereof we have designed the
Remedies; that not still persisting in the threadbare paths of Ancient
Physic, by a certain blind and implicit obsequiousness, after the manner of
Beasts, according to the proverb, to be only guided by our Ancestors footsteps;
but deriving the Causes and formal Reasons of Diseases from their very Springs,
we every where endeavor to show, from what Disposition of Blood and Humors,
from what affection of Animal Spirits, from what habitude of Fibers, and of
other solid parts, every disease proceeds. And these things so premised, and
laid instead of a solid Foundation, at length in the third place, that the
structure of our Curatory method being rightly compacted, may happily rise up
and firmly consist, we have gathered together most of the Medicines respecting
most of the private parts and regions of the body, and the peculiar Distempers
thereof, viz. both Simple and Compound, both Old and New, both Dogmatical and
Empirical, gathered out of the Physick-books of every Age, as also those
chiefly celebrated by Quacks and Nurses; more choice forms of all which, or at
the least the chief of them, and manner of using, we have aptly assigned, and
annexed the reasons as to the Preparations, as also the Operations and Effects
of them. But that all is not comprehended in this Tract that was omitted in the
former, which yet I had hoped might have been, happens from the plenty of
matter, and the bulk of the work increasing upon our hands: For assuredly, it
is more than the task of one Man or Generation, to exhibit a complete Curatory
Method, and absolute in all points. For if this Disquisition were more fully
instituted as to its Latitude, not only all the Materia Medica (which is almost
infinite) but also the whole Body of Physic offers it self. Wherefore these
our Attempts court not the name of Treatises, but of Essays. Truly it will not
be needful for many Physicians, especially those who neglect the Phenomenon of
Nature, being intent only on their Practice and Gain, to be learned about the
Reasons of all Remedies: but to the genuine Sons of Art, this will be of value,
if not to direct, at least to incite them to the Knowledge and serious weighing
always of those things they take in hand. And if these small endeavors shall
instigate others better to polish that Study, whatsoever Reviling I may reap
from the malevolent and envious, it shall never repent me of my labor. For
when I shall be well conscious to my self, that I have not suffered my
Faculties although small (as the Talent entrusted with me by God Almighty) to
perish through sloth, nor suffered them to be buried in the earth, but that
they may be rendered with some Interest beside the Principal, it will much
please me, nay, I shall seriously rejoice and triumph.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHile these were Printing, the most sad message arrives, that the Author, most
worthy of Immortality, oppressed by the irresistible assault of a Pleurisy, is
departed from among the Living; neither did the Arts profit their Master, which
did all others. The Reader will pardon us, if we for a little space celebrate
the Funeral of so Sacred a Memory, nor esteem it superfluous to hear in a few
words, what manner of person he was who wrote such things: yea he will rejoice
to understand that he was equally Good as Learned, that he also exercised
himself in the Practice of Piety, who was most conversant in that in Physic.

The matter requires a just Commentary, but we shall briefly propound what at
first came into our sudden thought, while our mind was surprised with so
unexpected an Accident.

Extracted from an honest Family, he had a Father educated in ingenuous
Studies, who after he had gone Master of Arts in the University of Oxford,
being taken with the retiredness of the Country, repaired to a Possession he
had near the same City, and solely attended his Domestic Affairs, and
maintenance of his Family: being enough deserving of the World, who begat such
a Son. But He, the Civil War raging, being snatched away by the Contagion of a
Camp-Feaver, left his Son an Orphan, near about twenty years of age, placing
the first Rudiments of his Studies in Christ-Church; who being called to take
on him the care of an Inheritance, for some time remained in the Country, but
harrased by the Incursions of the Rebels, who were possessed of a Garrison
strong enough Five miles from thence, and every where Plundering, he betook
himself again to Oxford, being the Tents of the King as well as the Muses;
where listing himself a Soldier in the University Legions, he received Pay for
some years; until the Cause of the Best Prince being overcome, Cromwell's
Tyranny afforded to this wretched Nation a Peace more cruel than any War. From
thence, the Church being trampled on, and Divinity together with Divines
suppressed, he applied himself to the study of Physic, in which, in a short
time he made eminent progress. In the mean time being nevertheless addicted to
the study of Piety, (whereof it was a considerable demonstration, that when the
Liturgy of the Church of England was thrust out of the Church, and none could
be present scot-free at those holy Offices after the ancient manner) he
entertained Religion then a Fugitive; and allotting part of his House for Holy
uses, brought it so to pass, that Assemblies, and Public Prayers, and other
Offices of Piety were constantly performed according to the Rites of the Church
of England. In the mean time he writ and published those most excellent Tracts
by which he first became known to the World, viz. Of Fermentation, of Fevers,
and of Urines.

At length the King restored, and access opened to University Degrees and
public Employs, he proceeded Doctor, and was publicly declared Professor of
Natural Philosophy, which Profession he did adorn with the highest praise;
Moreover, his Anatomy of the Brain, and his Treatise of the Scurvy, and of
Convulsions, were published.

But about the Year 1667. being called to London to practice Physic, it is
incredible to relate, how soon, and with how great Commendations he grew
famous, especially being so composed by Nature and Custom, that he could not
recommend himself by words composed to deceive, or the cunning Arts of
Mountebanks. But though he spent whole days and nights in care of the Sick, he
was yet at leisure to adorn his Art by composing Books, from whence among a
thousand Interruptions he published these Treatises, of the Accension of the
Blood, and of Muscular Motion, of the Soul of Brutes, of the Diseases of the
Brain, and the first part of his Pharmaceutice Rationalis, and at length the
other which we now present. All which, with the Authors Animadversions, and
writings unpublished, being collected into one Volume, and committed to the
care of the most faithful Apothecary Mr. J. Hemming, we hope some time to print
here.

Moreover, the same care for Divine Worship was still impressed on this most
Pious Soul; and since he could not be present, by reason of Employ, at the
Canonical Hours at the Public Devotion in the Parish Church where he dwelt, he
procured the Sacred Offices of the Church to be there celebrated early in the
Morning and late in the Evening, and for the most part was constant at them,
whatever Business was repugnant. And seeing this Institution profitable to many
in the Neighborhood, who were likewise all day detained about Commerce and
Trades, he endowed a Priest with a fit Salary at his Death, to discharge that
Function for ever.

But small was this proof of his excellent Pious temper. Although no Person
more frugal and attentive to his Employ, yet none more munificent, denying all
things to himself, yet denying nothing to the Poor and helpless. Besides what
he bestowed with his own hands, he provided Almsgivers and Dispensers of his
Charity every where in the City, Country, and in the University. I speak what
I know by frequent experiment; one might easier have received from him, for a
fit object of Charity, an hundred Crowns, than have extorted as many farthings
from most others. And though any one might justly impute the large Revenues he
acquired, to his indefatigable Diligence and constant Frugality, yet I believe
it rather to proceed from his bountiful Largesses, and the Divine benediction
thereon. From the beginning of his Youth to the last period of his life, he was
Master of no sum of Money which he accounted his own, until he had
consecrated some considerable Portion of it to God and the Poor: And when a few
days before his last, which I must ever lament, we conferred together, (as if
he had foreknown his approaching Death, and being more solicitous about the
Poor than his own Offspring,) he diligently advised about stating these
Accounts.

I omit here to decipher, how undisturbed he was in Adversity, and how
temperate in Prosperity; how modest in the highest Fame for his Learning; when
unworthily provoked, how prone to forgive Injuries; how faithful to his Prince
to his death; how obedient to the oppressed Church; how candid and ingenuous in
the Profession of his Art; how indefatigable in his Studyes, how sparing in his
Speech, and how much a Christian in the whole state of his Life. To finish all
which according to his deserts, is not the work of one hour or Paragraph. In
short, he was constantly exercised in Prayers, Studyes, Labors, Alms, and
Watchings; at length being near Fifty seven years of Age, in the beginning of
November he seemed troubled with a Cough (now the Epidemical Disease of the
time) which (while it was thought light and inconsiderable) suddenly passed
into a Pleurisy and Peripneumonia. And when this most expert Person was not
relieved by frequent Bleeding and diligent taking of Remedies, himself
perceived the Period of his Life to approach, (his Friends hoping better;) and
after three days his Household affairs being settled, and having taken the
Viaticum of the Holy Eucharist, and being received into the Peace of the
Church, he commended his pious Soul to God, having his senses entire to the
last breath, and finished his most exemplary Life with the like Death.

lobe of the lungs Sect. 1: Cap. 1 part. 2.is it Tab: I.
lobe of a Sheeps lung Tab: II. part. 2.is it Sect. 1: Cap. 1.
Tab: III. part 2.is it Sect. 1: Cap. 1.
Fig: 1.
lobe of the lungs Fig: 2.
part of the pulmonary lobe trachea blood vessels Tab: IV. Sect. 1. Cap. 1.
part 2.is it
Fig: 1.
tracheal branching Fig: 2.
branchings of the artery and pneumonic veins Fig: 3.
Branchings of the Artery and Pneumonic Veins pulmonary nerve Sect. 1: Cap. 1:
part 2.is it Tab: V.
Fig: 1.
part of the nervous trunk Fig: 2.
Fibers of the Trunk and Every Branch Fig: 3.
fibers of the trunk and every branch anatomy of the artery Tab: VI. part 2.is it
Sect. 1: Cap. 1:
Fig: 1.
four distinct coats of the vessel Fig: 2.
anatomy of the vein coats of the Trachea Tab: VII. part. 2.is it Sect. 1: Cap. 1:
Fig: 1.
most inward coat Fig: 2.
glandulous coat Fig: 3.
vasculous coat Fig: 4.
outward coat Outmost Pulmonary Coat Sect. 1: Cap. 1. Tab: VIII part. 2.is it
Fig: 1.
outmost pulmonary coat Fig: 2.
outermost membrane Fig: 3.
single area of the coat

THE SECOND PART OF PHARMACEVTICE RATIONALIS, OR OF THE OPERATIONS OF MEDICINES
IN HUMANE BODIES.
SECT. I. Of the Medicines of the Thorax.
CHAP. I. Of the Organs of Breathing and their Use.
IN the former Treatise having essayed to explain the reasons of every
Medicine, for the most part we have touched only upon general Medicines, namely
which excite some Evacuation, or recreate and restore the fainting Spirits, or
calm those which are too much raging and unquiet: The Authors purpose in the
present work.
But moreover there are many other Remedies, and those of several sorts, which
are supposed to have respect to some peculiar part of the Body, or some
particular Disease, and to be appropriated to those ends by a certain kind of
specific virtue or operation. Now as concerning both the (...) and (...) of
these, at least the chief of them, viz. whether it be really so, and for what
reason it comes to pass to be so, it seems now worthy to be inquired into: And
first of all we will treat of the Medicines of the Thorax, viz. those that are
wont to be prescribed against the Cough, Phthisic, Catarrh, Asthma, Dyspnoea,
and other Diseases of the Breast.

But since the reasons as well of these Diseases as of medicinal Operations in
healing them seem very abstruse and most difficult to declare: The parts of the
Thorax.
therefore before I enter upon this task, something ought to be premised about
the parts themselves, as well touching their uses and ordinary actions, as
their sicknesses or preternatural affects. As to the first, the parts of the
Thorax are either principal, as the Heart and Lungs, with the Vessels appendent
unto them; or subservient, as the Membranes and Muscles, with the Diaphragma;
as likewise the Ribs, with the Vertebra's; the Pneumonic Vessels, with the
nervous Fibers and Glandules. The consideration of the Heart and its Vessels
does not properly belong to this place, because not so much the sicknesses of
the Breast alone as the general sicknesses of the whole body are usually
reckoned amongst its passions. Whereas therefore the remedies appointed to cure
the diseases of that region, have special respect to the Lungs, and to the
other Organs of breathing serving them; therefore first we will describe the
fabric and use of these parts, then their diseases afterward, together with
the method of cure, and remedies; and lastly endeavor to add the reasons of
all these.

The substance of the Lungs was always accounted by the Ancients, and mostly
hitherto by modern Authors for flesh and a Parenchyma, like the frame of the
other bowels; which notwithstanding was accounted lighter and spongeous (for as
much as it was apt to be distended much by air pufft in, The substance of the
Lungs altogether membranous.
and to float upon waters.) Moreover, whereas the Lungs taken out of an Embryo
look red, and sink in water; and the Lungs of some grown persons being boiled,
appear compact enough and more solid; almost no man doubted but they consisted
really of flesh: until lately the renowned Malpighius, a most diligent Searcher
of Nature, found those parts to be altogether excarneous, and merely
membranous; and therefore he judges the bulk of the Lungs, if the Nerves and
certain Vessels be separated with the branches of the Trachea, to be a certain
heap of little Bladders, and those small Bladders every where stretched out and
sinuous, to obtain such position and knitting together, that an entrance lies
open into them from the Aspera Arteria, and so from one into another, until at
length they all end in the Membrane enclosing the Lungs. And truly that it is
so, he makes clear to sense by an Experiment. For let a Lung be taken out hot,
and let water be so often cast by a Syringe into the Pneumatic Artery, as till
the whole frame appear somewhat white, and almost transparent, the blood being
clean washed out; afterward this water being squeezed out by pressing, and the
air let in by the Windpipe, and penned in, let the Lung so filled be dried: and
it does not only, whilst exposed to the light, outwardly show transparent
little Bladders; but being inwardly cut, it presents a white heap of little
Bladders to the eyes. Besides, having viewed it with a Microscope, he
discovered a certain wonderful Net, binding and knitting together every one of
those little Bladders; which Net consists of the minute productions and
branchings of the Artery and Vein; which Vessels circulate the blood by the
small and crooked passages, and by the many turnings of the Pipes.

The most renowned man has found out beside these little Bladders for the most
part constituting the frame of the Lungs, a new and more admirable furniture of
this Bowel, Consisting of almost infinite Lobes.
viz. he shows plainly the bulk of the Lungs to be blown up by almost infinite
lobes girt about with their proper Membrane, which being endued with common
Vessels, grow to the small twigs of the Aspera Arteria: the insertion and
situation of which kind of little Lobes are manifold, as being sometimes affixt
to the Basis of the Trachea, sometimes to the Ribs, or to its Cone; also
according as they end in the outward and plain superficies, or in the corners
of the Lungs; and according as they ought to have a due position, knitting and
inter-spaces among themselves, rightly to fill up the frame of the Lungs. The
little lobes out of which each lobe of the Lungs is made up, in the third Table
are accurately and to the life expressed.

Certain inter-spaces distinguish these little lobes (which manifestly appear
in a larger Lung or in any other half boiled) which (as the renowned Person
has observed) are not bare cavities or empty spaces, Their little branchings.
but they have many Membranes spreading from the little lobes, some parallel,
some angular, and are also covered with many Vessels, so as these inter-spaces
are certain membranous little bladders, yet transparent and most thin. If you
lightly open in one single lobe of the Lung one of these inter-spaces with the
point of a knife, and shall blow into it by a small hole through a Pipe,
presently that whole lobe will be very much extended, every interspace being
pufft up; and then if you bring this frame to the light, the inter-spaces being
made transparent, do sever by great intervals every lobe very conspicuous; and
so every rank of the lobes will appear like a Polypody-leaf, and under the same
figures, as Malpighius has described, and are represented in Fig. 2. of our
third Table. But when the little lobes are filled and extended by liquor easily
congealing cast into the passages of the Trachea, the appearance thereof is
somewhat diverse, and seems in the form of Grapes, as is expressed in Fig. 1.
of the same Table. The Veins and Arteries every where accompany this production
of the Aspera Arteria, and extend themselves through the whole substance of the
Lungs by a certain knitting and alike branching. This is plainly perceived by a
pleasant sight, in a lobe of the Lungs being emptied and turgid, Quicksilver
being cast into some of the Vessels, and others filled with a colored liquor.
But in dissecting the living, another sort of Vessels, viz. Lymphaeducts are
manifest to the eye to be spread through the whole Lungs: The Lymphaeducts and
nervous slips.
and we have in another place clearly enough shown, both very many Nerves and
nervous slips every where to be distributed through them. Besides these parts,
and the primary or chief vessels of a Lung, some others, and those as it were
secondary, are to be observed. For the Pneumonic Veins and Arteries are endued
with other sanguiferous Vessels springing from the Aorta, moreover with
Glandules, and likewise with Fibers as well nervous as moving; and the
Windpipe is endowed with every one of these, and cartilaginous ones besides.

Whence we may infer, that the entire frame of a Lung is merely fistulous, The
Vessels of a Lung.
and compacted of Pipes of several kinds and magnitude, and variously and most
intricately disposed: which although they may appear wonderfully complicated,
and many ways twisted and wreathed, are yet every where continuous, and being
stretched out with a mutual respect to one another, do hither and thither in
good order and regularly convey and dispose the air, the blood, the Lympha, and
animal Spirits for some accessory uses. To describe as it were with a Pencil
this bulk of a Lung, together with the branchings, separatings, and mutual
complications of all its Vessels, would be no less difficult a task than to
trace the several threads of a harl of silk, and their respect one to another.
Nevertheless, that both the Pathology of the Thorax, and the cure, may be duly
known according to our design, it seems to be material to recite here all the
Vessels of the Lungs one after another, and to deliver as well their
descriptions, as their preternatural uses and diseases, to which at length the
Therapeutic Method shall be subjoyned. And these are the Vessels of which the
entire fabric of the Lungs consists, the Windpipe, with the Bronchia and
little Bladders, Arteries, Veins, Lymphaeducts, and Nerves, to which may the
parts and appendices of those Vessels be added, viz. the Coats of the greater
Vessels, which are endued with other sanguiferous Vessels and Glandules, and
also with nervous Muscles and Fibers.

Therefore as to the chief Vessels of the Lungs, although all these, by reason
of their mutual offices, communicate among themselves with a wonderful
affinity; yet the Arteries and Pneumonic Veins attend on the Trachea and its
partitions the most exactly; Wait on the Trachea.
for the branches and sprigs of every one of these springing alike from their
respective stocks, and stretched out to and fro, go on every where with like
pace; so that the Trachea and its branches are always in the middle, above that
the Vein, and beneath the Pneumonic Artery are carried, and all are distributed
with an equal and sociable branching: and the sprigs and branches, sent from
each of them, are presently applied to their like, and are interwoven like
wonderful Nets, of which the texture of the Lungs is almost totally
constituted. It will be impossible to describe the spreadings out and various
complications among themselves of all these going on together, as to the lesser
sprigs and slips; yet if you will cast into every vessel apart Quicksilver,
hot and flowing Gypsum, Wax mingled and made liquid with Oil of Turpentine, or
some such matter, which will extend all or the chief passages, and continue
them stufft, then you may exactly enough represent the figure: and after that
manner the frame or texture of the whole Lung may be conceived, each being
described by it self and apart. Wherefore upon these and all other Vessels and
parts of the Lungs we will treat in order; and first of the Trachea or
Windpipe.

The Windpipe or Aspera Arteria is a Pipe somewhat long, The description of
the Trachea.
consisting of Grisles and Membranes, which beginning from the Throat or lowest
part of the Jaws, and leaning on the Gullet, and descending into the Lungs, is
dispersed by manifold little branchings through their whole frame. It is
divided into two parts by the Ancients, viz. the upper, which is called the
Larynx, and the nether commonly called Bronchus; to which a third or lowest is
added, by Malpighius called Vesicularis, or the bladdery one.

The former of these, which is the beginning of the Aspera Arteria, The
description of the Larynx.
does chiefly serve for vociferation or loud noise, formed of many and various
Grisles, to which also are adjoined proper Muscles; the description and use of
all which are so exactly delivered by Anatomists, that there is no need of
dwelling longer on the description: we only advertise for methods sake and by
way of abridgment, that the Larynx contains some greater Cartilages of diverse
forms, and some uniform; the former, by reason of resemblance, bear the
denomination of Epiglottis, the Buckler-like Cartilage, the Ring Grisle, and
(...). To this last does succeed a continual rank or row of Cartilages,
fashioned altogether after the same figure and manner; every one of which,
whereas they resemble a circle, but not complete, are disposed after such a
sort, as if one so compose many wooden Rings, that there should grow up from
the sides of them, by laying a good many one upon another, a certain Pipe as it
were with Ribs. These circular Cartilages are equally distant one from another
in their whole passage, and are knit together by the benefit of an inner
Membrane (which fills up the spaces between like the Periostium) as with a
ligament. But the hinder part of every Ring-like Grisle where it lies upon the
Gullet, that it may serve better to the swallowing of meats, turns into a
Membrance, which altogether is the same, and binding together those
cartilaginous rings, and covering the whole hollowness of the Larynx, is always
moist with an unctuous humor, by which it may as well be defended against the
sucking in of sharper air, as breathing out more acrimonious vapors.

Besides this inner Membrane, Membranes encompassing the windpipe.
also another outward, though thinner, encompasses the whole Windpipe, by the
aid whereof both the Cartilages are more firmly knit among themselves, and the
whole Pipe bound to its neighboring parts, and descends more safely and
strongly into the Breast. Besides, we judge there are some other uses and
offices of either Membrane, than that it only serve to fashion or defend the
sides of the Windpipe: for as much as we do here manisestly observe many
Nerves and nervous strings every where inserted, and also the more inward Coat
of the Aspera Arteria to be endued with Fibers, as well nervous as fleshy or
musculous: from whence we may conclude the Windpipe to enjoy both a certain
sense and motion either in the whole, or at least in some parts. And truly it
is manifest even to common observation, that its more inward passage does excel
with a most acute sense; for as much as it is so much provoked by the smallest
prejudice, that presently it is wonderfully forced into a convulsive motion,
viz. a Cough: but as a sense of annoyance, and from thence very often an
instinct of motion arises from this Vessel; so we think that its Fibers do
after a sort move of themselves both in breathing and coughing. Surely in
respect of this it is not to be doubted, because in this inner Membrance we
find two orders of muscular Fibers in that fashion disposed as in the Aorta and
Intestines: to wit, there is one upper order of straight Fibers, which while
they are contracted, make all the circular Cartilages to be drawn together
nearer to one another, and for that cause to abbreviate the Trunk of this
Vessel according to all its parts successively. Under this lies another order
of circular Fibers, which (while they are pufft up) being contracted, the
hollowness of the Windpipe is much narrowed. Therefore when the moving Fibers
of either kind make the passage to be straightened according to all its
dimensions, it is obvious enough that they conduce to the discharge of the
function of breathing, and more or less to be active, as there is endeavor to
breathe quicker or slower, more intensly or more remiss. These Fibers being
more vehemently contracted in a Cough, in hawking, in blowing out, and certain
other more strong exercises of expiration, do force the breath and other
contents of the Aspera Arteria to be violently expelled. Moreover from this
action sometimes either depraved or hindered, it shall be declared hereafter how
an Asthma, a Dyspnoea, and some other diseases about breathing do arise.

This inner musculous Coat has also two others, The glandulous and vasculous
Coats.
as if growing thereunto, to wit, one glandulous, and that full of vessels. For
as in another place we have remarked about the Anatomy of the sanguiferous
Artery, one may also here take notice, that the inward Pipe of the Wezand is
covered with a most thick weaving of Vessels of every kind, and especially of
those carrying blood, in fashion of a Net. The Arteries not springing from the
Pneumonic Vessels, but from the Bronchial branch (which the most renowned Mr.
Ruisch discovered to have its rise from the Aorta) are inserted into this same;
which the veiny slips do accompany, owing their origin to the Vena cava. The
nervous sprigs meeting these two, are variously folded; and so of all weaved
together, is framed as it were a little Net, covering the whole back of the
Weazand, under which folding of Vessels very small and whitish Glandules are
every where strewed, or rather cleave to them; just in the like manner, as we
have in another place shown to be in most other greater Vessels, and in all
membranous Bowels: on all which the Lymphaeducts adjoined do wait. As to the
use of these, without doubt the Arteries and Veins wash through the Pipe of the
Weazand with bloody stream for its nourishment; and the Nerves carry plenty of
Spirits, and the faculty of performing motions to the muscular Fibers.
Afterward whatsoever of superfluous moisture be left by the Arteries, that the
Veins cannot bring back, the Glandules do receive and retain, until it may be
sent back to the mass of blood through the Lymphaeducts. When they are too much
filled, by reason of the Lympha more plentifully left, a humor distilling from
the Glandules as well as from the Arteries into the hollowness of the Windpipe
brings a Catarrh. All the Coats of the Aspera Arteria distinct and separated
from each other are expressed in the seventh Table.

The second part of the Windpipe, commonly called Bronchos, Of the Bronchia:
begins from the entrance of the Lungs: for near the fourth Vertebra of the
Chest that great Pipe descending, is divided into two Trunks, one whereof goes
toward the right side of the Lungs, the other the left: afterward both
having entered the Lungs, and being subdivided for the greater Lobes,
distribute very many sprigs (as for the most part in the gills of fishes) to
the Lobes or lesser Lobes through the whole frame of the Lungs. The passages of
all these are furnished, even as in the Larynx, with Cartilages, but framed
something in a differing manner: for in the Bronchia these are not Ring-like,
but resembling a Coat of Male, so that when there is need to contract those
passages, the inferior Cartilage goes under the hollowness of the upper,
almost in the same manner as it is in the joints of the shelly Coat of a
Lobster. Provision is so made by the work of God, that when the Lungs are
dilated, the Bronchia are stretched out into the greatest length; and when they
are contracted, the Bronchia are abbreviated, one part being drawn into another.

The Coats of the Bronchia, as also of the Larynx, Their Systole and Diastole.
have muscular Fibers of both kinds, together with the Glandules and the
Net-like twisting of Vessels: from whence we may also conclude, that all the
lesser Pipes of the Aspera Arteria have their constant turns of Systole and
Diastole, viz. all the Pipes are contracted while we breathe out, and relaxed
while we suck in air: moreover from the same Glandules and little Net of
Vessels every where continued almost within every inward recess of the Lungs,
does distill the Catarrh humor. A certain Bronchial branch of the Trachea
belonging to each Lobe of the Lungs is described in the second Table H. H.

And the branched Bronchia of both sides not only constitute two or more
greater Lobes; but, as Malpighius has observed, The Lobes of the Bronchia.
many lesser or little lobes distinct among themselves; for each Bronchial
branch sends forth to and fro many little branches or twigs, every of which
twigs being joined with alike twigs of the Pneumonic Artery and Vein, from
thence are parted into innumerable lesser sprigs; all which being every where
fellowed and complicated among themselves, and having got Nerves and peculiar
Lymphaeducts, and ending in the outward superficies of the Lungs, represent as
it were a certain private Grove; and so the whole structure of the Lungs
consists of many little branches of the aforesaid Vessels complicated, as it
were of so many several Groves. The branches whereof and outmost sides of
which, Their little branchings disjoined from one the other.
although they may seem mutually to touch themselves and cleave together, yet
they are disjoined one from the other, and are every one bounded within their
proper limits; far otherwise than the productions and communications of Vessels
are in the Brain, where the Arteries and Veins rising up in its several
corners, extend on every side, and creeping through its whole space, and
mutually inosculating, do all communicate among themselves.

That former fashioning of the Vessels has been very necessary to the uses of
the Lungs; for seeing the air ought only to enter the Lungs for that end, The
use of the aforesaid frame.
that it might pour out to the blood nitrous particles for its flame and
vitality or life, and presently return back; and seeing the blood does pass
through the Lungs for that cause, that it might meet the air sucked in according
to all its parts; therefore it behooves that both these, viz. the air and the
blood be divided into small portions, and with these make every where distinct
and short meetings. The manner of this is most elegantly perceived in the gills
of fishes; for seeing the Bronchia are as so many greater Lobes, every one of
these is divided into many rundles, furnished with a complication of every kind
of Vessels, as if it were into so many Lobes; in every one of which the blood
is drawn out by minute portions, as it were little rivulets, that it might
thoroughly meet with the nitrous particles, and afterward return into its
chanel.

The Bronchial Pipes lead into the utter cavities, The uses of the little
bladdery Cells.
viz. into the numerous little Bladders discovered by Malpighius; which truly
are certain continued parts of the Aspera Arteria, but distinct from the
former, because the Grisles are wholly wanting to them, and, which supply the
turn of these, are distant one from another in larger spaces: for all the
Bronchial branches send forth lesser slips from themselves every way; whose
passages, although void of Grisles, notwithstanding are straightened as it were
with certain ligaments at certain intervals; and the spaces between these being
filled with air sucked in do make partly those small bladdery little Cells. In
truth those passages may not unaptly be compared to the Gut Colon of a Mouse,
whose continued hollowness in as much as it is girt about in diverse places,
seems to be divided as it were into many little purses. Moreover those bladdery
passages being shorter on either side the Sinus or hollowness, have as it were
particular little Bladders growing thick to them, and therefore the heap of all
the Cells seems not much unlike to a bunch of Grapes. The Figures of these as
much as may be are exactly represented in the third Table. Those little
bladdery Cells, that they may put forth their contracting endeavors for
breathing, have muscular Fibers, as is plainly seen by the Microscope. For as
much as great plenty of air ought to be drawn within the Lungs, and reserved in
part, lest it fail at any time; therefore besides those upper passages which
are as it were the threshold and dens, moreover more inner chambers and
capacious are required, in which the air may be treasured up, and from thence
be dispensed upon occasion. For it sometimes happens the external is too sharp,
or otherwise disagreeable to the Lungs; so that as it was greatly necessary
that it should be sucked in more sparingly, and its vehemence presently be
attempered and rebated by the air treasured within. Moreover it cannot be drawn
in or inspired otherwhile in quantity great enough, as in running, singing, or
much speaking, also in some crazy dispositions; and in that case the inward air
being rarefied, supplies in a manner the defect of the outward.

Therefore seeing those bladdery little Cells receive a greater stock of air
than that they can be bound presently to return it all by every turn of
expiration; Endued only with Muscular Fibers.
therefore the grisly twigs are wanting to them, and their hollownesses are
more large of themselves, that they may be more largely distended: but that
they may puff out a greater quantity of air upon occasion, or throw out matter
to be coughed out, being endued with muscular Fibers, they contract themselves
more narrowly, and throw out what is contained within them thoroughly. For the
ordinary Systole's of the Breast, which the relaxation of the Muscles do partly
effect, cast out perhaps at every turn the whole air from the Trachea and
Bronchus, but not from the little Bladders: for the emptying of these as often
as need shall be, both the cavity of the whole Breast is very much straightened,
and the small bladdery Cells themselves are straightened from their proper Fibers
being drawn together.

2. The description and use of the Pneumonic Artery.
The next Vessel is the Pneumonic Artery, of whose most thick branches extended
every where to and fro, and with other branches twisted and complicated
together, the frame of the Lungs consists. This Artery issuing from the right
Sinus of the Heart, and inclining toward the Trachea, is parted into a right
and left branch; which applying themselves to the like parallel branches of the
Trachea, do accompany them every where, or rather are set under them; for they
are planted beneath, and are first carried into the greater lobes of the Lungs,
and afterward into all the lesser lobes: in every of which the little branch
of the Artery stretched out, sends out on either side more slips from it self,
which presently are associated by other bronchial and venal slips, and are
several ways complicated; and where the outmost sprigs of the Aspera Arteria
depart into circular little Cells, the Arteries being complicated with the
Veins (as is discovered by the Microscope) do girt about those little Bladders
with their thick branching, and enwrap them like Ivy: from whence we may
conjecture, that it is not for nothing that the Blood Vessels that are any
where in the Lungs, do curiously wait upon those of the air, and every where
insinuate and intimately mingle themselves. Surely whatsoever has been
supposed by others, I shall not easily believe that this is done for the more
exact mingling of the Blood and its parts, be they never so unlike. For to do
that, what need would there be of so full an access of air, which in rightly
making other mixtures (the more perfect whereof are called Digestions) we seek
as much as we can to keep out? For if the air might freely come and go, the
Particles that should be mixed, would most of them fly away. And as to that
which is affirmed, That the Blood in the Lungs is carried through those small,
winding and extreme narrow passages only that it may be the better mixed; I
say, that its being so carried is quite contrary to such an intention: for the
best mixture of any liquor (as also of the Blood it self) is made by
fermentation; and the liquour to be so mixed or fermented, like Wine in a
Hogshead, requires a free and spacious room: but its going through these small
and narrow passages like so many strainers, serves rather for the separation
than the mixture of its parts; wherefore unless the Blood be exactly mixed in
the greater Vessels, and be there rightly fermented, it does, while it passes
through the Lungs, leave there the dregs and whatsoever parts are not rightly
mixed, and so does stuff up and very much obstruct their passages; as we may see
in persons affected with the Green Sickness, Cachexy, and that sort of Dropsy
called Leucophlegmatia, who all have a difficulty of breathing, by reason of
dregs of the ill-mixt Blood that are left there. Wherefore the use of the Lungs
seems to be this, That the Blood through the lesser Vessels, as so many
rivulets, may as to all its parts lie open to and meet with the nitrous
Particles of the Air, and be by them enlivened and accended. The Pneumonic
Artery, as also the Aorta and Windpipe, has a muscular Coat furnished with
two ranks of Fibers, namely straight and circular; which doubtless, when they
are contracted, do make the Pneumonic Arteries to beat, and the Blood to be
urged and driven still more and more forward. A great many Glandules with a Net
of Vessels lie on this musculous Coat. The frame and branching of the Pnenmonic
Artery in some one Lobe of the Lungs are expressed in the second Table. All the
Coats of this Vessel are drawn distinct and apart from one another in the sixth
Table and first Figure, and also in the fourth Table and second Figure.

The Pneumonic Vein, having its rise in the left Ventricle of the Heart, The
description and use of the Pneumonic Vein.
and being divided and variously subdivided first into greater branches, and
then, according to the greater and lesser Lobes of the Lungs, into lesser, and
lastly into the least of all, is carried above the Weazand, and as it goes on
does exactly answer to the branching both of the Pneumonic Artery and the
Weazand, and goes every where with them as it were cheek by joll; and where the
Weazand ends into the little Bladders, the Veins being twisted with the
Arteries (as was said before) do make as it were a little Net wherein those
little Bladders are encompassed. The Anatome of the Pneumonic Vein differs
little or nothing from that of the Vena cava and its branches. All the Vessels
of this kind have four Coats distinct from one another.

1. The outmost of these Coats consists of Fibers that seem to be nervous,
which perhaps are after a sort muscular and are extended straight long-wise,
(though in no very regular order.) This Coat of the pulmonary Vein is very
laxe, and loose from the rest of the Vessel, insomuch that it may all of it be
blown up and very much extended, as if it were a distinct Vessel: Whence one
might suspect that this were a peculiar passage to carry back Lympha or Serum
separated from the Blood: but it seems to be more probable, that this outmost
Coat is therefore made so loose, that the passages might be much distended and
widened for the return of the Blood now hot and boiling.

2. 3. Two other Coats (common both to a Vein and Artery) viz. the vasculous,
The use of the venous and vasculous Coat.
and the glandulous lie under this: the office of the vasculous is to bring
nourishment to the part, and of the glandulous to receive and send away the
superfluous serosities.

4. The fourth and inmost Coat is plainly muscular, having Ring sibres, The
muscular Coat.
as the like Coat of an Artery has, which certainly being successively
contracted after the stream of Blood, do cause its return to be hastened, and
on occasion to be shortened. But here arises a doubt, wherefore, Why there is no
Pulse in the Veins.
seeing the Veins as well as Arteries have contracting muscular Fibers (which
in the latter are pulfifick) and seeing both are alike joined to the Heart that
beats continually, the Veins as well as the Arteries should not statedly beat
according to the constant turns of the Systole's and Diastole's in the Heart?
It may easily be answered to this, first, that the Arteries have a great deal
more of the moving Fibers than the Veins have; and therefore whereas those
being strongly contracted successively, do force the Blood along as if driven
with a wedge, for these it suffices that whilst they are gently contracted
behind the stream of Blood, they calmly and equally drive it forward, flowing
back again of its own accord, and as it were down-hill. But besides, the reason
hereof seems to depend somewhat on the unlike or rather inverted conformation
of the Vessels; for the Blood conveyed by the Arteries is driven still from
wider to narrower spaces, and therefore going along it every where violently
distends them, and lifting up the sides of the Vessels raises the Pulfe;
because whiles that part of the Artery that is behind the Blood is contracted
by its muscular Fibers, that part which is before it, must needs beat being
filled with the stream of blood gushing in: but on the contrary, the blood in
the Veins returning to the Heart, runs out of less into greater spaces, or out
of rivulets into a more capacious and deep chanel, and therefore glides along
silently and without the fluctuating of a Pulse.

The blood in the pulmonary Veins seems as much, The disposition of the blood
in the Pneumonic Veins.
or more than that within the Arteries to be animated or inflamed anew by the
air insinuating it self every where from the Pipes or little Bladders of the
Trachea, because in those Veins it is first changed from a black-purple to a
scarlet: the reason whereof is, because the blood at the extremities of the
Vessels, namely as it passes out of the Arteries into the Veins, does every
where and most of all meet with the particles of the air. And for that reason
it is, that if any liquour be squirted into the Pneumonic Artery, it will not
so readily and quickly pass through the Lungs and return by the Vein, as it
will do if you make the same experiment in any member, or part of the body
besides; yea part of the liquor so injected will sweat through into the Pipes
of the Trachea, or the spaces between the little Lobes, and another part, being
turned into a froth, will return very slowly by the Veins: which is a certain
proof, that while it passes through the Lungs it makes a stay in the mouths of
the Vessels, and is mingled with the airy particles. The Circulation of the
blood through the Lungs has something diverse from, or rather contrary to that
which is made through the rest of the body; seeing the Pneumonic Arteries
contain a black-purple blood, and the Veins a scarlet, whereas in all the body
besides the branches of the Aorta carry a scarlet blood, and those of the Vena
cava a black-purple. Besides we may observe of the pulmonary Vein, that it does
every where in its whole length want valves, except where it is fastened to the
Heart. Which appears by this, that when any liquor is injected into its trunk
(just as it is in the Artery) it presently passes through all its branches
without let. Which ought to be so, to this end, that the blood may always,
because of the violence of the passions, freely every way fluctuate and
regurgitate in and about the Heart. Besides, that the left Ventricle of the
Heart might never be overcharged with the blood impetuously rushing into it, by
the instinct of Nature the Fibers at the root of the Vein being contracted, its
course might be inverted and flow back. The description of the Pneumonic Vein
as to its utmost branching is in the fourth Table and third Figure.

To these three sorts of Vessels, The Lymphaeducts added to the aforesaid
Vessels.
wherein the air and the blood are conveyed, the Lymphaeducts that carry
forth a water are joined. A power of these dispersed through the Lungs, wait on
the Arteries and Veins. All the branches tending from the surface of the Lung
toward its original, unite into some greater trunks; which, being inserted
into the Windpipe, discharge thereinto the Lympha that is superfluous from the
blood and nervous humor. Indeed there is need of a great many of this sort of
Vessels in the Lungs; because, seeing the blood is hottest of all here, is
hastily circulated, and yet can exhale nothing to without by transpiration, the
Veins can hardly receive all the whole mass of blood from the Arteries; and the
Glandules contain not long what is deposited in them: therefore there as need
of Lymphaeducts as so many channels, whereby the superfluous humor might
continually be sent off. If these at any time happen to be obstructed or
broken, there often follows a Dropsy of the Lungs or Breast, and sometimes
Coughs and Phthisicks. These lymphatick Vessels of the Lungs may very well be
seen, if in dissecting a live Dog you press the top of the Thoracick duct, that
nothing may be poured into the subclavian Vein: for then the Lymphaeducts of
the Lungs, because they cannot discharge themselves into the common Receptacle
now stopped and filled, swell much and are very apparent. If such a stoppage be
made for some time in a Dog that has eat and drunk largely, a milky liquor
will sweat into the Lungs out of the Thoracick duct, the Valves being unlocked:
yea and the same liquor will pass through the Lymphaeducts placed far beneath
the Reins, and will render them strutted with that humor, as if abounding with
milk. The rough delineation of the Lymphaeducts spreading themselves in the
superficies of the lobe of a Lung, is represented in the first Table.

5. The last kind of Vessels belonging to the Lungs are the Nerves and their
branches, The nervous slips dispersed throughout the Lungs.
whereof there are many (as we elsewhere intimated) dispersed every where
through the Lungs. Heretofore doubting about the office of these, we were
induced to think the first force, or at least instinct of breathing depended on
these Nerves; because otherwise we can hardly conceive, after what manner the
motion of the Lungs in breathing, coughing, laughing, and other their actions
should be always so exactly proportioned according to the several exigences of
Nature. For even as the blood does more intensly or remisly heat and boil up
within the Praecordia, and as certain contents of the Trachea provoke the
nervous Fibers, we breathe either quicker or slower, and ofttimes, though
unwillingly, we cough. But besides there does occur another and more necessary
use of these Nerves: for since it is manifest, that the Coats of those Veins
and of the Trachea are every where endued with muscular or moving Fibers by
which they are contracted, it is plain, that the Pneumonic Nerves do convey as
well plenty of spirits, as inclinations of contraction to those Fibers. And it
is very probable from those Nerves convulsively distempered, that the
Palpitation of the Heart is often excited, as also the Asthma and Chin cough.
We have some time since delivered the Anatomy or description of the Pneumonic
Nerves in our Treatise of Nerves, viz. page 311. so that there is here no need
to repeat or enlarge. The fivefold Vessels forementioned being mutual, and many
ways accompanied in their distribution, as if divided into secret Groves with
small bladders as in Trenches every where interwoven, when they are complicated
and variously woven together do constitute a fleshy web, which is the very
structure of the Lungs: which moreover appears like a more solid Parenchyma, in
as much the Arteries and Veins being filled with blood are stufft up, and the
Vessels of the Trachea and Lymphaeducts being emptied of the air as well as
water, do fall together and seem to close. We shall the less admire the fleshy
fabric of this Lung wove together out of mere Vessels and little Bladders, if
we consider the frame of the seminal Testicles to be nothing else than a heap
composed of hollow filaments or spermatic Pipes woven together. The description
of the Nerves of the Lung, and what relates to the bundle of Fibers whereof it
is compact, and to the spreading of its branches, are described in the fifth
Table.

The web of the Lung, as abovesaid, The Coats of the lungs, whereof one is
smooth, and the other rough.
being weaved together of Vessels and little Bladders, and divided according to
their greater and lesser branchings into lobes and little lobes, a Membrane
wraps them about as a common covering. Of this there are two Coats, viz. one
outer and fine, which appears like a certain subtle texture or weaving together
of nervous filaments (as is apparent in most other Bowels;) the other more
inward, which is both rough and somewhat thick, and consisting almost of mere
ends of Vessels and little Bladders: and by reason of the hollownesses every
where caused from these, its inward superficies resembles a Hive of Bees; the
forms of these are aptly enough described in the eighth Table. This Membrane of
two Coats blown up has very many and large Pores, insomuch that if
Quicksilver be poured into the Trachial branch of one of the lesser lobes,
almost filling within the whole Membrane, it will every where burst out from
the Pores. Both the arterial blood and the air beating in this Membrane as
against a bank, are reflected; the former is brought back by the Veins into the
left Venture of the Heart, a certain watery part being sent away through the
Lymphaeducts. In the mean while the air is returned back by the same passages
of the Trachea by which it flowed in. For continually fresh air ought to be
sucked in, that it might supply nitrous Particles to the Blood; to make room for
which the other old air being now weak and useless, must be first breathed out.
Because therefore both functions are to be performed within the same passages,
it is to be done by alternate turns, first the one, then the other. While the
air is drawn in, the Lungs are blown up, as if wind were forced into them; and
whilst the same is breathed out they fall down, and are narrowly squeezed
together for the benefit of excluding it; and so after the manner of Bellows
discharge constant changes of the Systole and Diastole. Yet by what impulse and
Organs it is accomplished, is worth our labor here to consider.

Therefore upon the whole matter it is manifest by common observation, The
Systole and Diastole of a Lung.
the Diastole of the Lungs perpetually succeeds the opening the Breast, and its
Systole in like manner its contraction; so that we may conclude, when the
cavity of the Thorax being dilated a greater space is yielded to the expansion
of the lungs, the extern air of its own accord leaps into the Trachea, whether
by reason of the Pulse, or by its own Elastic force (for it is all one) and
presently enters into its Trunk, the bronchia and all the little bladders, and
blows them up; namely for that end, that its nitrous particles may every where
occur to the blood, washing all parts of the lungs: afterterwards when the
breast receding from that dilatation, is straightened as to its cavity, even the
lung being compressed, falls together by its Diastole, and excludes the air
even now breathed in. But truly, because the air does not of its own accord
leap out with that plenty as it skipt in, neither the hollowness of the breast
so straightly contracted, that it should mightily compress the lungs; therefore
all the passages of the Trachea are endowed with muscular fibers, which being
contracted orderly while we breathe out, they may promote the expulsion of air.
Wherefore, that the cause of breathing, and the manner of doing it may more
plainly be made known, inquisition ought to be made after what manner, and by
what Organs, that interchangeable dilatation and contraction of the breast are
performed.

We cannot enough admire, Its motion mechanically unfolded.
concerning these motions, the cunning artifice of the Divine Creator,
evidently adapted unto Mathematical rules; for truly in no other matter does He
more plainly appear (...). For when both the enlargeing and the straitening of
the breast ought to be performed by some muscles (to whose function it only
belongs to contract;) the matter is so ordained, that the ribs which shape out
the sides of the Thorax even as of oblong parallel lines bowed toward a
Cylinder, are brought one while in a square figure with right angles for the
enlargement of the breast, and afterward into the form of a Diamond-figure
with sides unequal, with acute angles for the contraction thereof. What follows
from the situation of parts so changed, that whenas the sides depart farthest
from one another, the ends are brought nearer, and so e contra; and for that
cause the largeness of the space is wont rather to be altered than either
augmented or diminished; lest it may so happen about the cavity of the Thorax,
it is so provided against by an admirable workmanship, that whilst the ribs
ascend upward for enlarging the breast to a square figure, lest the ends should
be shortened inward, the Diaphragma, which closes the bottom, swells downward
toward the Abdomen; so that the Thorax may be enlarged as well toward its
length as to its depth: on the contrary, while the ribs beneath are brought to
straiten the breast toward the figure Rhomboides, lest they should depart
farther than they ought, the Diaphragma ascends upwards for that cause that the
largeness of the Thorax may be straitened, while we breathe out, according to
both dimensions.

What belongs to the muscles of the breast, The Muscles serving respiration.
serving as well to the enlargement for sucking breath, as to the constriction
for breathing out, the most wise Creator of Nature has ordained more and
sundry instruments of either function; Therefore truly that the work of
breathing being especially necessary as to life might be performed incessantly
and very strongly, some of the former order of Muscles, viz. those by which the
hollowness of the Thorax is opened, do raise the ribs and afterward draw them
back, even as they are bowed and more enlarged; in which number there are three
muscles to the shoulder, one belonging to the loins, and eleven intercostal
outward; and another inward muscle, viz. the Diaphragma, depresses the bottom
of the breast, and enlarges its length and depth.

The aforesaid muscles, Their function as well in inspiration;
viz. the scapular, lumbar, and intercostals being also appointed with the
Diaphragma for the function of breathing, are accurately enough described by
many Anatornists, but chiefly by Fallopius, that here seems little need to
unweave this web; especially because a more full and permanent knowledge of
these parts is not wont to be acquired unless by frequent dissections and
anatomical inspection. The four former muscles being of diverse forms, conduce
chiefly to stronger and violent inspiration; but the exterior intercostals in
regard of the ordinary actions of breathing employ their continual endeavors
by turns during life, every one of these being uniform, with a fleshy and more
thick basis, being rooted in the bottom of the upper rib are carried by oblique
fibers, and broad toward the forepart unto the top of the rib that lies under,
and are implanted to it with a small and tendonous end; whence it follows,
those fibers being swelled, and shortened toward their root, do lead and draw
back the nether rib toward the upper; and so while all these muscles are
contracted together, all the ribs are raised upwards, and altered from oblique
angles into direct ones, they render the trunk of the Thorax more large, but
something shorter; which defect that it may be helped, the Diaphragma (which
being free before from the Systole, is hidden within the cavity of the breast)
together with the ribs drawn upwards, is extended beneath; so that the breast,
as it were a Drum braced, does become most capacious; and in the mean time the
lungs, having a more ample space yielded to them, are blown up by the air
rushing in wheresoever there is passage, and sill the whole hollowness of the
Thorax enlarged.

Thus far touching the muscles serving to inspiration, As in expiration.
which ever and anon ceasing from contraction, the ribs presently fall down
from a direct position into an oblique; and the Diaphragma also being freed
from its extension, ascends into the cavity of the breast, or is rather thrust
thither by the bowels of the Abdomen; and so by reason of the position of parts
so changed, viz. the breast straitened, and the lungs compressed, the act of
exspiration does succeed. Some have determined this to be a mere intermission
of the other, and only to proceed from the rest, or ceasing of the muscular
motion (by which breathing is performed.) But the declination of the ribs from
right angles into oblique, and the ascension of the Diaphragma, is related to
be the natural position of these parts, because they are found in such a
situation in dead bodies. I think my assent not easily owing to this opinion,
because sometimes the function of exspiration is performed much stronger and
more violently than that of inspiration, as in coughing, singing, laughing,
hollowing, and in other affects whose exercises are the more difficult labor
and more earnest endeavors of the breast. Wherefore there is no reason that we
should think that such vigorous exercises of expiration, should be excited by
the mere rest and ceasing of the aforesaid muscles, but from the motion of
others opposed to them. Moreover the Muscles now cited and opposite, and
straitning the breast, seem to be required not only by reason of their violent
exspiration, but for their ordinary and constant service, at least for the
poising the function of respiration: for otherwise those other whose office it
is to enlarge the cavity of the Thorax, being sometimes unmindfull of their
task, do it either stronger or longer than is convenient; wherefore it is
necessary they be forthwith admonished by others, viz. their Antagonists
subservient to Expiration, and to be restrained in their duty. But the muscles
appointed for the straitning the breast, are the Sacrolumbus, the Triangular,
and inward Intercostals, and some muscles of the Abdomen; the use and
descriptions of all which are delivered by many Anatomists, and most accurtely
by Fallopius. The inner intercostal muscles as they obtain a contrary
situation, so a contrary function to the outer intercostals, which namely is
to depress the ribs, and to straiten the cavity of the breast, by forcing it
into the Rhomboidal Figure. For we are to observe, that the carneous and
thicker basis of each of these is implanted in the lowest part of the nether
ribs, and the moving fibers, ascending from thence obliquely and forward, and
dividing cross-wise the rest of the outward intercostals, with their smaller
and Tendony end are engrafted in the bottom of the upperrib; hence none need
doubt, but that these inner muscles do depress all the ribs, or bring them
downward: but whilst these ribs are so depressed, that the trunk of the breast
is rendered more strait, these inward muscles (otherwise than the outer) do not
only incline the ribs downward, but also their gristly or cartilaginous
processes. For Fallopius has acutely described this: That the outward
intercostal muscles do only fill up the inter-spaces of the ribs and not of
the gristles, but the inward fill up both spaces. The reason whereof seems to
be after this manner, affording a most delightful speculation of the Divine
Architect, viz. while the ribs are brought upwards to the exercise of fetching
in breath, and are withal drawn back toward the Spine, that motion commencing
backward, is performed by the ribs themselves; which being first moved
together, the cartilages easily discharge their function as cords fitted to
that purpose: wherefore there seems little need of the muscular aid to place
these in their order; but to put the ribs in action, not only the intercostal
muscles before mentioned, but the four other greater ones do continually
endeavor it; but on the contrary, that the ribs may be depressed and brought
forwards together, the force taking its rise before, is performed by the
cartilages as so many leading cords, most easily bending the ribs downwards as
far as need requires.

Moreover to this end, that the cartilaginous appendices of the ribs may be
drawn down and nearer one the other for the exercise of expiration, not only
the inward intercostal muscles fill as well the intervals of the cartilages as
of the ribs, but moreover an entire triangular muscle is allotted for this
function; for this springing beneath from the bone of the Sternon, and
ascending upwards obliquely, is inserted into to the lower Cartilages, which it
constrains toward its head, and bends the Thorax nearer on the other side.
That is worthy of consideration, which Fallopius has remarked touching this
muscle, viz. whereas it is so little and minute in a man, that it may hardly be
allowed for a Muscle, it is stretched out in a Dog along the whole bone of the
Breast, and reaches to all the Cartilages, even those inosculated into the
Sternon of the true Ribs. Wherefore the triangular Muscle being small in a man,
is stretched out through the whole bone of the breast in a Dog. The Diaphragma
follows the motion of the Abdomen.
The reason of which difference clearly points at the Divine Providence
touching the Fabric of Animals. For whereas this Animal is born to most swift
and long running, that the blood, while it is more vehemently agitated, may
duly be kindled and fan'd, as it ought swiftly and strongly to draw in the air,
even so to expire it; (for that fresh air may be more freely sucked in, it
behooves that all the old be strongly cast out and exploded) therefore for the
stronger discharge of this exercise (of the which little use in a man) this
Muscle of a Dog is allotted a great bulk, proportionable to such a work.

Hitherto of the Muscles that straiten the Trunk of the Breast: by whose
provision it is manifest enough, that the relaxation of the opposite muscles
are not sufficient to this function. But that while the breast is constrained,
the Diaphragma ascending upwards may shorten its hollowness, it is not enough
that it is released from its contraction, but it is also necessary, that as
soon as this ceases, the muscles of the Abdomen being contracted squeez
together the Bowels, and press them upwards, by which the Diaphragma being
relaxed, is lifted up and driven higher into the Trunk of the Thorax.

From the supposed reasons of these things we may infer, The labor of Muscles
the same in exspiration as in inspiration.
no less endeavors of the muscles are employed in the exercise of expiration,
than in inspiration: nay rather we may affirm them greater, after this is
added, that the Pipes of the Trachea and Bronchii are endowed with muscular
Fibers (as we have showed) which being only contracted while we expire, do
cause the air contained within to be cast out with the greater force. And truly
so it ought to come to pass, because the air prevailing with an elastic force,
does of its own accord readily enter the pulmonary passages, as often as they
are suffered to be open; but from thence that again it may presently and
thoroughly be excluded, there needs a certain force and compression of the parts
to thrust out. For although the inspiration precede in course, yet it is
necessary that expiration follow immediately after, and be proportioned
according to the fashion thereof; for that it may be great, the turns or
changes of this being greater are requisite. Wherefore in vehement exercise of
the whole body or of the Lungs alone, that the fresh air may more plentifully
be drawn in, all the old air must be moved, not only out of the Trachea and
Bronchii, but also out of the farthest little Bladders every turn or change of
breathing out, and expulsed most of it: whereas while we draw in the breath
only the muscles of the Breast are employed, the Lungs having respite, in
strong breathing out both the opposite Muscles and the Lungs themselves labor.

Having thus explained the Organs of Breathing, The causes of the
abovementioned motions.
it remains yet to be inquired into, by what instinct, being stirred up to
motion, they so repeat perpetual changes of Systole and Diastole, that one
while these muscles are contracted for inspiration, and another while for
expiration, in the mean while the opposite muscles have a pause, and are moved
by turns, that they mutually give place to themselves successively. From all
this in the first place it is clear (which likewise in another place we have
abundantly declared) that the animal Spirits, for the exercising the
contractive motion of the muscles, leap from the Tendons into the fleshy
Fibers, and afterward for their relaxation they recede out of these into
those. Moreover, whereas the mutual function is twofold, viz. spontaneous and
merely natural, In the animal function.
we have before showed in the former, that the Spirits are brought from the
Tendons into the fleshy Fibers by approaches according to the command of
appetite, and to remain within during the action, till they are dismissed by
its will; and afterward return into the Tendons, till they are again commanded
forth; insomuch that the times of their motion and rest are unequal and
uncertain, and variously determined at our pleasure.

But it is far otherwise in the natural function: And natural.
because the animal Spirits are carried out from the Tendons into the flesh by
perpetual turns, or constant reciprocation, and a short contraction being made,
presently leap back from the flesh into the Tendons, and so alternately: after
which manner the Heart it self, the Organs of the Trachea and breathing, also
the fleshy Fibers of the Stomach and Guts, unless they are otherwise limited by
reason of their objects, are drove on by their constant Systole and Diastole.

It will be needless to repeat here what we have already observed in another
place touching these two kinds of motions, The motion of the former sort
arises from the brain, the other from the Cerebellum.
viz. that the animal spirits of the spontaneous moving function are altogether
or chiefly dispensed from the brain, and the others causers of the merely
natural function are dispensed from the Cerebellum; moreover also as the plenty
of both sorts of spirits, so the very instincts of beginning those actions have
their conveyance through the Nerves.

Notwithstanding here arises a doubt, to what kind of moving function, It is a
quaere of what kind the actions of breathing are.
viz. whether spontaneous, or merely natural, the actions of breathing ought to
be referred; also of what original, viz. whether of the Brain or Cerebellum,
the animal spirits appointed to that employment, are. It is manifest enough
that this function is in a sort partaker of a spontaneous motion, because it is
in our power one while to shorten its exercises, at other times to prolong, and
otherwise diversely to alter them, yea sometimes a little to restrain them.
Moreover the nerves belonging to its chief moving Organs, viz. the Diaphragma
and Muscles of the breast, springing from the nerves of the Arms and Loins, do
owe their descent to the Brain, and do plainly acknowledge the spirits they
contain are chiefly ordained for voluntary motions: but moreover on the
contrary, this function is so far natural, that its organs do reciprocate the
constant changes of Systole and Diastole in sleep, without our notice, and
while we wake, we not perceiving it: Moreover although we can for some little
time stop its exercise, or at our pleasure vary it, yet we deny it to be
altogether or long suspended: besides, although the nerves appointed to the
muscles of the breast and Diaphragma proceed from the spinal nerves, yet these
latter coming from the branches belonging to the arm communicate in their
progress with the slips of the intercostal nerves; moreover, all the other
nerves (which belong to the Cerebellum) arise from these, which are spread
about through the Trachea and Lungs.

From these it plainly follows, It is concluded to be a mixed act.
that the power of breathing is as it were a mixed action, and does participate
of either moving function, viz. as well of the spontaneous as natural; and that
the spirits and nerves of either Province are employed in this duty, which
proceed as well from the brain as from the Cerebellum; and truly so it ought
to come to pass according to the animal government: for although some actions
of breathing necessary for the preserving life, ought to be constant and
perpetual, there are yet many other motions of the breast and lungs only
occasional, and to be performed at our pleasure, as may be discerned in
laughing, crying, singing, hollowing, whistling, and other singular offices of
the lungs and windpipe; in which works that they may be done strongly, the
muscles conspire together, and endeavor jointly. As in violent labors and
exercises of the whole body, by which the blood being stirred up does want the
greater ventilution, the arms being vehemently moved also do force the muscles
of the breast, and other pneumonic organs, into more speedy motions for a more
frequent breathing. And truly for joint labor of this sort of the Arms and
Diaphragma, the nerves serving this motion proceed from the nervous branches of
them. Moreover, it is provided for this purpose, lest the exercises of the body
might enfeeble at any time the strength of the lungs, or exceed the order of
breathing; for when its organs labor more difficultly, or begin to be weary,
the nerves of the Diaphragma do warn the other nerves of the arms, plucking
them and as it were admonishing of their duty to desist from an over intense
motion.

For whereas the function of breathing is ordained for many uses, The nerves of
the lungs some rulers of the natural motion, and others of the voluntary.
whereof some are merely natural, and others spontaneous or violent; therefore
the spirits and the nerves which proceed and have their government as well from
the brain as from the Cerebellum, ought to be joined together, and to afford
their social endeavors; yet on that condition, and as it were by mutual
agreement, that one give place to the other by turns for the discharging all
works chiefly necessary, or convenient, and do mutually obey. From the
pneumonic nerves, the instinct of ordinary breathing or merely vital begins,
and is presently communicated to the nerves of the Diaphragma, and from thence
to all of the Thorax; Both do alternately obey one the other, and agree in
their office.
so that presently all the moving parts agree together in the action, and cause
the Systole and Diastole of the breast in such sort as are required to the
present state of the blood; notwithstanding on the contrary, as to other
actions of breathing, whether spontaneous or violent, it seems to have them
also, viz. the instinct or first force of these, beginning one while from these
muscles, another while from them is presently communicated to all the other
Organs; so that it is called upon by a working consort of all together sooner
than the twinkling of the eye, for the performing the designed acts of
breathing.

What we have hitherto declared about the Organs of Breathing and their
functions and uses, that they may more clearly be manifest, it seems to be
material to expose to your view the forms of some of their chiefest parts
described to the life, together with the explication of their Figures: yet it
seems proper first to insert a few things concerning the Lymphaeducts and
interspaces of the Lobes omitted in the former Discourse.

The most renowned Malpighius first discovered these little Lobes of the Lungs
and their interspaces; but to what uses they serve he has not clearly enough
showed. Happily it may seem that these little places and empty spaces within the
Lungs, are certain receptacles of the air (that there may be a larger store of
it.) Notwithstanding it is evidently manifest upon experiment frequently made,
that the air pufft into the Pipe of the Trachea (which is the only entrance
into the Lung) does not enter or blow up these interspaces of the little Lobes:
The interspaces of the little Lobes have passage one into the other, and from
thence into the Lymphaeducts.
notwithstanding if you blow into the hole of any of these interspaces,
immediately all these spaces pufft up do swell in the whole lobe of the Lungs,
so that all the little lobes distinct by great interspaces, will appear with a
pleasant prospect; as is expressed in the second Figure of the third Table.
Moreover the Lymphaeducts creeping through the superficies of the Lungs, seem
to be every where included in little Membranes covering those interspaces, and
to end in them. But as the lymphatic Vessels are all furnished with little
valves, so those which appertain to the Lungs are furnished with almost
infinite; as is to be seen in the warm large lobe of an Ox, and expressed to
the life in Tab. 1. d, d, d, d.

That I may dare to conjecture concerning the use of these things, Which
therefore is done, that the vaporous steaming of the blood being received by
the interspaces, and condensed into water in the Lymphaeducts, may be conveyed
out.
it is probable, that those cavities intercepting each little lobe, do receive
the vapors flowing copiously every where from the blood being kindled, (when
they cannot any where else be better thrust down or separated) which sweat
through their slender Coats into these cavities out of the ends of those
Vessels, and thence being forced further, they are condensed into water to be
carried out of the Lungs through those appropriate Vessels: moreover lest the
Lympha's caused from vapors within those passages, and so being made thick,
should whirle again back into the Lungs (which would bring great prejudice to
them) the thickest obstacles of the valves do hinder. For I have frequently
admired what becomes of the vaporous steams which incessantly flow in great
plenty, and sometimes most impetuously out of the blood burning ardently in the
Praecordia. For although very many of them fly away through the passages of
the Trachea together with the air while we breathe, notwithstanding one only
way of passage or particular sluice does not suffice to them, from every place
breaking forth: wherefore these little places or empty spaces are every where
placed, that they may receive those vapors shut up in the Lungs, and may drop
out the same immediately condensed through the Lymphaeducts, as if through so
many noses of an Alembick.

The lymphic Vessels having their passage out of the Lungs incline toward the
passages of the Thorax with their numerous branches, The progress and
distribution of the pulmonary Lymphaeducts.
and are for the most part mingled with them; but they climb upon the
Oesophagus in their way, as also the trunks of the Trachea and the Aorta, and
do lose many slips in them by a various insertion; likely for this cause, that
some of the lymphatic humor may be bestowed for making slippery the sides of
those Vessels.

The Explication of the Figures.
THE first Table shows one entire lobe of the Lungs, upon whose superficies the
Lymphaeducts are seen spread through every where.

A. The Orifice of the Trachea being cut lying in the midst of the Vessels. B.
The Orifice of the Pneumonic Artery lying under. C. The Orifice of the
Pneumonic Vein placed above it. d, d, d, d. The outer Lymphaeducts spread
abroad through the superficies of the Lobe. e, e, e, e. More Lymphaeducts
meeting on the back of this Lobe, from whence they pass into the Thoracick
ducts.
The second Table shows one lobe of a Sheeps Lung cut in the midst, that the
upper part (wherein is the trunk of the Vein) being removed, and the trunk of
the Aspera Arteria laid by it self, the branching of the Pneumonic Artery is
shown throughout its whole frame, viz. through the small and least little
Lobes. All the passages of this, viz. the slips and twigs how small soever,
being filled and colored by any liquid thing cast into them, are drawn to the
life.

A, A, A, A. The nether half of the Lobe divided, containing the branching of
the Pneumonic Artery. B, B, B. The Trunk of the Pneumonic Artery belonging to
this Lobe. C. A hole from whence its other branch was cut off and removed. D,
D, D, D. The Trunks from which its other branches (because they could not be
expressed in this Table) were cut off. E, E, E, E. The arterious stems thereof
stretched forward into length, the side-branches on both parts stretched out into
the right and left side. F, F, F, F. The twigs and lesser slips, which are
every where intermingled with the like from the Veins and Bronchials; and at
last woven together with the Veins every where encompass the orbicular little
Bladders, and bind them as it were in clusters. G, G, G, G. The Bronchial
branches, which being cut from the stem of the Trachea laid aside, and entering
secretly into this lobe of the Lungs, are accompanied with branches that bear
blood. H, H. The stem of the Trachea appertaining to this Lobe, which lay upon
the Pneumonic Artery, cut and laid aside. f, f, f, f. The stems of the
Bronchial branches, which are immersed partly in this portion of Lobe described
G, G, G, G, and are partly distributed in the other half cut off.
The first Figure of the third Table expresses one lobe of the Lungs, according
to the branchings of the Aspera Arteria divided into lesser and less lobes, the
twigs and slips of which Vessel being filled by a liquid first injected, and
afterward separated from among themselves toward the little lobes, are also
drawn to the life.

A. The Trunk of the Aspera Arteria being cut from the rest of his body. B, B,
B. The inner part being cut open, that as well the holes leading into all its
branches, as its straight muscular Fibers, are viewed together. a, a, a. The
abve-mentioned holes leading into the every where stretched out branches. b, b,
b. The straight muscular Fibers, upon which the other circular do lie. C, C.
The upper part of this Tracheal stem being whole or shut, that the Ring-like
Grisles might appear. D, D, D, D. The branches of the Trachea constituting the
lesser lobes are whole and shut, that the Ring-like Griste may also appear in
them. E, E, E, E. The like branches being cut open, that the holes and straight
muscular Fibers may be seen together. F, F, F, F. The trunks from which the
Tracheal branches being cut off are removed, that there may be space afforded
to the rest, when cut open. G, G, G, G. The secondary little lobes hung upon
the trunks of the Bronchii as grapes, which also may be divided into lesser
lobes, the more inward passages of all which pass out of the Bronchii into the
little bladdery Cells. h, h, h, h. The Vessels bringing blood crawling over the
superficies of those little lobes.
The second Figure of the third Table expresses a part of the pulmonary lobe,
wherein the membranous interspaces being blown up, all the little lobes appear
in their proper figure, and do somewhat represent the leaf of Polypody.

A, A. A part of the Arteria complicated with the other Vessels, to which trunk
made up of all those, the little lobes grow like leaves of a tree. b, b, b, b.
The little Lobes themselves. c, c, c, c. The Vessels bringing blood creeping
through them. d, d, d, d. The membranous interspaces of the little lobes, which
also are covered with e, e, e, e, the Vessels bringing blood.
The fourth Table expresses as well the Vessels belonging to the Trachea as
those bringing blood, separate and distinct one from another, constituting one
little Lobe, as also the peculiar framing of every one of them.

The first Figure represents the separating into diverse parts the Tracheal
branch distributed into one little lobe, and the branching into Pipes and
orbicular little bladders.

A, A, The trunk of the Aspera arteria, in the superficies whereof the
ring-like gristles do appear. b, b, b, b, The lesser branches going from that
trunk, wherein also little Rings appear. c, c, c, c, The passages of those
branches into orbicular little bladders, which seem like the clusters of
Grapes. d, d, The Vessels bringing blood, distinct from the Pneumonic which
cover the Trachea, and serve to nourish it.
The second and third Figure shows distinctly the equal branchings of the
Artery and Pneumonic Veins within the same little Lobe; both which being
complicated with Tracheal Vessels, do for the most part make up the texture of
the pulmonary frame.

The fifth Table sets forth the pulmonary Nerve more accurately described by
the aid of a Microscope; so that it plainly appears that the Trunk is as it
were a bundle of innumerable little Fibers bound together; moreover its Trunk,
while it creeps into the lungs in the likeness of Mother of Time, does spread
the various little sprigs every way.

Fig. 1. resembles a part of the nervous trunk cut away, one end whereof being
opened and looked on by a Microscope, seems to unfold it self almost into
innumerable little fibers.

A, The trunk of the Nerve. a, a, a, a, The little Fibers divided from one the
other about the end cut off, and spread abroad.
The second and third figure do show some fibers as well of the trunk as of
every branch, and moreover the slips of the little twigs from diverse stemmes
often repeated.

B. The chief trunk. b. b. b. b. The little fibers about the extremity cut off
explicated. c. c. c. c. The little twigs springing from the bundles of the
little fibers.
The sixth Table first sets forth the anatomy of the Artery bringing blood
drawn in apt figures, which we have described in a late treatise.

The first and upper figures hereof, represent the four distinct Coats of that
Vessel, viz. the nervous, muscular, glandulous, and the vasculous.

1. The first inward nervous coat, which perhaps is somewhat musculous,
consisting of straight or long fibers, which being contracted shorten the Pipe
of the Artery.

2. The coat properly muscular, consisting of a heap of small circular fibers,
which when they are contracted successively under the stream of blood, do make
its circuit to be shortened. It is from the motion of these that the arteries
beat.

3. The glandulous coat, which (like that in the guts) being placed over the
musculous coat, is weaved together of very small and most numerous glandules.

4. The outward vasculous coat, which variously folded together and wreathed,
of Vessels bringing blood, and with slips and nervous fibers, seems like a
certain little net.

The second and lower figures of the sixth Table, do show the anatomy of the
Vein, or its four coats expressed in fit places; which Coats do appear entire
as successively taken one part from the other (beginning outmost.)

I. The outward coat consisting of nervous fibers (which perhaps are somewhat
muscular) and as it were straight or stretched out in length, although not
orderly.

II. and III. The vasculous and glandulous coat, which are the same as in an
artery.

IV. The most inward muscular coat, consisting also of circular fibers, as in
an artery, which being contracted behind the stream of blood, hastens its
returning course.

The seventh Table expresses the distinct Coats of the aspera arteria, and
separated one from the other.

The first figure shows the most inward Coat, endowed with straight or long
muscular fibers.

The second figure descrbes the glandulous coat, and the third figure the
vasculous coat (which are almost the same as in the vessels bringing blood, and
also in the Guts.)

4. The fourth figure expresses the outward coat (which is partly
cartilaginous, and partly muscular.) The transverse or annular fibers hereof do
fill up and weave together the interspaces of the Cartilages.

The eighth Table shows a part of the outmost pulmonary Coat covering over its
whole frame, most finely and curiously described by the help of a Microscope.

The first Figure shows a portion of the abovementioned coat, which partly by
reason of the extremities of Vessels of every sort ending in it, seems pricked
full of holes as it were, and partly from the complications of the vessels
bringing blood, which like the twining sprigs of Vines gird about the orbicular
bladders, is distinguished into many irregular Area's.

The second Figure represents a part of the outermost membrane separated from
the clusters of vessels pulled off, and without any Area, only marked with
little holes as it were with small pricks.

The third Figure expresses one singular area of the Coat above mentioned,
augmented in largeness by the help of a Microscope.

SECT. I. CHAP. II. Of the sundry kinds of Breathing hurt, and their causes,
with the accounts of their Symptoms.
HItherto we have strictly viewed the Lungs, and the parts any way serving
their motions, and consequently the vital function; which being many and
different, and the provision of the Organs as many very accommodate to
Breathing; so the same are many ways in hazard to be perverted or vitiated,
upon sundry occasions. Truly a Watch framed with the greatest artifice with a
Spring, with wheels plain and toothed, with chain and balance, is not more
prone or easy to be obnoxious to depravation than this Pneumonic machine of
the breast, The organs of breathing being hurt, the breathing is hurt also.
through which by sucking in air we preserve the vital flame of the blood with
its motion and heat. For whereas the vessels of the lungs belong to the
function of breathing, viz. the Trachea, with the Bronchii and little bladders;
also the heart with arteries and veins, besides which there are nerves with
fibers as well musculous as nervous, Lympheducts and Glandules; also the
contents of these Vessels, viz. Air, the old and fresh blood, with its Serum,
the Lympha, and the animal Spirits; any fault happening in any of these does
oftentimes discompose the whole Pneumonic function. Nor less also the moving
Organs of the breast, viz. the muscles with the Diaphragma, and the nerves
appointed to their use. And likewise sometimes the animal spirits before they
enter into those nerves, being ill disposed, often cause great disorders in
breathing.

When the chief function and uses of the Lungs have been to convey the blood
and air through the whole frames of the parts and their inmost recesses, The
uses and ends of breathing which use to be hurt.
and every their smallest passages, and every where to mingle them; namely for
that purpose, that the venal blood returning from its circuit, and diluted with
fresh juice, and thereby crude and as it were half extinct, may as well be more
perfectly mixed and wrought together, as more effectually kindled afresh in all
its parts by the nitrous air; from hence the chief faults about this business
or function of the Lungs do most of all consist in these two things. First,
that the blood has not due passage through the Sinus of the heart, and the
pneumonic vessels: And secondly, because the Air is not drawn in and breathed
out in a due manner into the Trachea and its passages. The defects and failings
of the Lung in its office.
There are two parts of either of these: For first as to the passage of the
blood, sometimes the fault is caused within the right Sinus of the heart, or
the pneumonic Arteries; and also sometimes caused within the pulmonary veins,
or the left Ventricle of the heart: Secondly, as to the Air, the failure is
chiefly in inspiring and exspiring; although each function offends sometimes
equally. There are diverse accidents of each, and many causes and ways of its
being done, whereof we will here briefly touch upon the chief.

Therefore first, First in respect of the blood.
when the blood does not duly pass through the right Ventricle of the Heart and
the Pneumonic Arteries, either it happens by its own fault, or by the fault of
those passages, and sometimes by the fault of further passages. For sometimes
the stream of blood stops in the nether region of the Pracordia, by reason of
obstruction in the other; moreover, sometimes the defect or fault of the air
breathed in stops the free passage of the blood.

What relates to that fault of the blood, The opinion of the famous Sylvius
concerning the blood fermenting in the Lungs.
when it passes not quick enough through the right Sinus of the Heart and
Pneumonic Arteries, the opinion of the Renowned Sylvius should here be
discoursed, but that it would be too tedious, and from our purpose. For he
supposes, The descending branch of the venal blood, moistened with chyme
together with the lymphatic humor returning from the whole body, has the
nature of an acid-sweet spirit; and in the mean time its branch ascending
impregnated with choler from the bladder of the gaul mixed into the mass of
blood, does participate of an oily volatile salt; and so by the meeting
together of these something contrary to themselves, a gentle and friendly
contention or boiling is stirred up in the right ventricle of the heart, in
which and for which the fiery parts lurking and being shut up in each, being
freed and set at liberty, do rarifie the chyle and blood, and so change and
alter them, that they exercise the function of life and heat as well as motion
and nourishment through the whole body. Which seems not likely to be true.
There are many reasons why I assent not to this ingenious and neatly-framed
Hypothesis. For besides that many do far otherwise determine about the origin
and dispensation of Choler, and so not without strong reasons and experiments
are thoroughly persuaded, (by eyesight) that there is not any such boiling up of
the blood of a different quality, and striving or contending in the right
ventricle of the Heart: Our opinion hereof.
Our judgment continues still, as it has been, that both streams of blood,
washed thoroughly with the fresh chyme, do consist altogether of one kind; and
for that cause the milky Vessels of the Chest carry about part of the Chyle so
long a journey, which they pour into the descending trunk of the Vena cava,
just as the meseraick Veins pour the other part into its ascending trunk: also
that the lymphatic humor together with the Chyle is poured into the subclavian
Vessels, so that it may very commodiously be reduced into blood; neither truly
does there seem need of other or more passages. Moreover we determine that that
humor rightly constituted does agree with, and is easily assimilated to the
mass of blood, as well as the Chyle it self made sweet, without any contention
raised in the heart. But if the lymphatic humor returning from the Brain and
nervous kind as well as from the Glandules, degenerate from its due
temperature, and contract a sowreness (as it often comes to pass) then being
re-infused into the venal blood it overcomes it, and it precipitates it into
serosities, and from thence great streamings of urine do ensue. Moreover we
have showed elsewhere, that the Diabetes is provoked from such a cause. But
such a flux of the lymphatic humor is so far from exciting a greater boiling up
of the blood in the right ventricle of the Heart, that rather on the contrary
from thence often chilness of the whole or stiffness, with a weak Pulse, and
sometimes swoonings or convulsive fits are provoked, accompanied with a
plentiful and pale urine. The reason whereof without doubt is, that then the
clear humor flowing from the brain and nervous parts, turns the blood into
serosities, and cools it by too much diluting; and for that cause the animal
spirits being destitute of their vehicle, either faint or run into irregular
motions.

But truly as we altogether deny an Elastic effervescence of the blood in the
right Ventricle of the Heart from contention of dissimilar parts; The pneumonic
circulation of the blood is stopped sometimes by the fault of the heart it self.
so as often as from thence the blood is not cast out into the Lungs after a
due manner, we determine it to happen not so much from the proper fault and
defect of the blood it self as from the animal faculty. For if the spirits
actuating the moving Fibers of the Heart, either grow weary, or are forced into
convulsive disorders; for that cause the Heart beating in disorder, drives out
before it the blood either infirmly or irregularly.

But that the blood issuing out of the Heart does not always with expedition
pass through the Pneumonic Arteries, 2. Sometimes by the fault of the blood. 3.
Sometimes by reason of passages obstructed.
that sometimes happens from its own proper fault, and also sometimes from the
passages obstructed, and also by reason of other causes. The blood it self in a
double respect hinders its own passage through the Lungs, viz. either offending
as to its kindling, or as to its temperature. There are sundry accidents of
either of these. For first, even as the blood is more or less kindled than is
convenient, it is hindered or obstructed in the pulmonary circuit: if at any
time the watery, earthy, or fixed saline parts are predominant in the blood, the
spirit and sulphur being consumed or brought low; by reason hereof its liquor
being not well or less kindled by the nitrous air, is not easily rarefied in
the pulmonary passage, and scarce passes through them like a flame of its own
accord, but it sticks still in its passages, heavy and muddy, and creates much
trouble and labor to the Heart wheresoever it is circulated. Hence as often as
the blood is a little more plentifully forced into the Pracordia by the quicker
motion of the whole body, or of its parts, the Heart and Lungs labor hard for
its driving about, and that with the utmost endeavors. And in this case it is
probable, The blood hindered in the Lungs sometimes because not kindled enough;
that the blood carried more rapidly into the right Ventricle of the Heart,
does somewhat stagnate; because it cannot presently be carried into the
passages obstructed before it. Moreover from this cause those grumous or fleshy
concretions called the Polypi of the Heart sometimes seem to arise. Hence both
in the Pica, Leucophlegmatie, Dropsy, and inveterate Scurvy from the quicker
motion of the body arises difficult and painful breathing.

2. Sometimes the blood is too much kindled, and breaking out almost into a
flame, Sometimes too much.
and being above measure expanded, it can scarce be contained in the pulmonary
passages (which it very much blows up and extends) but endangers them to be
inflamed or kindled; wherefore lest it should tarry longer in them, the
Pracordia beat with most frequent and strong endeavors, that the blood so
overmuch kindled might be ventilated and circulated: for otherwise it being
carried within the Lungs, and inflaming them all over, would quickly destroy
the vital function.

Besides these things which concern the kindling of the blood, It is also stopped
through its temperament being vitiated.
there are other faults as to its temperament or mixture, by reason of which it
less freely or expeditely is conveyed through the pneumonic passages. For when
its consistence is either too laxe or too close, it will not easily pass
through the small passages of the Lungs; but oftentimes is in hazard to stick
and stagnate in them, and also run out and be extravasated.

The blood being in a diverse manner made loose in its consistence, either
deposites its Serum, or its dregs, or its putrefaction in the Lungs; which
being lodged in the recesses of the Vessels, or affixed unto their sides, do
variously stop or pervert the course of the blood.

1. The dissolution of blood, which is most commonly injurious to the Lungs,
When the blood is too much loosened in its consistence.
(although not very dangerously) is wont to happen, for as much as the
serosities being unapt to be contained within the mass thereof, and when they
are not presently sent away by sweating or urine, they separate from the blood
within the Lungs; and so boiling up, and breaking out from their proper
vessels, do as well disturb and stop the passage of air, as that of blood; so
that for the sake of expelling those serosities and continuation of the
circulation of blood, the Lungs are provoked into a frequent and very
troublesome Cough. What the formal reason of this Cough is, and the manner of
its being brought about, we shall declare hereafter.

Though there are many causes and occasions, by which the serous liquor, Why it
lodges the Serum in the Lungs.
departing from the loosned consistence of the blood, flows out abundantly into
the Lungs; yet for the most part it happens from one of these three, viz. first
and most frequently, because the Pores outwardly bound up by cold, cast back
the serosities which were wont to be sent away by perspiration, into the mass
of blood; which compel it presently to boil up, and cast off the serous
superfluities in the Lungs. The various causes and ways of doing it.
From this kind of cause Catarrhs and Coughs frequently arise, insomuch that
the beginning of every cough by the vulgar is always imputed to such an
occasion, to wit, catching cold. 2. The drinking of sharp and thin liquors, as
Cider, Rhenish Wine, white Wine, Paris Claret commonly causes to some a Cough,
or catarrhal distemper: the reason whereof is, for that the blood, weak in
temperament, is presently dissolved and precipitated into serosities like milk
by sour things cast into it, which flow plentifully from the mouths of the
inward Arteries. I have experimented this upon my self yearly, when in the
Summer season (when the blood abounds with sulphur) I have drank Cider and
tartish Wines safely, yea frequently to advantage, the same in winter (when the
blood is prone to sowreness) but moderately tasted of, do presently provoke a
Cough. 3. There is another cause of this serous inundation flowing out upon the
Lungs, viz. when the Lympha watering the nervous and solid parts, does suddenly
suffer a flux; and for that cause it streams back into the blood out of the
Fibers and Glandules, and other passages and receptacles; whose liquor it
presently dissolves, and precipitates into serosities, which often infests the
Lungs.

For this reason a sudden and troublesome Cough frequently accompanies
convulsive distempers, which being commonly called a vaporous Cough is ascribed
unto vapors. Moreover in great alterations of air, especially when the season
varies from dry into moist, and the volatile and fixed salts do thereby melt,
the Cough and Catarrhs increase very much.

Neither does the serous liquor only, but also many other humors or recrements
of the blood lodged in the Lungs frequently stuff up their passages; so that by
obstructing both the passages of air and of blood, they cause difficult
breathing or a cough. This is every where perceived in ill-habited bodies, also
in Gluttons and Drunkards, and others leading an inordinate and slothful life.
Wherefore Footmen use a thin and spare diet, that they may have their Lungs
free from the filth and recrements of the blood. I have observed some
melancholy persons, the adust faces abounding in the pulmonary passages, to
have voided blackih spittle like ink; also others choleric, and inclining to
the Jaundice to void yellow, and sometimes very bitter, as if it had been meet
choler.

3. The blood dissolved also lodges in the Lungs infections that cause
corruption.
Moreover many instances manifestly declare, that sometimes the Lungs are
tainted by the corruption and putrefaction of the blood. For the blood, touched
with an infection or a pestilent or venomous contagion, begins to be corrupted,
and withdraw into clotted and corrupted portions; from thence the Lungs undergo
the chief taint, from whence the greatest danger of life is threatened. This is
too well known in the Measles, small Pox, Plague, and malignant Fevers, for me
now to undertake to explicate it: by which maladies as often as the sick die,
it seems to come to pass, either because the blood clodding in the vessels of
the Heart or Lungs, obstructs the way of its proper course, so that presently
its influx into the Brain is hindered, or because the corruption of the blood,
affixt to the sides of the pulmonary passages, causes a Phlegmon as it were;
and therefore provokes a most troublesome cough or difficult breathing, and
frequently bloody spittle. So much for the impediments of the circulation of
the blood, which happen in the Lungs by reason of the mass of blood too much
dissolved, The blood is hindered in the Lungs by reason of the too thick
consistence of the blood;
and apt to depart into parts and portions, (which being there left obstruct
their passages.) There remain other no less prejudices to the Pracordia, which
proceed from the consistence of the blood too much bound up together, and
sending nothing from it self: by which a burning Fever, Pleurisy, or
Peripneumony arise.

In the former distemper the blood being more sulphurous than it ought, and
therewithal being thick, As is perceived in a Fever.
is not diluted enough with its Serum; and those particles of it contained
within it self, it puts away with great difficulty: wherefore it is more
plentifully kindled in the Lungs; and when it passes through the passages
hereof with more difficulty, by reason of its greater boiling, and of its
thickness, the Heart beating quick and most vehemently, endeavors its
circumpulsion with all its might; notwithstanding from its greater flame
growing hot within the Pracordia, heat and a most troublesome thirst, with
roughness, and as it were a certain parching of the tongue arises.

In the other kind of distemper, In a Pleurisy and Peripneumony.
viz. a Pleurifie and Peripneumony, the blood is alike thick, but less
sulphurous, and inflammable; wherefore it does not participate of such a
burning: yet by reason of its thickness it does not so easily and quickly pass
through the Chest or Lungs, is frequently extravasated, and sticking to the
interspaces or sides of the passages, causes obstructions, and soon after an
inflammation, to which pain often succeeds with bloody or discolored spittle.
We may observe in blood-letting in these kinds of distempers, that after it
has settled, its superficies is covered with a little whitish skin, or
otherwise discolored, but always with a thick and viscous: the reason whereof
is, that the blood, when it does not send away in the circulation its old
particles, nor does admit enough of new, it is thickened with a continual
boiling, and like boiled flesh changed from a bloody color into a whitish; in
which state, passing with difficulty through the small passages of the vessels,
it is in danger to be extravasated, and easily provokes a Pleurisy or
Peripneumony.

Besides these stoppages of the blood, The blood is hindered in the Lungs by the
fault of the heart.
caused by its own fault, while it passes through the Praecordium, there are
also other impediments, which happen either by the defect of the Heart, or its
passages, or by the fault of the air inspired. By what means and for what cause
the Heart offending in its motion, forces the blood from its right ventricle
through the Lungs into the left irregularly, we have clearly shown in our late
Tract of Cardiac Distempers: to wit, that muscle sometimes laboring for want
of spirits does not vigorously and strongly enough perform its beatings. 1.
When the spirits thereof are wanting.
For when in corporal exercise the blood more plentifully than usual, is forced
from the Vena cava into the ventricle of the Heart; if this cannot firmly
contract it self, laboring according to its strength, it causes frequent and
weak Pulses: moreover to help this, as well the Pneumonic Arteries, as others
in fundry parts of the body, which drive about the blood every way, do cause
frequent and inordinate contraction. Thus I have observed in Virgins afflicted
with the Green Sickness, and in other cachectical bodies, from a quick motion
of the body, not only a palpitation of the Heart, but in the neck, temples, and
other places the Arteries to have beaten irregularly. Neither is it the want of
spirits only, 2. Because moved inordinately.
but their disorder is sometimes the cause that the Praecordium does with less
strength convey the blood; for sometimes the spirits, the inmates of the
Cardiacal nerves, being stirred up by an incongruous conjunction, and affected
convulsively, do impress their irregular contractions upon the Heart or
Arteries, whereby the progress of the blood is several ways perverted or
hindered, as it often happens in Palpitation of the Heart, Trembling,
intermitting Pulse, and other the like passions.

3. The pneumonic process of blood is variously stopped, 3. The blood is hindered
from obstruction of the passages. Which are shut up diverse ways. For diverse
causes here rehearsed.
because the passages are not open enough: which impediments happen as often as
the Pores or those passages are either stopped or broken. Of the former there are
two reasons, viz. sometimes the ways are shut, for as much as the passages of
the vessels, contracted by the carneous fibers, are brought nearer one another;
as we have elsewhere showed, does sometimes happen in Palpitation of the Heart,
and a convulsive Asthma. The affects of which sort, by reason of the stream of
blood shut within the Praecordia, difficult or hard breathing, a small Pulse,
and chilness of the whole body are wont to accompany. Moreover sometimes the
course of the blood is shut up, because the passages of the vessels are pressed
together by a body, or by some humor from without: wherefore when the little
Cells or bronchial Pipes (as is usual) are filled with a viscous phlegm,
purulent matter, or blood extravasated, as the free passage of the air is
hindered in them, so also the passage of blood is stopped in the vessels
adjoining. On the same account come tumors, little swellings, worms, also
stony, sandy, and curdly concretions, and others of another kind are in diverse
manners excited; the chief whereof we shall touch on hereafter. The bronchial
Pipes are filled.
Moreover we sometimes see the canals as well of an Artery as of the pneumonic
Vein, made very bony in some part, and their sides so compressed, that a very
small chink remains for the blood to pass. Not long since we dissected a young
man who died by reason of an ill formation of the pneumonic Vein, Sometimes wax
hard.
in whom the trunk of this vessel growing stony near the juncture to the heart,
did stick so close, that the blood did drop into the heart only by drops, or by
a very little stream. 2. That the passages bringing blood are often filled and
stopped, insomuch that the stream of blood is obstructed or straightened, many
anatomical instances and observations manifestly declare. From thence it
appears, The vessels are stuffed with concretions resembling the Polypus.
that grumous, or as it were carnous concretions of the blood do frequently so
stop the ventricles of the heart, and the roots of its larger vessels, that the
course of the stream of blood is almost entirely stopped. Moreover reason
persuades, and experience concludes this more frequently to happen in the
lesser vessels: for seeing (as we have even now intimated) the blood emitted by
Phlebotomy in Rheumatisms, Peripneumonies, and Pleurisies, when it is cold is
covered all over with a thin skin altogether of the like substance with those
concreted Polypus's; it plainly appears, that it passes with difficulty through
the passages of the lesser vessels by reason of those viscous excrements:
wherefore that it may pass by some means, it distends them very much, and
sometimes breaks quite through them, also it frequently unlocks their mouths,
and opens gaps into the Trachea, insomuch that portions of the extravasated
blood are by coughing frequently ejected. We have known some to have died
Asthmatic or short-winded, whose Lungs being free from an Ulcer, or any more
grievous wound, have swelled so much, that they wanted room for their motion
within the cavity of the Chest: the reason whereof doubtless was, that the
thicker and more feculent blood, for that cause not easily passing through
those vessels, every where extended the Arteries and Veins, and caused it to
stagnate in the lesser Pipes. Moreover the feculencies of blood one while salt
of different kinds, another while sulphurous or earthly being combined with
them, and thrust into the small passages of the vessels, and fixed there, do
altogether obstruct them; insomuch that the pneumonic circulation of the blood
is contracted into a shorter space, and consequently the function of breathing
is straightened in the compressed Pipes or little Cells. There are many kinds and
sundry ways of such an obstruction, which if all or the chief should be
enumerated, such a Pathology would swell into a too great bulk. 3. The
pneumonic passage of blood is not only hindered by reason of the passages shut
and obstructed, but sometimes also being burst asunder. For those vessels being
small, The blood is also hindered because the passages are burst asunder, as in
spitting blood.
or tender, or very loose in some persons, are frequently opened by the force
or acrimony of blood; so that the blood either bursting into the Trachea, is
ejected by spitting, or heaped up in the interspaces of the passages, causes a
Peripneumony, or falling down into the cavity of the Chest, produces an
Empyema. Of all these we shall treat singly in the Chapter of spitting of blood.

3. One impediment of the blood is want or default of air.
There remains as yet a third impediment of blood in the pneumonic passages,
which happens for the want or fault of Air. If at any time the Blood is not
kindled after a due manner within the passages of the Lungs, from air breathed
in by the Trachea; for that cause as presently its flame is irregular, so
likewise its motion is variously stopped or perverted: for although the blood is
forced through the lungs by the mere impulse of the heart, notwithstanding the
pulse hereof is proportioned according to the tenor of its being kindled by
the air; wherefore when the flame of blood is diminished, or suppressed, for want
or through the fault of the air, presently the pulse proves languid or unequal,
and by reason of the bloods course being troubled, or stopped, presently a
paleness and coldness succeeds wholly intercepted or frustrated (because the
nitrous particules are wanting) presently the pulse ceases, and anon life is
lost. The reason of all which is, both because the blood being much impeded in
its accension, or extinct, like Must given over working presently subsides, and
is unapt for any motion; and chiefly because the flame of the blood failing,
and being subtracted from the brain, presently the Hypostasis of the animal
spirits, as it were light streaming from thence, immediately fails, and
together with it the exercise or actions of all faculties do cease. But if the
blood is too much kindled, the Sulphur of the Blood, and the Nitre of the Air
running together more than it ought; for that cause presently, that this too
much burning may be eventilated enough, the pulse of the heart is increased to
its utmost. We might add many instances of this kind; but truly this
consideration of the blood leads us to the second thing proposed of Respiration
hurt; namely that we may duly weigh, what sort of failings or defects do
happen about the inspiration as well as expiration of the Nitrous air,
requisite for the preserving the nitral flame of blood; that is to say, from
what causes they proceed, and also what effects they are wont to produce; in
which search we will first treat of Inspiration hurt.

SECT. I. CHAP. III. Of Inspiration hurt.
BReathing is accounted hurt, Breathing hurt by the vicious qualities or defect
of air.
when its use is frustrated, or any ways hindered; which most frequently
happens, by reason of the fault or defect of the Air drawn in. As to the
former, if the Air chance to be depraved, it neither duly kindles nor
eventilates the blood, yea it sometimes overthrows the temperament thereof, or
infects it, as is every where seen in a Constitution of Air very malignant.
That we may touch on the chief reasons of these distempers, The faults of the
air.
we are to observe, That as the Nitrous particles of Air are chiefly necessary,
(as is manifest by manifold experiment) for the preservation of life; so
frequently it happens that Nitre of the Air either to sail or be wholly
wanting, or by particles of another kind to be so much muffled, or bound up,
that they cannot enough exercise their vital power; or lastly, malignant or
fatal Corupscles to be adjoined thereunto. First, the nitrous particles of Air
are deficient, if when it stagnating or growing hot the Nitre is chased thence,
or not stirred into action. Wherefore, in a low-roost Chamber, or too close,
and in other places crowded with assemblies of men, or made hot with the ardor
of the Sun, we difficultly or weakly breathe. The same comes to pass in places
of great height, on the tops of those mountains exceeding the top of the
Atmosphere; wherein breath is faintly drawn for want of Nitre, neither can we
live long there. Secondly, the Nitrous particles of Air are wont to be obscured
or blunted by other accessories, also sometimes they are too much sharpened.
For as often as the South Wind blows, the Air is too moist and thick, inasmuch
as the Nitrous particles are seized upon by the watery and sulphurous, and are
much blunted, so that while it is drawn in, the blood is not vigorously
kindled, but like green wood put into fire it rather smokes than burns bright;
wherefore during such a state of Air we become stupid and dull, and unapt for
motion; but on the contrary, the North Wind blowing, the cooling, sharp and
most nipping particles are adjoined to the Nitrous, and the blood is enough
kindled, and we breathe freely; yet the Vital flame is every where restrained
by intense frost disproportioned thereunto, and unless refreshed by motion and
heat, it is frequently entirely extinguished.

2. Besides these faults of the Air, whereby breathing is wont to be hurt, The
defect of air hurting breathing, proceeds from the pneumonic Organs.
moreover this evil sometimes proceeds from its defect; inasmuch as it cannot
be drawn in in plenty enough. Of which effects though there are many and diverse
causes, yet for the most part it happens in respect of the organs of breathing,
either hindered as to their motion, or their passages obstructed.

1. The Organs of breathing are either merely passive, viz. which are moved, as
the Lungs; or are Active, and move themselves, and those together, as the
muscles of the Chest and Diaphragma. In every of these the impediments of the
motion by which breathing is hurt, happen variously. And first what respects
the Lungs, we mentioned before, that they sometimes very much swell, by reason
of the vessels being much distended, and filled with blood, insomuch as being
stiff and inflexible, they obey not the turns of the Systple and Diastole of
the Chest. Moreover it happens sometimes through a phlegmon, little swellings,
and other concretions of diverse forms, that a like stiffeness is caused in
them. Secondly, the active organs of breathing, or the moving parts, viz. the
muscles of the Chest and Diaphragma are wont to be perverted or stopped from
their moving function by diverse causes. A solution of continuity made in any
part of these, either by clotting of blood, or by falling down of the Serum,
and other homors, as in the Pleurisy and Scurvy, or in those that are wounded
or bruised, does every where cause pain in the place affected, with impotency
of motion and difficult breathing. Moreover, sometimes without pain, or any
evident cause, those parts being hindned from their motion do produce a most
heavy pursiness; As is frequently seen in an Asthma, Suffocation of the womb,
and in certain other convulsive or hypochondriac distempers. The reason of
which passion without doubt consists in this, for that the animal spirits
appointed to the moving function of those parts, are disturbed about their
Origin, or hindered in the passages of the Nerves, and are turned aside from
their due influx into the moving fibers: Insomuch as many who are sound enough
as to their Lungs, and only obnoxious to affects of the Brain and Nerves, are
frequently surprised with horrid fits of an Asthma, as we have at large
declared in another place.

2. The stopping of air, hindering breathing, whereby it less freely enters the
Lungs, frequently happens, by reason of the Conveyances, viz. the passages of
the Trachea being shut, or not enough open. For indeed those passages are wont
to be stopped (as we have formerly observed touching the Vessels bringing Blood)
and prohibit the full entrance of air, when they are either obstructed or
compressed, or more narrowly contracted. The various ways of Obstructions.
Though there are many causes and ways whereby the passages of the Trachea are
wont to be obstructed, yet chiefly and most often a Catarrhal distillation of
the Serum, while it departs from the blood, and flows out of the vessels
bringing blood into these parts; which being first thin and sharp, produces a
troublesome Cough; afterward thickening by digestion, and cleaving to the
sides of the Trachea, exceedinly straitens the ways of inspiration, A Catarrb.
and shortens them by quite stuffing up their extremities. In like manner the
sweating out of extravasated blood, as also of Pus or ichorous matter out of
the Lympheducts or Veins into the tracheal little bladders, does frequently
produce an Asthma, and often a Consumption; the reason of which sort of
distempers shall be more largely explained hereafter. Secondly, it is manifest
enough by common observation, that the Tracheal passages as well the last as
the intermedial, oftentimes are straitened, or shut, The swelling of blood by
which the passages are pressed together.
by compression. For after a plentiful meal, or abundant drinking of Wine or
strong Ale (inasmuch as the pneumonic vessels are very much distended by reason
of the turgency of blood, and the sides of the Trachea being pressed together,
do not admit of a free and usual entrance of air) men otherwise healthful
enough, do breathe difficultly and painfully: Which truly we esteem to happen
from the lungs being filled and extended rather, than from a crammed stomach
hindering the Systole of the Diaphragma. Moreover, for this reason, even in the
very paroxysmes of fevers a frequent and painful breathing is manifest.
Neither only from the turgency of blood, but also from the same stagnating, or
extravasated, and also from stony concretions, and diverse other manners, the
vessels of the Trachea being pressed together, cannotdischarge a free breathing.

3. The passages of the Trachea being sometimes more nearly contracted and
closed from their fibers convulsively disposed, deny a passage to the Air for
due breathing. The Cramps of the tracheal passages.
From hence, when there is no obstruction, or ill conformation in the lungs, as
also no consumptive disposition, yet from those fibers preternaturally
convulsed and drawa together, dreadful fits of an Asthma frequently arise.
Whereas we have in another place discoursed of these passions, it will not be
requisite here again to repeat that discoure. Resides these accidents of
breathing hurt, there are certain others which are stirred up by reason of the
Air prohibited in its frist entrance, viz. in the Nostrils, the throat, the
Larynx, from a tumor or ill conformation: For the Polypus in the Nose, the
Quinzy in the Throat, or inflammation of the Tonsils, do render a difficult
breathing; in the same manner as a heap of sand about a Haven, obstructs the
ingress and regress of Ships. But truly since the reasons of those passions,
and their manner of being made, are exposed to sense, it seems superfluous here
to deliver their causes.

SECT. I. CHAP. IV. Of Expiration hurt.
AS Expiration is much easier, The act of expiration is easier than of
inspiration.
and with lesser trouble performed than Inspiraration, so it is less endangered
to be stopped or perverted, as to its function: for in truth the contractive
endeavors of fewer muscles are required to perform that, insomuch as some do
affirm that the mere relaxations of the moving parts, whereby the dilatation of
the breast in discharged, does suffice for its constriction. Hence when in the
agony of death, the ultimate labor is to open the breast, and fetch breath, by
which the flame of life may be continued; as soon as that endeavor is become
frustrate, the animal exspires, and is readily extinct. But truly we have
already clearly enough evinced, that the tasks of breathing out, no less than
those of breathing in, are performed by the help of peculiar muscles.
Wherefore, when it happens that the Organs of Expriation are either hurt of
prejudiced, there must needs follow difficulty or depravation of that function.
The moving parts, which bind together the breast, and straiten the cavity
thereof, are especially the inward muscles of the breast, some belonging to the
Loins, and others to the Abdomen; as also the muscular fibers of the Larynx and
Trachea; by reason of some faults, occupying sometimes these, anon them, either
single or many together, exspiration is wont to be stopped or perverted after a
diverse manner. Expiration hurt sometimes proceeds from the fault of
inspiration.
Although the hurt of this function frequently depends upon inspiration being
prejudiced; notwithstanding it sometimes happens alone; so that when we suck in
Air easily and duly enough, we return it disturbed or perversely, which truly
is wont to come to pass through diverse causes, and after many manners (the
chief of which we shall here briefly touch upon.)

1. Sometimes being alone depends on various causes.
For first, when a wound, or convulsive or paralytical distemper happens in one
muscle (which causes exspiration) or in more, for that cause the cavity of the
Thorax cannot be so freely drawn together and compressed, for the more full
breathing out air or breath. 1. On the wound of a part moving.
Hence not only such as labor in a Pleurisy, but in a tumor or wound in the
intercostal muscles or the Abdomen, cannot easily couth, or sing, or perform
other acts of stronger expiration: Neither is the due drawing together of the
Thorax less stopped, by reason of the moving fibers of those parts affected
either by a resolution, or a cramp.

2. 2. In a Cough.
The act of expiration, whereas it is variously perverted or disturbed, so it
chiefly happens in a cough, in sneezing, in laughing, in crying, and in
Hiccough; into the reason and manner whereof we will briefly enquire; And first
we shall speak of a Cough.

A Cough may be described, The description of a Cough.
that it is a vehement, more frequent, unequal and loud expiration, stirred up
either for the quieting of some troublesome and provoking thing, or for
expelling of it out of the Lungs through the passage of the Trachea. For air
being violently excluded, and dashed in the way on the sides of the Tracheal
passages, whatsoever is in any place impacted in them, if it be easily moved,
it discusses and wipes it away, and frequently sends it out of doors.

For the exciting of a Cough, Its formal reason and the manner of its being
done.
both the muscles contracting the Thorax, and also the moving fibers of the
Bronchii, do concur in motion with a joint force together. For while the
muscles straiten the cavity of the breast, and every where squeeze the whole
lungs; these fibers one while contracting these tracheal passages, another
while them, closing behind the air while it is driven forwards, do endeavor
its expulsion more quick and vehement.

A more intense sudden inspiration precedes every act of a Cough, to wit that
the air being admitted in greater plenty, may presently be more violently
driven out with noise; in which endeavor not only the new that is fresh
breathed in, but also the old, being heaped up before in the tracheal little
bladders, is driven forth together with a noise, for the increase of breath
blown out; and when what is troublesome is not settled nor removed at the first
assault, the vehement exspiration of this kind is repeated by a frequent
course, even to the great wearying of Nature.

The first cause of every Cough is an irritation of the nerves or sibres
belonging to the lungs; concerning the nerves we are to observe, Its primary
cause.
that not only the branches and their slips inserted into the Lungs, but
others from which they do arise, or with which they do intimately communicate,
being provoked in places far distant from the breast, immediately cause a
cough: for which cause oftentimes a sharp humor being lodged within the Brain,
and from thence falling down into the little head of the pectoral nerves, is
wont to produce a most troublesome Cough or Asthmatick distempers, as not long
since we have declared by notable instances. For the same reason a pain
inflicted on the nostrils, palate, or Gula, provokes a Cough, or rather a vain
attempt of coughing. Moreover a little Serum distilling from the Arteries into
the upper parts of the Gula or Larynx produces a frequent and very troublesome
Cough, without any notable prejudice of the Lungs. But truly this provocation,
inflicted on the nerves and fibers distributed in the Lung it self, more
frequently, and truly more violently provokes an endeavor of Coughing, which
is repeated by courses, till what is troublesome be turned forth, or the
provocation restrained. Of this kind of Cough from the nerves, a notable
Example shall be after set before you.

The provoking causes producing a Cough are manifold, The evident causes
thereof.
and make their stay in several places: for besides that the nerves, as we but
now intimated, and also the membranes, with which there is an intimate
communication with the Lungs, being provoked in the open Nostril, give an
impression of that passion at a distance to the Lungs; most frequently that
irregular exspiration is stirred up, by reason some incongruous or in some
measure unproportion'd thing is cast into the Lungs. For in the first place,
that this troublesome thing may be removed, the nerves and the nervous fibers
dispersed about the Lungs are irritated; afterward by the consent of these,
the muscles of the breast that draw it together, and the moving fibers of the
Trachea at once are forced into vehement and often repeated contractions.

Every Cough is either moist or dry; The kinds thereof.
in the former a certain humor being deposited in some place within the
tracheal passages is shaked by coughing, and being to be thrown out upwards is
cast into the mouth. That humor, whereas it is manifold and after diverse
sorts, for the most part it is either called serous, or nutritious, or
purulent, or bloody.

Of the former there are many kinds and differences; namely, as to its
consistence it is either thin, or thick, or crude, or digested; as to its
color, it is either white or yellow, or somewhat greenish; also sometimes it
is bluish, or black. Moreover, A moist Cough.
a moist Cough is variously distinguished, as to the places from whence the
humor to be coughed out proceeds. For sometimes cleaving to the sides of the
Larynx, or sweating from them, the moving fibers being shaken by a gentle
little Cough, it is easily and by a short passage cast forth into the mouth;
sometimes the matter to be excerned, being impacted a little deeper in the
pipes of the Bronchii, is not shook out but by large expirations, and often
repeated; and lastly it sometimes happens, that the excrements to be cast out,
are deposited within the farthest little bladdeers of the Trachea, out of which
it is not brought forth without a vehement labor of coughing, and that
frequently repeated, and at last driven forth by a long journey through the
whole lungs. Concerning the Cough of a nutritious humor, as also of a bloody
and purulent, hereafter it shall be discoursed when we treat of a Consumption
and its remedy.

A dry Cough, as often as it is the proper passion of the Lungs, A dry Cough.
is excited after many manners and by sundry causes; for an obstruction of any
of the pneumonic passages, whether it be by compression, or oppletion, or
contraction, does necessarily induce this. Wherefore an inflammation, a tumor,
a little swelling, a stagnation of the blood either through plenty or scarcity,
also gravelly, stony, or polypose Concretions, worms and many other
preternatural things, inasmuch as they almost perpetually provoke the nervous
fibers, do induce a dry, vain Cough, but troublesome. But a dry Cough sometimes
is stirred up by the instinct of Nature, as in place of a Pump; to wit, that
the blood either by reason of its proper ill temperament, or by reason of the
pneumonic Vessels not being open enough, not passing well through the lungs,
may be promoted by the shaking of these parts, and forced into a more rapid
motion.

What belongs unto the other acts of expiration hurt, as when in sneezing,
hiccough, laughing, crying, and in other affects its natural and even function
is troubled or perverted; seeing the rendrings of the causes of these (which
also in another place we have in part designed) do not properly appertain to
our purpose, omitting them here we will pass to the thing chiefly designed,
viz. to the diseases of the breast and their remedies, and to the reasons of
curing them.

SECT. I. CHAP. V. Of a Phthisis or Consumption in general.
WHereas we have hitherto viewed the fabric of the Lungs accurately
delineated, and the motion thereof together with that of the whole Breast, and
the ways and passages of the air, and of the blood, and of other humors through
them; and have also observed their various impediments, their remora's, or
diversions, according to which it happens the act of the pneumonic function is
after a diverse manner hurt or perverted in inspiration and expiration: now in
the next place we are to descend to the Pathology of this region so traveled
over, and, which was our design from the beginning, to treat of Medicines
belonging to the Thorax, or Remedies appropriated to heal the distempers of the
Breast, and the manner of their operation.

Of all the diseases of the Breast a Phthisis, A Phthisis accounted chief among
the diseases of the breast.
or Consumption, by right claims the first place: for there is none more
frequent or difficult to cure. Moreover all the other affects of the Thorax
being ill, or not at all cured, do lead into this, as lesser streams into a
greater Lake, and so ending in Phthisis, lose both their natures and ancient
names.

But truly these terms of Phthisis and Tabes in their proper signification
denote an Atrophy, The various acceptance of Phthisis.
or a withering away of the solid parts with debility of strength: the
distempers of which sort frequently proceed from a wound or Ulcer of the Lungs;
notwithstanding sometimes without any fault of these, the extenuation or pining
away of the whole body takes its rise from the mere fault of the blood, or
chiefly from the nervous juice. It denotes any Atrophy.
Therefore before we handle a private pulmonary Phthisis, seems to our purpose
to explain the general reasons of this sickness, and to declare how many ways,
and from when causes the ill temperaments of the humors are wont to induce a
privation of nourishment of the whole body, as it were consumptive. For truly
the Consumption of the Lungs it self does not next and immediately proceed from
an Ulcer or corruption of that bowel; but it arises for as much as the blood
from them contracting a corruption, and highly defiled, for that very cause
loses altogether its nutritive virtue. Moreover as well this as the nervous
liquor acquires such an indisposition. Of which in general we will now inquire.

And first what relates to the Blood, An Atrophy first depends on the blood
made unfit to nourish.
we may often take notice, that some pine away without a Cough, or without any
apparent fault either in the Lungs or Breast; in the mean time as to appetite,
digestion, sleep, and almost the economy of the whole natural and animal
function do carry themselves indifferent; notwithstanding, as if nourishment
should be poured into a Receptable bored through, they are not nourished, but
pine away sensibly maugre all Dietetical Rules. The formal or conjunct reason
of which kind of affect frequently consists only in this, that the blood being
notably depraved, cannot assimilate the nourshing juice continually mixed with
it; wherefore it does not only forthwith send it away, but also takes away some
particles of the solid parts; which snatching to it self, it presently throws
out, or casts it into some place or other, or consumes it by evaporation.

The depravations or degenerate states of the blood, that are wont to induce an
Atrophy, either consist in its proper distemper, or themselves are communicated
from some other place, and indeed chiefly from the bowels, or from the nervous
liquor being also degenerate.

The proper Dyscrasie of the blood it self is twofold, according to which it
happens, The consumptive Dyscrasit of the blood either from it self or
communicated from other parts.
that the saline-acid particles or the sulphurous and most sharp are exalted
above measure, and predominate over the rest. For sometimes the blood withdraws
it self from its genuine disposition, viz. a sweet and volatile into an acid,
as is always found in scorbutical, melancholy, or cachectical persons.
Wherefore the nutritious juice being ever mingled with the bloody mass, seeing
it cannot for that reason be assimilated, and affixed to the solid parts, is
released again in a short time; and is either forthwith sent away by urine,
sweat, or a Diarrhoea; or being penned up within the flesh or cavities of the
bowels, brings a Dropsy: of which sort of distempers, being led forth into an
evil state, 1. The kinds of the former are reckoned up.
the ordinary effect is wont to be, that when some parts do swell very much,
other parts are very much extenuated. Here it would be far from our purpose to
deliver the true cause of the abovementioned affects, and to put our sickle
not only into another man's harvest, but also one far remote. 2. Moreover there
is another state of blood unfit for nourishment quite contrary to this, to wit,
when being above measure hot and sulphurous, and from thence always violently
burning out, it consumes the nutritious juice by its effervescence and raging,
and causes it too much to evaporate; so that the solid parts being defrauded of
their provision pine away. The persons obnoxious to this distemper have large
vessels, and much distended with blood, but their flesh withered and hardened by
heat. Though persons so affected seldom pine away to death, yet they grow old
sooner, and end their life in a shorter space.

2. The blood not only from its proper indoles, This proceeds sometimes from a
fault of the bowels or solid parts;
but also by reason of a Consumption elsewhere, and chiefly communicated from
the bowels and nervous juice, is often unfit to nourish. And first this
frequently happens by fault of the bowels; for these being ill-affected,
sometimes do not duly digest the Chyme to be conveyed over to the blood; also
oftentimes they pervert and defile it with their extraneous and heterogene
ferments, insomuch that the functions are frustrated in the faculties of
breeding good blood and nourishment. Moreover sometimes by reason of the
Vessels bringing the Chyle obstructed within them, though much be eaten, yet
little or less than due, is conveyed into the bloody mass. Also in the bowels
of concoction sometimes Tumors, Imposthumes, and Ulcers happen; from whose
corruption the blood being infected in its passage, contaminates the rest of
the mass, and renders it unapt to the work of nourishing. How often do we see
from a Schirrus happening in the Spleen, Liver, Pancreas, or Mesentery, or by
an Ulcer or cancrous Tumor of some Gut, as also of a Kidney, Womb, or Bladder,
or otherwise malignant Sore, a deadly Atrophy to have succeeded without any
notable fault of the Breast or Lungs? Yea Tumors, Imposthumes, or cancrous and
strumous Ulcers happening in the outward parts, and especially in the Back, do
frequently end in a pernicious Consumption. The reason whereof is plain, viz.
in as much as in such distempers both great plenty of the nutritious juice
brought to the affected part through the Arteries, is either entirely bestowed
in the same place, or from thence is poured forth abroad, insomuch that all the
other parts of the whole body are defrauded of their due provision; as also
that the virulent or very incongruous matter there engendered and lodged is
swallowed up by again the Veins, which defiles the blood by an impure black
gore, and from thence renders it altogether unapt to discharge the faculty of
nourishing.

Neither only from the bowels and solid parts, Or from the nervous juice.
but also from the nervous juice the stain (by which it becomes unfit to
nourish) is frequently communicated to the blood. For when this liquor
degenerates from its genuine temper, to wit, sweet and volatile into an acid,
presently flowing out of the fibers and nervous parts, and flowing back into
the blood, it does precipitate the liquor thereof, and compels it into fluxes,
whereby all the nutritive matter is cast forth, and one while poured forth by
Urine or Sweat, another while by Vomit or Looseness. The reasons of all these,
and how they come to pass we have explicated in a late Treatise.

But the nervous liquor, sometimes by it self, departing from its good temper,
The nervous juice sometimes of it self is chiefly the cause of an Atrophy.
and being vitiated in its temperament, is a cause of want of nourishment,
which also happens to be made in a twofold respect, or two manner of ways. For
sometimes that Juice being very much vitiated and degenerate, proves as it were
vappid and decayed; so that it does not actuate enough the fibers as well
nervous as carnous, and inlighten them with an animal spirit: wherefore as the
motive virtue, so also the nutritrive fails in the solid parts. From hence
either the entire body, or certain members and parts thereof being for some
while affected with a Palsy, at length they wither away: as we have at large
declared the reason thereof in another place. 2. We have also observed, that
many laboring with a slow Fever (or as called by us a nervous) do presently
languish, and in a short time become much emaciated. In either case the same
reason ought to be assigned; for, as is showed in another place, seeing the
animal spirits, together with the nervous liquor, their vehicle (which is as it
were the masculine seed) do actuate the nutritive humor every where collected
by the solid parts even as the feminine seed, and render it as it were pregnant
with a nutritive faculty; for that cause if that nervous liquor becomes either
depraved or vappid, the bulk of the solid parts pines away as if it were made
barren.

So much of these things touching an Atrophy, Two chief kinds of Atrophies.
or waxing lean, and the formal reasons thereof, the causes and various manners
of its coming to pass in general. Of this disease as there are many kinds and
differences, so two chiefly and more observably occurr, whereof either will
deserve a particular consideration; viz. Tabes or Phthisis Dorsalis commonly so
called, Tabes Dorsalis.
and a Consumption of the Lungs. This latter, which properly belongs to this
place, shall be discussed in the following Chapter; in the mean time concerning
that (because the knowledge thereof does illustrate the Pathology of this) we
shall speak in a word.

Tabes Dorsalis, Two kinds.
although it has almost lost its name in this our Age, or perhaps changed it
into a Gonorrhoea, yet Hippocrates makes mention of it, and handling it
avowedly, From the nervous juice stopped or depraved in the loins.
he assigned a twofold kind thereof, viz. one from immoderate Venery, and the
other from a destillation into the Spine of the Back. What relates to the
latter, I have often observed some to be most grievously vexed with a pain
about their Loins, yea sometimes in the whole Back, which when for some time
some have so labored under, they afterward come to be lame or crooked, and at
last fall away in the whole body, all but the head. The cause of which disease
doubtless consists in this, viz. first a humor or a certain incongruous
morbific matter, descending with the nervous juice through the spinal marrow,
did run into the branches of the vertebral Nerves, and therefore from the
beginning, by reason of the Fibers being twitched, a continual pain almost did
arise; afterward by reason of some Fibers being resolved, the opposite ones
more vehemently contracted distort certain Vertebra's of the Spine; and lastly
seeing the animal Spirits cannot actuate enough the Nerves and Fibers belonging
to the trunk and members, by reason of the nourishment frustrated, the
withering of the entire body succeeds. Surely when the nervous liquor and
animal spirits pass not fully and freely out of the Dorsal Spine into the whole
body, from thence oftentimes a pining does arise: hence Imposchumes and Ulcers
arise about the Loins or the Os sacrum, which in as much as they consume or
pour forth the nervous liquor too much, cause an Atrophy in the whole, or at
least in the lower parts.

2. From the expense of the humor through the genital parts. That humor is
first either seed, a too great expense whereof induces an Atrophy.
Another kind of Tabes Dorsalis far more frequent, is also twofold: viz. it
either arises from the great or too-often loss of the genital humor, or from a
continual corrupt flux from the genital parts.

1. As to the first, it is manifest by vulgar observation, that the immoderate
use of Venery, yea involuntary efflux of the seed, if it be either great or
continual, produce a faintness in the whole body, and at length a pining away.
The reason of this (as we have intimated in another place) is not, that the
seed, according to the opinion of some, descends from the Brain through the
Nerves into the spermatic bodies, and from thence, by reason of a great loss
thereof first the Brain, and then the parts, all depending on the influence of
the Spirits springing from thence, become infirm and pine away. But seeing we
have sufficiently evinced, that the seminal matter is immediately supplied out
of the mass of blood into the genital parts, and that it is altogether the same
with that out of which the animal Spirits instilled into the Brain are
proceated, it will necessarily follow, by now much the greater portion is got
to the Testicles for repairing the loss of seed, by so much is the Brain
defrauded of its due share, and therefore at length the sunction in the whole
body, as well motive as nutritive, does waver and diminish. Our furious
Whoremongers are sensible of a great debility about their Loins, and the parts
placed below them, to wit, the Thighs and Legs, do chiefly wither away; the
reason is, because as well the provision of the animal Spirits in its first
spring, viz. in the Brain failing, the outmost channels, viz. the ends of the
spinal marrow, and the Nerves springing from it, do suffer first and chiefly
for this defect; and moreover because near the Loins the arterious blood gives
out to the Testicles more excellent particles and chiefly restaurative, being
destined to nourish the Back, and in the mean time the venous blood being for
that cause decayed or consumed, is enfeebled, and steals from the Loins as much
as possibly may be.

The loss of the seed causing a Consumption is sometimes voluntary, The losses
whereof are voluntary or involuntary.
of which sort the salacious and prone to Venery do suffer: sometimes
involuntary; of which affects there are diverse kinds. For in some it only
happens by dreams or obscene phantasms; but in others, besides those occasions,
every endeavor of the Back, whether through bearing a weight, or excretion of
Urine, or the faeces of the Belly, causes the genital humor to be thrust out:
the cause whereof is, both because the seed is watery and thin and at once sharp
and provocative, also because the parts are weak, and not able duly to digest
or retain it.

In the other Tabes Dorsalis abovementioned, not the seed it self, 2. Or Ichor
flowing into those parts from solution of continuity.
but an ichor or a certain putrilage is cast out abundantly from the genital
parts; the efflux whereof, if it the great and continual, does frequently
impair the strength of the whole body, and by withdrawing and prodigally
removing the nutritive matter, it induces an Atrophy or consumption. For near
the spermatic Vessels, or in passage from them, as well in men as women, there
are certain Emunctories placed, whose faculty is to receive the superfluous
humor from the seed formed, and when it abounds to send it abroad through the
genital parts. For this cause that those passages in either Sex may be made
slippery and moist (lest they grow dry, The formal reason of a virulent
Gonorrhea.
and become less sensible) the Prostates in men and the Glandules about the
horns of the womb in women are constituted; out of both which always in the act
of coition, and sometimes without, when the spermatic bodies abound with too
much moisture, a certain serous liquor sweats out: and in women (whose bodies
are more moist, and in whom nature has made these ways for their menstrual
excretion) this does oftener and more plentifully happen than to men. But if
these Emunctories be affected with a great debility, or a certain virulency, so
that they corrupt this liquor sent, or do not retain it enough, it is not only
sent away incessantly, and flows out plentifully through the Pudendum, but also
other superfluous humors or recrements of the whole body flowing together to
those weak parts are thrown forth together. Also the nutritious Juice destined
to the neighboring parts flows thither, and presently goes out together; so
that at length by reason of the loss of the nutritious Juice (which flowing to
the same place is corrupted and continually sent away) not only pains of the
neighboring parts, but of the whole body, and a pining does succeed. These
things are commonly known in a Gonorrhoea, also in fluore muliebri, or those
affects from an impure bed, or immoderate Venery, or are caused by a blow, a
bruise, violent exercise, or any other hurt inflicted upon the Loins. It is not
proper to this place to deliver particularly the true rendering of the cause and
curatory method of healing of this sort of passions: we shall proceed to treat
of a Phthisis or Tabes properly so called, viz. which arises from the only or
chief fault of the Lungs, which was the business of our design.

SECT. I. CHAP. VI. Of a Phthisis properly so called, or of a Consumption
arising by fault of the Lungs.
A Consumption does so frequently and usually proceed from the Lungs being
depraved, that some have termed it the peculiar Disease of this Bowel: and that
it very often so comes to pass, the reason is; because (as we have showed
before) the pining of the body does for the most part more immediately proceed
from the blood depraved and unapt for nourishment, it is manifest, that as its
perfection is acquired in the Lungs, so from these being ill-affected the same
is most of all vitiated, and degenerates into a languishing and corruptible
state. For in the Lungs rather than in the Heart or Brain, the threads of life
are spun, and there they are oftnest defiled or broken.

A Phthisis is usually defined to be A pining away of the whole body, The
definition of a Phthisis.
taking its rise from an Ulcer in the Lungs. But less true: because I have
opened the dead bodies of many that have died of this disease, in whom the
Lungs were free from any Ulcer, yet they were set about with little swellings,
or stones, or sandy matter throughout the whole: for from thence the blood,
because it could neither be freely circulated in the Praecordium, nor animated
enough by the nitrous air, and when in the mean time it is perpetually polluted
by its proper dregs deposited in the Lungs, is frequently vitiated and made
incapable of nourishing thereby: wherefore a Phthisis is better defined, that
it is a withering away of the whole body arising from an ill fromation of the
Lungs.

The Ancients following Hippocrates, The cause assigned by the Ancients.
for the most part have assigned only two causes of this disease, viz. a
Catarrh, and the breaking of a Vein, to which some have added an Empyema: and
others exclude a Catarrh from this number: for what is vulgarly affirmed, that
phlegm falling from the Head into the Lungs, and abiding there putrifies, is
most commonly the cause of a Phthisis, or is often brought by it, we have
formerly intimated to be altogether erroneous, and shall presently show it more
clearly. In the mean time to show what the matter is that generates a
Consumption as often as it arises without an Empyema or Haemoptoe going before,
What the consumptive matter is.
it must be considered after how may manners and by what ways any thing
disagreeable or heterogene can enter into the Lungs; which diligent search
being made, it will easily appear, that any thing that is an enemy to the Lungs
creeps in and is admitted chiefly either by the Trachea or by the pneumonic
Arteries, By what ways it enters the Lungs.
yea and sometimes happily by the Nerves, but nothing by the Veins or
Lymphaeducts, whose function is only to carry back or away the blood or Lympha,
and to leave there nothing at all.

As to the Trachea, it is manifest it is ordained for this end, that by its
passages or pipes the air might be conveyed in or presently carried back by a
constant recourse from whence it comes; Sometimes by the Trachea, yet not
destilling from the head.
moreover, whether any matter being hurtful or mortal to the Praecordia may be
admitted the same way, shall be now our present disquisition. And that the
Lungs frequently incur a pernicious pollution by this entrance is clear from
hence, because the moist air of some regions, repleat with fumes, or abounding
with malignant vapors, does frequently induce the consumptive inclination;
nevertheless the affection thereof is wont to be communicated only by aerial
minute particles (whereby either the temperament of the blood or the
conformation of the Lungs or both are prejudiced.) But whether besides this a
serous matter or some humor corrupting the Lungs does enter them through this
passage, is not without reason doubted: although many do determine a Catarrh or
a destillation of the Serum from the Brain into the Lungs by the passages of
the Trachea, the principal cause of a Phthisis. Which opinion being erroneously
delivered by the Ancients, I admire any either of our modern Physicians or
Philosophers have admitted thereof; for it is manifest by anatomical
observations, that nothing from the Brain by the Glandula pituitaria which
seems the only passage from thence) falls down into the Palate or Breast, but
that the Serum there deposited is conveyed by appropriate passages to the
jugular Veins, and is remanded to the blood. Moreover it is manifest to sight,
that whatsoever relic of Serum is laid aside in the Glandules of the Ears,
Mouth, Nose, or Face, is conveyed from them all by peculiar passages, insomuch
that no humor whatsoever destils from the Brain or the Palate into the Lungs.

But although matter exciting a Congh does not destil from the Head by the
Trachea into the Lungs, yet sometimes falling down from the sides of the
Trachea into their cavities, But sweating out of the sides of the Trachea.
it produces that disease commonly called a Catarrh. For the Aspera Arteria,
like the Arteries beinging blood, are endued with a nervous and musculous Coat,
and so do occasionally enjoy sense and motion, having also a glandulous Coat
and full of little vessels to sustain the vital heat and nourishment. These
last Coats make those interspaces, and as it were cover the Cartilages.
Moreover the superfluous serosities proceeding from the blood watering the
Trachea are deposited into this glandulous Coat, which for the most part
presently sweating into the cavities of the Trachea, serves chiefly to make
them slippery and most: but if the mass of blood be poured out too much, and
precipitated into serosities (as it frequently happens, a cold being taken, or
the swallowing down of acid things, and on many other occasions) for this cause
a great plenty of watery matter sweats out of the Glandules of the Trachea and
mouths of the little Arteries into its cavities, which soon does cause a most
troublesome Cough, and often much spittle (which afterward comes to be
consumptive.)

But surely this cause of Spittle and as it were a Catarrhal Cough very rarely
comes alone, The consumptive matter brought into the Lungs rather by the
pneumonic Arteries.
because while the blood watering the Trachea having suffered solution, throws
in its serosities into the Glandules (whence presently they sweat into its
cavities) and also the remaining blood being in like sort dissolved, it
insinuates its Serum set apart within the pneumonic arteries, partly into the
tracheal hollownesses, and partly into the Lympheducts, by the overflowing
whereof the Lungs are as it were overwhelmed and much incited, for the most
part provoked to Cough and continual spitting. A Cough and spitting of this
kind as long as moderate, A Cough and spitting sometimes healthful.
only throwing off the serosities of the blood, rather are beneficial than
prejudicial; because the mass of blood, and the very lungs being thoroughly
purged after this sort, those symptoms for the most part spontaneously abate,
and from thence ensues a more perfect health. But if they be protracted a long
time, the serous humor being on both sides laid aside into the tracheal
passages, and from thence more plentifully daily heapt up, at length it will
change into corruption; because as well the free enjoyment of air is impeded,
as also the motion of the blood, and its temperature wholly perverted; from
hence a Cough becomes more fierce, and breathing more difficult; nay rather the
whole mass of blood in as much as it is defiled by the foul blood (which the
Veins receive from the Lungs) degenerating by degrees from its benign
properties, and being depraved, it not only continually pours forth the super
fluous Serum, but also the nutritive Juice (which it cannot assimilate) out of
the pneumonic Arteries into the tracheal passages; Yet often being too much is
dangerous.
and so this mass of consumptive matter is daily increased, till the Lungs
being more and more obstructed and filled, and the blood being defiled, and
rendered unfit to perform any of its functions, the Cough and Spittle become
worse and worse, and presently become dangerous; Moreover breathing being hurt,
the faintness and pining away of the whole body, the debility of all the
functionx, and at length a hectic fever, and a hasty declination to death
follows.

When by the long continuance of a Cough and Spitting, leasurely increasing,
Why the Consumptive matter affects, and by degrees hurts the lungs.
the humor is more plentifully deposited out of the mass of blood into the
lungs, it first of all enters into the tracheal little bladders, and at length
fills them, and somewhat distends them, from which while every morning by
expectoration then more copiously performed, it is almost entirely cast out
from them, thence the Thorax is exempt for a short space from the burden, and
respiration seems more free: yet a little afterward the blood being stuffed
again with Serum or nutritive juice, it pours down new matter into the lungs;
and from thence again after meat or sleep the little bladders are filled, and
the humors by the afflux daily increased, are more distended and enlarged, and
at length the sides of two or more of the little bladders, being burst, many
little bladders are here and there framed as it were into one lake, within
which the consumptive matter being more abundantly collected, there it
putrifies (for it is not entirely prefently cast out) and from thence it
corrupts the substance of the lungs, to which it is joined, and imparts a
putrid defilement to the blood passing through it. This breach thus made in the
lungs is daily increased, and frequently more are at the same time formed in
diverse places, and by reason of the great plenty of humors heaped up and
putrified in them, a heaviness of the breast is felt, like a weighty burden
upon them, the breathing is more hindrd; moreover from the tabid blood being
more plentifully intermixed with the mass of blood, frequent effervescences of
it, destruction of the nutritive juice, also thirst, heat, loss of appetite,
nightly sweats, and a pining of the whole body do arise. How an Ulcer of the
Lungs is made.
But the blood being polluted from the lungs, causes them to be punished with a
reciprocal affection, that is to say from its peculiar pollution; because the
blood in the veins receiving this purulent matter in every circuit, it
immediately delivers it into the arterial; from whence, whereas it cannot be
sent enough away by sweat, or by Urine, it is brought back by the pneumonic
arteries to the lungs, where again being separated from the blood, it is every
where conveyed as well into the little bladders of the Trachea as into the
lesser passages; insomuch, that at length the whole frame of the lungs being
filled, clefts or ulcers are formed consequently in many places, and all the
other hollownesses are stufft with frothy quitter.

But sometimes it happens that there is one Ulcer or hole, or happily two
formed in the Lungs, and the sides grow callous round about, so that the matter
being there gathered together is not conveyed into the mass of blood, but is
daily expectorated though in a vast plenty. They that are so affected, as if
they had but an issue in the lungs, An ulcer of the lungs covered with a callus
less prejudicial.
although they cast up much Spittle, and thick and yellow matter every morning,
and a little sometimes all day, yet otherwise they live well enough in health,
they breathe, eat and sleep well, are well in flesh, or at least remain in an
indifferent habit of body, and frequently arrive to old age: insomuch that some
are said to have been consumptive thirty or forty years, and to have prolonged
the disease even unto the term of their life (for that cause not being
shortened). And in the mean time others who cough or spit less, within a few
months fall into a hectic fever, and in a short while are hurried into their
grave.

Hitherto touching the conjunct cause and formal reason of a Phthisis or
pulmonary Consumption; The evident causes of a consumption.
what belongs to the other causes (that is to say, procatarctic and evident
ones) they truly are various and manifold, inasmuch namely as they are more
near or more remote, inward or outward, and lastly connatural or adventitious:
That I may undertake to design the powers, operations, and modes of effecting
of all these in producing a Phthisis; primarily it is requisite that I show, by
how many modes, and by reason of what occasions the serous humor of (as folks
commonly say) the Catarrhal, is laid apart out of the mass of blood into the
little bladders of the lungs, and into other passages of the Trachea. The
primary causes of a Consumption some from the blood, others in part from the
lungs.
Upon diligent search of this it is obvious to any one to percieve the morbific
cause consists of two parts, and that the fault is in the ill temper of the
blood sending an offending matter to the Thorax, and also the weakness or ill
tone of the lungs easily receiving it.

As to the former, it is manifest enough by common observation, that the mass
of blood being stuffed with incongruous particles, viz. its proper ones
degenerated, or with others from other places intermingled, The ill temper of
the blood disposes to it.
does boil up for the expurging of them, and what is to be separated, when it
is not easily sent away by any other ways, it is spread abroad into the lungs,
(if they are of a weaker constitution) and cleaves to them.

There are many dyscracies of the blood, and those of diverse kinds and
affections, by by which its liquor being dissolved in its consistence, and as
it were curdled, does not rightly contain the serous and nutritive juice within
it self; moreover sending away these and other excrementitions humors
uncessantly from, it self, as sometimes it deposits them among other parts, so
more often into the lungs.

1. The blood sometimes like Milk grown sour of it self, is depraved by little
and little, and at length departing from its genuine faculty into a sourness,
and being dissolved in its existence, does cast abroad its serosities (too
easily prone to separate themselves) out of the Pneumonic and also Tracheal
Arteries into the tracheal passages. Thus to some it is ordinary once or twice
in a year, without any manifest cause to be afflicted with a grievous and
troublesome Cough, with copious spitting, which in a certain process of time
(after the blood purged from its dregs and excrements recovers its temperature)
does spontaneously abate, and after does succeed a more firm and durable
health. By reason of such a Cough serving for a purge to the blood, I have
known some often in a day, and especially every morning, who were wont to spit
out spittle like black Ink, with a small endeavor of the Trachea; which
distemper when for many months they had constantly labored under, after a
greater Cough occasionally contracted, with much and yellow spittle, they have
afterward escaped altogether free from that former black spittle; the reason
whereof it, that a heavier Cough abiding with plentiful spitting for several
days, altogether purges away those melancholy foeculencies from the blood, and
moreover it alters the temperament of the blood, or rather takes away the ill
temperament thereof.

2. And sometimes it receives a consumptive taint from the nervous juice.
The nervous juice being frequently degenerated, and with an abundant lympha
returning back out of the fibers and nervous parts into the blood, as it
produces ill affects of the bowels, and of the reins (whereof in another place
we have hinted) so sometimes it causes a fierce and very troublesome Cough.
This kind of Cough one while is Catarrhal, inasmuch as the Lympha having passed
through the mass of blood, is deposited in the Lungs by the arteries; another
while it is convulsive, inasmuch as the Nerves and fibers, constituted to move
the breast, are possessed by that liquor, and are provoked into convulsive
motions: from either cause either conjunct or separately it comes to pass, that
more grievous passions of the brain and nervous kind frequently call on a
troublesome Cough, or are wholly changed into it.

3. And sometimes by reason of a fault communicated from the Lympheducts.
Besides the faults of the blood and nervous juice, frequently exciting a
Cough, it is probable that it sometimes arises from the Lympheducts being
obstructed, which belong unto the Lungs: for whereas very many Vessels of this
kind are spread abroad through the Lungs, whose function it is to receive
whatsoever is superfluous of the Lympha that is carried through the Arteries
into the Praecordia, and not immediately brought back by the veins, and to
convey it to the trunk of the passage of the Thorax; if by chance it happens
that these passages are stopped or obstructed by viscous matter, or compressed or
thickened by cold should not well discharge their duty, it must needs be that
those watery excrements shut out from their wonted sluices, or whirling back
into the blood, do incite its fierce boiling up, or being poured into the
passages of the Trachea, do stir up a Cough.

4. Neither do the humors abovementioned only, The fourth reason is usual
evacuations suppressed.
in as much as they either pervert or hinder the crasis or motion of the blood,
induce a Cough (which frequently is the beginning of a Phthisis;) but moreover
any usual or wonted Evacuations suppressed, or let, do usually impress a fault
upon the Lungs. The menstruous flux or the Haemorrhoids obstructed, often
bleeding at the Nose it by chance it ceases, Issues closed up, Pustles, Scabs
and Wheals driven back, do frequently affix a taint in the Thorax. If a
plentiful spitting from the Glandules of the Mouth stops of its own accord, or
be cured by Medicine, afterward sometimes a consumptive Cough succeeds;
wherefore the same is vulgarly called a Rheum, which had lately fallen from the
Head into the Jaws and Throat, and thence destilled deeper into the Lungs; when
indeed it is nothing else but a certain superfluous serosity of blood, that
being used to be put aside by the cephalic Arteries into the Glandules of the
Mouth, now being excluded thence, is hurried through the preumonic Arteries
into the Lungs.

Besides these private and periodical, or extraordinary Evacuations, By reason
of transpiration hindered.
whose suppressions incline to a Cough and Phthisis, there occurs another
general and constant Evacuation, viz. insensible transpiration; which being
either stopped or suppressed, is oftener the occasion or parent of that evil than
all the rest. For the steams that usually evaporate by the Pores of the skin
being restrained within, ferment the blood, and soon pervert it, and cause it
to be precipated into serosities; which with other excrements of the mass of
blood being immediately laid aside in the Lungs, do stir up a troublesome Cough
and often a consumptive one. Hence it is a common observatioin, that the
catching of a cold, by which the Pores are stopped, whether it be by the blowing
of cold air, or being wet by rain, or leaving off clothes, or by what other
means it may come to pass, disposes very many to distempers of the Thorax.
Wherefore in our Idiom the cause being put for the effect, a Cough is called
Catching of cold.

These are the chief causes and occasions which occur from the blood any ways
depraved, Partly from the Lungs.
and therefore depositing a peccant matter into the Lungs. There follow other
causes in regard of the Lung it self, viz. those which dispose this Bowel more
readily to a Cough or a Phthisis, of which there are three sorts. 1. An ill
frame of the Breast. From the breast ill formed. From the hereditary
disposition. From foregoing distempers of the breast. From incongruity of the
air.
2. An innate weakness of the Lungs, or hereditary disposition to a
Consumption. 3. Preceding diseases of the Thorax, as a Wound, a Blow, a
Pleurisy, a Peripneumony, Empyema, Spitting of blood, the small Pox and
Measles, etc. 4. The incongruity of air which is inspired (as deserving a place
among the procatarctic causes.) By reason of any one of these causes, and
sometimes of many together, the matter provoking a Cough, proving often after
consumptive, does easily assault the Lungs, and enters them, and frequently
imprints a deadly hurt. On each of these we shall insist a little.

First therefore as to the frame of the Breast the case stands thus: viz. that
the Lungs being still whole and sound, and free from any phthisical impression,
may be kept for a long time in their office, it will behove that they sitll be
exercised with a motion that is vigorous, and with stretched our sails as it
were to discharge the strong interchanges of the Systole and Diastole; to that
end, that the air being plentifully sucked in, The reason of the former exposed.
may be admitted to their inmost apartments, and from thence immediately be
cast back for the most part together with all the effluvia and sooty vapors at
every change of breath. Wherefore since the action of the Lungs does depend
much on the frame of the Thorax, as being the moving Engine, it must needs be,
that by reason of its ill fashioning, the function of breathing becomes
defective in many things. There are two special kinds of a Breast ill framed, (
viz. crookedness, and shoulders like wings) for which reason many are found
prone to a Phthisis: the reason of which is, that in any such figure of the
breast, being either depressed or made long, the Lungs do neither enjoy a space
so free and ample, nor can the moving Muscles be so strongly contracted as in a
square breast.

2. What an hereditary disposition is.
The innate debility or hereditary disposition of the Lungs to a Consumption is
so frequent and vulgarly known, that when any is found inclining to a
Consumption, he is presently questioned, whether his parents were not obnoxious
to this distemper? Very many of these being endued with a narrow breast and a
neck somewhat long, and of a constitution very tender, contract a Cough from
the least occasion; neither can they endure a cold or moist air. To some of
these a mansion in a City is very prejudicial, where the air is breathed in
thick and smoaky; on the contrary, to others prone unto the same disposition it
is very friendly (the reason whereof we shall diligently inquire hereafter) To
all of them a North Wind is for the most part an enemy, considering that it
usually irritates a Cough, also a Spitting of blood, a Pleuisie, or
Peripneumony, viz. the pneumonic or the thoracical Vessels being thereby
stufft, and in the mean time the blood being rendered more rurgid and sharp, by
reason of transpiration hindered, and the effluvia's restrained within the mass
thereof.

For an hereditary disposition to a Phthisis does chiefly consist in these two
things: In what it consists.
viz. 1. In regard the Patients being endued with a more sharp and elastic
blood, do require a more plentiful transpiration; which perhaps if it be less
granted, the matter that was wont to evaporate redounds upon the infirm Lungs.
2. If the pneumonic Vessels be too loose and tender, they do not duly contain
the Serum and other recrements of blood within the dissolved mass thereof, but
they sometimes suffer both them and a certain portion of the blood it self to
break out into the Tracheal passages: whose moving Fibers, when they are
infirm, do not presently turn forth what is poured out into the cavities; but
they suffer it to abide and putrify in the same place, and at length to
degenerate into black filthy gore corruptive both of the Lungs and blood.

3. What the consumptive diseases of the breast are.
A Phthisis is sometimes the product or consequent of some other previous
distempers of the Breast. Those consumptive passions chiefly are Empyema's,
Pleurisies, a Peripneumony, and Imposthume of the Lungs; and sometimes the
small Pox, Measles: also irregular Fevers ill or slightly judged, do cause the
same effect. The chief of these distempers, or at least those which are proper
to the Thorax, together with the rendering the reason of the causes, and how
they dispose to a Consumption, shall be declared hereafter, with the reasons
and manner of procedure; in the mean time we are to take notice, that this kind
of fault is common to them all, that is to say, they dissolve the unity and
weaken the tone of the Lungs, and pervert the temperature of the blood; whence
whatsoever incongruous or distempered thing is poured out upon them from its
depraved mass, they do easily admit thereof, and difficultly or not at all
drive it back.

4. The influence of the air for exciting a Consumption.
The procatarctic causes of a Phthisis being now explained, viz. those which
consist as well from the blood as the Lungs, there is another common to them
both, which may be justly added, and (although altogether extrinsec) has great
affinity with them both, viz. the condition or temper or the air breathed in.
For such is the influence hereof to some consumptive persons, that the cause of
the disease is sometimes wholly ascribed to the incongruity of the air wherein
they dwell, and for a cure the alteration of air or soil is preferred to all
other remedies whatsover. Hence many of our Country troubled with a Cough, or
being in a Consumption, flock to the Southern parts of France; and others in
the mean time who cannot go beyond Sea, or will not, presently hasten to remove
out of the City-smoke into the Country as to a most undoubted refuge: wherefore
all our Villages near London, which enjoy a clear and open air, are esteemed as
so many Spittles for consumptive persons. Notwithstanding all do not alike
receive help from such a change of places; for many either passing to France or
to Country Villages, do in those places rather find their graves than health.
And therefore London is not presently to be forsaken by all phthisical persons:
for I have known may obnoxious to a Cough or Consumption to have enjoyed their
health much better in this smoaky air than in the Country. So that for cure of
the same disease, while some avoid this City as Hell, others fly to it as to
an Asylum.

The reason of these things do clearly appear out of the Doctrine of Breathing
before handled; The grosser and City-air to some consumptive persons healthful,
to others hurtful.
for we do demonstrate the blood passing through the Lungs, both as to its
kindling or vitality, and as to its motion does chiefly depend on nitrous air
sucked in; whence it is a consequence, that the tenor of this ought to be so
proportioned to the temperament of that, that the blood being moderately
kindled within the Pracordia, may burn out clearly and vigorously, The reason
whereof is inquired.
as well without smoke and sootiness as without too intense a flame, and that
it may pass the pneumonic Vessels freely, and without any hindrance or leaving
of recrements. Wherefore a moist, and close air, as it is healthful to none, so
to them that cough it is especially hurtful; on the contrary, a serene and mild
air, moderately enjoying the Sun and wind, as it is healthful to all persons,
so it is friendly to all consumptive persons. As to other conditions of the
air, some escape a Cough, or lose it living in mountainous places exposed to
the Sun, where the impendent Atmosphere being free from all thick, smoaky, and
feculent vapous whatsoever, abounds with nitrous particles: for those whose
thick and feculent blood abounds with an impure Sulphur, to kindle this duly
and to waste the dregginess, there is need of a very thin and nitrous air. If
the Lungs be not too tender, but firm and strong, they endure the more fierce
assaults of its particles; on the other side, they who have a thin and subtle
blood, easily dissolvable and endued with a more pure but very little Sulphur,
and having tender and soft lungs, very sensible, and of a finer texture; these
persons being impatient of a nitrous and sharper air, are most at ease and best
in a thick and more sulphurous one. Wherefore it conduces to these persons,
that they breathe the gross and more fat air of a smoaky City; which to an
impoverished and more thin blood, does afford Sulphur (which fails sometimes)
and also Nitre, and does something thicken and fix its subtle consistence;
moreover it dulls the substance or texture of a Lung too much sensible and more
thin, and is a defense against the invasions of a more sharp and
improportionate Air. A sulphurous air healthful to some consumptives.
It is manifest by frequent experience, that a thicker Air, provided it be
sulphurous, proves very benign to some phthisical persons (that I do not say
to all.) It is a common observation, that a Consumption seldom infests those
Regions either in England or Holland, where fires are nourished by turffe, and
do breathe a very sulphurous odor, yea rather those places are chiefly
wholesome and frequently sanative to persons obnoxious to a Phthisis, or
laboring under it. To which we may add, that a suffumigation of Sulphur and
Arsenic (which is filled with much Sulphur) is reputed for the curing of almost
incurable Ulcers of the Lungs, although the last, yet the most efficacious
remedy. Sulphurous Medicines chiefly agreeing.
Moreover add to this, that pectoral Medicines prepared of Sulphur are far to
be preferred to any other; so that Sulphur is justly reported by Chemists to be
the Balsam of the Lungs. By what order and by what means these Medicines do
work; and so notably help in diseases of the Thorax, we shall hereafter make
diligent search into: in the mean time that sulphurous Air is found helpful to
certain phthisical persons, the reason consists in these two things; viz. in
the first place, as we now intimated, from such an Air sucked in there is help
brought to the jejune and depauperated blood and to the tender Lungs. Secondly,
that the sulphurous Particles being sucked in with the nitrous, do provide
against, The reason thereof discoursed.
or take away the acidities of any of the humors (by which their flowings and
extravasations into the Lungs do chiefly arife.) And for this reason it is that
sulphurous Medicines, being also taken inwardly, do confer so excellent a help
to them that cough or are phthisical: therefore Sulphur, as I now hinted, has
the report of being the Balsam of the Lungs. For as balsamic things applied to
an Ulcer or Wound extinguish the acidity of the Ichor there sweating out and
corrupting and paining the little Fibers, soon ease the pain, and afterward
heal the wound; so also the sulphurous Particles, passed into the Lungs either
with the air or with the blood, in as much as they provide against or abolish
the acidities of all humors, i.e. the blood, the Serum, the Lympha, the nervous
or nutritive Juice, they conduce to the prevention or cure of a Consumption. We
shall in what follows more at large declare the cause, when sulphurous
Medicines shall be particularly treated of. The conjunct and procatarctic
causes of a Phthisis being thus handled, it will not be necessary to discourse
much touching the evident causes. For in what manner a closing of the Pores by
cold, a surfeit or tippling, and other errors of several sorts, in the six
non-naturals, dispose to those distempers, and sometimes presently do bring
them, The three times or distinct states of a Cough.
is so clear, that it needs no explaining. Neither is there any reason we
should be long delayed about the Semiotical part of this disease; nevertheless
it is fit we observe the diverse states or distinctive signs which certainly
belong unto it. 1. When it is merely a Cough. 2. When it begins to degenerate
into a Phthisis. 3. When it is a perfect and almost desperate Phthisis. From
which things duly designed, the Prognostic of the abovementioned affections
will be very apparent.

1. And in the first place what belongs to a new Cough, and as yet alone, When
new, there is no suspicion of a Consumption.
this taking its rise from any cause whatsoever in bodies predisposed to a
Phthisis, will scarce ever be free from the suspicion of danger; but in a
strong man, and one who has often before endured a Cough Scot-free, it will
not be immediately to be feared: for when being stirred up from a more forcible
evident cause, without Fever or indisosition of the whole body, it shall not
be very troublesome, then it merely passes for a cold being taken, and is
altogether neglected, or in a short time is wont to be finished without many or
very considerable Remedies. Moreover if a small Fever with thirst and want of
appetite accompany this, there is hope that the blood being restored to its due
temperament, the Cough then will cease of its own accord: but if it be
protracted longer, and not easily yield to vulgar Remedies, and produces much
spitting, and that discolored, it must not be any longer neglected, but be
provided against by a method of healing, and by fit remedies and an exact
course of diet. For then it may well be suspected, that the Lungs being
prejudiced in their structure, do not circulate the blood entirely, but let
fall the Serum and Lympha, and frequently the nutritive Juice; and moreover
those humors so laid aside do putrify; and from thence the blood is defiled,
which by a reciprocal hurt prejudices again the Lungs.

2. When it begins to induce a Consumption.
But if to a Cough growing daily worse and worse with plentiful and thick
spittle, a languishing and pining of the whole body, loss of appetite,
difficult breathing, thirst, and fervent heat of the blood be added, there is
great cause of suspicion that it is come at least to the first limits of a
Phthisis (if not further.) Wherefore it will behove us to use all means,
whereby the Lungs may be freed from the great quantity of matter heaped up
together, and be defended from its continual assault or invasion; and also that
the mass of blood may be cleansed from all dregs, and restored to its due
temperament whereby it may rightly contain its serosities and other humors
within it self, or transfer them to some other place than to the Lungs.

3. When it becomes a confirmed Consumption.
But if, beyond the state of this distemper now described, plenty of spittle,
and that discolored, shall be daily increased, and all other things growing
worse and worse, a dejection of the whole strength, and a hectic Fever with a
continual thirst, night Sweats, an Hippocratical face, an utter decay of the
flesh almost to the dryness of a Skeleton, happen upon all these, then for the
most part no place is left for Medicine, but only a dreadful prognostic; at
least all hope of Cure being waved, we must insist upon Anodynes, whereby an
easy death may be procured.

What therefore belongs to the cure of a Cough in general, The curing method,
and first against a beginning Cough.
according to the three abovementioned states of this disease, a threefold
method of healing ought to be appointed, viz. that bounds as it were being set,
we may more distinctly prescribe what is to be done for the cure of a Cough,
whilst being on this side the limits of a Phthisis, it passes only for a cold
catched. 2. What manner of healing to a beginning Phthisis. 3. What to a
Phthisis consummated, or desperate.

1. Although against a new Cough for the most part there are used only Remedies
Empirical, and scarce any of the common people but are furnished with many and
diverse of this sort, which every where without the advice of a Physician very
many confidently take, and without method, and give them to others: yet men of
a delicate constitution, or inclining to a Consumption hereditarily, or
sometimes formerly in hazard from a Cough, ought immediately to provide against
the first assaults thereof, and readily betake themselves to the Precepts of
Physic; according to which, that the method of healing may be duly instituted,
the curatory indications shall be chiefly these three; Three indications.
viz. 1. To appease or take off the disorder of the blood, from whence the
fluxes of the Serum do proceed. 2. To derive the excrements of the blood and
all exuviae, apt to separate from it, from the Lungs to the Pores of the skin,
or to the urinary passages, and into the other Emunctories. 3. To strengthen
the Lungs themselves against the reception of the Serum and other humors, and
also to defend them against the invasion of outward cold, whereby they are wont
to receive further hurt. Upon each of these we shall treat a little more
plainly.

1. The first respects the effervescence of the blood.
The first indication respects as well the boiling up of the blood, wherein by
reason of the effluvia's restrained, it grows too fervently hot, and boils in
the vessels; as its dissolution, whereby being solved in its consistence, it
lets go too much Serum and other humors from its embraces. For the taking away
of both, a thin diet must be appointed, and, the injury from outward cold
carefully declined, a little more sweating ought to be procured, or at least
the accustomed restored. To this end let the Patient put on thick garments, and
let him keep his bed or chamber, at least let him hardly go out of his house,
evening and morning let a small breathing Sweat be provoked by Posset Drink
boiled with Rosemary or Sage. If notwithstanding all this the Cough increases,
Phlebotomy, if the strength and constitution will bear it, is often used with
success: after which Hypnoticks for the most part help, in as much as they
retard the motion of the heart and consequently the too precipitate course of
blood: moreover they cause it to circulate in the pneumonic Vessels gently and
mildly without any great throwing out its serosities, and to send away what is
superfluous either by Sweat or Urine. To this purpose pectoral Decoctions are
also to be administered, in as much as they destroy the acidity of humors, and
hinder the dissolution of the blood, and its melting into serosities. By the
like reason and manner, Medicines prepared of Sulphur do so signally help
against a Cough. The second respects the derivation of the Serum and other
excrements from the Lungs.


The second indication, viz. that the Serum and other recrements of the blood,
derived from the Lungs, may be evacuated by other ways, is performed by
Diaphoretics, Diuretics, and mild Purgers; which ought to be mixed with other
Remedies, or now and then used alone. Wherefore after Phlebotomy we use to
prescribe a gentle Purge, and sometimes to repeat it. Among the Ingredients of
the pectoral Decoction let the Root of Chervile, Butchers-broom, Elicampane,
and other things that provoke Sweat and Urine be put. Hog-lice, volatile Salt
of Amber, and other fixed Salts and Powders of Shells made into Pills with
Turpentine are often given with success.

The third indication, The third intends the suppressing the Catarrh and
strengthing the Lungs.
that the Lungs and their passages might be desended against the flowing of
humors, the encountering of cold, and the suppression of the Catarrh, as they
commonly call it, is performed by Linctus's, Lohochs, and other private
Remedies, and chiefly respects two things; viz. that the mouths of the Vessels
and Glandules opening into the Trachea be shut with moderate Astringents, lest
they should too much east out the serosities into it: and secondly, that the
sides of the Tracheal passages may be made smooth and glib, that neither from
the pouring out of the sharp Serum, nor invasion of any outward cold they may
be offended, and continally provoked into a troublesome Cough; and moreover
when those passages are made slippery enough, the spittle sometimes obstinately
cleaving to their sides, might be the more easily coughed out. For the first
intention it is, that Conserve of red Roses, Olibanum, Mastich, Lohoch of
Pine Tree, Syrup of Jujubes, of dried Roses, of Cup-moss, and other Astringents
are often put into the forms of Pectoral Prescriptions. For the second
intention Liquorish, with the diverse preparations thereof, is reputed a famous
Remedy against any Cough: for this purpose Syrups and Lohochs, and all other
sweet Pectorals seem to be ordained. To which is added Oil of sweet Almonds,
either administered by it self, or brought with pectoral Syrups after a long
stirring of them together into a milk form liquor.

These are the chief Therapeutic indications, together with the apt intentions
of healing, which seem chiefly to be of use for a new Cough, while as yet we
have no suspicion of a Phthisis, or at least that it subsists without the
manifest limits thereof; it now remains, after this general method briefly
shadowed out, that we subjoin certain choice forms of Medicines appropriated to
every intention. These, though they are manifold and of diverse preparations,
yet those which are of chiefest note and most in use, Forms of Medicines which
are most in use.
are Mixtures, Linctus's, Lohochs, Tinctures, Balsams, Troches, Lozenges,
Powders, Pills, Decoctions, and distilled Waters. Of each of these we shall set
down some choice Receipts.

1. Mixtures.
Take of Syrup de Maconio, of Jujubes, of each an ounce and half; of powder of
Olibanum a dram, the water of Earthworms, or of aq. Hysterica, or Peony
compound a dram, mingle them. The Dose is one spoonful at bed time and after
midnight.

Take of the water of Snails, of Earthworms, of each an ounce and half; of the
liquid Laudanum Tartarizated two drams, Syrup of Violets an ounce. The Dose is
one spoonful at bedtime.

Take of Snail-water vj. Syrup of the juice of Ground Ivy, iij. Flower of
Brimstone ss. mix them. The dose is one spoonful at bedtime, and soon in the
morning.

Take of our syrup of Sulphur 4 ounces, Water of Earthworms 1 ounce. Dose 1
spoonful after the same manner.

2. Linctus 's.
Take of syrup of Jujubes, Maidenhair of each one and half, syrup of red
Poppys 1 ounce, mix them; to be licked with a Liquorish Stick.

Take Oil of Sweet-Almonds fresh drawn, Syrup of Maidenhair, of each 1 ounce
and half, white Sugar Candy 2 drachms, mix them by beating in a Glass-morter,
or shaking them in a Glass Vial till it wax white.

3. Lohochs.
Take Conserve of red Roses 2 ounces and half, Lohoch Sanum 1 ounce and half,
Spec. Diatragacanth. frig. 1 dram and half, flowers of Brimstone half a dram,
Syrup of Violets or red Poppyes as much as suffices, let it be made a sost
Lohoch. Dose 1 dram and half at night and early in the morning; at other times
to be licked with a Liquorish stick.

Take of the powder of the leaves of Hedge-mustard, or Rockets, 1 ounce and
half, clarified Honey 4 ounces, mix them for a Lohoch, let it be administered
after the same manner. It agrees with cold Constitutions.

4. Tinctures.
Take of Tincture of Sulphur, without empyreuma 3 drams, Dose from 6 drops to
ten in the evening, and early in the morning in 1 spoonful of Sir. of Violets,
or of the juice of Ground Ivy; I scarce know a more excellent remedy for any
Cough, provided there be no fever.

Take of Tincture of the Sulphur of Antimony 2 drams, Dose 20 drops evening and
morning in one spoonful of the pectoral Syrup.

Take of the Tincture of Gum Ammoniack (prepared with the Tincture of Salt of
Tartar) 1 ounce, Dose from 15 drops to 20. After the same manner the Tinctures
of Galbanum, Assa foetida, Gum of Ivy (prepared after the same manner) are
proper for a Cough in any cold constitution.

5. Balsams.
Take of Opobalsamum 2 drams, Dose from 6 drops to ten in a spoonful or two of
Hyssop, or Pennyroyal, or any other Pectoral water.

Take of the Balsam artificially distilled, commonly called the Matter Balsami,
two drams, Dose from 6 drops to ten in one spoonful of Syrup of Violets or
Canary Wine evening and morning.

Take Balsam of Sulphur two drams, the dose from five drops to ten after the
same manner.

Take of Balsam of Peru one dram, Dose from two drops to 4 or 6 in Conserve of
Violets.

6. Troches.
Take of the Species of Diatragacanth. frigid. ss. Liquorish j. flower of
Sulphur ij. flower of Benzoin j. Sugar Penids iij. make a Paste with the
dissolution of Gum Tragacanth in Hyssop-water, form it into troches of the
weight of ss. Take one often in the day or in the night.

Take of the seeds of white Poppies vj. of the powder of the flowers of red
Poppies j. extract of Liquorish ij. milk of Sulphur ss. Sugar Penids ij. with
mucilage of Quinceseeds make a Paste, and form it into troches.

Take of the Species Diaireos, of the lung of a Fox, of each ss. Sugar Penids
ij. with the dissolution of Gum Tragacanth, make them into Troches.

Take of powder of Elicampane, Anniseeds, Liquorish, of each ij. flower of
Brimstone j. of Tablet Sugar iss. juice of Liquorish dissolved, as much as will
suffice, make Troches.

7. Lozenges.
Take of the Species Diatragacanth. frigid. iij. powder of the flowers of red
Poppies, milk of Sulphur, of each ss. of Sugar dissolved in Poppy-water, and
boiled to make Tablets, iiij. form lozenges of ss. weight.

Take of Species Diaireos, of the lung of a Fox, of each iij. flower of
Brimstone, powder of Elicampane of each ss. of the whitest Benzoin j. make them
in a fine powder, adding of Oil of Anniseeds j. Sugar dissolved, and boiled to
a height to make lozenges viij. for lozenges of ss. weight.

8. Powders.
These though more seldom, yet are sometimes given with success in a Cough, and
pneumonic distempers.

Take of the tops of Ground Ivy somewhat reddish, a sufficient quantity,
bruised let them be formed into a Cake, which dried presently in the hot Sun,
reduce into fine powder, and keep it in a glass. This Plant keeps its virtue
with smell and taste longer than any either Conserves or Syrups, and greatly
profits in a grievous and pertinacious cough. Take from ss. to a dram, in
distilled water, or pectoral decoction twice in a day.

After the same manner Powders of other pectoral Plants are prepared, and taken
with benefit.

Take of Cup-moss or chin-cups iij. milk of Sulphur j. Sugar Candy ss. make a
powder; the dose from j. to ss. twice in a day. This powder is given with great
benefit to those laboring with a chin-cough.

Take of the flour of Brimstone, Olibanum, Ceruse of Antimony, of each ij.
divide it into xii. parts, take one part in the morning, and another in the
evening in a spoonful of a convenient vchicle.

9. Pills.
Take of Aloes rosata, or rather of Ruffus's his Pill, flower of Brimstone of
each one dram and half, flowers of Benzoin j. Juice of Liquorish dissolved in
as much Snail-water as will suffice to make a mass, form it into small pills to
be taken 4 at night, to be repeated every or every other night.

Take of powder of Elecampane, Liquorish, flower of Brimstone, of each one
dram, flowers of Benzoin half a dram, Tarr as much as is sufficient, form it
into small pills, the Dose 3 or 4, evening or soon in the morning.

Take of Millepedes or Hogs-lice prepared ij. the powder of the seeds of
Nettles, Burdock of each half a dram, Oil of Nutmegs distilled j. Salt of Amber
half a dram; Juice of Liquorish what will suffice, form it into small Pills,
take three in the morning and in the evening.

10. Decoctions.
These are taken either by themselves, or with the addition of Milk. Among
those which are of the first kind, 1. The Pectoral Decoction according to the
London Dispensatory, offers it self. Which is taken twice a day from iiij. to
vj. or viij.

Take of the leaves of Ground Ivy, white Maidenhair, Hart's-tongue, Coltsfoot,
Agrimony, of each one handful, Roots of Chervil, Knee-holm, of each one ounce,
Carthamus and sweet Fennel seeds, of each half an ounce, boil them in 6 pints
of Spring Water to the consumption of half, adding toward the end Liquorish
three drams, Raisins stoned two ounces, Jujubes, no vi. or clarified Honey
three ounces, make an Apozeme, clarifying it with the white of an Egg; Dose 6
ounces warm, 2 or 3 times in a day.

Decoctions taken with Milk, are used morning and evening instead of Breakfast
and Supper, according to the manner following.

Take the flowers of greater Daisies one handful, three cleansed Snails, half
an ounce of candied Eringo roots, Barley 3 drams, boil them in a pint and half
of water to a pint. Take 6 or 8 ounces warm, adding a little milk; and
afterward the quantity increased by little and little.

After the same manner, Cup-moss, Ground Ivy, St. John 's-wort, and other
pectoral herbs are boiled and taken with Milk.

The Decoction of Woods often does conduce much to the cure of a stubborn
Cough, especially if appointed in the place of Beer, for ordinary drink, and
taken for some time.

Take of the roots of Sarsaparilla 4 ounces, China two ounces, white and red
Sanders of each half an ounce, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn of each 3
drams, let them be infused, and boiled from 8 pints of Conduit-water to 4,
adding Liquorish 6 drams, Raisins stoned an ounce and half; in a phlegmatic or
colder constitution, add of shavings of Lignum vitae.

11. Distilled Waters.
Every one may compound manifold and diverse forms of these as occasion
requires, and appoint according to the constitution of the patient, sometimes
simple Milk, sometimes Milk with some part of Wine, sometimes Ale, or Brunswick
Mum. For a Sample we will prescribe the form of these.

Take of the leaves of Ground Ivy, Hyssop, Pennyroyal, of each four handfulls,
of Snails half-boyl'd in their shells two pounds, Nutmegs sliced no. vj. Upon
all being cut small pour eight pints of fresh milk, let it be distilled in the
common Organs, i.e. a Pewter-Still.

The dose 3 ounces twice or thrice in a day by it self or with some other
Medicine.

Every dose let it be sweetened when it is taken with Sugar Candy, or with the
syrup of the juice of Ground Ivy.

In a constitution less hot, especially if there be no fervent heat of the
blood or Praecordium, to six or seven pints of Milk, add one pint or two of
Canary wine; and in a phlegmatic or old body, instead of Milk let the
Menstruum be Ale or Brunswick Beer, i. e. Mum.

Moreover, in Winter-season when Snails cannot easily or scarcely be procured
at all, there may be substituted in their stead Lambs or Sheeps Lungs, also
sometimes Calves, being half-boyl'd and cut small, with the forementioned
ingredients, and a fit Menstruum being added, let them be distilled in common
Organs, or Rosestills.

To this form, The convulsive Cough of children called the Chin-cough.
treating of a Cough not yet arrived to a Phthisis, ought to be referred the
convulsive or suffocating Cough of children, and in our Idiome called the
Chin-cough. This assaults chiefly Children and Infants; and at certain seasons,
viz. Spring and Autumn especially, is wont to be epidemical. The diseased are
taken with frequent and very fierce fits of Coughing, wherein namely the Organs
of breathing do not only labor in pain, but also being affected convulsively,
they do variously suspend or interrupt their actions; but for the most part the
Diaphragma convulsed by it self, or by the impulse of other parts, does so very
long obstinately continue the Systole, or Diastole, that Inspiration, or
Expiration being suppressed for a space, the vital breath can scarcely be
drawn; insomuch that coughing as being almost strangled they hoop, and by
reason of the blood stagnating, they contract a blackness in their countenance;
if perhaps, those organs not in such a measure convulsed, they are able to
breathe any thing freer, notwithstanding they are forced always to cough more
vehemently and longer, until they wax faint.

The formal reason or conjunct cause of this disease, The reason thereof.
consists in these two things, viz. that there is present a quick and vehement
irritation of the lungs, whereby they are almost continually incited to throw
off something troublesome by Cough; and also that the motive parts of the
Thorax, viz. the Nerves and nervous fibers being predisposed to convulsions, as
often as they are irritated, do excite a Cough not regular but convulsive, and
such as is opposite or injurious to the usual function of breathing.

The matter provoking the lungs so frequently into a Cough seems to be the
Serum, The cause partly a Catarrh.
uncessantly soaking out of the mass of blood, by reason of its frame being too
much loosened, and troubling the parts belonging to the breast, inasmuch as it
destills as well through the tracheal arteries into the hollowness of aspera
arteria, as that it is poured in plentifully through the pneumonic arteries
into all the open passages.

The convulsive disposition of the moving parts, A convulsive disposition of
the parts of the breast.
as in other convulsive distempers, seems to proceed from a heterogene and
elastic matter falling from the brain through the nervous passages, together
with the nervous liquor, into the small moving fibers of the breast; wherefore,
when the spirits that are contained in those little fibers, are stirred to
perform violent motions of breathing out, they pass into convulsive motions.

What relates to the Prognostic of this distemper, The prognostic of this
disease.
this Cough although it be seldom very dangerous or mortal, yet it remains very
difficult of cure; and frequently it rather ceases by change of the season than
is extinguished by remedies. The cause whereof is, that here not, as in an
usual Cough, the blood only ought to be altered, and its recrements to be
derived out of the Lungs, to be conveyed to the habit of the body by sweating,
but moreover an amendment of the nervous juice ought to be procured.

About the curing of this disease, Cures first Empirical.
the way of healing used in other kinds of Coughs does rarely profit here;
wherefore old women and Empiricks are oftener consulted than Physicians, and
the rational curatory method being postponed and neglected, remedies for the
most part only Empirical are brought into use.

Among the many remedies of this kind, these two following are preferred to all
others, and chiefly wont to be used; viz. Cup-moss or Chin-moss or Chin-cups,
and the various preparations thereof and compositions are taken inwardly, and
if there shall be need of any further medicine, that some Bugbear being
presented, the Child laboring with it may be cast into a sudden fright. But if
the wished success be wanting to administrations of this sort, Ptisans, Syrups,
Julips, or Decoctions, and other pectoral helps are rejected, and frequently
they desist from all other Medicines, expecting until the disease either at
length of its own accord determine, or be cured by reason of the succeeding
change of the year.

1. Chin-cups a great remedy.
Chin-cups or Moss is in most common use in our Country against the Coughs of
Children, and is vulgarly enough known as to its form and manner of growing. It
is of an astringent nature (as far as we gather by its taste) and contains in
it self particles somewhat sharp and biting, and smelling of plenty of volatile
Salt: from whence we may safely conjecture that its use is to fix the blood,
and to appease the fluxes of Serum, The reason whereof is inquired.
and moreover by volatilising the nervous juice, to take away the convulsive
disposition. It is usually administered in form of Powder, Decoction, and Syrup;
according to the following Receipts.

Take of Chin-cups in powder one dram, Sugar Candy one scruple, mix them;
divide it into three or four parts, take a dose morning and evening with a fit
vehicle.

Take of the same Cup-moss two drams, milk of Brimstone two scruples, powder of
Anniseeds one scruple, divide it into six parts to be taken as the former.

Take of the same Chin-moss or cup-moss one dram boiled in milk for one dose;
take it morning and evening. To those with whom milk does not agree, or to whom
it little profits, let it be boiled in Spring Water or Hyssop-water, or in any
other pectoral water, and let it be given from two ounces to four, twice in a
day, sweetning it with Sugar or some fit Syrup.

Take of this Muscus Pyxidatus or chin-moss one ounce, boil it in two pints of
some pectoral water to the consumption of half: To it strained add of
Sugar Candy one pound, and evaporate it in a gentle bath, to the consistence of
a syrup.

2. The other remedy for the convulsive Cough is wont to be, Frights profit in
this Cough.
that they be cast into some sudden fright; from hence, whenas medicines effect
less, with the vulgar it is a familiar practice, that, to fright them, while a
great Mill is driven about with a screeking noise, and a dreadful aspect of the
wheels, the distempered be put into the Trough or Receiver of the Grain or
Corn, and from thence the sudden cure of this disease sometimes happens. The
reason whereof without doubt consists in this, that the Animal spirits being
put to flight and forced into fresh distractions, they relinquish their former
disorders; moreover, the convulsive matter is either dissipated by that
disturbance, or is forced into other nerves where it is less troublesome.

The Empirical cure of this disease being described after this manner, The
rational cure.
together with the remedies vulgarly used, and the rendering a reason of the
cause at least probably unfolded, from hence it will be lawful to design a
rational method of curing, and perhaps more efficacious against childrens
Coughs of this kind. Wherefore, in such a case sometimes successefully enough I
have prescribed according to the following forms. And seeing we ought to begin
with purging,

Take of the syrup of Peach flowers one spoonful, of Aqua Hysterica one
scruple, mix it, Purging.
and let it be taken with government.

Or, take of Mercurius dulcis 6 grains, Scammony prepared with Sulphur, Resine
of Jalap, of each three grains; make a powder, give it in a little Pulp of a
preserved Cherry to a lad six years old, and let the dose be increased or
lessened according to the age, let the Purge be repeated in 6 or 7 days.

If the Patient (as it often happens) be prone to vomit, Take of Oxymel of
Squils 6 drams, Salt of Vitriol 4 grains, mix it for a child of six years old,
and according to this proportion let the dose be accommodated to others. I have
known a Vomit of this kind taken every morning for four or five days together
with good success.

Vesicatories or Medicines drawing blisters are in daily use, Vesicatories.
and are applied sometimes to the Nucha or nape of the neck, another while
behind the ears, then to the inside of the arms near the arm pits, and as soon
as these sores begin to heal in these places, let others be raised in other
places.

Instead of Beer let the following Decoction be used for ordinary drink.

Take China-roots an ounce and half, of all the Sanders of each half an ounce,
the shavings of Ivory, and Hartshorn of each three drams, let them be infused
and boiled in six pints of spring water to the consumption of half, adding
Raisins stoned an ounce and half, Liquorish three drams.

Take of Spirit of Gum Ammoniac with Salt Ammoniac a dram, Mixtures.
Syrup of Chin-moss three ounces, Aq. hysterica an ounce: the dose is a small
spoonful in the evening and morning fasting.

Or, Take of tincture of Sulphur two drams, dose three drops in the evening and
first in the morning in a spoonful of the Syrup of Cup-moss.

To some endued with a hot constitution, and while they cough their countenance
is spread with redness, or rather blackness, I have prescribed Phlebotomy or
drawing of blood with Leeches to two or three ounces with good success.

Take Hog-lice living and cleansed two ounces, powder of Aniseed a dram, Nutmeg
half a dram, fine Sugar an ounce, bruise them together, and pour upon them six
ounces of Hysop-water, of Magistral Snail-water two ounces, stir them together
a little, and press them out hard: the dose two or three spoonfuls twice a day.

Hitherto of a Cough and its Remedy, while it is only an entrance to a
Consumption; now it remains to treat thoroughly of the distemper it self, having
passed the limits of this dangerous disease, and to design a method of curing,
and the forms of romedies, which are proper to heal an inveterate Cough, when
either being neglected, or not easily giving place to remedies, it begins to
degenerate into a Phthisis; namely when it arrives to that state, that the
blood being dissolved in its consistence, does not only pour out the
superfluous Sorum, but also the nutritive Juice, and perhaps the nervous, the
Lympha, and other its superfluities on the Lungs, and lodges them within its
passages; Of what sort the beginning of a consumptive Cough it.
and in the mean time the corruption of the Lungs is so much increased, that
the little Bladders being distended, or many of them broke into one, so that a
solution of continuity or an Ulcer being caused, a greater plenty of corruption
is daily heaped in; and moreover the matter in that place gathered together,
because it is suffered to abide there long, putrifies, and for that reason does
still more corrupt the Lungs themselves, and defile the blood flowing through.
In this case the Therapeutical indications shall be chiefly these three: Three
indications concerning its cure.

1. To stop the dissolution of the blood. 2. To draw out the filth from the
Lungs. 3. To heal the Lungs hurt.

viz. in the first place to stop the dissolution of the blood, which is the
root of all this evil, and to make provision that it pour not out the matter
any longer in such abundance upon the Lungs. Secondly, by expectorating the
purulent matter heaped up within the Lungs, and to evacuate it quickly and
sufficiently. Thirdly, to strengthen and dry the Lungs loosned from their
unity, or being too loose or moist or otherwise infirm, lest they be daily more
and more corrupted, and give more reception to the morbific matter. Every of
these indications suggests various intentions of healing, and requires remedies
of diverse kinds and many ways of administrations. The chief of which we shall
here briefly treat of.

1. The first indication suggests three intentions of healing.
Therefore what the first indication suggests, that the dissolution of blood
may be prohibited, these three things (as much as may be) ought to be procured:
viz. First that the mass of blood may contain and assimilate whatsoever of
nutritive juice it may be furnished with; and that it be so proportioned, that
it neither offend in quality nor in quantity. Secondly, that the acidities
either generated in the blood, or poured into it from some other place, may be
so destroyed, that the blood retaining as yet its mixture or temperament, may
not be prone to flowings and pourings out. Thirdly and lastly, that all the
excrements produced in the blood may be derived from the Lungs to other
Emunctories and places of Evacuations.

1. The first intention, that the nutritive juice may be proportioned to the
blood and assimilated by it.
As to the first intention of healing, viz. that the nutritive Juice may be
proportioned to the blood, let it be advised before all things, that they who
cough and are phthisical abstain chiefly from drink, and that they take liquid
things in a very small quantity; for that the blood being infirm in its
temperament, so long as it is not too much imbued with fresh juice, may be able
to digest small portions, and retain it within its own consistence. Moreover,
let that fresh juice consist of such kind of particles, which being mild and
thin, may be tamed by the blood, and assimilated without any effervescence or
heat. Wherefore Asses milk, also sometimes Cows or Goats milk; also
Water Gruel, Cream of Barley, Ptisan, Almond-milks, and other simple
nourishments will better agree and nourish more than Flesh, Eggs, and
Gelly-broaths, strong Ale, Wine, or any other kind of richer fare. Secondly, 2.
That the acidities of the blood and other humors be taken away.
that the blood retaining its own temperament, be not easily dissolved into
serosities injurious to the Lungs, it behooves that as well the acidities of it
self as of other humors mixed therewith, and chiefly the nervous and limpid ones
be destroyed: which intention Medicines prepared with Brimstone will best
accomplish; which for that cause in this case (provided a hectic Fever be not
present) may be more frequently and in abundance taken. Wherefore the Tincture,
the Balsam, the Syrup, the Flowers, and Milk of Sulphur in somewhat a large
Dose may be exhibited twice or thrice a day. For the same reason traumatic or
vulnerary Decoctions, also Decoctions of the pectoral Herbs commonly so called,
also of the Woods, are to be taken instead of ordinary drink. Moreover the
Powder of Crabs eyes, Hog-lice, and other things endued with an Alcali or
volatile Salt are often administered with great success. 3. That the excrements
of the blood be drawn off from the Lungs.
The third intention of healing respecting the first indication, viz. that the
superfluous dregs of the depraved blood, (if they shall be very much
predominant) being commanded out from the Lungs, may be discharged by other
Emunctories, suggests very many ways to be used for their dispatch. For besides
Phlebotomy, Diuresie, and sometimes a gentle Purgation (which take place in all
Coughs, yea in the beginning of a consumptive Cough, or Phthisis) hither also
ought to be referred Baths, taking in a more warm air whereby they may more
freely transpire, also Frictions of the extreme parts, Dropaces, Issues,
Blisterings, or Depilatories, Errhines, Gargles, and other private or public
sluices either of humors or vapors.

The second indication in the beginning of a Phthisis, viz. that the
consumptive matter laid aside within the Lungs may be easily and daily
evacuated, Second indication requires expectorating Medicines.
is performed by expectorating Medicines. These are said to operate after a
twofold matter, according to which their virtue is conveyed two ways to the
Lungs. For of those being taken by the mouth, some immediately dismiss their
active particles into the Trachea, which partly by making the way slippery, and
loosning the matter impacted, and partly by provoking the excretory Fibers into
Convulsions, do procure expectoration: in which number are chiefly accounted
Linctus's and Fumigations. The expectorating Remedies of another kind, which
deservedly are accounted more available, do exercise their energie by the
passage of the blood. For whereas they consist of such kind of particles which
cannot be digested and assimilated by the mass of blood, being spread through
the blood, because they cannot be mixed with it, they are presently again
exterminated, and so penetrate from the pneumonic Arteries into the tracheal
passages; where lighting on the matter they divide, and attenuate, and so
disturb it, that the little fibers being irritated from thence, and
successively contracted while they cough, the contents of the Trachea and of
its little bladders are ejected upwards into the mouth. Medicines proper for
this use besides Sulphur and the preparations of it, are artificial Balsams
distilled with Oil of Turpentine, Tinctures and Syrups of Gum Ammoniac,
Galbanum, Asa foetida, Garlic, Leeks, and such like yielding a strong scent;
from which also Lohochs and Eclegma's are prepared. And these work both ways,
partly by slipping into the Trachea, and partly by entering the Lungs by the
circulation of the blood, and assault the morbific matter both before and
behind, and so exclude it with the greater force.

3. What belongs to the third indication, viz. that the frame of the Lungs
being hurt, or their constitution vitiated, may be either restored or amended;
Third indication is performed by Balsamicks and vulneraries.
such things are of use as resisting putrefaction do cleanse, heal, dry, and
strengthen; to which intent also Remedies prepared of Sulphur, Balsamics and
Vulneraries do agree. Hence some Empirics do not only successfully prescribe
the smoke of Sulphur vivum, but also of Auripigmentum, to be sucked through a
Pipe or Funnel into the Lungs. Moreover it is for this reason, that change of
air and soil, viz. from Cities to the Country or sulphurous air, or the
passage from one Region into another that is hotter, is of such a signal
advantage.

Hitherto of the Method of Healing, which seems to be of use against the more
painful Cough, or Phthisis beginning; now it remains according to all those
curatory indications to subjoin certain select forms of Medicines, which also,
according to the way of healing described above in a slight Cough which is
short of a Phthisis, Forms of remedies for a consumption.
we shall distinguish into certain ranks, viz. which are Mixtures, Linctus's,
Lohochs, Tinctures, Balsams, Troches, Lozenges, Powders, Pills, Decoctions, and
distilled Waters. We shall set down some Examples of each of these: whereto
also may be referred some of the forms of Medicines before described for a
beginning Cough, and not as yet consumptive.

1. Magisterial Medicines and Syrups.
Take of our Syrup of Sulphur three ounces, Mixtures.
water of Earthworms an ounce, tincture of Saffron two drams, mingle them.
Take one spoonful at night, and first in the morning.

Take of Syrup of the juice of Ground Ivy three ounces, Snail-water an ounce,
flour of Brimstone a dram, mix them by shaking. The Dose one spoonful at night
and morning.

Take of tincture of Sulphur two drams, Laudanum tartarizated a dram, Syrup of
the juice of Ground Ivy two ounces, Cinamon-water two drams: the dose one
spoonful at bedtime, and if sleep be wanting, toward morning.

Syrupus Diasulphuris. Take of Sulphur prepared after our manner half an ounce,
Syrups.
best Canary wine two pints, let them be digested 28 hours in a water or sand
Bath; which being done, take of the finest Sugar two pounds dissolved in
Elder-flower-water, and boil to a height to make tablets: afterward pour to it
by little and little Wine colored with Sulphur and warm, let it boil a little
on the fire, strain it through woolen. You will have a most delicate Syrup of a
gold color, and for coughs and other distempers of the lungs (where a hectic
Fever and heat of the Praecordium is absent) most profitable: the dose a
spoonful morning and evening by it self or with other Pectorals.

Syrup of Garlic. Take ten or twelve cloves of Garlic stripped from the little
skins, and cut into slices, Aniseeds bruised half an ounce, Elicampane sliced
three drams, Liquorish two drams, let them digest for two or three days in a
pint and half of spirit of Wine close and warm; strain it clear and hot into a
silver dish, and add a pound and half of fine Sugar, the dish standing upon hot
coals, let the liquor be fired, and while it burns stir it; and strain it
through woollen, and keep it for use.

Syrup of Turnips. Take Turnips sliced and fine Sugar of each half a pound, put
them in a glased pot a lay of Turnips and a lay of Sugar, the pot being covered
with paper, put it into an oven to bake with the bread; when it is taken out,
press the liquor, and keep it for use: the dose one spoonful morning and
evening.

Syrup of Snails. Take fresh Snails with their shells n. xl. cleanse them with
a linen cloth, afterward each being run through with a bodkin, let the open
shell be filled with powder of Sugar Candy, and being put in a linen bag, let
them be hung in a cellar, it will dissolve into a Syrup and drop into a glass
vessel set under it: the dose one spoonful twice or thrice a day in a
convenient vehicle, viz. Milk-water or pectoral Decoction.

2. and 3. Linctus's and Lohochs.
Take of conserve of red Roses three ounces, Linctus's.
of our tincture of Sulphur two drams, mix them in a glass mortar: the dose the
quantity of a Nutmeg evening and morning. To this sometimes to appease a
troublesome cough add from half to a dram of powder of Olibanum.

Take conserve of red Roses four ounces, Lohoch.
flour of Brimstone four scruples, fine oil of Turpentine a dram, powder of
Fox-lungs three drams, syrup of the juice of Ground Ivy as much as will suffice
to make a soft Lohoch, to be taken after the same manner, viz. morning and
evening; also to be licked at other times with a Liquorish-stick.

Take powder of Sugar Candy four drams, tincture of Sulphur two drams, mix it
in a glass mortar: take it after the same manner.

In the place of Tincture of Sulphur may be administered other balsamic
Tinctures, viz. Balsam of Peru, Opobalsamum, Gum of Ivy, Guajacum, Amber, with
many others, which either may be mixed with Conserve of red Roses, or with the
Conserve of the flowers of Coltsfoot, or with Sugar Candy.

4, 5. Tinctures and Balsams of the same nature and composition, but in a
larger Dose are convenient in a Phthisis, which we have above prescribed for a
beginning Cough.

Take of Tar an ounce, Limewater thrice cohobated two pints, distill it in a
Bath to half; Tinctures.
afterward being filtrated, let it be drawn off to the consistence of Honey in
Balneo; to which pour half a pound of tincture of salt of Tartar, let it digest
in a close glass to extract the tincture: the dose from 20 drops to 30 in a fit
vehicle. After the same manner is prepared the tincture of the black oil of
Soot, liquid Amber, liquid Storax, and many others.

Take of our prepared Sulphur an ounce, adding Mirrh, Aloes, and Olibanum in
treble quantity, draw off a tincture with oil of Turpentine, also with
rectified spirit of Wine: dose from 15 drops to 20.

6, 7, 8. Troches, Lozenges, and Powders, because they chiefly respect a Cough,
are almost of the same nature and composition with those before-described for a
new Cough; unless that for the drying and healing of the Lungs things
sulphurous and Vulneraries are required in a greater proportion.

Take powder of the leaves of Ground Ivy a dram, flour of Brimstone two drams,
Troches.
of Sugar penids a dram and half, with juice of Liquorish dissolved in
Hysop-water make troches of the weight of half a dram.

Take of Yarrow bruised and dried in the Sun half a dram, flour of Brimstone,
Olibanum, Powder.
of each a dram; powder of dried red Roses half a dram, Sugar dissolved and
boiled to a height six drams, oil of Aniseeds a scruple and half, make Lozenges
of half a dram weight: take one three times or oftener in a day, and especially
evening and morning.

9. Pills.
Take a pint of the juice of Ground Ivy clarified in the Sun, flowers of
Colts-soot dried, Pills.
the tops of Hysop, Sage, Pennyroyal, each a handful; Aniseed, Caraway-seeds,
sweet Fennel-seeds bruised, each half an ounce; distill them in Balneo Mariae to
half; strain it and distill it to the consistence of Pills, by adding half a
dram of juice of Liquorish, powder of Elicampane, flour of Brimstone, each
three drams; flowers of Benzoin a dram, Balsam of Peru half a dram, tincture of
Sulphur three drams, tartarizated Laudanum two drams: make it into a mass, and
form it into small Pills to be taken three or four evening, and first in the
morning.

10. Decoctions, as I have above prescribed for a stubborn Cough, Decoctions.
are used with success against a beginning Phthisis. In a case almost desperate
I have prescribed the following Decoction to be taken twice a day, and also
instead of ordinary drink with very good success.

Take Lignum vitae four ounces, China, Sassaphras, each two ounces; of all the
Sanders each an ounce, shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn, each three drams: infuse
them, and boil them in twelve pints of Spring Water to half, adding Liquorish
an ounce, Raisins stoned four ounces: strain it.

11. Distilled Waters, such as we have before prescribed, are specific here,
Distilled Waters.
whereto may be added Solenander-water of Hogs blood and Turpentine; also
Balsamic Waters distilled from Turpentine with Pectoral Ingredients.

Take leaves of Ground Ivy, white Horehound, Hysop, Pennyroyal, each three
handfuls; root of Elicampane, Orris of Florence, each two ounces; Turpentine
dissolved in Oil of Tartar four ounces, Hysop-water four pints, Malaga-wine two
pints; distill them in a sand Bath: let all the liquor be mixed, the Oil
separated: the dose two or three spoonfuls twice a day, with a spoonful of
Syrup of Ground Ivy.

12. In the last place we must describe the forms of Vapors and Fumes; Fumes
and Vapors.
the administration whereof does use to profit more than any other remedies in
a Phthisis not yet desperate, for that they arrive at the very Lungs, and so
purge them by an immediate affect, dry them, and keep them from putrefaction,
strengthen and open all their passages. 1. Therefore a moist steam may be made
after this following manner.

Take leaves of Hysop, Ground Ivy, white Horehound, each two handfuls; Formules
of the former.
Elicampane two ounces, Calamus aromaticus half an ounce, Aniseeds and
Caraway-seeds, each an ounce: boil them in a sufficient quantity of
Spring Water: let the vapor of the hot strained liquor be drawn by the lungs
through a paper rolled up like a cone or funnel: and used morning and evening
for a quarter of an hour.

2. A fumigation or dry vapor, is made one while more mild out of mere
Balsamics, another while more strong out of Sulphurs, and sometimes out of
Arsenicals.

Take of Olibanum, Forms of the more gentle Fume.
white Amber, Benzoin, of each two drams, Gum Guaici, Balsam of Tolu of each
one dram and half, powder of red Roses, and red Sanders, of each one dram to be
strewed upon burning coals.

Take Gum of Ivy, Of the more strong.
Frankincense, of each two drams, Flower of Brimstone one dram and half,
Mastich one dram, with a dissolution of gum Tragacanth, form Troches.

Take of white Amber, Arsenicals.
Olibanum, of each two drams, prepared Orpiment half an Ounce, Styrax,
Labdanum, of each one dram and half, with solution of Gum tragacanth, make
Troches for fumigation.

Mountebanks do ordinarily prescribe the smoke of Arsnick to be sucked into the
mouth, Smoke of Auripigment.
like Tobacco kindled in a Pipe, and sometimes with good success: Moreover, it
is in practice with the Vulgar, to burn like Tobacco in a Pipe little bits of
cloth stained with Arsenick (such as wherewith the walls of Taverns are hung)
and so suck the smoke into the consumptive Lungs for cure.

3. Of a confirmed Consumption.
These things being thus unfolded concerning a Cough, and a Phthisis beginning,
both as to what belongs to the Pathologie, and cure; it remains now lastly to
discourse of a more painful Phthisis confirmed, and almost desperate; and to
consult what is to be performed, when the lungs being very much vitiated, and
affected with one or more filthy ulcers, neither the air nor the blood do
rightly pass through them, but choke or corrupt the mass thereof, by
continually suggesting filthy corruption; insomuch that a hectic fever and an
Atrophie, by reason of nourishment being frustrated, infest the diseased, with
the loss of all their faculties, and by daily weakening their strength
precipitate them to the grave. The most certain sign of this disease growing
desperate, uses to be accounted a pain very troublesome with an inflammation of
the throat; for this symptom argues a great putrefaction of the lungs, from
whence the putrid effluvia's exhaling are thrown about in the narrow passage of
the throat, The formal reason thereof.
which wound and grievously irritate those tender fibers there. In this case
the cleansing of the lungs, as also the drying up of the Ulcer are in vain
designed: for all hotter Medicines ordained for those purposes, and fit enough
in the beginning of a Phthisis, are not to be endured in a confirmed one;
inasmuch as augmenting the inflammation of the lungs, they procure a hectic
fever, thirst, wathings, and other more painful symptoms, or call them back
afresh. For truly in such a state of this disease where only the prolongation
of life is proposed with a light toleration and an easy death; those remedies
help chiefly, which bridle the fervor of the blood, allay the heat in the
Praecordia, and restore the sprits, and gently cherish them. Hence for food,
Asses Milk, also Water Gruel, Barly-broths, Cream of Barley, and for drink,
Ptisan, Emulsions, water of milk distilled with Snails and temperate pectoral
herbs, are usually of greatest success. Forms of remedies in a desperate
Consumption.
Syrups and Linctus's, which appease the inflammation of the throat and Lungs,
and facilitate expectoration, but chiefly the more mild Hypnoticks, whereby
moderate rest may be procured, may be frequently or daily taken. The forms of
these are common enough; but however according to our method, we will annex
some of the more select of each kind.

Take of Barley half an ounce, Decoctions.
candied Eringo roots 6 drams, parings of Apples one handful, Raisins stoned
two ounces, Liquorish three drams, boil them in three pints of spring water to
two, make a Ptisan to restrain thirst: take it 3 or 4 times a day, also in the
room of ordinary drink if it agree.

Take the tayls of twenty Crevises, candied Eringo roots one ounce, a crust of
white-bread, Raisins stoned two ounces, Liquorish 3 drams, boil them in 3 pints
of Spring Water to two, strain it, and take 3 or 4 ounces three times a day.
After the same manner is prepared the Decoction of Snails.

Take of Snails half-boyled and cut three pound, Distilled waters.
Ground Ivy 6 handfulls, Nutmegs sliced numb. 6. crum of white-bread two pound,
fresh milk 8 pounds, distill it in a Pewter Still. The same way is distilled
the water of Crevise-tayls. The dose 3 or 4 ounces three times a day,
Hypnoticks.
sweetened with pearl'd Sugar or Sugar of Roses.

Take ears of greeen Wheat as many as convenient, distill them in a common
still; drink three or four ounces three times a day, sweetened with pearl'd
Sugar.

Take syrup de Meconio three ounces, water of green Wheat 6 ounces, mix them,
Hypnoticks.
drink two or three spoonfulls at bedtime, every or every other night.

Take Conserve of Mallow-flowers wild or garden three ounces, Lohoch de pino
two ounces, Eclegma's.
Syrup of Jujubes two ounces, make a Lohoch, of which take often a dram and
half or two drams.

What hitherto we have discoursed of concerning a Cough of every kind (whether
it be solitary and simple, or the forerunner and companion of a Phthisis) also
what is to be prescribed in every case touching the method of healing, it would
be easily illustrated by the history of Cures, or by the Anatomical
observations on those that have dyed by that disease. For instances of this
sort, and very many examples are every where had, and happen daily; it pleases
us here to annex a few of the more select, out of the large choice of these,
accommodated to the chief kinds of a Cough, and Phthisis. And first I will
endeavor to illustrate the type of a simple Cough by one history or two, and
which takes its rise of it self, and is altogether void of the suspicion of a
Phthisis.

It is now many years since I took care of the health of a certain Student, The
History of a Cough threatening a Consumption.
obnoxious to a Cough from his tender years, and who was wont frequently to
undergo the more painful affections of it, and those of long continuance. This
person seemed of a melancholic temper, of a sharp wit, of an indefatigable
spirit, of a constitution indifferently strong, but that his Lungs originally
being infirm, did suffer when the blood dissolved into serosities. In Summer as
long as he transpired freely, he lived healthily enough; but in the Spring and
Autumn, when the blood changing its temperament, those serous fluxes came upon
him either of their own accord, or from any slight occasion, he fell easily
into a Cough with abundant and thick spittle; notwithstanding this distemper
frequently within six or seven days, as soon as the mass of blood was purged
thoroughly by the Lungs, vanished leisurely without any great use of remedies.
But if to the aforesaid occasions of this disease were added some stronger
causes, as chiefly the obstruction of the pores, and errors touching his diet,
sometimes a more prodigious and stubborn cough, neither presently nor easily
yielding to remedies, and threatening nothing less than a Phthisis, did come
upon him, then manifestly the patient for the first days suffered light
shiverings in his whole body, and the sense of a Catarrh in his Larynx;
afterward by frequent coughing with thin spittle, together with a giddiness,
he was afflicted with numness of his senses, and a dropping at his nostrils.

In this state his best remedy was wont to be, and frequently tried with
success, to drink a little more freely generous Wine, and any other liquor very
sparingly: for so the acidity and fluor of the blood being suppressed, and
transpiration procured more freely, he was much eased, and sometimes recovered
health in a short time. Moreover at night and early in the morning he was used
to take seven or eight drops of the tincture of Sulphur in a spoonful of Syrup
of Violets, or of the Juice of Ground Ivy, or

Take Conserve of red Roses three ounces, spirit of Turpentine two drams
mingled, the dose the quantity of a chestnut evening and morning.

If that these remedies together with the Canary Antidote and thin diet
effected little, the disease not being so cured, spinning out into a long
period, and pressing him sharply for many weeks, yea sometimes months, it
reduced the sick to a remarkable leanness, and to the very brink of the Grave.
For then the Cough daily increasing and being very troublesome, did very much
impede and break his sleep, his strength languished, his appetite was dejected,
heat and thirst molested him; in the mean time spittle every day increased, and
was cast forth in great plenty; so that not only the Serum of the blood, and
the recrements, but also the nutritive Juice, and the drainings of the solid
parts being continually poured out upon the lungs, turned into corruption,
which was abundantly cough'd out; moreover his breath was difficult, his joints
very infirm, and his flesh very much consumed.

When of late our patient labored after this manner, we prescribed the
following method, and remedies, by the continued use whereof at length he
recovered his health. First of all, a thinner diet being appointed him, and for
the most part Ale being forbidden altogether, he took twice in the day of the
following Apozeme about six ounces warm, and a little at other times cold to
restrain his thirst.

Take of the roots of China two ounces, Sarsaparilla three ounces, white and
yellow Sanders of each one ounce, Ivory and Hartshorn of each three drams;
infuse and boil them in 8 pints of water to half, adding Raisins of the Sun 3
ounces, Liquorish 3 drams, strein it, and keep it for ordinary drink.

Take tincture of Sulphur three drams, take from seven drops to ten, at night
and in the morning, in a spoonful of syrup of Violets, or of syrup of the
juice of Ground Ivy.

When he began by continual use to nauseate this Medicine, in its place the
following Eclegma was appointed.

Take conserve of red Roses three ounces, spirit of Turpentine two drams, mix
them; the dose is one dram, at the same hours.

Afterward instead hereof the following Powder was sometimes taken.

Take of the powder of the leaves of Ground Ivy dried in the Summer Sun three
ounces, Sugar Candy half an ounce, mix them, the dose half a spoonful twice in
a day, with three ounces of the following water.

Take Ground Ivy 6 handfulls, Hyssop, white Hore-hound, of each 4 handfulls,
Lambslungs half-boyl'd and cut small, pour upon them eight pound of
Posset Drink made with small ale, distill it in common Organs, the liquor being
mixed, let it be sweetened to the taste as it is used with Sugar Candy or syrup
of Violets.

To appease his almost continually troublesome Cough, Troches.
he swallowed the following Troches, and sometimes a little of the extract of
Liquorish.

Take of the species of Diatragacanth. frig. 3 drams, Annise, Carue, sweet
Fennelseeds, of each half a dram, flower of Brimstone two scruples, flowers of
Benzoin one scruple, extract of Liquorish dissolved in Hyssop-water; make a
paste which form into Troches. Or,

Take of Species Diaireos, e pulm. Vulpis, of each two drams, flower of
Sulphur, of Elecampane, of each half a dram, Oil of Anniseeds ss. Sugar
dissolved in a sufficient quantity of Penniroyal-water and boiled to a body vj.
form Lozenges of half a dram weight, let him eat one, swallowing it by degrees,
as often as he will.

In the midst of this course, although he was endowed with a weak pulse and
more cold temperature, we breathed a vein in his arm: moreover, with these
remedies, the chiefest help accrued to him from the open air, which for the
most part he daily enjoyed, either by riding on Horseback, or in a Coach; for
from hence he first began to recover his appetite, his digestion, and sleep;
whereto afterward a relaxation of the other symptoms did sensibly follow, till
at length he recovered his entire health. As often as he was afflicted since
then with a stubborn and tedious Cough, he used a method like this, and with
the like success; and now although he lives altogether exempt from that
distemper, notwithstanding he is constrained to decline carefully all occasions
or causes whereby either the pores might be shut, or the flux of blood or its
precipitation into serosities might be provoked; which were chiefly his going
by water on the Thames at London, and drinking of acid liquors, as Cider,
French or Rhenish wine.

From the above-mentined history, you may easily conceive both the means and
the reason of healing of the Cough, (which caused by the fault of the blood, is
without the limits of a Phthisis): The other follows, which illustrates the
nature of the same distemper, when it chiefly proceeds from the nervous juice.

A Boy about ten years of age, The second remarkable History.
of a hot temper and fresh countenance, from his infancy obnoxious to a
frequent Cough, in his succeeding years sustained more grievous and lasting
fits and assaults of this distemper, and by turns was used to labor with a
strong and shrill Cough, A hooping Cough.
without spitting, which almost continually afflicted him day and night, and so
infesting him many days, yea weeks, brought the sick to utter weakness.
Afterward the period of his disease being come (which happened not but by
consuming the store of th morbific matter) he again in a short time became
healthy enough, and very free from any sickness of the Thorax: till the
morbific matter (as it seems) being heaped again to great abundance, without
any evident cause, the same distemper returned and performed its Tragedy with
its wonted fierceness. About its first beginning the Cough was troublesome only
morning and evening: after wards the evilby little and little increasing, he
almost continually coughed whole days and nights, and if at any time sleep
happening of it self, or by the use of Anodynes, afforded any truce, a more
outrageous fit of couhing succeeded his wakening. After this manner most
frequently and fiercely coughing without any spittle, he labored for three or
four weeks, till he was brought to an extreme leanness and weakness; and then
the sickness leisurely remitted, so that he coughed somewhat seldomer, and
enjoyed moderate sleeps; afterward in few days growing very hungry, being
quickly made full of flesh and vigorous, he recovered his former health in a
short time. Fits of this kind more seldom infested him in Summer-season, but in
the restof the year, repeated three or four turns, and brought the sick even
into great hazard of life.

If disquisition be made of the nature, causes, and formal reason of this
unwonted and as it were irregular kind of Coung, it is manifest it proceeds
like all other, from the provocation of the Lungs; nevertheless as to the
matter exciting, its seat, and manner of affecting it is doubted: because
neither thick spittle, nor plentiful thin (as is usual in other distempers) is
here cast out; neither does the Patient complain of feeling a Catarrh, nor of
any weight of the Lungs. Wherefore, not as in a common Cough, does the serous
humor either slowly or plentifully sweating out of the Trachea or pneumonic
vessels into the little bladders or pipes of the Trachea, induce the before
mentioned symptoms: But it is plain from thence that the passages of the aspera
Arteria are wholly empty of the serous or thick humor, because the deep and
sounding Cough throws off nothing. Moreover, neither from the blood impacted in
the Membranes of the Lungs, does this Cough take its origin, because neither
fever, nor thirst, nor pain are present here as in a Peripneumonie. Besides,
neither does the morbific matter seem to adhere to the nerves or muscles
appointed to the function of breathing; because then besides a Cough,
Asthmatical or otherwise convulsive fits would sometimes urge with a sense of
strangling; which notwithstanding did not happen to our patient.

Having frequently and seriously meditated about the aetiologies of this very
difficult case, I am at length induced to think, that a certain serous and
sharp matter, as being loaded with a scorbutical taint, falling from the head
by the passage of the nerves, does enter into the nervous fibers and Membranes
of the lungs or Trachea; which cleaving thoroughly to them, is by degrees
increased to a fullness, The conjuct cause of the disease.
and at length being chafed, and grown turgid with a perpetual provocation,
creates so troublesome a Cough. We have in another place declared the matter of
this kind impacted in the Coats of the guts, and the neighboring parts about
them, not rarely to excite a scorbutical Colic, for many days, yea sometimes
weeks, infesting them with vo miting and a most sharp torment; and what else is
this Coungh, but a certain convulsive distemper of the lungs, whose taint
notwithstanding, according to the capacity of the part laboring, is impressed
rather and more on the motive, than on the sensitive Power. For the lungs
however twicht adn hurt, do suffer small pain, or scarce any at all;
notwithstanding from any light occasion, they are invaded by storms and fits of
coughing. Indeed we compare this distemper of coughing so much the rather to
the Colic, because the subjects of either of them, that is to say, the
Trachea, and the guts, as to their coats, vessels, little fibers and glandules,
are after the same manner fashioned.

The chief cause of the Cough now deseribed, depends upon the morbific matter
heaped together within the little fibers of the rough arteries, to a provoking
fullness; wherewith when they are loaded, first a quick and painful breathing
infests only, with amornings Cough; because from the beginning only some
small portion of that matter being disquieted provoke the part: afterward when
the whole mass thereof growing turgid, almost perpetually twitches the fibers,
there follows a most troublesome cough; which also being often repeated, endures
a long season; because the morbifick mass impacted in the parts affected, is
neither presently cast off by the strength of nature, nor easily gives place to
any remedies.

For in all the fits of this disease, I have made trial of various methods of
curing, and of medicines of diverse kinds, though with little success. That
distemper beginning at any time, is wont to make a long period, maugre all
remedies. The medicines commonly called pectoral, as Syrups, Lohochs,
Eclegma's, or Lambitives, have conferred little benefit to its cure; not
withstanding sometimes it has seemed good to admit of them into use for this
purpose, that they might make slippery and moisten the Lungs, lest they run the
hazard of being rent by a violent Cough, and their vessels burst asunder: for
sometimes a more fierce fit troubling our sick Patient, he has been wont to
cough out a little blood, though no thick spittle.

A gentle Purge both in the beginning and declination of this distemper has
succeeded well. Opening and diuretical Apozemes are ever administered with
success, both which he used enough through his whole course instead of ordinary
drink. Evening and morning he took some drops of the Tincture of Sulphut with
the Milk-water of Snails; late at night I was sometimes constrained to
administer a Dose of Diacodion or of liquid Laudanum: his belly for the most
part loose enough, that it seldom required Clysters: in two of his fits he
breathed a vein, whereby nothing of success ensued.

In the last fit, The usual method of curing.
beinning about the Autumnal Equinoctial, which passed away a little more
lightly and gently, this following method of healing was observed.

First of all this Purge was given, A Purge.
and after four days repeated. Take of Mercurius dulcis ten grains, Resine of
Jallop four grains, mix and make a powder to be taken in a spoonful of Syrup of
Violets.

Take China-roots sliced a dram, A Drink.
Grass-roots three ounces, Chervil an ounce, candid Eringoes six drams,
shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn, each three drams; Raisins of the Sun stoned
three ounces: boil these in three pints of Spring Water to two pints, strain
it, and use it for ofdinary drink.

Take syrup of Jujubes two ounces, A Mixture.
Diacodion an ounce, spirit of Salt Ammoniac with Gum Ammoniac a dram, mix
them: the dose a spoonful at night and early in the morning. He was mauch
relieved with this medicine, notwithstanding he took it only every other or
third day, and for change sometimes a dose of the tincture of Sulphur with
syrup of Violets.

The disease declining a Purge was twice repeated, and afterward, recovering
his health by degrees, within two weeks he became healthy enough. But when I
beheld him not only obnoxious to frequent relapses of coughing, but every fit
to be irresistible when it assaulted him, and its stay very long
notwithstanding the use of remedies, and all this threatening no less than a
Phthisis at length; I advised that as well for his preservation, as for the
more easy cure of the distemper, if it should return, he should travel into a
hotter Region. Hereupon he did not much delay, but sails into France about the
beginning of November, and from thence by a straight journey to Montpelier,
where abiding half a year he was sick only twice and both tiems lightly:
afterward returning into England quite free from a Cough, praise be to God he
enjoys his perfect health.

SECT. I. CHAP. VII. Of Spitting Blood.
HItherto of a Cough and Phthisis, as well in its beginning as confirmation;
which are the most common affects of the Lungs, and most especially dangerous.
Besides which there are many other diseases of those parts that do occur, which
when they are not at all, or not seasonably enough cured, for the most part
degenerate into a Phthisis. These passions, or at least the chief of them, (as
we have before hinted) are spitting of blood, an Imposthume, or Ulcer of the
Lungs, a Peripneumony, Empyema, a Pleurisy, a Tumor of the Lungs, and
obstructions by reason of things diverse ways concreted, viz. sometimes little
Pustles and Scirrhus's, another while gravel and little stones, and sometimes
other preternatural matter; and lastly hitherto belong an Asthma and convulsive
distempers of the Breast. Of these we shall treat in order, and first of
Spitting blood.

The spitting of blood out of the Lungs and the ejection thereof by Cough
sometimes less and almost none, Spitting blood a distemper very frequent.
another while more violent, is a distemper frequent enough, and truly an
admiration it is, that it happens not more frequently. For whereas the vessels
bringing blood are divided into twigs and innumerable slips, and those very
small; and whereas the blood even siercely boiling, is violently conveyed
through them all, complicated after diverse manners and variously intorted; we
can hardly conceive how the circulation thereof being so perplexed and
intricate, and also so impetuous, should be performed without some impediment
and interruption. And truly we conclude it to be very difficult in living
bodies, because it hardly succeeds by injection in the dead: for as much as
liquor sent therough the entrance of the pneumonic Artery, will not readily and
easily return by the Veins; but sticking longer in the passage, and skipping
over the usual passages, variously runs out into the little bladders and other
canals of the Trachea, and into the interspaces and other various gaps of the
little Lobes.

Concerning an Haemoptosis or spitting blood we are to consider, Three things
to be considered concerning it.
first out of what vessels, and by what distemper the blood bursts out;
secondly in what places most frequently laid up; thirdly by what means it is
wont either to be ejected or brought upward, that it may be discharged by the
mouth.

As to the first, we are to suppose by the Law of Circulation, that the blood
of it self bursting out, does altogether proceed from the Arteries: for the
Veins, as long as they remain whole, do reduce it toward the Heart, and not at
all pour it out; although we deny not that sometimes they being hurt by a
wound, fall, bruise, or some violent accident, so as to be loosned from their
unity, do let go the blood out of their cavities. Out of what vessels the blood
bursts out.
Nevertheless the blood most commonly causing an Haemoptoe or blood-spitting,
proceeds from the little mouths of the Arteries being open or torn; and then
the fault is wont to be either in the ill temperament of the blood, or ill
framing of the vessels.

Of either of these there are variousw kinds and differences, By what sault
both of the vessels and of the blood it happens.
which also concur after a diverse manner to provoke the spitting of blood. For
the blood being sometimes more thin and also sharp, it unlocks or corrodes the
mouths of the little Arteries; and sometimes again being more thick and prone
to coagulate, when it cannot readily enough be received by the Veins, it is
extravasated. By reason of these faults in the blood, they who labor with the
Scurvy or with a pestilent Fever, as also those who have drunk some sort of
poison, do srequently fall into a spitting of blood. Neither is this distemper
less wont to arise from the fault of the vessels, in as much as those being too
tender or too thin, many times are burst by a violent motion, as by coughing,
hollowing, leaping, or other vehement exercises; or for that being too loose
and moist, their mouths open, and suffer the blood to break out of its
circulation: moreover sometimes for that the Veins being contracted and
wrinkled by cold, do not readily pass away the blood, but the same restagnating
distends the little Arteries, and bursts out of their mouths.

As to the Arteries, out of which the blood breadks, causing a spitting of
blood, What Arteries chiefly and where placed do void blood.
it concerns much of what sort they are, and where they are placed; for besides
that there arise notable differences of bloody spittle, according as the blood
breaks out from a smaller or a greater vessel; and if either of them be placed
in the top of the Lungs near the Larynx, or in the middle region thereof among
the greater branches of the vessels, or lastly in the lower region among the
orbicular little bladders: moreover we observe, that the Arteries which use to
void blood, are either of the number of them, Both the pneumonic and tracheal
are in fault.
which arising out of the pulmonary Trunk, do every where accompany the
branches of the Trachea; or of those which owning their origin to the Aorts,
do cover the coat of the Trachea with a thick branching.

For it is apparent (as we have declared before) from the mouths of these, as
also of the Glandules, and unctuous humor sweats out to make the inner
superficies of the Trachea slippery; Spitting blood from the tracheal Arteries.
moreover in as much as a serous houmor distills abundantly ont of the same into
the cavity of the rough Artery, a Catarrh arises. Wherefore we doubt not at all
to affirm, that even fro the mouths of these being open, mere blood sometimes
soaking into the Tracheal passages, does propagate a bloody spittle, though in
quantity very small. I have observed many, who without a Cough or any
indisposition of the Lungs, have once or twice a day voided one or two bloody
spittles: which as often as it came upon them, the Patients perceived, either
in the bottom of the throat, or on the top of the breast a kind of
distillation; whence immediately by the mere contraction of the Tracheal
Fibers, with a Snail-like motion, a little of the fluid blood being mixed
thoroughly with phlegm, and not at all frothy, is voided: and when sometimes that
distemper had lasted for many months, no prejudice ensued from thence, which
might bring or threaten a Phthisis: which would not have come to pass, if any
of the pneumonic Vessels had been opened.

2. So much concerning Vessels voiding blood, and of their diverse affections.
2. In what places the blood is deposited.
What belongs to the places wherein the extravasated blood is deposited, these
chiefly and almost only arew the rough Artery, and the inward cavity of the
parts thereof. For into this, as into a Jakes, all the filth or superfluities
of all the rest of the passages are derived by the utmost endeavors of Nature,
as far as is possible, to be presently sent out of doors. But if the
extravasated blood be thrown into the interspaces of the little Lobes, or
soaking out of the outer Membrane, fall into the cavity of the Thorax, it does
propagate an Empyema, and frequently an Imposthume in that place. But for the
most part the blood subject to fall from the pulmonary course, produces various
kinds of bloody spittle; Either in the Larynx, or in the middle of the
Bronchii, or in the orbicular little bladders.
according as it makes its nest, either upwards within the cavity of the
Larynx, or a little beneath about the intermedial passages of the Trachea, or
lastly further within the orbicular little bladders. The first distemper
proceeds alone from the mouths of some Artery being opened, which covers the
trunk of the Trachea; the next sometimes perhaps from this cause, yet more
often from the pneumonic Arteries themselves being open or burst asunder, which
vessels as they are greater, pour out often a dreadful quantity of blood; the
spitting out whereof proves plentiful and violent, in regard that the muscles
of the whole breast, together with the fibers of the Trachea are much provoked
and greatly contracted. But if the spring of bloody spittle consists in the
lowermost little bladders, the blood is thrown out more sparingly, but with a
profound, frequent, and very troublesome Cough.

3. And from hence (which was in the third place purposed) the differences of
bloody excretion out of the Lungs, and the manifold modes and courses of bloody
spittle are made known. For the blood soaking into the Larynx, after a small
tickling in the throat without coughing or hawking, does easily and almost
insensibly ascend into the mouth: and if an extravasation of this kind of blood
happens in sleep, it presently flows out of the mouth upon wakening, they being
scarce sensible of it; in as much as the moving fibers of the Trachea being
contracted while one sleeps, have then emptied the blood fresh distilled into
the mouth. But if from a greater vessel gaping or burst about the middle of the
Lungs, the blood (which is ever frothy) does break out abundantly into the
Tracheal passages, this by an outrageous Cough raised thereby is forthwith cast
upwards with violence and in great plenty; insomuch that the sick seem rather
to vomit than cough out blood. And finally, if the blood breaking out of the
foldings of the vessels wherewith the orbicular little bladders are
encompassed, falls down into those little cells, from thence it is discharged
by turns in lesser quantity, and not unless by a strong and very frequent Cough.

So much concerning the formal reason, The procatarctic and evident causes
thereof.
the conjunct causes and differences of an Haemoptoe: as to what belongs to the
primary and evident causes, either of them are manifold and various. In the
former number are reckoned, first an hereditary indisposition of the Lungs,
whenas they have originally been weak and soft with a straitness of the breast.
Moreover their ill temper from a Cough, Empyema, or Pleurisy going before, and
especially an obstruction or ill conformation do very much dispose to spitting
blood, and so much the rather, if in such a habit an acrimony or Dyscrasie of
the blood shall accrue from an ill course of Diet, unwholesom Air, or by any
other means. The suppression of the Menstrua, the Haemorrhoids, or blood
flowing from the Nostrils incline most to a spitting blood. Secondly, among the
evident causes ought to be reckoned primarily the excess either of heat or
cold; for when the blood grows above measure hot, or the transpiration thereof
through the Pores of the skin is hindered; thereupon swelling after a huge
manner, it frequently bursts out of the pneumonic Vessels. From hence
Hippocrates long ago observed, and as yet it is a vulgar observation, That
spitting blood most frequently happens in the winter when the North Wind blows.
Neither less seldom has the use of bathing brought this evil upon many, before
the use whereof they were healthful enough. Moreover many contract this from
drinking of wine and strong waters, from a blow, a fall, hollowing, vomiting,
coughing, or any other violent stirring of the whole body or of the Lungs. Also
certain poisons, and according to Hournius the Lunar beams (the reason whereof
does not easily appear, neither does there remain any credit thereto) are
reported to provoke this distemper.

The Prognostics of this disease are enough known to the vulgar, The
Prognistics of this disease.
whereas there is not any one of them, who does not suspect the spitting of
blood as very dangerous. Nevertheless whereas the kinds hereof are various, one
is found more or less dangerous than another. The blood soaking out of the
vessels of the Trachea is often free from any evil: moreover when breaking out
from the lowest and lesser pulmonar Vessels, it often admits of Cure; at least
it is much safer than a plentiful spitting of blood happening from the great
branches of the Artery being opened into the Trachea. But the predisposition of
the Patient makes a great difference in the Prognostics of this disease: for
if blood-spitting be provoked by reason of a solitary evident cause, and shall
happen to a body formerly sound and well set, there appears far greater hope of
help, than if the distemper arising of its own accord shall happen to a
cachectical, phthisical, scorbutic, or otherwise sickly body. However it is a
common observation, that this disease is dangerous and always difficult to
cure: the reason whereof is also clearly manifest, for as much as the function
of the Lungs consisting in a perpetual motion, is altogether contrary to the
method of healing a wound, whereto primarily ease and rest are required. In
like manner this happens to be a greater hindrance to its Cure, in as much as
the frame of the Lungs is not a Parenchyma (as was thought) but a texture or
very subtle web of innumerable vessels; the unity whereof if once dissolved,
it will be altogether impossible for the ends of the disjoined vessels to meet
again together, or the space to be filled up with flesh or callous, as in other
parts. But there is this only to be hoped, that while the ends of the vessels
grow together incongruously and always imperforated, the circulation of the
blood ceasing in the part distempered, may be supplied by another neighboring
part: which indeed rarely succeeds without hurt or prejudice of the whole Lungs.

As to what appertains to the Method of healing the Haemoptoe or spitting
blood, The Cure thereof.
the curative indications shall be chiefly these two, viz. to stay presently
and restrain the flux of blood; then secondly, to heal the dissolution of unity
without any relicts of a Consumption in the Lungs.

I. As to the former, these two things are chiefly to be procured, 1.
Indication.
viz. first that blood flow not to the part distempered; and secondly, that in
the mean time the opening of the vessel may be some-how shut.

1. That the blood may not flow to the part distempered, 1. It stops the flux
of blood.
there are many intentions of healing in use, viz. it will be requisite to
diminish the abundance of blood, to restrain the boiling thereof, to alter the
intemperament, and depress its motion or divert it another way: for which
purposes Phlebotomy, Ligatures, and Frictions are often convenient: also
Juleps, Decoctions, Emulsious, and succulent Expressions of Herbs ought to be
drunk. Likewise moderate Hypnotics, and in the first place Diacodiates are
exhibited with success: for these, by restraining the motion of the Heart, do
force the blood to cool.

2. That the opening of the vessel may be shut, 2. It shuts the opening of the
Vessels.
astringent and agglutinating remedies are in the first place convenient. The
chief of these are used to be exhibited in the form of a Linctus, so that while
one swallows, certain particles gliding into the rough Artery, may more
immediately communicate their power to the part diseased. But the reason of
this operation seems not to be of any great moment; because the efficacy of the
Medicines themselves, chiefly and almost only by the conduct of blood reaches
to the seat of the disease. Wherefore not only Lohochs, but also Decoctions,
Powders, and Pills of vulnerary and balsamic Ingredients are prescribed with
success. The forms hereof we shall annex beneath.

II. The second indication, which is also preservatory, II. The second
preservatory indication.
respecting the healing of the dissolution of unity without any remaining hurt
of the Lungs, ought to provide against two sorts of evils, viz. lest the
spitting blood (whereunto the distempered are afterward always prone) begin
again; and lest a Phthisis succeed, which threatens every body subject to the
Haemoptosis. For these ends for the prevention of this disease daily care and
constant course of healing ought to be ministered to the blood and Lungs.

1. As to the blood, the mass thereof ought to be contained ever in a due
quantity, 1. It respects the blood which is to be kept in a right Crasia.
and a right temperament, with a mild and equal motion. Hence lest it
superabound, or distempered with a Dycrasie enter into turgescencies, or lodge
its impure feculencies in the breast: it is requisite sometimes to use
Phlebotomy and a gentle Purgation. An exact course of Diet is always necessary.
Moreover for the depurating and sweetning the blood, drinking of Asses milk, or
of Medicinal waters sometimes does greatly help. But Decoctions, distilled
Waters, Juices of Herbs, which carry away the ill temperaments of blood, and
derive the Serum and other impurities from the Lungs, and bring them forth
either by Sweat or Urine, are to be carefully drunk. Besides for this purpose
Issues do chiefly conduce.

2. Neither ought there to be less care of the Lungs themselves, 2. A (...)
frame of the Lungs to be procured.
namely that the whole frame thereof, and chiefly the place affected, be
preserved in due frame and right tone. Hence every violent motion, whereby its
unity is more dissolved, or the restitution thereof hindered, should be
industriously declined. Let the party live in a clear and open air, but not too
fierce, or sharp; let him abstain from grosser foods, from Noon-sleeps, from
plentiful Suppers, and other errors in diet, which induce either repletion or
obstruction upon the Praecordia. But let remedies be admitted in daily use,
which by a peculiar property, or certain specific virtue are reported to heal
the Lungs.

The method of healing requisite for spitting of blood, being shadowed after
this manner, there yet remains as to all the therapeutic indications, and
according to the various intentions of healing which belong to them, for us to
subjoyn some more choice forms of Remedies, whose Van those deservedly lead
which meeting with the symptom most urging, do suddenly restrain the flux of
blood cast out by coughing or otherwise out of the Lungs. In the first rank of
these Medicines those are reckoned which hinder the blood from flowing to the
part affected, and together are impregnate with a certain astrictive and
agglutinative power whereby the opening of the vessel may be shut; The forms of
Medicines.
and after the Belly being cleared with a Clyster, and Phlebotomie (unless a
weak pulse and defect of heat withstand it) made use of, there is wont to be
given somewhat in form of a Julep, Decoction, Emulsion, juicy Expression,
Powder, Pills or Lohochs. We will annex certain more elegant and more
efficacious Receipts of all of these, as likewise of Narcoticks, which
notwithstanding ought not every where and indifferently to be used, but
methodically and seasonably, according to advice of a discreet Physician,
according to the various constitution of the patient and condition of the
disease.

1. Juleps and Distilled Waters.
Take of Purslain and Poppy-water of each 6 ounces, Juleps.
Dragons-blood in most fine powder half a dram, syrup of red Poppies two
ounces, spirit of Vitriol of Mars ss. mix them; the dose iij. repeated once in
5 or 6 hours.

Take of Plantane-water lb j. Gum Tragacanth and Arabic powdered, of each ss.
mingle and dissolve them; after adding syrup of dried Roses j ss. make a Julep;
the Dose iij. or iiij. every third or fourth hour.

Take of the water of Oak-buds, red Roses, Water Lillies, of each iiij. of
Boodstone finely ground, Bole-Armenick powdered, of each ss. syrup of
Water Lillies ij. mix them; the dose iij. or iiij. three or four times a day.

Take of the Dew or almost insipid Phlegm of Vitriol lb j. Sir. of Myrtles ij.
mix them, Distilled Waters.
the dose ij. or iij. often in the day or in the night.

Take of Cypress-tops M. viij. of the leaves or flowers of Willow M. vj. the
greater Comfry-roots, Water Lillies, of each lbss. Pomegranate flowers M. ij.
All being cut small together, pour on them lb viij. of new Milk; let it be
distilled in common Organs, the dose iij. or iiij, often in a day.

Take of this distilled Water, and of Plantane-water, of each lbss. Gumm
Tragacanth and Arabic of each ij. dissolve them; the dose is iij. every third
hour.

The following Mixture is prescribed by Dr. Frederick Decker, to be taken a
spoonful at a time in spitting blood, and seems a very beneficial one.

Take of Plantane-water ij. Cinnamon Water ij. conf. of Hyacinth iss. distilled
Vinegar ss. of red Coral prepared ss. Balaustins, Dragons-blood, of each ss.
Laudanum Opiate gr. iij. Sir. of Myrtles j. mingle them.

Take of Plantane, red Rose, and Purslain-water, of each iiij. of Boodstone
and Dragons blood reduced into fine-powder, A Julep.
of each half a dram, Sugar Candy vj. make a Julep.

A Solution of common Vitriol, or of Vitriol of Mars made in Spring Water, and
applied with a rag to a wound, wonderfully stops bleeding, but is scarcely
convenient to be given inwardly.

2. Decoctions, Tinctures, and Emulsions.
Take the leaves of Blood-wort, Apozems.
Periwincle, Mouse-ear, Plantane, Wood Sorrel, both sorts of Daisies, of each
one handful, red Rose leaves half a handful, Barley half an ounce, Raisins two
ounces, boil them in three pints of Smith-forge water filtred, (or water
wherein hot Iron has been often quenched) to two pints. To the strained liquor
add two ounces of the syrup of the Juice of St. John's-wort, or of Mouse-ear,
make an Apozeme, dose from four ounces to six, three times in a day.

Take the leaves of St. John's Wort, roots and leaves of Tormentil, of the
greater Burnet, Meadow-sweet, of each one handful, of the seeds of Purslain,
Plantane, Sorrel, of each one dram, Conserve of red Roses half a pound,
Spring Water eight pound, boil them for 12 hours in Balneo Mariae, to it being
strained add half a scruple of the spirit of Vitriol of Mars, to be taken as
the former.

Take of Barly-water with Madder-roots boiled in it a pound and half, Tinctures.
infuse in it being warm a handful of red Rose-leaves, adding one scruple of
spirit of Vitriol, after three hours strain it, adding Syrup of the Juice of
St. John's wort one ounce and half, take three or four ounces, three or four
times a day.

Take of the decoction of the roots of fresh Nettles a pound and a half,
Emulsions.
white Poppy and Henbane-seeds of each two drams, Melon-seeds 6 drams, make an
Emulsion, sweeten it with Sugar penids; the dose is three ounces, three or four
times in a day.

3. Juices of Herbs and juicy Expressions.
Take of the Juice of Plantane half a pound, Juyces of Herbs.
take two or three drams three times a day, in 3 ounces of the distilled water
prescribed before; sweeten it to please.

Take of fresh Nettles, Plantane, the smaller Daisies, of each 3 handfulls,
bruise them, and pour upon them of Purslain-water 6 drams, make an expression,
take it as the former.

4. Powders and Pills.
Take of the powder of Boodstone, Dragons-blood, ground with Rose Water on a
Marble, Powders.
Pearls, of each one dram, Bole Armenick, and Earth of Lemnos, of each half a
dram, Troches of Winter-cherries two drams, make a powder, divide it into
twelve parts, one part to be taken three times a day in the former distilled
water.

Take of Henbane, white Poppy-seeds, of each 10 drams, sealed Earth, red Coral,
of each 5 drams, Sugar of Roses three ounces, make a powder, the dose one dram
morning and evening; this composition made up with a fit Syrup into a soft
consistence, was anciently called and renowned in Germany, by the name of
Helidaeus Electuary.

The aforesaid Powders with the addition of Gum Tragacanth dissolved, or some
fit syrup, Pills.
may be reduced into Pills or Lozenges.

The spongious excrescence usually growing to the fruit of Hipps or Dog-bryar,
reduced into powder, half a dram taken twice a day, is a very profitable remedy
in spitting blood.

Take of Yarrow bruised and dried in the Summer-Sun as much as you please,
reduce it into powder to be kept in a Glass; the dose from half a dram, to a
dram twice a day in any convenient liquor.

Julius Caesar Scaliger's Powder, or rather that of Serapion is mightily
commended. Dose four drams, twice or thrice a day.

5. Lohochs and Electuaries.
Take conserve of red Roses, of Dog-rose, of each two ounces, Electuaries.
powder of white Poppy and Henbane seeds, of each two drams, species
Diatragacanth. frig. one dram and half, of Boodstone, Dragons-blood prepared,
of each half a dram, Syrup of red Poppyes what will suffice to make an
Electuary. Take the quantity of a Chestnut evening and morning, at other times
let him lick with a liquorish stick.

Take conserve of the greater Comfry flowers, of Water Lillies, Lohochs.
of each an ounce and half, Troches of Winter-cherries, of Diatragacanth. frig.
of each a dram and a half, syrup of Jujubes what will suffice to make a soft
Electuary, of which lick often.

Take of the white of an Egg well beaten two drams, Sugar of Roses one dram,
of white Starch three drams, make a Lohoch to be taken often with a spoon.

Take of Conserve of red Roses 3 ounces, Leucatella 's Balsam half an ounce,
Troches of Winter-cherries two drams, Syrup of red Poppies what suffices to
make a soft Lohoch: the dose is the quantity of a Chestnut night and morning.

II. The second Indication.
The second preservatory Indication exhibits such remedies, which by containing
the blood in its right temper, and the Lungs in their due frame, do provide
against a relapse of spitting blood, and the following of a Phthisis. Such
things which respect the blood, The first intention in respect of the blood.
either are mild evacuators by Stool, Urine or Sweat; or are merely
Alteratives. Every of these are usually prescribed either in form of Potion,
Powder, Electuary, or Pills: We will here show you the most select patterns of
the chief of them.

1. A Purge.
As to Evacuators, a gentle Purgative is sometimes appointed after this manner.

Take of the best Senna three drams, Cassia fistula bruised one ounce,
Tamarinds three drams, Coriander-seeds a dram and a half, boil them in
Spring Water to 6 ounces, to it strained add syrup of Chichory with Rhubarb one
ounce, clarify it with the white of an Egg. Or,

Take 4 ounces of Gereons decoction of Senna, Syrup of Apples purging one
ounce, mingle them and make a potion.

2. Alteratives.
That the good temper of the blood may be preserved, and the superfluities
drained from the Lungs may be continually discharged by Sweat and Urine, these
following Alteratives, or some of them are for the most part received in
constant use; which also being endued with a healing power, do succor the weak
Lungs, or those whose Unity is dissolved.

For ordinary drink, let simple water, especially in a hot constituion, or
being colored with a little Claret Wine, be drunk. Those with whom this does
not agree, a Bochet of China, Sarsa, with shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn, with
white Sanders, or small Beer, or small Ale, with the leaves of Hart's-tongue,
Oak of Jerusalem, and the like infused, are frequently used with good success.

Pectoral Decoctions or Hydromels with temperate Vulneraries are taken twice or
thrice a day to 6 or 7 ounces.

Take of fresh Nettles, Decoctions.
Chervil, of each one ounce, Hart's-tongue, Speedwell, Mouse-ear, Ground Ivy,
St. John's wort, of each a hand-full, boil them in three pints of Springwater,
to two points, adding Raisins stoned an ounce and half, Liquorish two drams, to
it strained add Syrup Byzantine two ounces, clarify it with the white of an
Egg, make an Apozeme to be taken from 4. ounces to 6, twice or thrice in a day
for a month. In a more cold or phlegmatic constitution, let the Liquorish and
Raisins with the Syrup be omitted, add at last of Honey well? clarified two
ounces, strain it and keep it for use. The Dose is the same.

The use of these is sometimes intermingled with a distilled water appropriate
for that use, which likewise is more frequently taken by such who nauseate and
loathe Apozemes.

Take the tops of Cypress, A distilled water.
leaves of Ground Ivy, of each 6 handfulls, of Snails half boiled one pound and
half, of all the Sanders bruised of each one ounce, being cut and bruised
infuse them in 8 pound of fresh Milk, distill it in common Organs, the Dose 3
or 4 ounces with a spoonful of Syrup of Ground Ivy, to be taken twice in a day.

2. The second intention respects the Lungs.
In respect of the Lungs, viz. that without obstruction or opening of the
vessels, the Union of parts, and due conformation of the whole may be
preserved, temperate balsamicks chiefly conduce. To this intent Leucatello's
Balsam is commonly prescribed to be taken daily and for a long season. Chemists
and certain Noble women do cry up with great praise a balsamic Oil drawn by
distillation, called by them the Mother of Balsam.

It would be easy here to reckon up very many other remedies against spitting
blood, very much celebrated by the ancient as well as by modern Writers;
notwithstanding the harvest of these already gathered together does at present
seem rich enough. But it remains, that I illustrate as well the Theory of this
disease, as the curatory method above delivered, by a History or two of sick
Patients.

A noble young man, The first History.
when after a scorbutical Cachexia he was affected with a Palsy, and for
curing this disease, remedies not only great but improportionate to the blood
and spirits were experimented by him, viz. Salivation and the use of Baths, he
contracted a spitting of blood, whose fits (of all I ever knew not presently
mortal) were most fierce. Presently on the first appearance of this disease,
spitting blood followed the Operation of Hues's powder (from which having for
some time suffered a flowing of the Mouth, without his Palsy being cured he
was reduced to great weakness:) Then being afflicted with a Catarrh, and a
Cough very troublesome, he began to discharge a discolored Spittle, sometimes
stained, and sometimes sprinkled with blood; but this disease being mild from
the beginning, did suddenly vanish away by the use of remedies, and after going
into the Country, and sucking in a more pure air, he became better, and after
a while feeming healthful enough in his breast, he went to the Bath, for the
benefit of his Palsy; where daily bathing for a fortnight in those hot waters,
he again contracted a Cough, and a little after an horrid Haemoptoe or a
spitting of blood, so that in the space of 24 hours, coughing often and
plentifully, he poured out blood in a vast quantity.

I first visiting him in this condition, provision being made for the whole, I
prescribed presently Phlebotomy for revulsions sake: notwithstanding after this
administration (both then and ever after) he either repeated the bloody
spittle, or grew worse. Moreover, I exhibited Juleps, Lohochs, Decoctions, and
also Hypnoticks, which helping little or nothing, ligatures made about his arms
and thighs, did first of all restrain the tyranny of this disease: And when
afterward the Evil broke out again, I persuaded him at length, (his drink of
Beer being left) that he should constantly drink the decoction of China and
Sarsa with the Pectorals. By the continual use hereof, observing moreover an
exact course of diet, and altogether abstaining from wine, more hot aliments,
and Salt, and Sugar, for above two years he was well in health.

But afterward when by being crowded in a Court of Judicature, he grew mighty
hot, he relapsed back again into a terrible spitting of blood. A Physician
being sent for, he was presently let blood in the arm, whence his spitting of
blood became more sharp; and when afterward letting blood was repeated the
second and third day, and the evil grew worse every time, at length Ligatures
(as at first) being administered, and the pectoral drink and a Linctus being
often taken, the disease presently remitted, and in a short space wholly
ceased; notwithstanding he continued the use of his pectoral decoction and
slender diet, viz. no flesh-meat, for a fortnight; and from thence he obtained
truce from his enemy for three years; and when afterward at any time the blood
sweeling by drinking of wine, or taking more dainty food, began to break out
from the Lungs, presently by ligatures, and the use of the Decoction and
Lohoch, and a thin diet, its assault was wont to be repulsed. But he did not so
safely escape, but that it was necessary for him for the most part to keep
perpetual watch against that enemy always lurking: for not long since by reason
of the intemperature of the year, he contracted a troublesome Catarrh, with a
Cough, a plentiful spittle, and sometimes bloody, and then the former
medicines effected less; wherefore, he betook himself by his own advice to new
things, and in the first place took evening and morning a spoonful of Syrup of
Ground Ivy, and thereby ensued a notable help: but when that Syrup became
quickly loathsome by reason of the Sugar, he took the powder of that herb well
prepared to half a dram, or one dram twice a day in a spoonful of some liquor;
by the long use of which Medicine he was much better as to his Catarrh and
Cough. But when the spitting of blood now and then broke out, though in little
quantity, he changed again his Medicine, and took twice in a day the powder of
the tops, and chiefly of the hairy excrescences of Cynorrhodon or Dog-bryer:
which only medicine a certain Physician renowned for merly for the cure of
spitting blood, used with great success. Neither did our Patient receive a less
happy effect from that medicine, for presently after he escaped altogether free
from a Cough, a Catarrh and bloody Spittle, and so remained for a long while:
until at length believing this disease of the Breast to be wholly subdued, and
therefore slighting it, he assumed weapons against the other more ancient enemy
the Palsy. Wherefore, while his Haemoptosis or Spitting of Blood was
neglected, he daily took a large dose of hot Medicines to conquer that other
distemper, viz. magistral waters distilled with Wine, spirit of Hartshorn, of
Sa't Armoniack, and Aromatic Powders and Confections; Besides, whilst he
indulged himself in a more plentiful diet, with a moderate drinking of Ale and
Wine, the roaring Lion that at first seemed to sleep, was again stirred up,
viz. he had not long continued in that antiparalytical Method, but the Spitting
of blood returned with its greatest fierceness, so that in the space of a day
and a night he coughed out above three pints of spumous blood. But afterward a
Physician being sent for who presently prescribed Phlebotomy, the spitting of
blood began to cease upon bleeding (as formerly it was always wont to do) but
then fell into sharp fits again: which however by the use of Ligatures, and a
Lonoch and pectoral Decoction daily taken, was presently assuaged, and a while
after wholly ceased. And when afterward he used the pectoral Decoction three
months, and a very slender Diet, viz. without any flesh, only of Herbs, Barley,
etc. and Milk-meats, in a short time he recovered his former health, and now
lives in that state, so triumphing over that cruel disease, that many
Haemoptotic persons consult him as their Oracle, and for a Cure do propound a
method of this kind of living to be followed before the Physicians advice.

What is most wonderful in this case is, The reason of the case.
that after so many breaches so often happening in the Lungs, this famous
Person was not in the intervals affected with a Cough, neither fell afterward
into a Consumption; whereas most after any of the smallest vessels being open
in the Pracordia, for some time after labor with a Cough with plentiful and
thick spittle, and at length frequently become consumptive. And that it
happened otherwise to our Patient, I chiefly attribute to the balsamic
constitution of his blood, viz. in the mass whereof the serous recrements are
either less collected, or so strictly mingled, that they cannot be easily
separated thence; wherefore after the vessels were broken, or their unity
dissolved, a plentiful I chor or sharp humor (being wont to generate a Cough
and Spittle) did not sweat out as in many others. Moreover what he himself
observed, contrary to many others, that his spitting blood happened never in
winter, but in Summer, came also so to pass by the same reason: because when
the blood did less abound with vaporous recrements, the opening or obstruction
of the Pores were neither an advantage nor prejudice to it; nevertheless the
blood growing hotter than it ought to be, seeing it exhaled not, there was a
necessity it should break out of the vessels; and when again diminished in
quantity, sending away little or no serous Ichor out of the orifices of the
Vessels, the spitting of blood ceased without a remaining Cough. The same
reason holds of many that spit blood, wherefore some are found much inclinable,
others not prone to a Consumption. This Gentleman ever found the use of the
pectoral Decoction advantageous to him: wherefore when he often varied other
Medicines he always retained the same Decoction: moreover he has commended it
to many others spitting blood with success. The form of the Prescription was
this.

Take of all the Sanders of each six drams, A Drink.
infuse them for twelve hours in seven pints of Spring Water, then hoil them to
a confumjption of a third part, after add leaves of Colis-foot, Maidenhair,
Mouse-ear, Speedwel, flowers of St. John's Wort, each two handfuls; sweet
Fennel-seeds six drams, Liquorish half an ounce, Raisins stoned half a pound:
boil them to four pints, afterward strain it, and keep it for ordinary drink.

Moreover the spitting blood threatening and pressing upon him he took thrice or
oftener a day the quantity of a Nutmeg of the following Electuary, drinking
after it seven spoonfuls of a Julep.

Take conserve of red Roses three ounces, The Electuary.
conserve of Hips, Comfry, each an ounce and half; Dragons blood a dram,
species of Hyacinth two scruples, red Coral a dram, with a sufficient quantity
of syrup of red Poppies, mix them and make a soft Electuary: let him take
hereof evening and morning a dram and half, drinking after a draught of the
following Julep. At other times let him lick it with a Liquorish-stick.

Take Plantane and Spawn-Frog water, each six drams; The Julep.
syrup of Coral, dried Roses, each an ounce; Dragons blood two scruples: mix
them, and make a Julep.

Among the examples of them that spit blood the case of that Reverend person
Dr. Berwick S.T.P. and lately Dean of St. Paul's Church ought not to be omitted,
which some while since I learned partly from the Patient himself, and partly
was communicated to me from his Brother that most skilful Physician Dr. Berwick
my most dear Friend.

That most renowned Divine fifteen years before he died labored with a most
obstinate Cough, The second History.
and sometimes with a bloody and falt spittle, with a grievous breath stinking
like Heel; by which being made lean by a pining away of the body, he wanted but
little of being almost extinguished by a Consumption. As often as his spitting
blood intermitted, the rankness of breath and spittle ceased also; afterward
the return hereof declared constantly that other affect to be presently
attendant. In this languishing condition, when this Renowned man was discovered
to favor the Kings Party at that time oppressed with a grievous Tyranny, and
being cast into a strait Prison, did drink mere water instead of ordinary
drink, he recovered his health beyond the hope and expectation of all persons,
and so remained indifferently healthful for above ten years space. Nevertheless
afterward, I know not by what occasion, unless by the hardship of a cold
winter, not only the aforesaid evils, viz. a Cough with bloody and salt
stinking spittle did become fierce upon him, but also over and above, a
debility of stomach, want of appetite, and a nightly Fever did accrue. But not
long after these Symptoms a little remitting, fair weather again seemed to
shine out; until on a certain day, the air being suddenly changed into an
intense cold, toward night he was assaulted with great straitness of breast
and difficult breathing, with a quick and weak pulse, and fainting of all his
spirits, as if he had been expiring. Nevertheless from his danger he suddenly
escaped by the interposition of a Crisis, viz. by a plentiful spitting of
blood, and after by a breathing Sweat: but from that time his spittle remitted
much of the usual stench, and something of its saltness; and when in a short
time afterward the last and most painful invasion of spitting blood threatened
him, that usual presage from stench of breath was wanting; but the subsequent
spitting of blood being very plentiful, did so dcebilitate his strength, that
from that time declining sensibly, he expired within a month: and when a little
before his decease, by reason of a sharp pain in his side, a Vein was breathed,
his blood seemed to fail so, that almost none streamed out. Moreover in his
body dissected after death very little quantity of blood was found: nor could
they find any footsteps of the other most notable Symptoms, viz. spitting of
blood and of the stinking breath and spittle; for there was no collection of
any filth or stinking and putrid matter, nor any cavity in the Lungs made by an
Ulcer or Wound; but only one lobe of this bowel, or rather the whole left side
was so hardened from a scirrhous Tumor, that the blood could not easily or but
very little pass through the frame being so obstructed, and as it were stony:
wherefore it is no marvel, if the blood that should have passed most swiftly
through the Lungs, did now and then burst out in some place from the vessels,
which were joined together, or suffered not a circulation by reason of the
Schirrosity.

Notwithstanding here a greater difficulty arises, The reasons of the case.
viz. whereas his Lungs were found altogether free from any Ulcer or notable
wound, whence that most dire stench of spittle and breath, always a forerunner
and companion of the bloody spittle (the last invasion of this disease only
excepted) proceeded. We have in another place given remarks upon all these
things, as that Ulcers of the Lungs and the purulent spittle of consumptive
persons seldom or never stink, but the matter cast out of an Imposthume of the
Lungs does frequently stink: but that in the sick Doctor the Lungs being free
from either affect, breathed out so horrible a breath, the reason will best of
all appear, if we inquire of the manner and cause of a stench in general. For
we observe this to be excited when the impure Sulphur is dissolved either by a
lixivial, or an acid Salt, and is precipitated by the other. Let common
Sulphur, or Sulphur of Antimony be dissolved by Oil of Tartar or Stygian water;
afterward if you pour on this solution a dissolution of fixed Salt, and upon
that, Vinegar, a most hideous stench will arise. In like manner we may conceive
in the case proposed, that the sulphurous particles of the blood being very
impure, were corroded by the fixed Salt, with which its juice abounded very
much; afterward when the acid humor, having endured a flux, reflows from the
nervous parts into the mass of blood, it precipitates the dissolved Sulphur,
and so causes that stench to be exhaled from the Lungs, and whilst it forces
the blood into a turgency, a little after it compels to a spitting of blood. I
have known some endued with a breast firm enough, and free from all Coughs and
consumptive disposition, who have for the most part breathed out a most hideous
stench: which could proceed from no other cause, besides what even now we have
observed. The impure blood abounding with Sulphur dissolved with Salts, if
perhaps while it is rarefied within the Lungs, and loosned in its frame, it
meets with an acid humor, it will exhale in breathing putrid and horrid
effluvia's. It happens by the like reason of the blood otherwise disposed, that
as the breath of some persons is very stinking, so of others very sweet. And
indeed the breath or air reciprocated through Respiration, for that it carries
out with it the effluvia's of blood highly rarefied within the Pracordia, one
while disperses a grateful vapor, another while a most unpleasant.

SECT. I. CHAP. VIII. Of a Peripneumony, or Inflammation of the Lungs.
APeripneumony is usually defined to be, The description of a Peripneumony.
an inflammation of the Lungs with an acute Fever, a Cough, and difficult
breathing. They who labor with this distemper are greatly sensible of a
notable inflammation in their breast with a swelling of the Lungs, and
sometiems a pricking pain, they draw a painful and short breath, or, as
Hippocrates affirms, a deep breath; the Fever presses with great thirst,
watching, and painful Cough; whereto also bloody spittle, or streakt with
blood, succeeds. By which Symptoms it clearly appears, that this disease
arises, in as much as the blood boiling feaverishly, does not easily pass
through the lesser pneumonic Vessels; but sticking in their passages, begets
first an obstruction, afterward being more heaped and extravasated, propagates
a Phlegmon or inflammation with heat, a Cough, and discolored spittle.
Moreover in as much as the blood so accumulated and stagnating, puffs up these
passages of the Lungs, and compresses them, a difficulty of breathing is
caused; and in as much as it pulls or distends the nervous Fibers, a pain
frequently arises.

But if it be asked, After what manner a Phlegmor is bred in the Lungs.
how a Phlegmon should grow together in the frame of a Lung merely bladdery and
excarnous; and after what manner it is distinguished from that distemper which
is wont to be stirred up in musculous flesh, or the substance of a bowel? We
must answer, although the abovementioned parts vary as to the texture,
notwithstanding the reason of the affect is altogether the same in each of
them. For the small sanguiferous vessels do every where alike embrace, bind,
and variously gird about both all the Tracheal passages in the Lungs, and also
the fleshy fibers in the Muscles, and lastly the little fibers and nervous
threads, with the thickest foldings like clusters, of the Parenchyma. But that
which produces a Phlegmon is the blood it self, which, while it grows very hot,
and is hindered in its passage, every where, and especially in the Lungs, whose
vessels branch into very small foldings, does first beget an obstruction, and
then an inflammation.

Wherefore the formal reason and conjunct cause of a Peripneumony consists in
these two things, The conjunct cause of a Peripneumony consists in two things.
1. That the blood boils. 2. That it sticks in the passages. Sometimes this
disposition, sometimes that is first.
viz. that the blood boils feaverishly, and sticking also within the more
narrow passages of the Lungs, engenders there an obstruction causing
inflammation. Unless these two things concur, there is an exemption from this
disease; for in many other Fevers, especially in a burning Ague, though the
blood, most intensly heated and inflaming all the Praecordia, as also in the
longing of women, the Green Sickness and the Dropsy of the breast, is very
clammy, yet though sticking very much in the passages of the Lungs, it does not
stir up a Peripneumony: to produce which both distempers must concur and join
their strength. Nevertheless when there is an indisposition of both these, one
while this, another while that, is first in act, and after a sort one is the
cause, or at least the occasion of the other. For sometimes the blood irritated
into a Fever causes an obstruction of the Lungs; and the blood also sometimes
finding a remora in the Lungs, receives a feverish boiling from its proper
obstruction. Notwithstanding, for the constituting the procatarctic cause of
this disease, the blood ought to be fitted as well for the boiling, as for the
obstructing the vessels of the Lungs.

Though it will not be easy to show what this disposition of the bloody liquor
is inclining to a Peripneumony, What that is Phlebotomy discovers.
yet the reason thereof does something appear by Phlebotomy, always made use of
in this disease with the best success. For the blood being drawn from any
laboring with this disease, as also from those in a Pleurisy, after it grows
cold, in its superficies instead of a Scarlet cream, it has a little film
somewhat white or otherwise discolored growing on it, which also is very tough
and viscous: whence we may conjecture, that the mass of blood being too strait
in its frame, whilst that in the circulation it does not discharge its
recrements, grows too thick, and as it were clammy, and for that cause becomes
too prone as well to boil as to stick within the narrow passages, and
especially of the Lungs.

But if farther inquisition be made, What affection of the blood produces it.
from whence this disposition of blood proceeds, by which it becomes clammy and
viscous like ropy wine; the general reason hereof is this, viz. that the more
thick parts of blood are not made thin enough by the more subtle; so that all
of them being equally mixed and mutually incorporated, at length the good
humors separate themselves into their appropriate functions, and the
superfluous are perpetually discharged by their proper Emunctories. But on the
other side in as much as the sulphurous particles of the blood being combined
together with the saline and earthy too much exalted, ensnare and entangle all
the rest; for that cause its liquor containing within it self all its
recrements and impurities, grows clammy as glue, and in that regard contracts
an inflammable disposition.

For it is obvious to every person, that the blood that grows clammy in this
manner, is rendered prone to obstruct the narrow passages of the vessels (which
surely are very small in the Lungs); moreover for the same reason they are
disposed to become fearish: viz. because retaining obstinately within its own
bosom all the feculencies and ecrements, from the same presently gathered into
a heap, it is constrained into a great turgescence or swelling, whereby of
necessity an inflaming obstruction of the Lungs takes either its origin or
augmentation.

Moreover as to the procatarctic cause of this disease, The fault of the Lungs
produces it.
very frequently the faultiness of the Lungs is joined herewith, and determines
that general intemperament of blood to affect this part in such a sort. For as
the clammy blood grows hot, the more strong and sound Praecordia do frequently
discharge the designed mischief from themselves, and the taint being fixed to
the Pleura, or about the habit of the body, a Pleurisy or Rheumatism is rather
caused than a Peripneumony. Nevertheless the tender Lungs being bnoxious to a
Cough, or formerly prejudiced in their frame either by spitting blood, or other
distempers of the breast, from the blood boiling up (while it is too much bound
nd clammy in its own consistence) they easily engender an obstructing Phlegmon.

Hitherto of the conjunct and procatarctic causes of a Peripneumony: The
evident causes of a Peripneumony.
as for what regards the evident causes, whatsoever suddenly perverts the
temperament of the blood, or restrains its free transpiration ought to be
referred hither, as chiefly are excesses of heat and cold, or the inordinate
drinking of Wine or strong Waters, any veement exercise, and the drinking of
some waters, and those especially icy. Besides, sometimes a malignant
distemperature of Air does engender this disease in many, and aches it
Epidemical.

Authors in Physic do every where observe (and it is also a vulgar
observation) a Peripneumony frequently succeeds or comes upon a Pleurisy; It
often succeeds or follows after a Pleurisy.
but nothing is more usual than in a Pleurisy a bloody and thick spittle, and
as it were purulent to be voided. Hence a regat disquisition arises, by what
passage or ways the matter by spittle cast out, can be conveyed from the Pleura
to the Tracheal passages. Some think, that this being fallen into the cavity of
Thorax, is sucked into the Lungs as with a Sponge; and others suppose, that it
is transferred thither by the Membranes adhering thereto, by which the Lungs
often stick unto the Pleura. But truly either way seems improbable, if not
impossible. For first, that the Lungs do not suck in the contents of the
hollowness of the Chest is manifest from hence, because in a Dropsy or wound
of the breast, when they happen, the Lungs being unhurt, neither water nor
blood is at all discharged by coughing; though frequently great plenty of this
or that humor be there, which presently flows out of its own accord from the
Thorax, incision being made. But that Sometimes the Membranes growing from the
Lungs, knit themselves tot he Pleura, is clearly manifest by Anatomical
observation; yea and by this way of return I have sometimes known the purulent
matter translated into the side, and there by an Issue, made by Art or Nature,
to have been evacuated with a heathful Crisis: nevertheless such Membranes of
the Lungs joined to the Pleura do seldom pre-exist, and in a Pleurisy, which
is a very acute disease, they cannot, like a Mushroom, be the issue of one or
two days: moreover, though sometimes those obscure passages may be ready at
hand, which perhaps by some admirable instinct of Nature discharge something
out of the Lungs toward the precincts of the Thorax; yet it seems against the
Economy of Nature, that they can derive any corruption outwardly engendered to
this most noble part within, which surely is the fountain both of life and heat.

As to this, if it may be lawful to propound our Judgment, The reason of this
is inquired into.
I am induced to think that a Peripneumony and Pleurisy are one while singular
and separate affects, and another while bred together and coexisting from the
first, and another while are by course one after another or succedaneous. For
the procuring cause being stirred up into act, so that the blood growing
clammy, and boiling together, obstructs in some places the lesser vessels: the
nest of the disease sometimes is fastened on the Pleura, or separately in the
Lungs, sometimes in each of them together, and sometimes first in one, and then
in the other: but for the most part, the Pleura being first healed, presently the
same morbific cause invades also the pneumonic Vessels. Moreover we have known
a various shifting of this affect; viz. that it has first troubled the right or
left side, presently that being deserted, to have occupied the Lungs, and
afterward both being deserted, to affect the Brain, and frequently to transfer
its seat from thence into the abovementioned places. But for the reason
aforesaid a Peripneumony not only succeeds a Pleurisy, but frequently a
Squinancy, and sometimes other distempers: for while the blood growing clammy,
and boiling together, continues a Fever in the whole, it transfers the
obstruction causing a Phlegmon variously hither and thither. And from hence the
solution of that observation is clearly manifest, which has so much puzzled
Interpreters, viz. that a Palsy or dead Palsy of one side does sometimes
succeed a Peripneumony, because the blood that being clammy, had lately
obstructed the pneumonic Vessels, afterward stuffing certain foldings of the
vessels of the Carotides, prohibits the engendring of animal spirits in this or
that part of the head, and so restrains their influence into the respective
nervous parts. The differences of this disease.
From what has been said, the chief differences of a Peripneumony are made
plain, namely that it is either a simple distemper, or joined together with a
Pleurisy, Squinancy, or some other, and then it is either primary or
secondary. Moreover it is usually distinguished as to the Fever and state of
breathing: to wit, according as this is more or less prejudiced, and as it
shall be more intense or remiss, this disease also is denominated either more
or less acute.

As to the Prognostics of this disease, Prognostics.
common experience does attest, that it is a very dangerous disease, because
many Patients either die of it, or very difficultly recover health. No less may
we conclude this from the reason or Etiology of it; for a wound with much
extravasation of blood, or a stagnation caused in the Lungs, is most
difficultly cured, and the affected place is never restored unto its former
conformation. The prognostic signs, which are of greatest note, are taken from
the appearance of Symptoms and nature of things thrown out, and the state of
strength.

1. 1. From the appearance of Symptoms.
A Peripneumony coming upon a Pleurisy or Quinzy, for the most part is worse
than arising of it self, or succeeding either of them: but if upon this
disease, after what manner soever begun, an acute Fever follows with great
thirst, watchings, and not breathing unless set upright, it is ill; and yet
much worse, if upon it a Delirium, a Fenzy, convulsive motions, or a Palsy on
one side ensue. Moreover the Patient is not in less danger, if he be very
pursie, if troubled with vomiting, or frequent swounding away, a weak Pulse,
and a cold Sweat. For while these Symptoms are instant upon him, the
obstruction of the blood in the Lungs is not removed, nothing is digested or
ejected by spittle; but the circulation of the blood being more and more
hindered, and its kindling by breathing stopped, the animal spirits are thoroughly
disordered, and at length faint, until together with a prostration of the whole
strength the vital flame is extinguished.

2. 2. From what is excreted.
As to Prognostics from things excerned, we observe a Peripneumony to be
dangerous, wherein nothing is thrown out by spittle; next to this, then the
spittle is thin and crude, mixed with blood; it is far better when the spitting
is yellow and thick, streaked with a little blood. The Urine being yellow from
the beginning, and of a good consistency, with a cloud in the midst, shows that
almost all the recrements of the blood are lodged in the place affected; when
from that state it is changed into a thick and turbid Urine, it shows the
morbific matter to be swallowed up again from that part into the blood; but if
such kind of Urine be suddenly changed into a thin one, then a Delirium or
death it self is impendent. Much Sweat and plenty of Urine, a Diarrhoea,
bleeding at Nose, flowing of the Menstrua's, or the Haemorrhoids do frequently
promise good in this distemper, yea any of these Evacuations happening
seasonably does frequently discharge the disease.

3. 3. From the state of strength.
The condition of strength is ever of great moment in forming a due Prognostic
in this disease: for oftentimes when horrid Symptoms, as an intense Fever, a
Breathing very painful, with a Cough, watchings, and other ominous signs, shall
be pressing, if the Pulse be as yet strong, and the animal spirits persist in
their vigor, there is better hope of the Patient, than if these things being
more quiet, there were a weak Pulse, and the Spirits should become drowsy and
oppressed.

The first indication about the curatory Method in a Peripneumony is, The Cure
has two chief indications.
that the blood being impacted in the pneumonic Vessels, and causing a
phlegmonous obstruction, may be from thence discussed and restored to its
pristine circulation. Which if not to be procured, the second indication will
be, that that matter be duly digested or brought to suppuration, and with all
expedition voided by spittle.

While the former indication prevails, the intentions of healing will be these
ensuing. The first indication suggests four intentions of curing.
First, that the more plentiful afflux of blood to the part affected be
prevented, or pro hibited by some means. Secondly, we must endeavor, that the
matter stagnated or extravasated in the Lungs, be swallowed again by the Veins
into the rest of the mass, and caused to circulate. Which that it may be the
better procured, thirdly, the hoold ought to be freed from its clammy
viscousness, whereby its fluidity is impeded. Fourthly, that we apply to the
Symptoms most urgent, viz. a Fever, cough, Watchings, and difficult Breathing,
fit Remedies. But if notwithstanding all these another indication shall come
into use, it will be requisite to prescribe maturating and expectorating
Medicines vulgarly so called, together with these.

1. That we may satisfy the first and second intention together, 1. The first
intention that the afflux of blood may be cut off. 2. That the extravasated be
reduced to oirculation.
Phlebotomy is for the most part requisite in every Peripneumony, yea sometimes
it ought to be more frequontly repeated; for the vessels being emptied of blood
do not only withdraw the nourishment of the disease, but do also sup up the
matter impacted in the place affected. Wherefore if strength remain, and the
Pulse be strong enough, a more free breathing of a Vein is convenient at the
very beginning; but otherwise let it be used in a little quantity, which
however may be repeated as occasion offers it self. We intimated above, that
blood drawn in a Peripneumony and also in a Pleurisy, after it is cold,
contains in its superficies a small viscous and discolored film: moreover we
may observe one while the blood entirely, another while only a portion thereof
is subject to this change. For when the blood is received into three or four
dishes, sometimes in all, but oftener in the second and third dish it is
apparently bad, and in the first and last laudable enough: wherefore they
commonly give it in precept, that blood is always so long to be emitted, till
that which is so depraved begins to come forth; and if strength remain, the
bleeding should continue till the good blood flows out again. Truly as common
experience does approve of this practice, even so does reason it self; for in
this disease, Rules concerning Phlebotomy.
because the whole mass of blood does not presently acquire that clamminess,
the depraved portions are chiefly accumulated about the place of obstruction,
and adhere on every side in the lesser vessels. Wherefore the blood first
issuing by Phlebotomy is often void of any fault; afterward the vessels being
emptied receive the other morbific matter at first stagnated, and restore it to
its circulation; and when the portions thereof being placed near, are carried
as it were in a joint troop, they flow out together at the orifice of the
opened Vein, and after that entire mass of bad blood has flowed out, the
residue being more pure does succeed. Wherefore in this case ever let incision
be made with a large orifice, and let the blood be drawn out not only with a
more plentiful spouting, but also with a continued: for otherwise if in the
midst of Phlebotomy, the bad blood issuing out, the orifice (as the manner of
some is, lest the spirits should saint) be closed with the finger, when again
it is opened, the blood pure enough will issue next, but the bad sliding by, if
there be any remaining, will not return presently to that orifice. Besides
Phlebotomy many other remedies, viz. whatsoever do repress the trugency of
blood, and empty the passages thereof, whereby the morbific matter may be sucked
up, are here to be used. Wherefore a very thin diet is prescribed for the most
part merely of Barley and Oats: and if Cathartics are altogether prohibited,
because they disquiet the blood, and hurry it more impetuously into the part
affected; notwithstanding Clysters which gently loosen the Belly, and draw the
recrements of the blood toward the Belly, ought to be daily used. Moreover
Juleps and temperating Apozemes which bridle the fervor of the blood, and draw
out the superfluous serositles thereof, and which also do gently open the
passages of the Breast, are taken with success.

3. The third intention of healing, The third intention of healing is that the
clamminess or viscosity of the blood may be taken away.
which respects the withdrawing of the clamminess or obstructing viscosity of
the blood, is altogether to be performed by remedies which unloose the frame
thereof being too much bound, and dissolve the coupling together of its salts.
And truly the remedies of this kind, which in this respect reason and analogy
would dictate, are now received into use by long experience. For Powders of
Shellfish, the Tooth of a Boar, and the Jaws of a Pike, and other things
endued with an Alkali Salt, also Sal Prunellae, for the most part are
prescribed by all Practitioners, as well modern as ancient. I have more
frequently known the Spirit of Salt Ammoniac and of Hartshorn to have yielded
notable relief in this disease: and for the same reason it is, ( viz. because
the volatile Salt is useful) that the infusion of Horse-dung, though a common
remedy, affords oftentimes singular help.

4. As to the Symptoms and their Cure, 4. That the most urging Symptoms may be
helped.
very many remedies appropriated to these fall in together with the former; for
against the Fever the same Juleps and Apozems which appease the heat of blood,
and withal recreate the animal spirits are of most common use: to which besides
in respect of the Cough and difficult breathing, temperate pectoral Remedies
are added. The great difficulty is what ought to be exhibited against want of
sleep, when it shall grievously oppress; for Opiates, because they do further
prejudice the breathing, which in this disease is already hindered, are scarce
safely administered, nay sometimes become mortal. Wherefore Laudanum and the
strong Preparations of Opium are to be shunned in a Peripneumony worse than a
Dog or a Snake; nevertheless Anodynes sometimes, and mild Hypnotics, as water
and Syrup of red Poppies, are not only allowed, but accounted specific remedies
in this disease and in a Pleurisy: but sometimes it will be expedient to use
Diacodiates as long as strength endures, and as long as the Pulse is strong and
good enough. For the pain of the breast, if at any time it be troublesome, it is
expedient sometimes to apply Liniments, Fomentations, and Cataplasms.

The second curative inoication, The second indication respects the maturation
and expectoration of the morbific matter.
whose intentions are to digest the matter impacted in the Lungs (if it cannot
be discussed or sucked up) and to throw it out by spittle, requires ordinary
maturating and expectorating Medicines, both which notwithstanding ought to be
temperate, that is to say, such as assuage thirst, and appease the feverish
heat rather than exasperate it. We have above recited in the Chapter of a
Cough, the kinds of these sorts of Remedies properly called Pectorals; the more
select Receipts, and chiefly accommodated to this affect, shall be annexed here
beneath.

The Forms of Remedies.
1, 2. The Medicines conducing to the first and second intention are prescribed
according to the following Forms.

Take the water of Carduus Mariae ten ounces, Juleps.
red Poppies three ounces, Syrup of the same an ounce, Pearls prepared a dram,
make a Julep: the dose six spoonfuls every fourth hour.

Take water of black Cherries, Carduus benedictus, Balm, each four ounces;
powder of a Boars tooth a dram, Syrup of Violets ten drams: make it into a
Julep to be taken after the same manner.

Take Grass roots three ounces, Apozemes.
shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn each three drams, Raisins stoned an ounce and
half, Liquorish two drams, boil them in Spring water from three pints to two,
to the strained iquor add Syrup of Violets an ounce, Sal prunella a dram: make
an Apozem to be taken thrice a day about three or four ounces.

For the same intention, Purgation.
viz. that the Vessels being emptied may withdraw the nourishment from the
disease, or sup up the morbific matter, a Purge is prescribed by many. In the
Practice of the Ancients against this disease, even as against many others,
after Phlebotomy, Preparatives and Purgatives were usually appointed in a
constant course, and of late the Chemists with greater boldness do recommend
Vomits, and in a Peripneumony prefer it to all other remedies. Yea Phlebotomy
being omitted or countermanded, they place the chief Cure in stibiate Vomits:
than which rash advice of theirs I know not any thing may be thought of more
pernicious. Indeed in rustic and robust bodies sometimes this Cure has been
effected without danger, notwithstanding for the most part no less
unsuccessful; but in tender constitutions it ought to be reckoned little
inferior to poison. But for what respects Purgation, although it may not be
presently convenient from the beginning, because it is then for the most part
prejudicial, nevertheless the flowing of the morbific matter being finished,
and the effervescency of blood being appeased, we may safely and gently
evacuate the body with a loosning Purge.

Take of the decoction of Senna of Gereon four ounces, Purges.
syrup of Roses solutive an ounce: mix them for a Potion. Or,

Take the best Senna three drams, Cassia and Tamarinds each half an ounce,
Coriander-seed two drams: boil them in a sufficient quantity of Spring Water to
six ounces, to which strained add syrup of Violets an ounce, clarified with the
white of an Egg, and let it be given.

Purgatives are not always to be exhibited, nor ever unadvisedly in this
disease: but frequent Clysters, and almost daily are in use; but let them be
gentle and emollient only, which easily loosen the belly, without any great
agitation of humors or blood. For this purpose Milk or the Whey thereof is
often convenient, with red Sugar, or syrup of Violets: Or, Take the leaves of
either sort of Mallows, of Melilote, of Mercury, of each one handful, Linseed
and sweet Fennel-seeds, of each half an ounce, sweet Prunes, Clysters.
numb. vi. boil them in a sufficient quantity of Spring Water to a pint, to
which add syrup of Violets one ounce, Sugar ten drams, sal Prunella one dram,
make a Clyster.

3. Medicines for the third intention, Things dissolving the clamminess of the
blood.
viz. for the dissolving the Clamminess of the Blood, are wont to be
administered in form of a Powder, of a Spirit, a Potion, or of a Bolus,
according to the manner following.

1. Powders.
Take of Crabs eyes two drams, sal Prunella one dram and half, pearl'd Sugar
one dram, Powders.
make a powder for 6 doses, one to be taken every sixth hour, with a proper
Julep or Apozeme. Or,

Take of the Tusk of a Boar, (or the Jaw of a Pike) of Crab's-eyes, of each one
dram and half, flowers of Salt Armoniack, Powder of red Poppy Flowers, of each
half a dram, mix them for 4 doses.

2. Spirits and Chemical Liquors.
Take of spirit of salt Armoniack distilled with Olibanum, 3 drams; Spirits.
the dose from 12 drops to 15 or 20, three times in a day. Or,

Take Spirit of Urine or Soote, after the same manner, three drams.

Take of the sweet Spirit of Nitre, ( viz. often cohobated with Spirit of
Wine,) 3 drams, the dose from 6 drops to ten after the same manner.

Take half an ounce of Spirit of Tartar, dose 15 drops to 20 or 25, in a fit
vehicle.

Take of the simple mixture one ounce: the dose is one scruple to half a dram,
after the same manner.

3. Potions.
Take of Carduus-water one pound, fresh Horse-dung 3 ounces, dissolve it warm,
Potions.
and filtre it; the dose is 3 or 4 ounces, twice or thrice in a day, with half
an ounce of Syrup of Violets or red Poppyes.

Take of the Leaves of Dandelyon two handfuls, bruised and infused in half a
pound of Cardnus Mariae water, Treacle-water half an ounce, press it out, and
add powder of Crab's-eyes one dram: take 4 or 6 spoon-fuls three times a day.

The fourth intention of Healing in respect of the symptoms greatly urging,
The cure of the Symptoms.
does suggest diverse sorts of preparations of Medicines. 1. In respect of the
Fever, the Juleps and Apozemes above recited are convenient. Moreover, the use
of Mineral Crystal ought to be frequent. 2. For the Cough and difficult
Breathings, Linctus's, Eclegma's, and Decoctions, or pectoral Juleps are
administered with success.

Take of Syrup of Jujubes, of Maidenhair, of each one ounce and half,
Linctus's.
of Violets one ounce, flower of Nitre one scruple; make a Linctus to be lickt
now and then.

Take of syrup of Marsh-mallowes one ounce, Diacodium, red Poppyes, each half
an ounce, powder of Crab's-eyes two scruples; make a Lohoch, to be taken the
same way.

Take Syrup of Hyssop, of Liquorish, of each one ounce and half, red
Poppy-flowers powdered, Lohochs.
one scruple, Crab's-eyes one dram, Lohoch de Pino 6 drams, make a Lohoch, take
the quantity of a Nutmeg four times or oftener in a day.

Take the roots of Grass, Chervil, Marshmallows, of each one ounce, An Apozeme.
Figgs numb 4. Jujubes and Sebestens, of each numb. 6, Raisins one ounce,
Liquorish three drams, Barley half an ounce, boil them in three pints of
Spring Water to two, strayn it; the Dose three or four ounces.

Take Raisins stoned one ounce and half, Filberds numb. 4. cut, Liquorish
sliced 3 drams, of Hyssop-water a pound and half, infuse them warm in a closed
Vessel 6 hours, strain, and add Syrup of Marshmallows an ounce and half, make
a Julep, the dose is 3 or 4 spoonfuls often in a day, swallowing it by degrees.

3ly, Against Watchings.
Against Watchings, Take Poppy-water 3 ounces, Sir. of red Poppies 6 drams, Aq.
Epidemica 2 drams, for a draught, to be taken at night.

If the Pulse be strong, and the strength agreeable, Take Cowslip-water 3
ounces, syrup de Meconio half an ounce, for a draught at night.

4. If the pain be troublesome about the place affected, For Pain.
Take Ointment of Marshmallows two ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds an ounce and
half, mingle them for a Liniment to be applied with thin Lawn-paper.

Take of Ointment of Marshmallows and pectoral Ointment, of each an ounce and
half, Linseed Oil fresh drawn one dram, to which add the Plaster called Emp.
de Mucilaginibus, make a Plaster for the Region of the breast, to be applied
on the place affected.

Fifthly, For the last intention of curing which answers to the secondary
Indication, and prescribes Medicines ripening and expectorating, the following
forms are convenient.

Take Linseed Oil fresh drawn three ounces, Maturating medicines.
Syrup of Violets two ounces, Hyssop-water half a pound, mix them in a Glass,
take two or three ounces three times in a day, shaking the Glass first.

Take powder of Olibanum one dram, put it into an Apple made hollow, and roast
it in hot Embers, let him eat it at night, repeating it three or four times.

Take Oil of Almonds fresh drawn, Expectorating Medicines.
Syrup of Maidenhair, of each an ounce and half, Sugar Candy two drams, stir
them well in a Glass-mortar until they are perfectly mixed, make a Linctus to
be taken often in a day with a Liquorish stick; also let a spoonful be taken
three times a day in a draught of Posset Drink.

As to the rest, Remedies prescribed against a beginning Consumption do also
profit in this case.

It would be easy to heap up here many Histories and Instances of Patients
affected with a Peripneumonie; but whereas the same order and figure of the
disease, and the same reasons of the Symptoms are almost in all, it suffices
here to note one or two Examples only. The first History.
And while I was writing these things I am sent for to a Patient grievously
sick with a Peripneumonie. He was aged about Fifty years, lean in body, and of
a choleric temper, by taking cold he fell into a Fever, with a Cough, with
pain of the Breast, and difficult breathing: when he had labored thus four
days without any remedy or physical administration, I found him in a notable
Fever, with thirst, and a huge inflammation of the Precordia, breathing very
difficultly, with labor of the Thorax, and painfully, with a noise of the
Bronchia, insomuch that he seemed evidently in the very Agony of death. His
Pulse being strong enough (although quick and disturbed) I immediately
prescribed Phlebotomy, to eight or ten ounces, by which when he received a
little relief, after three hours intermission, a Clyster being first
administered, I ordered him to repeat his bleeding to twelve ounces: Moreover, I
ordered Spirit of Hartshorn to be given twelve drops every sixth-hour, with an
appropriate Julep, and in the distance between I ordered a dose of the
following Powder to be administered:

Take powder of Crab's-eyes, sal Prunella, of each one dram and half, Pearls a
dram, Sugar Candy two scruples; make a powder to be divided into 8 doses.

Moreover, he took as often as he pleased a draught of a pectoral Apozeme. By
the use of these within three hours all the symptoms began to abate, and the
night following he sweat, and slept a little; the day after I repeated
Phlebotomy, and after continuing the same Remedies in four or five days he
entirely recovered his health. The blood we took from him was always in the
Superficies viscous and discolored.

A certain Gentleman of a sanguine Complexion and a strong habit of body, The
second History.
after an immoderate drinking of Wine contracted a Fever, with a most painful
Peripneumonie, insomuch that thirst and heat mightily pressing him, sitting
always upright in his bed or Chair, and breathing short and very frequent, he
could scarcely, yea almost not at all suck in air enough to sustain the vital
flame. Because he could not undergo a large Phlebotomy, I drew blood twice or
thrice day after day; frequent Clysters were administered: Moreover, Apozemes,
Juleps, also Spirit of Armoniack, and powders of Fish-shells were administered
by turns. Within four or five days the Fever somewhat abated, also he began
to breathe better, and sometimes to take short sleeps, yet he did always
complain of a notable heaviness of his breast, and intolerable oppression of
the Lungs; wherefore, when Phlebotomy was no longer safe, I applied very large
Vesicatories to his Arms and Thighs, the blisters in his arms dried up in a
short space, but those on his legs did not only remain open, but after five or
six days did run hugely, and afterward almost for a month daily discharged
great plenty of a most sharp ichor; in the mean time his lungs sensibly
amended, and at length were delivered from all their burden; lastly, the little
sores raised by the Vesicatories very painfully and not without frequent
Medicines could be cured.

SECT. I. CHAP. IX. Of a Pleurisy.
HOw great affinity there is between a Pleurisy and Peripneumonie, The
diseases of a Pleurisy and Peripneumonie are akin.
we have hinted before; viz. although either distemper is sometimes solitary,
and exists separately from the other, yet they often happen together, or one
while this, another while that, come one upon the other, or succeeds it. The
foregoing cause is the same of both, viz. a disposition of the blood to be
clammy and boil up withal; also, the conjunct cause is the same, viz. an
obstructing Phlegmon in some part of the lesser Vessels, by reason of such a
disposition of blood. Moreover, the same method of Cure is prescribed by most
modern Physicians for either disease: The chief reason of the difference
whereby they are distinguished one from the other, is taken from the places
affected, which their Names denote. How they differ betwixt themselves.
For the blood predisposed to the enkindling in some place an enflaming
obstruction, therefore often plants the nest of the disease in the breast,
because here it burns out more hideously, by reason of the Hearth of vital
fire; and also is not freed from the vaporous Effluviums and other Recrements
which hinder Circulation. To all which there ensues, that in this Region, the
mass of blood being shut up, and not able to pass through the more strait
Conveyances; is not as in the bowels of the lower Belly, opened with any
ferment, or new washed with any watery juice: wherefore, if perhaps the blood,
carried through the vertebral Arteries into the membrane encompassing the ribs,
shall stick in its passage, about the narrowness of the Vessels or
inter-spaces, the Distemper of which we now treat succeeds: In like manner, if
an obstruction happen within the passages of the Lungs, a Peripneumonie will
ensue, as we have declared before. Wherefore, according to the Pathologie of
this disease before delivered, those things which belong to the Theory of a
Pleurisy, as well as the Curatory method, may with small labor be designed.

Both the sense of pain, The seat of a Pleurisy.
as well as Anatomical Observations taken from the Patients dead of a Pleurisy
do plainly attest, the feat of this Disease (as often as it exists primarily
and solitarily) consists in the Pleura or Membrane environing the inside of the
ribs. And a true and singular Pleurisy is an inflammation of the Pleura it
self, from the abundant flowing in of inflamed blood, growing clammy withal,
taking its motion through the vertebral Arteries, with a continual and acute
Fever, a pricking pain of the side, a Cough and difficulty of breathing.

The next Cause is the blood obstructed by reason of its clamminess in the
lesser vessels and interspaces of that membrane (in like manner as it is in a
Peripneumonie) or being extravasated, being heaped in the same place more
plentifully, The next cause of it.
by reason of the swelling up, for that cause exciting an inflammation. An
acute pain arises upon this, by a wound in a part highly sensible; also there
arises a Cough by reason of a provocation giving impression to the intercostal
muscles; moreover a difficult breathing by reason of the muscular fibers being
hurt as to their action; which because they cannot perform long and strong
contractions, they are constrained to undergo weak although more frequent
Contractions: otherwise than in a Peripneumonie, in which that symptom arises
from a Lung too much filled and stuffed. The Fever is caused from
effervescence of blood, and is for the most part rather the associate than the
effect of a Pleurisy. For the blood from what cause soever driven into a
feverish turgescency, if it be bound up together in its mass, will be apt to
grow clammy, which together with the Fever most often induces a Pleurisy or a
Peripneumonie, or both of them. From hence we may observe this disease does
frequently vary its kind, and change its place, viz. from a Pleurisy into a
Peripneumonie, and on the contrary; afterward it passes from both or either
into a Frenzy or a Squinancy: for that the blood while it is boiling throws off
its viscous recrements one while in this part, another while in that, another
while in more together, and lastly it reassumes them again, and variously
transferrs them.

The more remote causes of a Pleurisy are the same as of a Peripneumonie, viz.
whatsoever stirs up the blood, The more remote causes of this Disease.
predisposed to grow clammy and also to boil up, and provokes a feverish
turgescency. Hither appertains excess of heat and cold, a sudden constipation
of the pores, surfeit, drinking of Wines or Strong Water, immoderate exercise;
sometimes the malignant constitution of the Air brings this disease almost on
every body, and renders it Epidemical: whereto may be added, that this disease
is very familiar to some from their constitution or custom; so that a
distemperature of blood, induced almost by any occasion, immediately passes
into a Pleurisy.

From what we have already said, the signs of this disease do appear manifest
enough, by which it is well known as to its Essence, and is distinguished from
other diseases, and especially from a Bastard Pleurisy and a Peripneumonie.
But it is to be observed that a pain in the side arises sometimes very
troublesome, which while it counterfeits a Pleurisy, is sometimes taken for
it, although falsely. For in some persons obnoxious to the Scurvy, and the
affects of the nervous kind, sometimes it happens that a sharp humor, and
very painful descends into the Pleura or intercostal Muscles, and being fixed
there produces most fierce tortures; which distemper is yet discriminated from
the Pleurisy, inasmuch as it is void both of Fever and Thirst, the Pulse
always abides moderate and laudable, frequently the appetite and strength
endure; moreover, the pain is not long fixed or limited to one place, but
sensibly creeps hither and thither into the neighboring parts, as the matter
slides down through the passages of the fibers, out of one place into another.

We meet not with many differences of this disease; The differences of it.
notwithstanding it is used to be distinguished, viz. to be either true and
exquisite even as we have now described, or spurious, which having its seat in
the intercostal muscles, or their interspaces, proceeds from wind, or a serous
and sharp humor heaped up in the same place, and raises a pain less sharp,
without so much as an inflammation or fever: And whereas the grief is planted
externally, the Patient for the most part lies better on the opposite side,
otherwise than in a true Pleurisy. Secondly, a Pleurisy is either single, or
complicated with a Peripneumonie or some other distemper, and so it is either
primary, or secondary, or joined with some other affection.

As to the Prognostics of this disease, The Prognostics.
Hippocrates has observed many certain tokens whereby a good or evil event is
signified to patients sick of the Pleurisy. To run through each of these, and
to unfold them with Commentaries added to them, we have neither leisure, nor
does it seem worth our endeavors. The chief thing of all in a Pleurisy, is,
that the disease be presently dispatched, partly with a free and frequent
bleeding, and partly by a Critical Sweat, arising about the fourth day, or
before the eighth; or these things not duly succeeding, it will be prolonged,
and then most frequently a Peripneumonie or Empyema, or a collection of corrupt
matter between the Breast and Lungs, or both distempers do arise upon this
disease; from which there follows a solution of the disease but slow and
uncertain, and most frequently full of dangerous chances.

A Peripneumonie coming upon a Pleurisy not presently cured (as it is often
wont to be) all our hope is placed in digesting maturely the Spittle and quick
Expectoration thereof: for if this be laudable and plentiful, and easily and
hastily thrown off, it does often finish both diseases entirely.
Notwithstanding, it is not therefore a consequent that the matter of a
Pleurisy is derived from the side into the Lungs by I know not what blind
passages, or that the same being sweat out of the Pleura into the cavity of the
breast is imbibed by the Lungs, and at length drawn upwards through the
passages, and excern'd forth. But when a Peripneumonie arises on a Pleurisy,
and the matter impacted in the Lungs begins to be evacuated by Spittle, so that
the affected places of the Lungs are continually emptyed; the blood resumes the
other matter fixed in the Pleura, and carries it to the Lungs where the places
of conveyance are open, to be ejected by Spitting. But if the Pleurisy be
cured neither by it self, nor associating with a Peripneumonie, then at length
either by an Imposthume made in the Pleura or in the Lungs, an Empyema or
corruption between the Breast and Lungs succeeds; or all the matter being
brought into the Lungs and there putrified, loosning the unity of the Viscera,
it propagates a mortal or scarce curable Consumption.

As to the cure of a Pleurisy, forasmuch as the state of this Disease, The
Cure thereof.
the Crisis and tendencies are manifold, diverse curatory Indications offer
themselves according to their various regards; and as occasion serves,
according to the advice of a prudent Physician, they ought to be appointed in
the beginning, and sometimes altered or continued. For surely one Method is
convenient for a solitary and simple Pleurisy, and another if it be
complicated with a Peripneumonie: Besides it behooves to ordain another and
another if perhaps a Crisis be expected by Spitting, or matters growing worse,
the disease is either passing into an Empyema, or tends to a Consumption. As to
the three later cases, that is to say, when a Pleurisy commencing, passes into
a Peripneumonie or Empyema, or lastly into a consumptive disposition, there is
designed an appropriate way of curing in the pathologies of each of these
diseases particularly delivered. But as to what appertains to our present
purpose, three Indications offer themselves for a primary and simple Pleurisy,
and they are curatory, preservatory and vital.

I. The first Indication takes care that the Inflammation or obstruction of
blood in the Lungs by all manner of means with all expedition be removed; The
first Indication.
for which intent phlebotomie in every Age by all physicians (excepting some
Fanatic or false Chemists) is wont to be prescribed, as a principal remedy:
Phlebotomie necessary almost in all Pleurisies.
The reason of which is altogether the same as in a Peripneumonie and many
other distempers, caused by reason of a stop of blood in some place, and so an
accumulation: Because that the vessels bringing blood being much emptyed, do
not only rescind the nourishment of the disease, but drink up the matter which
is the conjunct cause thereof, and convey it to another place. Wherefore blood
is to be freely drawn away in a Pleurisy, if the strength endure it, and the
Pulse be strong. And surely it is far better that the first time and every time
after (as often as there is need to repeat it) blood be more largely emitted,
than to do it more often and more sparingly. For very many portions of the
blood growing clammy and degenerating into viscousness, are heaped up about the
place affected; which, unless they are called away from thence by emptying the
Vessels through large phlebotomie, and in a great part let forth, the letting
of blood will be frustrated of its desired effect. Wherefore, that Physicians
prescribe blood in a Pleurisy to be drawn out even to swooning, seems not
incongruous to reason, although that practice is not rashly to be attempted,
for that every evacuation ought to be proportioned to the tenor and tolerance
of the strength, which rule such a phlebotomy does exceed.

But though there is almost a general consent of all Physicians to breath a
vein in a Pleurisy, notwithstanding there was ever an earnest contention about
the place, What Vein is to be opened in a Pleurisy.
what Vein ought to be opened. Hippocrates and Galen opened a Vein on the same
side of the patient; afterward the Arabians and their followers the Italians,
and French, did either open the Saphene or the Basilica of the opposite side,
damning the phlebotomy of the same side by Bell, Book and Candle. Yet in the
later generation, the practice of the Ancient Greeks by little and little
revived, Various opinions are recited.
so that some did dare to make incision on the same side; yet always one side
judged the others of the opposite persuasion as it were guilty of murder, as
often as any unlucky event did happen. So that while among Physicians about
phlebotomy there was no less a contention than among the Jews and Samaritans
about the Sacred place of Worship, at length the Doctrine of the Circulation of
the Blood held out like a new Light by the most renowned Harvey, discussed all
the clouds of this Controversy; so that immediately it clearly appeared to be
almost the same thing, whether incision be made in the Vein on the affected or
opposite side of a patient sick of a pleurisy; although in our Age Custom has
prevailed first and rather to open the Vein of the affected side.
Notwithstanding a Vein being opened in either Arm draws nothing at all
immediately from the vertebral Artery or from the pleura; they are only the
branches of the Azygos, or of the vertebral vein that receive the blood out of
the place affected: but that they may accomplish this, they are not unloaded in
any other manner, but that the quantity of the whole blood be abated by
phlebotomie wheresoever made. Only this may be affirmed for opening rather the
vein of the affected side, that the Basilick vein being unloaded, the Arteries
of the Arm receive the more ample provision of blood; from hence the bloody
stream of the vein Aorta runs down more swistly from that side toward the
branches of the Arm, and perhaps in the interim of its quick passage it infuses
less blood into the vertebral Arteries, for the nourishment of the disease. As
to that opinion, that the blood is sometimes more plentifully carried from
place to place, that from hence the right Lung or Liver being beset with an
inflammation or obstruction, the right part of the head is in pain, and of the
face grows more red; I say this sometimes is brought to pass, because the
patients do constantly lie in their bed on the side affected; wherefore, the
Vessels being compressed, the blood stays longer in other parts of the same
side while it is circulating. But of these things we will make a more diligent
search when we shall render the History and Aetiologie of phlebotomy.

But if phlebotomy by reason of a weak pulse, Cupping-glasses with
Scarification supply the place of bloodletting.
and fainting of the animal function, neither ought to be at first administered,
nor repeated, though the pain be most urging; Cupping-glasses with
Scarification do well supply the turn hereof, being applied to the place
pained. Riverius, and Zacutus Lusitanus have cited notable Examples of cures
effected by this remedy. And surely this practice seems to lean upon a reason
strong enough; for the blood being drawn away from the side affected, that
which is lodged in the neighboring vessels, being the conjunct cause of this
disease, is moved with it, and partly drawn away, and partly turned to its
Circulation. Moreover, to remove an inflammation of the Pleura, besides
withdrawing blood by a free Phlebotomy or Scarification, also the serous and
other excrementitious humors ought to be gently solicited and excerned as well
out of the mass thereof, as out of the bowels, by Stool, Urine and Sweat. The
more strong purgatives are deservedly prohibited, because they disquiet the
blood, and constrain it to be impacted more deep into the places affected. And
that certain renowned Chemists, viz. Angelus Sala, Hartman, M. Rulandus, with
many others, do audaciously exhibit Vomits of Stybium to any afflicted with a
Pleurisy, and magnify it for the best remedy, seems to me neither safe nor
congruous to reason; Whether Purges and Vomits are to be taken in a Pleurisy.
the only reason of helping, as I think, and that very uncertain, and full of
danger, may be, viz. that the medicine operating more vehemently while the
patients suffer exolution of spirits or swoonings, all the vigor and
turgescence of the blood abates, and for that cause the nervous Fibers remit
their wrinklings or painful contractions, and the Vessels carrying blood being
much emptyed, do suck up the morbifick matter: In the mean time, there is
danger lest the humors being violently disturbed, rush more impetuously to the
part affected; at least, lest the Spirits being too much dejected, and the work
of Nature disquieted about the digesting or separation of the morbific matter,
strength should utterly fail, before the disease be cured. Yet in the mean
time, Clysters are of frequent or daily use: yea sometimes more benign
solutive purgatives are allowed, provided that the Fever be not very intense.
Julips and temperating Decoctions and things gently moving Sweat and Urine,
What other kind of Remedies are convenient in this disease.
as we have prescribed before for a Peripneumonie, are also here convenient;
but let all hot and sharp things, whether aromatic, or endowed with a vinous
spirit be carefully declined.

II. The second Indication preservatory.
The second Indication preservatory, designed against the clamminess and
boiling up of the blood, prescribes Medicines of that sort which consisting of
a volatile or alcalizated Salt, do destroy the combinations entered into, of
the acid and fixed or otherwise distempered Salts, with the other more thick
particles. For which intent the eyes or claws of Crabs, the tooth of a Boar,
the Stone of Carps, the jaw of a Pike Fish, the Bone in the heart of a Stag,
the Priapus of a Heart, Sal Prunella, Salt of Coral, Salt of Urine, or volatile
salt of Hartshorn, powder of Goats-blood, infusion of Horse-dung, Spirit of
Hartshorn, of salt Armoniack, Spirit of Tartar, the simple mixture, mineral
Bezoar, Diaphoretick Antimony, flowers of salt Armoniack, are very famous
Remedies in a Pleurisy.

III. The third Indication vital.
The third Indication vital which provides that the strength and vital heat be
preserved during the course of the Disease in due tune and state, gives in
precept first an apt kind of food, and moreover Cardiac and Anodyne remedies,
and those which seasonably occur to other symptoms, if perhaps they arise.
First, in a true Pleurisy, a most thin Diet ought to be appointed, viz. of
mere Oatmeal and Barley; and for ordinary drink, a Ptisan or Posset Drink
rather than Beer alone is convenient: although in an outrageous thirst this
also is to be allowed of in a moderate quantity. Moreover, for quenching
thirst, Juleps, Apozemes, and Emulsions are taken by turns; to all which add
Sal Prunella. Secondly, Cardiacks.
let only the temperate Cordials be administered which mildly do recreate the
animal spirits, and not at all intend the kindling of the blood, burning out of
its due proportion. For these intentions, the water of Carduus Mariae, Carduus
Benedictus, of Balm, Borage, Cowslips, Black-cherries, are usually given with
success: whereto let the powder of Pearls and Coral be added. Thirdly, It
behooves to administer Anodynes, both inwardly, to provoke sleep in case it be
very much wanting, and also externally, to alleviate the pain of the side. Of
the former kind the more usual are the distilled water, syrup and powder of
red Poppies, which are esteemed Specificks in a Pleurisy and in a
Peripneumonie: Moreover, when the pain is very acute, Anodynes:
and watchings instant upon the patient, they may lawfully drink Diacodiates.
Against pains, Liniments, Fomentations, Cataplasmes, and sometimes the hot
bowels of Animals newly slain are convenient to be applied. These are the
principal Intentions of healing which seem requisite to cure an exquisite and
simple Pleurisy, before it contracts a Peripneumonie to it self, or passes
into it, or into an Empyema. It only remains to adapt to each of these the more
select forms of Medicaments.

First therefore in the beginning of the Disease, for taking away the Phlegmon,
Forms of Remedies.
Juleps, Apozemes, Powders, and gentle loosening Clysters are wont to be
prescribed.

Take water of Carduus Mariae eight ounces, red Poppies 4 ounces, First for the
removing the Inflammation. Juleps, and
Syrup of red Poppies one ounce, sal Prunella one dram, make a Julep, the
dose two or three ounces every third hour.

Take of Grass-roots 4 ounces, Barley half an ounce, Apple-parings one handful,
Apozemes.
Raisins one ounce, Liquorish two drams, boil them in three pints of
Spring Water to two; clarify the strained liquor, adding Syrup of Violets one
ounce and half, Sal Prunella one dram and half, make an Apozeme, the dose 3 or
4 ounces often in a day.

Take of Sal Prunella two drams, flowers of Nitre one dram, Powders.
powder of red Poppy flowers two scruples, Sugar Candy 4 scruples, make a
powder, the dose half a dram three or four times in a day.

Take of the Decoction of Mallows, leaves and roots, with Prunes, A Purge.
one pound, syrup of Violets three ounces, Sal Prunella one dram, make a
Clyster.

Take Cassia bruised two ounces, Tamarinds one ounce, Damask-Rose leaves one
handful, Coriander-seeds two drams, boiled in Spring Water to a pint, strain
it, and add Syrup of Chicory with Rhubarb two drams, clarify it with the
White of an Egg, the dose is 5 or 6 ounces in the morning, continued for two
or three days.

Secondly, The following are of use to dissolve the clamminess or coagulating
viscosity of the blood, in form of a Drink, of a Powder, and of Spirit.
Secondly for the taking away the Clamminess of the Blood.


Take fresh Horse-dung 4 ounces, Carduus-water one pound and half, infuse it
warm for two hours, after filtre it, to which add syrup of the juice of
Dandelyon, or of Chicory, An Infusion of Horse-dung,
two ounces, Spirit of salt Armoniack one dram, let five or six spoonfuls be
given three or four times in a day.

To this end Water of Horse-dung wonderfully profits.

Take of Horse-dung 4 pounds, leaves of Carduus Benedictus, Carduus Mariae,
Scabious, And distilled water.
Pimpornel, of each three handfuls, upon them cut and mixed together pour six
pints of new Milk, distill them in common Organs. The Dose is from two Ounces
to three, either with it self, or with other distilled Waters, in form of a
Julep.

For the same use, the Tinctures, or the solutions of other Dungs are
administered by some Physicians, and highly magnified by them. Helmont commends
the dung of an Ox, Panarolus commends Pidgeons-dung, others the white dung of
a Cock, for the Pleurisy. Epiphanius Ferdinandus was wont to give with success
the Decoction of Tobacco with new Wine; Valeriola by experiment as a familiar
remedy made use of the Decoction of the Flowers of red Poppies: Sylvius's
Anti-Pleuritick.
The renowned Sylvius prescribed the following mixture to be taken by
Spoonfuls, within short spaces of time.

Take Parsley and Hyssop water, of each two ounces, Fennel-water one ounce,
Treacle-water simple half an ounce, Laudanum Opiate 4 grains, Salt Armoniack
half a scruple, Syrup of red Poppies one ounce. Mingle them.

Frederick Deckers adds to this the Powder of Crab's-eyes, and Mineral Bezoar,
of each one scruple.

Medicines chiefly efficacious for this use are wont to be administered in the
form of a powder: for examples sake,

Take Powder of Crab's-eyes two drams, Powders.
Sal Prunella one dram and half, of the flowers of red Poppies half a dram, mix
them and make a Powder, the dose half a dram, three or four times a day, in a
convenient Vehicle.

Instead of Crab's-eyes, the powder of the Jaw of a Pike, or the Tusk of a Boar,
or the Pizzle of a Stag, or Bull, are used, and if they prove ineffective, try
the following.

Take of Antimony Diaphoretick, or the Ceruss thereof, or Bezoar Mineral, two
drams, the volatile Salt of Hartshorn half a dram, the powder of red Poppies
two scruples, make a Powder; The dose from one Scruple to half a dram, three
times or oftener in a day.

For the same intention of curing it was, that Riverius gave of the Powder of
Soot from half a dram to a dram; others the powder of Pigeons dung, or of a
Cock. And indeed by reason of this analogy, whereby the dungs of Animals
stored with volatile Salt, do succor in this disease; it is probable, the dung
of a Dog does no less conduce to cure a Pleurisy than a Squinancy, and so much
the rather, because these diseases frequently change their forms among
themselves, and one assumes the species of the other. Chemical liquors endued
with a volatile Salt do also notably help sometimes in a Pleurisy.

Take of Spirit of Blood two drams, Chemical Liquors.
Water of red Poppies three Ounces, the Syrup of the same one ounce. Let it be
given by spoonfuls often.

Take spirit of Sal Armoniack, distilled with Olibanum, three drams, the dose
from 12 drops to 15 or 20, twice or thrice a day, in any convenient liquor.
After the same manner the Spirit of Urine, Soot, or Hartshorn may be given.

Take the Spirit of Tartar 3 drams, the dose one scruple in a convenient
vehicle.

Take of the simple mixture 3 drams; Dose from one Scruple to half a dram.

As for the third Intention, What remedies the third intention requires.
besides a thin diet, Cardiac remedies and Anodynes are prescribed. Examples of
the former kind for the first Indication may be supplied by Juleps and
Apozemes; for the second Indication they may be supplied by Spirits and
Powders. Anodynes are prescribed to be exhibited inwardly upon watching, and
very intense pain, according to the following method.

Take of Poppy-water two ounces, Hypnotick Anodynes.
the syrup of the same 6 drams, Spirit of Hartshorn 12 drops, make a draught
to be taken at Bedtime.

If we must proceed higher, Take Carduus-water two ounces, Diacodium from three
drams to half an ounce or 6 drams, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac with Frankincense
half a scruple, make a draught: and sometimes although rarely Laudanum is
expedient, which timely given, inasmuch as it excites sleep, and moves sweat
and Urine, does greatly profit.

Take Cowslip-water two ounces, Tartariz'd Laudanum from 16 drops to 20. the
Spirit of Blood half a Scruple, Syrup of Violets two drams, mingle them for a
draught.

Outward Anodynes in form of a Liniment, External Anodynes.
Fomentation, and Cataplasm, are usually prescribed.

Take Ointment of Marshmallows two ounces, Oil of Almonds one ounce, Dogs-turd
two drams, mix them by grinding together.

Take the Plaster of Mucilages two ounces and a half, moistened with
Linseed-Oyl, and applied upon Lawn-paper.

Take the tops of both Mallows, the leaves of Mercury and Beetes, of each 4
handfuls, boil them in Spring Water, and strained, let it be used for
Fomentation.

Take the Dregs of the herbs after the liquor expressed, to which add the bran
of Oats 6 ounces, Linseed and Foenugreek-seeds, of each two Ounces, Ointment of
Marshmallows two ounces, make a Cataplasme.

There is no occasion to go far for Histories and Instances of patients sick of
a Pleurisy, An History.
for a notable Example of this disease is now under our hands: to wit, A very
lovely Maid, frequently and as it were habitually obnoxious to that distemper,
is committed to our care. This Virgin being very amiable, of a sanguine
complexion, but of a weakly constitution, upon any the smallest occasion, viz.
by taking cold, or by errors in any of the six Non-naturals, yea sometimes from
the mere alteration of the year, or the air, has for many years been wont to
fall into a fever; whereupon immediately pleuritick pains, with a Cough and
difficult breathing come upon her, and afterward for the most part hideous
Convulsions; under which passion in time past she did so grievously labor,
that frequently every year for or above six months she was constrained to keep
within her Chamber. But of late, although she is not acquitted from this hurt,
yet she is seldomer punished with it. The last year all the Summer, and almost
the Autumn, she enjoyed her health indifferently; in the beginning of Winter
she took her bed with this sickness, and now about the end is again sick. A
pain from the Pleurisy constantly afflicts her right side, where the blood
sticking in its passage, and being extravasated about the intercostal muscles,
the Fibers being provoked, fall into a most troublesome condition, together with
a convulsive motion of Coughing, and almost perpetually repeat it: In the mean
while her Lungs being sound enough, and open as to the passages, do readily
convey the blood without any stop by its clamminess, (which frequently is the
author of a Peripneumonie.) No remedies that are used will do her good without
phlebotomie, which continually is so very necessary, that upon every return of
the sickness, in spite of all things, we are compelled three or four times to
repeat it, and sometimes oftener: the blood let out in the Superficies has
constantly a viscous and whitish silme. This disease was ever a simple
Pleurisy void of a Peripneumonie, and for cure she with constant success used
the following method.

Take Spirit of Sal Armoniack distilled with Gum Ammoniacum three drams; take
from 15 drops to 20, three times a day, with the following Julep.

Take Carduus and Black-Cherry water, of each six ounces, Hysterical Water one
dram Sugar 6 drams. Between whiles she took a dose of this Powder with three
ounces of Apozeme.

Take Powder of Crab's-eyes, of a Boars tooth, Sal Prunella of each one dram,
make a powder for 6 doses.

Take Grass-roots 3 ounces, candied Eringo one ounce, Shavings of Ivory and
Hartshorn of each two drams, the Parings of Apples one handful, Raisins one
ounce, boil them in three pound of Spring Water to two pound, to it strained,
add Syrup of Violets one ounce, sal Prunella one dram, mix them, and make an
Apozeme.

Clysters of Milk with Syrup of Violets were injected, sometimetimes every,
sometimes every other day. If Opiates, however mild, were given to allay pain,
upon it a pain and drousiness of the head, and Convulsions did infest her most
grievously.

SECT. I. CHAP. X. Of an Empyema.
IT is clearly manifest from what has been said before, An Empyema is the
product of other diseases of the breast.
that a Pleurisy, and Peripneumonie, ripneumonie, are diseases not only akin
but commutable among themselves, and successive to one another; Moreover, as
well this as that, and frequently both together, not being well cured, do pass
into an Empyema. For when a Phlegmon raised about the Pleura is brought to
suppuration, at length the Imposthume being broke, the matter falling into the
cavity of the Thorax, produces this disease. In like manner sometimes it
follows from the Lungs being inflamed: inasmuch as the ichor accumulated about
the place affected, turns into a thick and yellow humor by a long digestion,
which unless it be ejected by a Cough, either sensibly corrupting the inner
substance of the Lungs, it causes a consumptive disposition, or dissolving the
unity of the entire Lungs, and at length corroding the outmost membrane, it
slides down into the breast, and so engenders an Empyema. And one laboring
with an Imposthume or ulcer of the Lungs, although he do spit out abundant and
foetid matter (at it frequently happens in an Imposthume of the Lungs,) is not
therefore accounted obnoxious to an Empyema. For in truth, by the common
acceptance of this Term is signified a Collection of rotten matter within the
cavity of the Thorax, by which the Organs of breathing are oppressed: but that
rotten matter is wont to have a conflux thither either by a Pleurisy or
Peripneumonie, (and sometimes perhaps from a Squinancy) brought first to
suppuration and afterward broke.

Forasumch as an Empyema never begins primarily and of it self, It rarely or
never begins of it self.
but for the most part is the effect or product of other diseases, not duly
cured, it will not be requisite to make much inquisition about the causes
thereof. The formal reason or conjunct cause thereof is known well enough, (to
wit) it is a purulent matter, poured out from the Pleura, or the Lungs, or the
Larinx, into the cavity of the Thorax. But the other proper causes of the
previous effects, appertain to the Etiologies of every of them.

There is a certain dispute about the morbific matter; What the morbific matter
is.
for some contend that it is mere corruption, others not that, but that it is a
purulent matter, of which opinion is Johannes Heurnius, who averring a purulent
matter for the conjunct cause of an Empyema, distinguishes between this and
mere and pure Pus, affirming this to come to pass from a bloody nutritious
humor, i.e. from the blood it self somewhat corrupted, but capable of
digestion, but that a purulent matter is an excrementitious humor, viz. a
Serum or Ichor, which proceeds from the blood obstructed and hindered somewhere
in its Circulation. From hence we may observe concerning an Imposthume which
affords true and laudable Pus or matter, that it is for the most part compact,
every way shut up and wrapped up together either in a bladder, or (as it were)
within private Apartments, and then after it is maturated and broken, pours out
the contained humor, and is soon and easily healed. The difference of Pus and
a purulent matter.
But an Imposthume affording a purulent matter forms its nest not so bound up
and encompassed with walls, but for the most part unequal and crooked, and
being broken rather pours out filthy blood or gore than matter or Pus, and then
by reason of the successive source of excrementitious humor, it is very
difficultly healed.

Moreover, we are to consider, that each humor as well Pus as purulent matter
does sometimes stink notably, and is also sometimes very free from any bad
savor. Some maturated and broken Imposthumes pour out fetid matter, others
matters without any smell. I have often observed Imposthumes of the Lungs, as
well as Phlegmons of other parts to have this several distinction. Purulent
matter from any Ulcers stinks ill; Why both sometimes with, and sometimes
without stench.
the Spittle of consumptive persons which is esteemed to be very dangerous, for
the most part is without any scent. It is usual where the side is opened by
reason of an Empyema, that at first the matter flows out not unsweet, but after
two or three days the air having more frequently entered into the orifice, it
stinks most horribly: which stench notwithstanding after an injection of some
aromatical or vinous Spirit vanishes again in a short space. But it would be a
thing of much tediousness to denote the particular reasons of each of these
accidents and alterations, for that never so little alteration of the Pus or
purulent matter, both causes and removes the stench from them. When the
sulphurous particles are equally digested, and being subjugated to the salts
are contained in a mixture, there is no stench; but as soon as they being
loosed begin to fly away, and carry the salt particles with them (whereby they
are sharpened) they disperse a very bad stench round about. But whereas an
Injection or Lotion with vinous and aromatical liquors, being sometimes
administered to a putrid Ulcer or nest of an Empyema, frequently removes all
stench; the reason is, becase the sides of an Ulcer, no otherwise than as a
stinking pot, infect the contained liquor as with a certain ferment, and so
impresse a stink; but when that ferment of the vessel or bowel is washed or
overcome by a well-tempered and strong liquor, then that propagation of a
stench cease. From hence follows not always an ill sign, nor is it so very
good, if the Spittle of consumptive persons, and the Imposthumes of such as are
Empyematical are excerned either with, or without stench; for that I have known
it to have been to some healthful, and to others deadly in either case.
Moreover a more certain Judgment is not to be taken from thence, that the
spittle of some consumptive persons floats upon the water, and that of others
sincks.

But although we do not much disapprove of that distinction of Pus and purulent
matter, Neither the cause of an Empyema.
notwithstanding we adjudge neither only this, nor always that, to be a
conjunct cause of an Empyema. Whenas this disease succeeding a simple
Pleurisy, arises from an Imposthume being suppurated and broken in the side,
it is most commonly pure and mere Pus, which falling into the cavity of the
breast, engenders that disease. But if an Empyema be an Offspring of a
Peripneumonie (unless an Imposthume of the Lungs intervene) the ichorous matter
being accumulated about the place of the phlegmon, and after thickening by mere
concoction, it wounds the Lungs, and at length making a hole through the
membrane encompassing it, and flowing out into the Thorax, produces an Empyema.
That matter is rather to be accounted purulent than mere Pus.

The signs of an Empyema either prognosticate it while it is in fieri, The
Signs of an Empyema whilst beginning.
or indicate it plainly done. Some foregoing diseases are esteemed of the
former sort, whose issue this uses to be, of which sort are the Pleurisy,
Peripneumonie, and Squinancy, also sometimes a stroke or wound of the breast,
and sometimes other distempers thereof, not well cured, nor discharged; out of
which the suspicion will be greater of an Empyema to ensue, if after one or two
weeks without abundant Spittle, the shivering of an Ague and fainting of the
Spirits overtakes one. Then after fourteen or twenty days, there will be signs
of an Empyema fully made, as difficult breathing, When perfect.
a heaviness of the breast, a swimming to and fro of the matter, and a sense of
pain from the position of the body changed, thirst and a small fever almost
continual, redness of the cheeks, disquietness of the whole body, and watching.

An Empyema is distinguished many ways, viz. First according to the distemper
going before, whose Offspring it is; also according to its seat, one while in
the right side of the breast, another while in the left, and another while in
the whole capacity thereof; and lastly, as to the morbific matter, which is
either mere and laudable pus, or purulent matter, and this one while gentle,
and benign, and another while sharp and stinking.

Prognostics of this disease begin as well before as after incision;
Prognostics of this disease.
the former determins whether the side ought to be opened or not, also it
presages of what sort the event will be, either with or without opening. If an
Empyema succeeds more slow, after the first distemper, to wit not before the
thirtieth or fortieth day, whenas the strength is very much worn, and the Lungs
are vitiated, and their structure hurt; and also if a fever remain as it were
hectic, the breathing short and painful, the Pulse weak and quick, with cold
sweat, and with a Diarrhea or wasting looseness, and frequent faintings of the
Spirits, then the state of such a person being evidently desperate, does not
admit of any opening; let a Physician suffer him to dye without bleeding, lest
he seem to murder him. But if on the contrary, after manifest signs of an
Empyema more maturely perfected, the painfulness of the Lungs or side, as also
the fever and other symptoms abate, and the Pulse, and strength of the
Spirits are in vigor, it will be lawful safely to advance to cutting, and
thereby to hope a happy success. Incision being made, if white Pus duly
concocted or otherwise laudable skip out with ease, and thence the heaviness of
the breast and difficult breathing abate, and the patient is better as to the
other passions, there will not the least doubt remain of his cure: but if no
Pus, or that which is bad, if thin, something bloody, or stinking, flow from
the side being opened, we can conceive thereby but small hope of recovery.

Hippocrates among the presaging signs of a mortal Empyema, What it signifies
when the Probe is gilded by the Empyematical matter.
recounts that of the Probes being colored by the Pus, as by fire; or what we
often observe, and sometimes without any evil event, if the silver Probe being
put into the orifice of the opened side, be presently tinged with a color as
it were of Gold or Copper; which surely signifies no other thing but that the
sulphurous particles of the pus, or purulent matter are so exalted, and
loosened from the bond of mixture, that easily departing they may be affixed to
any other body, and especially silver, whereunto they are akin. Sometimes I
have seen Venison killed by long and wearisome hunting, presently baked in an
Oven for Entertainment, become not only most tender, insomuch that it might be
taken out with Spoons, but even to have gilded a bright silver Spoon at the
first touch. The reason whereof is the same with the former; viz. that the
flesh was so disposed to putrefaction by too much exercise while the animal
lived, that the particles of the Sulphur being exempt from Concretion, and apt
to fly away, presently adhere to any other fit subject: But this by the by.

As to what belongs to the curatory part of an Empyema, The cure of the disease.
we ought chiefly to consider whether the signs of this disease, as being now
perfected, be certain, or doubtful. In the former case there will not be much
need of Medicine, but the body only being prepared beforehand, we may
immediately proceed to the opening of the side. Wherefore, if from a Pleurisy
or Peripneumonie not rightly cured, or from blood poured out after a stroke,
fall, or inward wound, a fluctuation of Pus or purulent matter, or bloody
within the cavity of the Thorax, be perceived, with no Spittle, or with little,
there will not be need that we dwell longer on maturing or expectorating
Medicines, but the belly being loosened, and the blood and humors rightly
temperated by Juleps, Apozemes and Anodynes, either that a bare Section be
ordained; or that in tender and fearful persons a Cautery be applied between
the 6th and 7th Vertebra, The cutting or opening the side.
and after the Eschar is raised, the Incision-knife be obliquely fore'd by
little and little, toward the hinder and upper part, until it penetrate into
the very Cavity of the Thorax; afterward, a little silver Pipe being put in,
let the contained matter be sent out by degrees; notwithstanding in such manner
that, if his strength will bear, an evacuation of the whole humor be
accelerated; for a portion thereof being left within, The Empyematical matter
is went to stink by the often admission of the Air.
often contracts a hideous stench, within a few days (by reason of the Air, as
is abovesaid, being admitted) which evil, that it may be provided against, or
soon removed, a vulnerary and abstersive liquor is to be cast in twice or
thrice a day by a Siphon or Syringe. It will not be requisite to prescribe
particularly the other things belonging to this operation, and the process
thereof; for that each of these things are evidently known to any of the more
expert Surgeons, and are used in familiar practice. After incision and the
appertaining administrations rightly performed, there will not be much besides
left for a Physician to do. It is convenient there be a right course of Diet,
a frequent loosening the belly (as often as need shall be) by Clysters; and
moreover it behooves us to prescribe remedies vulgarly called Vulnerary, which
hinder the dissolution of blood, and the profusion thereof into ferosities
injurious to the breast.

But if the Signs of this Disease be less certain, Those things which persuade
of forbid a Paracentesis.
and (as for the most part it is wont to be, from a Peripneumonie and
Imposthume of the Lungs going before) altogether doubtful, Incision must not
too soon or rashly be made. For I have known some spitting forth a purulent
matter, yea a fetid Pus, with painful breathing, and heaviness of the breast,
to have undergone a Paracentesis in vain, and not altogether exempt from hurt.
Wherefore, until it is apparent by pathognomic signs that it is an Empyema
confirmed, expectorating medicines (as are before prescribed for the cure of a
Peripneumonie) as also things gently moving evacuation by Urine and Sweat, may
be used for some time: But these availing nothing, and the Empyema still
remaining or increasing, (because whilst there is strength it is better to try
doubtful Medicines than none) proceed to a Paracentesis.

As to the Forms of Medicines requisite to the curing an Empyema, Forms of
Remedies.
before Incision, the same remedies that are prescribed in a Peripneumonie are
convenient; but the Paracentesis being made, these following will be chiefly in
use.

Against fainting of the Spirits, and swoonings which happen in that operation,
or afterward, let the following Julep be at hand to be taken now and then
about four or five spoonfuls.

Take Balm and Black-cherry water, of each six ounces, Aq. Mirabilis one ounce,
Cardiacs.
powder of Pearl one dram, syrup of Gilliflowers one ounce. Mingle for a
Julep.

The following Decoction to be drunk three or four times a day.

Take of Hart's-tongue, Speed-well, Agrimony, Coltsfoot, Mousear, Sanicle, A
Vulnerary Decoction.
of each one handful, Madder and Chervil-roots of each one ounce, Barley half
and ounce, red Cicers half an ounce, Raisins an ounce and half, boil them in
four pound of Spring water to half, sweeten it with clarified Honey, or with
Syrup of Mouse-ear as you take it, to your pleasure. If a Fever be wanting,
the following Pills may be taken from one scruple to half a dram, Evening and
Morning.

Take powder of Crab's-eyes two drams, Flower of Sulphur one dram, Sal Prunella
half a dram, Spec. Diarrhodon Abbatis one scruple, Venice Turpentine washed,
make a mass formed into small Pills, or omitting the Turpentine take the powder
from half an ounce to two scruples, twice in a day.

Examples of persons sick of an Empyema are not so frequent, An History of one
troubled with an Empyema, the cutting of whom was mortal.
and those cured of that Distemper more seldom. I have known two, unwilling to
admit of an Incision prescribed by all means by the Physicians, to have fatally
expired, and their dead bodies I have dissected. Also I saw that operation
administered to two others, whereof one recovered health, the other dyed
consumptive; but the reason thereof was, his Lungs being notably corrupted, and
his strength utterly lost, the too late opening his side conferred no help to
him; but did much depress his spirits, weak enough before, and wasted his
strength. He whose side was opened, had Lungs found enough; but from the
Imposthume of the side being broke inwardly, the matter falling into the cavity
of the Thorax did so compress the Diaphragma that he could scarcely breathe.
The Surgeon without a Caustic thrust in his Incision-knife between the 6th
and 7th Vertebra, and having made a hole quite through his flesh, Of another
who recovered by that remedy.
he put in his Pipe. A bloody ichor first flowed out, afterward being drawn
away by a moderate quantity at times for three days, it flowed out without any
stench; but afterward as often as the Orifice was opened, a most horrid smell
came forth, exceeding the stench of any Jakes, though never so stinking, and
infected the whole Chamber with the ill scent: Moreover it remained so for many
days, until by injections made of Myrrh and bitter herbs, boiled in Water and
Wine, and very often administered every day, at length it was extinguished; by
the daily use of which, the morbific matter and at length all the fordidness
being washed away, all flowing out ceased; and last of all the Orifice being
closed, the patient recovered his entire health. I dissected the dead bodies of
those who dyed, when by no persuasion of Physician or Friends they would admit
of the opening of their side. One I have spoke of otherwhere, The History of
one who dyed because he was not cut.
the result whereof was, the Pus streaming from the Imposthume raised in the
Pleura, and in the intercostal Muscles, and broken internally, had wasted part
of the affected place, and of the contiguous Lung, with a Sphacelus or
Gangrene, and so corroding the Diaphragma, and a hole being made on the right
side thereof, it had descended into the Viscera or bowels of the lower belly:
and there in the whole passage of the Ventricle and Intestines, the outer Coats
on which the purulent matter had fallen, appeared eaten and discolored; and at
length the purulent matter corroding and boring through the intestinum rectum,
it came forth through the fundament together with his excrement. The sick man
being strong and impatient of any medicine, endured the tyranny hereof for
about two months, but in the mean while he lived miserably, afflicted with a
light Fever, thirst, inquietude, pain of the stomach, and frequent tumbling up
and down, and almost with continual watchings. His body being opened after his
decease, a most horrid stench, exceeding any Jakes, diffused it self throughout
the whole Chamber. The Anatomy of another who dyed by an Empyema, A fourth
History like the former.
afforded not so vast an effusion of purulent matter. This indeed had its nest
in his side, from whence falling into the cavity of the Thorax, and there
accumulated in a vast heap, and continually defiling his Lungs drenched
therein, it caused a slow and as it were a hectic Fever, whereby the patient,
being very old, dyed.

SECT. I. CHAP. XI. Of an Imposthume of the Lungs.
A Vomica of the Lungs is something akin to Empyema or Peripneumonie, Vomica
Pulmonis a disease seldom observed,
considering that the morbific matter is always mere Pus, which notwithstanding
is generated in the Lungs without a Fever and Phlegmon, yea without any great
Cough or Spittle, as it were silently, and without noise; and frequently this
evil does not discover it self before it kills the patient. Galen makes mention
of this in lib. 1. de locis affectis; but among Authors who have written
Systemes and the Practical parts of Physic, mention thereof is seldom of
scarce to be met with. Tulpius in lib. 2. chap. 10. describes this distemper
after this sort. This evil (meaning an Imposthume of the Lungs) lurks in the
beginning so secretly that it scarce discovers any signs of it self, besides,
in the first place, a little dry Cough, and presently moist; which continuing
for some time, the breath is drawn with difficulty, the spirit fails, and the
body withers by degrees, although in the mean time the Spittle makes no show
either of pus or blood; and if the Imposthume break by way of surprisal, the
man is killed immediately. It is wont sometimes so to happen, but I have known
many who in an Imposthume rising insensibly, being maturated, and at length
breaking, have spit up g^^t plenty of fetid corruption; and though with voiding
daily such a Spittle, for many weeks, nay months, they became very weak, and as
it were consumptive, yet at length by the help of Medicines, after the Ulcer
has been mundified, and dried, they have recovered their health entirely.

This disease, The formal reason and conjunct cause thereof.
if we search into the formal reason and conjunct cause thereof, is in truth a
concourse of ill humors gathered in some part of the Lungs; whose matter
although it be heterogene and an enemy to nature, notwithstanding from the
beginning appears not sharp, or irritative. For when at first being separated
from the blood, it is deposited in some hollow place of the Lungs, perhaps in
some bladdery cell, it does neither raise a Cough nor produce a Fever; but
after wards when sensibly increased it compresses the neighboring Vessels
bringing blood, and moreover insinuates into the very blood passing by,
incongruous Effluviums; from thence a small Fever succeeds, with a certain
disquietude, and feebleness; and at length being accumulated to its fullness,
and maturated by a long digestion into mere pus; breaking its nest very much
distended before, it flows out every where all about. But if the ways are not
open for the issuing of the pus, it incontinently mingles it self with the
blood, and either empoysons it, or impedes it from Circulation; or rushing by
heaps into the Tracheal passages, it does fill most of them at once, and so
stuffs them, that a sufficient entrance is denied to air to kindle the blood,
and presently the viatl flame expires: but if this matter find passage, and
flow by degrees into the Trachea, from whence again it may be presently carried
away, and spit out, there will be then some truce of life, with hope and
opportunity of cure. And indeed I have known may cured of this disease.

The usual matter of an Imposthume of the Lungs is mere Pus, The morbifick
matter.
which often stinks notably, and by that differs from the Spittle which is
ejected in a Peripneumonie or a Consumption of the Lungs. But whence that
matter proceeds in the beginning thereof, and of what disposition it was before
it was ripened into pus, I cannot so easily determine: because the seeds of
this disease being privily sowed, and growing up secretly, spring wholly from
an occult original; wherefore its procatarctick or more remote causes lie
concealed, yea while it begins and increases, can neither be discovered by any
pathognomical Signs, nor can any prognostic be devised, before it discovers it
self with a mortal stroke, but the whole procedure thereof is treacherous.

Now if after the Imposthume is broke, and the spitting up of pus with an easy
discharge being begun, with a constancy of strength, there be means offered for
some method of cure, the chief Indications according to the common custom in
most diseases will be these, viz. Curatory, preservatory, and vital. The first
commands the matter of the Imposthume speedily to be discharged by Spittle, and
that the sides thereof should be cleansed and healed as much as is possible.
The second Indication provides against the conflux of new matter to that nest,
or other adjoining places of the Lungs (whence a Consumption may be engendered).
The third restores the languishing of the Spirits, the lost strength, and the
frustrated Nourishment.

1. As to the first Indication, remedies commonly called expectorating, First
Indication.
and of them those that are more hot and sharp, and do very much cleanse and
dry, but especially (for that for the most part here a Fever is wanting)
sulphurous remedies are expedient; which also may be prescribed according to
the following forms.

Take of Tincture of Sulphur three drams, take from seven drops to twenty,
Forms of Remedies.
at bedtime, and early in the morning in a spoonful of Syrup of the Juice of
Ground-Ivie. Or,

Take our syrup of Sulphur, as before set down, 6 ounces, let a spoonful be
taken at the same hours.

Take the dried leaves of Ground Ivy, Germander, white Maidenhair, Coltsfoot,
Hyssop, white Hore-hound, Savory, of each one handful, Enula-campane, Orris,
and Chervil-roots, of each one ounce, Anniseeds half an ounce, boil them in 6
pound of Spring Water to three pound and a half, adding toward the end
White Wind 6 ounces, clarified Honey three ounces. Let the strained Liquor be
clarified, and kept for use: the dose 6 ounces warm, three times a day. Or,

Take of Limewater 6 pound, put it in a Glass with a large mouth, hanging in
it the following bag:

Take the dried leaves of Germander, Ground Ivy, white Horehound, of each one
handful, Orris and Enula-campane sliced one ounce and a half, Anniseeds bruised
two ounces, Liquorish an ounce and half, Raisins stoned three ounces, let them
be stopped and stand cold. Pour out for use, the bag remaining.

Take Lohoch Sanum three ounces, Species Diaireos two drams and a half, flower
of Sulphur one dram and a half, of simple Oxymel two ounces, make a Linctus to
be lick with a Liquorish stick.

Take the powder of Hedge-mustard, Ground Ivy, of each half an ounce, flower of
Sulphur a dram and a half, syrup of Sulphur (or of the juice of Ground Ivy)
what will suffice to make a Lohoch.

Take of fine Mirrh, of white Amber, of each half an ounce, Sulphur Vivum,
Auripigment, of each two drams, the rinds of Pistaches one dram and a half,
make a powder for Fumigation, to be used in a Paper-funnel, morning and
evening.

2. The preservatory Indication, abolishing the morbific matter, Second
Indication.
and so providing against a Phthisis prone to succeed; endeavors the purifying
of the blood, and strengthening the Lungs, to which ends, Purgers, Vulnerarie
Decoctions, distilled waters and physical Drinks, are convenient.

Take of the Decoction of Senna of Gereon (with one dram and half of Agarick)
three ounces and a half, purging syrup of Apples one ounce, Aq. Mirabilis two
drams, make a potion to be taken with government once in a week.

The form of the Wound-drink let be the same as was prescribed for an Empyema
after opening, or 4 or 6 ounces of the Decoction common in Shops, three times a
day, (because here is no fever.)

Take of Firre-tops 6 M. fresh Ground Ivy, Hyssop, Sage, Rockets, Hedge
Mustard, St. Barbaries herb or Winter-cresses, of each four handfuls, the seeds
of the Sun-flower 6 ounces, sweet Fennel-seeds two ounces, Enula campane,
Orris-roots, of each 3 ounces, being cut and bruised, pour upon them 8 pound of
Brunswick Mum or Spruce-Beer, distill it in a cold Still, let the liquor be all
mixed, and when used, sweetened at pleasure with syrup of the juice of
Ground Ivy; the dose three or four ounces, three times a day.

Take of the roots of Sarsaparilla six ounces, China two ounces, of each of the
Sanders six drams, Shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each half an ounce,
Mastick-wood one ounce, being cut and bruised infuse them in 12 pound of
Spring Water, boil them to half, adding one ounce of Liquorish, Raisins 4
ounces, let the strained liquor be kept for ordinary drink.

3. The vital Indication prescribes Cordials, Anodynes, Third Indications.
and a convenient course of diet. The same forms of Medicines for the most part
are expedient here, which were prescribed for an Empyema after incision, and
also the same diet as was ordained in a beginning consumption; besides, in this
case Asses-milk oftentimes does much good. As to the curing this disease, I
have observed, that an Issue made in the side, for the most part does signally
profit. I remember two suffering under this distemper, by coughing up
plentifully mere stinking Pus or corruption after the Imposthume broke, to have
been healed by this Remedy in a short space of time. The Histories of the Cures
shall be afterward annexed. Fontinels in the side very often greatly help in
this disease.
In both these by a shallow orifice made in the side by incision, mere Pus
began within three or four days to flow out, and then the Spittle began to be
abated; and after that flowing, increased from day to day, for some time
continued, the Spittle altogether ceased, and the Patent recovered his entire
health.

The reason of this admirable Effect seems to be, that the part affected of the
Lungs, or that which is bordering upon it, while the disease was arising, or
before, grew to the very side, and therefore Nature had endeavored by this way
the thrusting forth of the Pus or matter contained in the Imposthume; and for
that cause perhaps had made secret passages even to the superficies of the
side; wherefore, afterwarts an issue being laid open by a knife, the excretion
of the morbific matter was conducted thither. It is also probable, that a
certain part of the Lobe of the Lungs at first grew to the side in the
diseased, and by reason of the cleaving thereto, afterward the Imposthume had
its rise; for whereas that part being almost immovable, could not be stirred
like to the other parts of the Lungs, the morbific matter was deposited there,
and was the better able to reside or form its nest there.

Although the Imposthume of the Lungs be thought a very rare distemper with
some Physicians, and by Tulpius judged so mortal, that when it breaks it kills
out right; yet I have known many to have labored under this disease, and by
the help of Medicines to have recovered their pristine health. We may here
describe two or three of the more remarkable Histories of them.

A Gentleman of a middle age, and before strong and continually healthful,
finding himself not well, without any apparent cause, contracted as it were a
crazie disposition; for being without pain, without Vomit, Cough or notable
Fever, in a short time grown weak, he became without any appetite, unapt to
sleep, full of thirst and hot about the precordia; this person was handled a
long while by some Physicians as Scorbutical, and by others as hectical; and
after various methods of healing were assayed in vain, at length the disease
fallying out as from an ambush, appeared manifeltly. For whilst on a certain
night being more unquiet than usual, he tossed himself very much in his bed,
all on a sudden the Imposthume breaking in his Lungs, a large quantity of
stinking pus was thrown out by Cough, so that in four or five hours he threw
off about two pints. Moreover, after his Cough continuing about two months, he
daily spit out purulent matter, thick and very stinking, until his flesh being
consumed, and he wholly spent, was reduced to languishing, and a notable
Consumption. From the stench of his Spittle and breath the whole Chamber was so
filled, that his Servants or those attending him, could not endure the ill
scent thereof.

After the Imposthume was thus broken, I and two other well-known Physicians
being advised with, with all circumspection we prescribed Medicines to absterge
and heal the Imposthume, and to cleanse the Blood and Lungs, and to redeem him
from an imminent Consumption. A Tincture, and syrup of Sulphur, together with
Pectoral and Vulnerary Decoctions and Distillations were taken; also Lohochs
and balsamic Pills, day after day in a constant course, with Clysters, gentle
Purgatives and Diuretics, were taken between whiles: then these, Vaporations
and Fumigations, as well sulphurous as arsenical, were used morning and
evening. After these things being long and carefully used did help nothing, I
often propounded the opening of the Thorax; but the sick man obstinately
rejecting this operation, said he would rather dye than be murdered; yet at
length, when I assured him that this remedy, or none, was further to be
attempted, he began to deliberate with himself, and immediately baring his
breast, he suffered me to search a place where I might apply a Cauterie; the
business was presently put out of doubt, for a Tumor appeared on the left side
of the Sternon, between the 5th and 6th Vertebra. Instead of a Cautery, I
applied thereto a suppurating Plaster, and within three days the top of that
swelling became red and soft: out of which, being the next day opened, first a
thin ichor, and a little after a yellow and concocted pus flowed out, and
afterward it continued daily to stream out more plentifully: from that time
his stinking Spittle began to abate, and within fourteen days it ceased quite;
the morbific matter obtaining through that orifice both an easy and more
convenient issue. Although by the effect it was manifest, that the passage of
that orifice lay open into the breast, and perhaps into the middle of the
Lungs, yet no liquor cast in by a Syringe, could either penetrate or be forced
in thither: so secret and intricate are the conveyances which Nature forms for
her last aids; that by the same paslage by which the morbific matter is
exterminated, nothing more hurtful can enter. This opening of the side was at
length changed into an Issue, and a Pease or a wooden pill being put in, there
came forth daily for half a year together plentiful ichor; and in the mean
time this well-known person, all corruption of the breast being shook off, and
the fleshy habit of his body being recovered, became healthful in all respects,
and lastly, that issue being removed to his arm, he bears no sign of that nor
any other disease in his breast.

After this Cure so by chance accomplished, it happened I performed another like
it, on purpose, not less successefully; for shortly I was sent for to a noble
Lady which had been for many years obnoxious to the heat of the precordia with
a Cough. One day, when she coughed she was thoroughly sensible of something
broke in her Lungs, and presently she voided abundance of mere pus, and that
stinking; after that, this kind of Spittle continuing with a Cough, for a week,
notwithstanding the use of remedies, seemed rather augmented than diminished, I
advised to have an Issue cut in her side, near the very place whence she
perceived the pus to ascend, which she readily granted: Within three days, from
the orifice being opened mere pus began to flow out, like that she discharged
by Cough. Then after the morbific matter had issued out by that Fontinel, both
the Cough and the spitting of pus wholly ceased, and within a Fortnight the
patient recovered her firm health.

After this I was sent for to another, viz. strong man, and as strong a
drinker; who being affected with an Imposthume of the Lungs, also spit up an
abundance of pus and very stinking matter. This Patient by a certain rude
contumacy abhorred any issue, wherefore he would not suffer any to be made in
his side; notwithstanding he took any Medicines offered to him, by a long use
of which Remedies he escaped free from that disease: the Medicines whereby he
chiefly received help were prepared of Sulphur, as our Syrup and Tincture,
taken daily and very frequently. To these for Vehicles were added one while a
Decoction, another while a pectoral Hydromel, another while Limewater, with an
infusion of pectoral, as well as vulnerary Ingredients. Moreover Fumigations
and Smokes, especially of sulphurous and arsenical Ingredients, did contribute
very notable help.

SECT. I. CHAP. XII. Of an Asthma.
AMong the Diseases whereby the Region of the breast is wont to be infested, An
Asthma a most terrible disease.
if you regard their tyranny and cruelty, an Asthma (which sometimes by reason
of a peculiar symptom is denominated likewise an Orthopnoea) does not deserve
the last place; for there is scarce any thing more sharp and terrible than the
fits hereof; the organs of breathing, and the precordia themselves, which are
the foundations and Pillars of Life, are shaken by this disease, as by an
Earthquake, and so totter, that nothing less than the ruin of the whole animal
Fabric seems to be threatened; for breathing, whereby we chiefly live, is very
much hindered by the assault of this disease, and is in danger, or runs the
risque of being quite taken away.

An Asthma is denominated from (...), (which is to breath pursie, or
difficultly) and may have this description, that it is a difficult, frequent,
and pursie breathing, with a great shaking of the breast, and for the most part
without any Fever.

The act of breathing depends as well on moving the Lungs, The causes of
respiration hurt.
the Structure whereof ought to be of that fort that its passages, and all the
pores may perpetually be open, for the free sucking in and letting out air; as
from the parts or organs moving them, which by alternate turns of Systole and
Diastole, do cause the hollowness of the breast, and consequently the Lungs
themselves to be dilated, and contracted: whereas therefore there are many and
diverse reasons of disturbance, whereby respiration is prejudiced, for the most
part they may all be reduced to these two heads; viz. that there is a fault
either in moving the Lungs, or in the parts or instruments that ought to move
them, and from hence the differences and kinds of this disease are best of all
designed; for according to the various nature and position of the morbific
cause, it is called an Asthma, either merely pneumonick, proceeding altogether
from the passages bringing in air being obstructed, or not enough open; or it
is merely convulsive, which only arises by reason of a defect of fault in the
motive organs; or mixed, when either parts conspire in the fault, which origin
every great and inveterate Asthma is wont to have; of each of these we will
treat in order.

1. The ancient Physicians, The Ancients allowed the cause of it only from the
Bronchia obstructed:
and for the most part hitherto the Moderns have only acknowledged the first
kind of Asthma, judging the next cause, and almost the only cause of this
Disease, to be the straitness of the Bronchis, viz. inasmuch as the spaces of
those passages, being either straightened together by obstruction, or compression,
as often as the use of breathing is required, do not admit of plenty enough of
Air, wherefore, for the more free inspiration of air, as shall be needful,
the organs of breathing do most difficultly labor, with throes most frequently
repeated. But that some are found obnoxious to fits of an Asthma, Or vapors
from the Spleen or Womb, but erroneously.
without manifest taint of the Lungs, it was wont to be ascribed to vapors
from the Spleen, Womb, Mesentery, or some other bowel, undeservedly enough; but
surely that passion, without the straitness of the Bronchia, or fault of those
bowels we have in another place sufficiently evidenced to arise from Cramps of
the moving parts, and shall be presently clearly made out. But in the mean time
by what means it may arise also from the passages of the Trachea obstructed, or
compressed, it lies upon me to declare.

The straitness of the Bronchia, After what manner the straitness of the
Bronchis arises.
inducing the first kind of an Asthma, is supposed to come to pass by an
obstruction, as often as either thick humors and viscous, or purulent matter
or blood extravasated, are forced in upon them; or that little swellings, or
Schirrus's, or little Stones, stop up their passages; or finally that a Catarrh
of a serous humor suddenly distills upon them. Moreover the same distemper is
thought to be raised by compression, as often as matter of that kind (and of
every kind of them) shall cleave to the passages of the pneumonic Artery or
vein. Surely, an asthmatical disposition depends upon these various causes and
manners of disturbance: but all invasions of the disease, or at least the
greater fits are usually provoked by reason of some accidents or occasions. For
while the stream of blood sliding and running down gently can be content with a
small breathing, it passes through the precordia without great labor either of
Lungs or Breast. But being boiling and passing through the Lungs more
impetuously, it requires a more full inspiration of air; for the freer
admittance of this through strait passages presently all the breathing organs
are alarmed into most frequent throes. Whatever causes an effervescence of the
blood is the evident cause of an Asthma.
Whatsoever therefore makes the blood to boil, or raises it into an
effervescence, as violent motion of the body or mind, excess of extern cold or
heat, the drinking of Wine, Venery, yea sometimes mere heat of the Bed does
cause asthmatical assaults to such as are predisposed. It is usual that those
who are obnoxious to this disease oftentimes dare not enter into a Bed, only
sleep in a Chair, or on a bed, being covered with garments. The reason whereof
is, Why Asthmatical Persons are worse in bed.
that the body covered and heated with bed-cloaths, the blood being a little
raised into a more quick motion. and grown hot, requires a more plentiful
sucking in of air than may be supplied from the passages of the Trachea being
straightened: for the more blood passes the Lungs each Systole and Diastole, by so
much, for the enkindling and eventilation thereof, the air ought to be more
plentifully and quickly brought in, and sent forth: to which task (when by
reason of impediments it is not easily dispatched) yet in some manner to be
performed, the ultimate endeavors of all the parts appointed for breathing are
made use of with a great contention of the whole breast. Moreover the blood
being stirred, is not only an occasion, but also in some part a cause in those
that are asthmatically predisposed; for the vessels bringing blood being
thereby more filled and distended within the lungs, compress the Tracheal
passages being already very strait, and render them much more close.

II. A convulsive Asthma (which we judged to be the second kind of this
disease, A convulsive Asthma.
and to be raised without any great obstruction or compression of the Bronchia,
from the mere Cramps of the moving fibers) is not limited to one place, or to
any peculiar organ, but being of a diffused energy, it is extended to almost
all the parts employed in breathing (whereof one while this, another while
that, or some other is in fault. Its Seat manifold and diffused.
) For a convulsive affection inciting an Asthmatical invasion, has regard to
the moving fibers of the vessels of the Lungs, to the Diaphragma, to the
muscles of the breast, to the Nerves, which belong unto the Breast, or Lungs,
nay to the origin of those Nerves planted within the Brain; and whilst the
morbisic matter dwells in every of these places, hindering or perverting the
work or breathing, it brings on the fits of this Disease, as in another Tract
we have somewhile since plainly demonstrated. For the animal Spirits destined
to the function of breathing, if at any time they are very much molested and
constrained into irregular motions, enter inordinately into the fibers as well
nervous as moving of the organs of breathing, and make them for that cause one
while to be contracted, another while to be distended irregularly, as also
their solemn and equal turns of Systole and Diastole to be variously disturbed
or hindered.

The morbific cause or matter provlking the Spirits prepared for the pneumonic
work, as in diverse places, so chiefly in these three, The morbific matter
consists in several places.
is wont to advance its force or power, viz. 1. Either in the muscular fibers
themselves, or 2. In the branches or nervous slips, or lastly within the Brain
by the origin of the Nerves.

1. As to the former, 1. In the muscular fibers.
the heterogene matter being inimical to the Spirits is sometimes shaken off
from the Brain into the trunks of the Nerves, and from thence by their passages
and slips, if perhaps it shall be in very little quantity, without very great
or sensible hurt slides down to their lower ends. And when it falls in the
nervous fibers, and being heaped up daily, shall at length sensibly increase
unto a great quantity, it begins to trouble the inmate Spirits, and to provoke
them into asthmatical Convulsions; which forthwith infest, and are increased by
reason of evident causes, neither do they utterly cease, until the stock of
matter so accumulated, be wholly dispersed, and consumed; afterward when it
being renewed arises to a fullness, the fits of that disease return, and are for
that cause most frequently periodieal, as is manifest to common observation.
According to this account we do deservedly suspect the cause of a convulsive
asthma sometimes to lurk in the muscular coats of the pneumonick vessels, also
sometimes in the fibers of the Diaphragma, or the Processes thereof toward the
loins. It is not very probable that the nest of this disease consists within
the fibers of this or that pectoral muscle, although in Scorbutical persons
from these also possessed with a convulsive matter, we have known pains to have
risen with breathing being hurt.

2. But truly (even as in another place we have not only demonstrated by
reason, 2. Within the Nerves and their ensoldings.
but by the observations and Histories of the sick) a convulsive asthma is
often incurred, as often as the morbific matter sliding down into the pneumonic
Nerves, sticks in some place within their passages, and especially about their
foldings: whence as often as it is accumulated to a plenitude it begins to be
moved and shaken; wherefore the spirits lying lurking, and flowing into the
ongans of breathing disturbed, are forced into irregularity, and those spirits
presently affect other inmates of the fibers of the Lungs and breast, and
provoke them into unequal and asthmatical convulsions. For this cause and the
reason of the disturbance, we have declared that not only invasions of this
disease, but also the precordia being disturbed thereby the Cardiack passions
do arise.

3. 3. Near the Origines of the Nerves.
We have clearly unfolded by anatomical observations that the cause of a
convulsive Asthma sometimes consists in the hinder part of the head near the
origines of the nerves. Surely I have observed some patients, who when, lying
sick of other desperate diseases, they were also asthmatick, found it necessary
to be whether in bed or chair with their head always erect, or looking down,
but lying on their back or leaning backwards incontinently they gaped for
breath as if they were dying, and hardly breathed; the cause whereof (as
appeared by dissection after they were dead) was only a huge collection of
sharp Serum which was gathered within the cavities of the brain; which, if by
reason of the head inclining back wards, it fell into the origin of the Nerves
of the eighth pair, presently the precordia, and chiefly the breathing organs
were affected with horrid cramps. Moreover sometimes for this very reason it
seems that Orthopnoick persons cannot lie down in their bed without danger of
choking, but are constrained to sit up with an erect body.

III. 3. A mixed Asthma or partly Pneumonic and partly Convulsive.
Although an Asthma is sometimes simple from the beginning, viz. either merely
pneumonical, or convulsive, notwithstanding after either disease has for some
time encreafed, for the most part it gains the other to it self: hence it may
be concluded every inveterate Asthma to be a mixed affection, stirred up by the
default partly of the Lungs ill framed, and partly by default of the Nerves and
nervous fibers appertaining to the breathing parts. For when the pneumonic
passages being straightened or obstructed from some cause, do not admit of a free
sucking in, and breathing out of the air, for that cause also the blood, yea
and nervous humor, being hindered in their courses, and compelled to proceed
slowly and to stagnate, do fasten their feculency and dregs upon the nervous
parts; whence the passages of the spirits are obstructed, or perverted, and at
length a convulsive taint accrues to them. Moreover the blood, being not duly
inspired and eventilated within the precordia, at length being vitiated in its
temperament supplies the brain and nervous stock but with a depraved juice,
whose faults do chiefly punish the organs of respiration before hurt and
debilitated. In like manner also the evil is reciprocrated on the contrary
part, as often as this disease begins by fault of the nervous stock; for as much
as the motion of the Lungs is often stopped or hindered, by reason of Convulsions
in the muscular fibers, both the blood and the nervous juice being restrained
from their usual motions, do heap up dregs and filths, fastening them to the
parts containing them, by which not only viscous humors and obstructing of the
passages, but even Tumors and other more solid concretes vitiating the
structure of the Lungs, are produced.

Therefore if when an Asthma being for some time confirmed and become habitual,
The causes of an Asthma recited.
shall attain to frequent fits, and those emergent upon every occasion; the
conjunct cause thereof, and also the procuring cause is placed as well inwardly
in the lung it self, as outwardly in the Fibers and Nerves, and in the spirits
employed for the function of breathing. Neither will it be difficult, by
seeking diligently each of these things, to find in any case of the patient, as
well the chief nests, as nourishment of this morbifick matter. But as to the
evident causes they are very many, and also of diverse sorts. For hitherto
ought to be referred whatsoever move, either the blood and the other humors,
or trouble the animal spirits and force them into irregularities. Asthmatical
persons can endure nothing violent, or unaccustomed: from excess of cold, or
heat, from any vehement motion of body or mind, by any great change of air, or
of the year, or from the slightest errors about the things not natural, yea
from a thousand other occasions they fall into fits of difficult breathing.

As to the prognostic part, The Prognostics of the Disease.
an inveterate Asthma is difficulty or scarce ever cured; notwithstanding the
medicines and method of healing being rightly ordered, oftentimes great succor
is afforded, viz. the fierceness of the fits is diminished, longer respites are
procured, yea, even the dangers of life it self, seeming frequently to be
imminent are removed.

This disease growing worse, either threatens a Consumption, or a Dropsy, or
some drowzy, or convulsive affect; accordingly as the Serum by reason of
perspiration being hindered, being more abundantly accumulated (because the sick
cannot sleep enough in their beds) it is either fixed in the lungs, or
transferred into the habit of the body, or into the brain it self. For this very
reason the diseased do find themselves better in Summer, when they breath more
freely, than in Winter; likewise better in hot countries than in cold, the
South or West wind blowing, than the North or East.

Of the curatory method of an Asthma there will be two chief indications, Two
chief Indications.
or rather so many distinct methods of healing, viz. Curatory and preservatory.
The first instructs what is to be performed in the fit it self, that the
Patient may be delivered from present danger; the other, by what out of the
fit, we ought to endeavor the taking away the morbifick cause, lest that
distemper be repeated more often, or more heavily.

1. Therefore a fit urging, there will be two chief intentions of curing, viz.
first, What is to be done in the fit.
that a more free breathing be procured, as well upon the account of air, as of
the Lungs, at least so far, as may suffice to support life; and secondly, that
the organs of breathing may be withdrawn, and restrained, as soon as may be,
from the Convulsions begun, and usually obstinately continuing.

1. As to what respects the former, 1 Intention to facilitate breathing.
let the Patient be placed in an upright position of body, in a more open
place, and pretty airy, free from Smoke and breath of bystanders; then let it
be endeavored that the Lungs, being made free from all obstruction, and inward
oppression, and also external compression, may be able to draw and change the
breath more easily. For these purposes lest the bulk of the nether bowels
compress or straiten the precordia, the belly is to be loosened by a Clyster,
the apparel and what ever binds about the Breast to be loosened; also when in
this case either from the blood swelling up inordinately within the Pneumonic
vessels, or from the Serum distilling out of the Arteries and Glandules into
the tracheal passages, they are wont to be oppressed, the impetuosity and
instigations of either humor ought to be restraind and appeased; insomuch that
if strength endure, and the pulse be strong enough, Phlebotomy is oftentimes
convenient. Moreover those things are carefully to be administered which
dispatch away the Serum and superfluities of the boiling blood by urine, as
well as sweatings: to which intention, Juleps, Apozemes, commonly called
Pectorals, do notably conduce; yea, powders of shells, millepedes prepared,
Spirits and volatile salts, are successfully used. In the mean time besides let
there be administered whatsoever opens and makes slippery the passages of the
Trachea, and moves expectoration, and whatsoever, if need be, gives stop to a
Catarrh distilling upon the fame; for which purposes, Lambitives, Lohochs,
pectoral Decoctions and suffumigations are good.

2. As to the other intention of curing in these Convulsive fits, 2 Intention
to free from Convulsions the moving parts. Remedies which dissipate the spirits
profit for this end.
viz. that the organs of breathing may be restrained from the Convulsions
begun, and may quietly return to their ordinary task, (unless this succeeds of
its own accord, after the boiling of the blood and Serum in the Lungs be
appeased) we must use Antispasmaticks or remedies against Convulsions, and
Anodynes: for medicines which are used to be administered in hysterical
passions, do conduce in a convulsive Asthma.

Spirit of Hartshorn, of soot, and especially of fall Ammoniac distilled with
gum Ammoniacum; also the tinctures of gum Ammoniacum, of Sulphur, of Castor, of
Asa fetida, Syrups of Ammoniacum, Sulphur; Oxymel of squils and such like,
which because they are of an ungrateful taste or smell, as it were dissipate the
spirits and withdraw them from tumults, do sometimes help notably. But if the
spirits being outrageous cannot by this means be appeased, we must assay
Narcotics, Or do bring them asleep.
that some of them being subdued the others may be reduced to order: for surely
unless a stuffing up of the Lungs, with a great oppression of the Precordia do
hinder, Opiates do sometimes greatly profit. In the dreadful fits of this
disease, when other medicines had effected less, I have often administered
successfully Diacodium, as also Laudanum Tartariz'd. But these may not be
exhibited without great circumspection, because whereas more or less they
hinder breathing (which already is difficult and too much hindered) they
frequently bring the Patient into danger of life. Besides this, that the
Pneumonic spirits may be diverted from their Convulsions, it is many times
expedient to molest the spirits in other places; for some of the spirits being
in other places afflicted most commonly the residue as well as those that are
smitten do dismiss their irregularities: Wherefore Vesicatories,
Cupping-glasses, ligatures, and painful frictions bring help; also for this
reason vomits are successfully taken in the midst of a fit. The scope of
healing being now designed, after what manner the patients in an urging fit of
an Asthma ought to be handled, it yet remains for us to propound some more
select forms of Remedies appropriated to the same ends.

In the first place therefore to give a stop to the flux of blood and serum,
Forms of Remedies.
and to dismiss their superfluities derived from the Lungs by sweat and urine,
these ensuing are prescribed.

Take the water of Ground Ivy eight ounces, of Rue, Pennyroyal, Dragons, of
each two ounces, of sal prunella one dram and a half, Syrup Byzantinus, red
Poppies of each one ounce; make a Julep, take it three or more times in a day,
the dose three or four ounces.

Take grass roots three ounces, An Apozeme.
roots of Kneeholm two ounces, candi'd Enula campane one ounce and a half,
barley half an ounce, Raisons of the Sun, one ounce, boil them in three pound
of water to two pound, adding to your strained liquor sal prunella one dram and
a half; sweeten it, if there be occasion, with Syrup Byzantinus or of Violets.

Take tincture of Sulphur three drams, A Tincture.
the Dose six drops to ten, evening and morning in a spoonful of Syrup of the
juice of Ground Ivy, or Violets.

Take of faecula of Aron and Briony, of each one dram and a half, flower of
Sulphur one dram, flowers of Benzoin half a dram, Suger-candy half an ounce,
Liquorish two drams; make a powder to be taken to half a dram or two scruples
twice in a day with the former Julep or Apozeme: or,

Take of the powder prescribed two ounces, A Powder.
honey or Oxymel what will suffice, make a Linctus, take about half a spoonful
evening, and morning, and at other times lick it with a stick of Liquorish.

Take Syrup of Horehound, of Garlic of each one ounce and a half, tincture of
Saffron, Castor, of each two drams mix them, take a small spoonful in the fits.

Take of spirit of sal Armoniack with gum Ammoniacum three drams, Mixtures.
of snail water, and of Earthworms of each three ounces, Syrup of Horehound
two ounces, mingle them, take by a spoonful once in four or five hours.

Take of the powder of Hedge mustard, or of ground Ivy gathered in the heat of
the Sun one ounce, of Oxymel simple enough to make a Linctus.

2. 2. The Indication preservatory proposes what is to be done out of the fit.
So much concerning the method, and medicines requisite in the fit of an
Asthma. The other indication preservatory designing the taking away of the
whole procuring causes and the morbific matter, contains two parts or distinct
scopes of cure: both which for the most part are wont in the practice to be
complicated and administered together. One of these endeavors to amend the
conformation of the Lungs, if it be any way hurt or faulty, Suggests two
Intentions of healing.
and the other to take off the irregularities of the moving parts and spirits,
appointed for them. We shall best answer both these intentions if the remedies
vulgarly called pectorals, are mixed with anticonvulsives, and the use of these
with other medicines respecting the preparation of the whole body and emergent
symptoms be applied between whiles. For which purposes the method and ensuing
forms of remedies may be administered.

Take of Aloes rosata a dram and half, Forms of Remedies.
flower of Sulphur a dram, salt of Amber half a dram, Tar what will suffice,
make 24 pills, take 4 every, or every other, or every third night. or,

Take of gum Ammoniacum, Pills.
Bdellium dissolved in vinegar of squils of each half an ounce, flower of
Brimstone three drams, powder of hedge mustard and savory of each half a dram,
make a mass with Syrup of Sulphur or Oxymel of squils; make small pills, take 3
every evening. or,

Take Hog-lice prepared two drams, flower of Benzoin half a dram, salt of Amber
two scruples, extract of Enula campane half a dram, Castor half a dram, Saffron
a scruple, Venice Turpentine enough to make a mass, form small pills, take 4
every evening and morning except the times of purging.

But if this form of Pills will not please, or the above mentioned Medicines
profit little, afterward the ensuing shall be essayed to free the Lungs from
obstruction.

Take spirit of gum Ammoniacum distilled with sal Ammoniac three drams,
Mixtures.
the syrup of Ground Ivy three ounces, magistral Snail and Earth-worm water of
each an ounce, tincture of Saffron two drams, mingle them and take a spoonful
evening and morning. Or,

Take Tincture of Ammoniacum three drams, the dose from 15 to 20 drops in a
spoonful of Oxymel, or of syrup of Ground Ivy. Or,

Take Tincture of Sulphur three drams, dose from 7 drops to 12 or 20 in a
convenient vehicle at the same hours.

In like manner other spirits endued with a volatile salt, and mixed with
pectoral Syrups and Cephalic waters, may be prescribed successfully evening
and morning.

In place of a mixture or an Asthmathical Julep from distill'd-waters in the
shops, let this following magistral be prepared for frequent and several uses.

Take roots of Enula campane, Orris of Florence, Angelica, Masterwort, A
distilled water.
of each four ounces, of Bryony a pound, the leaves of white Hore-hound, Hysop,
of Savory, Pennyroyal, Ground Ivy of each four handfuls, Juniper and
Ivy-berries of each a pound, Bay Berries half a pound, sweet Fennel, Carue,
Annis, Louvage, Dill seeds of each an ounce, Cubebs two ounces, Long-pepper,
Cloves, and Mace of each an ounce, all being sliced and bruised pour on them
eight pound of Brunswick beer, distill it in common organs, mix the whole, and
as you use it sweeten it with Sugar, or Syrup of Ground Ivy, or with Oxymel.

Moreover in lieu of Oxymel, or any common pectoral Syrups, the ensuing forms
of medicines appropriated to an Asthma are prescribed; and in the first place
the Syrup of Enula-campane invented by Horatius Augenius and called by his
name, and afterward commended by Platerus, Sennertus, Riverius and other
renowned Practitioners, ought to be observed in this place, and used frequently.

Take of Enula-campane, Polypodie of the Oak prepared of each two ounces,
Magistral Syrups.
Currance two ounces, Sebestens 15, Coltsfoot, Lungwort, Savory, Calaminth, of
each a handful, a large leaf of Tabaco, Liquorish two drams, Nettle and
Silkworm seeds of each a dram and a half, boil them in Wine mingled with Honey
and diluted to a pound and half, and with a little Sugar make a Syrup: take it
by it self in form of a Linctus, or a spoonful evening and morning, or add a
spoonful to the distilled water or Apozeme.

Take Florence Orris-roots, Enula campane of each half an ounce, Garlic peeled
four drams, Cloves two drams, white Benzoin a dram and half, Saffron a scruple,
slice and bruise them and digest them warm in a pound of rectified spirit of
Wine for 48 hours; to it strained add fine Sugar a pound, put it in a Silver
Basin upon live coals, stirring it till it flame, and let it burn as long as it
will, then the flame being out make a Syrup of it to be taken as the former.

Moreover hither may be referred the decoction of an old Cock so much magnified
by renouned Physicians as well ancient as modern, for the cure of an Asthma;
The decoction of an old Cock.
which although Septalius damned for gross and of no efficacy, notwithstanding
Riverius after him vindicates; and to attest the efficacy of this remedy
opposes his own experience to the others. These broths are of two kinds, viz.
either with or without purgers; and various Recipes of each do remain in
practical Authors, all which would be tedious to recount here, we shall propose
one or two forms.

This is the common example without purgers.

Take of Orris and Enula-campane roots of each half an ounce, Without purgers.
Hysop and Hore-hound dried of each six drams, Carthamus seeds an ounce, Annis
and Dill seeds of each two drams, Liquorish scraped and Raisins stoned of each
three drams; let them be prepared and sewed into the belly of an old Cock,
which boil in fifteen pound of water until the flesh depart from the bones,
strain it and let it settle: of the clear liquor the dose six ounces, with an
ounce of Oxymel simple. Or if the remedy be desired to be solutive, dissolve of
fresh Cassia and Manna of each half an ounce in each draught, taken for many
days together, and sometimes for a whole month.

Riverius prescribes a convenient form of such a kind of purging broth.

Take Enula-campane and Orris-roots of each a dram and a half, Hysop and
Coltsfoot of each a handful, Liquorish and Raisins of each two drams, Figgs 4,
Senna cleansed three drams, polypodie of the Oak, and Carthamus seeds of each
half an ounce, Anniseeds a dram and a half, boil them with the third or fourth
part of an old cock, make broth for one dose to be taken in the morning, let
them continue it for twelve or fifteen days.

Of many examples of Asthmaticks I shall propound only two singular ones, The
first History of a Convulsive Asthma.
viz. I will describe the History of one who has been obnoxious to fits of
this disease merely convulsive, and of another partly convulsive and partly
Pneumonic. A Noble person, proper and well set, and formerly healthful enough,
after that by chance he had struck his side against some solid body, from that
time contracted a hurt, and afterward an Asthmatical taint. For we may
suspect, a certain folding of the Nerves belonging to the precordia placed near
was prejudiced by that accident, and from such a cause afterward this
distemper derived its origin, viz. at some uncertain times the pain at first
troubled him about that place, and presently a most painful Dyspnoea ensued
with a laborious and lasting contention of all the breathing parts; insomuch
that while the fit lasted the patient was thought to be in the agony of death.
I was first sent for to him after laboring for two days with such an invasion
of the Asthma that he was accounted in a desperate condition; Notwithstanding
finding his Lungs without hurt, our prognostic willed as yet to hope well, and
immediately by a consultation of other Physicians it was prescribed as
follows.

Take of spirit of gum Ammoniacum distilled with salt of Tartar three drams,
The Cure.
take from 15 to 20 drops in a spoonful of the following Julep, drinking after
it five spoonfuls, repeat it every sixth hour.

Take elder flower, camomile, and Penyroyal water of each four ounces,
Snail-water two ounces, Sugar one ounce, mingle them, between whiles he took a
dose of the following powder with the same Julep or pectoral decoction.

Take powder of Crabs eyes two drams, sal prunella a dram and a half, salt of
Amber half a dram, mix them, divide it into eight doses.

Large vesicatories were applied on the inside of his arms near the armpits,
Clysters daily administered, and frequent frictions. By the use of these he
received sudden and unexpected help, and within a few days became wholly free
from that fit. Afterward as often as he had any perception o the first motions
of this disease, presently he took a large dose of that spirit with the same
Julep 3 or 4 times a day, by which remedy often used, one while for
preservation, another while for the cure sake, he was void of any outrageous
invasion from his habitual Asthma for above two years, in the mean while
suffering some more light assaults but easily blown off.

A very Honorable old Gentleman dignified by many great Titles, The second
History of a mixed disease.
himself being greater than all them, after that for some years he had lived
every winter obnoxious to a cough and a moderate spitting, and gentle enough,
at the end of the last Antumn returning from a long journey he was less
healthful: (as it was thought by cold he had taken) for he complained of a pain
in the middle of his breast next the sternon, which growing worse in an
evening, as soon as warm in his bed, wholly disturbed his sleep, and most part
of the night was very troublesome: notwithstanding without any Dyspnea or
evident sign of an Asthma. To take away this pain both Purging and Bleeding
were used, pectorals and antiscorbuticks were daily used, liniments and
fomentations were applied to the place pained, yet without any great success or
ease: for the alteration which happened afterward declined rather to worse;
for a difficult and obstructed breath came upon the pain's growing a litlle
more remiss, so that from his first sleep, or inclination thereto he became
asthmatical and gaping for breath, and suffering about the precordia he was
constrained to sit upright in his bed. Moreover a dyspnoea of this kind and a
convulsive agitation of the breathing parts did not only return every evening,
but from day to day were rendered more outrageous and lasted a longer time;
insomuch that one night waking from his sleep, for many hours he was assaulted
with a most painful fit of an Asthma which had almost killed him. The
Physicians being at a great distance from him, although desired about midnight
came not while the morning following, mean while by reason of bleeding used by
a Barber this worthy Gentleman revived, being redeemed from the jaws of death;
but afterward by the consultations of Physicians that day a slender diet and
loosening the belly by a Clyster were prescribed: In the evening and early in
the morning he took of Spirit of gum Ammoniac distilled with sal Ammoniac 12
drops in a proper vehicle, and continued the use for many days after;
Vesicatories were applied on the inside of his arms near the armpits; moreover
Juleps and pectoral Decoctions, Lohochs, Clysters, and also mild Purges were
taken by turns; also Phlebotomie was repeated after two days. Whereas formerly
he was used to drink for his mornings draught a pint of Alf with Wormwood and
Scurvy Grass, in the room of that about eight a clock he took 15 drops of
Elixir Proprietatis tartariz'd in a draught of Coffee made with Sage. By these
remedies his asthmatical fits presently abated of their fierceness, insomuch
that the beginning and end of every night were quiet enough, but in the middle
light troubles about the precordia kept him from sleep, sitting upright an hour
or two. Certain other medicines were propounded by the Physicians, and others
of diverse sorts privately offered by his friends, which notwithstanding the
Honorable Person utterly rejected, or soon loathed; and that the rather,
because, winter then being almost spent, his restoration was hoped for by the
coming on of the Spring and enjoyment of the Country air without the help of
much Physic. Wherefore of the medicines above mentioned he used one while this
and another while that a little by turns, and sometimes kept holy day from them
all; but in the interim although his asthmatical invasions little or nothing
troubled him as formerly in the night, yet by reason his Lungs were very much
obstructed, and a serous humor fallen down into his feet, he was not able to
walk fast or ascend steep places, without a painful dyspnoea, being in danger
of choking; and now (while I am writing this) not so much an Asthma or
Consumption, as a Dropsy is feared.

The Aetiologie of this case is clearly enough manifest from the
abovementioned things, The reason of this case.
viz. one procuring cause of this Asthma was a lung greatly obstructed,
insomuch, that whereas the blood boiling, passed through the precordia more
impetuously, the air requisite for its ventilation could not be admitted in
plenty enough; wherefore to supply this defect there was necessity that the
Lungs and their motive organs should be provoked into more frequent, and more
vehement throes. Afterward from thence ensued a convulsive disposition of the
fibers moving the breast: for the heterogeneous matter descending into those
parts together with the nervous juice, and being gathered to a plenitude, first
excited pain and afterward fierce and periodical convulsions in the pneumonic
organs: and now although this latter disposition cease (because the Elastick
and spasmodical matter is blunted or extinguished by the serous illuvies) yet
the other procuring cause still remains, and has got another associate, viz. a
worse Devil that it self, to wit a Dropsy.

SECT. I. CHAP. XIII. Of a Dropsy of the Breast.
IT is clearly manifest by certain and manifold discoveries, A Dropsy of the
Breast is easily known.
that the Region of the Breast is sometimes affected with a Dropsy; for the
sense and sound of water fluctuating, do most evidently demonstrate it in
living bodies; and Anatomical inspection in the defunct. But yet concerning the
cause of this Disease, and manner of coming to pass, to wit, by what ways, and
after what manner disposed, the accumulation of water first begins within the
hollow of the breast, as also how it is sensibly augmented, and frequently
insensibly continued until the Disease becomes desperate, is a thing yet in
the dark. Whenas there is a general distemper of a Dropsy or an Anasarca
appearing, and has seized on the flesh and cavities of the bowels every where,
or in most places, we are not to admire if that illuvies of waters seize also
upon the Pectorals: But besides, sometimes it happens, that the Region of the
Thorax, is either first or only overflown, the other parts in the mean time
remaining sound enough, or only hurt secondarily.

About the origin of this Disease, Its cause is hidden.
and the manner of generation it is much disputed whence, and by what passages
that illuvies of water being found every where in the hollowness of the Thorax,
does come thither. Some Authors do derive it from above, viz. that it descends
from the head by the Trachea; and others deducing its Spring from beneath, from
the cavity of the Abdomen, also sometimes from the Liver and Spleen, by I know
not what blind ways, judge those waters to be conveyed into the hollowness of
the Breast. But neither of these Opinions challenge our assent, or deserve our
arguments to disprove them: for none considering the passage of the blood and
humors will acknowledge either this or that way of commerce. We cannot but
affirm, that the serous humor, raising a Dropsy of the breast, does arrive
thither either in a kind of vapor, which being exhaled from the Precordia and
sides of the Thorax, is easily condensed into water; How many ways it may be
produced.
or secondly, that the Serum is there deposited under its own proper form,
inasmuch as it flows into that cavity from the mouths of the Vessels, i.e. of
the Arteries being open. We will anon enquire whether the Lymphaducts or
vessels bringing chyle, being any where open, or broke, do sometimes produce
that disease.

1. 1. By Vapors condensed there.
As to the former, it is so very probable that a Dropsy of the breast takes
sometimes its origin from vapors condensed within its cavity, that it is a
wonder how it should be otherwise at any time, or that any should live exempt
from such an effect. For how much is there of vapor that separates from the
boiling blood? and when it waxes cold in the precordia, how can it come
otherwise to pass but that the abundant vapor should be condensed in this
enclosure into water, even as if shut within a Still? And truly it will not be
easy to determine, when the vaporous steams are so uncessantly heaped within
the cavity of the breast, what may become of them, how they are consumed, or
from thence discharged abroad. Surely we must affirm, they either penetrate the
sides of the Thorax, or (which rather seems to be) they insinuate into the
pores of the Lungs, and so fly away in breathing. Certainly by either way, the
vapors of the breast may exhale: and perhaps if either be defective, or
hindered, by that means a Dropsy of the Breast may be caused.

2. 2. By Serum deposited there.
But moreover, I am apt to think, that this Disease also sometimes happens in
another manner (inasmuch as the Serum distills from the vessels in its proper
form.) For in a cacochymical constitution of body, or a person very
scorbutical, where the watery and weak blood every where casts off its
superfluous Serum from its own consistence, and every where ejecting it from
the little mouths of the Arteries being loosed and open, excludes it from the
clew of circulation, nothing is more usual, than for the cavities not only of
the Bowels, but also of the Precordia, yea the Brain it self, to be overflown
with that watery collection; Which sometimes breaks out from the Arteries.
moreover in so general a disposition to a Dropsy, that one while this region,
another while that, or another should be first and almost only possessed; and
that also sometimes the inmost parts being untoucht, the outward flesh, viz.
the muscles and their interspaces are overflown with that serous illuvies.

3. Among the vessels that pour in the dropsical matter into the cavity of the
breast, 3. And sometimes from the Lymphaducts.
the Lymphaducts and parts bringing the chyle, do justly fall under a
suspicion. What relates to the former, it appears by anatomical inspection,
that a great company of these do creep thorough the whole Lungs, and do tend
from their outer parts, stretching out themselves inwards toward the passages
of the breast, and for the most part pour out into them their liquour, which
being superfluous, they every where suck up from te arterious Blood. Therefore
whenas these vessels are obstructed, or are by any means impeded from
discharging their function, it must needs be that a heap of water be
accumulated in the Lungs, which afterward falling into the cavity of the
breast, will excite a Dropsy in that region. For in truth, this Lympha
restagnating within the consistence of the Lungs, it often happens that the
little bladders called Hydatides, in the outer superficies of the Viscera are
raised up, which afterward being broke, discharging the waters into the
cavities of the Thorax, they produce there an Ascites. A distemper of this
kind is often discovered in Sheep, when they dye by heaps of a Dropsy, by
reason of a moist season and watery pasture. A remarkable history of the like
case.
And surely the following History does clearly seem to argue, that the Ascites
of the breast proceeds from the like cause sometimes in a man, (there being yet
a living example of this disease.) Lately a young man healthful enough and
strong, having accustomed himself to hunting and insatiable riding, and other
exercises of the body very immoderate, a while without detriment, at length he
perceived a fullness in his Thorax as if it were a kind of swelling; insomuch
that the left side of his Lungs seemed to begin to swell, and his heart to be
thrust out of its place toward the right side; for that he perceived the
pulsation thereof to be on that part chiefly. After he had been for some time
in this condition, on a certain day he felt as if a Vessel had been burst
asunder within the cavity of the Thorax, and from thence for the space of half
an hour, in that place, as it were the dropping of a humor falling from above
into the bottom of his breast, was not only felt by himself, but could be
heard also by the standers by. Although he was at first surprised with the
rarity of this affect, yet for that he was well enough as to strength,
appetite, sleep, and other natural functions, immediately after he became
secure, and negligent of Medicines; But afterward by any motion, bending or
stirring of his Body, a fluctuation of water gathered within on his left side,
was felt by him; moreover, the motion and sound was evidently perceived by
others, either by handing, or by the ear. As without doubt this Gentleman was
affected with a Dropsy of the Breast, so it seemed most probable that the
disease had its original from thence, in regard the lymphaducts relating to the
left side of the lungs, being first obstructed near their insertions into the
passage bringing the chyle, did swell up to a great bulk, and afterward being
broken distilled their humor into the cavity of the Thorax.

When now an Inundation of the Precordia, and so of the vital Fort, was
imminent, The reason thereof.
this Gentleman at length, thinking it time to provide for himself, entered
into a course of Physic, and carried certain Medicines into the Country for
his cure, yet without any signal success. Afterward coming to London, he first
consulted the worthy Dr. Lower, being of his former acquaintance. He proposing
the opening of the Thorax for his only remedy, took care that the worthy Dr.
Micklethwait and my self should be sent for to the consultation. The Cure by a
Paracentesis of the breast.
Immediately an incision was appointed by the consent of us all: wherefore,
after provision for the whole being made, a Surgeon applied a Cautery
between the sixth and seventh Vertebra, and the next day he put his Pipe into
the Orifice cut into the cavity of his Breast; which being done, immediately a
thick liquor whitish like Chyle, and as it were milkie, flowed out. There was
about six ounces only taken from him the first time, and the next day as much
more. The third day when a little greater quantity was suffered to come out,
being affected immediately with great fainting, and afterward being feverish,
he was ill for a day or two. Wherefore it seemed good to stop the issue of that
matter till he recovered his temperament and strength: but afterward a sparing
evacuation of the same matter being daily made, the cavity of his breast was
wholly emptyed: but as yet he wears a pipe in the orifice with a tap, which
being opened once in a day and a nights space, a very little of the humor
flows out; in the mean while, being well in stomach, visage, and strength, he
walks abroad, rides, and performs all exercises he was formerly accustomed to,
vigorously enough. He used not (neither was there need of) much medicine, only
after the Incision we advised temperate Cordials, viz. powder of Pearls,
Juleps, and sometimes Hypnoticks, and afterward a vulnerary decoction to be
taken twice a day.

By this method, and these forms of Medicines sometimes continued, this worthy
person seemed to recover his temper, and his strength, and the habit of his
body, and his breast exempt from the Dropsy. Notwithstanding he still wore a
silver Pipe in the orifice of his side (out of which ichor daily flowed): and
when after some months this being withdrawn, the Issue was shut up, a gathering
of the same humor was made within the hollow of his breast, perceivable by the
sound and fluctuation thereof: but when that the disease returning, the same
medicine was to be used, and incision of his side appointed, (Nature by chance
discharging the function of a Surgeon) the matter being prone to burst out,
and flowing to the place made its own way. He is now necessitated (for
preventing the illuvies of his Breast) to keep that orifice constantly open
like a sink.

From these things I think it manifest enough, that an Ascites of the Breast,
sometimes arises from the lymphatick vessels burst asunder within the Lungs;
neither doubt I less but that the same affection may be caused from the
chyliferous passages being broke within the Thorax; notwithstanding, this
chance so rarely happens, that as yet I have not known it by my own
observation, or others relation. Moreover, it little avails to make inquisition
into the Aetiologie of such a disease, because it is not only apparently
incurable, but in a short time mortal; because the Precordia are incontinently
overflown by the inundation of the chyle, and also the blood and the animal
spirits being defrauded of their wonted supply of nutritious Juice, are
immediately dissolved.

From the various causes of this Disease even now set down, The differences of
this disease.
it will be easy to collect its differences: For first a Dropsy of the
Breast, is either simple and primary, peculiar to this Region; or secondary,
coming upon a general Dropsy, as it is wont often to be in cachectic presons.
Secondly, this Disease is distinguished as to the places affected, viz.
forasmuch as water is either collected in the whole breast, or only in one side
thereof. Thirdly, as to the matter accumulated in a pectoral Ascites, which one
while is limpid and plainly waterish, another while more thick, whitish, and as
it were milkie, such as we have described in the foregoing History.

The diagnostick signs do manifestly enough discover this disease: The
Diagnostick signs.
viz. the fluctuation of water is perceived by handling, and by feeling at
every bending of the body, and the sound is clearly heard. Moreover they are
affected much with a dry and empty Cough, as also with a Dyspnoea almost
continual and painful, especially while they ascend steep places; Besides, they
have a thirst, with a little fever, and in the night after the first sleep,
great disquiet and tossing of the body, proceeding from the vapors being
elevated by the heat being more intense. Sometimes there comes upon these a
Palpitation of the heart, an intermitting or disturbed Pulse, and frequent
faintings of the spirit. As to the prognostic, this disease is always
difficult to cure, and among the vulgar accounted incurable. And surely if it
come upon an Ascites of the Abdomen or an Anasarca throughout the whole body,
it is judged not without cause desperate; But if the affection be primary, and
happen to a body otherwise sound, we are not altogether to despair of Cure.

What relates to the curatory part of this Disease, The Cure.
the chief Indications will be three, Curative, Preservative, and Vital,
according to the common method of curing in most other Distempers.

The first has regard that the water heaped up in the cavity of the Breast by
any means be evacuated. The Second provides, that afterward a new illuvies be
not gathered in the same place. The Third procures the restoration of strength,
and the symptoms impairing it to be removed with expedition.

To satisfy the first Indication, What Intentions of healing the first
Indication suggests.
and that an Ascites of the Breast may be emptyed, there are but two ways or
means of evacuation to be met with, whereby this collection of waters may be
drayn'd, viz. Either that the vessels of the Breast, and the passages of the
humors, being emptyed, might suck up that Lympha being rarefied, and
afterward by the passages of the blood or air convey them forth: or secondly,
that by an incision of the side, those waters may be drained forth plentifully
in their own Species.

That former manner although more seldom, yet sometimes succeeds; The first
Intention.
which I can attest out of my own observation. For the consistence of the Lungs
being spongy within, and externally very porous, while by every turn of the
Diastole, they are drenched in the underlying waters, they sometimes imbibe
them being turned into vapor; and so dispatch them to the blood, or
continually exhale them with air coming out at the mouth. That an effect of
this sort may more easily happen to cure this disease, medicinal aids are
taken: For that intention therefore the passages of blood, air, and humors
ought to be emptyed as much as may be, and to be kept so empty. For this
purpose, Purges, Diuretics, and more mild Diaphoreticks are methodically, and
alternately exhibited; also remedies for the breast, and expectorating,
challenge here their place; let the Diet be slender and warming, and a
government appointed as to all other things of that nature, that the blood may
be made to exhale the more, and all the superfluous humors to evaporate. I
think good to annex some forms of Medicines accommodated to these uses.

Take of Chervil-roots, Knee-holme, Polypodie of the Oak, of each an ounce,
Agrimony, A Purging Hydromel.
white Maidenhaire, Oak of Jerusalem, Ground Ivy, of each one handful,
Carthamusseeds one ounce, Florence Orris half an ounce, seeds of Danewort 5
drams, Calamus Aromaticus half an ounce, boil them in four pound of
Spring Water, to the consumption of a third part, add to it being strained
Senna one ounce and a half, Agarick tow drams, Mechoacan and Turbith, of each
half an ounce, yellow Sanders a dram and a half, Galangal the less one dram,
boil them two hours gently, and close covered, afterward strain it and add of
Honey two ounces, clarify it with the white of an Egg, make a purging
Hydromel. The Dose is from six ounces to eight, in the morning, twice or thrice
in a week. Or,

Take Mercurius Dulcis one scruple, Resine of Jallap half a scruple, Balsam of
Peruwhat suffices to make four Pills, to be taken in the morning, and to be
repeated within five or six days.

Take Tincture of Sulphur three drams, take from seven drops to ten, Tinctures.
at night and in the morning, in a spoonful of the following mixture, drinking
after it three spoonfulls.

Take of the water of Snails, Earth worms, and compound rhadish water, Julep.
of each four ounces, water of Elder-berries fermented one pound, Syrup of
Juice of Ground Ivy two ounces, mix them for a Julep. Or,

Take of Tincture of Ammoniacum, or Galbanum, take twenty drops evening and
morning in the same mixture. Or,

Take of Hog-lice prepared two drams, flower of Sulphur two scruples, Pills.
flower of Benzoin one scruple, powder of wild Carrot and Burdock-seeds, of
each half a dram, Turpentine of Venice, enough to make a mass. Make small
Pills. Take four evening and morning, drinking after them a small draught of
the Julep.

At Nine a Clock in the Morning, and Five in the Afternoon, A Limewater.
let him take four onces of the Compound Limewater, by it self, or with any
other proper remedy.

For ordinary drink take the following Bochete.

Take Sarsaperilla six ounces, China two ounces, white and yellow Sanders, A
Bochet.
of each six drams, shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each three drams,
Calamus Aromaticus half an ounce, Raisins half a pound, Liquorish three drams,
boil and infuse them in twelve pound of Spring Water to six pound, strain it.

Formerly about twenty five years since, when I resided at Oxford, A History of
a Patient.
I was sent for to a young Scholar, who suffered for three weeks space under a
pain of the Thorax, and a most grievous Dyspnoea constantly troubling him in
the evening, moreover, from a more quick motion of body, or going more hastily
than usually up any steep place, he labored extremely, he could not ly down
long on either side, but was necessitated to lie in his bed supone, and his
head erect; if perhaps he attempted to lie on either side, immediately pain
followed that position of body, and if perhaps he rolled himself from one side
to another, the pain being also presently translated, he felt as it were water
to wave from place to place. Hence I had a just suspicion of a Dropsy of the
Breast, whereof that I might be more assured, I ordered that lying upon his
back on his bed, he would suffer his head to bend backward from the bedside to
the floor, immediately he had a plain perception of water running toward the
Clavicles, together with a change of the pain thither. Moreover if at any time
he grew more hot than usual, from motion, or in his bed, or by the fire, he
presently felt sensibly in his breast, as it were water boiling over the fire,
and also complained of a Vertigo, and a small decay of Spirits. Wherefore, when
we might lawfully collect out of these things rightly considered, that he was
affected with a dropsy of the breast, I prescribed the following method and
medicines with success.

Take of Mercurius Dulcis fifteen grains, The Cure of him.
Resine of Jallap half a scruple, Syrup of Roses solutive what suffices, make
three Pills. He took them early in the morning and had twelve stools with great
ease; afterward on the third day by the same Medicine he had but four, but
with greater benefit; he took afterward for many days six ounces of the
Pectoral and Diuretic Apozeme twice in a day, and lastly repeating the Purge
he perfectly recovered.

SECT. II. Of Splanchnick remedies, or those which respect the bowels of the
lower Belly.
CHAP. I. Of the Jaundies and the remedies thereof, and the manner and reason
of their operations.
HItherto we have largely enough unfolded the Pathologie and curatory method of
the Thorax; now it follows next to finish our task in like manner about the
lower Belly. But we have in our former tract for the most part described
already the medicines belonging to this region, and the manner and reasons of
their working, together with the Anatomy of the Stomach and Intestines: we have
treated of remedies stomachical, dysenterical, and others belonging to the
intestines, as also diuretics together with the reasons of them: Moreover we
have sussicently elsewhere handled the aetioligie of Hypochondriack, and
Hysterical remedies. What therefore remains, of Hepatical distempers as well
proper, as of those vulgarly ascribed thereunto, and of their remedies we will
discourse in this Section; notwithstanding in each of these, we will bestow
more labor, about the curatory, than pathological part.

The chief diseases by which the Liver and the appendix thereof, Diseases of
the Liver.
are wont to be encumbered, are the Jaundies, and a Tumor, and under this
latter many other affects, viz. obstruction, inflammation, induration, and
schirrus are numbered; to all which are vulgarly appointed remedies commonly
called Hepaticks, and which make up a great part of the Dispensatory.

The Jaundies is either a disease by it self, primarily beginning, which is
here properly treated of: or it is an effect or product of another disease; as
when it arises upon an intermitting Fever, which oftentimes it puts an end to,
of which also we will presently treat by the by.

An Icterical distemper by the common consent of most is judged to arise in as
much as the yellow choler, not at all, or not enough received, The Jaundies.
from the ends of vena porta, into the passages of the choleric pore,
overflows into the mass of blood and pollutes it with its greenness, whereby
also the very skin is discolored.

That obstruction is wont to happen after many manners and in various places.
The cause of it.
For sometimes it happens near the extreme ends of either kind of vessels, viz.
the end of the vena porta, and the porus bilarius; the interspaces whereof
happen frequently to be compressed, and stopped by reason of the Parenchyma of
the Liver being tumefied, or otherwise vitiated; wherefore the humor of the
gall not being transferred out of the separating vessels of the porta into the
other receiving vessels, turns back upon the blood. Secondly, the passage of
the humor of the gall is sometimes intercepted in the middle passages of the
choleric pore; for that the cavities of these are filled either with a
viscous, or sandy, and sometimes with a stony matter; as is plainly discerned
in the Livers of beasts in the winter senson, while they are fed with hay and
straw. Thirdly, it is also manifest by Anatomical observation, sometimes an
obstruction in the very bladder or the gall, or in the cystic passage is the
cause of the Jaundies; for if at any time, it being filled with stones, receive
not the choler, or being here shut up, or grown together, it restrains the
descent of the choler toward the guts, that humor although well separated
from the blood, is constrained to flow black into the mass thereof, and so
propagates the Jundies.

Against this most received opinion, by which it is judged, The opinion of
Sylvius of the cause of the Jaundies.
that the cause of the Jaundies for the most part consists on this side the
vesica fellis or about it toward the Liver: the most Renowned Sylvius
altogether places it without this, viz. in the Cystic or common passage. For
supposing the choler not to be separated from the blood, within the passages of
the Liver, but in the very bladder of the Gall to be propagated of a humor
brought thither by the Arteries; He judged the greatest part, being carried
upwards by the passage of the pori bilarii, to be poured into the blood for
some notable uses, and also another part to descend beneath to the Intestines,
also for necessary uses: wherefore if this latter sluice be shut, all the choler
is carried upwards into the blood, and filling it too much with this humor,
perverts it from its genuine temper, into an Icterical.

But truly lest the stopping of the passage of the bladder, or of the common
passage, (neither of which easily happens, or from any light occasion) may seem
less efficacious to excite any Jaundies; therefore, whether such an obstruction
has place, or no, the most Renowned man ingeniously supposes besides, The
choler while it is generated in the bladder does undergo sometimes a notable
change, by which it is moved, and is born about more plentifully and
impetuously, toward the blood, with which yet it is less mingled than is was
wont to be, but only confounded together with it, and so more easily departs
from it and infects and tinges the solid parts with its color.

But that the choler in the Jaundies may be rendered unfit a mix with the other
humors, or to be nearly united; he determines it to be done, by a spirit too
valatile, mixed plentifully with it, and so making it more spirituous and
immiscible with others. He confirms this assertion by two instances, viz. in as
much as the most spirituous poison from the biting of a Viper, and the too much
use of the more generous drinks, viz. Wine and Strong Water, causes sometimes
the Jaundies. Moreover he endeavors to procure credit to this Hypothesis, for
that this disease is wont to be cured, not only by medicines opening
obstructioins, but by them which blunt the force of a raging volatile salt (of
which sort are the decoction of Hemp-seeds, also Venice soape with many other
things of the same sort.)

It belongs not to this place, neither is it to our purpose to descend to end
this contention, nor dare I now rashly determine it (since it has tired so
many Renowned Wits of the Moderns) whether really the choler be made in the
bladder of the Gall, or whether it be only separated from the blood in the
Liver, the great organ of separation; I confess this latter opinion best
pleases me. The Authors opinion.
And weighing these things seriously I am induced to think the cause of the
Jaundies to consist chiefly in this, that the choler being severed in the
Liver, is not, by reason of the ways being obstructed, at all, or not enough
conveyed to the bladder of the Gall, but that it must of necessity regurgitate
into the mass of blood; notwithstanding in the mean while we deny not, but this
affect may sometime arise (although more rarely) from the Cystic passage or
common pipe being obstructed. But also we think the fault of the blood to
preceed in part and perhaps sometimes wholly for the morbific cause; when to
wit from its sulphurous and fixed Saline Particles above measure exalted, the
choler is more plentifully, or quicklier generated in the mass of blood, than
can be separated or discharged forth by the ordinary ways; wherefore this,
separating every where from the blood with the Serum, The cause of this disease
sometimes in the blood.
is affixed to the solid parts, and impresses its tincture upon them. And
without doubt it is for this reason that some poisons, and chiefly the biting
of Vipers, and the daily use of more generous drinks, induces the Jaundies in
bodies before sound, for whose cure sometime Phlebotomie, and medicines
reducing the blood to a right temper, are wont to profit more than those
opening obstructions. Moreover it seems for this reason, that a tertian
intermiting Fever so frequently terminates in the Jaundies; for we may not
suspect the passages of the Liver can be by any means obstucted, since in all
fits, so great an agitation of the blood and humors, by cold, and heat, and
such an-evacuation of them happens either by vomit or sweat: and truly even as
feverish fits are caused, inasmuch as the sulphurous part of the blood being
too much advanced, in the first place perverts the nutritious juice into a
morbific matter, and afterward being inflamed consumes and exterminates it; so
when the fixed salt is at last exalted together with the sulphur in the blood,
and for that cause mere choler is abundantly engendered, the feaversh
enkindling of the blood ceases, by reason of the restrictive force of the fixed
salt, and in place thereof the distemper of the Jaundies does succeed. But as
the blood being too much advanced to a sulphureosaline distemperature causes
the Jaundies in any, though least predispos'd to it; so in others very much
disposed thereto, having the ways of choler obstructed and the sulphur of the
blood being too much depressed, it produces a freedom from that disease; for I
have known many cachectick and phlegmatic persons, to have been free from the
Jaundies though they have suffered under obstructions and indurations of the
Liver, as to most of its passages.

It is not worth our labor to make more ample disquisition about the
aetiologie of this disease; as to what respects the cure, there will be three
primary indications, The cure of the Jaundies.
all which (for what may be the chiefest of them, and first to be exhibited,
for the most part is concealed) we shall prosecute together; wherefore the
intentions of healing shall be, 1. That the obstructions of the passages or
choler-bearing vessels be opened, if perhaps any shall be either in the porus
bilarius, in the Cystic passage, or in any place about the Liver. 2. That the
blood be reduced to its due temperament and mixture, lest it engender choler
above measure, or render it unapt to be voided. 3. That the strength may be
sustained, and the symptoms chiefly hurting them may be withstood.

1. That we may satisfy the first indication, cathartic evacuations notably
conduce, The 1. Indication.
as well by vomit, as siege, whereby the choler's descending toward the
intestines may be furthered, and vessels obstructed, by the great snaking of
them, freed from their obstruction. 2. Sharp, bitter, salt medicines and others
endued with a certain briskness ought also to be given, which provoke the
motion of choler gathered in the Liver, and stagnating; hither also ought to be
referred, what by similitude of substance, and as it were signature, in as much
as they are endued with a yellow juice, have the report to help against the
Jaundies; notwithstanding many of these may fitly be numbered under the same
classis of evacuators, as the former, because they move urine or sweats.

The second indication altogether requires alteratives, The 2. Indication.
viz. medicines which may depress the exaltations, or ragings of the Sulphur
and fixed salt, and in the mean time provoke the restitution of the volatile
salt depressed; for these ends remedies endued with an acid or volatile salt,
besides chalybeats do principally bring help; from hence spirit of salt, of
vitriol, juice of Lemons, also spirit of Hartshorn, also dung of Sheep, and
Geese, crocus Martis and diverse other preparations thereof, are frequently
used with success in the Jaundies.

The third indication vital suggests more and sundry intentions of cure, The 3.
Indication.
procuring the strength to be restored, and the removing the symptoms whereby
it is prejudiced, all or the chief particularly to enumerate, and prescribe
would be a vast and tedious work; wherefore we will annex only certain general
rules about diet, and some cordials and anodynes appropriate in this condition.

The curatory indications being appointed after this manner, Forms of Remedies.
it next lies upon us to acommodate the most select medicines, viz. as well the
simple as the compound, to these now proposed intentions of curing, and to
unfold the manner and reason of the operating of remedies which are accounted
of special note in this disease. Therefore first we propound the forms of
evacuating medicines appropriate in the Jaundies.

1. Vomits.
Vomiting medicines are frequently wont to help in the recent Jaundies, Vomits.
while the tone and strength of the bowels are firm; in as much as they
alleviate the stomach always oppressed in this disease with an unprofitable
burden of viscous phlegm; and moreover do free their infarctions by irritating
the vasa choledocha, and by much shaking all the passages of the Liver, and
make easy the passage of the cholet by the former accustomed ways.

Take of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum half an ounce to six drams, Wine of
Squils an ounce, Oxymel simple half an ounce, make a vomit to be taken with
government.

Sometimes it is convenient to exhibit, the evening before, the following
preparatory medicine for the easier vomiting.

Take of the powder of Asarum roots, faeculae Aronis of each a scruple, of
Tartar vitriolated half a scruple, of Oxymel of Squils an ounce, mix them.

Take of Sulphur of Antimony seven grains, Scammony sulphurated eight grains,
cream of Tartar half a scruple, make a powder, give it in a spoonful of panada.

Take nine Asarabacca leaves, cut and bruised put them into three ounces of
white wine, press out the liquor, let it be taken in the morning with regiment.

Take of Gambugia prepared eight grains, Tartar vitriolated seven grains, make
a powder.

2. Catharticks.
Purgers take place in this disease, Purgers.
be it recent or inveterate, viz. that as well a more plentiful store of
Excrements may be now and then withdrawn from the first passages, as that the
vasa choledocha may be excited to Excretions.

Take of Electuary of juice of Roses three drams, A Bolus.
Rhubarb a dram, Salt of Wormwood, Cream of Tartar, of each half a Scruple,
Syrup of Rhubarb, make a Bolus.

Take of the roots of sharp-pointed Dock prepared one ounce, Apozems.
the tops of Roman Wormwood, of Centaury the less, of each P. ij. Gentian and
Turmerick roots an. two drams, yellow Saunders one dram, boil them in a pint
and a half of Spring Water to a pint, adding toward the end Senna six drams,
the best Rhubarb three drams, Agarick a dram and half, Coriander-seeds two
drams, White Wind two ounces, let them boil close two hours, after strain it
and clarify it by settling; the Dose from four ounces to six, with one ounce
of Syrup of Rhubarb, the water of Earthworms three drams; make a potion to be
repeated every or every other day, for three or four days.

In a weaker Constitution.

Take choice Rhubarb two drams, A Potion.
Agarick trochiscated, half a dram, Cinnamon half a scruple, Ginger half a
scruple, make an infusion in White Wind and Cichory-water, of each three
ounces, for three hours, in it strained dissolve one ounce of Syrup of Rhubarb,
water of Earthworms two drams. Or Rhubarb from half a dram to a whole one, Salt
of Wormwood a scruple, make a powder.

Take pil. Ruffi a scruple, Pills.
Extr. Rudii half a scruple, make 4 Pills, take them in a morning with
government, after 4 or 5 days repeat them.

In the third place follow Deoppilatives, Deoppilative Medicines.
which are also Diuretics, or Diaphoreticks, some whereof are accounted
specific, by reason of similitude of substance; Medicines of this sort, both
promote the separation of choler from the blood, and urge the passage of it,
being separated, through the passages and pores in the Liver open but little.
Moreover, in the mean time, by dissolving the blood, they carry off the
serosities and choleric recrements thereof, sometimes by sweats and urine.

Take of Elixir Proprietatis one ounce, Elixir.
take 20 drops in the morning, and at Five in the afternoon, with a convenient
vehicle: after the same manner are taken, Tincture of Antimony, or of Salt of
Tartar, and the simple mixture in a greater Dose: for vehicles, Apozemes,
distilled Waters, and Juleps for this Intention of curing are convenient.

Take of the roots of Celandine the greater, Apozems.
stinging Nettles, Madder, of each one ounce, tops of Roman Wormwood, white
Horehound, Agrimony, Germander, of each one handful, Worm-seeds two drams,
Shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each two drams, yellow Sanders a dram and
a half, Coriander-seeds two drams, boil them in three pound of Springwater to
two pound, adding of White Wind four ounces, strain it, and add Syrup of
Chichory with Rhubarb two ounces, water of Earthworms, an ounce and a half,
make an Apozeme, the Dose four or six ounces twice in a day.

Take of white Horehound dried, Centaury, of each one handful, Gentian and
Turmerick-roots, of each three drams, Cinnamon one dram, Saffron half a dram,
being sliced put them into a Glass with two pound of White Wind or
Rhenish-wine; make an infusion, the dose three ounces.

To this we will add Gesners famous Antictericum.

Take of the roots of stinging Nettles a pound, Saffron one scruple, bruise
them well, and draw off the tincture with White Wind, the dose three ounces 4
or 5 days.

Like to the former is that of Fr. Joel. Take the Roots of Celandine the
greater, Empirick Remedies.
two handfuls, Juniper Berries a handful, bruise them and pour on them a pound
of Rhenishwine, and draw out the juice, the dose sour ounces twice a day.

The juice of white Horehound is mightily commended by Dioscorides, and the
Syrup of the same by Forestus, for curing the yellow Jaundice.

In lieu of an Elixir, and other chemical liquors, which to avoid nauseousness
are to be taken in very small quantity; to others endued with a stronger
Constitution, Electuaries, Powder and Pills may be administered with better
success.

Take of Conserve of Roman Wormwood, of the yellow Rinds of Oranges and Limons,
An Electuary.
of each two ounces, Species Diacurcumae one dram and half, powder of Ivory,
yellow Saunders, of Lignum-Aloes, of each half a dram, Troches of Capers one
dram, of Rhubarb half a dram, Salt of Wormwood two drams, with Syrup of Cichory
with Rhubarb, make an Electuary, the dose the quantity of a Chestnut twice a
day, drinking after it three ounces of the following Julep.

Take of the greater Celandine-water, Fumitory, Wormwood, Distilled Waters.
Elder-flowers of each five ounces, Snail-water, water of Earth worms,
compound, of each two ounces, Sugar half an ounce, mingle them and make a
Julep. Or,

Take of the roots of stinging Nettles, Angelica, Gentian, of each four ounces,
the greater Celandine leaves and roots, six handfuls, Wormwood, Tansie,
Southern-wood of each four handfuls, the outer rinds of twelve Oranges and four
Limons, prepared Worms and Snails of each one pound, Cloves bruised two ounces,
being all cut and bruised pour upon them eight pound of White Wind, let them be
distilled in a cold still, and the whole water mixed. Or,

Take of filings of Steel one pound, fresh Strawberries six pound, put them
into a glazed pot, stirring them together, and let them stand a day, afterward
add of English Rhubarb sliced one pound, the rinds of four Oranges sliced,
pour upon them of White wine six pound, and distill them according to Art; let
all the liquor be mixed together. The dose of this and of the former is three
ounces twice in a day after the Electuary or any other medicine.

Take of Turmerick-roots, Rhubarb, of each one dram and a half, the Bark of
Caper-roots, of Asarum-roots, of each half a dram, Extract of Gentian, and
Centaury, of each one dram and a half, Salt of Wormwood four scruples,
Water-cress-seeds half a dram, of Rocket half a scruple, Elixir Proprietatis
one dram, gum Ammoniacum dissolved in the water of Earthworms what will
suffice to make a mass, form it into small Pills, the dose is half a dram
evening and morning, drinking after it three ounces of the distilled water.

Sylvius does much magnify for cure of the Jaundies, Sylvius his Empirical
Remedies.
the Decoction of Hemp Seed in milk, and the solution of Soap, and from thence
endeavors to establish his own Hypothesis (as we have above intimated) whereby
he endeavors to deduce the Aetiologie of the Jaundies, rather from an
alienation of the choler, than from the obstruction of its passages.

2. The Second Indication respecting the altering or tempering of the blood,
The second Indication. Remedies against the Jaundies endowed with an animal
volatile Salt.
by which it may breed but moderately, and duly separate the choler, requires
Medicines of that sort, which depress the Sulphur and fixed salt too much
advanced. For these ends, I know not by what chance or conduct Medicines
endowed with a volatile salt, as Worms, Snails, Millepedes, yea Lice, Dungs of
fourfooted Beasts, and Fowl, are brought into practice for curing the Jaundies,
and not only prescribed by Empiricks, but the more famous Physicians: These
sometimes by themselves, but oftener joined with Purgers and Deoppilatives,
become the chief Ingredients in Compositions against the Jaundies.

Fonseca prescribes Goose-dung gathered in the Springtime and dried, as also
the white excrement of Pullets, of both which let the Powder be given in a
convenient vehicle from half a dram to a whole one.

Take powder of Earthworms prepared, of Goose-dung, of each three drams,
Ivory, Varlous forms of them.
yellow Sanders, of each half a dram, Saffron one scruple, make a powder,
divide it into six parts. One to be taken every morning with some appropriate
liquor. To the Apozeme, or Anticterical Tincture prescribed above, Earthworms,
Goose-dung, and also Sheepsdung are profitably added.

Take Millepedes fresh and alive from 50 to 100. Saffron half a Scruple, Nutmeg
a scruple, bruise them together, and infuse them in Water of Celandine four
ounces, of Earth worms two ounces, express them strongly, and drink it: after
this manner take it first once, then twice in a day for a week.

The vulgar and Empirical remedy with us is, that Nine quick Lice be taken in a
morning for five or six days, by which remedy they report to me many to be
cured (whenas other remedies effected little) which truly can help by no other
means than by restoring the volatile Salt depressed in the blood.

Upon the same account of succor even in this disease the flowers of Sal
Ammoniac, Also such as are endued with a mineral volatile Salt.
the volatile Salts of Amber, Hartshorn, Soot, in like manner their Spirits
are frequently administered with great success.

Take powder of Earthworms prepared two drams, Species Diacurcumae one dram,
flower of Sal Ammoniac half a dram, Salt of Amber a scruple, Extract of Gentian
one dram, Saffron one scruple, Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in water of Earthworms
what suffices, make a mass, and form it into small Pills; the Dose is three or
four, morning and evening, drinking after it three ounces of the Julep before
prescribed.

Take Spirit of Hartshorn tinctured with Saffron three drams; Dose from 15
drops to 20. with the distilled water prescribed above.

In this Class of Medicines by which the icterical distempers of the blood are
to be corrected, Steel remedies of several kinds.
steeled remedies do also challenge their place by right; for these afford
notable help, not so much by unlocking the obstructions of the bowels, as by
depressing the rage of the Sulphur, and fixed Salt, and by volatilizing the
blood, in the Jaundies, no less than in other cachectical distempers.

Wherefore, to the Decoction, or Tincture, or Infusion above prescribed, is
properly added the filings of Iron, or the prepared powder thereof (its mineral
consistence being some ways opened) or the vitriolic Salt extracted; from
hence it is, that Medicinal waters heal even to a miracle those sick of the
Jaundies, that had been despaired of; although these drunk in a very large
quantity, inasmuch as they pass through all the vessels, do also open the
passages of the Liver, however shut up.

Therefore also even Preparations of Steel are added to the Electuary, Pills
and Powders above recited, one while this, another while that, in due
proportion. Moreover the Syrup thereof given twice a day to one spoonful, in
three ounces of Apozeme or water against the Jaundies; also tincture of Steel
to twelve or fifteen drops may be administered in the same manner.

In the last place we may annex to this classis of altering Medicines those
things which not taken inwardly, Outward and Sympathetick remedies against the
Jaundies.
but outwardly applied, and by contact, used to the very urine of the Patient
are held to cure this disease.

As to the former, a remedy often tried by the vulgar, is a living Tench-fish,
whose Scales and outer superficies do resemble a yellow color, applied to the
right Hypochondria, or Stomach according to some, (to the soles of the feet,
according to others) whence a sudden flight of this disease is expected; hence
although many promise themselves a sure cure, it has often deceived me.

Another cure of the Jaundies at a distance is said to be done by I know not
what sympathy or secret manner of working.

Take the fresh Urine of the Patient made at one time, of the ashes of the
Ash-tree searced, as much as suffices to reduce it into Paste, which may be
formed into three equal balls, to be placed in a place shut, near the hearth or
Stove; as these dry and harden, the Jaundies will vanish; after this course, I
have known this inveter ate disease happily cured, although resisting many
other remedies; the practice thereof is very familiar with the Vulgar.

If of a certain it could be made manifest that this effect does for the most
part happen, The reasons of some of them.
and the reason of it be inquired into; in the first place we ought to suppose
a consent or sympathy of the spirits and other particles in the animated blood,
with other symbols inmates of the fresh urine; and that they immediately are
affected in the like manner with these. Notwithstanding it is evident enough
that a lixivial Salt mingled with urine, does presently set free the volatile
salt formerly subdued or enwrapt in other particles; as is plainly seen in
distillation of Urine, which if you urge by it self with a sand-heat, nothing
but phlegm will arise; but add the calx of Tartar, or Ashes, immediately the
Spirit and volatile Salt will come forth: wherefore, that Empirical
administration being administered, at the same time, both in the Icterical
urine, and also in the blood of the Patient, the volatile Salt escapes out of
the power of the fixed Salt and the Sulphur, and for that cause the icterical
distemper of the Blood is put to flight. Also upon the same reason is built
another sympathetical cure of the Jaundies, whereof Phil. Grulingius and Felix
Platerus do make mention, viz. the sick party pissing upon Horse-dung while it
is hot, has cured many of the Jaundies; inasmuch as the fixed Salt of the
Urine, and thereby the fixed Salt of the icterical blood of the patient, is
altered by the volatile Salt of the fresh dung, and reduced into its due
temperature.

3. The third Curatory indication vital institutes a convenient course of Diet,
The Third Indication vital.
and moreover Cordials and Anodynes, of both which there is frequent need.

As to what relates to the former, Food in this disease, more than in any other
ought to be medicinal. For Vegetables and their parts, styled commonly Hepatick
remedies, are boiled in the broths of these Patients. And these also are wont
to be made instead of other flesh, of Worms, or Snails, (which are accounted
Antidotes against the Jaundies.) Moreover Ale, and other ordinary drinks are
impregnated with infusion of Medicaments.

Take of the roots of stinging Nettles, of Strawberries, of each an ounce and
half, Eriygo-roots candied one ounce, Ivory and Hartshorn, of each two drams,
Earthworms cleansed twenty, a Crust of White-bread, Mace two drams, boiled in
two pound of water to one pound, strain it through Hippocrates sleeve, to which
add Diasantalon half a dram, make broth, whereof take from four ounces to
six, twice in a day: for ordinary drink, fill a Tub of four Gallons with Beer,
after it has wrought, put in the following Bag.

Take the tops of Roman Wormwood, white Horehound dried, of each two handfuls,
the roots of sharp pointed Docks six ounces, of the Bark of Ash, of Barberries,
of each 3 ounces, the outer Rinds of eight Oranges, and of four Limons, being
sliced and bruised, let them be prepared according to Art.

Since many sick of the Jaundies are usually affected with a great languishing,
Forms of Cordials.
and frequent faintings of the Spirits, they have also need of cordial
Remedies.

Take of small Aqua Mirabilis eight ounces, water of Earthworms four ounces,
Syrup of Orange-peels two ounces, mingle them, the dose two or three ounces.

Moreover, they who are troubled with this disease, do very much suffer with
pain sometimes very troublesome in the night, and are often obnoxious to
waking; wherefore also Anodynes come into use for administration.

Take of Aqua Mirabilis, water of Earthworms, of each one ounce, Diacodium six
drams, Tincture of Saffron half an ounce, the dose one or two spoonfuls late at
night, if sleep be wanting.

Take of Laudanum tartarizated two drams, Aqua Mirabilis two ounces, Syrup of
Clove-gilly-flowers one ounce, mix them, the dose is one spoonful after the
same manner.

SECT. II. CHAP. II. Of other Hepatick Remedies.
THe Liver is seldom or never found obnoxious to an Atrophie or extenuation,
since truly it performs the office of a strainer, and according to some, of a
mingling bowel; but on the contrary by reason of many causes and occasions, it
runs the hazard of being increased as to its bulk, and to be stufft and swelled
with diverse things gathered therein, and with concretions. Hence no small
account of health consists in this, that the Liver having right conformation
may freely convey the blood every where, without keeping back too much Custom
or provision for it self.

Truly many faults, The Kinds of Remedies assigned to the Liver.
and indeed not altogether undeservedly, are imputed to this Bowel, as also
unto the Spleen; the chief Kinds of which we shall touch upon. The Liver
frequently and chiefly is wont to be faulty in one of these two, viz. Frist
that intercepting the nutritious juice appointed for other parts, it bestows it
to its own proper use; this is plainly discerned in Children affected with the
Rickets, and moreover in many others that lead a sloathful and idle life.
Anciently there was an art with the Romans so to feed a Goose that the Liver
prodigiously increased might weigh more than the whole body. Secondly, the
other fault of the Liver is, that it too easily receives all the excrements and
feculencies whatsoever of the depraved Blood, brought into its inward recess,
and by retaining them there, does not only grow large, but is obstructed in its
passages, whence frequently comes the Jaundies, or a Dropsy; it contracts also
tumors and preternatural Concretions of diverse kinds of matter.

Many and diverse distempers of the Liver ought to be referred to these two
heads: Two general intentions of curing this bowel.
of each of which it is not our purpose to institute particular pathologies. As
to what appertains to the general pharmacie of this bowel, there will be one
principal scope of curing, that its income be diminished as much as may be, or
altogether cut off. Wherefore it will behove us to procure these two things,
viz. That the Liver augment not above measure, by taking the nutritious juice
too much unto it self; and that it retain not the feculencies of the Blood,
whereby it may be affected with obstructions and preternatural Tumors.

It will be much easier to prevent than cure either of these faults of this
bowel. For truly the former may be done, respect being had only that the blood
be well vonstituted in its Temperament, and enjoying a free Circulation, it may
both dispense its nutritious juice to the parts, and especially its outward
parts, and driving forth all its excrements to the particular Emissaries, it
may put them away there. And surely, the Medicines vulgarly called Hepaticks,
do first and more immediately exert their power by purging the blood, rather
than by correcting of the Liver: those namely consist of particles of such a
kind, which entering into the blood, and not mixing with it, do so stir up
the mass thereof, and break it into pieces, that all the Coagulations and
Concretions being taken away, all its dregs and impurities may easily depart,
and being carried to their proper Emunctories may be cast out of doors.

For truly all remedies which are called Splanchnick, Medicines vulgarly called
Splanchnick, first and chiefly operate upon the blood.
first work upon the blood, and incite its constitutive parts into a kind of
effervescency, and so toss, divide, and move them rapidly to and fro, that the
vaporous effluviums being sent into the habit of the body, the serous
excrements into the Kidneys, the choleric into the Liver, the melancholy into
the Spleen, and others to other Emissaries for which they are fitted, may be
shut out, without impediment or adhesion.

Wherefore the same Remedies which help the Liver, What such they are which
more especially respect the Liver.
help also the Spleen, the Reins, the Lungs, and other the Bowels in their
separations; and for the most part move sweating and urine. If any be found to
respect one part before the rest by any specific power, it is therefore
because their particles being more allied unto the excrements to be separated
within that bowel, and from thence associated to them are conveyed thither
together with them. For this reason Rhubarb, Turmerick, the greater Celandine,
with many others adjoined to the bilious humor, do the more easily reach the
passages of the Gall, and are wont to succor in the Jaundies. We have observed
before, the energies and manners of operating of Medicines of this kind. As to
what appertains to the other, vulgarly called Hepaticks, first we will annex
briefly certain forms of those which are reported either to prevent or remove
the unnatural augmentation of the Liver, and then those which are held to
provide against or take away the obstruction and preternatural Tumors thereof.

1. Against the too much increase, or improportionate nutriment of the Liver,
first a more sparing and thin diet, short sleeps, and moderate and frequent
exercises are convenient: wherefore we prescribe for Infants, and Children,
when they are discovered obnoxious to this distemper, as in the Rickets, that
they suck thin and serous milk, that they be shaken or tossed in their Nurses
arms, and tumbled quickly to and fro, or be carried swiftly in a Chair or
Coach, and as soon as may be, learned to go and to use their feet.

Take of the water of Snails, of Earth worms, of each three ounces, Some forms
of Hepaticks.
Syrup of Chicory with Rhubarb two ounces, spirit of Sal Ammoniac with Gum
Ammoniacum one scruple, mix them, and take a spoonful evening and first in the
morning.

Take of the roots of Maleferne, Chervil, candied Eringoes, of each one ounce,
the leaves of Agrimony, Hart's-tongue, male Speed-wel, of each one handful,
Shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn, of each two drams, white and yellow Sanders, of
each one dram, Raisins stoned one ounce and a half, Barley three drams, boil
them in three pounds of Springwater to two, to it strained add of Snail and
Earth-worm water, of each one ounce and half, Syrup of Chicory two ounces, make
an Apozeme, take two or three ounces in a day.

Take Powder of white and yellow Sanders, Crab's-eyes, Lignum-Aloes, of each
half a dram, Salt of Wormwood one Scruple, make a powder, the dose half a
Scruple to a whole one twice a day.

Take Empl. Diasaponis, Cerate of Sanders, of each what will suffice, make a
Plaster to be applied to the Hypochondrion.

Take Vnguentum Splanchnicum two ounces, Oil of Wormwood one ounce, mix them,
and make a Liniment for the region of the Liver.

Hither many other methodical as well as Empirical Medicines being used for the
Rickets may be referred, but we hasten to other things.

2. Their numbers enumerated.
Remedies ordained for most other distempers of the Liver are either simple or
compound. Very many of the former sort are reckoned by Authors, as if they were
procreated for this particular use. Heurnius says, That God Almighty has
offered to the World the greater plenty of Remedies of this kind, by reason of
their notable necessity. And to this Rank may be referred in the first place
all kinds of Chichories, the Sorrels, First Simples.
the sharp pointed-Docks, and almost all Vegetables endowed with bitterness and
something of sharpness, (wherein the deoppilative virtue is reported to
consist) as Wormwood, Germander, Ground Pine, Fumitory, Tanzy, Agrimony,
Liverwort, Lignum Aloes, all the Sanders, Tamarisk-bark, and Ash-bark, the
roots of Capers, with many others, which commonly make up the greatest part of
Herbals; so that whilst the Liver like a certain Goddess ruled sanguification,
very many Medicines were used to be ascribed fot its safeguard and succor.

The fixed Salts of herbs, the acid Spirits of Minerals drawn by distillation,
belong by right to this number, as they do chiefly exagitate the mass of
blood, dissolve the Concretions thereof, dispatch their obstructions, and cause
it every where to be passable, as to all the parts thereof.

If I here omit Chalybeates, most Chemists will censure me very unjust to the
Liver; Chalybrater.
for truly as the Prerogative of Venus is vulgarly attributed to this bowel, so
as to constrain to Love, we may hence expect that Mars will be perpetually
kind unto it. And really it is manifest by Reason, as well as Experience, that
Preparations of Steel are convenient in hepatical affects, as chiefly in the
Jaundies, and oftener in the Dropsy; wherefore these are put into the Receipts
of the Ancients and modern, and among curatory Compositions. For what reason
the Preparations of Steel as in like manner the medicinal waters from Iron, as
well natural as artificial, do purify the mass of blood, and by consequence
do relieve many distempers commonly called Hepatical, is shown by us largely
enough in another place, so that here is no need for repetition.

Medicines that are appointed by Physicians for the Liver are divided into
various forms, but first into hot and cold, and also into moist and dry;
accordingly as the temper of this bowel is supposed to consist after diverse
manners: when in truth it is only a dyscrasie of the blood, which being so
diversely faulty, desires so various an energy of medicines. Neither is it a
less vulgar error, that in the estimating of men's constitutions, the various
temperament of every one due to the blood, is ascribed chiefly to the Liver, as
hot or cold, or otherwise disposed.

In the Antidotaries of the Ancients there are many Shop-compositions extant,
The Shop-compositions of Hepaticks.
which seem to be besigned for the Livers sake only, of which sort are Rhasis
his Electuarie of the dross of Iron, Crocus ferri of Balchusis, which being
mixed with Treacle is commended for hepatical affects; the species Diatrion
santalon, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Trochiscs of Rhubarb, of Agrimony, of Capers,
Diacurcuma, Dialacca, Syrup of Wormwood, Chicorie, of the five roots,
Byzantinus, with many others, unto all whose forms, a vast Catalogue is annexed
for curing all the diseases of the Liver. But these passed over, it pleases me
now to propound some Kinds and Examples of Medicines which are counted
deoppilative according to the practice of the Moderns.

Therefore for an opening Decoction, Take of the roots of Fern, Magistral
Compositions.
Chervil, stinging Nettles, Dandelyon, of each one ounce, the leaves of
Agrimony, Hart's-tongue, Speed-well, Oak of Jerusalem, Liver-wort, of each a
handful, white and yellow Sanders, of each three drams, Ivory half an ounce,
red Cicers an ounce, Coriander-seeds three drams, Raisins two ounces, boil
themin four pound of water to two pound, adding toward the end White Wind four
ounces, stram it through Hippocrates Sleeve, to which add Species Diarrhodon
Abbatis one dram, of our prepared Steel two drams, Syrup of Chicory with
Rhubarb two ounces, the Water of Snails and Earthworms, of each one ounce, the
dose six ounces twice in a day after ae dose of the following Electuary.

Take of Conserve of the yellow of Oranges and Limons, Electuary.
of each two ounces, of Wormwood and Fumitory, of each one ounce, simple Powder
of Aron-roots, yellow Sanders, Lignum Aloes, of Caper-roots of each one dram
and a half, Crab's-eyes one dram, Salt of Wormwood two drams, syrup of Fumitory
what suffices, make an Electuary, the dose the quantity of a Walunt twice in a
day, drink after it a draught of the Apozeme now prescribed, or of the
following distilled water.

Take the leaves of Wormwood, A distilled Water.
Centaury, Tansie, both sorts of Southern-wood, Tamariske, of each four
handfuls, of green Walnuts four pound, of Ashen keys green two pound, the
Rinds of ten Oranges and four Limons, Snails and Earthworms prepared, of each
one pound, all being sliced, pour on them of White Wind eight pound, distill it
in a cold Still, let all the liquor be mixed together, the dose three ounces,
sweetning it with Sugar or a fit Syrup.

If a form of Pills will please better, the ensuing Extract called in the Shops
Extractum Ecphracticum, seems profitable.

Take of white and clear Tartar, Pills.
and of fresh Filings of Iron, of each 4 ounces, let them be ground together
into powder, after boil them in Fountain Water from four pound to two (some use
White Wind) to the strained liquor add the tops of Centaury, of Roman
Wormwood, or Carduus, of each one handful, Gentian-root half an ounce, Species
Diacurcumae an ounce and half, let them boil shut close for three or four
hours, strain it, and evaporate by the heat of a Bath to the consistence of
Pills, adding roots of Rhubarb or Species of Hiera Picra two drams; the dose is
from one scruple to half a dram made into Pills, in the evening, with an
appropriate vehicle.

For the same intention, viz. to prevent or to remove the obstructions of the
Liver, a medicated purging Ale, to be taken many days in Spring and Autumn, is
by some very much magnified, and exactly observed every year during their lives.

Take of the roots of sharp pointed Docks prepared, Polypodie of the Oak, of
each 3 ounces, Madder-roots two ounces, English Rhubarb two ounces, of leaves
of Senna four ounces, Epithymum two ounces, yellow Sanders one ounce, Carthamus
and Coriander-seeds, of each one ounce and a half, slice them and bruise them
according to Art, make a bag for 4 gallons of Ale, after six days let him take
to 12 ounces more or less in the morning, expecting four or five Stools without
regiment.

SECT. II. CHAP. III. Of Remedies for the Dropsy called Ascites.
AFter the Jaundies and the Remedies thereof, our method leads us to treat of a
Dropsy; not because of the Vulgar opinion, that it always arises from the
fault of the same bowel; but because that former disease having long continued,
for the most part concludes in this: which happens so, not so much from the
fault of the Liver, as from the whole Blood, for this and not that perform
sanguification. Wherefore, when the mass hereof has for a long time been
filled with choleric excrements, and at length degenerating from its temper,
accumulates also watery humors, then does a Dropsical Disposition come upon
the Jaundies.

But whereas three sorts of Dropsies are vulgarly supposed, viz Ascites,
Tympanites, The more remote causes of an Ascites.
and Anasarca, we will at present handle only the two former, appertaining to
the Splanchnick or Pathologie of the nether Belly. And first what relates to an
Ascites, this disease as to its matter and formal reason is manifestly known by
the sign of even many senses together, viz. it is a Tumor of the Abdomen,
First in respect of blood.
from a waterish tumor contained within the cavity thereof. The water making
this tumor, sometimes increases to a huge inundation, and scarce credible
quantity. I have once seen a Tub would hold 15 gallons filled with water taken
out of the Abdomen of a woman dead of a Dropsy. But whence that humor
proceeds, also by what manner, and from what causes it gathers together in the
belly first, and afterward is sensibly augmented; and lastly by what passages,
and by what virtue and operations of Hydragogue Remedies, it may again be taken
from thence, and evacuated, seems most difficult to be unfolded.

As to the former, viz. the increase of water, It does not always proceed from
the Liver and Spleen.
some have thought it to descend from the Liver, and others from the Spleen
distempered, into the cavity of the Abdomen; and so this bowel or that being
vitiated, always to be the cause of an Ascites. But that this is otherwise,
Anatomies of many dead of this disease, do manifestly declare: when after the
inundation of the belly, the Liver and Spleen and found often without fault.
And truly these bowels do not seem the Springs of any such illuvies, being
endowed with no cavityes, wherein waters might be accumulated together:
wherefore the origin of an Ascites, as of a standing Pool or Lake, is to be
derived from a River, or at least a glutt or inundation of some Humor.

The humors that flow within the passages, or Vessels as Brooks, The humors
by which it is produced are,
are chiefly these three, viz. the Blood, the milkie Humor, and the Lympha.
The showering or distilling of water may come to pass from the nervous Liquor
which sometimes slowly and insensiby sweats out of the fibers and membranes,
and from vapors condensed within the hollowness, or some Cavity of the Body.
Whether by these ways an Ascites does rather, and oftener proceed, we will now
search.

And in the first place as to what relates to the blood, it is without doubt,
First the Blood.
the Serum falling from the mass thereof, too much dissolved, as it does
excite Fluxions and Catarrhs of various kinds, so it sometimes stirs up the
greater illuvies of waters, viz. Dropsical: wherefore when an Anasarca proceeds
altogether from this cause, and when oftentimes an Ascites comes upon that
disease not immediately heald, we may well enough infer that either distemper
is induced from a watery humor, every where poured out from the little mouths
of the Arteries. Moreover, it is not much improbable, that the Serum of the
dissolved Blood is first and solitarily poured out of some end of the Coeliac
and Mesenteric Artery being open into the Cavity of the Abdomen, and so brings
on an Ascites without an Anasarca going before; and so especially if perhaps it
happen, that scirrhous Tumors, Ganglion's, little swellings, or preternatural
Concretions of another manner, are first raised about the Mesentery, the
Spleen, the Liver, the Womb, or any of the other bowels of the nether belly:
for, because the Circulation of the blood is hindered in those places, that the
blood being carried through the arteries, may be some way brought back, the
serous part being thrust out from its company, falls into the cavity. For truly
it is most evidently manifested, that it so comes to pass, by this Experiment
mentioned by us in another place, viz. If in a living animal, the jugular veins
being taken up and bound with a thread, the reduction of the blood be stopped, the
whole Region of the head swells in a short space, with a water between the
skin, and clearly hydropical. And truly I have more frequently observed that an
Ascites has followed upon secret tumors gathered and raised in some place in
the lower belly: which certainly happens for the reason above recited. When the
course of blood being obstructed, the watery part is extravasated in a short
space, that humor is not merely serous, but besides, the nutritious Liquor,
ordained to nourish all the solid parts, is emptyed into the belly: wherefore,
while this Region swells up, the members are extenuated, and the Lympha taken
out from an Ascites, with heat thickens and grows white, like the white of an
Egg.

It is also very probable, 2, and 3. The milkie and watery humor.
that the milkie Vessels being burst asunder, pour out their humor into the
cavity of the abdomen. Truly the most renowned Sylvius thought this disease
most frequently engendered from such a cause. And truly as out of the milkie or
watery Vessels, viz. one of them or both together, being divided, or opened, we
may well suspect the illuvies of water or chyle sometimes to overflow the
bowels of the nether belly; so the following observation seems to confirm the
same thing. Of late one that had been long sick of the Jaundies, and in the
mean time temperate and abstemious of drink (to which he was not prompted by
thirst) contracted an Ascites, increased in a short time hugely. After that
medicines were administered in vain, a Paracantesis is attempted according to
the manner of Sylvius, with a hollow Needle; out of the orifice, not icterical
water, but limpid and thin flowed out abundantly; from whence we may infer,
that hydropic humor flowed not out of the mass of blood, for then it had been
colored, but distilled out of the lymphic or milkie vessels into the cavity of
the abdomen. We have joined together as akin the ways of the milkie and lymphic
Vessels in propagating an Ascites, because both vessels do convey the chyle, or
what is analogous to it, to the common Receptacle; and many branches or leading
Pipes of either kind, are distributed about the bowels of the nether belly; in
the mean time, it is not improbable but that a solitary fault of either vessel
may sometimes produce an Ascites.

As to the other wamys of generating an Ascites, proposed in the beginning, I
am scarce induced to think, such an inundation of the belly can easily arise
from the distilling of a nervous humor, or by reason of vapors there
condensed: although perhaps in a Tympany where the cavity of the abdomen is
enlarged, and transpiration hindered, the effluvia that were wont to exhale,
being forced inwards, are changed into Lympha or water, wherefore for the most
part an Ascites is ever conjoined with that disease.

The immediate or conjunct causes of an Ascites being designed after this
manner, An Ascites often the product of the Jaundies.
which indeed seem to be, either a watery humor poured out of the Vessels
bringing Blood, or Lympha or Chyle poured out of the proper passages of them
both; not we must in the next place inquire about the more remote causes of
this disease, viz. for what occasions, and after what manner, the vessels
affected of either sort deposite their burdens into the cavity of the belly.

First therefore, The kinds of a Dropsy.
that the watery part of the blood sweats out into the Aqualiculum or belly,
either the very Blood, or Vessels containing it, or both together, are in
fault. The Blood is in fault, when being depraved in its Crasis it does not
rightly contain within its consistence the constitutive parts, but being apt to
be dissoved, it every where rejects its serosities from the mixture; which
either it drives out by Urine or Sweat, or permitting them to reside within,
pours them out into the pores of the flesh, The Description of an Ascites.
or the cavity of the bowels. The vessels bringing blood grow faulty for a
second reason, for that their extremities or little mouths either are too much
loose, or altogether shut up. In the former state the clew of Circulation of
blood is not entirely and firmly continued; but the thinner and more crude part
of the blood being apt to depart, is suffered to flow out near to the
interspaces or inosculations of the Arteries and Veins; likewise on the other
side, when the course of blood is hindered, by reason of a tumor or obstruction
of some vessels, their little mouths being thoroughly closed; to this being so
straightened that a passage may be made open by some means, that which is thin and
watery is extravasated, and sent away into the neighboring places, as we have
showed above.

2, 2. In respect of the Lymphaducts.
and 3. But an Ascites beginning alone, does often arise, by reason of the
milkie or lymphatic vessels being depraved; wherefore seeing we suppose the
cause of this kind of disease to be oftentimes conjunct, we must enquire, by
what means, and for what occasions, these vessels are wont to be so opened or
burst asunder, that they pour out they liquor into the cavity of the belly.

First therefore as to what belongs to the Lymphaducts, these vessels may be in
fault after a diverse manner, but chiefly, either that being obstructed or
compressed near their origin, they do not receive the humor, or being burst
about the middle or extreme parts, do pour it out into the belly. There are
many causes and reasons of effecting of either of these, for it may be a
viscous matter obstructs their beginnings, or glandulous, scirrhous, and other
preternatural Tumors compress them, as also a vast inundation of Lympha
flowing out, moreover vehement motions of the Body, or passions of the mind,
may burst them asunder.

2. The milkie Vessels, no less than Lymphatick, are in danger to be broke, 3.
In respect of the milkie vessels.
and so by pouring out their liquor into the cavity of the Belly, do excite the
Dropsy called Ascites; and truly they are wont to be hurt for the like reason,
in regard their middle passages, or their ends, either are obstructed by a more
viscous chyle brought into them, or by Phlegm from the intestines, or they are
compressed by Tumors bred in the Mesenterie: for forthwith the chyle entering
into the beginnings of the vessels, and not finding a passage, first very much
distends them, and afterward breaks them. There are many causes and occasions,
for which the thicker and obstructing humors are driven forwards into the
milkie Vessels; for besides an irregular Diet, and for the most part from meats
hard to be digested, this evil is frequently caused by too much drink, or
immoderate exercise immediately after Food, also from cold drink while the
Bowels are very hot; for so the passages of the Vessels before gaping are
suddenly shut, and afterward more narrowly closed, wherefore the chyle
sticking within their straightened channels, does thoroughly fill and obstruct them
in a short space.

As to what belongs to the differences of this Disease, besides them already
cited, The differences of this disease.
viz. that it comes after an Anasarca, or comes solitary; that this also is
manifold and after a diverse manner, according as the Vessels bringing blood,
or water, or milk, are found in the fault; Moreover we observe, that the
Dropsy called Ascites sometimes proceeds from a mere watery humor filling and
distending the parts of the nether belly; but sometimes there happens to this
deluge an extension of the membranes, or inflations made by the irregularities
of the inmate spirits, and so they do increase the swelling of the Abdomen; and
in this case a certain Tympanites comes upon an Ascites, even as more
frequently on the contrary, this is the offspring of that.

Moreover, in an Ascites merely watery, sometimes the Lympha only fluctuates
within the Cavity of the Abdomen, so that in the mean time the bowels being
soakt in it, continue still entire, and little or nothing increased in their
bulk; but sometimes besides the inundation of the Lympha in the hollow of the
belly, the blood being slowly circulated there, and almost stagnating it is
much diluted with water; Moreover the Parenchyma of the bowels, and the sides
of the Vessels and of the membranes, and chiefly the Glandules every where
numerous, being moistened, do swell with the flowing water, and so the tumor
of the belly consisting as it were of many pools of water and moorish Contents,
rises into a vast bulk.

The Prognostic of this Disease, is always suspected and accounted of an ill
omen: The Prognostic.
for none of the vulgar but will pronounce the obstinate tumor of the belly to
be very dangerous and difficult to cure: If any seem to be affected with a
Dropsy, or a Consumption, with them presently the next question is, Who shall
be his heir.

An Ascites beginning after an Anasarca (which proceeds commonly from the whole
mass of blood being poured forth into serosities, and sweating them out of the
little mouths of the Arteries into the cavity of the Abdomen) is accounted of
easier cure, or at least of more promising hope, than that solitary disease
coming from tumors about the bowels, or from the Lymphatick or lacteal Vessels
being burst asunder; for as well the conjunct as procatarctick cause of the
former Disease, oftentimes is used to be removed wholly, or in part; but in the
other case, both for the most part exist incurable. A reddish Urine, lixivial,
and little, in an Ascites is of ill signification, for it is a sign that the
mass of blood, being repleated with a scorbutic Salt and Sulphur boiled
together, is too much bound up in its substance; insomuch that it does not well
separate the feculencies, nor discharge them by fit and convenient Sinks, which
notwithstanding it does evilly dispose by constraint into the Cavity of the
Belly, forasmuch as it is hindered in its Circulation in the very same place.
For in an Ascites the blood is not always dissolved as in an Anasarca, but
sometimes appears too much compacted in its temper, yet so, that the salt Serum
being denied to the pores of the skin, and to the Urnary passages, by reason of
the Obstructions of the bowels is forced to break out within the abdomen.

If in an Ascites, by a Purge taken, the waters are evacuated with ease
plentefully by stool, and from thence the swelling of the belly is somewhat
diminished, we are not to despair of the Cure; but if Purgers bring out little
or nothing of the Serum, or Lympha, and thence by reason of the Nervous fibers
being irritated, and driven into extensions or inflations of the bowels and
membranes (as it uses frequently to be) the belly swells the more, and grows
like a Drum, we may expect only a fatal event of the Disease.

About the curing of the Dropsy called Ascites it behooves us chiefly to
consider by what ways the waters heaped within the abdomen, The Cure of an
Ascites.
may be thence brought out, and evacuated, for such an evacuation ought to be
attempted only by possible ways. And here presently is to be observed, that the
remedies used for Hydragogues according to the ordinary practice of Medicine,
intend to accomplish that end by purging, by Urine, By what and how many
remedies the eduction of the water is to be endeavored.
by Sweating, and by insensible transpiration: In some cases of the Sick you
ought to proceed by this way, and in other cases rather by that way, or
another, and if none of these seem feasible, or succeed well, let mature
consultation be had for a Paracentesis. It will be worth our labor to weigh
every of these kinds of Medicines, and the reasons of every one, and the manner
of their operations, and with how much virtue Hydragogues are endowed.

First, First by purging.
therefore as to what relates to purging, we have in another place showed that,
from the irritation of the Physic made in the belly and guts, as well the
Contents and wind of these bowels, as moreover the humors driven into their
Coats and Glandules, and which are heaped up in the Vessels and Pipes of the
neighboring parts, are disquieted, and partly streined into the passages of
the guts, and partly returned into the mass of blood; insomuch that the tumor
of the abdomen arising from the stoppage, and as it were a waterish affection
of those kind of Parts, is often abated by Purgatives seasonably administered,
and sometimes wholly removed; but it does not so succeed when it proceeds from
a Lympha fluctuating within the cavity of the abdomen, or from an inflammation
of the membranes, or from a tympanitic extension: because Hydragogues do little
or nothing bring out those waters, and if they be of the stronger sot, they
increase this passion and exasperate it by inflaming the part.

Catharticks used for Hydragogues, Catharticks are either Vomits or Purges.
are either Vomits, or Purges; they exert their power in the stomace, and these
rather in the Intestines; insomuch that they powerfully provoke and twitch the
Nervous fibers; and together pour forth the blood and nervous liquor by a
certain septick force, and do cause the serous humors wherever impacted to be
stirred, and do cause them plentifully to be sent away by the passage granted.
Either are reckoned of a various kind, viz. either simple or compound, gentle
or strong, by the Ancients as well as by the Moderns; some of which that are
most chielfy noted, we will here briefly observe.

1. Emetick Hydragogues, chiefly famous, are Gambugia, Esula, Spurge, and their
several Preparations, as also the Hercules of Bovim, and the Pilulae Lunares.

2. The chief medicines of either kind.
Purgers are Elder, and Dwarf-Elder, Soldanella, Gratiola or Hedge-hyssop, the
Juice of Orris, and Elaterium. We will briefly prescribe some methods either of
preparing or compounding or administering each of these.

1. 1. Gummi guttae.
Gambugia, first an Indian Medicine, being from thence brought by our
Contrymen, from the Painters Shops coming to the Apothecaryes, began to be
in use, and is much magnified for purging out serous humors. But sorasmuch as
taken by it slef it vehemently disturbs the Stomach, and often weakens it,
therefore, that its outrageous and violent vomiting force may be somewhat
abated, there are diverse ways of its Preparation invented; but truly it is best
corrected with an acid Spirit, or with an alcalizate Salt, or by thoroughly
mixing and correcting it with aromaticks.

Adrian a Mynsicht, Its various Preparations.
extolls the magistery thereof, which is made by a dissolution in Spirit of
Wine, and after drawing it off, and precipitating it with Spring Water; also
dissolving it with Spirit of Wine vitriolated, and with Tincture of Roses, and
red Sanders, and after by evaporating it: others prepare it with the fume of
Sulphur after the manner of Scammonie sulphurated; others grind it on a
Marble, moistening it with Oil of Cinnamon, or Cloves, or other chemical
Aromaticks. I use most the Solution thereof made with a tincture of Salt of
Tartar, the dose from 15 drops to 20 or 30.

Take of Gum-gutta, gr. 6. Mercurius dulcis gr. xv. Conserve of Violets, The
forms of Hydragogues prepared thereof.
a dram and a half, make a Bolus.

Take of Gambugia twelve grains, Salt of Wormwood fifteen grains, Oil of Mace
one drop, Conserve of Damask Roses one dram, make a Bolus: and it is wont to be
given with Tartar vitriolate, or Cream of Tartar, and powder of Rhubarb.

Take of Gum-gutta sulphurated, or vitriolated, fifteen grains, Cream of Tartar
half a scruple, Extract of Rhubarb one scruple, Oil of Cinnamon, gut. 2. make 4
Pills.

Lately, a woman afflicted with a most painful Ascites, and most desperate, as
it seemed to me, the ensuing Medicine being taken for 6 days successively, she
began to be much better, and in a short time afterward recovered her health
entirely.

Take of powder of Gum-gutta twelve grains, Oil of Cinnamon one drop, with
syrup of Buck-thorn, make a Bolus, the dose daily to be augmented, ascending
from twelve grains to twenty.

Take of our Tincture of Gum-gutta one scruple, water of Earth worms one ounce,
Syrup of Rhubarb half an ounce, mix them, and let it be taken with government.

2. Whereas there are several species of Spurge, or Tithymalus, 2. Spurge. The
Preparations thereof.
and all of them work more violently either by Vomit or Stool, by reason of the
notable provocation they make in the bowels; and for that cause do abundantly
bring out serous humors; yet by reason of the too outrageous force of many of
them, the lesser Spurge for the most part only is now in use, and the
preparations thereof most of all magnified are, the powder of the bark of the
Roots, and the Extract, and we think fit to add the tincture inferior to none
of the rest.

Take of Spurge with the Roots cleansed four handfuls, Lignum-Aloes, and
Cloves, of each one dram, bruise them and boil them in four pound of
Spring Water, to half, the strained Liquor clarify by separation or settling
in a long glass afterward evaporate the clear liquor in a Bath heat, to the
consistence of an Extract, the dose one scruple.

Take of this Extract half an ounce, Forms.
pour upon it into a mattress of the Tincture of Salt of Tartar 6 ounces, digest
them in a Sand-hath to the Extraction of a Tincture, the dose from 20 drops to
30 in a convenient vehicle.

Take of the Powder of Spurge from seven grains to ten, Cinnamon half a scruple,
Salt of Tartar eight grains, mix them together in a glass mortar, give it by it
self or mixed with a fit Conserve, or Syrup, make a Bolus or Pills.

2. Precipitate of Mercury with Gold, The Hercules of Bovius.
or the Hercules of Bovius which is much extolled by the Author for curing
Dropsies; it is described in a former Treatise in the Chapter of Vomits, and
the manner of preparing, and the working thereof, and the Reasons are there
delivered. This Medicine, inasmuch as it twitches the stomachical fibers by its
acrimony, and pours out the blood by reason of the mercurial and salt
particles, causes or stirs up a fierce Vomit, and thereby causes the serous
humors, violently strained into the Cavities of the bowels, to be ejected.

3. The Pills called Lunares produce the same effect in like manner, Pilulae
Lunares.
by reason of the vitriolate particles of Silver sharpened with other saline
menstruums, viz. by wrinkling of the fibers of the Bowels very much, they force
the serous humors to be strongly strained into their passages, and so to be
evacuated.

A Solation of Silver made in Stygian water, and well cleansed, and by a little
evaporation is reduced into pleasant Crystals, which by themselves (or with an
addition of Salt Nitre to abate the fierceness of the Lunar Vitriol) are made
into Pills with crumbs of bread: the dose is one Pill, sometimes two or three,
respecting the ability of strength and working. Medicines of this kind are
exhibited sometimes with success in a strong constitution, and bowels strong,
and a good habit; but they are scarce ever conveniently or rarely without
prejudice taken by tender and cachectical persons.

Hydragogues merely or chiefly purging, are either of a more mild sort, as
Elder, Purging Hydragogues.
Dwarf-Elder, Soldanella, and juice of English Orris, which seldom being
administered by themselves, do want the stirring up of sharper Medicines, and on
the other side they blunt their too much fierceness; or they are of a stronger
sort, as Gratiola or Hedge hyssop, Jallap, and Elaterium.

The seeds or grains of Elder and Dwarf-Elder being dried, Elder and
Dwars-Elder.
are reduced into a powder, which being taken to the weight of one dram, does
gently bring forth serous humors by siege; Water and Spirits are distilled of
the juice of either sorts of Berries fermented, also Robs and Syrups are made
of them; which with many other Preparations of those Vegetables, are much
magnified for all hydropical Distempers.

Soldanella and Gratiola, Soldanella.
are rarely used by themselves in our age, neither are any neat and very
efficacious Medicines prepared out of those Simples, they are frequently mixed
with certain other Hydragogues, and chiefly are ingredients in compounding
Apozems.

The Juice of English Orris is a very profitable Medicine, The juice of Orris.
and because to be easily provured for the poor, is the more to be esteemed: It
is given grom six drams to an ounce and a half, or two ounces, either by it
self in a fit vehicle, or with other things appropriated thereunto. Jalap is a
most known Medicine against every Dropsy, and common enough. Any one of the
common people suffering under that disease, presently takes of the powder of
the root of Jalap a Pennyworth, mixed with Ginger and White Wind, and the
desired effect does frequently follow this remedy used with intermission.

Elaterium, is rightly esteemed the most powerful Hydragogue, Elaterium.
for that it most painfully provoking the splanchnick fibers and together
melting the blood and humors by a certain corrosive force, compells whatsoever
serosities the Coats of the Bowels, Membranes, Vessels, also the Glandules, and
flesh do contain in themselves, to be poured out into the cavities of the
Stomach and guts: by which Medicine happily working, the asswaging of the
Abdomen does sometimes succeed. Truly this is the chief weapon of the Empirical
Magazine against any Ascites; which they notwithstanding using in all cases, do
oftener administer to the hurt than benefit of the Patient: the dose is from
three grains to ten or fifteen, taken either by it self, only with correcting
spices added, or it is given with other hydragogues in form of a Powder, Pills,
or Electuary. The tincture and essence of it are extracted with Spirit of Wine,
or with tincture of Salt of Tartar.

These are the chief simple Hydragogues, The forms of Hydragogues.
from which being prepared with the addition of others, many compounded ones as
well Magistral as common in Shops are made, adn are every where in use;
moreover, very many more might be prescribed extemporarily, as occasion serves.
Of these we will here annex a few more select forms, and chiefly those that are
taken in the form of Potions, Powders, Electuary and Pills.

Take of Dwarf-Elder, A Tincture.
English Orris, of each an ounce and half, leaves of Soldanella and Gratiola,
i.e. Hedge-hyssop of each one handful, Asarum, and Ass Cucumber-roots of each
two ounces, roots of lesser Galangal six drams, choice Jalap half an ounce,
Elaterium three drams, Cubebs two drams, shred and bruise them, and pour upon
them three pound of small Spirit of Wine tartarizated, digest it stopped close in
Sand for two days, strain it clear and depurate it by settling. The dose from
two spoon-fuls to three, in a convenient vehicle.

Take of Elaterium, Powders.
Soldanella, Ginger, of each one scruple, Galangal, Cloves, Cinnamon, of each
half a scruple, Salt of Tartar fifteen grains, make a powder for two doses.

Take powder of Jalap one dram, Ginger one scruple, Cream of Tarar 15 gr. make
a powder to be given in a draught of White Wind.

Take of Rhubarb one scruple, Pills.
Elaterium 5 grains, Tartar vitriolated half a scruple, Spicknard three grains,
with Syrup of Buckthorn make four Pills.

Take of pill Aloephanginae half a dram, Elaterium half a scruple, Oil of
Cloves gut. 3. make four Pills.

Bontius hydropick Pills are given from half a scruple to half a dram, prepared
thus:

Take of Aloes two drams and a half, the preparation of Gum-gutta one dram and
a half, Diagridium corrected one dram, Gum Ammoniacum dissolved, one dram and a
half, Tartar vitriolated half a dram, make a mass, and form it into Pills.

Certain hydragogue Electuaries re now every where in use and celebrated by
practisers. Electuaries.
Of which sort are, 1. One described by the renowned Sylvius, and the other by
Zwelfer. This following pleases us.

Take of Resine of Jalap two drams, Tartar Vitriolate one dram, Extract of
Rhubarb two drams, of Spurge a dram and a half, lesser Galangal one dram, beat
them in a mortar, and lastly add of Conserve of the flower of English Orris,
four ounces, and with Syrup of Peach-flowers make an Electuary, the dose from
half a dram to a dram and a half, or two drams.

I might here set down or describe many other purging Hydragogues, 2. Diuretic
Hydragogues.
but Catharticks do not always cure an Ascites, yea oftentimes exasperate it,
and (if they be long continued) render it incurable; hence it is necessary to
have recourse to other Remedies for the Cure of this disease. Wherefore, let us
next enquire whether Diuretics do here profit or not?

And truly any one may easily think that Remedies moving Urine conduce very
much for draining waters out of every place or cavity of the body. In truth it
is manifest by frequent experience, these do often cure an Anasarca before any
other Remedy; let us see what they may effect for the emptying the Cavity of
the Abdomen.

As to this it first appears, What Profit they bring in an Ascites.
that there is no passage immediately open from an Ascitick pool to the Reins,
although contiguous; but that whatsoever waters are transferred from hence
thither, must of necessity first be drunk up into the mass of blood, and from
thence be poured out of its bosom into the sink of Urine; and truly it is but a
little which the gaping little mouths of the veins about the superficies of the
bowels can receive (if perhaps they are open at all) and Diuretics can but
effect this one thing, that by pouring forth the blood, and forcing its
serosities more plentifully to the Kidneys, they cause the waters fluctuating
in the belly to be allured to it being so emptyed; in the mean time there is no
less danger, lest Diuretics being unseasonably administered, while they
dissolve the blood too much, they constrain the serum to depart into the seat
of the Ascites, more than into the Reins, and so rather augment than remove the
inundation of the belly. For that it sometimes so happens, I have often found
by experience; wherefore when Diuretics are prescurbed to cure an Ascites, we
must chielfy provide against such a contrary effect. For this reason indeed
Astringents and Corroboratives are always mixed in Remedies for the Dropsy
(founded on experience, and the Authority and Practice of the Ancients) not
that such (as is commonly said) do confirm the Tone of the Liver, but conserve
the temperature, and mixture of the blood, lest it be wholly dissolved by too
great a fusion. Wherefore in an Ascites which chiefly or in part happens by
reason of the frame of the bowels and vessels, and chiefly the Coats,
Glandules, and their little strings, and their interspaces being stuffed by a
serous humor, and therefore very much swelled up, as Catharticks so also
Diuretics profit, and are frequently taken with success; forasmuch as by the
use of these the mass of blood being emptyed (the serum being more plentifully
derived to the kidneys) does easily reveive unto it self those waters every
where stagnating about their little mouths, and conveys it toward the urinary
sink: but on the contrary, in a mere Ascites where the heap of waters do
overflow the Cavity of the Belly, the Textures of the bowels being free from
the serous stuffing; Diuretics are given in vain, or incommodiously; inasmuch
as they express nothing from this Lake of the belly, and most frequently by
dissolving the blood more impetuously drive together the waters apt to be
instilled there.

Not all Diuretics of every kind are equally convenient in an Ascites, With
what choice and difference they ought to be administered.
neither ought they indifferently to be administered; for we must observe, the
affected in this disease for the most part make a little, reddish Urine, and as
it were lixivial; which truly is an indication that the temperature of he blood
is too much bound in them, by reason of the fixed and sulphurous Salt exalted
and combined together: and therefore that the Serum is not duly separated
within the reins; which notwithstanding is shook off about the windings of the
obstructed bowels, and so is depisited in the Cavity of the Belly. Wherefore in
this Case it will be convenient to drink only those things to excite Urine,
which so restore and amend the Constitution of the blood, that the enormities
of the fixed Salt and Sulphur being taken away, the serous part might be
separated within the reins, and more plentifully discharged; for which purpose,
not acid or lixivial things, but those endowed with a volatile Salt are
appointed. For I have often observed in Patients of that kind, when the Spirit
of Salt, and other acid drops of Minerals, and when the dissolutions and
Deliquiums of Salt of Tartar, Broom and other things, have done more hurt than
good, that the Juice of Plantane, Brooklime, and other Herbs abounding with a
volatile Salt, have much helped, as also the expressions of Millepedes: for the
same reason Salt of Nitre thoroughly purified or Crystal Mineral does often
profit. Forms of Medicines more accommodate for this use are extant in our
former Treatise, where, viz. examples of Diuretics are described, in which
both volatile and nitrous Salts are the Basis. Moreover, hither ought to be
referred the notable experiment, by which Joannes Anglus affirms himself often
to have cured the Ascites from a hot cause, John English his Empyrical remedy.
which Medicine also that expert Physician Dr. Theodore Mayern was wont to
magnify and prescribe in the like case.

Take of the juice of Plantane and Liverwort, and fill an Earthen pot to the
top, which being stopped close, put in a hot Oven after the Bread is drawn, and
make a little fire on the sides of the pot to continue the heat of the Oven;
after it is so boiled strain it, and being sweetened with Sugar, drink of it
Morning and Evening, and it cures. In imitation of this I have often with
success prescribed as follows.

Take of green Plantane-leaves four handfuls, Liverwort, Brooklime, of each two
handfuls, bruise them together, and pour upon them half a pound of small
compound Radishwater, or other appropriate Aagistral, express it strongly, the
dose three ounces three times in a day.

Although Diaphoreticks are most efficacious in an Anasarca, How beneficial
Diaphoreticks are in an Ascites.
yet in an Ascites they are rarely or not at all used: for being unseasonably
offered, they impress oft-times great hurt on the Patient without any avail;
forasmuch indeed as by heating the blood, they cause the fluctuating waters to
grow hot, and as it were to boil in the hollowness of the belly; so that the
spirits and humors are disturbed by vapors raised from thence; and so a
disorder of all the functions follows, and the very bowels being as it were
boiled, are much prejuciced. Moreover from sweating unadvisedly instituted, the
blood being forced into a fusion and precipitation of the Serum, throws it off
the more into the nest of the Ascites. Wherefore when some prescribe
fomentations, and liniments, adn bathing, to be applied to the swelling Paunch
of the Belly, for the most part it turns to the worse in such Patients; for
besides a little Fever, a Vertigoe, fainting of the spirits, and other ill
symptoms of the brain and heart, being most frequently so raised, even the
belly also does from thenc swell the more: forasmuch as the Blood being
agitated and poured out, deposits in that place more largely the Serum; and for
that cause the mouths of the Vessels are more loosened and opened, so that they
may more readily let fall water prone to depart from the mass of blood. But the
Remedies which are chiefly wont to be administered with success near the places
affected (when a Cure is intended without a Paracentesis) are Clysters and
Plasters.

The former draw the Serum out of the Vessels and Glandules of the Guts and
Mesentery without fusion of the whole mass of blood, Glysters and Plasters.
(which the stronger purging Medicines do excite,) which being so emptyed do
imbibe a little the extravasated Lympha. For this purpose the ensuing Clyster,
wont to be prescribed by us in this case, is most fit, in regard it contracts
the intestinal fibers together, and draws the Serum imbibed by the blood, or
contained formerly therein, toward the Reins.

Take a pint of Urine of a sound man that drinks Wine, Forms thereof.
Venice Turpentine dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg, an ounce and a half, Sal
Prunella one dram and a half, make a Clyster, which repeat daily. Sometimes
Plasters yield help in an Ascites, yet let them be such, as by a certain
restringent and comfortable virtue strengthen the bowels and bind together the
moughs of the Vessels, lest they too much spue out their serosities: for this
purpose, I use to apply the Plaster Diasaponis with success. Or,

Take of the Plaster of Minium, Paracelsus Plaster, of each what suffices,
make a Plaster to be applied to the Abdomen. If this disease is accompanied
with a Tympanie, Epithemes of another manner are fit, as we shall hereafter
declare.

The great and most present remedy of an Ascites, is, that the waters may be
drawn out by a Paracentesis being made; which administration however does not
oftener cure the disease, than kill the Patient; wherefore there is need of
exact caution to whom, and at what time of the disease it ought to be
administered: to persons of an ill habit, who have been long ill, in whom the
conformation and temper of the bowels is wholly depraved, it will be in vain to
have the Lympha drawn out by the Paunch being pierced; for thereupon
immediately the Spirits faint and the strength is dissoved, and after a while a
new illuvies of the morbific humor succeeds. When and to whom a Paracentesis
is convenient in an Ascites.
But those who being formerly of sound bowels, and healthful enough, as to
other parts, when they fell into an Ascites from some great and evident cause,
as we are not at first presently to make a Paracentesis, so neither if it be
needful ought we to defer it too long: for an incorrigible depravity of the
Bowels is contracted by a longer delay, while they remain a long while drowned,
and as it were boiled in water.

It is beside our purpose to describe here the administration of a
Paracentesis, whether it be done after the ordinary manner, or by a hollow
Needle according to Sylvius; this part of Surgery, as dangerous, when
Physicians seldom prescribe, yet Quacks and Empiricks rashly and unluckily
essay it, Artists not being consulted: we will relate here for conclusion the
History of a true and huge Ascites, lately cured without and Paracentesis.

A young Woman wise to a Merchant, being slender and proper, A history of a
cure.
while she gave suck to her Child, to increase her milk day and night did
immoderately guzzle one while plain Ale, another while Posset Drink. After
having used this kind of diet for a fortnight, she contracted a vast Ascites in
a short time, the beginning whereof she was not in the least sensible of; for
her Abdomen being great with water fluctuating within, did much swell up, and
its bulk when she turned from one side to the other, fell without the Ileon and
borders of the rest of the body: when in the mean while the flesh of all her
Members was very much consumed, that she seemed no less in a consumption than a
Dropsy.

The Child being weaned, and a better course of Diet being appointed, she
betook her self to Medicines, and took in the first place the more mild
Hydragogues, as well purgative as diuretical, but without any advantage; also
she was worse after every purge; but being committed to our care, and almost
desperate, I handled her after the ensuing method.

I prescribed these Medicines, for the most part forbidding Ale, and any
potulent liquor (medicined excepted.)

Take of the leaves of Plantane, Brooklime, Clivers, of each 4 handfuls
bruised, and pour upon them of water of Earthworms and Rhadish compound of
each three ounces, press them, take it twice a day, viz. at Eight in the
Morning, and at Five in the Afternoon. She continued long in the use of this
Medicine, but did sometimes vary the Composition, sometimes changing the herbs,
sometimes the Liquor poured on them.

Take of the reddest Tincture of Salt of Tartar an ounce and a half, she took
20 drops at night, and early in the morning, in two spoonfuls of the following
Julep, drinking seven spoonfuls after it.

Take water of Elder-flowers, Saxifrage, of each six ounces, water of Snails,
Earthworms, and Rhadish-compound, of each two ounces.

She wore a Plaster of Minium and Oxycroceum upon her Belly.

The following Clyster was given first daily, afterward every two or three
days.

Take Urine of a healthy man one pound, Turpentine dissolved with the Yolk of
an Egg an ounce and a half, Sugar an ounce, Sal Prunella one dram, make a
Clyster.

By the constant use of these things her Belly assuaged within a fortnight, but
her flesh daily wasting, a Consumption was threatened. Wherefore, going into the
Country to avoid this, she drank Asses milk; by the benefit of which Nutriment
and of purer Air, continually taking the abovementioned Medicines, she
recovered her entire health within three or four weeks, and lives yet in health.

SECT. II. CHAP. IV. Of a Tympanie.
ATypany vulgarly, A Tympany not properly a kind of Dropsy.
although not properly, is esteemed a kind of Dropsy, from which rank, Prosper
Martianus alleading the testimony of Hippocrates, rejects as well this Disease,
as an Anasarca. But the former infessting the region of the Abdomen, and
raising it up into a bulk, now comes under consideration next after an Ascites,
(to which it is something akin): where first of all it is obvious, that this
Disease as it is most difficult to cure, so also to be known; for although its
outward form, viz. a somewhat hard swelling of the belly, very stiff and
yielding a sound like a Drum, upon touching it, is evidently perceived by many
senses together; notwithstanding what may be the morbifick matter inducing that
Tumor, or after what manner it is generated in the belly, or from what place
it comes thither, is altogether unknown: therefore those who have a Tympanie,
as though they were big with wind, are ignorant both of the manner and time of
its conception. Wherefore its cause is occult.
Truly I therefore judge the nature and causes of this disease to lie
concealed, because whereas its first beginnings are not observed, it suddenly
augments prodigiously; so that they who are affected, do scarce sooner perceive
themselves to be sick, than that they are become almost incurable. Moreover, a
Tympanie, its station being accomplished, degenerating into an Ascites, or
rather procuring it to its self, seems to lose its own nature; and truly after
death Anatomical inspection scarce discovers any thing more in bodies dying
with a Tympany, than with an Ascites. Commonly ascribed to Wind.
But that many Physical Authors do readily declare this Distemper to be raised
by wind enclosed within the cavity of the abdomen, does not at all satisfy a
mind desirous of the truth; because it seems altogether improbable that winds
should be produced so suddenly, and in so great plenty in that place; or admit
they were, that so hard, unmovable and constant a tumor should be raised.

Moreover they do not easily agree concerning the seat of the disease, Authors
do not agree about the seat of the Winds.
where the wind is supposed to be included; for some affirm that this place is
determinate in the concave of the Peritonaeum, and by the unequal superficies of
the Intestines, and other bowels of the lower part of the belly; but affer what
manner such a heap of winds can be therein collected, in my opinion it cannot
be manifested by any reason, example, or parallel instance. Besides, if the
case were such, it might be more easily cured by pricking, than an Ascites by a
Paracentesis; which yet I never heard accomplisnied. Helmont reports a stinking
wind was vented by a Paracentesis, Not without the guts in the cavity of the
Abdomen.
in one esteemed Hydropick; that suddenly his abdomen sunk, and the man dyed
immediately. But Platerius and Smetius, no less worthy of credit, do affirm,
They discovered in some who wore thought to have the Tympaine, and dissected
after death, that no wind broke forth out of the hollow of the belly, neither
that it fell, but that especially the smaller guts being distended, and
strutting with wind, burst out so, that they could not be put up again into
the same belly.

But truly neither is this observation an argument to me, Nor within their
passages.
that the cause of the disease (of which we treat) remains within the Cavities
of the guts, and that the winds accumulated in that place, do often or most of
all raise a Tympanitick swelling of the belly. For besides that, a disease
taking rese from such an occasion, would not be of immovable, and frequently
incurable; moreover, I am induced to think, that the Intestines are not so
greatly dilated by winds shut up in them, but that they often of their own
accord swelling out, give occasion to those winds consequently and secondarily
to be produced, by which the spaces enlarged might be filled, as we shall by
and by more clearly demonstrate.

But what is asserted by others, Not between the coats of the bowels.
that the winds which are the cause of a Tympany, are engendered among the
Coats of the Mesentery, and Guts, seems yet much more improbable; because when
there is no cavity in that place preexistent, after what manner can the winds
so tear those parts and separate them froom one and another so that from such
formed Denns, the whole region of the Belly should grow into so vast a bulk by
accumulated winds there laid up? Certainly so many and so great divulsions
could not be made without continual torment and most sharp pains.

Wherefore, omitting these opinions already spoken of about a Tympanie, By what
and how wany causes the Belly swells.
let us proceed another way to the more assured searching out its Pathologie;
viz. by thoroughly weighing by what means, and by what evident causes, the
Abdomen is wont to swell up. Wherefore, we advertise there are four kinds of
things contained, from which proceeds a tumor in the nether Belly of the
living, (why the Abdomen swells in dead personns, the reasons follow hereaster)
which kinds are, solid, humid, wind and Spirits.

First, It is obvious enough, that the inward tumors of the bowels, 1. From
tumors of the Bowels in that place.
viz. scirrhous, strumous, cancrous and glandulous, and some perhaps of another
kinds, when they rise to any notable bulk, do swell the whole belly; yet in the
mean time as long as they are simple, and new, they may be perceived and
circumscribed by the touch; yet afterward growing inveterate, they cause other
evils to the neighboring parts, yea over the whole Region of the Abdomen.
Truly these as they are sometimes the procuring cause of an Ascites, so of a
Tympany from the beginning, to which afterward for a complement of either
disease, another conjunct cause gains access, viz. an illuvies of waters, or an
irregularity of the Spirits.

Secondly, a watery humor gathered within the Cavity of the abdomen, 2. From
waters gathered as in an Ascites.
or being impacted in the membranous or glandulous parts thereof, frequently
produces an Ascites, the reasons whereof, and the manner of its coming to pass,
are at large set domn before.

Thirdly, Winds within the bowels of Concoction being reised from crudities, 3.
From winds.
ill concoction, or fermentation of heter ogeneous humors, do frequently puff
up the Cavity of the guts, and for the most part produce a short and transitory
tumor of the belly. For the fermentation of the Juices ceasing, and eruption
of wind being procured, immediately succeeds an asswaging of the Belly. To this
cause, both the Colic and Tympanie, not only by the vulgar but by Physicians
of great note are imputed; but in our judement, when it is solitary it produces
neither of these distempers.

Fourthly, There yet remains another sudden, and vast swelling of the belly, 4.
From the inflation of the Fibers, by reason of the Spirits being disturbed.
which the animal Spirits, (not for nothing styled by Hippocrates violent) seem
to procure. For when these in heaps, and inordinately, rush into the nervous
fibers belonging to the bowels of the lower belly, presently the parts that
these weave together are caused to be puffed up, and extended every where round
about. For truly, from this cause (as we have often showed in another place) a
swelling, and as it were a tympanitical puffing up of the whole abdomen, as
well in the Colic as in Hysterical fits vulgarly so called, does often happen.
And truly these distempers are so allied to a Tympany, that they srequently end
in it; for I have often observed, that those who have been obnoxious to the
Colic and hysterical passion long and grievously, unless they receive cure, do
become Tympanitical. And then the greatest of the difference will be, that the
swelling of the belly, which before was a wandering Symptom, and soon passing
over, at length grows to be a fixed and permanent disease.

Wherefore, it seems material in this Case, to accommodate th Aetiologie of
those passions delivered by us in another place, to unfold the Nature and
Causes of this present malady.

Which truly will not be of any great business or difficulty. An Affection of
what sort a Tympany is.
For supposing (what we have in another place more largely set down) the
extensions and inflations of the membranes and hollow bowels, take their
origin from the impetuous invasions of the Spirits into the nervous fibers (of
which they are interwoven) it will be obvious enough to conceive cven a
Tympaine to be produeed from such a cause, but being more sixth, and longer, or
uncessantly in the act; into the reason of which difference, we will by and by
inquire.

In the mean time I am induced to believe a Tympanie not the be stirred up from
winds shut up within, or without the Cavity of the guts, Its cause and formal
reason explicated.
(for such an accumulation of winds in those places, is an effect, but not a
cause of this disease) but that it does arise, inasmuch as the animal Spirits,
in the bottom of the belly, belonging to the membranous bowels, being forced
into disorder by something incongruous, do tumultuously rush every where into
the nervous fibers, and puff them up, neither do they immediately recede back
from them: from hence the Peritonaeum swells, and the guts being blown up and
enlarged, they are as it were inflated, the Mesentery, and other membranous
bowels, being turgid with an impetuous Spirit, are as it were raised up into a
bulk; moreover, while these come thus to pass, that the vacuities caused from
the swelling of hollow bowels might be filled, a portion presently of every
humor within contained, being rarefied into vapors, forthwith turns into
wind, wandering about those empty spaces.

Truly, And proved by arguments and instances.
we have clearly enough shown, by reasons and instances in our Pathologie of
Convulsions, that the animal spirits puff up the membranous parts by their
irregularity, and so produce as it were this windy Distemper. Moreover the
fame is demonstrated by Anatomical observation made in dissecting a living
Creature; viz. inasmuch as the Trunk of the eighth pair of Nerves, descending
on each side by the Neck, if it be taken out and bound with a thread, forthwith
all the stomach swells up, as if it were puffed with wind; An universal
Tympanie.
which certainly can proceed from no other cause than that the animal Spirits
of the fibers of that bowel, and others flowing through the nervous passages,
(inasmuch as they being cut off from their origin, are driven into confusion)
do tumultuously enter those part, and puss them up. Besides these, for the
further illustrating of this Hypothesis, I will relate a History cited by the
most renowned Smetius, of an universal Tympany (as he calls it) in a certain
young man of Liege: Who when he had received, in a conflict, under his right
arm-pit, a wound, made by a prick, penetrating into the Cavity of his breast,
next day and night being past, he appeared in the morning after swelled
throughout his whole body, not only in his breast, but also in his back, belly,
loins, and in the cods, besides both in his arms, shoulders, neck and face,
that he could not open his eyelids, also on the crown of his head, the skin
being every where swollen and tumefied, the tumor was every where extended with
great pain. The Author calls this wonderful affection, an Universal Tympanie.
The most renowned Sennertus relates a Case like this from his own knowledge:
Moreover, I remember I have heard or read of the like from a wound of the
breast being reveived near the arm-pit.

Notwithstanding, The Cause of an universal Tympanie enquired into.
the reason of this Symptom, delivered by Smetius, and approved by Sennertus,
does not at all please me: for they ascribe the cause of the general Tympanie
to the puffing up of the breast, by the axillary wound, made all that night
under the skin, as we see a new and moist bladder to be blown up by boys with
a quill: which truly does not only seem improbable, but also we think scarce
possible, that the wind to be blown out of a wound of the Thorax, by reason of
the hole one might stopped, can enter the skin, and from thence passing through
the whole body, should make it become every where Tympanitical: For besides
that the wind cannot so suddenly pass from thence into all parts, although it
should be blown with a quill from the mouth, under the skin; besides, while the
orifice of the wound is stopped, no wind can altogether be blown out from the
Cavith of the breast, because none in the mean time enters. But assuredly the
cause of that wonderful affection is this; (whence also the formal reason of a
Tympanie is illustrated) In the Breast near the Armpits, The true cause
assigned.
are many and eminent folding of Nerves, (as we have described in our Treatise
of Nerves,) by which the nerves of the whole body communicate among themselves:
viz. the Trunk of the eighth pair unites with the intercostal Nerve, and both
with the nerves of the Spina Dorsi, by branches and sprigs sent here and there.
Wherefore, this nervous, folding, perchance being pierced by the point of the
Sword, first of all the spirits residing in that place being provoked, run into
disorders, afterward a consent being immediately made through so many notable
Nerves, and transmitted to and fro every where, other Spirits, and then again
others, are sensible of the like irregularities, and puffing up the membranous
and nervous Fibers (which every where they enter tumultuously) they induce as
it were a tympanitical affection throug the whole body. By reason of the like
fury or virulent madness imposed upon the Spirits, in any place, and from
thence immediately diffused far and wide, certain Poisons being fdrunk, the
strokes of weapons, or of wild Beasts, or a venomous bite, do frequently induce
a swelling together of many parts, or of the whole body; which swelling
distemper of the Spirits, is styled by Helmont to be Indignatio Archaas. There
are many other Cases and Instances, by which it is most clearly evinced, that
the Animal Spirits being provoked, and driven into angry inclinations, inasmuch
as they do more impetuously enter into the nervous Fibers, are wont first to
swell the membranous parts, and to excite many passions out of those, which are
vulgarly but falsely ascribed to winds: so that in truth no other cause of a
Tympanie can be assigned more like truth.

If it objected, Why the belly swells in the dead.
that the Paunches of the defunct after some time are raised by wind into a
bulk, and swell like as in a Tympany: I pronounce this to proceed from the
putrefaction of humors, and the extreme dissolution of the mixture, wherein
all the active particles depart, being freed one from the other, and flying
about seek vent in every place, and distend greatly all obstacles, and chiefly
the sides of the Cavities, (which does not at all happen in living bodies;)
wherefore, as all Carkases do not putrify alike, so their bellies swell sooner
or later, more or less: But while life endures, no rottenness or dissolution of
particles is made in an animated body, that can bring about a splanchnick
fermentation or swelling. In the mean while we deny not, that winds are
generated within the offices of concoction, fanguification, and separation, yea
within all the particular cells and recesses of our whole body; notwithstanding
from them all, unto the winds wheresoever engendered (whilst the Spirits have
their due influence, and actuate the nervous as well as moving fibers, that the
sides of the howels be not kept distended and rigid) and easy vent does every
where lie open. And the truth is, in a Tympany, we allow the wind to fill up
the empty spaces, but the spirits, inasmuch as they extend the bowels by their
irregularity, do first cause those vacuities, (wherein the winds secondarily
and consequently are engendreed) and they (inasmuch as the same bowels are
still kept strutted and distended) do hinder those winds from being removed.

And now I judge it is plain enough by what we have said, The Animal Spirits
and not wind the cause of the Tympanie.
that the animal spirits rather than the wind do raise swellings of the belly
in that fort; at least such short and transitory ones, as happen in Hysterical
and Colic fits. Notwithstanding there yet remains a great difficulty, after
what manner the Tympanitical swelling of the Abdomen, which is fixed and
permanent, yea for the most part immpovable, can proceed from any such cause;
especially, because the Animal Spirits being of their own nature active and
very apt to motion, do for the most part so affect removal, that unless they be
wearyed or become defunct, they scarce ever lie still.

That I may loosen this knot by reasoning, it becomes us to consider the
Nervous Juice together with the substance of the Animal Spirits, which is every
where a vehicle to them, and also a bridle: for the Spirits enjoying the most
subtle stream thereof, do freely expatiate, and lest being dissipated from one
another, they might fly away, they are contained in and entire series. When
therefore theat Juice is faulty as to its temper or motion, immediately the
animal spirits become diversely delinquent, or are perverted in the exercises of
their functions, as we have at large expounded in our Treatise of Paslions. And
lest by repeating them now I should make long Preambles, I will contract into a
few words what belongs to the present purpose.

Wherefore in the first place, it is to be observed, This happens by the fault
of the Nervous juice.
that the contents of the nether belly (excepting only the Liver, Spleen, and
Kidneys) are furnished with many membranous bowels, (which the nervous fibers
for the most part weave together) whence it follows that the nervous Juice
(whose journey is longer, and the passages straiter in these parts) does find
here many remora's which also may be proved from the effect, forasmuch as the
convulsive invasions, every where stirred up in the Hypochondriack, Colic,
Nephritical and Hysterical Passions, do so grievously infest the Abdomen. When
therefore that Juice watering the nervous fibers of these parts, shall be
either viscid or tenacious of it self, or fill them with very many feculencies,
for that cause it will come to pass, that all the animal spirits will not
easily return from thence as often as they are hurled into these fibers, in some
part obstructed: and when in this manner there is a full incursion, and a small
return of them, at length it will happen that great abundance of the spirits
remain in these fibers every day more and more impacted, and hold them always
distended and very much pufft up; and at length by reason of the ways of their
ingress and regress in those fibers being obstructed, they become immovable in
that place, and keep the affected parts always extended and stiff: in the mean
time because these Spirits there impacted within the nervous passages, By the
obstruction whereof the Spirits whthin the fibers are detained and made
immovable.
and crammed thick, have commerce whit others that flow to them in their dens,
therefore the affected part although it be stiff and almost immovable, yet
however enjoys sense. This Pathologie although it may seem to some a Paradox,
and uncouth, I doubt not but it will deserve assent from many, if it be
thoroughly weighed, that those who have been a long time obnoxious to
Hypochondriack, Colic, and other convulsive distempers of the nether Belly, do
at length become sick of a Tympany.

The formal reason and conjunct cause of a Tympanie being delineated after this
manner, before we proceed to trace out diligently the more remote causes
thereof, it may be lawful for us from what we have said to deliver a
definition, of at least a certain description of this disease, viz. That it is
a fixed and constant Tumor of the Abdomen, equal, A description of the disease.
hard, stiff, and yielding a noise upon striking, taking its origin from a
convulsive inflation of the parts and membranous bowels, by reason of the
Animal Spirits being driven into those fibers in too great abundance, and
through the fault of the nervous juice obstructing, being hindered from their
return back; to which disease consequently an accumulation of winds in the
empty places, accrues as a complement.

As to what appertains to the procuring and evident causes of this disease, it
very seldom happens that they are altogether observed, Its procuring causes.
but that insinuating it self by silent beginnings, it frequently is finished,
or becomes deplorable before it is perceived; insomuch that against this
disease scarce any antidote can be appointed; for while the ordinary functions
are not much prejudiced, the swelling of the belly is presumed only to have its
origin from wind, and while it is expected to vanish spontaneously, it often
grows into a Tympanie. Wherefore that we may have timely notice of its
beginning, we may take notice, that some previous affects dispose to it; Other
previous convulsive affections.
of this sort is first an Hypochondriack, Colical and Hysterical disposition,
yea and sometimes an Asthmatical; whose fits when they are used to be
frequently raised, if at length a tumor of the Abdomen follow it, though it be
small in the beginning, a Tympany forthwith may be feared. Of the former of
these affects cases every where are to be met with, and stand fair to common
observation: of the later Scherichius reports, The case of an Asthma ending in
a Tympanie.
That a man of Sixty years of age was infested with this symptom some months
before his Belly was swelled into any manifest tumor, that as often as he sat
at meat, beginning to eat, also when composing himself for sleep, he began to
sleep soundly, he was surprised with such a difficulty of breathing, that the
frequency of it threatened the danger of choking; at which time also he
perceived a certain palpitation about the Hypochondria, as if some living
Animal were underneath the midriff; this distemper afterward ended in a Tumor
of the Abdomen, by which he dyed. In this and other cases now cited the same
reason holds, viz. that the animal spirits being used to make irregular
excursions into the nervous Fibers of the lower belly, at length do not only
more often and abundantly enter into them, but being impacted and hindered they
abide in them, and so at length induce tympanitic inflations of the bowels.
Truly this morbific beginning happens sooner of later, The evident causes of
this disease.
if thereupon do come the evident causes, which disturb the Spirits in the
bottom of the belly, and compel them to frequent disorders, and also do either
stop the motion or pervert the temperature of the nervous Juice flowing within
those Fibers; in which rank are accounted irregularities in the six
Non-naturals, immoderate Passions, and chiefly of grief, and usual evacuations
suppressed, drinking of cold water after some great heat, or any sudden cold
induced on the belly, either from air or water.

As to the Prognostics, The Prognostics thereof.
this disease is always accounted of so bad an omen that commonly the name is
abhorred, insomuch that frequently when there is no suspicion of ill from the
tumor of the belly, if perhaps that swelling be called by the Physician, a
Tympanie, forthwith it is concluded desperate. Notwithstanding this Disease
rarely kills of it self, but being protracted a long space of time, that it may
at length more certainly kill, it gains to it self an Ascites, as a Harbinger
of Death. That we may search into the reason thereof, it will be obvious enough
to conceive, while all the bowels are distended in the lower belly, and are
held as it were stiff, the passages of the blood, and nervous and lymphatic
humors, being too much extended, or compressed are much straitened, and for
that cause cannot freely and readily transmit its Juice; from whence it follows
that every humor being straightened in the passage, that at length it may pass by
some means, it shakes off a certain serosity from its mass wherever way is
given; and those droppings of the humors falling into the hollow of the
Abdomen, excite an Ascitick Dropsy.

What relates to the Curatory part of this Disease, The Cure.
the whole scope of healing is commonly bent against wind, viz. Indications
inculcated by practical Authors suggest the matter to be evacuated, from whence
the winds are raised, and to remove the cause that lifts them up, and the winds
to be discussed and dissipated, which do already distend the belly.

For these ends Purgers appointed against the humor chiefly suspected are wont
to be prescribed with great confidence, although with small or ill success;
that is to say, Phlegmagogues so called, another while those that purge
Melancholy, another while those that purge Choler, whereto also are joined
purgers of water (as weapons intended against every enemy.) For this disease
(as is manifest by our observation) is wont for the most part to be exasperated
with strong Purgers, and seldom alleviated; the reason whereof is evident
enough, because the nervous fibers being provoked by a sharp Medicine, the
animal Spirits renew their irregular excursions, Remedies designed against Wind
profit not.
and do every where more and more stretch them out, rather than give any
remission to them; wherefore, although frequent and abundant watery and
flatulent stools are procured, notwithstanding the Belly swells the more.
Moreover, to dispell, discuss, and bridle the wind, there is a more than
Aeolian power prescribed; Medicines commonly called Carminatives, almost of
every kind or form are sedulously administered, within and without, above and
beneath, and upon the part affected; notwithstanding this disease for the most
part is untamed by all these; whence we may suspect, that the true cause of the
disease lies as yet concealed, because Medicines profit not that are
administered, indicated or suggested according to the ordinary Aetiologie or
reason of it.

Although I cannot challenge a better success in curing this disease, or a
more certain method of healing, attested from experience, notwithstanding in
the mean while we will here proffer another way of curing, accommodated to our
Hypothesis, and established by reasons strong enough.

Wherefore in a Tympany, as in most other affections, 3. Curatory Indications.
there will be three chief indications: Whereof the first, and chiefly insisted
on, is the Curatory, that by recalling the animal Spirits from their convulsive
affection, and reducing them into order, endeavors the removal of the swelling
of the Belly. The second Preservatory, which restrains those or other Spirits
from their irregular excursions into the lower Belly, and together corrects the
faults of the nervous liquor, watering it, both as to its temper, or motion.
The third Vital, by removing the Symptoms urging, does succor and sustain all
the functions oppressed or weakened, as much as possible may be.

I. The first Indication is of greatest moment, The first Indication hardest.
on which the hinge of the whole Cure turns, but it is most difficultly
performed, for it does not easily appear by what remedies or ways of
administration it ought to be attempted, when most weapons or medicines do
little or nothing prevail against this inviolable enemy. What, and what sort of
Medicines are good or hurtful in this Disease.
Phlebotomie assumes no place here, but is declined for the most part as
prejudicial; also Catharticks, insomuch as they provoke the affected fibers,
and disturb the Spirits, and hurry them more impetuously, do increase rather
than diminish or cure the Tumor of the Belly; in like manner Diaphoreticks
impell the Spirits and the morbific particles deeper into them, whereas they
ought to be allured, and called out of the Fibers. The chief order of healing
seems to be placed in Diuretics and the use of Clysters; and also great things
are expected from topical Applications, because they are more immediately
exhibited to the disease, and as it were by contact, and because they do best
discuss Tumors in other places. Yet not all Dissolvents are here fitting, nor
those which profit most in other Tumors; for the more hot being given for
discussing, whether they are applied by fomentation, Liniments, or in the form
of a Cataplasm or Plaster, oftener afford hurt than succor in a Tympanie; for
the both open and dilate the passages of the fibers, that from thence they may
lie more open to the incursion of the Spirits; and also rarifie the particles
impacted, so that while they occupy a larger space, an inflation and
intumescency of the Belly is augmented. Lastly, what appertains to Alteratives
which succor against other affections of the nervous kind, only a certain few
are fit in a Tympanie; for where the morbific matter sticking within the
straiter passages cannot be impelled straight, or thoroughly, Elastick medicines
render the stoppage greater and more fixed, by enfixing the matter deeper;
wherefore Spirit of Hearts horn, of Soot, of Sal Armoniack, yea also Tinctures,
Elixirs, and other Medicines endowed with a volatile Salt, or active particles
of another kind, do not only acquire heat, and a troublesome thirst in the sick
person troubled with a Tympanie, but also cause the Abdomen to swell the more,
inasmuch as they melt the blood and nervous Juice, and stir the Spirits,
insomuch that the particles deposited by each of these, are compelled into the
parts affected.

But truly although Medicine does so little avail against this disease, Only
mild Purgers and Clysters are convenient.
it is not altogether to be neglected, (as if either it effected nothing, or
what is ill,) but it behooves us to turn every stone, that by some means we may
succor the Patient, and at length may obtain a cure for him, or at least an
alleviation. Wherefore in the first place (because it is the custom to begin
with Purgatives) although the stronger do ever hurt, and the gentler scarce
ever prevail to discharge the conjunct cause, notwithstanding these latter,
inasmuch as they do something substract the nourishment of the disease, also
make a way by which other Medicines do exert their powers, they ought to have
their turns in physical practice once in six or seven days; and at other times
let Clysters (whose use is much better) be frequently administered. Hydroticks
being prohibited, we must rest upon moderate Diuretics, whereto are adjoined
things respecting the alteration and reduction of the Spirits and Humors,
which truly make up the Tympanitical pharmacy. Moreover in the mean time the
use of Topics is not to be neglected. We will annex certain select forms of
Medicines appropriated for every of these purposes. For a Medicine mildly
solutive, let the laxative Wine be used, prescribed by the renowned Greg.
Horstius for a Tympanie, in his book of Observations, lib. iiij. Chap. xxx. or
in its place let the following be prescribed with greater ease.

Take the leaves of Peach-flowers, Forms of Medicines.
of Damask-roses, of each two Pugils, Broom, Elder, Centaury the lesser, of
each Pugil 1. the leaves of Agrimony, Roman Wormwood, of each one handful,
Senna one ounce, Rhubarb six drams, Carthamus-seeds half an ounce, Dwarf-Elder
two drams, A solutive liquor.
yellow Sanders three drams, Galangal two drams, slice them and bruise them,
put them into a silk Bag in a Glass, with 2 pound of White Wind,
Saxifrage-water one pound, Salt of Tartar one dram and a half, let them stand
48 hours, let the patient drink from four ounces to six, every third or fourth
day.

In a hotter Constitution let the following form be taken, which I have proved
with success in this disease.

Take of purging Mineral-waters eight pound, Salt of Wormwood two drams, let it
evaporate in a gentle Bath to two pound. To this I use to add four ounces of
water distilled from Purgers with Wine; the dose from four ounces to six.

Or to the two pound of evaporated water add of Mechoacan, Turbith, of each
half an ounce, Rhubarb six drams, yellow Sanders two drams, Cloves one dram,
digest them close and warm for two hours: filtre it through Paper, the dose 3
or 4 ounces.

Clysters are of frequent use in this Disease, inasmuch as they loosen the
Belly without any great irritation of the fibers.

Take of the Infusion of Stone-horse dung with Cammomile-flowers a pound,
Clysters.
Mellis Mercurialis two ounces. After the same manner Decoctions and Infusions
are prepared, with Carminatives, from Dogs-dung.

Take of the Emollient Decoction one pound, Sal Prunella, or Sal Armoniack from
one dram to a dram and a half; make a Clyster.

Take of sound Urine one pound, Sal Prunella one dram, Venice Turpentine
dissolved with the yolk of an Egg, an ounce and a half: make a Clyster.

2. Diuretics.
Diuretics if any other Remedies promise help in this Disease.

Take of Millepedes living and cleansed three ounces, one Nutmeg sliced, bruise
them together, and pour upon them one pound of the Diuretick-water prescribed
below: Press them strongly, the dose from three ounces to four twice a day.

Take of green Juniper Berries, Distilled Waters.
and Elder-berries, of each six pound, of Firre-tops four pound, green Walnuts
two pound, Cortex Winterani four ounces, the outer Rinds of six Oranges and
four Limons, Seeds of Ameos, Rockets, Cresses, of each an ounce and half,
Dillseeds two ounces, slice them and bruise them, and add of Posset Drink made
with Whitewine 8 pound, distill it in common Organs, let the whole liquor be
mixed.

Take of Crystal Mineral half an ounce, Pills.
Volatile Salt of Amber, two drams, the powder of Carrot-seeds one dram,
Turpentine of Venice what suffices to make small Pills, the dose Numb. 3. in
the evening and morning, drinking after it three ounces of the distilled water.

Take of the sweet Spirit of Salt half an ounce, Spirits.
take six drops to twelve, twice in a day, in a draught of the same water, with
a spoonful of Syrup of Violets.

Take of spirit of Salt of Tartar one ounce, take one scruple to half a dram,
twice a day, after the same manner; So also spirit of Nitre, and Tincture of
Salt of Tartar may be taken.

Take of Plantane, An Expression.
Chervil and Clivers-leaves, of each four handfuls, bruise them, and pour on
them a pint of the former distilled water. Press them strongly, the dose three
ounces, twice or thrice in a day with other Medicines.

Take of Grass roots three ounces, of Butchers-broom two ounces, Apozems.
Chervil and Eringo candied, of each one ounce, shavings of Hartshorn, Ivory,
of each two drams, of burnt Hartshorn two drams and a half, Burdock Seeds three
drams, boil them in three pound of Spring Water to two pound, in it strained
hot, infuse the leaves of Clivers, Watercresses, bruised, of each one handful,
adding of Rhenish wine six ounces, make an infusion close and warm for two
hours, after strain it again, and add of Magistral-water of Earthworms two
ounces, Syrup of the five opening Roots an ounce and a half. Make an Apozeme,
the dose four ounces twice a day, with some other medicine.

While these are taken inwardly, Topics.
also Topics and outward Applications may be carefully administered; not those
which are hot and discussing, but those which are endowed with particles of a
volatile Salt, and Nitrous, to wit, those which destroy the Combinations of
other Salts, and dissolve the impactions of the Spirits, for which we propound
the ensuing things. If Fomentations ought at all to be admitted into use, let
them not be applied too hot, also let them be prepared not of those that are
usually called Carminative, but chiefly of Salts and Minerals. Cabrotius (cited
by Helmont) says, That he cured one of 80 years of age, whose Belly he somented
twice a day with a Lie, in which he boiled Salt, Alum and Sulphur, and after
applied Cow Dung for a Cataplasm. I use to prescribe these ensuing.

Take of flowers of Sal Armoniack one ounce, Crystal mineral two ounces, A
somentation.
Spirit Wine small and imbued with much Phlegm two pound, mix and dissolve
them in a glass.

Let a woollen Cloth dipped into this warm be applied upon the whole Abdomen, and
then let it be changed, wetting it again; let it be done for the space of half
an hour twice a day, afterward let there be applied a Cataplasm of Cow Dung,
with the powder of Dogs turd, or the following Plaster.

Take Empl. Diasaponis, that is, de Minio, with Venice Soap, A Plaster.
let it be spread thin upon limber Leather, and applied to the whole Belly, to
be renewed once in ten or twelve days.

II. The second Indication requires mostly alterative Remedies, to wit, The
second Indication.
those which stop the fermentations of the humors in the bowels of the nether
Belly, and the Orgasms and irregular excursions of the Spirits, also those
which procure equal mixtions and due motions of the Chyle and nervous Juice: Of
Chalybeate Medicines.
for which end Chalybeates are chiefly in use. And truly it is wont not only in
this, but in many other splanchnical Diseases, to have resort to the Medicines
of Iron, as if from thence to fetch the sharpest weapons; whenas many Empiricks
and Quacks, who prescribe these things confidently and dogmatically, observe
not by what way such a Medicine does operate, or what alterations for the
better may be lawfully expected from thence: wherefore, while Iron, changed
into Medicine, although the Sword of Goliath, is snatched and brandisht by a
blind man, it is no marvel if it prove in vain, or if in the stead of the
disease, which is an Enemy, Nature it self is sometimes hurt; and truly
frequently it happens so, when Chalybeats, of which there is great variety, and
diversity of operations, are administered without any choice or difference
either of the temperament or constitution in the Patient, and respect to the
state of the Disease.

Of Medicines prepared of Iron or Steel, and of their virtues and manner of
working, What preparations of Iron are not convenient.
we have in another place treated, and there is no need here to repeat the same
things. For this disease, if any of them, not all of them are fit; for those in
which the frame of the mixture being opened, the Sulphur remains still, and
being loosened predominates over the rest, they are altogether to be excluded
from this number; for they do much ferment the Juices of the bowels with their
notable fermentation, and do so exagitate the Blood and Spirits, that the whole
Region of the nether Belly is lifted up into a greater bulk, as if by a certain
Spirit thronging violently into it.

Neither here are they fit, from which the sulphurous particles together with
the saline are chased away, as in Crocus Martis prepared by long and strong
Calcination. For this Medicine as it is conducing to stop all fluxes, rather
fixes any impaction of Humors and Spirits, and renders them more obstinate.

But there remains a Martial Remedy of a middle kind, What sort may be admitted.
wherein the Sulphur being wholly or for the most part expelled, a vitriolic
Salt remains and predominates: as indeed it is in the solution of the filings
of Iron, or in a simple Infusion, or in Mineral water, in the Salt or Vitriol
of Mars, in our preparation of Steel, with many others; out of which medicines,
being prepared or compounded, we find by often Experience that in some cases,
they contribute notable help. For these destroy the exotic ferments of the
bowels, and restore the native ferments; they open their obstructions, they fix
the blood, and restrain its consistence from too much dissolution; wherefore
Chalybeate remedies, after the same manner as certain other alteratives, do
perhaps something profit against the procatarctick, and more remote causes of a
Tympany; but as to the conjunct cause, they contribute little or no succor.

Take of our Steel finely prepared two drams, Forms of Chalybeates.
the distilled water above prescribed two pound, Syrup of the five Roots two
ounces, mix it in a glass, let it clarify by settling, the dose three or four
ounces, in the morning, and at five afternoon.

Take of the Powder of Aron-roots, Crab's-eyes, of each three drams, Crystal
Mineral two drams, Vitriol of Mars a dram and a half, Sugar of Rosemary-flowers
two drams, mix them, the dose half a dram twice in a day with a convenient
vehicle.

Hartman does wonderfully magnify the liquor of the flowers of Tapsus Barbatus
or Mullein, A liquor of the flowers of Tapsus Barbatus.
as a specific remedy in this disease, by putting the fresh flowers into a
Vessel, being strongly pressed, and put into an Oven with bread being close
stopped, afterward the Liquor being strained, let it be distilled in Balneo, the
dose one Scruple in the Decoction of Fennel-seeds and Roots. Surely this
Medicine, if it does effect any thing, ought to be given in a larger dose.

Johannes Anglus commends an Electuary of Rosata Novella with Diatrion
Santalon, and Eggs of Ants, which remedy seems to promise something probable
enough. In imitation of this I here propound this ensuing.

Take Conserve of Chichory flowers, An Electuary.
of Indian Cresses, of each three drams, powder of Aron-roots, Lignum Aloes,
yellow Sanders, of each one dram, Crab's-eyes one dram and a half, Salt of
Wormwood one ounce, Ants Eggs one ounce, the liquor of Tapsus Barbatus half a
dram, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Citron-rinds make an Electuary,
the dose two drams twice in a day, drinking after it of the former distilled
water, or of the following Julep three ounces.

Take the water of the leaves of Aron, A Julep.
of the Juice of Elder-berries, of the water of Juniper and Elder-flowers, of
each six ounces, the magistral water of Snails, and of Earth worms, of each two
ounces, Syrup of the Juice of Elder-berries two ounces, mix and make a Julep.

III. Third Indication.
The third Indication Vital prescribes Remedies against fainting of Spirits,
and difficult breathing, and against Watching and Thirst. We will briefly annex
certain forms of either kind.

1. Cardiacks.
Take of the water of Napha, Cordials.
Marygolds, Camomile, of each three ounces, of Dr. Stephan's water two ounces,
Tincture of Saffron two drams, Sugar one ounce, Pearls one dram, make a Julep,
the dose four or five spoonfuls three times a day or oftener in faintings.

Take Conserve of Marygolds two ounces, Confection of Alchermes, and de
Hyacintho, of each two drams, prepared Pearl one ounce, Syrup of the juice of
Citrons, enough to make a Confection, take the quantity of a Nutmeg evening and
morning, drinking after it a draught of the Julep.

2. Hypnoticks.
Take of Aqua Hysterica six drams, Hypnoticks.
Syrup de Meconio half an ounce, mix them, and take late at night. Or,

Take of small Cinnamon Water one ounce, Diacodium three ounces, Tincture of
Saffron two drams. Mix them, and take one spoonful at night, if sleep be
wanting. Or,

Take Syrup of Cowslip-flowers three spoonfuls, compound Poeony-water one
spoonful, Laudanum tartarized one dram, take one spoonful, if Watchings require
it.

3. Extinguishers of Thirst, in this Disease being very thirsty, Things
mitigating Thirst.
ought frequently and in small quantities to be administered, that that
troublesome symptom may be restrained without much drink, which is perpetually
pernicious. For which purpose,

Take of Conserve of Wood Sorrel passed through a Sieve three ounces, Pulp of
Tamarinds two ounces, Sal Prunella one dram, with a sufficient quantity of
Syrup of the juice of Wood sorrel, make a Lohoch, of which let him lick often.

SECT. II. CHAP. V. Of an Anasarca.
NOw two kinds of Dropsies, viz. Ascites and Tympanie (according to common
reckoning) being finished, although the third, to wit an Anasarca (for that it
is an affection rather of the whole body, than of the nether Belly) appertains
not properly to this place, notwithstanding the Pathologie thereof having some
affiance with the former, we think sit to deliver here also its Cure in short.
The description of an Anasarca.
An Anasarca is described after this manner, That it is a white soft Tumor of
the whole outward Body, or of some of its parts, yielding to the touch, and
leaving a dent upon compression, proceeding from a watery humor extravasated,
and accumulated as well within the interspaces of the Muscles, as within the
pores of the flesh and skin, yea of the Glandules and Membranes.

It differs from an Ascites as to its outward form and appearance, How it
differs from an Ascites.
yet not as to its morbific matter, which being the same in both distempers, as
it is heaped within the greater or lesser hollownesses, it gains diverse
Appellations of the Disease.

The watery humor procuring an Anasarca, The Original from the blood.
does proceed altogether or for the most part from the blood; for it being
continually produced within the mass of blood by the fault and defect of
sanguification, it is poured out in greater abundance from the extremities of
the Arteries, than can be received, or brought back by the Veins, or the
Lymphaducts, or can be discharged by the Reins or pores of the skin, and other
vents of the serous Juice.

From these it follows, that the material cause of this Disease is a watery
humor, The material and efficient cause.
and the efficient is blood, which engenders waters and deposits them in the
places affected. We will exactly weigh the reasons of either of them, and the
manner of becoming and effecting it, and first we will treat of the efficient
Cause of an Anasarca.

1. The affection of the Blood, or rather the Hydropical brood, The Blood its
efficient cause in a double respect.
consists in these two things, to wit, First by reason of a failure or fault of
sanguification, it does not rightly assimilate the nutritious Juice perpetually
infused into its mass, but suffers it to degenerate into a watery humor: Then
secondly by reason of the too loose mixture thereof, it does not retain that
humor, so degenerated, so long within its consistence, until it might be
discharged through fit Emunctories or Emissaries, but lets it out every where
near to the ends of the Arteries, into the inter-spaces of the Vessels, and
there leaves it. Either of these vices of the Blood we will consider a little
more.

In the first place as to the former, for the most part it is confessed by all,
First that it does not rightly sanguifie.
that the Blood it self and not the Heart or Liver sanguifies, by what of late
is plainly understood concerning the functions of these parts; yet by what
means the Blood assimilates Chyle infused to it self, and converts it into
fresh blood, to be bestowed to so many and diverse sorts of uses, does not
easily lie manifest to us. But what some affirm, that it is made only by the
exact comminution and commixtion of particles, and for that cause the particles
of either kind being confused together, they think, that within the straiter
passages of the Liver and Lungs they are kneaded and wrought together as it
were with little pestils, seems little probable to me; but on the contrary, I
think these bowels (as I have showed already) are constituted the Organs rather
of separation than of mixture; The reason whereof enquired into.
but the reason of sanguification altogether consists in this, that the active
particles of the old blood, to wit, the saline and sulphurous, being placed in
vigor with the spirituous, immediately act upon the like particles of the
infused Chyle as yet existing in an inferior state, and do so stir them up and
ferment them, that thereupon being extricated from the coverings of the thicker
parts, they are carried into a like degree of exaltation or perfection with the
former, and being at length associated with them, and made also homogeneous,
they put on the same nature of Blood; the more thick and heterogeneous
particles being removed thence to another place, from those which they had
deserted and gone away from. For truly Sanguification is altogether finished by
Fermentation, even as the maturation of the Must into Wine or Ale; but the
reason of the difference is, that Wine being shut up in the Tub, still
remaining entirely in the same Mass, is flowly fermented, as to its whole
consistence, and is not accomplished but in a long space of time; but the Blood
constituted in a perpetual flux by the loss of some parts and the reparation of
others, is fermented by the parts still received fresh, and is generated anew.

The old Blood for the most part affords the same thing toward the fresh
Chyle, The reason and manner of sanguification explained.
as Ferment from the flower or faeces of old Ale, being put into new Ale;
notwithstanding as it were by a contrary manner; because the huge mass of blood
being formerly fermented, does suddenly ferment and alter the small portions of
the Chyle continually brought in; but the fermenting liquor in Ale in a very
little quantity is put to the great mass of the other liquor to be fermented;
which it brings not to maturity under a long space of time. After the rudiments
of blood are so cast by fermentation, the conclusion and perfect assimilation
into blood, is acquired by accension; (for surely that it is so enkindled (as I
think) I have formerly showed by demonstration, which arguments chiefly taken
from its proper passion, although many have cavil'd at, none have been yet able
to overthrow.) Wherefore, while the whole mass of blood consists of Blood and
Chyle confusedly mixed together, it is fermented while it is circulating;
andbeing divided into most minute portions, is spread through the whole Lungs,
that it might be kindled successively according to all its parts, by the
nitrous air sucked in: for by that means both the vital flame is continued, and
all the particles of Blood having as it were passed the fire, become more
purified, and more agreeable among themselves; moreover, they are so disposed
of whilst they are kindling, that while some go into Nourishment of the
Spirits, of the Nervous Juice and the folid parts, and others less useful
depart into the ferments or recrements of the bowels; mean while others being
more fixed, abide longer in the mass of blood, and sustain its consistence, and
by fermenting the Nutritious Juice, still engender new Blood, until themselves
being impoverished, are at length discarded, and give place to others that are
fresh and Iustie.

Having showed after this manner by what course Sanguification ought to be
finished, An Hydropick temper of the blood springs from a double respect.
as well by fermentation as accension of the Blood; it will be easy to
conceive wherein the fault confists producing an Hydropick dispdsition: To wit,
this usually assumes its rise whenever either or both those Conditions
requisite to Sanguification, either fail, or are perverted.

First therefore this bappens more frequently and rather, Viz. First from the
desect or fault of its Fermentation;
for that the blood being depraved in its temperature, does not rightly ferment
the Nutritious Juice poured into it, that so it might be changed into laudable
blood. For when the watery particles predominate with the earthy in the mass of
Blood, the Salt and Sulphur being depressed with the Spirit, as all the
functions, both Vital and Animal, from thence languish and waver; so especially
Sanguification it self fails and is perverted. For the Juice of the Chyle
commixt with the Blood, when it cannot be dissolved and fermented, with the
particles thereof, (after the fashion of other liquors, as often as being mixed
they want ferment,) it degenerates perhaps into a watery, acid, or ropy, or
otherwise faulty humor, which being afterward daily increased, and at length
rising to its fullness, lies heavy on the blood, and oft-times almost stifles
its heat; from whence there is a necessity that it be forthwith discharged by
some means, and wheresoever it can get vent; but afterward for that the
offices of separation fail in their sunctions (the stock of the animal Spirits
Languishng by reason of the diminished provision from the influxe of Blood,)
the abounding Serum is deposited every where into the pores, and next vacuities
whether greater or lesser, out of the little moughts of the Arteries; from
whose daily and great increase, after all the pores are filled, arises that as
it were fenny habit called Anasarca of the whole body outwardly, or of some of
its members.

Secondly, not only the defect or fault of Fermentation, Secondly, from defect
of Accension.
but also of the accension of the Blood, induces sometimes an Hydropical
disposition on the mass thereof: which is clearly discerned, inasmuch as some
persons inhabiting Maritime or moorish places, fall into the Dropsy without
any other cause or occasion, than that they draw a thicker air endowed with
heterogeneous vapors, by which the Nitre is either driven away or obscured.
Therefore the blood becoming degenerate, and vitiated as to its temperature,
because it is not duly kindled, nor perfected by efflagration within the
precordia, does not rightly dissolve and assimilate the Juice of the Chyle, but
suffers it to be perverted into a watery liquor. But although in the first
place, the blood being depraved for this reason, sometimes loses its fermenting
virtue, and therefore the rather and more immediately procures a Dropsy;
notwithstanding it is manifest, the first fault thereof assumes its origin
from unwholsom air sucked in, and not duly enkindling the Blood; because such
Hydropicks removing their residence into Sunny and Mountainous places, recover
their health without any other Medicines.

Hitherto of the nearest Causes of an Anasarca and which are conjoined to the
Disease it self, which namely are the depravation or defect of the mass of
blood, chiefly as to its fermentation, and in some measure as to the enkindling
thereof; which latter is scarce wont to be effective but when if follows the
former: But what remains as to the more remote and procuring causes of this
Disease, to wit, from which the defermentative affection arises (that I may say
no more of the defect or depravation of its enkindling;) I say that these
appear so diverse and many, that I judge it hardly possible to recite them all
particularly; notwithstanding, very many or at least the chief may be reduced
to these three heads: to wit, Reduced to three heads.
For that the watery distemperament of the blood does arise, inasmuch as its
active Principles, viz. Spirit, Salt and Sulphur, are not invested with their
fermenting and sanguifying force or virtue, I account this to come to pass,
either First because those particles are too much wasted by their great
expenses; or Secondly because they are not repaired by convenient and
proportionate Refections; or Thirdly, for that they are overwhelmed or obscured
by some other duller or heterogeneous Particles being too much accumulated in
the mass of Blood: We will a little weigh the Reasons and ways of each of these
their coming to pass.

In the first place, the former of these is evidently discerned in frequent and
inordinate Haemorrhages, whereby many men, although strong and formerly
healthy, First, because the active particles of the blood, are too much
consumed.
are immediately inclined to a Dropsy, more than from any other accident or
occasion; the reason whereof is, that the blood is so impoverished, through its
more noble Particles issuing out in great abundance, that afterward it can
neither duly ferment nor enkindle the Juice of the Chyle brought into it.
Moreover, sometimes the same effect fucceeds (although in a more slow degree)
from Fevers and other long maladies and languishings; to wit, inasmuch as the
blood suffering under a long depression, is so extenuated and robbed, that at
length it becomes watery and defermentative.

Secondly, the Blood sometimes deferting its genuine disposition, Secondly,
because they are not enough repaired.
declines into an Hydropical one, for that the nourishment being more slender
than it was wont, or ought to be bestowed upon it, its active and sanguifying
Particles are not enough repaired within its mass; for so we have observed,
that some who have used themselves to Wine and stronger Drink, after they have
been reduced to homely Diet, and smaller drink, of water of small beer,
suddenly have become Hydropick. It is a common observation, and frequently
true, although of ill omen, that Drunkards, and darly drinkers, if that wild
Custom be left, at length becoming sober and abstemious, are much in hazard,
lest by reason of the usual fermentation of the blood being denressed, they
become obnoxious unto that Disease. I knew a notable Drunkard, who declared
that a Priest very learned and Pious was guilty of his death, because he gave
him admonition to Temperance, and to leave his Drunkenness, Thirdly, because
they are buried in duller particles.
and he complying therewith, incontinently fell into a mortal Dropsy.

But the third cause or occasion disposing to that Disease, the most common and
notable, consists in this, that the active Particles of the Blood, being
involved with other more dull or heterogeneous ones, or being dissipated from
one the other, lose their fermentative power, or cannot enough exercise it. But
such an affection of them, as it is wont to be raised from various causes and
accidents, so chiefly from these, three, Whereof there are three causes.
one while solitary, another while united together; to wit, First from the
Non-naturals immoderately received: Secondly from the Naturals unduely
retained; or Thirdly, from the Preternaturals corruptly generated in the body.

The errors of Diet deservedly may be referred to the first rank of these
(whereby the stock of that Disease is always most abundant) For it is a common
Prognostic and in every bodies mouth, First from Nonnaturals immoderately
ingested.
that Gluttons and great Drunkards dye at length of a Dropsy: to which
moreover, not only Surfeits and immoderate and daily Tiplings incline, but also
frequent and unseasonable Treats; and moreover the continual pouring in of
absurd and hard to be digested Nourishment. For from the evil course of Diet of
each kind used any while, whenas the Juice of the Chyle, oftentimes crude,
incongruous, and above measure plentiful, is poured into the mass of blood, it
of necessity follows, that it is first burdened, and afterward its Consistence
being loosened, the more noble Particles being forced asunder, it is so
involved, or abated by the other heterogeneous ones, that being hindered, it
desists from its fermentative or sanguisying virtue; insomuch that the bowels
being in a short time hurt by its assaults, a Cachexia, and then a Dropsy
sollowes, whereof that is always a forerunner.

Secondly, Secondly, From Naturals unduely retained.
in this place are put all ordinary, accustomed and solemn Evacuations
suppressed. It is observable enough, that a Cachexie, and often a Dropsy, does
arise from a menstruous or Hemorrhoidal flux dimmished or stopped, no less than
from a too immoderate one, (by reason of the fermentation of blood impeded by
the heterogeneity of Particles.) Moreover, the same is often wont to be
effected from Issues suddenly stopped, or eruptions of the Skin suddenly
repercuss'd. Lastly, suppression of Urine, and sweating much hindered, do render
the blood more watery, by an immediate and necessary affection, and incline to
the Dropsy. Also it is an observation frequent enough fo healthful Persons,
who being compelled for some time to abstain from going to Bed, that their feet
have swollen.

Thirdly, Thirdly, From Preternaturals generated in the Body.
Preternatural things generated within the Body, but especially Tumors and
Humors do hinder the motion of the blood, or pervert its temper, and so induce
an Hydropical disposition. Tumors stirred up in some place about the Bowels,
inasmuch as they hinder or straiten the circuit of the Blood, do cause its
Serum to be there extravasated, and poured out; by the accumulation whereof
within some cavity, in the first place an Ascites (as we have shown above) and
at length an Anasarca a consequent of that does frequently ensue. Different
manners hereof are reckoned.
Moreover, Humors of diverse sorts being engendered in diverse places within, and
transferred into the blood, do first pollute the mass thereof, and defile it
with heterogeneous Particles, whereby at length it is so depraved in its
temperament, that it perverts the Juice of the Chyle brought in (when it cannot
further ferment and assimilate it) into an hydropical liquor. For this reason,
nothing is more usual than that Consumptive persons, and those that are
affected with strumous and cancrous Ulcers, nay of any sort within the Reins,
Mesentery, Guts, or other Bowels of the lower Belly, after they have been long
consuming, dye at length hydropical.

Hitherto concerning the next efficient cause of this Disease, The material
cause of an Anasarca is partly the Serum of the Blood, and partly the
nutritious Juice.
also of the chief remote ones, as well procuring, as evident. But as to what
appertains to the material cause, it is obvious unto the Sense, that it is a
mere Lympha accumulated within the pores of the Skin, and of the other outward
parts; which being deposited there by the blood (the liquor thereof being
partly serous, and partly chylous Juice) but failing in Sanguification and
Nourishment of the body, to which it was destinated, it is cast off like
recrements into the vacuous spaces of every vessel. And though the matter of
the Dropsy proceed from the Blood and Chyle, yet it is no wonder if it appear
neither like blood, nor milkie, but only limpid; because the Urine even of
healthful people, after more plentiful drinking, is rendered crude as well as
watery; and therefore it is manifest, it is nothing changed by the blood, but
leaves in that place, whatsoever of color or thicker consistence it brings to
its mass. And although a reason may be given in either case, that the Urine,
inasmuch as it is streined through the Kidneys, and the hydropic matter
thorough the pores of the solid parts, even so become limpid and watery;
notwithstanding it is evident by observation, that the watery part of the
Chyle, even while it is confounded with the blood, is not intimately mixed with
it, but being deprived of its color and consistency, it remains under the form
of Lympha, within the pores of the blood; the sure sign of which is, that the
blood taken from any Animal by Phlebotomy, after being cold it is divided into
parts, Why the hydropick humor is limpid and not milkis nor bloody.
exhibits a watery liquor (which consists of Serum and Nutritious Juice)
plainly limpid, and separate from the other blood. It will be from our present
purpose to enquire any further into the reasons hereof, and manner of being so,
and wherefore blood, which being poured into water does presently tinge the
same, and bloodies all solid bodies whenever it is sprinkled thereon, yet
dies the Serum of no color with which it is intimately confounded and a long
time circulated.

From the AEtiologie of this disease now delivered, The Differences of the
Disease.
the differences of it may easily be collected; to wit, first it is either
universal, when the whole habit of the body and all the members swell up; or it
is particular, wherein for the most part the inferior members only suffer, in
the mean time the rest of the body pining away for want of Nourishment, which
kind of distemper, and not a Tympanie, Prosper Martianus will have Hippocrates
style the dry Dropsy, in which what is reported of the Siren, the dry is
joined to the watery.

Secondly, an Anasarca whether universal or particular,is either simple of
conplicated with an Ascites; and then either an Anasarca ensnes an Ascites, or
this disease follows that. Moreover an Anasarca may be distinguished many ways
in respect as well of the procatarctick as evident causes, as we have before
intimated; and such differences thereof are found to be frequently fo great
moment about duly instituting the Prognostic and Cure.

Wherefore, what relates to the prognostic part, this disease while it is
simple, The Prognostics of it.
proves least dangerous among all the kinds of Diopsies; and a particular one
seizing only the inferior members, so that the belly does not together swell
with them, in much safer than an universal one.

An Anasarca bringing on an Ascites, wherein for the most part the Urine is
plentiful enough, and the thirst not very intense, is far more safe than an
Anasarca brought in by an Ascites, wherein the diseased do very much thirst,
and make little, red, and thick, and for the most part a lixivial Urine. In
like manner it is, or worse, when an Anasarca comes upon a Tympanie or a
Phthisis (as sometimes it is wont.) Lastly, no slight Prognostic of this
disease is taken from the compliance, or the obstinateness of the Patient,
about Diet and Medicine. For whatsoever the condition of the disease may be, if
the hydropick person refusing medicine will indulge his fancy, we may not hope
any good from thence.

About the Curatory part to be designed in order, The Cure of it. Two
Indications.
two chief Scopes of Healing do occur, viz. First, that the water between the
skin be consumed by some means; Secondly, then provision must be made, lest it
be continually generated and accumulated afresh; for which purpose a Physician
is to employ his labor, both that the bowels of Concoction being emptyed of
their Superfluities, and free from obstructions, may always procure laudable
Chyle, and supply the mass of blood in due plenty; as also that the blood (the
principles thereof being restored to its sermentative power) may orderly
ferment the Juice of the Chyle continually poured into it, and assimilate it
into Blood. The vital Indication seems not at all necessary in this disease as
in many others, for that very rarely in this appear swoonings of the Spirits,
or Watchings, for which Cordials and Hypnoticks are required; and there is
little need of restoring Diets, because Fasting and Abstinence rather help, and
ofttimes make up the greatest part of the Cure: the reason whereof is, that the
Vessels being emptyed through want, do swallow up the waters between the skin,
or stagnating in other places, and do discharge them forth partly by the
Kidneys, by the pores of the skin and other Emunctories, and partly do
adyantageously employ them being yet turgid with alimentary Juice, to the
nourishing of the body.

First, That the first Indication being Curatory, The first intends the
evacuation fo the morbific matter.
intending an Evacuation of th morbific matter, may be performed, there ought
to be exhibited all Hydragogue medicines, as well simple as compound; and also
the froms of medicines recounted and prescribed in the former Chapter of an
Ascites. Moreover, hereto belong not only Catharticks and Diuretics, but also
Diaphoreticks, which though in other sorts of Dropsies they are very much
forbidden, often take place in curing of an Anasarca.

In a simple Anasarca we may lawfully administer strong Purgers, By Purgers.
and frequently they much profit. And truly this Disease being cured sometimes
by means of a Cathartick, Empiricks do much glory of their Cures, and certain
of their medicines become much cried up for curing hydropical persons; for if
at any time it happens that they have healed one or two laboring with an
Anasarca, by their specific Hydragogues and Elateriums, it is enough wherewith
they may always magnify themselves and their Art, although by the same
medicine they have murdered a hundred Ascitical persons. Strong Purgers are
couvenient but not to all.
Wherefore, although Preparations of Spurge, or Elaterium, Pilulae Lunares,
Hercules Bovii, and other Hydragogues, have sometimes profited in some cases;
notwithstanding if they be indifferently exhibited to all Hydropicks, or at all
to any endowed with a weak Constitution, and Bowels of a brittle tone, or of
evil conformation, they oftener cause death than remedy: wherefore let it
always be committed to the judgment of a prudent Physician, the time when, how
long, and what sort of Catharticks are to be used.

We have before described froms of Hydragogue Purgers of every sort, to wit,
those that exercise their power upwards and downwards, and as well mild as
stronger workers, so that they may be referred hither, and accommodated to the
method of healing now proposed.

But if the reason be enquired, The manner of their working.
after what manner Purgers do operate in this disease, and why they more
happily, and much more efficaciously bring out waters than in any other sorts
of Dropsy; I say, in an Anasarca the morbific matter (which is the Lympha)
subsists partly in the mass of blood, partly in the habit of the body, within
the pores and vacuities between the ends of the vessels; wherefore, a strong
Cathartick being administered, presently troubles and dissolves the mass of
blood, and stirs it up to the excretion of any superfluous or heterogeneous
thing; and irritates also the little mouths of the Arteries gaping toward the
Cavities of the Intestines, that the humor ejected from the blood may easier
find vent through these Emunctories. From hence in the first place, the waters
fluctuating within the blood are abundantly drained out, afterward the vessels
being emptyed, do presently swallow up again the waters between the skin, and
presently discharge them forth partly by siege, and partly by Urine, or Sweat;
in the mean time there is no fear lest, as in an Ascites, the morbific matter
being driven and poured from the blood, by the Medicine, should be further
forced into the places affected, whence not easily flowing back again, it
should be more largely increased; nor lest, as in a Tympany, by reason of the
Fibers of the Stomach and Guts being too much irritated by the Physic, those
bowels might be provoked into convulsive swellings. For as long as the bowels
are firm and well constituted, the particles fo the Medicine inflict them with
no hurt; but presently being brought into the blood, they do not only allure
waters out of it, but by exagitating the mass thereof, they raise the active
particles formerly overwhelmed, and dispose them toward their fermentative
power.

Secondly, Secondly, By Diuretics.
Hydragogues working by Urine, as well simple as the compound, as also forms of
Medicines prepared from either of them, and the manner of their administration,
we have also described above, which also may be transferred hither to save
repetition. And chiefly Lixivials.
But because not all Remedies of this kind do help alike in all the Distempers,
it is here observable, that for curing an Anasarca Lixivials (as has been
frequently manifest by our observation) do far excel other Diuretics. For
indeed now it is a common and thredbare Remedy, for any one having swelled
members, after a previous Purge, to take twice or thrice in the day, from six
to eight ounces of a Lie made of the Ashes of Wormwood or Broom, made in
White Wind, and to continue the use of it for some days. This Medicine moves
potently the Urine as I have observed in many, yea sometimes in such abundance,
that pissing the quantity of half a gallon in a day and a night, the Patients
have recovered their healths in a short time even to a miracle.

We have unfolded in a former Treatise, The reason and manner of their
operation enquired into.
by what manner and fashion Diurticks of several kinds do operate, and after
what manner they affect the bowels, blood and other humors: But that in those
that labor under an Anasarca, Medicines endowed with a fixed and lixivial Salt,
expel Urine more than those of an acid, alcali, or volatile Salt, the reason
as I judge is this, viz. in those affected with this disease, after the
fermentation and sanguisying virtue of the blood failing, the watery and crude
humors heaped up as well in its mass as in the habit of the body, do there
remain almost immovable for a long time, till at last they (as the manner is of
watery Juices long stagnating) do wax sour; wherefore the lixivial particles
of the Medicine spread abroad in the blood presently boil up with the acids of
the waters, which while they serment and move, they stir up in the whole mass
of Blood, a notable and excretive fermentation; insomuch that all the particles
being put into motion, not only the watery and superfluous being thrust from
the rest, are discharged by the Reins; but also the innate and active particles
of the blood it self, unfold themselves from the more gross with which they
were involved, and lastly rising up, they begin to resume their fetmenting
power, and to sanguifie.

Take of the Ashes of Broom or Wormwood, Forms of lixivial Diuretics.
or of the twigs of a Vine calcined to whiteness and sifted, sour ounces, put
them into a glass bottle with a quart of White Wind, let them digest close
stopped and warm for three or four hours, after strain it j the dose froms six to
eight ounces twice a day.

Take of white Tartar calclned with Nitre, and after melted in a Crucible to
blueness three ounces, small Spirit of Wine a pound and a half, water of Snails
and Earth worms, of each four ounces, digest them in a Sand furnace for two
days: the dose of the clear liquor from two to three ounces, with sour ounces
of the decoction of Kneeholm and Burdock-roots in Ale.

For ordinary Drink:

Take of the white Ashes of Broom cleansed two pound, put them into a little
Bag, with three ounces of Sassafras, one ounce of lesser Galangal, an ounce and
a half of Juniperberries, and as much of Carrot-seeds, make a bag for four
gallons of Ale, after seven or eight days begin to draw it.

3. Diaphoreticks.
Diaphoreticks od often very hotably help in a Leucophlegmatia (which is the
commencing or declination of an Anasarca) but in this disease confirmed, they
are wont to be more convenient than in other kinds of Dropsies. And although
from the beginning they cannot cause Sweats, by reason of the habit of body
surrounded as it were with a more thick marsh, however while they exagitate the
blood, they cause the innate active particles thereof, being before dormant,
and half overwhelmed, to be raised up and disposed toward fermentation, and
also they cause all the excrementitious, and chiefly the watery, to be raised
into motion, so that presently flowing out of their Receptacles, they may the
more readily and easily find way by siege or Urine, and oftentimes in some part
by transpiration. But truly after the waters being poured out by purgation, the
morbific matter is diminished so much, that the bulk of the body and the
swelling of the members begin to abate, the relics of the humor are best
consumed by a moderate transpiration and constant sweating.

We have described before the number and forms of Hydroticks; Diaphoreticks
profit which are taken in a targer dose.
as to the present purpose for curing an Anasarca, those chiefly are fit which
are given in a larger dose; for they whose quantity is very small, their active
particles being overwhelmed in the waters, are lost before being infused into
the blood they can exert their strength. Wherefore, Spirits, whether armoniack
or vinous, as also Tinctures and Elixirs, yea and powders, are more rarely used
in this disease, because they effect little in a lesser dose, and if they be
exhibited in a very large one, they often hurt the bowels by their outrage; But
those things are rather chosen, which being taken hot, and in a full draught,
are able to pass into the whole blood not weakened; of which sort, in the first
place are Decoctions of Woods, and Roots, whose particles being agreeable
enough to the Blood, and not to be tamed thereby, do pass through the whole
mass thereof, and do exert their Elastic power by moving together all the
humors.

Take of the Shavings of Lignum Vitae six ounces, Forms thereof.
of each of the Sanders six drams, shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn, of each three
drams, let them be infused and boiled in eight pound of Spring Water to half;
adding of Calamus Aromaticus, lesser Galangal, Burdock and Butter-Bur-roots, of
each one ounce, the leaves of Sage, Germander, dried, of each two handfuls, let
the strained liquor be kept for use; the dose from eight to ten ounces twice in
a day warm; to every dose may be added 20 or 25 drops of Spirit of Sal
Armoniack drawn with Amber, or of Spirit of Soot, or half a dram, or a dram, of
Tincture of Salt of Tartar.

Hitherto of inward Hydragogue Medicines, External Hydragogues.
which cause the Lympha to be drawn forth, either by alluring it inwards
toward the guts, or by driving it forth to the Reins or pores of the skin.
Besides, there are certain outward administrations in use, by which the water
accumulated within the habit of the body are moved together, and so are either
generally disposed to go forth by sweating, or Urine, or particularly are sent
out forthwith, a vent being made in some private places.

In the first rank are placed Frictions, The chief Kinds of them, and the
manner of their Administration.
Liniments, Fomentations and Baths as well dry as moist: Then those particular
things that bring out waters are, Vesicatories, and things that bring the Skin
to an Eschar, and pickings by a Needle. We will treat briefly on each of these,
or at least of the principal of them, as far as they have reference to this
disease.

1. 1. Frictions.
Frictions do frequently afford advantageous success in a Leucophlegmatia and
an Anasarca: for when the habit of the body is not only filled with a watery
illuvies gathered there together, so that nothing can evaporate, but that the
extern parts grow cold by reason of the approach of blood toward them being
stopped, often and stong frictions do move together the stagnating waters, and
dissipate them from thence in some measure, and also recall again the blood by
opening the passages into those parts from whence it was banished; wherefore,
not only the swollen members, but also the whole body once or twice in a day, is
expedient to be rubbed with a course Cloth, or with a little Brush now
ordinarily prepared for that purpose.

2.3. 2. Liniments, and, 3. Fomentations.
With or after Frictions, Liniments and Fomentations are sometimes convenient.
They are prepared either of Salts, and other Minerals dissolved, or from hot
and discussing Vegetables, with the faeces of Wine boiled in water, the hot
application whereof opens the pores, moves together more amply the accumulated
waters, and discusses them, and also enlarges the compass of the bloody
Circuit, the watery heap being somewhat dissipated. Let the Liniments consist
of Sulphur, and Salts of a diverse kind, or of Quicklime, and other Minerals,
which being powdered and mixed with the mucilaginous Extracts of sharp Herbs,
are reduced into the form of an Unguent; to which let a fit quantity of Oil of
Scorpions be added, for the better consistency. Moreover this Oil (so it be
genuine) applied by it self, does frequently afford notable help. I knew a Boy
much swelled with an universal Anasarca, who was cured by this Remedy alone:
for his mother (I know not by whose advice) anointed his whole body morning and
evening with Oil of Scorpions, strongly rubbing all the parts with her hot
hand; by which act within three days he began to pour forth abundance of
Urine, and when he had continued pissing so for some days, the swelling
vanishing by little and little, he became sound.

4. 4. Baths.
Baths are not convenient in any Dropsy but an Anasarca, and not for this
unless in a Diathesis or Declination. For seeing the Blood from the heat
thereof, encompassing the whole Body, being made boiling and stirred up, every
where puts in motion the waters formerly stagnating, and swallowing them up
into it self, conveys them variously away; the danger is, lest (as frequently
it falls out) receiving them out of the habit of the body into its own mass, it
should depose them presently into the Praecordia or the Brain: for there in
noting more usural than an affection of those parts, viz. an Asthma or
Apoplexy to come upon Hydropicks by unseasonable bathing. But when the
conjunct cause of the disease ( viz. a Swelling) becomes moderate, or not much,
a Bath of water impregnated with Salts and Sulphur, or a Hot-house, by which a
gentle Sweat is promoted, is frequently administered with success: As for the
Stew it is more expedient, and oft-times notably helps, that the Patients be
placed in fitting Seats in Salt-houses, near the Furnaces wherein Mineral
Waters are boiled into Salt.

5. 5. Vesicatories.
Vesicatories send out abundantly the waters between the skin, and often too
profusely. Touching the manner how they operate we will treat more specially
hereafter; in the mean time we advise, that they are very cautiously to be
exhibited to Hydropicks, for that Epispasticks of this kind, applied to the
swelled places, do make the Emissarie too open, by which apertion the water in
the first place bursting out, draws oftentimes a great illuvies after it from
the neighboring parts, whence immediately ensues a great prostration of the
Spirits. Moreover, sometimes the place is so suddenly emptyed, that being
destitute of heat and spirits, it is in a short time sphacelated or mortified;
wherefore this Medicine is seldom applied to the Legs, or the Feet of
Hydropical persons, where the heat is weak, and the humor greatest, but
sometimes to the Things and Arms with security (as often as there shall be
need.)

6. 6. Escharoticks.
Escharoticks are administered a little safer than Vesicatories, to the swelled
places, because from this Emissary the flux of waters happens not so headlong
and abundant at first: but commencing moderately grows up by little and little
to a great stream, which Nature (after that by degrees it is accustomed
thereunt) endures the better. Moreover, there is less fear of a Gangrene from
an Escharotick than from a Vesicatory, because in that application the part,
whose union is dissolved, is defended by the Eschar against the loss of heat. I
have known sometimes an illiterate and rude Empirick, who frequently by an
Escharotick did evacuate with success the members of hydropick persons, however
swelled, by the ensuing manner: to wit, he fomented the legs evening and
morning with the Decoction of Dwarf-Elder, Wormwood, The empirical manner of
Escharoticks.
Cammomile and other hot herbs put into the Lees of Ale of Wine; and between
the times of the Fomentations he applied a Cataplasm prepared of the mass of
that Decoction with Bran; after he had used these for three days, he covered
both legs and seet with a Plaster of Burgundy Pitch, leaving only a small hole
on each Calf, about the bigness of a Nut, in which places he put an
Escharotick, on the bare skin, of the Ashes of Ashen-bark: which after twelve
hours being removed, a small Eschar was left, from whose pores water was wont
at first slowly to sweat out, afterward day by day a little more plentifully
to drop out, and afterward (the Eschar falling off) it used to flow out more
abundantly as from an open Spring until it had drein'd the whole leg both
beneath and above.

7. 7. Pricking with a Needle.
There remains another manner (not inferior though less used than the former)
of draining out the waters between the skin, viz. by the pricking of a Needle;
which likewise ought cautiously, and minutely to be used, lest a headlong and
too great efflux of waters be provoked thereby. Take an ordinary Needle (such
as Tailors use) and let it be thrust into the skin, pricking over the place
chiefly swelled, only so far that blood follow not: and so at one time let six
or seven little holes be made, a thumbs breadth distant from each other; from
every little hole the water will issue forth by drops, and so it will
contiually drop out until all the swelling vanish about the place so pricked;
afterward, the next time after twelve hours, another while after 18 or 24
hours, let the same pricking be exercised in another part of the same thigh, or
of the other; and afterward once or twice a day in this or that member, or in
both together, or in more places, let such Emissaries of the water between the
skin be excited. For in truth after this manner the hydropick illuvies may be
exhausted more plentifully and safely than from any other outward Surgery;
In the mean time if the new provision thereof be provided against by inward
Physic, the disease will be the easier cured. Moreover in a desperate Dropsy
life is best prolonged by such an administration, for that the waters being
exhausted continually by those outward Emissaries, the inner inundation of life
is longer protracted. Not long since an old man aged seventy years, overwhelmed
with a Dropsy over his whole body, by the help of this Remedy only, remained
living for many months beyond expectation, and raised his head above the
waters.

Hitherto of the Kinds and Forms of Remedies suggested by the first Indication,
The second Indication preservatory what kind of Remedies it suggests.
viz. the Curative; what belongs to the other, to wit the Preservatory, which
respects the temperature and sanguisying power of the Blood to be restored, it
offers Medicines of that sort which being endowed with more hot and Elastick
particles, revive the active or depressed Principles of the mass of blood, or
cause those consumed to be repaired, for which end Remedies commonly called
Altering are wont to be prescribed under the form of an Electuary, Powder,
Pills, distilled Water, Julep, Forms of them.
Apozeme and Diet, to which also Spirits, Tinctures, Elixirs, are sometimes
added, for the better essicacy. We will propound one or two Examples of each of
these.

1. Take of Conserve of Roman Wormwood, Scurvy Grass, the yellow Rindes of
Oranges, 1. Electuary.
of each two ounces, Winters-bark two drams, Species Diacurcumae a dram and a
half, of Steel prepared with Sulphur three drams, Syrup of Citron-peels what
suffices to make an Electuary, the dose two drams morning and evening, drinking
after a draught of the Julep, or three or four ounces of the distilled water.

Chalybeate Medicines notably help in this Disease, as in the green sickness of
Virgins, Chalybeates profit much in this Disease.
insomuch that frequently the whole or chief scope of curing depends upon this
kind of Remedy; yet we are to observe, that not all Medicines of this kind are
equally convenient in these cases: for those which are chiefly in use, viz.
Salt of Steel, But only those endued with Sulphur.
or Vitriol of Mars, and others prepared with acids, and deprived totally of
Sulphur, do not help, inasmuch as they do not promote the fermentation of the
blood, but rather on the contrary fix it, being too wild or elastick. But for
an Anasarca or any watery tumors, in a cachectick habit of the body,
Chalybeates of that sort are given, wherein the sulphurous particles are left,
and are predominant; as in the first place the Filings of Iron, and the Scales,
reduced into a fine Powder, also Steel dissolved with Sulphur, and powdered.
The powders of this being taken, are presently dissolved by the acid Salts
within our body, whence the sulphurous metallic particles being set free, and
brought into the blood, they ferment the whole mass thereof, and revive the
like particles in the same, which before lay dormant, and being conjoined
therewith, they give vigor to the blood, and renew its sanguifying power being
formerly depressed. Wherefore we may observe by using but a little Chalybeates
of this sort, the green and yellow color of the face is converted into a
florid.

2. 2. Powders.
Take of the compound Powder of Aron-roots, of Winters bark, of each three
drams, lesser Galangals, Cubebs, of each a draw and a half, of Steel prepared
with Sulphur half an ounce, Sugar of Rosomary flowers six drams, make a Powder,
divide it into twenty parts. One part is the dose, morning and evening, with a
draught of the sudoriferous Decoction before prescribed.

3. 3. Pills.
Take half an ounce of the gummous Extract residing after the distillation of
the Elixir Vita of Quercetane, powder of Earth worms two drams, lesser
Galangal, Wintersbark, of each one dram and a half, Salt of Wormwood two drams,
of Rust of Iron two drams and a half, Balsam of Peru one dram, Tincture of Salt
of Tartar two drams, Balsamum Capivii what suffices to make a mass to be formed
into small Pills, the dose half a dram evening and morning, drinking after it
three ounces of the Julep or the distilled water following.

4. 4. Julep.
Take of the water of Elder-flowers, of the juice of their Berryes fermented,
of each one pound, water of Earthworms magistral, of Rhadish compound, of Aqua
Mirabilis, of each two ounces, Syrup o fthe juice of Elder-berries two ounces,
mix them and make a Julep.

5. 5. Distilled water.
Take the leaves of Carden Scurvy Grass, of Hedge-Mustard, of Pepper-wort, of
each six handfuls, of the Roots of Calamus Aromaticus, Galangal, of Zedoaria,
Orris of Florence, of Elder, Aron, of each six ounces, Winters-bark, Jamaica
Pepper, of each three ounces, Juniper Berries four ounces, Cloves, Ginger and
Nutmegs, of each one ounce, slice and bruise them, and pour upon them eight
pound of old Rhenish-Wine; distill it in common Organs, let the whole Liquor be
mixed.

6, 7. 6, 7. Decoction.
An Anti-hydropick Decoction is described above, among the Diaphoreticks. A
Diet-drink is to be taken instead of Ale, and is to be made according to the
ensuing form.

Take of Shavings of Guaiacum, Dirt-drink.
Sassafras, of each four ounces, Florence Orris-roots, Calamus Aromaticus,
Galangal, Enula-campane, of each one ounce and a half, of Juniper and
Bay Berries, of each two ounces, Anniseeds, Carue, Sweet-fennel, Coriander and
Dill-seeds, of each one ounce, long Pepper and Cubebs, of each an ounce and a
half, cloves, Nutmegs and Ginger, of each half an ounce, Jamaica Pepper two
ounces, the dried leaves of Sage, Wood-sage, Calamint, Agrimonie, of each one
handful, Liquorish four ounces sliced and bruised, boil it in four gallons of
Spring Water to half, the strained liquor being cold, let it be kept in glass
Bottles for use; with the constant use of this drink, I have known many
laborring with a deplor able Anasarca to be made well. Among many Examples of
Dropsies cured, I shall propound but one.

A certain strong man of a middle age, An Example of the Cure of an Anasarca
Dropsy.
after he had contracted an Epidemical Qnartan Feavour, and being evilly
handled from its beginning, had labored with it above a year, and in the mean
while had used an ill course of Diet, fell into an Anasarca, which afterward
in a short space augmented hugely, by reason he indulged himself more freely to
drink for quenching his thirst (which was outrageous) so that all his members
being swollen from head to foot, and over the very Abdomen it self, he could
not turn in his bed from side to side without help.

When I first visited this man, The Prognostic and Cure of the Disease.
and despairing of a Cure (as the Physician in Celsus lib. 3. Chap. 21. who
denied that any intemper are Hydropick could possibly be cured) I immediately
affirmed this Prognostic, That he would dye in a short time unless he
abstained from drink. Whereunto he replying, professed he would not drink in a
weeks space, provided he might be helped; and indeed did as he said, although
being very thirsty, for six or seven days he scarce took any liquid thing in
his mouth, but what was Medicine; and during that time, when in the mean while
he took Hydragogues, Catharticks and Diuretics, and any other things
prescribed carefully, he became much better, and afterward the method (before
described) somewhile being administered, he was restored to his entire health,
and even now though five years since lives and continues sound.

There remain certain other splanchnical Affections, The (...) of (...).
touching the Remedies whereof, according to the ensuing method, we should here
have treated, notwithstanding I have performed this task already for the most
part under other titles; for as is above intimated, Remedies which concern the
Kidneys we have for the most part unfolded under the rank of Diuretics, and
those which concern the Stomach and Guts, under that of Vomits and Purges; what
relates to the Spleen we have finished in the Hypochondriac Pathologie; and
what to the Womb in the Hysterical. As to what appertains to the Genital parts
and their Diseases, and help, I reserve for another time and place; it behooves
me now next of all, after treating hitherto of the inward Pharmacie, to
discourse something of the outward, and of the Reason or Aetiologie of the
administrations thereof, which shall be done inthe next Section, beginning with
Phlebotomie, that great Remedy.

SECT. III.
CHAP. I. Of Phlebotomie.
AMong the universal Documents of Philosophy, Phlebotomie a very general and
ancient medicine.
or aids of Physic, none either in Theory or Practice has been more ancient
or general than the speculation of the Blood and letting it out by opening a
Vein. As to the former we have in other places often explicated the nature and
constitutive parts of the Blood, we have unfolded the Virtures and Energy of
the same, and have demonstrated that it is in truth enkindled, and that from
the burning there of the flame of animal life, as of a Lamp, does begin and
receives continuation: But as to what relates to Phlebotomie, all Authors of
every age have made mention thereof: Moreover the same was ever in Medicinal
use with all Nations howsoever barbarous or rude. Neither is it a wonder, for
truly Nature it self in the first place has taught the necessity, and way of
that part of Surgery; Even the Divine Law commanding the Rite of
Circumcision, as a Symbol thereof, seems to intimate that the innate impurities
of Humane Nature ought to be purged in some manner by letting out the blood.

That we may methodically discourse of this great Remedy, Nature shows it by
Haemorrhagies.
we ought first to consider, by what means, also for what causes and ends, the
letting of blood either happens spontaneously to Nature, or is indicated by the
Physician; then secondly we will annex the chief effects of this Evacuation, as
well good as bad, whether advantageous or disadvantageous, and together
propound certain Rules and Cautions to be observed, about due administration of
Phlebotomie.

As to the former, spontaneous Haemorrhagies (which suggest the use of
Phlebotomy) whereas they are manifold and of diverse kinds, they are usually
reduced to these two heads or ranks: to wit, they are denominated either
critical, Nature endeavoring something good and wholesome; or symptomatical,
which for the most part happen, she being dejected from her government, and
being altogether out of order. Critical either with or without a fever.
The bloody eruptions of the former kind are again distinguished; that they are
either raised without a Fever, and are either perodical, which happen often at
set seasons, as the Flowers in Women, and the Hemorrhoids in some, and in
others the solemn or otherwise accustomed opening of the Nostrils; which very
often succeed according to the great changes of the Year, or alterations of the
Air: or they are fleeting and uncertain, as when blood does advantageously
break out of those places, and of many others, one while in this part, another
while in that part of the body. Moreover, bloody Crises do sometimes happen in
a Fever, and do often put an end to it, as Hippocrates long ago observed, and
is now manifest by very common observation. The blood breaks out in all these
cases, inasmuch as being turgid, and above measure rarefied within the vessels,
it desires a larger space, wherefore, unless some portion thereof give way, the
whole mass rund the hazard of being constipated, and as well the motion thereof
to be hindered, as the enkindling to be suffocated, and the temperature to be
perverted.

For there are two chief Reasons or Causes, The causes thereof proceed either,
wherefore such turgescencies of the Blood do arise: inasmuch as its liquor is
as well inflammable, as fermentative.

1. As to the former of these, that the Blood may be duly enkindled for the
supporiting Life, 1. From the kindling of the blood.
and the due exercise of the functions thereof, it behooves that the innate
sulphurous particles of it be proportioned unto the Nitrous adventitious ones
from the Air. Therefore as often as the Blood being very boiling and rarefied,
is much opened and loosened in its own consistence, so that the Sulphur being
dissolved, is kindled in greater plenty, there is a most frequent and painful
breathing instituted for the drawing in of a more plentiful Nitre. Now if the
Sulphur abounding in this manner, cannot be wasted by burning, nor the vital
flame regulated, the next course immediately to diminish the sulphurous suel,
is, that a certain portion of the rarefied Blood have vent. From hence, not
only in Fevers, but after drinking Wine, Bathings, being in the Sun, and other
accidents by which the Blood grows very turgent, either an Haemorrhagia of its
own accord succeeds, or there is often need to supply the defect of such a
spontaneous evacuation by Phlebotomie. But that such kind of effusions of
Blood, whether made by Nature or Surgery, are commonly reported to bridle
its heat or raging; really they do this only inasmuch as they diminish the
kindling of the blood, by withdrawing part of the sulphurous fuel, as Oil from
a Lamp.

2. But moreover in the second place, the Blood, 2. From its Fermentation.
inasmuch as it is a fermentative liquor, it is apt also to be extravasated.
Namely, if at any time any heterogeneous thing, and not miscible, be confounded
with its liquor, it grows hot very much, like Wine in a Vessel, and boyls up in
the Vessels to exclude that disagreeable thing, which if it can neither subdue,
nor turn off by Sweat, Urine, or otherwise, the Blood it self excludes part of
it self as a Vehicle for carrying that matter forth, wheresoever a vent is to
be found. For this reason ( viz. that any disagreeable or indomitable thing may
be turned out of the mass of blood) diverse sorts of Hemorrhagies happen, as
well in Fevers as without them; all which are excited by Nature for an
intention of good, as also those by which the too much enkindling of the Blood
is depressed: But that frequently it happens otherwise, ought to be imputed to
diverse accidents and circumstances. But for the most part the sailure about the
spontaneous Hemorrhagies critically instituted, 1. Critical Hemorrhagies
sometimes turn into symptormatical.
is either in the first place because the blood while it is boiling knows no
measure of flowing out, and therefore being stirred into violence, it flows out
too much; or secondly, because the mouths of the vessels once opened do not
presently close again, nor are able to be shut; or Thirdly, because Nature
endeavoring an excretion of blood, does it by places more open,but often
inconvenient; as when an Hemorrhage happens through the Lungs, the Kidneys,
Guts, or other Bowels, which therefore pass from a Critical into a Symptomical
and often into a malignant Haemorrhage.

Neither only by these means, but by many other failings of Nature, or
impediments, 2. Symptomatical Hemorrhagies arise either,
do Symptomatical Haemorrhagies happen, in all which either the Blood it self,
or the Vessels containing it, or both of them together, are wont to be chiefly
in fault.

1. In the first place, the Blood, besides the reasons above mentioned, First
by the fault of the blood.
(to wit, forasmuch as it becomes inflammable or fermentable above measure) is
apt also to be extravasated, because either its liquor being empoisoned, or
otherwise corrupted, cannot retain its due mixture, but being apt to coagulate
or putrify, divides it self into parts; and whilst some of them being here and
there planted, sending forth spots, wheals, and other brands of Malignity, do
discolor the Flesh and the Skin, and obstruct the proper passages; others
otherwise running out an breaking forth wheresoever there is a vent found, do
produce bloody Excretions in diverse places, as is commonly discerned in the
Plague, Smallpox, Measles, and malignant Fevers; yea perhaps this in some
measure is the reason why in scorbutic Distempers, as spots and marks, so also
Haemorrhagies are so familiar.

2. Secondly, The vessels bringing Blood being faulty many and diverse ways,
Secondly, The fault of the Vessels, for that they are ill formed.
but chiefly in these three, do appear the cause of a symptomatical
Haemorrhage, viz. In the first place, if perhaps any where some of them are
obstructed, as often as the blood assumes a more rapid motion, either in the
same place, or in the contiguous parts, and also sometimes in remote parts it
is constrained to burst out. Frequently from such a cause an Haemoptoe
proceeds; moreover Spitting of blood, and the Haemorrhage of the Nostrils do
often follow the suppression of the Terms and Hemorrhoids. Secondly, the little
mouths of the vessels (by reason of the fleshy Fibers being loosened or
resolved by which they are closed) sometimes are ill formed, so that when the
ends of the Arteries do gape too much, the little mouths of the veips do close.
By reason of this affection, Scorbutical and Cachectical persons, are found
obnoxious to Haemorrhagies, as we have remarkt in another place. But Thirdly,
Thirdly, Forasmuch as they are convulsively affected.
it frequently comes to pass that the Vessels, being so evilly formed, are also
convulsively affected, and so the morbific cause being as it were doubled, this
evil is much increased, insomuch that the muscular fibers of the Vessels being
inordinately contracted, cause sudden and violent fluxes of the blood, one
while toward the upper parts, anotehr while to wards the lower; and so their
little mouths being open in the mean time, they provoke prodigious
Haemorrhagies. For I have observed in some persons, when the current of blood
was small enough, with a small and weak pulse, the Convulsions of the Vessels
generated in some place, and propagated under the likeness of wind running to
and fro in the body, to drive more impetuously the blood, however slow of it
self, and to constrain it into violent eruptions; and in cases of this sort,
when Phlebotomies and Medicines refrigerating and tempering the blood have not
at all profited, the greatest relief has been found from Narcoticks,
Antispasmodicks and Ligatures.

3. 3. From the blood and vessels being both in sault.
Thirdly, If perhaps it shall happen that these faults of the Blood and Vessels
are complicated, and put forth their mischiefs jointly at once, from thence it
will be of necessity that this evil will be more intense, and more frequent and
prodigious Haemorrhagies will be raised; the reasons of which as they appear
plain enough by what goes before, it will be neither necessary nor seasonable
here longer to dwell upon explicating of them; but rather, whereas we have
designed hitherto the acts of Nature about spontaneous effusion of Blood, and
its courses both rightly instituted, and also wrongfully and evilly
constrained; now it behooves us next to declare, how far Art (for the most part
the Ape of Nature, and sometimes Mistress or Moderatrix thereof,) can act
likewise well, or better about letting of blood, and how sometimes it is wont
to succeed worse.

We advertise of these things in general, Emission of the Blood procured by art.
that a Physician imitates Nature in some cases of letting blood, exceeds her
in other cases, and frequently regulates and reduces her when acting amiss.
Moreover, there are some cases wherein Nature excells far the efficacy or Art
concerning bloody excretions; briefly of each of these.

Therefore in the first place, 1. It either imitates Nature.
in whatever affects, spontaneous Haemorrhagies are wont to bring help, when
these are wanting, Physic the Handmaid of Nature rightly substitutes
Phlebotomie. Therefore, if perchance the Blood be immoderately kindled by
reason of its Sulphur being too much loosened and advanced, by breathing a
vein, what is superfluous of that inflammable fuel will flow out, as also the
immoderate turgescency of Blood, by reason of somewhat untamable being mixed
with it, will be allayed by this course. Wherefore letting of blood is
advantageously administered, as well against continual Fevers, which proceed
from the former cause, as intermittent Fevers, whose fits proceed from the
latter cause. Also in like manner, as often as an accustomed evacuation being
suppressed, or a humor driven back from the ourward parts, or a sudden
stoppage of the pores, or if a Surfeit, drinking of Wine, or other accidents of
this nature, cause a turgescency of blood (inasmuch as they dash heterogeneous
particles against it) Phlebotomie is usually the most ready Remedy.

Secondly, 2. Or excells and regulates it.
Physic in Blood-letting, not only imitates Nature, but often excells it; and
also succors her being weakened, and reduces her often erring. For if at any
time the blood struck with violence, rushes in a heap against any part, and
either presently breaks out in the same place, or abundantly gathered together
engenders an Inflammation, a vein being pierced in a remote place, stops that
preternatural tendency of the blood, and frequently carries away the bleeding,
or inflammation. Wherefore, in a Pleurise, a Squinancy, a Peripneumonia, in
spitting or vomiting of blood, when Nature is vanquished, or being outrageous,
seems to cast violent hands upon her self, Surgery recalling the blood to
another part, and sending it out, restores the matter that was almost desperate.

Moreover Physic frequently restrains or reduces Nature, when too prodigal or
prevaricating in pouring out of the blood: for in truth all immoderate
Haemorrhagies do want Bridles, not Spurs. But in the Plague, Smallpox and
Measles broke out, and in malignant Fevers, sometimes the blood spontaneously
flowing out, portends for the most part evil; therefore in those affects
styptic Remedies, or things stopping the eruption of blood, are more convenient
than breathing of a Vein.

Thirdly, 3. Or Art outdone by Nature.
Notwithstanding on the contrary there are cases of shedding blood by Nature,
which Physic can no way imitate, neither if they chance to fail, can be
supplied by Phlebotomy. In Fevers about the Crisis of the Disease, to wit,
after the digestion of the matter, that is to say, the preparation for
Excretion, spontaneous Haemorrhagies if coming in time, do far excel any
Phlebotomie which none knows the best season of; Moreover, the Fluxes of the
Terms and Haemorrhoids happening by Natures instinct, are more advantageous
than the mission of blood provoked by Art in any of those places.

Between Phlebotomie and spontaneous Haemorrhagies, Phlebotomy and spontaneous
Hemorrhagies differ as to the subject and matter.
there is yet a notable difference. (although not of great moment in Physical
practice) viz. both as to the Subject and Matter of either of them; for in this
the blood being florid, and thoroughly Scarlet, does for the most part only flow
out of the Arteries, but in the other Evacuation the Blood being of a black
purple with a Scarlet Cream, is only drawn out of the vein. Whence the stream
of Blood, which is one within all the vessels and throughout continuous,
acquires such a diverse kind of appearance, seeing we have showed in another
place, it is not our present purpose to make any surther search into this
Aetiologie; because it concerns not much to the curing any distemper, out of
what vessel the blood be let, provided it flow out largely: But that the
ancients do in some cases commend Arteriotomie, and prefer it to an incision of
a vein, the Circulation of Blood not being then known, we have elsewhere
discoursed how well it may be done.

Hitherto of Phlebotomie compared with a spontaneous Haemorrhage; The use and
effects of Phlebotomy.
now our next business is, to describe the use and effects thereof, as well
good as bad, in Physical practice. Wherefore we will first show in general what
alteration of the mass of Blood this Evacuation bring; then what diseases it
more immediately respects, either of the whole body, or its particular parts.

About the former, How it affects and alters the Blood.
it is obvious enough that the blood is altered by breathing a vein, both as to
its quantity and temperament, and as to its disposition and motion.

The first and most common Indication of Phlebotomie, is, 1. Diminishes its
quantity.
that the plenty of blood be diminished by this Administration. And truly this
is a vulgar Remedy, to remove or provide against a Plethora. Any one, though of
the vulgar sort, growing to a full habit of body, lets blood without the advice
of a Physician; Moreover Rusticks and Contrymen for healths sake, Emission
of the Blood is not to be either too prodigally, or too slenderly made.
once or twice in a year cause blood to be drawn from themselves and their
Beasts But although this custom is grown so much in use with some prodigal of
their blood, that they breathe a Vein on the smallest occasion, and sometimes
without any manifest cause; notwithstanding we may find many others no less
obstinate against this custom, insomuch that for no cause will they lose any
blood, unless the greatest necessities be urgent.

Upon this matter (whereas Arguments are alleged on either part,) The reasons
of the former hinted at.
that I may in few words determine what seems fit to be ordained, in the first
place it is requisite we grant, that letting blood is convenient against a
Plethora either made, or beginning: for by no other Remedy are the evils of
that Affection wont to be better removed or provided against. Notwithstanding,
the necessity of this evacuation ought to be declined as much as may be;
because from thence (as we have intimated elsewhere) the blood becomes more
sulphurous, and less salt, and for that reason it most commonly disposes all
men to be feverish and to be fat. Moreover the Great Remedy Blood-letting, if
it be prostituted to every little occasion, becomes less efficacious to any
grand affections when need requires: To which we may add, that according to
the vulgar observation, by how much the more familiarly any one uses
Phlebotomy, he will the more frequently stand in need of it: for blood being
emitted to avoid a Plethora, the rest of the mass will the sooner rise to a
Plethora: far otherwise than is the opinion of some, who dread lest the store
of blood be consumed by frequent Phlebotomie; for that on the contrary by this
means the quantity is more increased, although the Crasis be the worser: for so
the blood having lost much of its balsamic Salt, and preservative against
putrefaction, instead thereof, is filled with a pinguifying and more fiery
Sulphur.

Secondly, 2. Phlebotomie amends the mixture of the Blood.
Phlebotomie does frequently correct the mixture and temperament of the blood
in a manifold respect. For in the first place, if any thing heterogeneous be
confounded with its mass, which cannot be rightly digested, nor easily excerned
and sent away: a Vein being opened, the blood flowing out conveyes frequently
much of the portion of that matter forth with it, insomuch that the rest may be
either subdued or expelled. For the orifice of a vessel being opened, presently
the blood fermenting gathers together the extraneous particles as much as
possible, and excludes that portion of it self wherein many of them are heaped
up: From hence we may observe the blood flowing out first and last to be well
enough, It restores its temper.
when that emitted between appears corrupt. Also secondly, the blood declining
from its temperament, is frequently restored by Phlebotomie. For when the mass
thereof by the Sulphur or fixed Salt, or both together being exalted, shall
degenerate into sharp, salt, or saline-sulphureousness, a portion of the blood
being withdrawn, immediately a new fermentation thereof arises, and very often
there is a transposition made of all the particles of that sort, that
afterward the Spirits may a little emerge with the volatile Salt, and recover
their dominion, the Sulphur, and fixed Salt (as is fitting) being subdued. For
this reason it is that letting Blood does not only confer great help in
Fevers, but also in the Scurvy, Jaundies, and beginning Consumption; for the
blood after the vessels are emptyed, like the Stomach disburden'd, does better
digest and assimilate any humoursingested, and the more easily throws off and
separates whatever is heterogeneous.

But if the mixture of Blood begins to be much loosned and become very bad,
Some distempers of the blood admit not Phlebotomy.
as in the Plague and malignat Fevers, we must altogether abstain from
Phlebotomie; for the blood being withdrawn, the store of Spirits (whose only
part it is to vindicate the mass of blood from putrefaction and corruption) is
diminished, so that immediately all things tend to a deadly dissolution.
Moreover, if the Dyscrasie of the blood shall be of that manner, that the more
noble Principles, to wit, the Spirit, the volatile Salt and Sulphur, being
depressed or cnsumed, the watery and earthy particles predominate, the blood
ought not to be sent out, but preserved even as the treasure of life; for when
the abundance of Spirits are so small, any loss of them does cause all the
functions to stagger, and gives way to the disease; wherefore in a Dropsy,
Cachexia, Consumption, and other Distempers, where the active Principles are
greatly depressed, the opening a vein is almost the same thing as cutting the
man's throat.

In the before mentioned cases, In some eases about Phlebotomy it is very
doubtful.
where the temperament of blood is respected, it is easy to determine, whether
Phlebotomie be convenient or not; but in some others, as in a putrid continual
fever, when upon this hinge Life and Death are turned, there is need of the
greatest deliberation: and so much the rather because the event of the Disease,
and the success of all the accidents in its whole course, whether good or bad,
is usually imputed to Blood-letting, or its omission: and from hence it is,
that Physicians being solicitous to preserve their own repute, do chiesly raise
doubts in their consultations of this matter. And chiefly in a continual putrid
Fever.
But truly in this difficult knot that we may not be led by the rumor of the
vulgar (as it chances to happen) one while approving, another whise condemning
Phlebotomie, but with more certain advice: we must consider the state of the
Blood, the tendency of the morbific matter, and the strength of Nature. First
as to the former, if in a putrid Fever, the blood very much growing hot shall
raise a great heat, with thirst, watchings, and burning of the Jaws, and no
eruption of abundant sweat, nor pushes appear, or is suddenly expected, opening
of a vein is so clearly demonstrated, How the doubt is to be determined.
that it is a wickedness to omit it; but on the contrary if in a languid body,
a slow and remiss Fever, but continual, arises, with a weak Pulse, let
Blood-letting be spared, and the cleansing thereof be procured by breathing
Sweats, Urine, and blistering. Notwithstanding, in a middle state of Blood, and
of a Fever, Phlebotomy almost indifferent in it self, is determined by other
things. Therefore secondly we must weigh the tendency or flux of the morbific
matter, which if it remain dull in the mass of blood, and unfit to be
separated, and so (as it is frequently wont to be) instead of a Crisis, a
translation toward the head be made, and threaten the brain and nervous stock,
the cutting of a vein ought seasonably to be administered, whereby these evils
may be provided against. Notwithstanding, if that this matter being soon raised
into a rage, and either rushing inwardly to the bowels of the nether Belly,
provokes a huge Vomiting, or Dysenterical affections, or being driven
outwardly, seems to be about to bring the Smallpox, Measles, and other pushes,
every such force of Nature, if good, ought not to be disturbed, if evil, not to
be made worse by Phlebotomie; for in these cases it is not only dangerous to
let blood, but also very scandalous, Thirdly, about Phlebotomy to be
administered in a doubtful case, we are to take heed to the strength of the
Patient; for in a healthful Constitution, a vigorous Age, the commencing of a
Disease, and the functions both vital and animal being yet in a florid or
indifferent estate, we may confidently prescribe letting of blood, unless
something indicates the contrary. Notwithstanding, when it is otherwise, as to
those conditions, we may not rashly proceed to that Evacuation.

Thirdly, Thirdly, Phlebotomy corrects or stays the inordinate motions of the
Blood.
the inordinate motions of the Blood, when being very much moved, as it were
with fury, it either rushes impetuously one while into these parts, another
while into those, or transferres the noxious matter, are best restrained or
reduced by Phlebotomy; wherefore in great Cephalalgies, in all soporiferous or
convulsive invasions, for Catarrhs, Ophthalmia's, and a Cough, Asthma, fits of
the Gout, and Stone, or Phlegmons, Erysipelas's, also for many other
Distempers, raised by the flowings of the Blood or Serum, an incision of the
vein is commonly prescribed, and indeed for the most part as with good success,
so also upon right Reason; for the Vessels being emptyed, the blood having
obtained a more free space, is circulated pleasantly and undisturbedly,
besides, whatever is extravasated of the Blood or Serum, is wont to be sucked up
again and reduced into its course.

The Effects as well good as bad being thus shown, What Diseases, and of what
parts Blood-letting chiefly respects.
which happen to the blood in the manifold state thereof, by Phlebotomie, we
will next make strict examination what Diseases chiefly, either of the whole
body, or of any private Region that kind of Remedy does more immediately
regard. And first as to what relates to general Distempers, it is commonly
enough known, that letting blood is indicated bu a hot and dry temperament, and
interdicted by a moist and cold. It is usually propounded in every Fever, but
never in a Dropsy, Moreover, if we consider particular Diseases, there is no
region or part of the Body, but as they rejoice in the influence of vital as
well as nutritious blood (as long as it is well) so as often as it is disturbed
in any place, or reaches out any disagreeable or provocative thing, in place of
benign Juice, it requires avocation and a letting out thereof. If I should take
notice of every single case of this Indication, we should here rehearse almost
the whole Pathologie of the humane body. An aching Head, a Brain oppressed with
blood, or overflowed with Serum (whence spring a world of evils) burning of the
eyes, inflammation of the face, mouth and throat, all the diseases of the
Breast and Praecordia (inasmuch as the disorder of Blood affords a rise or fuel
to each of these) likewise obstructions or inflammatory affections of the
Liver, Spleen, and other Bowels; moreover, as a Plethora, and Athletick habit
of the whole body, so also the tumors of each member, painful and convulsive
passions, seem to accuse the blood as Author of all the evil, and require its
sending out, as a certain kind of revenge.

In these and very many other distempers, if at any time Bleeding be clearly
indicated, After Phlebotomy being indicated these four things following ought
to be considered.
before it be performed four things ought to be considered, viz. In what place,
by what manner and instrument, at what season, and in what quantity the Blood
ought to be taken away.

First, as to the former, although according to the Laws of the Circulation of
the Blood, as often as the mass should be diminished, First the place from whence
Blood is to be taken.
it differs little from what vessel a part thereof be taken, provided it be
large enough; notwithstanding, for that besides a general evacuation of the
blood, sometimes a particular one properly called Derivation (as when the blood
is to be brought out of a private place where it is accumulated) and moreover a
Revulsion, when it is to be called into this or that part, are intended; for
that reason, in a humane Body there are appointed as it were various
Boundaries, out of which, now by this, now by that, or by another vein, the
blood may be emitted as occasion is given, and for the uses chiefly requisite.

If therefore at any time an univeral Evacuation of the blood be indicated, the
median vein of the Arm is best to be opened, for this is easily opened being
large enough, and whereas it equally flows from the whole body to the orifice
thereof being open enough, by whose more free efflux nt only a Plethora is
taken away, but the greater vessels being every where emptyed after this
manner, the blood stagnating in any place, is brought into motion, and being
extravasated is again swallowed up into the veins; wherefore, in great
distempers when the blood being heaped in the Brain, In some cases from the Arm.
or Praecordia, does threaten sudden destruction, the best way not only of
general Evacuation, but of a Revulsion, is to send the blood by a full current
out of the vein of the Arm, being largely opened.

But if without any great Plethora the blood ought to be evacuated from the
whole, and pulled back from the upper part of the body toward the inferior,
as in the suppression of the menstrual flux or Hemorrhoids, it will be rather
fit to bleed in the Foot or sedentary vessels by Leeches. In others from the
vein of the Forehead, Temples or Throat.
But if after the blood being evacuated from the whole, it be also to be
derived from any private part where it is accumulated, let its drawing off be
near the place affected. Hence in Cephalic Diseases, we open the vein of the
Forehead, of the Temples, or of the Throat. To cure Tumors, or pains raised in
the Joints, we cut a vessel either beneath or near them, or draw out the blood
by Cupping-glasses or Leeches. In like manner in distempers of the Thorax and
nether Belly, either Cupping-glasses are applied to the region suffering, The
Cophalic Vein of the Arm, the Liver Vein, or the Salvatella erroneoufly so
called.
or Leeches to the sedentary vessels.

But that some Vessels are reported to bear a peculiar respect to certain
Bowels, and that they ought to be lanced in their distempers; viz. such are the
outward brachial vein, which is said to respect the head, and the inward the
Liver, also the outer vein of the Hand tending to the Ring-finger, which is
said to respect th Spleen, and for that cause this is called the Salvatella,
and the former of them the Cephalic, and the other the Jecorary; all this is
merely a vulgar error, which being propt by no reason or Anatomical
observation, I am ignorant whence it took its origin: Therefore as soon as it
is agreed on to cut a vein and its place, let a large Vessel be chosen, and
very conspicuous, that it may the more easily be opened; and being remote from
an Artery, Nerve, and Tendon, may be the more securely lanced; wherefore in
the Arm the median vein is commonly chosen, although the Cephalic being less
environed with other Vessels, is the more safely opened.

The Jugular Vein is almost always opened as often as blood is let in Beasts,
The jugular Veln is most safely opened.
it is a wonder it has not obtained the same Custom in Man, when the large and
eminent Pipe hereof may most easily and safely here be cut, because it neither
has an Artery for its companion, and lies a great way from any Nerve.
Moreover, from this vessel as from any other whatsoever opened, an universal
evacuation of blood is made from the whole body, and together the best
derivation thereof from the head, so that all the stagnations or aggestions of
the Blood and Serum are discharged thence.

Concerning Vessels in the soot or the hand there is no great reason of choice,
Of Veins in the band or feet.
but take the vein which chiefly swells: it matters little concerning the
Place, unless that if incision be made above, or near the Ankle, there is great
care to be taken lest a Tendon be hurt, which sometimes by unskilful or rash
Surgeons happens to the damage of the Patient. Moreover, let care be taken
lest a vein be cut near its Anastomosis with an Artery, for if this be
committed, the blood being entirely Scarlet, will impetuously skip out, and the
flux thereof is not easily stayed, nor the orifice of the vessel soon stopped.

The chief places being thus designed of letting forth the blood, we ought to
consider by what menns or by what instrument the Blood ought to be drawn forth.
and the choice of the vessels being showed, we ought next to treat of the
Manner or Instruments by which blood is drawn out; which is used to be done
either by a Lancet, in cutting the vein, or by suction by Leeches, or by
Cupping-glasses after Scarification. But there is no need of discoursing these,
because each of these parts of Chirurgerie are every where in familiar use by
Quacks, Barbers and Women, and all things relating to them so commonly known,
as a man his own house; wherefore we will speak but one word.

Helmont of late, and still certain followers of him, Some of the Ancients as
well as Modern have ridiculously exclaimed against letting of Blood.
Pseudochymists and Fanatics, have ejected Bleeding out of all Physic,
because they think this evacuation to be a great injury to Nature, (which being
aided either by her own strength, or by their Panacea's, they will have to
overcome every offensive thing of her self;) Surely, this is no less ridiculous
a thing than that long since Chrysippus, Apaemantes, Strato, and some others,
(as Galen reports) damned this remedy, because a vein is difficultly known from
an Artery. Truly it is manifest enough by sad experience, that in cutting a
vein sometimes an Artery has been pierced; whence either death or loss of the
member sometimes ensues: the reason whereof is, not as is commonly alleged,
that the coats of an Artery being more nervous or membranous than the coats of
a Vein, can scarcely or not at all be healed; when in truth that Vessel is
endowed with more and thicker fleshy fibers; Wherefore in opening a Vein the
pricking of an Artery is so dangerous.
but the cause is, that an Artery like the Heart it self, ought incessantly to
shake and beat, the fibers thereof repeating perpetual turns of Systole and
Diastole; wherefore, a little hole being made in its Pipe for the most part
remains uncurable by reason of the continual motion of the Vessel, and the
efflux of blood. It is otherwise in a Vein whose opening is immediately stopped
of its own accord; for but little of contractive work lies in its Coats, yea
this only, that its fibers being lightly opened as occasion serves, the blood
flowing back of its own accord, is gently moved forwards; and after Phlebotomy,
the vessel being empty, they are permitted to be quiet, so that in the mean
time the little hole made by incision is easily glewed together. Whenever
Physician or Patient do dread the opening of a vein to be administered, drawing
of blood by Leeches or Cupping-glasses, will aptly enough and with like
advantage supply the defect hereof. Moreover these administractions to remove
the conjunct cause of a disease, where there is need rather of partial than
general Evacuation or Derivation, are frequently preferred to Blood-letting it
self. There is no need to dwell longer on explicating the manner and reafon of
the effects of either of these operations, commonly enough known, but
proceeding to other things, we will next thoroughly weigh the Time and Quantity
of letting Blood.

The opportunity of letting blood is often of so great moment, Thirdly, The
Time of letting Blood comes into consideration.
that whereas this Evacuation succeeds well at one time, at another it highly
prejudices: But there are diverse respects of time to be considered about the
due performance of Bloodletting, but chiefly these four: The Time of the
Disease, the Age, the Year, and Day: The first concerns chiefly the Cure of the
Patient, the others the Preservation of him.

First therefore if blood ought to be let in any Disease, 1. In respect of the
disease.
it will be chiefly sesonably about the beginning or increase thereof, but not
at all or very cautiously in the state or declination. For at that time whilst
Nature is busied, endeavoring a Crisis, so that the Spirits are in great
labor, and the blood ferments very much, that great endeavor of it ought not
to be disturbed; and in the height of the disease, either Nature being
Conqueress does not want such a relief, or being subdued will not endure such
an Evacuation.

Secondly, If at any time for preservation it be deliberated touching letting
blood, 2. In respect of age.
Infants, Boys, and Old men, by the Custon of all Nations obtain an exemption;
also this evacuation was wont to be interdicted to pregnant Women, but now most
commonly prescribed. Men of a vigorous Constitution and middle Age, do well
enough endure Phlebotomy, and often times want it. Notwithstanding the first
and second time it ought not to be done without great occasion, for that being
once begun and afterward repeated, it will soon proceed into an inevitable
Custom.

Thirdly, Hence they who used to let blood Spring and Autumn, 3. In respect of
the Tear and its parts.
afterward cannot omit this evacuation without hazard. But to whom it will be
either profltable or necessary to breath a Vein once or twice a year, the chief
seasonable times will be in the beginning of Spring and Autumn, viz. when the
Blood being prone to ferment anew, is in danger to change its Crasis.
Phlebotomy seasonably administered, provides lest the Sulphur and Salts being
exalted, it should contract a feverish, scorbutical or other peccant
distemper; likewise, lest suffering a flux, it should pour forth the serous
Recrements, and other Feculencies upon the Brain, the Lungs or Bowels of the
nether belly. About the Solstices, when our bodies are very cold, or hot, the
blood, as the juice of all Vegetables, consisting in a more fixed state, and
unapt to sweel up, ought not to be let out, unless upon some urgent cause.

But whereas some precisely, or rather ridiculously, observe about Phlebotomy,
The Aspect of the Moon and Stars are here of no moment.
(even as the Contrymen about Gelding Cattle,) the position of the Heavens,
and the Aspects of Moon and Stars, it appears altogether frivolous; and for
that chiefly is this Custom condemned, inasmuch as counterfeit Astrologers have
a Figure in their Almanacks wherein every sign of the Zodiac, is allotted to
every particular member of our bodies; and for that cause, under what sign the
Moon is conversant, they forbid blood to be drawn from the respective part of
man. They who observe without reason the Heavens, do err (as the saying is)
the whole compass of the Heavens. Moreover, this vulgar error is not only
absurd, but frequently malevolent, inasmuch as many of the common people will
abstain from Phlebotomy whatever indication makes for the same, if (as they
say) the Sign be in the place of letting blood.

Fourthly, As to what relates to the time of the Day, in acute Disease, 4. The
time of the day about letting of Blood.
when a Physician is sent for, and there be indication for Phlebotomy
immediately to be performed, after the body is prepared, he may prescribe that
operation any hour in day or night; but otherwise, if any interval may be
allowed, then breathing a Vein rather is to be celebrated in a morning when the
Stomach is fasting, the vessels emptyed by sweat in the night, the stream of
blood being quietest, and appearing free from any ^^ous filth. Yea although
necessity urge, it may be deferred a little until the new Juice of things
eaten be passed into the blood; for the vessels being emptryed-will not only
snatch the crude Chyle into themselves, but frequently what is disagreeable or
unproportionate unto the blood, whence not only its motion is difordered, but
also the vital flame runs the hazard of being extinct. I have known some by
Phlebotomy administered presently after plentiful Drinking, or pouring in of
vinous liquors, to have fallen into dreadful swoundings away, which have
lasted very long, until the vital spirit being almost overwhelmed recovered it
self again.

Moreover, in the fifth place, the opening the vein being indicated, 5. The
Quantity of the Blood to be taken away ought to be considered.
and its time appointed, there remains still no little consideration to be had,
what Quantity of blood is to be let out, in which point there is most commonly
a fault committed, while some being too audacious, and others no less timorous,
they affix those bounds on this or that side of which for the most part
consists the Right. For that I may omit those who scarcely or not at all admit
of Phlebotomy (as I have before hinted) so I cannot easily assent to their
practice who fear not to draw blood to swounings: Too much Phlebotomy to be
avoided.
Besides, an error of no light moment is committed within the moderate bounds,
while in some cases blood is drawn by too sparing a hand, and in others with
too free. In a burning Fever, But a more spare Bleeding often hurts, and fixes
a feavour.
Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, Squinancy, Frenzy, Apoplexy, and other great
diseases, that have their origin from a turgescency or phlegmonic incursion of
the blood, a sparing Phlebotomy does always more prejudice than advantage. For
besides that it does not remove the antecedent cause of the disease, to wit,
the Plethora, it further causes the conjunct cause, viz. the inflammation and
bursting out of the blood to be angmented. For truly it is a constant
observation, that upon blood too sparingly drawn, the whole mass does boil up
more notably, and does acquire a new flux into the part affected; the reason of
which is, that in a great Plethora many portions both of the Blood and Serum
being thrust forward into recesses and strait places, are there constrained to
abide; which, after the Vessels being a very little emptyed, The Reason of
which is declared.
do impetuously regurgitate into the mass of blood, and do much disturb it, and
force it more impetuously to and fro. Wherefore also in this respect the
vessels ought to be very much empted, viz. that besides freeing the former
Juice from straitness, also space may be given to the Juice reduced from exile,
which otherwise being not congruous, coming upon the blood, troubles it, and
provokes it into effervescencies and eruptions. From hence we may observe, that
almost all men grow more hot presently after Phlebotomy, and yet the blood
being sufficiently evacuated, a little after they enjoy a more temperate
condition.

But as a slender withdrawing of blood in some cases is only vain, but is
performed with prejudice, so in other cases too much effusion is rarely
committed scotfree, and sometimes brings notable detriment of health. For when
either strength languishes, or the body labors under a notorious Cachexia, we
must spare Bloodletting and its taking away is either prohibited, or being
indicated by some accident, is allowed but in a small quantity. Wherefore in
men endowed with a weak, tender and cold Constitution, and in consumptive
persons, those affected with a long or malignant Fever, In some eases the
mission of Blood must be altogether avoided.
also in Hydropicks or Cacochymicks a vein is not rashly to be breathed, at
least if it be, much blood is not suffered to be taken away. It will be an
impossible thing to prescribe general Rules, according to the particular cases
of every individual person, whereby the quentity of letting Blood may be
exactly proportioned according to the strength of the Disease and the ability
of the Patient; but let this be left to the judgment of the prudent Physician
present, and let his Commands be ever exacutly observed; And let not (as it
every where is) such leave be given to Quacks, Empiricks and Barbers to play
with humane life, who every where rashly and wickedly use Phlebotomy; and if
the blood spring more sreely and appear discolored, therefore bragging of the
vessel being well pierced, they say it must be let out more plentifully,
because it appears bad, when oftentimes on the contrary it ought to be spared.

As soon as the Quantity of Blood to be taken away is determined, Phlebotomy
ought ever to be done with a large orifice.
our next care ought to be, that a more large orifice being made, the blood
equally mixed may flow out as soon as may be; for otherwise, if it go out from a
small hole, or drop by drop, or with a little stream, the mass of blood
fermenting will separate into parts, and what is more subtle and spirituous
will burst out, the thicker and feculent remaining behind. Hence it is to be
observed, that the blood being let out of a large orifice with a more full
stream, if it be a little stopped with the finger clapped on it, and a little after
suffered to flow out, the blood going out the second time becomes much purer
and brighter than the former, because in the interval of flowing, the more
subtle particles being unfolded from the thicker, and accumulated together,
have prepared themselves to fly away. Wherefore, if Hippocrates's Precept shall
be observed, 'viz. to let it run to the change of its Color, it behooves us to
procure that it spring out quickly, with a full a not interrupted stream.
Besides all this, as to what appertains to the alteration of the blood let out,
and cold, and to the inspection and the judgment thereof, for that we have
often discoursed it in other places, we now pass it by, hastening to other
things; and now the thread of Method leads us to entreat of Remedies opposite
to Blood-letting, to wit Ischaemones, that is, those which are convenient to
stop immoderate Haemorrhagies, whether engenderd by Nature or by accident.

SECT. III. CHAP. II. Of Remedies restraining or stopping of Blood.
EVen as Art imitates Nature in letting forth the blood by Phlebotomy offending
in plenty, or temperament, or in its motion, Every Hemorrhage is not to be
stopped.
so it succors her being diseased or working wrong, by stopping the flux of
blood whenever it is immoderate or hurtful. Whereas there are various and
many species of an Hemorrhage, there is no need of Physic for them all. If
perhaps a great effusion of blood happens by a solution of unity, excited by an
outward accident, as a wound, or stroke, Surgery suggests the manner of
Administrations whereby it should be restrained. Moreover, an Hemorrhage as
long as it shall be Critical, ought to be disturbed by no Medicine, but left to
the mere government of Nature (as long as she does aright use her power;) and
as to the Symptomatic, whilst it is little or not much troublesome, there is
required no Physic: notwithstanding there is great need of it, if at any time
the Flux of blood be either immoderate, or flow out by unapt places.

Eruptions of blood of this last kind chiefly challenge a Cure, But only the
immoderate and inconvenient.
if perhaps the blood be cast upward by Coughing or Vomit, or downwards by
seige, or thrown off through the Ureters. For in these cases, though the
quantity of the Blood excreted, be not much to be dreaded, notwithstanding
because often a dangerous or mortal Ulcer ensues the solution of the Unity so
made in the Lungs, or in the Stomach, Guts, or in a Vein; therefore we must
industriously rancounter those Hemorrhagies from their first appearance.
Therefore among the Diseases of those parts, The chief Cases of the latter are
reckoned.
such bloody excretions are accounted; but we have already in another place
delivered the Theories of Spitting Blood, and of the affection Dysenterical,
and the reasons of healing them, so that there is no need to repeat them here;
neither also to propound here a remedy for bloody Urine, for that it belongs to
the Nephritic Pathology; wherefore we will pass to those Passions, for which by
reason of an immoderate efflux of blood, there is great need of restraining
Medicines.

The kinds of these Affections are chiefly three, viz. Haemorrhage of the
Nostrils, And also of the former.
of the Flowers, and the immoderate Flux of the Hemorrhoids: The Cure of which
last does belong more to Surgery than Physic, and I think it best to
refer the other to the hysterical Pathologie. Here properly belongs to this
place the blood flowing out of the Nostrile, being the most general kind of
passions of the sort, For the present the Cure of the Hemorrhage of the
Nostrils is only propounded.
and common to every Age, Sex and Temperament, so that from the Diagnostick and
Therapeutick of it duly assigned, the uses and efficacies of Medicines
stopping blood will best appear: for what we proffer for the unfolding the
Causes and Cure of this bloody eruption, may be accommodated unto all other
dreadful Hemorrhagies.

It is observable enough, that the Flux of blood from the Nostrils does happen
to most men from extraordinary occasions; for as often as the blood, about to
break out through its own turgescency, or through laxity of the vessels, is apt
in some place to make or find its way, it is, by a certain instinct of Nature,
very often directed to the Nostrils, as to the part most easily opened. A
description of the Vessels from which Blood flows.
The vessels from whence it flows in that place, are slips of the arterial
Branch going from the Carotides, after having passed the Cranium, it comes to
the basis of the Cerebrum; for this proceeding near to the mammillary
Processes, sends very many twigs from it self every where about, of which some
eminent ones passing the hole of the Sieve-like Bone with the smelling Nerves,
are distributed through the glandulous membrane, investing the windings of the
top of the Nose. These nasal Arteries departing first from the Trunk of the
Carotides within the skull, anticipate part of the blood chiefly serous from
the brain, and lay aside the Serum it self and other watery recrements into the
glandules of the Nostrils, as into the proper Emunctories of that Region,
whence they distill into the cavity thereof. Wherefore, if the mouths of those
little Arteries do always gape somewhat by reason of the sweating out of the
Serum, it is no marvel if the blood it self being made more turgid, opening
them a little more (which often are too loose of themselves) bursts forth of
doors. Indeed this Emissary both of the Serum and of the Blood, being apt
ordinarily to open, or on any occasion, prevents or cures great incommodities
of the brain, or of the Praecordia, yea and sometimes of the whole body.

For in the first place, They are the same by which the Serum distills to the
Nostrils.
this way the Serum (as I said) is derived from the head, and when the mouths
of those Vessels are vellicated or provoked by any sneezing Medicine put into
the Nostrils, the Serum is from thence more abundantly drawn out; which yet
does not descend from the Brain (as is commonly thought) but is anticipated by
these nasal arteries, lest it should go to it; from which when it is more
plentifully drained and brought forth by the use of Errhines, for that cause
the Brain becomes more serene and exempt from vapors. Then secondly, lest the
Brain should be overwhelmed at any time by blood more impetuously overflowing,
a portion hereof passing through these vessels and breaking out, easily
prevents it.

But sometimes it happens that an Haemorrhage of this kind, The Blood flowing
forth in too great plenty from these Vessels, is very hurtful.
rather becomes a Disease than a Remedy; for whenever the blood flows out
more often and more abundantly than is fit from the Nostril, if life be not
immediately hazarded by reason of too great loss, yet the remaining mass of the
blood being impoverished thereby, and losing its temper, acquires a cachectick
and frequently an hydropick disposition; even as we have clearly intimated
before, where we also have shown the Aetiologie of this distemper in common
with other too great Hemorrhagies, either to consist in the fault of the blood,
or of the vessels, or of both together.

First, The causes of such an immoderate flux.
the blood bringing an Hemorrhage of it self, offends either in Quantity or
Quality; and therefore while occasionally it boyls up, it cannot be contained
within the vessels, but either opening their mouths by distending them, or
unlocking them by its acrimony, 1. From the fault of the Blood.
it skips out: To which happens that the blood being sometimes dissolved in its
consistence, and as it were infected, becomes unfit to continue the course of
Circulation, inasmuch as portions thereof separating from one another, are
partly fixed in the flesh or skin, having suffered death; and partly breaking
out, stir up frequently dreadful, and sometimes mortal Haemorrhagies, as
every where is discovered in malignant Fevers, and sometimes in the Scurvy.
Notwithstanding the blood offending by mere Quantity or Acrimony, unless the
fault of the Vessels happening thereon provoke the flux thereof, or too easily
permit it, seldom breaks out into a great Hemorrhage.

Therefore secondly, 2. From the fault of the Vessels.
the vessels bringing blood, as often as they conspire to produce that
affection, are usually in the fault, either first inasmuch as their small
mouths gaping, by reason of the fibers being too loose and weak, do not readily
enough transvasate the blood out of the Arteries into the Veins; which fault
happens to scorbutic and cachectical persons; or secondly inasmuch as by
reason of the same moving fibers being affected with the Cramp and Convulsion,
the blood being snatched impetuously to and fro, and chiefly toward the Head,
is constrained to break out to continue the thread of circulation, even as it
will plainly appear in the case of a Patient which shall be shown below.

1. Prognostics.
As to the Prognostics, although an immoderate flux of Blood, in the
Smallpox, Measles, malignant Fevers, and in the Plague, does ever presage
evil, and is expedient to be stopped; notwithstanding it ought to be restrained
not by mere cooling or revulsory things, but to be changed by temperate
Hydroticks into sweating.

2. An Haemorrhage of the Nostrils, though not great, is more dangerous in
Cachecticks with a weak Pulse, and a cold sweat, than a plentiful Hemorrhage
in men endued with a Pulse strong enough, and blood very fervent.

3. They who are obnoxious to this Disease, by reason of a Dyscrasie of blood
and looseness of the vessels, if there come upon both these a convulsive
disposition of the fibers of the little Arteries, they receive a far more
difficult Cure, and frequently are reduced to extreme languishings by reason of
the great losses of blood.

4. From those who are feverish, when much blood shall flow out of the
Nostrils, and does not terminate the disease, oftentimes in the place of a
Crisis a delirous or a soporiferous affection succeeds. There are many other
prognostics about a Hemorrhage accurately remarkt by Hippocrates, which
notwithstanding properly belonging to the discourse of a Fever, we omit in
this place; for truly, the Cure in general of this Distemper is here almost
only intended.

About which there will be three primary Indications, Three primary Indications
of Cure.
to wit, Curatory, Vital, and Preservatory; the two former respect immediately
the symptom to be stopped, as often as it shall be urgent; and the last is busy
about removing the Cause of the Disease, that so the assaults of the Hemorrnage
may be small, or not at all. Besides, an Hemorrhage ought to be handled one way
without a Fever, and after a different manner if pressed with a Fever.

Therefore whenever without a fever much blood shall flow out of the Nose,
The Curatory Indication suggests three intentions of healing.
presently as there shall be need of stopping Remedies, there will be three
chief intentions of Curing, all being together assumed into practice, viz. Let
the turgescency of blood be bridled, that it may be less disposed into
inordinate tendencies. Moreover in like manner let it be endeavored, that as
well its fluxion being withdrawn from the Nostrils may be diverted to another
place, as that the mouths of the Vessels gaping within the Nostrils be shut:
for which purpose Remedies as well external as internal very many and of
diverse kinds are wont to be exhibited; of the former we will entreat in order
briefly.

First therefore let the Patient be quiet, placed with his head upright,
Outward remedies to stop the flux of blood.
then let many of the Joints of his Arms and Thighs, but not all, be bound with
strait Ligatures, which ought now and then to be loosened and removed to other
parts; for all being bound together and long, by reason of the blood being held
in the outward parts, 1. Ligatures.
and too much detained from the heart, has caused most dreadful swoundings;
but otherwise this Remedy being prudently administered, frequently helps. For
when the blood by this means running into the members by the Arteries, is
stopped, that it presently returns not by the veins, its more impetuous spreading
it self into the head is impeded. Moreover, by the painful Ligatures of the
Joints, the muscular Fibers of the Carotides Arteries are preserved from Cramps
which oftentimes come upon them.

Secondly, For diverting the tendency of blood from the Nostrils, 2. Bleeding.
it is sometimes expedient to breath a Vein in the Arm or in the Foot. For by
how much more blood is carried by the Arteries to the vein cut, by so much less
will the afflux be toward the Nostrils. Yet this administration does not
always so help, but sometimes a contrary effect thereof happens, as we have
already observed in spitting blood. The reason whereof is, that the vessels
being suddenly and not sufficiently emptyed, suck up again the disagreeable
humors formerly ejected, and stagnating within the pores, whereby the blood
incontinently is stirred up into a greater eruptive turgescency.

Thirdly, Cold things applied to the Forehead and Temples, 3. Application of
cold things.
also to the Nape of the Neck, where the vertebral Arteries ascend, cause the
vessels to be bound together, and the flux of blood to be somewhat stopped or
repelled. Notwithstanding it is ill which some advise, that cooling Topics be
applied to the Jugular Veins; for so the blood being retarded in its recourse,
flows the more plentifully out of the Nostrils. Moreover, what is usual, to
apply linty Clothes, or a Sponge moistened with Vinegar, to the Pubes and
Testicles, helps by no other means than the ligature of the members, to wit,
inasmuch as the flowing back of the venous Blood is impeded. A sudden and
unexpected sprinkling of cold water on the face, frequently stops an
Haemorrhage, inasmuch as it gives an impression of terror.

Fourthly, Cupping-glasses applied upon the Hypochondres, Flanches, 4.
Cupping-glasses.
inner part of the Thighs, and the soles of the feet, are accounted a famous
remedy as well with the ancient, as with modern Physicians, for diverting a
tendency of the blood from the Nostrils. And the reason is plain, viz. because
a Cupping-glass being put on, the impulse of air being prohibited by the space
of the orifice, and increased every where about, presently the blood and
humors, yea and vapors, and solid parts, being called from any other
tendency, are driven toward the empty space of the Glass.

Fifthly, 5. Frictions.
Rubbing of the extreme parts are commended in this distemper by some
Practitioners, which we judge not always useful, nay scarce safe; because,
although they solicit a greater appulse of the blood to the feet or hands, yet
they so hasten the return thereof, that the whole mass of blood being raised
into an effervescence, it hazards a more violent tendency toward the Nostrils.

Sixthly, Zacutus Lusitanus among his revulsory Remedies, 6. Cauteries.
propounds an actual Cautery to be applied to the sole of either foot; and
Crato the bending the little finger of the same side, which because done with
no trouble we may try; but we advise not so of the former, unless the way of
helping were more certain, which might compensate the pain and lameness that
would ensue thereon. Seventhly, Swounding raised by any means, presently stops
an Haemorrhage, 7. Faintings.
however contumacious it be; wherefore when such bleeding persons are taken out
of their beds, or when they do timorously admit of Phlebotomie, though but
sparingly, or have their members bound for a longer time, or are suddenly
affrighted with some feigned rumor, or by some other occasion fall into a
swouning or fainting of the spirits, the flux of blood ceases thereon
presently. The reason whereof is evident enough, for that as soon as the motion
of the heart fails, presently the blood and spirits rush thither, and so every
outward flux is stopped on a sudden, and what was immoderate before, does not
again return.

Eighthly, Remedies by Sympathy and Antipathy.
In the last place, for repressing the flux of blood from the Nostrils,
Remedies ought to be recited, which are said to operate after an occult manner,
by Sympathy or Antipathy, 1. Sympathetick powder. 2. Young Ashwood.
of which sort first is the sympathetick powder, made of Roman Vitriol calcined
to a whiteness by the Summer Sun; also a piece of wood cut from a young Ash
first sprouting about the time the Sun enters Taurus; the efficacy of which
remedy in the late Civil Wars many worthy of credit attest to have been
approved for stopping the Hemorrhages of wounded Soldiers: Yea some still with
much confidence prescribe it in all eruptions of blood. I confess the reasons
of effects of this kind are concealed from me, if so be they happen often.
Besides, it seems not a less Empirical and irrational Remedy, that a silk Bag
with a dry Toad in it, 3. A dry Toad.
worn on the pit of the Stomach, stops any kind of Hemorrhage, and prevents its
return: unless (according to the Aetiology of Helmontius) that the application
terrifying the Archaus, compells the blood being astonished, either to go back,
or desist from its inordinate excursion.

There remain very many famous Medicines whose Operations are wont to be
referred to hidden Causes and secret virtue; 4. A Bloodstone. 5. Moss.
as are Necklaces of Boodstone hung about the Neck, also the moss of a humane
Skull carried in the hand; Epithemes of the leaves of Nettles bruised and
applied to the soles of the feet, and the Palms of the hands; the Empirical
administrations of which kind, when they may be administered without trouble or
cost, we make no refusal of; since in a dangerous case every thing is to be
attempted; and applications of that sort do help sometimes in respect that they
fortify the imagination of the patient.

While such like outward Administrations are used, Topics closing the mouths
of the Vessels.
for repressing or calling aside the flux of blood out of the Nostrils, also
other Topics are put up into the Nostrils, which may shut the gaping mouths of
the vessels, for which use the injections of liquid things, Pledgets, Powders
to be blown in, and Fumes are wont to be prescribed, which not helping, in the
last place we descend to Escharoticks.

Ninthly, 6. Escharoticks. The injection of Vitriol water.
Among Liquids, not only first, but as good as all others is esteemed the
solution of Vitriol in Fountain Water. Some boast this for a great secret, and
a most certain Remedy. Indeed the same being applied to a fresh wound,
forasmuch as it shuts the ends of the cut vessels, by wrinkling them up, it
restrains and presently stops the flux of blood. But that application in
Hemorrhages of the Nostrils, where the blood being brought to the gaping mouths
of the little Arteries, ought to be received by the Veins, in regard it shuts
them as well or rather than those, it succeeds little, and sometimes not at
all, as I have known it frequently experimented. This Medicine is prepared of
Green Vitriol, viz. of Hungary, or of our Country, also of the fictitious
Vitriol of Mars dissolved in a sufficient quantity of Spring Water. I know some
commend the solution of Roman Vitriol, which they not only apply by injection,
but also to a linen cloth dipped in the blood are wont to administer it
sympathetically. Moreover the water of the infusion of white Vitriol prepared
with Bole and Camphire, I have known to be used successefully as well in
wounds, as often in other Hemorrhagies.

Tenthly, 10. Pledgets.
Since water cast into the Nostrils, does not adhere enough to the mouths of
the Vessels, but is washed away by the breaking out of the blood, before it can
exert its Virtue, it is therefore more expedient either that a Styptick powder
be blown in, or that a Pledget dipped in the water of Vitriol, either by it self,
or strewed with an astringent powder, be thrust into the upper part of the
Nostril. For this purpose many and several kinds of styptick powders have been
prescribed, I have frequently used either Crocus Martis calcined to the highest
redness, or the powder of Camphorated Vitriol, or the vitriolic Soot scrap't
from the bottom of an old Brass Pot, the powder whereof I have often used with
success in this case. In obstinate Hemorrhagies not yielding to other remedies,
let Pledgets, whose tops are dipped in Caustic Colcothar, be put up deep into
the Nostrils, that the mouths of the Vessels being burnt, and covered with an
Eschar, all flux of blood may be presently stopped. Many other Errhines to stop
bleeding are accounted famous with Practitioners, Hogs-dung.
as Hogs-dung, thrust into the Nostrils, which by the mere ill savor is
thought to repel the blood; also the smoke of Blood dropping on hot Iron,
Burnt Blood.
repercuss'd into the Nose, the Powder being burnt is also taken inwardly. The
moss of a humane Skull unburied, put into the Nostrils, is commended by many
for this effect: but these latter applications ought to be referred to the
sympathetick Aetiologie, if they avail any thing.

These things concerning outward Remedies stopping blood, the virtue and
efficacy of which ought at the same time to be promoted by intern Remedies,
seasonably exhibited and cooperating.

Therefore a slender Diet being instituted, Inward Remedies, whereof are two
intentions.
and the Patient ordered to keep himself in an upright posture, or not much
supine, while the aforesaid Administrations are orderly administered, medicines
appropriated to the same end are also prescribed to be taken inwardly. There
will be two scopes of Remedies of this sort, viz. 1. That the effervescency of
Blood whether incentive or fermentative being suppressed, the liquor thereof
being restrained within the vessels, may pleasingly circulate. 2. That the more
impetuous motion of the heart driving about the blood too rapidly, may be
dedpressed by apt Sufflamina's.

1. 1. Things appeasing the effervescency of the blood.
The first Intention requires Medicines that suppress the too much kindling of
the blood, and appease the undue fermentation thereof, for which intents I
usually prescribe the ensuing Remedies.

Take of the water of Plantane, red Poppy, Purslain, and frog-Spawn, Juleps.
of each four ounces, Syrup of Water Lillies two ounces, Sal Prunella one dram,
mix them for a Julep, the dose three ounces three or four times a day.

Take Barly-water two pound, Red-rose leaves one handful, Tinctures.
Spirit of Vitriol what suffices to make it grateful, or about half a dram,
make an Infusion warm for extracting the Tincture, add Syrup of St. John
's-wort two ounces: the dose three or four ounces, as often as they please day or
night.

Take leaves of stinging Nettles, of Plantane, of each three handfuls, pour
upon them being bruised Plantane-water 6 ounces, press them strongly, let the
strained liquor be taken.

2. For the second Intention, to wit, 2. Intention, to cool the motion of the
Heart,
for the cooling of the heart too vehemently beating, Hypnoticks and Opiates
are convenient.

Take water of red Poppies three ounces, Is done by Hypnoticks.
Syrup of Diacodium half an ounce, make a draught to take at night. Or,

Take Conserve of red Roses an ounce and a half, Powder of Henbane, and white
Poppy-seeds of each two drams, Syrup of Poppyes, enough to make an Opiate. The
dose the quantity of a Nutmeg every six or eight hours.

Take of Laudanum Cydoniatum one dram, the dose fifteen drops twice a day in a
convenient Vehicle.

These things touching an immoderate Hemorrhage, and the Remedies thereof, Of a
Hemorrhage in a malignant Fever.
when it happens without a Fever: but that which coming in a fever ought to
be stopped in regard of the too great loss of Blood, is either Critical making an
immoderate excursion, by reason of some accident, for which the Method and
Medicines even now prescribed with caution and respect had to the Fever may be
accommodated; or merely Symptomatical, which being excited in a malignant and
Spotted Fever, Smallpox, Measles, or the Plague, neither scarcely can, nor
ought to be stopped with the Remedies above recited. For letting of blood is not
convenient, repelling Topics, also cooling Juleps, or Decoctions, and
Narcoticks, have no place here: The chief intention of Healing will be to
change the Hemorrhage into Sweating, for a gentle Sweat being raised, the flux
of Blood often ceases, if it be not very dangerous.

Take water of Meadow sweet, Tormentil, of each four ounces, Remedies.
Saxons cool Cordial two ounces, Treacle water an ounce and a half, Acetum
Bozoardicum three drams, Syrup of Croal an ounce and a half, Confection of
Hyacinths two drams, make a Julep, the dose six spoonfuls, every third hour.

Take of the Powder of Toads prepared half a dram, Camphire two grains, take it
every sixth hour, with the forementioned Julep. Or,

Take Powder of Scarlet-cloth from half a dram to two Scruples, as before.

Take Consection of Hyacinths three drams, Powder of Scarlet-cloth on edram,
Syrup of Corals enough to make a Confection; the dose the quantity of a Nutmeg
every other hour.

Take of Bistort and Tormentil-roots, of each one ounce, the leaves of
Meadowsweet, Pimpernel, Wood Sorrel, of each one handful, burnt Hartshorn two
drams, Shavings of Ivory and Heart horn, of each two drams, boil them in
Spring Water from three pound to two, adding about the end Conserve of red
Roses three ounces; the dose three ounces being strained, often in a day.

2. Second Indication vital.
Hitherto of the first Indication Curatory, together with the scopes of
healing, and forms of Remedies, appointed for a Haemorrhage of the Nose
happening with or without a fever. The second Indication Vital only prescribes
a slender Diet, temperate Cordial, The Position of the Sick.
and a fit handling of the Patient. The Provision of the first is so small and
easy, that there seems no need to appoint a Measure and Rules for it
particularly. About the latter the chief question is, whether we ought to
retain them within or out of their beds. Without doubt the languishing, and
those obnoxious to often swounings, are not to be roused up, unless (as we have
already hinted) it be for a Curatory attempt: as to others less weak, it seems
so to be determijned. Those whose Blood does not easily transpire by reason of
the constipation of the pores, Sometimes in bed, and sometimes out.
and is incited into a greater turgescence from the heat of the bed, and proner
to break out, it will be expedient they not only remain out of bed while
bleeding, but also sometimes through extern applications to be cooled in the
whole habit of their body, or at least in most of their members. Wherefore,
Fabritius Hildanus relates he suddenly cured one of a great Hemorrhage of the
Nostrils, after many things tried in vain, by putting him into a vessel of cold
water. Also with like success Riverius cured another affected in like manner,
being taken out of his bed, and laid on a woollen Matte on the Pavement, he
bathed his whole body with Linen dipped in Oxycrate. Yet this method is not
alike convenient for all persons, or at all seasons; but on the contrary, those
whose blood is halituous, and enjoying more open pores, does evaporate easily,
mnad being wont to be dissolved by a more moderate heat encompassing them, into
sweat, and from thence find themselves more quiet, it is more convenient that
they remain within the bed, not only while the blood breaks out, but as long as
there is danger of its return. For this reason it is, that many obnoxious to
dreadful Hemorrhagies, during the Summer, when they transpire more freely, live
exempt from that disease, but the Winter cold pressing them, by reason of their
pores being bound up, they suffer under more frequent and dreadful Invasions.

3. Third Indication Preservatory has two intentions of healing.
The third Indication Preservatory, which regarding the removing the Cause of
that disease, either stops the eruptions of blood, or renders the same more
rare, or less, and suggests these two Intentions of healing, viz. 1. That the
blood being restored to its due temperament and mixture, may quietly circulate
within the vessels, without turgescency and breaking out. 2. That the Vessels
carrying Blood, as to the structure of their little mouths, and the tenours of
the muscular fibers, may be contained in their due state; so that they neither
cause those inordinate tendencies of blood toward the Head, nor suffer
effluxes out of the nose: For both these ends too great plenty and impurity of
the Blood are carefully to be provided against by Phlebotomy and Purgation
seasonably used; afterward for procuring and conserving its good temperature,
the following Alteratives may be given at fit seasons of healing.

Take of Conserve of red Roses, Forms of Remedies.
of Hipps, an. three ounce, powder of all the Sanders an. half a dram, Coral
prepared one dram, of the reddest Crocus Martis two drams, Sal Prunella four
Scruples, with Syrup of Coral, make an Electuary, take the quantity of a
Chestnut early in the morning and at night, by it self, or drinking after it
three ounces of the following water.

Take the tops of Cypress, Tamaris, an. eight handfuls, St. John's Wort,
Tamarisk, Horsetail an. four handfuls, of all the Sanders bruised an. one
ounce, of the Crum of Whitebread two pound, slice them small, and pour on them
of new milk eight pound, distill in a cold Still, sweeten each dose when taken
with Syrup of the juice of Plantane.

Take leaves of Plantane, Brooklime, stinging Nettles, of each four handfuls,
to them bruised pour half a pound of the foregoing water, of small
Cinnamon Water two ounces, press them strong, the dose three ounces to four, at
Nine in the Morning, and at Five in the Afternoon.

Madicines of this sort are taken in Spring and Autumn for twenty or thirty
days, with sometimes a gently Purge coming between. In Summer let them drink
Mineral Steel-waters for a Month, than which in this case there is not a better
Remedy. Out of many Examples of persons laboring with an Hemorrhage, we only
propose this one singular case.

I was lately consulted at a distance for a certain Gentleman that had suffered
frequent and great eruptions of blood, one while at the Nostrils, An Example of
a rare Hemorrhage.
anotehr while at the Hemorrhoid Vessels. He had frequently used Phlebotomy by
persuasion of his friends, without benefit; yea frequently falling into cold
Sweats and Swounings after breathing a vein, and notwithstanding obnoxious to
eruptions of blood, he was wont to be much worse. I prescribed Juleps (having
not yet seen him) and cooling Decoctions, and Anodyhnes, also the juicy
expressions of herbs, and other things cooling the blood, but even from these,
(as if all still far enough from the scope) he was nothing the better. At
length being sent for into the Country to visit him, I found the affection
under which he suffered to be merely or chiefly convulsive; for whereas he
daily bled, his Pulse was weak, the extreme parts cold, and all his Vessels as
being too much emptyed fell flat; Its Aetiologie.
also the patient was affected with a continual Vertigo and trembling of heart,
and by and by with a swouning or fear of it. Really the blood was so far from
breaking out by reason of turgescentce, that rather the stream thereof being
depressed and small, it seemed scarce enough to sustain the current of
Circulation. Notwithstanding the truth of the matter was, he was often sensible
of something in his body creeping one while upward, another while downward like
wind, and for the most part the flux of blood out of his Nostrils or
Hemorrhoids, followed the tendency of that motion: henced it was easy to
conclude, that the moving fibers of the Vessels carrying blood, by which they
are contracted, being affected with a Convulsion, did disorderly convey the
stream of blood however small and low, to and from, and so compel it into
Eruptions: which also happened the easier, inasmuch as the mouths of the
vessels being laxe and gaping, suffered the blood forced into them to flow out
without any due resistance. His Cure.
The instituted method of Curing did plainly approve of this Aetiology,
inasmuch as it happily succeeded, leaning on this supposition; for
Bloodletting, and the use of Medicines stopping blood being at last omitted, I
prescribed the use of the ensuing Powder, a dose whereof he took every sixth
hour with a fitting Julep.

Take the powder of male Poeonie, red Coral, Pearls, of each one dram, Ivory,
Crabseyes, Blood stone of each half a dram, Lapis Prunellae one dram, make a
Powder, the dose half a dram.

Take of Black-cherrie water eight ounces, Balm, Barley Cinnamon Water, of each
two ounces, Treacle-water one ounce, Syrup of Coral an ounce and a half.

But I commanded that Ligatures should be applied to certain places by a
constant course, and by and by to other places as occasion should be given, as
well to stop as to intercept the Convulsions of the Vessels; and by remedies of
this kind, and means of administration, he recovered his health in a short
space, without any return of the disease.

SECT. III. CHAP. III. Of Vesicatories.
OF losing Blood by Phlebotomy, whenever it is troublesome and injurious, and
swells too much, and tumultuates within the vessels; also of retaining it by
Medicine s stopping Blood, as often as being outrageous it rages too much of
its own accord and flows out, we have hitherto largely discoursed. There remain
other certain humors, viz. Nervous and Nutritious, as also Serous, and other
recrementitious ones which are wont to flow within the Brain and Nerves, and as
well in the nervous fibers, as the fleshy, yea and within the Pores of the skin
and of the solid parts, which being often depraved or hindered in motion,
require emission, being otherwise about to raise great troubles or pains, and
frequently dangerous Diseases. Wherefore, that we may seasonably rencounter
distempers that are about to rise or take their origin from thence, Physic
has found out certain other Emissaries, mediately or immediately deriving the
forecited humors out of the parts and places where they shall offend. And
those are either continual, viz. Fontinels of diverse kinds, which are as it
were perpetual Drains, and pour out continually the Ichor; or they are
temporary, when as occasion requires, the Scarf-skin being taken away in some
part of the body, the extremities of the vessels in the skin are made naked,
and withal so provoked, that they spue out in great abundance the serous
humors of a various descent and disposition, and so continue to evacuate the
same for some time, one while longer, another while shorter. But such a manner
of drawing out the serous humors from the outward superficies of the body or
any part thereof, is wont to be procured gby Medicines called by the Ancients
Phaenigms, or Sinapismus, Vesicatories anciently called Phenigms and Sinapisms.
by Moderns Vesicatories; of which in the first place we will treat here,
(because the knowledge of these leads the way to the Doctrine of Fontinels) and
we will chiefly insist on unfolding these three things; viz. First, It shall be
shown, from what Bodies, and after what manner disposed, Vesicatories are wont
to be prepared. Secondly, Whereas they are of diverse kinds, it shall be
decalred what is the manner and reason of their operation in every one, or at
least in the chief of them: Thirdly and lastly, we will make search for the
curing of what sort of Distempers they ought to be appointed, and in what
places applied.

1. 1. Of what prepared.
As to the first, the most simple Blisterers are either Fire, or soled Bodies,
or Liquors endued with fiery particles; (which are seldom administered for this
use by reason of the terror which they impress, and the imminent danger, lest
being more strongly applied, they do not only blister the Scarf-skin, but burn
the skin and other parts.) 1. From actual Fire, or things imbued with it.
Let therefore what is safer and less dreadful, Epithemes out of Concretes
having more sharp and (as as is affirmed) potentially fiery particles, be
applied to the places to be blistered, which are either milder, and by the
Ancients were called Phaenigms, because they made the part red, the scarf-skin
taken away; or were called Sinapisms in respect of the matter, and were wont to
be prepared of Mustard, Pidgeons-dung, 2. From things potentially burning.
Squills masht, Garlic, Milk of Figs, and the like; or they were stronger, and
consisted of Euphorbium, Cantharides, Flammula Jovis, Crows foot, greater
Plantane, with many others, which being endued with a certain burning and
caustic quality, are used outwardly for the use above recited, but taken
internally, they prove venomous and frequently mortal.

The Composition and forms of things drawing blisters are reported to be
manifold and of sundry kinds, although one or two may here suffice, and by how
much the more simple, the better; and in most cases for the most part it is all
one which you use: notwithstanding we shall after our manner annex some select
Prescriptions of these kinds of Remedies. And that we may say little of
Dropaces, Sinapisms, and Phaenigms, whose use is almost exploded; almost all
Vesicatories now in use have Cantharides for their Basis.

Take powder of Cantharides half a dram, Forms of Vesisicatories.
to a dram, powder pf Ameos seeds one scruple, of old Leaven kneaded with
Vinegar, enough to make a Plaster, spread some of it on Leather, apply it
twelve houns to the place to be blistered. This works certainly and strong
enough: but because it is lessx compact and sticking, and may fall from the
place to which it is put, or is apt to crumble, therefore for the more
commodious application, this following is very convenient, and now in use with
most.

Take of Cantharides three drams, Euphorbium half a dram, powder of Ameos seeds
one dram, let be incorporated with Melilote-Plaister by a warm hand, as much of
this powder as it is capagble to receive, then spread it on Leather, and apply
it for twelve or sixteen hours.

Some do use to incorporate the foregoing powder with Burgundy Pitch, A more
delicate Vesicatory with a Dropace.
and spread it upon Leather, afterward to cover the sides with red Sanders
incorporated with Burgundy pitch, and so administer both a Dropace and
Vesicatory. Also by applying still the same Plaster, the Scarf-skin being
blister'd and taken off, and the place being red, and ulcerated, and only
wiping it once or twice in a day, and putting it on again, they cause the
little Ulcer raised by the Vesicatory, to flow at pleasure, yea sometimes above
a month, and to throw off a plentiful Ichor.

Others enclose Cantharides bruised, and sprinkled with Vinegar in Silk, and
apply to the place.

Some Empiricks use in the room of Cantharides a mass of the leaves of
Crow-foot, or flamula Jovis bruised on the place, by which the Scarf-skin being
blistered, or rather eaten, the skin it self, as if touched with an actual fire,
is much inflamed and deeply ulcerated; whence not only a profusion of Ichor but
an inflammation of the whole member, and a feverish disposition sometimes
follow: wherefore these things are not to be used rashly.

2. 2. How they operate.
If it be enquired of the manner and reason how these and other Vesicatories
operate: in the first place we ought to show by what manner actual Fires, and
things endued with particles proceeding from Fire, do raise a blister; then by
an easy Analogy the force and manner of working of those sorts of remedies
will be known, which are reported to be endowed with a potential fire.
Wherefore we observe of the former, that the fiery particles not being too
vehemently applied, penetrating the Scarf-skin without dissolution of unity,
enter under the skin it self, Showed by the example of Fire.
where the extremities of the vessels bringing blood, of the Nerves, and of the
nervons Fibers are terminated; and there do variously twist together these,
altering them from their position, and pervert the structure of the whole
texture of the skin: insomuch that from all the vessels being made angry in a
high degree, the watery humor being imbued with igneous particles, and
therefore rejected, as well by the blood as by the nervous Juice, is spued out
in great abundance: This Lympha, because it cannot pass through the Scarf-skin,
separates it from the skin, and raises it into a bladdery bulk, from which at
length being broke of its own accord, or occasionally, it flows out. Moreover
as long as the igneous particles adhere to the skin, and the mouths of the
Vessels, being covered with an Eschar, are not closed up, these being
continually twitched by them, do continue to spue out the Ichor. This kind of
ichorous flux will the sooner cease, if immediately upon the hurt inflicted,
the fiery particles be drawn out, by the application of some proper
Antipyretick, as Fire it self, Nitre, Soap, Onions, and the like. Moreover it
runs the longer, if omitting an Antipyretick, medicines hindering the
generation of a Cicatrice, or of the outer-skin, and unlocking the mouths of
the vessels, be worn upon the place affected.

By these it is easy to understand by what manner Vesicatories perform their
operation, How Cantharides excite Blisters and draw forth water.
viz. Cantharides (as likewise any other of the same virtue) being outwardly
applied, and being heated by Effluvia's of the parts subjected, and so being
provoked to exert their power, do plentifully dispatch sharp and as it were
fiery particles from themselves, which penetrating the Scarf-skin without any
tearing it, they are dashed against the Cutis or other skin, where first they
act upon the Spirits, and then by the affecting these, upon the Humors and
solid parts. They very much provoke the Spirits, and drive them into painful
Convulsions of the fibers, dissolve the Humors, and constrain them to separate
into parts, so that the watery part being very much embued with those sharp,
and as it were venomous particles, is rejected every where by the other Juice;
and when in the mean time the ends of the Vessels and Fibers are either eaten
by the burning, or opened by twitching, and as it were drained, that Ichor
conveying the hurtful particles is plentifully spued out of their little
mouths; which then separateds the impervious Cuticula or the Scarf-skin, from
the other skin or Cutis is self, and raises it into a little bladder, and after
this being beoken and taken away, it is for some time poured out by the
ulcerated shin (as we showed it to come to pass by reason of the particles of
fire.)

But this is not only done, because the serous Juice imbibing the sharp parts
of the Medicine, and conveying them out, does not always bear them all back the
same way by which they entered, but sometimes this being endued with these
stings, regurgitates into the mass of Bloodl; and afterward being circulated
with it, and ejected with its infestous burden through other Emunctories, Why
they bring a fervent Dysurie.
offends some weak or tenderer Channels in its passage or going forth; from
whence very many contract a Strangury, from great or many Vesicatories, by
reason of the urinary passages being affected for that cause with Acrimony or
Erosion, which in some becomes most sharp and intolerable. Also that
application sometimes brings bloody Urines to others afflicted with the Stone;
hence a suspicion also arises, that those who have tender Lungs, or who are
subject to a Consumption, are much endagered by this Medicine outwardly
applied; which notwithstanding I have not known happen to any; but can reather
attest by frequent experience on the other side, that it redounds to advantage
rather than hurt. For the more sharp particles of Cantharides, if they be long
applied, being sometimes imbibed more plentifully by the blood, infect its
whole Serum: which Juice so sharpened, as long as it is confounded with the
Balsamic blood, hurts no part; but being separated from it by the Kidneys, it
sometimes brings hurt to them, and frequently not only twitches the neck of the
Bladder by its Acrimony, but sometimes corroding it, causes filth, and little
skins, nay and blood to come away: but in the mass of blood, the same more
sharp, saline-volatile particles do often most notably help; inasmuch as they
destroy the fixed or acid Salts in it, and unlock the consistence of the blood
too much bound up, and so do cause the serous and other morbific recrements
before wrapped up with it, to be separated from it, and to be more easily
dispatched by Urine and Sweat; Vesicatories move Sweat and Urine.
hence Vesicatories being applied long in Fevers do call forth plentiful
Urine and a more easy Sweat. Also they open the obstructed ways, and move
together the portions of Blood or Serum, stagnating or being extravasated in
any place, and restore them to their Circulation. Wherefore they are not used
only to help in serous maladies, but also in those of the blood, yea in a
Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, and in any other Fevers.

Having hitherto showed after what manner Vesicatories operate first on the
Spirits, and then on the Humors and solid parts, it is now our business in the
next place to show both the good and evil effectgs of them, as also the manners
of using them. But that they in the first place operate on the Spirits is
manifest from hence, that they exert no power on the deceased, and it is an ill
Omen in those that are languishing, when Vesicatories have no operation,
because it is an Indication that the Animal Spirits are much dejected, or
abundantly diminished.

Thereofre, The effects of Vesicatories.
it behooves to consider about the due unfolding the energy, force or virtue of
this remedy, what humors it either immediately or mediately evacuates or
alters; and afterward in what Diseases, and bodies how disposed it either
profits or hurts.

First, 1. As to humors of the Skin.
As to the former, the humors that are immediately sent out by a Vesicatory,
drop forth partly from the pores and glandules of the Skin, and partly out of
the mouths of the little Arteries, and partly out of the extremities of the
Nervous fibers; perhaps some little of the Juice newly received, out of the
mouths of the veins, though not much, seems to be carried back. The humors
mediately drawn out by a Vesicatory are those which the aforesaid parts being
emptyed receive elsewhere, and derive them forth.

1. The Skin is a thick Memgbrane consisting of a double Coat, very porous,
also thick set about with most numerous galndules, with fat, as also the ends
of the Vessels and fibers being terminated therein, and thickly woven one
within another. Wherefore, while a portion of it is made bare, the Scars-skin
being taken off with a Vesicatory, and the nervous sibres being twitched, do
bind together, and wreath the glandules and pores, the serous humor contained
in both, is most plentifully squeezed out. And whereas some pores are pervious
into others, the Serum does not only flow out of the place blister'd, but
sometimes into the little holes first so emptyed, a portion of the Serum coming
from the neighboring pores succeeds, and thence by and by sweats out:
wherefore in Patients affected with an Anasarca, the little ulcers raised by a
Vesicatory, exhaust the waters every where in great plenty; and draw them out
of the neighborhood, yea and sometimes at a great distance.

2. 2. In respect of the blood.
The little mouths of the Arteries being uncovered and twitched about the
blistered place, do not only vomit out a portion of the Serum brought to them,
by ordinary custom, but the serous liquor being imbued with the Stimula of the
medicine in the whole mass of blood, immediately is separated more plentifully
from the blood; and at every turn of Circulation a greater plenty thereof is
thrown out by the same mouths of the Arteries continually irritated: Which they
purge and alter.
Moreover together with the Serum as it were so stagnating, and therefore
removed from the whole blood into the little ulcers of the skin, other
recrements and sometimes the morbific matter it self depart in plenty, and are
dispatched forth by the same Emissaries; and for this reason in malignant
fevers, yea in some putrid, that are difficult to be judged of, when the
recrements and corruptions of the blood, unapt to be thrown off, do threaten
the Praecordia or Brain, Vesicatories continually and leisurely draining it, do
frequently yield notable relief; whereunto we may add, that they do also alter
and restore (as we before mentined) the blood degenerate or depraved as to its
Salts, and also by opening or subtiliing its consistence, dispose it toward an
Eucrasie; wherefore, not only in a seaverish state of Blood, but also in a
state otherwise peccant, or of ill Juice, this kind of remedy is often
extremely convenient.

3. 3. In respect of the Nerves and of the humors abounding in them and in the
nervous parts.
Both reason and experience have enough proved, that Vesicatories evacuate a
certain humor from the Nerves and nervous Fibers, and for that cause profit
very much in convulsive distempers: For surely we have in another place clearly
enouth demonstrated, that the watery liquor of the Brain and Nervous sytem,
does sometimes abound with heterogeneous Particles. Also it is manifest by
frequent and familiar observation, that the impurities and recrements of that
liquor, together with the watery Juice, do spontaneously sweat out from the
Nerves and nervous Fibers, when the fluor is raised, and either restagnating
within the mass of blood, are carried off by Urine or by Sweats, or being
deposited within the Cavities of the bowels, are dispatched by Vomit or Stool.
Wherefore, when a Vesicatory is applied, the extremities of the Nerves and
nervous Fibers being made bare, and very much angered, immediately a humor
abounding near their ends is voided; and also the whole Juice planted within
their passages by a long succession, is chafed, and delivered from stagnation;
and the heterogeneous particles mixed with that nervous Juice, being every where
agitated and derived from the Brain, slide toward their newly opened Emissary,
by degrees, and at length are removed wholly forth.

From these things we may collect, For the curing of what Diseases Vesicatories
are convenient.
for the Cure of what Diseases this kind of remedy does chiefly conduce; for by
reason of its evacuation out of the pores and glandules of the skin, as often
as any serous, salt, sharp, or otherwise hurtful humor is collected in those
parts, or their neighborhood, and being excluded from the Circulation of
blood, shall obstinately stick in that place, surely there is no more ready or
easy way afforded for drawintg it forth, than by applying a Vesicatory, 1. In
all cutaneous Distempers.
upon or below the place affected. Wherefore, it is not only indicated by an
Anasarca, or by any foulness or eruptions of the Skin, but moreover a
Vesicatory is required for pains either arthritical or scorbutical, fixed any
where in the extern habit of the body, or in any certain member.

Secondly, In respect of the Blood, Vesictatories are always used in malignant
Fevers, 2. They take away the impurities and ill temperament of the blood.
as well to purge out leisurely any heterogeneous or morbific matter, as to
change it from a disposition either too acid, or salt, or otherwise peccant,
into a right temperament; yea they are of most excellent use in all putrid
fevers of ill habit and hard to be judged of. Also for that cause in the
Scurvy, Leucophlegmatia, This Remedy is profitable in those Diseases which the
blood produces in other parts.
Pica Virginum or Green Sickness, also in any other ill habit of body, this
kind of remedy affords frequently notable help. Moreover not only for the sake
of correcting the blood it self, but besides as often as it being depraved
spreads its corruption on other parts, and so does first beget diseases in the
Head, the Chest, the nether Belly, or Members, and then excites their Fits,
Vesicatories are usually exhibited with success. Wherefore it is a common
remedy in Headaches, a Vertigo, and soporiferous affections, no less than in a
Catarrh or any defluxion either into the Eyes, Nose, Palate, or Lungs, in which
every one without consulting a Physician, will prescribe to themselves
Cantharides for Revulsion. I confess, when I have often been surprised with a
great Cough, with abundant and thick Spittle (whereot I am originally
obnoxious) I have received relief from no other Remedies more than from
Vesicatories; wherefore I am wont, while that distemper does urge, to apply
Medicines drawing blisters first upon the Vertebra's of the Neck, then those
little Ulcers being hcaled, beneath the Ears, and afterward if need require it
upon the Scapula's; for so the serous filth loosened from the consistence of
the blood sweating forth, is derived from the Lungs, and also the mixture of
the blood sonner recovers its temper, inasinuch as after this manner its
enormous salts are destroyed.

Thirdly, 3. Also in all Distempers of the Brain and of the nervous Stock.
In respect of the Humor, Epispasticks, as they are of most common use, so
they are wont to confer great help, in soporiferous, convulsive and painful
distempers, for deriving and evacuating it out of the nervous stock and the
brain it self. Was ever any surprised with a Lethargy, Apoplexy, or Epilepsie,
but that immediately Friends and Attendants however unexpert, have tormented
his Hide with the application of Cantharides? In stupendous convulsie motions,
ascribed usually to nothing less than Witchcraft, I have applied Vesicatories
with great benefit in many parts of the body at once, and I have continued them
above a Month, presently renewing them in fresh places. And also pains that are
fixed and most fiercely tormenting in the membranous parts, are seldom cured
without this administration. For sometimes morbific humors and Particles which
being deeply radicated, yield nothing at all to Purgers or sweating Medicines
or Diuretics, yet have seemed to have been pulled up by the roots by
Vesicatories, as it were remedies laying violent hands on the disease.

But this Remedy although most general is not used to operate so easily and
happily in some Diseases and Constitutions; For what Distases Vesicatories are
intended.
wherefore we may not rashly or indifferently use it toward all persons. For
those who are Nephritick and obnoxious to a frequent and painful Strangury,
scarce ever endure the application scot-free; wherefore, on those that are so
affected we must not use Vesicatories, unless in malignant Fevers, or acute
Cephalic Disea2es, for avoiding the greater Evil.

As to what relates to the various Temperaments and Constitutions of men in
respect of which Vesicatories are used to be more or less convenient or
advantageous: In what Constitutions they agree best.
Concerning these, this threefold notable difference occurs. In the first
place, some persons for the most part endure well the use of this Medicine, and
the little Ulcers raised thereby in the skin, sweat out an Ichor sufficiently
plentfull witout any Dysurie, or great Inflammation of the place blistered; and
then heal of their own accord; which effect succeeds only in blood of a good
temperament, where, to wit, the Salt and Sulphur being moderately and rightly
constituted, there is present an abundant plenty of Serum; whose Juice easily
and more largely separating from the rest of the blood, carries away the
sharper particles of the Medicine imbibed with it self, and partly sweats them
out through the placd blister'd, and partly conveys them out without prejudice
by the Urinary passages; therefore also the advantageous effects now recited
are produced in the mass of blood.

2. Also in whom not.
But secondly this remedy with some does nither well agree, nor operate
profitably; because it rubifies the place very much to which it is applied, or
rather excoriates it with most fierce pain and great inflammation;
notwithstanding the little ulcers made in the ssme place, although they do for
some time torment the patient, yet pour out very small or scarce any Ichor:
Also to these always blister'd with torment, for the most part a violent
Strangury happens. The use of these Vesicatories being troublesome and
unsuccessefull, does frequently to men of a choleric and hotter temperament;
In men of a more hot temperament they torment the part and do not draw forth
the water.
whose blood is endowed with a plentiful Salt and Sulphur, and a small quantity
of Serum, being more thoroughly concocted with the rest. Wherefore, when the
Juice that ought to carry away the more sharp particles of the Medicine, does
neither easily nor plentifully pass from the rest of the blood, (that it may
speedily wash them out) those particles sticking still in the skin, do as it
were infect and impoyson the blood it self, passing through, and for that cause
beingimpeded from its circuit, they cause it to stagnate, and to be gathered
together about the extremities of the Vessels, whence they are inflamed.
Moreover the serous Juice being separated by the Kidneys when of it self it is
little and sharp, and besides becomes stinging from the particles of the
Medicine, it irritated the Neck of the Bladder, and frequently corrodes it by
its acrimony. In others, inasmuch as they draw forth too much Ichor, they are
not profitable.


3. There remains a third Case although more rare, relating to blistering, to
wit, in whom little Ulcers beling raised in the skin, presently pour out the
serous humor in so great abundance, that in a little time it will be necessary
to give repelling Medicines, and that shut the mouths of the Vessels;
otherwise, from too much flowing out of waters, a dissolution of strength, and
a fainting of the Spirits are in danger to ensu. This I have known so
constantly happen to some Patients, that afterward I was fain to restrain
their use of Cantharides although there was need of them; the reason whereof
seems to be, that the blood being endowed with a salt Serum, and more sharp
than it ought to be, has a consistence too easily dissolved: wherefore, that
serous juice being sharp, and fretting of it self, as soon as it is provoked by
the particles of the Medicine loosening the consistence of the Blood too easily
dissolved, immediately breaking out with violence from the mass of blood,
wheresoever there is a passage afforded, it flows out with a full torrent
through the mouths of the vessels gaping in the blistered place. Besides this
too much flowing out of the Serum, The Ulcers of Vesicatories do sometimes
plentifully flow in Fevers, and give Judgment of the Disease.
raised from the first application of the Vesicatory, sometimes happening late
in malignant Fevers, and in others ill, or not at all judged, and remaining a
good while, wholly consumes the morbific matter, and delivers the Patient from
the jaws of Death. In such a Case after the little Ulcers for the first days
have poured out little or a very small quantity of Ichor, at length Nature
attempting a Crisis by this way, a vast Illuvies of Serum flows out from the
same; and so sometimes for many days, nay weeks, continues to flow out, until
the Patient before accounted desperate, recovers his entire Health. Little
Ulcers so abundantly flowing, as it is not easy, They are not to be cured.
so it is not safe to stop them before the whole Mine of theDisease be
consumed. Not long since, a famous Doctor of Physic in London, An Example is
shown.
searcely recovering from a malignant Fever, did copioufly sweat out lchor
daily from places blistered in several parts of his body; after some time (they
being troublesome and tedious) he did apply stronger Repercussives to them all,
and immediately restanined their flux. Those sluices were scarce two days stopped,
but his disease revived, and on the sudden he was affected with sainting of
Spirits, and often swooning, a cold Sweat, and a low weak Pulfe: and whereas he
could not be relieved by any Remedies, however cordial they were, hd dyed
within three days; the cause of which seems to be, that the malignant matter
being suddenly repercussed, fell into the Cardiac Nerves, whose action being
hindered, the vital function quickly failed.

SECT. III. CHAP. IV. Of Fontinels, or Issues.
BEsides Vesicatories, which being as it were the extemporary Emissaries of the
Serum, and other humors externally to be brought forth, are only raised upon
some occasions, and then after their efficacy a little showed, are permitted to
be dried up; there are others esteemed as it were continual Foutains, Issues
rather a preservatory than curatory Remedy.
therefore named Fonticuli or Issues, out of which the Ichor or ferous houmour
flows with a constant Sping. Those former, as they are requisite for the most
part for Cure-sake in acute or other Diseases, whose morbifick matter requires
a quick dispatch, in the first place respect the conjunct cause of the Disease
to be removed; and therefore being more broad, are made only superficial, that
such little Ulcers being large, may evacuate much, and then easily be healed:
but on the other side, Issues being chiefly indicated for preservation, are
ordained to remove or vanquish the procatarctick cause of the Disease:
wherefore they consist of a more narrow orifice, but made more deep through the
thickness of the whole skin, to the end, that while they send out the morbifick
matter in lesser quantity, they may derive it further, and continue longer to
purge it out.

There are three chiefheads of disquisitions concerning Issues, viz. First,
About these, three things are to be enquired into.
what humors these Emissaries chiefly evacuate, and whence they bring them:
Secondly, in what Diseases or Constitutins, they better or worse agree:
Afterward Thirdly in what places, in what from, and with what instruments they
ought to bre made.

1. As to the former, Issues, like Blisters, 1. What humors they evacuate.
purge out all humors fixed within the skin, (although in a less compass,) or
brought through it as well by the sanguiferous, as nervous Vessels, not only as
they provoke, or as it were suck the outer superficies of the skin, but by
piercing through the whole hide or skin, they convey out whatsoever flows from
the sides of the orifice through the broken Vessels, also whatsoever slides
down elsewhere beneath the orifice. Wherefore not only humors accumulated
within the pores of the skin, or glandules, or brought thither by the Arteries,
or Nerves, have conflux to Issues; but moreover the serous recrements under the
skin, that are wont to be tranferr'd, or creep between the interspaces of the
muscles and membranes from place to place, tend every where unto them and find
passage. Moreover an Issue appointed in the way anticipates morbifick humors,
which were formerly wont to be conveyed to other weak and long afflicted parts,
and by such means exempts one while this part, another while that, from their
invasion. Hence either a Gouty, or Nephritick, or Colic matter, and sometimes
a Paralytical, or otherways scorbutical, are frequently intercepted by
Fontinels, in their passage from their Source to their nests or places of
residence, and so are conveyed forth, and the usual assaults of a disease
declined: Neither does this Emissary less purge from thence by degrees the
humors impacted in any part or region of the body, and there causing
prejudice, than water-furrows made for derivation of moisture, and so prevent
or cure a sickly disposition.

2. 2. In what diseases they chlefly prevail.
From these several accounts of assistance, whereby Issues in general are wont
to help, it is easily collected, for what distempers they are chiefly required;
for although there is scarce any disease happens, wherein this remedy is either
hurtful or unprofitable, notwithstanding it seems rather more necessary in
some cases than in others. It is commonly prescribed for almost every disease
of the head, whether outward or in ward: Every one of the ordinary people
procures an Issue as equal to all other Remedies, for the Convulsions of
Infants, or Youths, for Sore-Eyes, KingsEvil, as also for Headache in persons
adult or ancient, for drousie, vertiginous or Cramp like distempers. Neither is
it less celebrated against diseases of the Breast; As who is obnoxious to a
Cough, bloody or consumptive Spitting, or an Asthma that long enjoys his skin
whole? In like manner Issues are commended in affects of the lower Belly;
scarce any Hypochondriacal person or Hysterical woman, in like manner no Gouty
or Cachectical person, but has his skin pierced in many places like a Lamprey.
It would be a vast work to recount here particularly all the Distempers for
which Fontinels are helpful.

3. 3. In what Bodies they agree not.
But really this remedy, nt however advantageous and benign of it self, does
not agree with all persons, nor is it indifferently to be prescribed to every
one. For there are two sorts of men, which though sick, are to be excused from
Issues, inasmuch as this Emissary evacuates too much in some, and too little in
others, or less than is convenient; and in the mean while remains very painful
and intolerable.

Sometimes a Fontinel is not convenient, Viz. First where they evacuate too
much.
because it too much evacuates or consumes the humor or Spirits. For I have
observed in some, that an Issue made in any part of the body, pours out an
immoderate quantity of Ichor, and peccant in quality: for out of it by often
turns, if not continually, a watery, thin and fetid Juice, oftentimes
discoloring the Pea and Coverings with blackness, flows out in great
abundance, and so the strength and flesh is impaired by too great an Efflux
thereof.

The reason whereof seems to be this, Why they often pour out the humor too
much.
that in some persons end ued with an ill dispositon of blood and humors, a
wound being made and hindered from healing up, degenerates straightways into a
silthy and malignant Ulcer; the sides whereof put on the nature of an acid
corruptive ferment, whereby the portions of blood continually forced thither,
are so tainted and dissolved, that the Serum thereof imbued with the dissolved
Sulphur, and other Corruptions, being refused by the Veins, flows out there
copiously. Moreover, this putrefying pollution of an Issue being communicated
to the blood, depraves in some part the whole mass thereof, and so at least (as
also by too much loss of the serous Juice) it is rendered less nutritious:
Besides, from the Sulphur of the blood dissolved near the sides of the Issue
and flowing out with the Serum, the streaming Ichor does so stink, and black
the Covering. Sometimes an Issue pouring out the ichor not immoderately,
consumes the spirits and strength more than it ought, which really we take
cognizance of from the effect, and sometimes not till afterward; Why they
expend the Spirits too much.
inasmuch as some, while they bear about them one or more Issues, remain feeble
and lean; but they being stopped presently become vigorous and more plump.
Moreover, it is a common observation, that many from an Issue raised near the
head, have been presently surprised with a certain defect, and weakness of
sight, insomuch that they have been constrained immediately to heal it up:
which seems to happen for this cause, for that where the provision of spirits
is small, and their consistence very thin, the small losses of them, or of the
Juice from whence they are procreated, if so be they are constant, are
difficultly endured.

But in another and different respect, Issues like Vesicatories are forbid to
some, Issues are likewise inconvenient when they evacuate less than they should
do.
or very cautiously prescribed, for when they evacuate little or nothing at
all, they very much vex the place, where they are made. For in persons endued
with a choleric, or hotter constitution, the mass of blood being thicker than
it ought to be, and less diluted with Serum, becomes more bound in its
consistence; in these the solution of Continuity being made and kept by reason
of the Issue, the blood it self (for that it does not sufficiently discharge
its Serum, whereby it many go away) sticks in the passage, and so being
extravasated, causes a very painful inflammation; and in the mean while, as it
pours out little ichor, it remains as well unusefull as troublesome. The
operation and uses of Fontinels and their indications being designed, we shall
show in what place, in what form, and with what instruments they ought to be
made, and after what fort to be managed.

The places are appointed according to the ends or intentions of Curing by
them, The places of Issues are designed, according as the ends are Evacuation
Gineral, or Secondly, Evacuation and Revulsion, or both that and derivation.
which chiefly are these three, viz. 1. A general Evacuation of humors from
the whole body. 2. An Evacuation and also a revulsion from some particular
member. 3. An Evacuation and also a derivation from some particular member. In
respect of the first it is expedient that an Issue be made in the lest arm; The
fecond Intention requires it far from the part affected, and the Third near the
part.

For these ends, viz. one while for this, another while that or the other
Fontinels are made in all parts of the Body, viz. in the Head, Breast, Abdomen,
in the Arms and Thighs, and in most parts of each of these, either by Incision,
or Cautery, or piercing throngh, and in their holes or orisices Pease, or
wooden Pease, Pellets or Pledgets, are put to keep them open. We will observe
the principal places and kinds of Issues by running through the members of our
body.

1. A Fontinel is prescribed by some to be burnt by a Cautery in the Coronal
Suture, 1. In the Coronal Suture.
and is commended for exhausting and evacuating humors out of the brain and
its outer Coverings. Although some use this in familiar practice, yet I have
found by experience in some it does less happily succeed, insomuch that I have
ordered many Issues to be stopped that have been made on the top of the head,
being instructed herein from Reason and Experience; for that the blood
transferres more feculency toward the place where it was wont to lay aside its
recrements, and deposites them in the whole vicinage, and chiefly in the part
affected, (as being the weaker and more susceptible part) whence a Disease is
oftener augmented than cured. For the same reason, viz. for the derivation of
the humors from the inner head outward, some form Issues in the forepart of
the Head over the sagittal Suture, others in the hinder part of the Head about
the beginning of the Lamboides, but the same exception remaings against both as
the former. Issues in the fore and hinder part of the head.
And doubtless more rightly does an Issue in the Arm anticipate the morbifick
matter that is wont to be deposited about the head, or makes revulsion in the
Thigh, and raised a little beneath the head, derives from thence. For this
reason in painful distempers of the brain, and Meninges, we cut a deep hole in
the Nape of the Neck in Children and Youths; but for those grown up, and Old
men, we apply Cauteries on either side the Spine between the Shoulders or the
Homoplatas, and in the same places we make incision for two Fontinels capable
of many Pease, Between the Shoulders.
often with very great success. As to holes cut or burnt behind the Ears, or a
Seton with a skane of Silk drawn through the Lobes thereof, I have seen them
rarely with any success, but osten very troublesome; Inasmuch as a solution of
Unity made in these places, neither discharges much Ichor, nor for any long
space; for though the hole or orisice be filled with a Pease, or Pill, it will
be covered in spite of all endeavors to the contrary by the Cuticula, or skin
growing under.

Issues in the back do notably help diseases not only of the Head by
Evacuation, Which are profitable in many diseases.
and derivation of the morbific matter, but also in all Gouts, Stone and
Colicks, by anticipating the fuel of the Disease, and by intercepting it while
it tends to its feats: which really is plainly proved by experiments and obser
vations taken from the help of the Patients.

Fontinels between the Shoulders, also in the Arm or Thigh, conduce to the
evacuating or anticipating, in pectoral Diseases, the humors flowing to the
Lungs, and to the drawing back those deposited there. How an Issue cut in the
Chest between the Ribs does sometimes more immediately derive the consumptive
matter from the Lungs, we have elsewhere showed.

The Region of the Abdomen seems unapt for bearing an Issue in any part
thereof; notwithstanding the practice of some, An Issue in the lest
Hypochondrion.
although it be more rare, is much famed for a large Issue capable of many
Pease to be burnt with a Cautery upon the Region of the Spleen for any
hypochondriac affection. I have known it of sinall benefit to some, at least
not recompensing the trouble and pain of such a remedy.

Some time since I successefully cured a weakness in the Loins obstinate to all
other remedies, In the Groin.
by a Fontinel in the Groin, and in another patient an inveterate Sciatica. For
surely the glandulous Emunctories settled in that place, do imbibe very many
recrements of the blood and nervous Juice; which if they be thoroughly and
continually discharged from them by a fit vent, it will much conduce to exempt
the contiguous parts from any morbifick Mine.

The Thigh being a member soft and large in bulk, In the Thigh.
seems apt enough for enduring many and great Issues, to wit, those which may
purge away plentiful humors from the whole body. Yet it does not succeed so
with many patients, partly because of its figure too much declining, like a
Cone invers'd, the Ligature containing the Pease in the orifice is not easily
kept on, and partly because a solution of the Unity being made among the
concourse of so many Tendons, it frequently becomes inflamed and painful;
insomuch that fometimes it has been necessary that it should immediately be
stopped up, to withdraw the trouble of pain and of lameness. Notwithstanding it
succeeds better in some Patients, for that an inflammation does not always
ensue upon the place where the incision was made, and that the Ligature has
remained immovable to those that tie their hose above the knee.

Moreover, A fit place in the member to be chosen that it may be made far from
Vessels and Tendons.
as concerning Issues, it is requisite to choose a convenient place not only in
the body, but also in the very member where incision is made, which chiefly
calls for the judgment of an expert Physician or Surgeon; for careful
provision must be made, lest a Cautery or incision be made upon, or too near
the Tendons or greater Vessels; but let the Fontinel be made not in the very
body of the muscle, but in the interspace or distance between the muscles;
where the orifice, as John Heurnius learnedly observes, ought to pass through
the whole skin so far, until the little membrane of the muscle underneath be
penetrated. Wherefore, this part of Surgery is not rashly to be allowed to
Quacks and others ignorant of Anatomy, for that from this being ill done, not
only a frustration of the benefit, but from thence frequently great mischief
happens, and sometimes to the hazard of life.

It is not needful to describe the figure and use of the cutting Instrument,
Symptoms accidental to Issues how to be cured.
together with the manner of preparing and compounding Causticks for making
Issues, inasmuch as it is notorious to the common people; yet it behooves us to
handle in what manner the symptoms which happen to these Emissaries after they
are made, may be cured, and it will not be besides the matter to discourse,
what do either impede or pervert their powers.

Whereas many and several distempers happen to Issues, help is not required for
them all, but only for such as are of greatest moment: Wherefore there will be
need of help, 1. Wheresoever an inflammation ensues upon the part or place
where it is. What chiefly require help.
2. If the Orifice vent more or less Ichor than it ought. 3. If the Ulcer shall
be apt spontaneously to be dried up, and covered over with a skin: or if it be
prone to abound with spongious flesh growing about the sides. As to lesser
faults, as when the Ulcer shall break forth into frequent Haemorrhagies, or
change its place creeping into another less convenient, with many other ways by
which it prevaricates, it will not be worth our labor to discourse here.

1. 1. Inflammation.
An inflammation frequently happens to an issue, and that so painful
sometimes, that it threatens a Sphacela, yea and sometimes causes one. But such
an affection ensues either upon the orifice new made, or happens after wards by
reason of the blood and humors, occasionally agitated and rushing frequently
and in heaps to that part.

When a Fontinel is made, Which happens to a new Issue, the Reason of it and
Cure proposed.
immediately by reason of solution of the Unity, and consequently by reason of
the circuit of blood somewhat hindered in that place, a certain inflammation and
ulcerous pain happens to some patients; but in some endued with a fervent
blood, and whose Serum is less diluted, this ensues much fiercer. For the blood
being brought thither by the Arteries, the ends of the Vessels being cut off
and obstructed, it can neither go out nor be returned immediately by the Veins,
but sticking there in the passage it is accumulated more and more, and being at
length extravasated, and filling and stopping all the pores of the contiguous
skin and flesh, it raises a tumor with redness, and heat most intense, which
coming to pass, either the blood so heaped up, and extravasated, An
Inflammation has three manner of Crisis's.
in a snort space of time becomes immovable by reason of constipation, and for
that cause being as it were divided from the rest of the mass, it is
extinguished, and suffering death produces a Sphacela upon the part: or
secondly, the blood so stagnating, is after a sort agitated as to its
particles, and enjoying always a vital flame, and made more intense by the
same, it is as it were boiled thoroughly, and so is changed into a Pus, to be
evacuated by an abscesse: Or thirdly, which happens more frequently, and ought
always to be procured in our case, the blood provoking an inflammation is
reduced into the Vessels and restored to Circulation by other passages
whereinto it is constrained.

But that it may be reduced, these two things will be necessarily requisite:
First, The ordinary and best these is, that the extravasated blood may be
reduced.
That it be much diluted with the Serum flowing thither abundantly, or rather
thrust forward into the part: Then secondly, that the Vessels behind the Tumor
being emptyed, may swallow up the blood diluted, and driven back by the Serum;
for the blood being forced toward the Tumor, whenas it cannot advance
forward, yet its bulk being diminished, that it may be able to return back, it
dischages the Serum plentifully from it self, and drives it for wards into the
places obstructed; which entering under the stagnating blood, dilutes it, and
succeeding into its places, forces it back into the passages of the Vessels,
and in the mean while that Serum tending for ward exhales by the pores;
insomuch that the blood which was extravasated being diluted and forced back by
the Serum, and the Serum it self evaporated, How it is done.
the swelling with the Inflammation vanishes leisurely away. But if (as in more
hot temperaments it comes often to pass) the blood being extravasated and
impacted in the pores, be not diluted by the Serum brought to it in great
plenty, it will not only stick there pertinaciously, but it will irritate a
fiercer Phlogosie with a Fever, and sometimes other dreadful symptoms. So not
long ago, when a renowned Divine, endowed with a thicker and hot blood, had an
Issue cut in the inside of his Leg, although the skin only was cut, an
inflammation followed presently, which within a few days so cruelly increased,
that it could hardly be impeded by any Remedies from degenerating into a
Gangrene. Wherefore, when the blood being extravasated through the solution of
the Union, and wanting the afflux of the Serum whereby it may be diluted and
brought back, proceeds into an Inflammation, What Remedies there is need of.
Fomentations and Cataplasms of Emollients being outwardly administered, do
oftentimes bring help; inasmuch as the moist and sost particles falling from
these, go under the blood stagnating, and dllute it, and so pleasingly moving
it together, cause it to return the more easily into the Vessels; hence it is,
that the moist applications of this king being administered outwardly, do supply
the defect of the intern Serum requisite to dilute the blood; For this end
oftentimes pureing and bleeding are required.
notwithstanding that the blood being so diluted and irritated into motion,
might be rendered fit for its Circulation, there is also need that the Vessels
which should receive it should be enough emptyed, for which purpose Phlebotomy
and Purgation are frequently of necessary use, besides a slender Diet. And
indeed according to usual custom, we purge Cacochymicks or Plethoricks a little
before, or after the Issue is made, and frequently breathe a vein in those
Patients. Neither are these Remedies any fit in an Issue new made, to provide
against or discharge an Inflammation, but also they are advantageous as often
as that distemper ensues upon an old Orifice of the skin. For as often as the
blood being very impure, and together growing feaverishly hot, An Inflammation
sometimes happens to old Issues.
does enter into a separating turgescence, it frequently hppens that it
discharges its recrements and feculencles, otherwise unapt to be purged out,
about the Fontinel, and there being impeded in its Circuit by them accumulated
together, it is extravasated, and for that cause brings on a fierce Phlogosis.
Such an affection not long since happening in a renowned ancient person, and
being neglected from its commencing, within a short space of time degenerated
into a Gangrene; notwithstanding from which by the help of appropriated
remedies carefully exhibited, as well inward as outward, he escaped not without
great danger of life. At some other time hereafter perhaps, when treating of
Cutaneous diseases, we will speak more largely of the Aetiologies and Remedies
of an Inflammation, and of an Abscesse or Impostumation and Spachela. At the
present we will consider the other Symptoms of Fontinels. 2. An Issue pouring
out too much and stinking Ichor requires remedy.


2. Whenever an Issue throws out too much Ichor, which for the most part is
thin and very stinking, and sometimes discolored, so that the so vast loss of
humor, and that stinking, not to be endured, do require a Remedy; in such a
case there will be two chief Therapeutick Intentions, viz. First, that the
mixture of blood be strengthened, lest its consistence should be too prone to
dissolution and serous efflux: Of which there are two Intentions.
Secondly, That the tone of the place ulcerated by the Fontinel be preserved,
and rendered exempt from any putredinal ferment, so that no taint being there
lodged in secret, do impart any pollution on the blood passing through in
Circulation, whereby it being infected, might presently go into parts, and the
Serum be constrained there to discharge it self more abundantly.

This former scope of Curing enjoins scarce any thing but moderate purging by
intermission, First, that the Temperament of the blood be restored.
and a regular Course of Diet, viz. that the Patient be restrained from all
surfeit and excess, as to the plenty of Nourishment, the quality, and seasons
of receiving it; likewise more especially from small Wines, Cider and other
acid liquors, whereby the blood is wont to be dissolved into effluxes. For
indeed those that are so affected, do smartly pay for any error or irregularity
in Diet, pain being immediately irritated about the Issue.

For due preservation of the tone of the place where the Issue is made,
Secondly, to preserve the tone of the part ulcerated.
and exempting it from putrefaction, let sedulous care be endeavored, that all
nastiness be declined, that both the solid things put into the orifice, as also
the Coverings, whether Plasters or Leaves of Ivy, or Oil clothes, be changed
twice every day; for in some persons any of these will quickly contract a
stench, and presently cause the Ulcer of the Issue to putrify. But if this
tends to putrefaction, immediately in place of a Pease or wooden Pill, let a
Pill of Virgins Wax be put in, incorporated with red Sanders and Verdigrease:
Moreover, let a Fomentation withal, Morning and Evening, with the Decoction of
St. John's Wort, Yarrow, Centaury, etc. be made use of.

3. Thirdly, a dry and troublesome Issue requires help.
Sometimes a Fontinel like a dry Fountain pours out little or no humor; the
reason whereof is usually, either for that orisice being not deep enough, does
not penetrate the whole skin, which is cured by piercing it deeper; or the
Ulcer though hollow and large enough, yet remains always dry, because the Serum
does not easily nor in plenty separate from the mass of blood, by reason of its
consistence being too much bound up; and then the only remedy is, to wear solid
things within the Orifice, which may more proyoke or twitch the mouths of the
Vessels, for which purpose Pease made of Ivy-wood, or Box, or of the roots of
Gentian or Hermodactyls, are often used with success.

4. An Issue sometimes will heal up notwithstanding all endeavors to the
contrary.
It often happens, that the Orifice of an Issue being too mallow, and sparingly
sweating out lchor, is grown over with a thin skin with the Pease included
therein, and the deep hole is healed up quite; for which fault there is scarce
an apt remedy to be administered. Wherefore it is better to close that Issue
(rather than alsays in vain to fret the skin) or transfer it to some other
place.

5. Sometimes it has spongy flesh growing about the lips.
The sore of an Issue tending to healing, and being forbidden, often procures a
spongious flesh about the edges, and sometimes in the hollowness it self; the
reason whereof is, because the nutritious liquor being conveyed to the ends of
the Arteries and nervous fibers, and being not immediately washed away by the
serous Ichor, fixes there, and beginning to be assimilated stretches out both
these vessels to fill the cavity with flesh, and into these rudiments of flesh
both the blood and Animal spirits flow most copiously; and the blood int he
mean time being conveyed thither, forms sprigs of veins within that bulk for
its return: Not with standing this flesh as yet rude and without shape, being
excluded for the most part from the hole, grows up over the edge; and when in
this manner it rises higher than that it may possibly be covered and clothed
with skin and Cuticula, it remains always naked and spongious, This excrescency
is easily enough cured by sprinkling thereon Escharotick powders, of burnt
Alum, Colcothar, or Mercury precipitate; for remedies of this kind do eat away
the flesh so luxuriating by their acrimony as well as stiptickness, repel the
nutritious humor, The reason thereof delivered.
and lock up the mouths of the Vessels. As often as that superfluous flesh
increases about the sides of the Issue, it is a sign that the nutritious humor
flows thither more plentifully than the excrementitious; and for that cause in
Patients so affected that vent proves not always so benign. Wherefore, under
pretext of this reason many are averse to that remedy (though surely it is
harmless to most, although not alike useful and advantageous to all.) We have
before considered the chief disadvantages thereof, as likewise the scandals
objected thereunto; yet there remains another thing according to the opinion or
rather error of the Vulgar, a notable objection against Issues, which we will
here discuss for a Conclusion.

With many in England a contumacious opinion is grown up (I know not whether it
be so in other Countries) That one or more Fontinels dispose to barrenness. The
common error is that Issues dispose to barrenness.
Wherefore this kind of remedy, however otherwise conducible to health, is
scrupulously forbidden to all married Women that desire Children; of which
Prohibition there is no reason as yet made out, but only Stories related of
certain Women that have been barren having Issues; when it were as easy to
enumerate more barren women without Issues, and many others that have been
fruitful with them; and truly I use to retort (whenas there is no need of any
other refuting) this as a chief Argument against that opinion.

SECT. III. CHAP. V. Of the Diseases of the Skin, and of their Remedies.
AFter Attractive Remedies of the Cuticula and Skin, namely Issues and
blistering Medicines delivered before, by a certain Law of Method we are
induced to handle Diseases of those parts, and other kinds of Remedies of
diverse sorts; the true Aetiology of which will afford matter of most pleasant
as well as profitable speculation.

As for the fabric and uses of those parts, A Description of the Cuticula.
it needs not that I should here repeat all things already accurately
described, and well known in Books of Anatomy. It may suffice us to note
concerning the Cuticula, that this outward skin is thin and dense, without
blood and without sense, as destitute of Vessels and Fibers, which cleaving to
the inward skin, coners and defends it from outward injuries. This is every
where full of pores, into whose orifices the Vessels discharging sweat do open,
which Malpighius viewing more accurately with a Microscope, a little before
their gaping or opening, affirms to be endued with little Valves, for the
retaining or free breating forth of sweat: but I consess they lie hid to me.

The Cuticula being taken away by Fire, or Phaenigmons, the skin appears naked,
Of the Skin.
and looks red, by reason of the sanguiferous vessels. But this is a thicker
membrane, as to its greatest parts, formed of filaments of Vessels bringing
blood, of Nerves, and of nervous Fibers, variously interwoven and complicated
among themselves, among which numerous Glandules and Lymphaducts, or Vessels
discharging Sweat and Vapors, are thickly interposed. The substance hereof is
related to be double by most Anatomists, the outer is nervous, the inner
fleshy, or rather glandulous; for an example of which, the Rind of an Orange is
brought. If the skin be viewed naked by a Microscope, by the renowned
Malpighius's observations, The pyramidal Papillae the Organ of feeling.
First there presents it self a body in form of a Net, in whose thick holes are
contained not only passages of Sweat, but also very many Teats in form of a
Pyramid, rising out of the skin in parallel ranks, and passing into the
Cuticula, where being stretched out in length, they are divided as it were into
many little Fibers; which the same Author has determined to be the sense of
touching. Besides these, the substance of the skin contains very many
Glandules, by which means the Lympha or watery matter is carried by the
Lymphaducts or excretory Vessels, out of the Arteries to the Pores. The Pores
and Glandules of the Skin.
For indeed the most accurate Stenon has observed, that its Glandules lie
under every pore; which become either greater or lesser, according to the use
of sweating: the sweat or vapors continually streaming out of these by the
excretory vessels, avoiding the excrements, do moisten the nervous Teats in
their passages, lest perchance they should grow dry.

As to the pores or passages of Sweat, The Pores twofold, greater and lesser.
they are discovered by a Microscope to be of two kinds, viz. The greater, in
most of which the roots of the hairs are implanted, and by interspaces, on both
sides of each wrinkle of the skin, are disposed in a parallel rank: Or
secondly, they are the lesser Pores, which being numberless, do fill up all the
spaces between the former in most thick Punctums or pricks. For indeed the
whole skin with its wrinkles, appears like a Field furrowed by a Plow, and
after wards harrowed with the ranks turned, or rather oblique; so that its
ground being eminent above the surrows of either kind, there remain in its
plain, Figures very much of a Rhomboidal or a Diamond-fashion; The wrinkles and
furrows of the Skin.
and accordingly as those furrows, with their banks or flattes, are either
shorter and less, or deeper and greater, the texture of the skin appears either
delicate and thin, or thick and course. This kind of Constitution although it
be most owing to ones birth, and to the primogenial growing together of the
humors, is however manifoldly altered by reason of the various accidents of
the ensuing life. A more gross Diet, difficult labor, injury of Air, From
whence the Roughness or Fineness of the skin.
and chiefly excess either of heat or cold, render a skin more rough: also
contrariwise a nice and delicate education renders its tone more fine and soft.

That the skin may become more neat, smoothe and equal, it avails much that all
its pores be filled with a benign, mild and unctuous humor; for so, whilst
all its pores become full, Depends much on the Humors filling the pores.
and extended, the level of the whole skin appears more smooth:
Notwithstanding, if a vicious humor furnish those pores, or the benign humor
that was in them be too much exhausted, for that cause the skin will become
rough and full of wrinkles. Wherefore if any endowed with a most soft and even
skin, shall wet their hands in a Soap Lather, Lie, or Limewater, or also for
some time in warm Blood, presently the furrows and wrinkles will grow greater
and deeper, the saline humor being drawn out by the other Salts out of the
pores; wherefore more delicate women scrupulously decline washing with Soap or
any other things that furrow the skin.

Neither only the humor being too much exhausted out of the pores, but also
retained in the same either unduely or above measure, From the sudden shutting
up of the pores.
does render the skin rough and unequal. The hairy pores (which though they are
not the only, yet are much the passages of Sweat) do constantly send out more
plentiful Effluvia's for the sake of transpiration, wherefore they ever seem
greater and more open; but if it shall happen that these are suddenly
obstructed by any outward cold, the Vapors being restrained within, In the
larger pores are the roots of the hairs.
they do every where swell up the skin about the places where they break out,
and lift it up into little heaps: from hence of at any time our bodies are
exposed naked to the Northern wind, or are plunged in a River, the exterior
Superficies before smooth and soft, will become rough and rugge, like the skin
of a a Goose new pulled. Without doubt those greater pores, being, according to
the furrows of the skin, planted parallel and as it were in a rank after the
manner of a Quincunx or exact Square, are made as so many pitts for the
planting of hairs as it were trees; for so they appear in four-footed Beasts,
and in some hairy parts of men.

These things being thus briefly declared concerning the Cuticula and Skin, as
touching their frame and uses, there is way enough made to search and unfold
the Diseases of the same parts, and the reasons of healing them.

Wherefore first scarce any Diseases properly belong to the Cuticula, No
Diseases of the Scars-skin.
it being devoid of life and sense. This sometimes being too thick hinders
Transpiration, and also sometimes by reason of accidents in some places it
grows too thick and callous: but it self being clearly unsensible it is never
sick, notwithstanding this is a cause that some distempers which might be blown
off by Transpiration, do cleave to the superficies of the skin, inasmuch as the
dregs of the blood, and humors, and recrements being thrust forward outward,
The cause of some.
having passed through the whole skin, when they cannot evaporate wholly by
reason of the thickness of the Scarf-skin, being fastened in the outed skin,
produce various discolourations, and stains thereof; of which fort are those
spots called Heat spots, Freckles, or Ephelides, as also scorbutical and
malignant spots, also Pimples and whatsoever other stains without any swellings
or roughness do seem to besprinkle the skin or outward Scarf-skin, with marks,
or some little disfigurings. The Cutaneous distempers reckoned up.


But truly as to what belongs to the distempers of the Skin it self in general,
since they are various and manifold, they are wont to be distinguished under a
various respect, and chiefly that they are either with or without a Tumor; we
have but now taken notice of these latter ones.

Distempers of the Skin with a Tumor, Distempers in the skin with or without a
tumor.
are either universal, dispersed throughout the whole body; or are particular,
being raised in these or those members, dispersed or as it were by chance.

The former either happen upon a Fever, as chiefly the Smallpox, Measles, or
other malignant wheals, whereto also may be added the fleeting pushes of
Infants; or happening without a fever, as the Itch, Tetters, and leprous
distempers.

The outward particular Tumors, or dispersed ones, for the most part do not
seize upon the skin only, but also upon the parts subjected, viz. now the
carneous, another while the tendinous, or membranous or glandulous, and for
that cause do exist of a sundry disposition, and of a diverse form. To
discourse particularly concerning all these, and to assign the reasons of their
Causes, and Cure of every one, would be a matter not only of an entire Tract,
but of a great Volume: Wherefore, for the present we will only briefly speak of
the Distempers merely or for the most part Cutaneous (of which sort are all
spots and Pimples, as also the Scab, or Itch, Tetters, or leprous Maladies):
perhaps, an opportunity may happen, when I may treat more specially of Tumors
of every kind.

First then (that we may begin with Spots as Affections of lesser moment) those
offer themselves called Ephelides, because they are chiefly caused from the
Suns heat; 1. Spots called Ephelides.
for that cause frequent in the Spring, and increase most in Summer, again in
Winter they soon vanish. Moreover, whereas they happen in the more beautiful
persons, The description of the Ephelides.
and of a thinner skin, they break out chiefly in those places where the
Cuticula is most thick, and is exposed to the Sun and Air, viz. the face and
hands, of a color yellowish or brown, in magnitude of a Flea-bite, but they
exist unequal and irregular as to their Figure. These differ little or nothing
from those brownish or yellowish spots which some call Lentigines or Freckles,
which consisting of the bigness of a Lentil, mark the parts of the face as it
were with many drops.

The matter of these seems to be a more thin portion of the choleric humor,
The matter and cause thereof.
allured outward by the force of the Sun attenuating it, and opening the pores
of the skin; which beginning to be evaporated, is fixed to the inside of the
outmost skin or Cuticula, which it cannot pass through. Surely it is a sign
these spots proceed from Choler, or other yellow scums of the blood, because
they are chiefly familiar to them whose hair is yellow. Moreover, the reason is
manifest enough, because they arise more often in a fair Complexion, and in
those parts exposed to the Sun and Air; for their more thin skin transmits the
humor rarefied by the solar heat so far until it is retained by the thicker
Scarf-skin, near the places of issuing out. This affection presages or
indicates no evil, as to the state of health; and although in appearance it
represents something of deformity, notwithstanding that is made good again,
insomuch that it signisies them so spotted, to be endued with a more pure
Constitution.

Besides these small freckly spots there are others much larger, Lenticular
Spots.
above a hands breadth in magnitude, which deform the skin in diverse places,
especially about the breast and back, one while with brown, another while with
pale or blackish spots. These at certain times, as I have observed in many,
being wont to arise in certain parts and vanish again, are commonly called
Liver-spots, Liver Spots falsely so called.
and those most marked with them are thought to have a Liver less sound, or at
least not well sanguifying; which not withstanding is not true on this account,
but only inasmuch as the choleric humors, when they are not enough separated
from the mass of blood within the Liver, being thrust for ward to the skin do
so discolor it: which fault also is imputed to the Spleen; for truly this
deformity arises, because that the feculencies and excrements of the blood,
when not enough received by the Vessels of separation, are together dlluted
with the Serum, with which they are conveyed to the skin, and in the same place
being cast off by the blood, and deserted by the serous Juice while it is
evaporating, they are fastened about the outer little holes or pores, even as a
mossie down cleaving to the strait places of a River.

These spots chiefly appear in Summer, and most upon the Breast and Back, The
Description and Cause of them.
viz. at which time and in those places men are most apt to sweat: for that
serous Juice which brought out those dregs from the mass of blood, into the
strait places of the skin, leaves them there, altogether unable to evaporate.
This indisposition has nothing of evil joined to it, nor is it a symptom of
any present disease, nor does it prefage any suddenly approaching; Moreover,
when for the most part it happens to places that are covered, and brings no
deformity or trouble, there seems little or no need of Cure: but because an
opinion is frequent with the Vulgar, that the Liver is eminently endangered by
these spots, and necessarily requires Medicine, for this cause to satisfy the
importunate, craving Medicines, we are wont to prescribe, besides extern
Cosmeticks, even inward hepatical Remedies; whose use although not very
necessary, yet because from thence the depuration of blood, and opening
obstructions of the bowels are dispatched, they are not altogether in vain. The
inward Medicines profitable to this design, are described before among the
hepatical Remedies: The Topical or outward are altogether the same in these as
in any other kind of spots; some select forms of which we will annex.

Concerning Pestilential, Pestilential and scorbutic spots.
as also Scorbutical spots, of which we have purposely in another place spoken,
there is no need here to repeat the same; especially because for these another
method is required, than for those but now described; inasmuch that in one kind
of spots, Medicines for the most part outward are wont to be administered,
without Splanchnic or Cordial medicines, but in the other kinds only inward
medicines, without any that have reference to the Skin.

Wherefore, The Cure of the Spots.
as to the spots called Freckles, Lentigines, and those commonly called
Hepatical, they properly belong to the Art of Beautifying; and for the taking
away these Deformities of the Skin, only Cosmetick Remedies are prescribed,
without any method of healing. There is every where a plentiful harvest of
these with curious Ladies, and others, that are solicitous of cleansing their
skins; yet all these, forasmuch as they only respect two Intentions of healing,
may be reduced to these two heads; viz. either by opening the pores of the skin
and Scarf-skin, and sometimes by excoriating this, they do endeavor to have
the humor drawn outward, and also to be evaporated; or on the other side, and
not with less success, those things are administered that may drive back the
spotty matter, and force it inwards. We will annex here in order some usual
Forms of the Topics of either sort, being rationally found out, and frequently
made use of happily enough; because it is not lawful without offense of the
Great Ones to detect the more secret mysteries of the Cosmetick Art, Forms of
Cosmeticks.
and to profane it among the Vulgar.

First therefore for cleansing the skin, 1. Which cleanse the skin.
and drawing forth the matter of Spots:

Take of a small ly of Salt of Tartar four ounces, Oil of bitter Almonds made
by expression, as much as suffices, in such a proportion let it be mingled,
that the liquor turn presently white, and so remain; with this mixture let the
parts be anointed morning and evening, and gently chased.

Take of Aron-roots, Bryony, Solomons-Seal, of each one ounce, Powder of
Fenugreek: seeds one dram, of Camphir half a dram, these being beat together,
pour on them three ounces of Oil of Tartar per deliquium, let it be pressed and
applied with a rag twice a day.

Take of quick Brimstone in powder one ounce, black Soap two ounces, tie them
in a rag, and hang them in a pint of Vinegar for nine days; after let it be
used by washing the part twice a day, and chafing it.

Secondly, 2. Which repel the spotty matter.
For the other intention of discussing the spots from the skin, and repelling
their matter inwards, Lac Virginis was a renowned Remedy among the Ancients,
and is as yet commended and made use of by many: The Preparations are well
enough known, Viz. A Solution of Litharge made in distilled Vinegar, by pouring
of Oil of Tartar per deliquium, Lac Virginis.
it is precipitated into a white liquor like milk, with which let the face and
hands be washed twice a day, and gently chafed. A remedy like this or of the
same virtue is prepared out of the solution of red Lead or Ceruse made in the
same Menstruum, and precipitated with Alum Water, or a Solution of Sal Gem. Or,

Take of Camphir sliced two drams bruised in a glass Mortar, pour thereon
leisurely the juice of one Lemmon, then add one pint of White Wind, strain it,
and let the remaining Camphir tied in a rag be hung in the Glass.

Take Verdigriese four Ounces, pour thereon two pints of White Wind Vinegar,
being put into a Cucurbite-glass, let them be distilled in Sand, let the
Phlegm be kept for use, with which let the face be anointed twice a day.

For this purpose also the Phlegm of Vitriol does notably conduce. It suffices
some to use the distilled simple water of Bean-flowers, or of Fumitory, or the
liquor of a Vine distilling from the Boughs cut in the Springtime.
Notwithstanding the more nice, and those who chiefly boast to understand this
Art, are scarce content with any Remedies but Mercurial, wherefore the
following water is commended and sold by Empiricks at a great rate against all
foulness of the face whatsoever.

Take of Mercury sublimate one ounce powdered, A Mercurial Cosmetick water.
put it in a Tin Vessel with three pints of Spring Water, let them stand twenty
four hours space, ever and anon stirring it with a wooden Spatula until the
whole liquor grows black, which notwithstanding being philter'd through brown
Paper, becomes clear; with a rag or a feather dipped in this, let the face be
gently done over once or twice in a day.

This Remedy does most notably help against all cutaneous Deformities, Its
Virtue.
viz. inasmuch as it drives away the humors within the little pores, and those
impacted within the little holes howsoever small, dissolves the inveterate and
stubborn combination of Salts or Sulphurs, and restores the whole skin, (where
it is applied) though evilly framed as to its pores, and makes it well
colored. Wherefore it is useful not only to cleanse the spots of the face,
but also to take away wheals and its redness, as also the Disease of the
Erisypelas. Moreover, sometimes it happens that many parts of the face,
especially the Nose and Forehead, are marked with most thick Specks looking
black, as if burnt by Gunpowder, which proceeds from hence, because the
sudatory pores are sometimes filled with a more thick black humor, another
while with little worms with black heads (which little Insects being squeezed
out of the pores, and exposed to the Sun, are easily seen to live, and to move
themselves) and in such a malady of the skin, no Lotion or Ointments are wont
to profit, but what are Mercurial; notwithstanding to this Honey there is a
Thorn at hand more than enough malignant. Its familiar use is not safe.
For the particles of the Mercury together with its Salts (by which they are
divided and sharpened into small bits) being applied to the face, do shake off
the peccant and uncleanly matter out of the Pores, and expel it thence, but
having driven it back, they pursue it in, and readily insinuate with the Blood
and nervous Liquor, whose temperaments they prejudice. Yea by meeting with
these they imprint very often on the Brain and sometimes on the Praecordia and
other parts, their virulency that can never be wiped out. From hence it is
frequently observed, that women or men that have long used Mercurial
Cosmeticks, are troubled with a Vertigo, and convulsive Distempers, or are
obnoxious to paralytical, and their Teeth grow black, and sometimes fall out.

SECT. III. CHAP. VI. Of the Mange or Scab with the Itch.
AFter the more simple maladies of the skin, viz. those which happen without
any Tumor and Ulceration, and only deform it with spotted appearances, Psora a
disease properly cutaneous.
we will now in order treat of the more grievous Affections, and those which
dissolve the Unity, and especially of the Psora or Scab, which in sundry and
srequent places of the whole Body does much infest the skin with a painful
Itch, and with small Pustles and breakings out, being sometimes dry and often
scaly, and another while moist and disposed to ulceration; and a malady of this
sort is most properly the Disease of that part, considering it frequently
begins in the very skin by reason of some outward Contagion, and often receives
Cure by certain Remedies applied to the skin only, at least the reason of both
holds so far, that it is seldom otherwise undertook or perfectly cured.

The Psora or Scab is vulgarly described to be a breaking out of Pustules and
wheals throughout the whole body, here and there, Its description.
procured from a sharp and salt humor heaped up in the Pores of the skin, and
that it may be discussed from thence, induces a notable Itch, and a necessity
of scratching.

That we may search duly into the causes of this Disease, and the reason of the
symptoms, we will more deeply enquire concerning the matter effecting and the
conjunct cause thereof, that it may certainly be known of what sort that humor
is which is heaped up within the skin, by what means it is either generated
there, or comes from some other parts, afterward in what pores or little
places it is contained, and how endeavoring to break out, it does create so
troublesome an Itch.

Wherefore about the origin of this Disease, What humor its matter is of.
that we may not impute the fault with the Ancients to the Liver or Spleen, the
matter thereof is not any particular humor of the four commonly supposed ones,
not Phlegm, nor yellow Choler, nor black, Not any of the four common humors.
neither also the blood apt of it self to be extravasated; moreover neither
does it seem to consist of two or more of these humors mixed together. For
though such humors be granted, notwithstanding if this Disease always consist
of them, it would not so easily be caught by a mere and light contagion, But a
humor placed in the Glandules of the skin.
or receive Cure by an Ointment alone. Wherefore it is rather to be supposed,
that the morbific matter is the humor of the Lympha constantly resting in the
glandules of the skin; notwithstanding degenerating from its genuine
disposition, that is to say, its volatile-salt, into an acid or otherwise
offending disposition. For when the continual Supplements from the blood come
to this so depraved, and uncessantly evaporating, these Juices new and old do
not easily agree, or are united, but boiling together after the mutual custom
of dissimilar Salts, they are coagulated into a recrementitious matter, which
filling and distending the pores of the skin, every where raises it into
Tumors; Moreover it something hinders the Blood in its passage, and constrains
it to be extravasated. From hence thick Pustules are raised, and because that
matter passing into an Ichor is compelled by the Serum and Blood pursuing it
still forward, they rise up into little heaps; afterward the Animal Spirits
entering inordinately into the nervous Fibers, that they may promote the
throwing off that ichor, do cause the sense of that troublesome itch.

Indeed an inspection with a Microscope does most clearly discover that there
is a lymphous humor in the glandules of the skin which lie under all the
sweating pores, treasured up for some uses, The description of that Juice or
Humor.
so that according to the plenty and diverse stay thereof, these Glandules
exist more or less turgid. This Juice is laid aside by the Blood, through the
Arteries, in these Glandules, that this little burden being cast off, it might
return more easily through the veins; in the mean time being reposed there, it
has its uses, viz. In the first place continually moistening the miliarie
Teats, which lying under the nervous little Fibers, are the proper Sensory of
Touching, it preserves them from dryness, which would hinder the Sense; also it
imbues the adust effluvia's passing uncessantly from the blood being kindled,
in their passage near the skin, with a certain moisture, and renders them fit
to be voided by the pores; and whilst part of this humor does so continually
evaporate with the Effluviums of the blood, those expenses are repaired by the
Lympha continually fresh, being deposited by the Arterial blood as is abovesaid.

Notwithstanding this occonomy of the Region of the skin is not always so
regularly kept, How it degenerates.
but that the glandulous humor falling from its own disposition and function,
not only will provoke in the skin, but sometimes in the whole body,
preternatural affections of diverse sorts. This growing clammy, and cleaving
more obstinately in the little Cells obstructs transpiration; and immoderate
sweating proceeds from its too plentifully flowing out, and from the same
restagnating inwards, a more than usual Diuresis. This is done three ways.
Moreover, as to what belongs to the Scab and pustulous eruptions, that humor
as it is wont to be depraved many ways, so chiefly these three, and is wont to
enter into a coagulative disposition with the Serum, being fresh poured out
from the blood. 1. By reason of impure Blood.
viz. First the Blood it self being very impure, and also dissolved, it leaves
its corruptions and superfluous dross in the cutaneous Glandules, which in the
same place putting on the nature of more corrupted ferment, they boil up with
other adventitious Juices, or passing by these, and are diversely thickened, and
so they beget not only pustulous affections, but also leprous of diverse kinds.
From hence the daily and often eating of Shellfish, and also of others; and of
salted meats that have been hung in the Sun or Smoke; also the taking
disagreeing Drinks, and venomous Medicines, do cause cutaneous and frequently
dreadful eruptions.

Secondly, 2. By mere stagnation.
The humor being heaped within the cutaneous Glandules, sometimes does not
only become pustulous by a mere stagnation, but also frequently Lousie.
Wherefore, not only they that have been long in prison, but also those who
being of a sedentary life, are used to nastiness and sluttishness, do live
obnoxious to the abovementioned maladies; inasmuch as the cutaneous humor
being not at all eventilated, is corrupted by mere standing, after the manner
of putrefying water, and so it puts on the disposition of a corrupting ferment;
3. By Contagion received from without.
to which moreover Supplements of putrefraction come from the blood in the like
manner depraved.

Thirdly, If perhaps these Canses are wanting, that the glandulous humor of
the skin, neither contracts any stain from fault of the blood, nor its own
proper stagnation, notwithstanding virulent steams communicated from without,
render it no less prolific as to those diseases. This is manifest by common
observation especially, forasmuch as they that have health most, and are
endowed with the best Constitutions, scarce ever escape free from the same, if
they lie in the same Bed either with a scabby person, or where he has lately
lain: and not only so, but moreover the Linen of the Scabby, oftentimes washed
with other Linen have bestowed the contagion upon others. Surely, the taint of
no disease (the Plague only excepted) is more easily or certainly propagated
than this of the Mange.

If the reason of this be enquired into, The reason of its most sudden
contagion is unfolded.
we presently say that the liquour susceptive of the scabby taint is mightily
exposed, and most easily disposed unto it; and indeed much more ready to
either, than the Blood or Nervous Juice. For the glandulous humor of the skin
abounding in the outer superficies of the body, first imbibes every atome let
in by holes and pores every where open, and anticipates them from the blood.
Moreover, that this is so soon infected with a scabby Contagion, both the
activity of the ferment communicated causes it, and also the proneness of the
glandulous liquor to degenerate. For indeed the effluvia's falling from the
breaking out of the scabby skin, are aptly enough compared to the Yest of Ale,
remaining on the top as it were its outmost Coat; of which if the least portion
be taken from thence, and mixed with other new Ale unfermented, presently it
ferments the whole mass how great soever, and changes it into the disposition
of the liquor from whence it was taken. Certainly there is a very considerable
energy, which the particles however so small and little, carried to the highest
activity, are able to perform; but especially if they fall into a liquor (of
which sort is the cutaneous) made up together of subtle particles of several
sorts, as well partaking of the blood, as of the nervous Juice, and for that
cause most readily apt to be fermented. The Contagion when any where received,
presently spreads over the whole skin.
Wheresoever therefore these effluvia's of the Contagion abovesaid hit against
any outward part of a healthful body, first they will infect the cutaneous
humor only planted in that place, but then the particles of this so corrupted,
being received by the venous blood, and presently delivered to the Arteries,
are diffused through the entire habit of the body, and in a short time defile
the whole mass of this Humor, and make it scabby.

From these Causes of a Psora as well adjunct as procuring being unfolded, Of
the Itch.
the reason of the first symptoms, or breaking out in Pustules, is manifest
enough; but as to the other, viz. the Itch, as it is troublesome to Sense, that
the formal reason thereof may be known, we ought to consider to what Sensory or
organ of sense it properly belongs, and of what sort its passion or affection
should be.

Concerning these things, first it is sure it belongs to the sense of touching,
It belongs to the Sense of Feeling.
and that the first Instruments hereof are Teats fashioned like a Millet, and
their little Fibers dispersed through the whole skin, as we have before
declared. Moreover with this sense all the nervous fibers are endowed, being
diffused throughout the whole body. Notwithstanding, whereas there are two
supreme passions of Touching, Of what sort its Affection is.
and as it were generical, viz. Pain and Pleasure, it is deservedly doubted to
which of these Itching ought to be related. For the solution of which, we ought
to show by what means the Animal Spirits, being inmates to the organ of Touch,
are affected in Pain, and also after what manner in Pleasure; then their
demeanor also as to the Itching being designed, it will easily be manifest of
what Province this Passion is, The chies Affections of feeling are Pain and
Pleasure.
and in what things the nature of it, and the manner of its acting do consist.
Let the Reader pardon me, if I should by way of digression expound this more at
large, and even to tediousness, because this Aetiology seems very necessary
both to the understanding and curing of most outward distempers. Pain being
distinct from Sadness, and belonging to the Touch, is used to be defined,
Atroublesome feeling proceeding from the dissolution of Unity. And indeed it
takes its origin as often, The formal reason of Pain.
and in as much as any sensible thing, disagreeable or improportionate, being
applied to that organ of fense, divides and separates the fibers one from the
other; and for that cause repelling the animal spirits inhabiting in them, from
their wonted and quiet emanation, distracts them from one another, and as it
were puts them to flight; then presently forasmuch as that outward repulse of
the spirits, is communicated by a continued order of other spirits, to the
first organ of Sense, it stirs up the Spirits dwelling there into the like
confusions, so a perception is caused of grief or pain inflicted outwardly. In
truth the whole series of animal spirits which are affected with pain, as it
were some singular member of the sensitive Soul, conceiving trouble, as it
were, from the impression of the object, is forced to be wrinkled with pain,
and to contract in self into a lesser dimension.

When a dissolution of Unity is said to be the cause of pain, we must not
understand it so as if this affection only were caused from a wound or blow
inflicted upon the body, The Solution of the Unity always the cause of it.
for the same thing is used to be induced from cold, heat, wind, from the
extravasating of the blood and of other humors, or their being heaped up
together in several places, oftentimes the fashioning of the member remaining
as yet entire; in which cases, although the continued parts, and chiefly the
fibers and filaments, are not at all cut off, notwithstanding they are in every
Affection of grief pulled from their usual position, either by the oppression
of the object, or by strange particles forced like wedges, and are compelled
into too much tension or distorsion, or divulsion; and for that cause the
inmate spirits being pulled from their mutual embraces, and dissipated, are ill
at case, and incur the passion of pain or grief.

Pleasure is opposed to Pain, What Pleasure is.
and is a manner of Feeling clearly contrary thereunto; which takes its
origin, inasmuch as a pleasant stroaking being made upon the organ of Sense,
the spirits flock thither, and presently being thickly gathered together, and
overspread with a certain delight, they do as it were exult and rejoice
together in the organ: afterward, inasmuch as the spirits enter into the like
triumph or rejoicing within the Corpus striatum, a perception of pleasure is
stirred up.

The greatest pleasure which is offered to the Touch, Its formal Reason.
consists in this, that the cause of Pain being removed, the parts formerly
affected by it, may recover their wonted temper and frame; for so the animal
spirits being before put to flight, and dispersed from one another, It chiefly
consists in removing of Pain.
they recollect themselves, and rushing into the places from which they were
banished with reinforced strength, they prepare themselves to rejoice. From
hence the Peripateticks placed the formal reason of Pleasure only in the
removal of something that was troublesome, as when the excess of cold or heat
is received by an opposite and more agreeable state. Indeed the tangible object
(because it is always thick and dull) does scarce any way else (excepting
Venery) allure the animal spirits into heaps to the organ of Sense, unless for
that it removes their former confusion.

From these things so described concerning those passions, What the Itch is.
it is easily manifest, that the Itch according to the formal account thereof,
is neither perfectly nor fully either Pain or Pleasure, but imperfectly and as
beginning, partakes of both. For really the scabby matter being heaped up
within the pores of the skin, and making the solutin of Unity in many places,
enclines toward pain: yet as it is volatile, moving, and hastens toward vent,
How the Spirits are moved in it.
for that cause the Animal spirits are not put to flight from the Fibers
although pulled asunder, neither are they driven back with sense of pain; but
the contrary, as if being stronger than the humor infesting, they were able to
cast it forth, they being wrapped up more thick, but irregularly within the
cutaneous fibers, do twitch them together variously, and draw them on, that
they may the sooner discharge the morbific matter, and expel it forth.
Wherefore inasmuch as the Animal spirits being neither put to flight, nor
repulsed, but flowing together in crowds into the organs of Touching, they
manage themselves there tumultuously, and disorderly, and as it were by
tickling the sensible fibers do provoke them into small Convulsions, no
pleasure, but a troublesome feeling, nor also is it Pain, but a Passion clearly
diverse arises from it. But as soon as by rubbing or scratching, the plenty of
Spirits assembled about the organ of Sense, begin to be better disposed, and as
it were reduced into order, from thence a thorough feeling of Pleasure is
introduced. Wherefore the Itching seems to be a middle-state between the
betginning of Pain and Pleasure, A certain medium between Pain and Pleasure.
or a passage of the Spirits from the rudiments of that, toward the full
completing of this. But from this Physical discourse by the by, let us return
to our Pathologie or discourse of the distemper. From what is above said it is
easy to collect the differences of this disease.

In the first place therefore the Psora as to its origin either is got by
Contagion, The difference of the Psora as to its origin.
or by reason of an ill Course of Diet, the fierceness and supply thereof is
communicated by the Chyle and Blood being vitiated, or it is generated in the
skin it self, by reason of filth, and the defect of Transpiration: Whereto we
may add, that sometimes Infants acquire this taint hereditarit contracted from
their Parents.

Secondly, These cutaneous Eruptions as to their form, 2. As to its form.
vary according to the diverse Constitutions of the persons affected: for in
some persons of a choleric dryer Temperament, or Melancholy, only a dry Scab
is stirred up, and inasmuch as it evaporates lessby reason of the defect of the
Serum, with an stching not altogether so troublesome; but in others of a
moister Temperament, and of more unclean blood, very many wheals and pustules
imbued with schor, and most of all itching, do very much provoke to scratching,
and by reason of the Ulcers stirred up therewith, the Itch is immediately
altered into pain.

As to the Prognostics, although this Disease is never of it self mortal or
very dangerous, and always easy of Cure: yet frequently it contains an evil
event; The Prognostics of it.
inasmuch as being long continued, it utterly depraves the blood and nervous
Juice, and from it hastily cured, by reason of the matter received within,
while it is discussed from the Pores, a pernicious taint is brought upon the
Praecordia, and Brain, and other noble parts.

The greatest hazard from a Scab, threatens Children and Cachectick persons;
Most dangerous to Children and ill juiced or cachictick persons.
as in both of which the taint is more easily impressed from this Cutaneous
humor upon the nobler parts, which afterward when the outward malady is
removed, remaining within cannot be vanquished entirely, but by a very long
Course of Physic, of which neither is capable nor patient; wherefore, such
persons, Its Cure.
all care and diligence being administered, ought to be preserved from the
infection of the Scab as from the Plague.

Coucerning the Cure of a Scab or Psora, two chief Indications present
themselves, The first Indication curatory.
and each of them twofold, viz. The first intention Curatory respects these
two things, First, that the glandulous Humor (its corruptive ferment being
wholly extinct) may be reduced to a due temper. Secondly, afterward that the
Pores and passages of the skin being freed from those schorous congealings, may
recover their pristine frame or good temper.

The Second Indication Freservatory takes care to prevent these two things, The
second Indication preservatory.
viz. First, lest the impurity of the Psora, or corrupting Miasma's of the
skin, being discussed from the skin (while the ferment is expugned) turn back
again into the blood and nervous liquor, and bring upon them not only ill
temperaments, but also (as frequently it uses to do) a more considerable
prejudice upon the Brain or Praecordia. Secondly, also let it be endeeavoured
that the taint of the Humors, and of the noble parts contracted from the Itchy
matter, may be eradicated while the faults of the skin are repaired.

All these intentions of Curing, by remedies internal as well as external
together, Both inward and outward Medicines are to be taken together.
being much and often used, ought to be joined together, or at leastwise to be
interus'd, viz. that the morbific matter being discussed from its recesses, may
not depart into and lie hid in any lurking-places any where else, but from
every part, inwardly and outwardly, by remedies taken, may be wholly removed
away; wherefore Purgatories ought always to begin and end this method of
Curing. Purges, Bleeding and Alteratives, and afterward Topics are required.
Although Helmont with great pomp overthrows this Cathartick method of Physic,
and as it were leads it in Triumph, because it does not cure the Scab by it
self, yet we may affirm this Disease without that remedy can scarce ever easily
be cured, but never safely. Moreover Phlebotomy, unless something contradict
it, is presently to be celebrated in the beginning; upon these, Alteratives
that cleanse the blood and strengthen the bowels, and defend against the
assaults of the morbific matter, challenge their turns; and in the mean time
Liniments, or Baths, or topical remedies of another kind, and properly
Cutaneous, are administered: As without which not only Purging and Bleeding, but
also Diaphoreticks, Diuretics, yea whatsoever remedies evacuating blood or
humors, or altering them, become useless. We will annex some more select short
forms of Medicaments, of every one of these Kinds but now recited. And first
for the due undertaking of the Purging part, let there be administered in the
beginning a purging Medicine or a Vomit; also after Phlebotomy being used (if
need require) an Apozeme or purging Ale may be administered for seven or eight
days.

Take of Electuary Diacarthamus three drams, Forms of Purgers.
Spec. Diaturbith with Rhubarb one dram, Cream of Tartar, Salt of Wormwood an.
half a scruple, syrup of purging Apples what suffices, make a Bolus to be taken
with Government. Or,

Take Sulphur of Antimony seven grains, Scammony sulphurated eight grains,
Cream of Tartar half a scruple, make a powder.

Take roots of Polypody of the Oak, sharp pointed Docks prepared, an. one
ounce, leaves of Senna ten drams, Turbith, Agarick, Epithymum, an, one ounce,
Carthamus-seeds half an ounce, Curine Sanders two drams, Annise, Carus seeds,
of each two drams, being sliced, bruised, etc. digest them warm in four pound
of White wine twenty four hours, pour it clear off without straining: the Dose
six ounces by it self, or with a spoonful of syrup of Epithymum.

Or take the foresaid Ingredients and boil them in six pound of Spring Water to
half, Apozems.
then add one pound of White Wind, and presently strain it for an Apozeme to
be taken as the former.

Take roots of Polypody of the Oak, Medicated Ale.
sharp-pointed Docks an. three ounces, Senna four ounces, Epithymum, Turbith,
Mechoacan, of each two ounces, of yellow Sanders one ounce, Coriander-seeds six
drams, prepare them according to art, make a bag for four gallons of Ale; draw
it after five or six days, take twelve ounces more or less every morning, for
eight or ten days.

For ordinary Drink let a little four-gallon Vessel be filled with small Ale,
wherein may be put the following Bag.

Take the tops of Tamaris, dried Fumitory an. four handfuls, roots of
sharp-pointed Docks dried six ounces, the rind of woody Nightshade two
ounces, slice and bruise them and mingle them. Or let them take a Bochet of the
Decoction of Sarsaperilla, Saunders, with shavings of Ivory, Hartshorn, and
Liquorish.

II. Altering Remedies.
As to what belongs to altering Remedies, beside the Physick-Ale for ordinary
Drink, there seems not need of many others, but only, that a due government of
Diet be observed, by declining Salt and spiced Food, Shell fish, and others
seasoned with pickle; also abstinence from Wine, Strong waters, stronger Ale,
and from all Liquors apt too much to stir and ferment the blood. In a
contumacious Psora, and seizing upon a Cachectick body, it will be expedient to
administer the following Electuary with a distilled water twice a day.

Take of Conserve of Fumitory, Electuary.
roots of sharp-pointed Docks, of each three ounces, Troches of Rhubarb,
Species of Diatrion Santalon, of each one dram and a half, Salt of Wormwood one
dram, Vitriolum Martis four scruples, with a sufficient quantity of syrup of
Cichory with Rhubarb, make an Electuary, the dose from one dram to two, twice
in a day, drinking upon it three ounces of the following water.

Take of the tops of Fir Tree, A distilled water.
six handfuls, of leaves of Fumitory, Agrimony, Fluellin, Liverwort, Brooklime,
of each four handfuls, roots of sharp pointed Docks two pound, Bark of Elder
two handfuls, the outward Rinds of six Oranges, cut them and bruise them, and
then pour upon them eight pints of Posset Drink turned with middle beer,
distill them in a Rose-Still; let the whole Liquor be mingled together.

III. Ointments whereof the Basis is chiefly Sulphur.
Ointments for to anoint the Skin, are wont commonly and efficaciously to be
prescribed for the curing of the Scab; notwithstanding those which are
administered to many other Tumors or Ulcers, do not help here at all; but
Brimstone and Preparations thereof seem to have a specific virtue in this
Disease, so that for the most part they are put into all Liniments for the
Itch, and are the basis of the whole Composition. The Receipt chiefly used by
the Vulgar is this.

Take Powder or flower of Brimstone half an ounce, Forms of them.
unsalted Butter four ounces, powder of Ginger half a dram, make an Ointment.

A little more neat, though not much more efficacious is prescribed thus.

Take Ointment of Roses four ounces, powder of Quick Brimstone half an ounce,
Oil of Tartar per deliquium what suffices, make an Ointment: for scent sake
add one scruple of Oil of Rhodium.

When the force of the Brimstone is to be drawn forth or strengthened by other
things added, Other stronger Medicines.


Take Ointment of Enula-campane without Mercury four ounces, powder of Sulphur
half an ounce, Oil of Tartar per deliquium what suffices. For the same purpose
the Ointment of the roots of sharp pointed Docks boiled in Butter, or Oil, with
White Wind, to the consumption of the Wine, and made up with Sulphur and Oil of
Tartar. Also those Ointments are used with success by themselves, the more
curious abhorring the smell of Sulphur.

3. The third kind of Liniment against the Itch, is made of Mercury, The most
powerful made of Mercury.
wanting no guards of Sulphur, or any other Vegetables. But of it self it is
too powerful to be applied all over the body, but only to the Joints of the
Arms and Thighs, or worn about the Loins, made up in a Girdle, for so it seldom
fails in curing the Itch. But dangerous.
Notwithstanding there is danger lest this practice (as it often happens)
produce evil and pernicious symptoms; for from the Mercurial Ointment,
frequently a salivation, also sometimes dimness of the eyes, or drowsy or
convulsive Affections do proceed: Also sometimes the Poison of the medicine
within the Praecordia or Bowels produces the dreadful Affections of short
breathing, Swouning, or bloody Fluxes.

The vulgar form of a Mercurial Ointment, and chiefly in use for the itch, is
this. The Form of it.


Take of Quicksilver reduced into small particles with an acid, or (as they
say) killed, an ounce and a half, fresh Hogs Lard six ounces, incorporate them
well, stirring them long in a Stone or Glass mortar.

Neither only under the form of an Ointment, A Mercurial Water for the Itch.
but also after many other ways the aforesaid Medicines are wont to be often
used. For the fume of Cinabar (which is prepared of Mercury with Sulphur) cast
upon Coals and taken in at the mouth, or striking the superficies of the Body,
cures the Psora. The Mercurial Cosmetick before described, being weaker by two
degrees, if it be applied upon the Skin, chiefly on the ulcerated places, it
kills the Scab. Notwithstanding the use of these is not always so secure as to
be administered every where to all persons.

Baths are prepared of Sulphur and Vegetables, either apart or together, Baths.
being boiled in water, which heal this Disease not as a common Bath, by only
washing off the filthiness of the Skin, but also by destroying the ferment
thereof. Moreover, beside these there is another more easy and neater manner
of healing the Itch, viz. Let a Shirt boiled with Powder of Brimstone in
Spring Water, A Sulphurous Shirt.
and dried by the Sun or Fire, be worn next the body for four or five days;
for so that disease is wont to be cured without bathing, or nastiness of
anointing, or evil smell.

It the Aetiologie of these be enquired into, Why Sulphur is the Antidote of
the Psora.
and first why Brimstone is such a specific Antidote against the Itch, that
poor and ordinary men (who have not wherewithal to use any other Medicine) do
take against this Distemper inwardly only powder of Brimstone with Milk, and
administer it outwardly with Butter, I have already in part given an account,
where we have unfolded the balsamic virtue of Brimstone toward the Lungs.
Namely, it is a good expedient in either case, inasmuch as it destroys the
acidities of the Blood and Humors, and all the exotic and corrupting
roughnesses, and restores a benign disposition to every Juice, viz. a mild and
an unctuous: The Reason of it.
and so the Particles of Brimstone any way outwardly applied, do easily enter
into the pores of the skin, and being admitted inward, do forthwith work upon
the ulcerous Ichor there abounding, kill the Salts there predominating, and
procure a balsamic nature to the cutaneous Juice, that it may aftewards agree
with the Blood and Serum continually flowing to it.

As to Mercury, it is no wonder if Medicines prepared hereof do thoroughly heal
the places of the skin affected with the Psora wherever applied, How Mercury
cures this Disease.
for by the application hereof, wheals and pushes, and all malignant ulcers,
viz. Venereal and Scorbutic, are wont to be tamed. Neither is it a thing to be
admired, that these Remedies administered in any private places, as long as they
provoke salivation, are a Cure of an Universal Itch; but really that without
spitting they can produce such an effect, as that a Girdle wherein Quicksilver
is sowed and worn about the Loins, should abolish the Scab of the whole body,
and that sometimes without any sensible evacuation or harm caused thereby, I
say the reason hereof is not so easily apparent.

Yet for the solution hereof, The reason of its virtue.
we must say that the Particles of Mercury being able to extinguish the
scabbiness of every Itchy ferment, when they are applied to any private part,
do presently take away the Scab of that place; and besides being caught by the
venous blood, and diffused through the whole mass thereof, and a little after
they are not only carried back by the arterious blood to the same place where
taken in, but being brought outward every where, they are deposited in the skin
of the whole body, and in the same place destroy every Miasma of the Scab: If
it then shall happen that these Mercurial particles, after they have finished
the Cure, should be all evaporated again out of the skin, no salivation
afterward, or other prejudice will follow.

SECT. III. CHAP. VII. Of the Impetigo or Lepra of the Greeks.
AFter the Scab with the Itch, Several names of the Impetigo.
it follows that we treat of another Distemper, a little akin to this by
reason of the breakings out of little pustules, which is commonly called
Impetigo, by some a Tetter and Morphew, and by others the Leprosy of the
Greeks. And as it gains several names, so they are variously applied by
Authors, and by these they design one kind of Disease, and by those another
kind. Wherefore, as the names of this Distemper are variously confounded, and
perhaps that as to its nature and formal appearance it has been various in
diverse Regions, neither may it be altogether the same in our generation as in
former times, for this cause my business here shall not be to describe this
disease according to Boods, but from the proper observation of the Patients
themselves.

The Impetigo is wont to arise and affect after this manner; It is described
according to its appearances.
to wit, little wheals or red pustules, sometimes single, and sometimes many
together, are raised in diverse parts of the body, but chiefly in the Arms or
Thighs; to each of which, new ones every where are adjoined, (the Disease
augmenting) and in a short space of time there become many heaps of risings of
that kind, like clusters. For the little pimples breaking out daily near to
their stem, and spreading still larger, diffuse themselves into a Circle, and
so cause every heap of Eruptions to be enlarged. The rough superficies of each
appears something white and scaly, so that upon scratching the scales fall off,
and often a thin Ichor sweats out, which being presently dried up again,
hardens into a shelly scale.

These Clusters of little Pimples being first small and fewer, appear perhaps
three or four in the Arm or Thigh, or other particular member, about the
bigness of a Penny or half a dram: but afterward, if the disease be suffered
to augment, they break out every where more frequent, which being leisurely
increased in their ground, after wards appear to equal or exceed the bitgness
of a Silver Crown, but not always round or of a regular Figure, but diversely
formed. Moreover there is no stop in this condition, but the distemper, unless
it be restrained with Medicine, breaking out still in more places, and creeping
on every where in broadness, at length not only covers over the whole member
but also the whole body with a leprous dry scurf; and this kind of Impetigo the
Ancients called by reason of its outrage (...), and for the most part accounted
it incurable.

From hence the chief differences of this disease are made known; The
differences of this disease.
and in the first place as it is less or more malignant according to the
fashion thereof, it is distingushed, as it comes nearer the nature of the Scab,
or Leprosy, or as it is in a middle condition between both. We are also to
note, this distemper sometimes infests some particular members, as the Arms or
Thighs, the rest of the body being untoucht; but sometimes it begins together
in all parts, and every where excites scatrteringly little Pimples or Clusters
thereof. Also eruptions of this kind are in some for a season, or periodical,
and for the most part infest these persons during Winter only, vanishing away
about Summer; likewise on the contrary, in others they abhor Winter, and are
wont to observe the season of the Swallow going and coming: but in most others
the Disease being continual grants no truce, yea it hat neither remission nor
mediocrity.

Moreover, How it differs from the Psora and Leprosit.
we must distinguish an Impetigo from other Diseases akin to it, and first
from the Scab, and the Leprosy. It differs from the former as to the form of
the Pustules; for every where in the Psora they are single and remote from one
another, although by small spaces; here most of them break out in Clusters,
concurrently, and as it were disjoined by branches with great interspaces. But
between these distempers a notable difference yet arises, in that the Scab is
wont easily or scarce otherwise to be propagated or arise, but by Contagion;
but the infection of an Impetigo is so seldom or never, that the Miasma from
the Husband does not pass to the wise, or from her to him, though they lie
together.

Also this Disease differs from the Leprosy, as well in respect of the form of
its eruption, as of its contagion, which is likewise active in this, as in the
Psora; and the breaking out is much larger and more horrid, viz. it is every
where shelly and scaly, without intermission, and diffused through the whole
body.

From hence it is manifest, that the material cause of an Impetigo, The
material cause not a humor of the skin.
is not merely a cutaneous humor, by reason of effluvia's or a taint received
from without, or depraved by reason of other accidents, and degenerated from
its temperament; because it is not easily communicated to others by Contagion,
as in the Psora, neither is it immediately dispersed throughout the whole body.
But tartarous Concretions begot in the blood.
But indeed little Pustules breaking out first about the initiations of the
Disease seem therefore to proceed, for that certain acid salt Concretions
happen to be in the mass of Blood (like Tartar in Wine) which when they can
neither be concocted or again dissolved, are here thrust out into the skin, as
there into the sides of the Vessel. As long as these Concretions are small and
few, they are conveyed into the skin in this or that member, and by one or two
branches of an Artery; then as Nature is wont to continue the same manner of
excretion as it began, the matter being carried every where by the same
vessels, to the same nests, near the first wheals it causes heaps of others
round about therm; but afterward when the dyscrasie of the blood is daily
augmented, and that Tartarous matter is generated more plentifully in the mass
thereof, more portions are conveyed by other Arteries, and still by more to the
outward places: and for that cause also more pimples break out both in the
same, and in other members, which a new matter coming continually by the same
Arteries, and being placed close to the former, enlarges them every day, and
every where dilates them by the addition of other pustules; and at length if
this sort of Tartar of the blood augment hugely, being carried out by more or
all the Arteries together, it is fastened in the skin, and in process of time
covers over all the superficies thereof with a scaly or downright leprous
shell: And then that cutaneous humor being wholly corrupted, promotes the
disease it self; for it causes the stock of the morbific matter to be
increased, by polluting more, or rather poisoning the blood and humors,
whilst they pass in Circulation; moreover dismissing the corruptive steams
from it self, it renders the Contagion of the same disease unto others.

Wherefore, both the procuring and conjunct causes of this Disease consist in
this, The next cause of it.
for that without any fault of the skin, it happens that the blood is filled
with salt Particles of a various disposition and condition; (into the preceding
cause of which disposition we will anon inquire) and where those fixed and acid
Salts are especially predominant (as the manner is) they mutually embrace one
another, and so grow together into Tartarous Concretions; which being thrust
forth into the blood, cause eruptions of wheals, as it were nests of the
Disease; then they being daily and leisurely increased both in number and
largeness, according to the supply of matter, they produce the beginning,
augmentation, and state of this disease.

As to what relates to the antecedent and evident causes, The evident Causes.
there are two chief kinds of occasions from which this distemper for the most
part derives its origin; to wit, an evil manner of Diet, or a taint of the
Scurvy, or Pox, or other Diseases left in the body, being ill, or not at all
cured. We will weigh a little the reasons of each of these.

As to the former, besides the common irregularities in Diet, Irregularities in
Diet.
wherein some being too much addicted to eating of flesh salted and afterward
dried in the Sun or Smoke, and the drinking of acid Wines, do easily contract
this malady; Also it is a vulgar observation, The daily eating of Pork or Fish.
that very many are disposed thereunto by the too frequent or daily feeding on
Pork, and Fish, and especially Shellfish. There is a notable instance of the
former, which is, that that food was chiefly forbidden the Jews for prevention
of this disease. Also there is an example of the other, that in time past the
Inhabitants of Cornwall for the most part dwelling on the Seacoast, inasmuch as
the poorer sort were fed with Fish, became very obnoxious to Leprous
Distempers; The reason thereof inquired into.
insomuch that for their relief many Hospitals were erected in that Country.
That I may hint in a few words the reason hereof, I am apt to think whether
that food is rancid, or otherwise improportionate, that it conveys particles
not rightly mixed, nor easily to be subdued to our blood, which being so
heterogeneous and largely heapt up by a long use of such Diet, the saline
particles of which kind do easily associate themselves, and so do constitute
Tartarous Coagulations to be exterminated in the skin, and the seeds of the
Leprosy or of the Impetiginous Evil.

But yet a plentiful Crop is begot from the taint of the Scurvy and Pox left in
the body, It often follows the Pox and Scurvy.
and afterward by the combination of Salts and Sulphur exalted to extremity.
We have elsewhere discovered the reasons of the former disease, and especially
of the foresaid symptom coming after it, which being accommodated to our
present Hypothesis do make it more clear. And it so often happens, that
pustulous eruptions of this sort do follow an inveterate Pox, although it seem
to be cured, that none distempered almost with these, wants the suspicion of
that shameful Disease; so that the first Question of a Physician in such a
case being consulted, is, Whether the Patient have not at some time formerly
contracted that Distemper? For surely the Corruptions of the blood, after they
are by a long stay become altogether heterogeneous and indomitable, at length
acquire to themselves salt Particles, wherewith growing into such like
Tartarous Concretes, and being thrust forth into the skin, produce those
Impetiginous Pustules.

As to the Prognostic part of this Disease, Its Prognostics.
although it seldom threatens death or imminent danger, yet after it has taken
deep root, the Cure is very difficult, if at all: The Impetigo first beginning,
and exciting a few Pustules, and knots of them, perhaps in one or two members,
sometimes admits of Cure, but hardly without a most efficacious remedy. But if
the Disease proceed so far, that the frequent and broad clusters of wheals
appear dispersed throughout the body, then small remedies effect nothing, and
the great ones howsoever diligently observed, will not easily perform a Cure.
But if the Disease, maugre all remedies advance daily, and increase at length
into a Leprosy, Celsius judges it impossible to be cured, and therefore we
must wholly abstain form it.

There are two chief Indications concerning the Cure of an Impetigo, The Cure.
viz. Preservatory, which respects the cause of the Disease, and the Curatory,
which relates to the symptoms, Two chief Indications.
viz. the pustulous Eruptions. The vital Indication has seldom place here,
unless in a desperate condition, where sleep and strength fail. The Method of
Curing ought to begin with the Preservatory Indication, which takes away the
Causes of the Disease by inward remedies, for otherwise external (as in the
Psora) are never administered with success; but the roots of the disease in the
blood being cut off, the cutaneous sproutings quickly consume away: for the
taking them away, we must proceed in one manner when the Impetigo begins by it
self, and in somewhat a different manner when it follows an inveterate Scurvy
or Pox, being ill or not at all cured. We will consider each case thoroughly by
it self, and distinctly.

Therefore whenever this Disease is simple, How to be cured, the Disease
beginning of it self.
and primarie, and being yet New, let the evident and extern Causes be removed;
let the manner of Diet, and unwholsomness of Air be corrected; therefore those
that have been lately too much accustomed to salt Diet, and the flesh of Pork
and Fish, let them change to Diet of good Juice and easy of digestion. The
evident causes to be first removed.
They that inhabit the Seacoast, or Fenny places, let them remove to a dry and
clear Air; in the mean while let no less care be had to their Drink, by
declining thick and foggy Ale, and small and acid Wines too much abounding with
Tartar: at length let care be taken lest their Drink or Food be dressed with
any mineral waters that are apt to petrisie.

Secondly, The conjunct Causes how taken away.
In respect of the conjunct and procuring Cause, there are two chief Intentions
of Cure, viz. that the impurities of the bowels and humors be quickly purged
out; also that the acid faline distemperatures of the blood and nervous Juice
be altered (whereby the Tartarous matter may be the less engendered in them;)
for these purposes Medicines both evacuating and altering are prescribed of
several kinds. Notwithstanding, because not all, but the greatest remedies are
here convenient, those which are most chiefly of use and available, are
Catharticks, Phlebotomy, Whey, Chalybeate Waters, The chief Remedies made known.
Juicy expressions of Herbs, Decoctions of Woods, steeled Medicines and
Salivation. Some certain Models of each of these, and the manner of using them,
we will annex.

Wherefore in the first place, 1. A Purge.
universal purging and bleeding being celebrated (as in the Cure of the Psora)
we appoint the following Tincture or purging Infusion, whose dose is from six
to eight ounces, to be repeated in six or seven days.

Take of the roots of sharp-pointed Docks dried, Polyodie of the Oak, A purging
Infusion.
of each half an ounce, Senna ten drams, Epithymum six drams, Rhubarb,
Mechoacan of each half an ounce, yellow Sanders two drams, Celtick Nard half a
dram, Salt of Tartar one dram and a half, put them in a glass with three pints
of White Wind, water of Elder-flowers one pound, let them stand stopped in a cold
place three days, pour off daily as much of the clear liquor as is sufficient.

Secondly, For sweetning of the Blood, and washing of the Salts thereof, 2.
Whey.
let simple Whey, two or three pints, or with the infusion of Fumitory,
Chicory, and sharp-pointed Docks, be drunk every morning, for twenty or thirty
days, if the Stomach will bear it, and likewise evening and early in the
morning, let a dose of the ensuing Electuary be swallowed.

Take Conserve of the roots of sharp-pointed Docks six ounces, Crab's-eyes,
Coral prepared, An Electuary.
of each two drams, Ivory one dram, Powder of Lignum Aloes, yellow Sanders, of
each a dram and a half, Sal Prunella two drams, Vitriol of Mars a dram and a
half, Syrup of juice of Wood Sorrel what suffices to make an Electuary, the
dose two drams.

Thirdly, For the same reason that Whey, 3. Steeled Waters.
your Iron Mineral waters are prescribed bed for this Disease, and do often
notably help: for when all the other remedies have been in vain, I have with
those alone cured a painful and almost leprous Impetigo. Moreover, for more
efficacy sake, let the use of Sal Prunella or Vitriol of Mars, or of the
Electuary but now mentioned, be dexterously adjoined.

Fourthly, In some endued with too much Serum, and a watery Constitution, 4.
Decoctions of Woods.
where the drinking Whey or Mineral waters are less requisite, it is sometimes
expedient that a Decoction of the Woods be assumed at physical hours, and also
constantly instead of ordinary drink.

Take the Shavings of Willow half a pound, of Sarsaperilla eight ounces, whits
Sanders, Lignum Lentiscinum, of each two ounces, Shavings of Ivory and
Hartshorn, of each six drams, Filings of Tin, crude Antimony, of each four
ounces tied in a rag, of Liquorish one ounce, infuse them in sixteen pound of
Spring Water, and boil them to half, keep it strained for use.

Fifthly, Medicines of Steel, 5. Medicines of Steel.
in that they are every where accounted among the more excellent Remedies, are
wont seldom to be omitted in this Disease, although not frequently given with
success: for most Preparations of Steel, wherein the Sulphurous Particles
predominate, inasmuch as they ferment the blood, and irritate it into Critical
Effervescences, do cause these impetiginous eruptions to augment rather than
diminish; notwithstanding the Salt, Syrup, Tinctures, and infusions of Vitriol,
inasmuch as they fix the Blood, and something restrain the raging of the Salts,
do fitly enough agree with the intention of Cure now proposed; but being weak
in efficacy, they do not prevail against so Herculean a Disease.

Wherefore Sixthly, these and many other Remedies nothing availing, 6.
Sallvation.
many commend Salivation, as the stoutest Wrestler and only match for such an
Enemy. Yet the event does not always answer this great expectation; for I have
experimented this remedy without success in four Patients laboring under a
painful Impetigo, which had resisted other Medicines. Some of these were
provoked to abundant Spitting by Unction with Quicksilver, others by doses of
Solar Precipitate; which they have endured for the space of twenty days; which
time being elapsed, all the scaly eruptions and clusters of wheals have
vanished; notwithstanding, to confirm the Cure, a Diet-drink of the Decoction
of Sarsa was appointed, and frequent sweating under a Cradle, and due purgation
between, was continued for a month: Notwithstanding, this Course being
finished, Salivation does not always cure this Disease.
when no footsteps of the distemper seemed to be left, within another month a
new stock of the same Disease beginning to break out, it increased quickly to
its usual maturity. Moreover, when one of them would repeat this course, and
another after two relapses would experiment it the third time, both of them at
length after great sufferings of Pain despaired of Cure: Whence it is manifest
that the Venereal Distemper, although highly malignant, and raising most filthy
Ulcers consuming the flesh and bones, is more easily and certainly cured than
the Impetigo.

The reason whereof if we enquire, Why the Impetigo is more difficult of Cure
than the Pox.
may plainly be conceived, for that the cause of the latter Disease consists in
a malignant and altogether heterogeneous pollution, infecting and poisoning the
blood and nervous Liquor for a certain time, but not altogether overthrowing,
or for ever depraving its temperament; wherefore the Cure is performed by
Salivation, or a sudorifick Diet, eradicating all that venom, and then the
natural disposition of the blood and humors remains entire: But in a more
difficult Impetigo, the Elemental particles and first Constitutives of the
blood are corrupted, insomuch that unless the natural disposition and
constitution of these are restored, all Evacuations and Expurgations of any
venomous, malignant and heterogeneous matter, however plentiful and
eradicative, do little or nothing prevail. Wherefore, many famous Physicians
not undeservedly judged this Disease being confirmed and raised to the borders
of a Leprosy, to be hardly or never cured.

Secondly, Impetigo succeeding a Scurvy, how to be cured.
No better event attends this malady ensuing upon an inveterate Scurvy; perhaps
hence the intentions of healing are a little more certain when this Distemper
is placed as the Basis or root of that; to wit, that the chief curing
Indication being taken from thence, we must chiefly insist upon Antiscorbutical
remedies; but the more sharp and hot of this kind, as the Garden Scurvy Grass,
Watercresses, the Horse-rhadish, Hot antiscorbuticks do not agree.
Pepperwort, and others too much irritating the blood, inasmuch as they
dissolve the temperament thereof more, and drive out more plentifully the
Tartarous Coagulum to the skin, are always discovered to be more prejudicial
than advantageous; and for this reason the use of Baths, Nor Baths.
or bathing in hot waters, which namely evacuate the humors of the whole body
by an abundant Evaporation, and cleanse the pores of the skin, and seem very
available in this malady, oftentimes are so far from helping, that those
Eruptions are wont to be exasperated from thence and very much increased: for I
have known many not extremely Impetiginous, to have gone to our Baths, to bathe
in the hot waters, that have returned altogether Leprous. But only the more
temperate Remedies endued with a nitrous, vitriolick or volatile Salt.
Wherefore, when the Symptoms of this distemper arise from a scorbutic evil,
all elastick things are to be avoided, and only the more temperate, endued with
a Nitrous, Vitriolic or volatile Salt, are to be administered. We will lay down
some Models of each sort; As first Crystal Mineral, Juices of some Herbs and
Decoctions, Salt and Mineral purging Waters, are most predominant with a
Nitrous Salt.

Take of Crystal Mineral, Forms of Nitrous Medicines.
or Nitre purified one ounce, Flowers of Sal Armoniack one dram, bruise them in
a glass Mortar, give one dram three or four times in twenty four hours.

Take of the leaves of Housleek the greater two handfuls, bruise it and boil it
in two pound and a half of new Milk till it turn to Curds and Whey, strain it,
and take a pint of the clear liquor twice in a day.

Take of the leaves of Dandelyon six handfuls, Water of Sowthistles.
bruise them, and put them into a glazed earthen pot with a cover, which put in
an Oven after the bread is drawn out, let it stand six or seven hours, then
pour it through a Strainer, the dose is four ounces to six of the clear liquor,
thrice or oftener in a day.

Cucumbers being endowed with a Nitrous quality are advantageous by experience
against this disease, Cucumbers.
wherefore in lieu of a Sallad let them be plentifully and often eaten;
moreover three of four of them cut into slices, let them be infused, and stopped
close, in three pints of Spring Water all night; to the clear liquor poured
out, add Sal Prunella two or three drams, the dose is half a pint thrice or
oftener in a day. For the same purpose Decoctions of the leaves in running
water together with the fruit do profit.

1. Purging Mineral Waters.
Certain mineral purging waters, of which sort are chiefly those of North-hall,
an Analysis being made by Evaporation, manifestly show a Nitrous Salt with
which they are imbued, and I have sometimes found the daily drinking about four
pintes for many days, to help against a gentle Impetigo.

2. Vitriolick acidule waters.
But as I have before hinted, those Mineral waters endued with a vitriolic
Salt, of which kind are the SPAW, and Tunbridge, and Astrope Wells, do far
excel those Nitrous, and all other Remedies, and do more prevail in the Cure
of an Impetigo. To those Patients that have not the opportunity of using these
waters, I used to give with good success against this disease common water
impregnated with our Steel, and so rendering most exactly the gust of those
Mineral waters. By reason of the Mineral Salts, or at least the Mercurial
Particles in them, Tin and Antimony are often in use in the Cure of the Impetigo,
and are usually prescribed with other remedies. Let the Filings of Tin, and
Powder of crude Antimony, Medicines of Tin and Antimony.
be infused in Ale for ordinary Drink: also Dectoctions of Sarsa made with the
woods, are found beneficial against this Distemper.

3. The use of a Viper, 3. Medicines endued with a volatile Salt.
and the Preparations thereof, does enough commend the wonderful virtue of
volatile Salts in a grievous Impetigo, and also in curing the Leprosy it self.
This Antidote of that Disease is reported to be found out first by a casual
experiment, inasmuch (as Galen reports) that drink being poured out of a Bottle
wherein a Viper was put to poison one laboring with an Elephantiasis, Chiefly
prepared of Vipers.
and so given him to free him from his misery, proved his remedy, and what was
destined for his murder, dispatched an incurable Disease. Hither relates the
Analogy, taken from the nature of this Animal, whence they collect that it
helps in this Disease: because the Viper yearly shakes off his scaly Coat,
therefore some think its particles prevalent to throw off the leprous skin of a
diseased man; but though we do not attribute much to these things, yet it is
manifest by frequent observation, that remedies of a Viper do profit in the
Impetigo and Leprosy; the true reason whereof ought to be ascribed much to the
volatile Salt wherewith this Animal is endued. For the particles hereof destroy
the sixth and acid Salts predominating in the blood of the diseased, and
dissolve their combinations; notwithstanding, the Salt, Spirit, But not
chymically.
and Oil chymically extracted out of Vipers, by reason of their elastick
particles, contracting an Empyreuma from the fire, profit not in this disease;
as also neither Spirit nor volatile Salt of Hartshorn, Soot, Blood, and other
the like Armoniacks; because by violently stirring the Blood and Humors they
rather dissolve their temperament, and thrust forth the Corruptions more
plentifully into the skin. Wherefore the more simple Preparations of Vipers,
Broths and infusions of Vipers.
as broths from their flesh boiled in water, and Drinks impregnated by
Infusions, and Decoctions, and powders being made of them dried and beaten, are
prescribed more successefully against this Disease. Moreover not only the
boiled flesh of Vipers, but of any other kind of Oviparous Snakes being taken
in lien of ordinary food do ost afford notable relief.

4. The Impetigo or scaly eruption of Pimples, and formed as it were into
clusters, 4. How the Impetigo following the Pox is to be cured.
is so frequent and familiar a symptom of an inveterate Venereal distemper,
that we first ask the Patient whether something of that malignity be not
concealed of which they are conscious; and if we perceive the matter such, all
Specificks against this Disease, and Antiscorbuticks being omitted, we must
come to the Decoctions of Woods, and those little or nothing helping, we must
descend to the use of Quicksilver. And truly by this method I have cured many
that were accounted Impetiginous and Leprous, (who have been handled long in
vain, and wretchedly vexed with other Remedies appropriate to these diseases:)
But we referred this sort of Impetigo to the Pathology of the Venereal
distemper, whereto it is an Appendix.

II. The second Indication curatory relating to the Disease it self, The second
Indication Curdtory.
and the primary symptom, to wit, the scaly eruptions and clusters of Pustules,
prescribes Topical Remedies to be applied to the outer skin for the removing
these effects; for which purpose in the first place Baths and Liniments are
convenient: which yet rarely or never help of themselves, unless the procuring
cause, that is, the Tartarous disposition of Blood be first purged out.

There is a vast medley of Topics of this sort vulgarly vented, Topics of
Tar are the best.
as well by Physicians as by Empiricks and Quacks; among all which
notwithstanding, Baths or Liniments compounded of Tar do far excel all other
Remedies of either kind, insomuch that we should only use these but for their
ill savor; wherefore we will annex some models of Compositions both with and
without Tar.

Wherefore, for Baths it is common to take water out of Tubs wherein Tar has
long stood, and impregnated with the infusion thereof: Or,

Take of Tar two pound, and with white Ashes sifted incorporate it into a
gross mass, which boil in a sufficient quantity of Spring Water, adding leaves
of Ground Ivy, Fumitory, white Horehound, the roots of sharp-pointed Dock,
Enula-campane, of each four handfuls, make a Bath to be used with government;
Or let such a Decoction be prepared without Tar for Patients abhorring the
smell.

Sulphurous Baths as well Natural as Artificial are found by experience less
appropriate, Baths.
yea for the most part the former do prejudice; Moreover, every bathing ought
cautiously to be administered: for because this administration exagitates the
blood, and puts it into an Effervesence, its Temperament is endangered (as has
been said) rather to be dissolved, and the corruption to be spread more
plentifully over the skin.

2. Liniments.
Liniments whose use is more safe, and convenient, are of a Triple kind or
degree, viz. Gentle, Indifferent, and most Strong; of each of these we will
propound one or two patterns.

1. 1. Mild Liniments.
First therefore in a slighter Impetigo, when the Eruptions and Clusters are
small, Fasting Spittle is commended; likewise the weeping of green Wood in the
Fire, also mere rubbing them with roots of sharp-pointed Docks bruised and
macerated in Vinegar: Or,

Take Oil of Tartar per deliquium, Oil of Nuts or Almonds by expression of each
equal parts, make a Liniment to be used to the parts affected twice in a day.

2. 2. Stronger, of Tar.
Liniments of the Second kind have Tar for an Ingredient, which is esteemed
above all.

Take of Ointment of Roses six ounces, of Tar two ounces, melt them together:
Or,

Take a fat piece of Weather-mutton, which stick with the roots of
sharp-pointed Docks, spit it and roast it, and in the mean while baste it with
Tar dropped leisurely upon it; the Dripping being received in a Vessel under
it, keep it for an Ointment most excellent for an Impetigo.

3. 3. The strongest of Mercury.
The most prevalent Liniments are Mercurial, viz. those made with Quicksilver
or Praecipitate. Let the model of the former be that prescribed already against
the Scab; for the other,

Take of white Praecipitate three drams, Ointment of Roses three ounces, mix
them, for to anoint the parts chiefly affected.

The use of these ought chiefly to be suspected in this Malady; for if spitting
be raised, that great glutt of matter impacted in the pores of the skin will be
moved, which if the whole together rushing too much toward the Ductus
Salivales, gather about the parts of the Throat, will endanger suffocation.

Some years since a Virgin of a Noble Family, A notable Relation.
being of a hot Temperament, and endowed naturally with a sharp and salt blood,
after being a long time obnoxious to an Impetigo, almost from her Cradle, about
her riper years began to be afflicted more grievously; for the clusters of
scaly Pustules covered not only her Arms and Thighs every where, and the other
covered parts of her body, but also her Hands and Face were so defiled, that
she was ashamed to appear abroad or converse with others of her rank. Lesser
remedies almost innumerable were exhibited without success; by using Baths she
at first appeared relieved, but at length grew worse thereby. Astrope Wells
which have cured some, afforded her little or no relief. Wherefore, when all
ordinary means would not effect any thing, I propounded Salivation, as a remedy
more prevalent than all the rest and (as it is accounted) the last. When the
Parents and Patient readily consented to this advice, preparing her body duly
by Purgation and Phlebotomy, Salivation cures for a time the Impetigo, but with
a relapse.
I gave her (after our manner) Pills of Solar Praecipitate two days, and after
the interval of one day, the remedy being repeated the next, an abundant and
laudable spitting began, and continued for a month without any ill symptom; to
keep which in its due tenor, I applied a Mercurial Ointment to the bending of
the Joints and the places most affected one while to one, another while to
another. Before the finishing of this course, all the Eruptions vanished;
notwithstanding to confirm the Cure, as also for the extirpation of the
Mercury, she remained another month in Purging, Sweating, and Diet of the
Decoction of Sarsa, China, etc. in which time seeming perfectly cured, she so
remained for about forty days. But afterward though she observed an exact
course of Diet, the same disease began to bud forth again, and leisurely
increasing, at length it advanced into its former state. I being confounded
with this event, persuaded her to hope an alteration for the better after her
Menstrual Flux, which was suddenly expected. Notwithstanding, after long delay
that Crisis at length happening, and managing her self regularly after it,
brought no Cure or ease of that Disease, but rather a fresh assault. Whereupon
recourse was had again to Physic, and diverse Remedies assayed, all which when
they became frustrate, That remedy repeated, did not thoroughly cure the
Disease.
her friends importuned that she might salivate again, to wit, allured by this
hope, that that method which cured her for a short space, being administered
again, would cure her either for a longer space or altogether. Wherefore
according to their wishes, the same course of spitting and sweating repeated
for two months space, and thereupon the Pustules every where going off, the
Noble Virgin seemed again wholly to recover her health. But within a fortnight
after the course finished, the Pustules and their Clusters again appeared, and
leisurely increasing daily in number and bulk at length grew fouler than
before, insomuch that like an Hydra, after the loss of one head this disease
received sevenfold.

I knew another strong man endowed with a lusty habit of Body, who after he had
labored with an Impetigo many years, the malady still increasing, and being
advanced to the highest, he was covered all over with a white Scurf, as it were
leprous, that every night the Scales fell off like Bran in great plenty in his
bed, and might be gathered up in heaps. This man for Cures sake first tried the
ordinary Remedies of every kind, notwithstanding without success; and
afterward trying a lighter Salivation, found himself nothing better: but
afterward the same method being repeated, by a long and painful Spitting, he
seemed to be restored to health; but within three months the same disease
budding out, in a short space arrived to its former outragiousness; Moreover,
when he had undergone the third time that most painful Remedy, that affect,
which seemed expulsed for a certain time, returned again; and afterward maugre
this and all methods, it exercised its Tyranny during the Patients life. It
will not be requisite here to discourse any thing of the Lepra, which being
only a more intense degree of the former Malady, for the most part admits of no
Cure. As to what relates to other Tumors, and their manifold kinds, and the
Aetiologies or Reasons of each, I confess I am scarce able to contain my self,
but that I should enter upon that pleasant Field of Speculation. But this seems
as irrational and unusual, as for one wearyed with a long Course, and
breathless at the end, running beyond his Post, presently to begin a new Race.

FINIS.

