A DEFENSE OF THE TRVE SENSE AND MEANING OF THE WORDS OF THE HOLY APOSTLE Romans
CHAP. 4. ver. 3. 5. 9.

In an Answer to sundry Arguments gathered from the forenamed Scriptures, by
Mr. John Goodwin: which answer was first dispersed without the Authors name,
but since acknowledged By Mr George Walker.

Together with a reply to the former answer; or, Animadversions upon some of
the looser and fouler passages thereof.

By JOHN GOODWIN, Pastor of Colemanstreet London.

To every time there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven,
Ecclesiastes 3. 1.

A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance.
verse 4.

A time to keep silence, and a time to speak. verse 7.

A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of War, and a time of peace.
verse 8.

Published by a lover of the truth and peace.

Printed in the year 1641.

To the Reader.
Epistles of this nature, are ^^usually swelled up to their proper bulk with
large commendations, either of the works, (to which they are prefixed) or of
their Authors, or of both. I intend to wave this custom, though having a sure
foundation, and fitting materials, to build as sumptuous a structure in this
kind, as others have done in the like cases. Yet think not, that this
intention procedes from an unwillingnesse to pay that tribute of praise, which
is justly due to the name of any man: I acknowledge the equity of the Apostles
precept, Romans 13. 7, 8.
to render honor to whom honor does belong: it comes rather from an
indisposition, publicly to meddle in this great controversy, (wherein the
whole world stands engaged) viz to whom this golden apple is to be given; on
whose head this crown of honor is to be set. Whom o^e man approves, another
dislikes; whom a third does reverence, a fourth disdaines: and such is our
weakness, and partiallitie in judging, that no perfect agreement can be
expected, till the Romans 2. 5, 6.
revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who shall render to every man
according to his deeds. I shall not therefore endeavor to steal away the
heart of any man, after the Author of the Reply, or his opinion, by speaking
high and excellent things of him: all that I will say, is only this, I wish
him as much honor and respect from the world, as he is worthy of, which (I am
persuaded) is more then he looks for, and as much as his greatest adversary
can justly challenge: but to give in the full estimate, or precisely to set
down, what is his due above his fellows, I am unwilling, but far more unable;
yet something I could do this way, and I can hardly resist the strength of my
provocations hereunto, but I forbear; not that I dread Mr. Walkers
thunderbolts, to be censured by him as a rude impudent, Socinian Sectarie: but
because I desire that Mr. Goodwins reputation might be raised in none, by any
other engine, then by a real and evident conviction of his deservings: for
though to think well of those we know not, is counted charity; yet to applaud,
and admire any, upon no surer ground then the general vote, is folly, and may
prove dangerous: the womb of our times has been too abundantly fruitful
with instances herein many have we seen cast upon perplexing inconveniences,
and some yoaked with desperate errors, and that by those whose persons they
have ignorantly wondered after And I am persuaded, that many tenants in religion
(which are now confidently given, and greedily received as wholesome food)
would hardly down, were they not wrapped up in the sweet fame of such or such
men's names. I would not that Truth her self were entertained upon such terms:
certainly she accounts none her true subjects, but those only, who are
brought under her scepter, by the love of her commanding beauty; not by the
parts, learning, holiness of her choysest agents. Concerning the Reply (here
presented to thy consideration) I gather thus much from the Authors Vid
Preface.
words: that it was a work of recreation, not of labor; and therefore no
marvel, if it came into the world with a smiling countenance: and though in
this respect, it may be judged by some unlike its father, who is of a
wonderful grave and sober temper; yet upon a strict view, many of his
lyneaments are to be seen in the face of it; I mean, soundness of
judgment, quickenesse of wit, fairness of carriage, yea and mercy too
toward his adversary: for had he struck him in every place, where he found
him naked, he had left him so black and blew, that even Mr. Walkers friends
would hardly say, this is he. If any shall except, against the manner of
managing this warfare, and censure his expressions as too light, to hold out
with the weightinesse of his matter; I refer such for satisfaction to his
own preface. As far as I understand, no wiser course can be taken, to charm
down the spirit of anger into soberness, then to deal with it in a pleasant
way: whether Mr. Walker does strongly sympathy with this turbulent passion,
none will question, but such as are strangers to his dealings: and I verily
believe, when the Author put his Reply into this dress, he had respect to him
alone, to whom he privately sent it, not once deeming (as I conceive) that ever
it should be looked upon by so many, and such juditious eyes, as it is now
likely to fall under. For it is probable, that neither he nor Mr. W. when first
they joined their heads and pens together for the framing of these Tracts,
intended to scatter them abode by the hand of the press. Indeed Mr. Walker
when he received the Reply, promised the messengers to print both that, and his
own Answer; which had been fair, and worthy the man, he would be taken to
be. But wh^le the performance thereof was expected, he brings into the world, a
confused medley of the strangest S^cianisme and Christianisme, that was ever
heard of. By what figure he will be able to salve the breach of his promise,
I cannot guess; though he has forced them to do him service (as he
conceives) elsewhere, yet I much fear they will here all fail him: for
through the whole comp^sse of that his discourse, I can here nothing of the
R^ply; I confess he only mentions a scrurrilous Lybell fraught with lies,
forgeries, absurdities, contradictions, blasphemies, sent forth under the name
of a Reply: but I can harly persuade my self that he would so far abuse the
world, as to make it believe, that by this Lybell he means Mr. Goodwins
Reply. But if his passion so far transported him beyond his intellectualls,
as to charge so innocent a piece with such capitol crimes; I pity the man;
and expect its discharge from the hands of such as are not infested with so
mortal an enemy unto reason. Nor has he kept touch with his promise about
his own answer: for though the most part hereof may be gathered from thence,
yet is it made so unlike to what it was, by adding some thing, and substracting
others; that in consideration hereof, it was thought requisite, to print it in
that very shape, in which it came at first from between his hands, (for to
this alone has the Reply reference) and to couple both it and the Reply in one
volume.

I am consious of no other design, that the publisher propounded to himself,
but only this: to clear the Reply and the Author of it, from those false and
foul imputations of lying, forging, etc and to wash off from the face of that
truth, they plead for, those black coullers of Socinianisme, and
Arminianisme, which Mr. Walkers pencill has drawn over it; that appearing to
the eye of the world out of his clothing; their innocence might be
acknowledged in the judgments and consciences of reasonable men. The
accomplishment of which design, will (I dare say) satisfyingly recompense his
cost and labor; and enlarge his heart toward the God of peace and truth, who
has given success to so just, so pious, so commendable an undertaking.

Farewell.
AN EPITOME OF Mr. Walkers Answer. OR A special receipt by a modern Divine
against the Dangerous infection of an Orthodox Truth.
REcipe 21. folio's or leaves of papyrus, as close written as may well be read.
Sosinus and Arminius well beaten together, and strained through a course
boulter of an English discourse: A handful of good Scriptures carelessly
gathered, and well steeped in the standing water of a new laid interpretation.
Add hereunto two or three Hebrew roots: of reading a sufficient quantity: of
Learning about a third part: Of the herb called (...) in Engling lack-love, 6
leaves (at the least) of black tongue-wort some fifteen slips: of tropes and
metonymies gathered where they never grew as many as you can come by: of the
drugg called diabolico-pseudo* lobetico 12 ounces: of the simple called
insultory or assafetidea as much: of the sweet and savory herb discretion,
half a scruple.

Let all these be made up into the body of a discourse and swallowed down
without chewing upon a full stomach, and take heed of drinking any sound
interpetation after them, and there is little fear that the truth will ever
do you any harm.

Probatum est.
Reader, if thou had rather take a little pains, then be angry; I desire
thee to relieve the Printer with thy pen, and to reform thy Book, before thou
read it, according to these subsequent directions.
In the Preface.
Page 9: line 5. for, serapp. r. scrap. p 11 l. 1. for, present, r. pleasant.
l. 18. for, (...). p. 12. l. 25. for, passages r. pages. p. 13. l. 13. for,
discrologie, r. aischrologie. l. 14. for, messenger, r. messengers. l. 15. for,
magnificant, r. magnificent.

In the discourse.
p. 6. l. 31. for corponeris, r. componens p. 8. l. 29. for opinion any, r.
opinion, that any. p. 13. l. 13. for, Divinity (who, r. Divinity at Leyden
(who. ibid. for, of judgment, r. of that judgment. p. 15. l. 22. for, urge a
little, r. urge. A little. p. 20. l. 10. for, defended, here, r. defended, etc.
Here. l. 18. for, word, discourse, r. wordie disco^se. l. ult. for, too, r. to.
p. 22. l. ult. for, misperisiar, r misprision. p. 26. l. 13. for, our, r.
own. p. 29. l. 27. for, no satisfaction, r. no such satisfaction. p. 32. l.
15. for, this is, r. is this. p. 33. l. 27. for, first. r. fullest. p. 34. l.
20. for, says further, r. says he further. p. 37. l. 24. for, skill, r.
still. p. 40. l. 33. for, promises, r. premises. p. 43. l. 2. for,
justification, r. or free justification. p. 47. l. 9. for hihobular, r.
triobular. p. 48. l. 19. for, black, in so, r. so black and. p. 55. l. 26. for,
neighbors, r. neighbor. p. 59. l. 33. for, me, r. men. p. 65. l. 25. for,
contradiction, r. contradictions. p. 70. l. 2. for, belived, r. believing. p.
l. 10. for, not for, r. not of us for.
p. 74. l. 2. for, to speak, r. to speak to. p. 86. l. 12. for, interpres, r.
interpretesse. p. 95. l. 37. for, censured, r. conceived.
A DEFENSE OF THE TRVE SENSE AND MEANING of the words of the holy Apostle ROMANS
4. v. 3. where it is said, that Abraham believed GOD, and it was counted to him
for Righteousness: and v. 5. to him that believes his Faith is counted for
Righteousness: and v. 9. for we say that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for
Righteousness.
THE true sense and meaning of the holy Apostle in these speeches, according to
the common judgment of the most godly, learned, and judicious Divines of the
best Reformed Churches, is this; That upon Abraham's believing the Promise of
God, that God would be his shield, and exceeding great reward; and that God
would raise up out of his loins the blessed Seed (Christ the Redeemer;) in
whom all the Elect and faithful of all Nations being gathered unto God, and by
one Spirit Baptized, and united together into one spiritual body with him
their spiritual head; and made lively and sensible partakers of his perfect
obedience, righteousness, and full satisfaction for redemption, remission of
sins, justification and perfect salvation should become Abraham's faithful
seed, and partakers of the same reward, and should we more seek the reward of
blessedness, by the righteousness of their own works, performed according
to the tenor of the Law in every man's own person, but in the Lord Jesus
Christ who is the Jehovah Zidkenu, the Lord our righteousness, and God. the lot
and portion of every true believer; upon Abraham's believing of the promise, and
firmly without staggering applying to himself this blessing promised, and
upon his full persuasion that God who promised out of his free grace, was by
his power able to perform though he by course of Nature, and by reason of the
deadness of Sarahs womb, seemed and indeed was incapable of that blessing;
God the Lord counted this to him for righteousness, that is, accepted and
accounted him for a righteous man, as indeed he was not for any works of his
own, or by any righteousness performed in his own person according to the
Law, but by the righteousness of faith; that is, the righteousness of Christ
apprehended and applied by Faith, for being thus justified by faith, and having
this Communion with Christ of his full satisfaction and righteousness, God
becomes in Christ our shield and exceeding great reward.

The Corrupt exposition of the Apostles words, by the Heretic Socinus, and
his followers the Arminians, and other fanaticall Sectaries.
THey all hold and obstinately affirm, that Abraham's believing and his faith
(taken in a proper literal sense without any trope) was counted to him for
righteousness instead of all righteousness, which either Abraham him self in his
own person, or any surety in his own person, or any surety in his behalf,
could perform to the Law of God; And upon these words thus wrested; they build
all their heretical Doctrines and opinions, concerning justification of the
faithful before God, to wit; First, that faith as it is in every believer a
gift of God, even as it is inherent in him, and is his own faith and
believing, is the only thing which God of his grace and mercy, and out of his
absolute sovereigne power, and dominion is pleased to ordain, appoint, and
account for all the righteousness which a man shall have for his
justification, though in truth and in strictness of the Law, and according to
the rule of justice it is no righteousness; being weak oftentimes and full of
infirmities.

That the spirit of God by the Apostle in these words, did 2.
not intend or mean any of the Communion of the righteousness and perfect
obedience performed by Christ to the Law as our surety and in our stead, nor
any imputation of that righteousness to every true believer for justification,
nor Gods accepting of the faithful for righteous by their communion of that
righteousness applied, possessed, and enjoyed by faith.

By faith and believing they do not understand that 3.
gift and work of Gods spirit in the elect regenera^e, and sanctified, by
which they do believe and are persuaded that they are in Christ, and Christ is
their head, and they as members have communion of all his benefits, even of his
full satisfaction and perfect righteousness for remission of all their sins,
and for justification; and by this persuasion and believing they have a sweet
and lively sense, feeling and fruition of Christ's satisfaction and
righteousness, and rest on them as on the covering and propitiation of their
sins, and their righteousness by which they stand righteous before God and are
justified; but by faith and believing they understand no more but a confidence
in God: that he will perform his promises made in Christ, and an assent unto
his word that it is true; the tenor of which word and promises they conceive
to be this, that Christ in his pure perfect humane nature, by his righteousness,
sufferings and obedience unto death, has merited such high favor with God,
that God in honor to him, is pleased to accept and account the faith of them
that believe him to be a sufficient Savior, for righteousness, and requires
noe other righteousness to constitute them, and make them after any sort
formally righteous in their justification.

When they acknowledge that Christ his perfect satisfaction and righteousness,
is the meritorious cause of 4
our justification, they do not mean, that Christ his satisfaction and
righteousness are communicated to us, and by faith so apprehended and possessed
that we thereby are indeed, and in Gods account righteous before God and are
justified, and they deserve that he should so account us for them, but this is
their mind and meaning that Christ by his righteousness, and obedience, has
merited that God for his sake should account faith to us for righteousness;
without either our own works of the Law, or his righteousness imputed to us,
and made ours by communion, and when they say, faith is imputed for
righteousness as an instrument: they mean not as the spiritual hand or
instrument, applying Christ his righteousness, to be after a sort the formal
righteousness of the believer, but that faith as it is the instrument by which
the believer does believe that Christ has purchased this favor, that faith
should be the only thing accounted to him for righteousness.

The Orthodoxe Exposition I will prove and confirm from the words of the
Apostle himself; and other strong Arguments in the first place; and afterward
will confute and overthrow the Heretical Exposition.
The true Exposition defended.
FOr the right understanding of the Apostles words, three things are first to
be considered and explained: First, what is here meant by faith and believing.
Secondly, what righteousness is here meant. Thirdly what is meant by imputation.

By faith in this place we must not understand that natural habit, and power
which is common to all reasonable men, who upon their knowledge of things
spoken or promised, do give willing assent unto them that they are true,
either for the Authority of the speaker, whom they do respect and judge to be
faithful: or because they see good reason in the things spoken and promised,
and if the things promised tend to their own good, they rest upon them
confidently, and persuade themselves that they are sure and certain of them
already, or shall receive and enjoy them in due time without fail. But here,
by faith we are to understand that supernatural gift and grace of believing
wrought in the elect, regenerate by the spirit shed on them abundantly through
Jesus Christ, Tit. 3. 6. which is therefore called most holy faith, Jude 20.
this faith agreeeth with the other in these four points.

First, as that is an habit and power of believing, so 1
is this, secondly, as that contains in it, notitiam in 2
intellectu, a knowledge and notice of the things spoken and believed; so does
this; And as that contains in it assensum in voluntate an assent of the will,
so does this also; And 3
as that faith when it goes no further is called historical; so this also: And
as that faith when it reaches to good 4.
things promised to our selves particularly, to apply them and rest on them,
has also fiduciam in cord and affectionibus, a trust and confidence of the
heart and affections in it; so has this also, and is called a firm persuasion,
trust, confidence; but they differ in diverse things. First that is a natural
power or habit. This is spiritual, wrought in men by the Spirit of God,
dwelling in them and uniting them to Christ in one mystical body. Secondly
that has in it no knowledge but natural arising from light of natural
reason, nor any assent of the will or confidence in the heart and affections;
but such as are drawn, stirred up, and wrought, by means of natural light
and common causes; this has in it a spiritual knowledge arising from the
spirit of God, enlightening the understanding; the Spirit also enclines and
moves the will to give assent, and confirms the heart with confidence and
firm persuasion. Thirdly that is common to all reasonable men; This is proper
to the elect, regenerate, and sanctified by the holy Ghost shed on them through
Christ; and is the first and the radical grace and virtue of renovation. 4.
That has for the object or things believed, either natural and worldly things
only, or things heavenly and supernatural, seen and discerned through the
dark mist of natural reason and assented to, and rested on with a carnal and
unsanctified will and heart. This has for the object, things supernatural,
and heavenly and spiritual, discerned by supernatural light, assented to with
an holy and sanctified will: confirmed to the heart by a spiritual sense: and
sweet taste of the things promised, wrought by the holy Spirit in the true
believer, apprehending and applying them.

But to come near to the Text, the believing which the Apostle speaks of in
the 3. verse, and also in the 9. and 22. verses, is the faith and believing of
Abraham, who diverse years before this believing which is said to be counted to
him for righteousness, was called out of his own Country: and by faith obeyed
Gods calling, and went and so^ourned in the Land promised to him and his seed,
as appears Heb. 11. 8. 9. he had overcome and slaughtered four mighty Kings,
and their victorious arm^es by faith and confidence in Gods promises; an^
Melchizedeck King of Salem the Priest of the most High God, had blessed him (as
we read Genesis 14.) and after th^se things the Lord appeared and spoke to Abraham
and said, fear not, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward, and
withal he renewed his promise of the blessed seed, by means of which seed
all the families of the Earth should be blessed in Abraham, and should become
his faithful children; besides his natural seed and posterity which should
come of the Son and Heir of his own bowels, as appears Genesis 15. 1. 4.
These were the promises which God made to Abraham, and which Abraham believed
to be true, and resting upon the Lord by firm faith and belief for the
performance of them, the Lord counted it to him for righteousness, Genesis 15. 6.
or, as the Apostle expresses the same sentence in the same sense, though in
words somewhat different, it was counted to him, verse 5. even faith was
reckoned to him for righteousness, verse. 9.

Now this faith and believing was first an holy spiritual belief: and the
faith of a man long before called of God, and sanctified by his Spirit, and
made obedient to God and his word. Secondly, It was a belief not only of the
promise of Christ the blessed seed in general; but more specially that Christ
according to the flesh, should come out of his own bowels, and that by Christ
the Son of God made man of his seed, the redemption both of him, and of all
his faithful seed, that is, all true believers should be wrought and
performed, Gods wrath appeased, the Law fulfilled, Justice satisfied, perfect
righteousness brought in for their justification, and by his and their union
with Christ by one spirit, and Communion of all his benefits, they should have
God for their portion and reward, for their shield and defense and should not
need to seek the blessing, and reward of eternal life from their own works,
or their own righteousness; and fulfilling of the Law in their own persons,
but merely from the free grace of God, and of his free gui^t in Christ, as a
reward of Christ's righteousness freely given to them, and of them apprehended
by faith and believing. Thirdly, this faith of Abraham was not a weak, but a
strong faith, and belief without staggering, even a full persuasion, that God
who quickneth the dead, and calls those things which be not, as if they were,
and was able to make good, and to perform what he had promised; yea it was a
believing in hope against hope; that God could out of a dead body and womb
raise up a lively seed, and make them spiritually righteous: who are by nature
and according to the Law wicked sinners. All these things are manifest by the
places before cited, Gen: 15. and by the express words of the Apostle in this
chap: from the tenth verse to the end of the Chapter. And thus you see what is
meant by faith which is here said to be counted for righteous.

Secondly, the righteousness here meant is not the righteousness which is
according to the strictness and tenor of the Law; that is, righteousness of a
man's own works, performed by every man in his own person to the Law of God;
for the Apostle does dispute altogether against that righteousness and proves,
that neither Abraham was justified or counted of God righteous for it, as
appears in the 2. 5. 6. 13. verses, nor any other at any time, as appears in
the Chapter before. And Chap. 8. 3. and 9. 32. 10. 3. But here is meant an
Evangelical righteousness, which does not consist in any work or works
performed by a man himself in his own person, nor in any grace or virtue
inherent in himself, but is a righteousness which God of his own free grace
does impute to the true Believer; who by one Spirit is united to Christ, and
has communion with him, and is called the righteousness of Faith, and does
exclude legal justification, by righteousness of a man's own works, as
appears in the whole discourse of the Apostle in this and the former Chapter,
and in diverse other places of this Epistle, especially ver. 13. of this 4
Chap. and in Chap. 3. 27. 28.

Thirdly, the phrase of imputing, or counting a thing to one signifies both in
the Old and New Testament, an Act of judgment and estimation, by which a thing
is judged, esteemed, reckoned, and accounted to be as it is indeed, and then it
is just, and according to truth: but when a thing is counted, or judged,
thought, and esteemed, to be as it is not, then it is unjust, and not according
to truth. Now Gods thoughts are always just, and his judgment is according to
truth. Romans 2. 2. And therefore a lust imputing and counting, is here meant, for
God does account, and Judge of all persons, and things, so as they are. Of
unjust counting, and imputing fal^ely, we have some examples in Scripture, as 1
Kings 1 21. where Bathsheba says to David I and my Son Solomon shallbe
counted offenders that is, usurping Adonijah and his wicked Company, will so
esteem and judge us: of reputing, and coun^ing truly as the thing is, we have
examples also, as Nehemiah 13. 13. where it is said of the chosen Levites, that
they were counted faithful, viz upon former experience of their faithfulness,
and therefore the Office of distributing to the^ Brethren, was counted to them.
And Levit 17. 4. ^here it is said, Blood shall be imputed to that man he has
shed blood, and shall be cut off from among his people. And Psalm 22. 30. a s^ed
shall serve him, it shallbe counted to the Lord for a generation.

Moreover, this word impute or count, signifies sometimes in the most proper
sense a bare Act of the Judgment and thought, as Pro. 17. 28. where a ^oole is
said to be counted wise when he holds his peace; that is, men for the present
judge or think him wise, at least in that point of silence.

Sometimes it signifies in a more full sense, not only thinking, Judging, and
counting persons to be good or bad, just, or unjust, innocent, or guilty; but
also dealing with them, and using them accordingly, as in the places before
named, 1 Kings 1. 21. Nehem. 13. 13. and Levit. 17. 4. and Psalm 22. 30. also 1 Samuel 2^. 15. where Abimelech purging himself before Saul, from the offense of
conspiracy with David against him (as Doeg had falsely accused him) says, Let
not the King impute any thing unto his servant, that is, Let him not think or
judge his servant guilty, nor deal with him, or use him as a Conspiratour.

Sometimes it signifies by a Metonymie of the cause for the effect, condemning,
and punishing an offense in a guilty person as he has deserved, and to deal
with him and use him as he is justly thought and judged to have deserved, as 2 Samuel 19. 19. Shimei said, Let not my Lord impute iniquity unto me: he does not
desire that David would not think, nor judge, nor count his iniquity to be no
iniquity, that had been against all reason, but that for the satisfaction
which he had made, in coming first of all to the house of Joseph to meet David,
and to bring him again to his Kingdom, David would graciously pardon his
offense, and not proceed against him, and punish him as justly, and worthy of
punishment.

Sometimes it signifies by a Metaphor, to count one thing as it were another,
or no better then another, or of the same value, as Prove. 27. 14. where a
flattering salutation or blessing, given with a loud voice, is said to be
counted a Curse, that is, esteemed no better then if it were a Curse.

Sometimes to use one, as if he counted him of another Condition, as Genesis 31.
15. where it is said of Laban, that he counted his Daughters strangers; that
is, used them as if he had counted them strangers: and Job. 31. 10. where Job
says, that God counts him for his enemy; that is, afflicts, and plagueth
him, as if he counted him an enemy.

Sometimes the word signifies to skore up or to put upon a man's account or
reckoning, either the offense or debt which he himself runs into; as Romans 5.
13. where it is said, that sin is not imputed when there is no Law: that is,
it is not ^o skored up, that men are punished for it, and it is not judged and
punished in them, or the debt which he takes upon him for another: as Philemon
verse 18. If he has wronged thee, or is indebted to thee put that on mine
account, that is, impute and count it to me, and set it on my skore.

Now the several significations of the several words being thus laid open, I
proceed more particularly to the true sense and meaning of every word in these
speeches, and to show how far the speeches may be extended. And first, by
Faith, and believing which is counted to every true believer (and was counted
to Abraham) for righteousness. I understand here (according to the judgment of
the most Orthodox Divines) the true holy spiritual faith, and belief, which
is before showed to have bin in Abraham, and which is proper to the elect
regenerate, and is said to be imputed to them for righteousness: B^
righteousness is here meant Evangelical righteousness, (which is opposed to
the legal righteousness of works, which is inherent in every man, and is
every man's fulfilling of the Law in his own person) even the perfect
satisfaction and righteousness of Christ, (God and man) ^u^ mediator and
surety which he the Son of God, in man's Nature performed to the Law, and which
is apprehended by every true believer, and applied to himself by a lively
says and whereof he has communion and is truly made partaker by his
Spiritual union with Christ, of whose mystical body he is a member, being
B^ptized and engraf^ed thereinto by one Spirit. By the imputing and counting of
that faith for righteousness to Abraham, and to every one of his faithful
seed, is here meant Gods setting of Christ's righteousness on the skore, and
putting it on the account of every tru^ believer, and and his j^dging,
esteeming, and counting them no more guilty of sin, but perfectly righteous
by that Evangelical righteousness, which is called the righteousness of God.
2 Cor. 5. last ver. because it is the righteousness of God, performed in our
Nature, and the righteousness of faith, and not of works, because the
faithful obtain, and enjoy, and apply it by believing, and not by working the
works of the Law, Romans 4. 11. 13. For the confirmation of this exposition, and
justifying of this truth, we need seek no further Arguments, but such as may be
gathered from the Apostles own words, as in other of his Epistles, so
especially in this to the Romans.

The first argument is drawn from the words of the Apostle in the second
chap: of this Epistle, verse 26. where this word (...) (as it signifies) to be
imputed or counted, is first used; If (says he) the uncircumcision keep the
righteousness of the Law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for
Circumcision? by uncircumsion (in the first clause) we cannot understand the
foreskinne of the flesh not cut off, it is most absurd, and against common
sense and reason to think or to suppose that it can or could perform and
keep the righteousness of the Law, but by uncircumcision is meant a Gentile not
circumcised, as Beza, (the most learned, judicious, and accurate Critik and
searcher out of the sense of everyword and sentence in the new Testament) does
expound the word, and so we have in this word a Metonymie of the a^janct for
the Subject: The same word in the second clause (as B^za also well observes)
does not here signify the foreskin or uncircumcision in a proper sense (for
that cannot but most falsely be reputed and counted for circumcision; because
they are contradictories one to another) but the state and condition of him who
is uncircumcised, even the outward state of Gentilisme; and here is another
Metonymie of the same kind, even the sign put for the thing signified, yea it
signifies not the state of a Gentile or uncircumcised man barely considered in
it self, but as comprehending in it the righteousness of the Law, which the
man uncircumcised has kept and performed in that state, as the words
necessarily imply; for the Apostle does not here suppose only uncircumcision,
but the observation of the righteousness of the Law in the state of
uncircumcision; and so here is a Metalepsis or double trope, even a metonymie
also of the thing containing for the thing contained, that is, of the Subject
for the adjunct, and also of the cause for the effect; that is, the man in the
state of uncircumcision keeping the righteousness of the law, for the
righteousness of the law by him performed. By circumcision we cannot understand
the outward cuting away of the foreskin of the flesh, neither taken literaly
and carnally, as the corrupt Jews did take it, for a work of righteousness and
obedience to the Law for justification, so it was an obligation, by which the
circumcised was bound under pain of cutting off for ever to perform the whole
Law, as appears Gal. 5. 3. And for a righteous Gentile to be brought under
this bondage was no benefit, but a miserable condition; neither can
circumcision be here taken sacramentally, as it was an outward sign and seal
of the righteousness of faith, and of Mortification, and of all virtues of
Holiness by which men are sanctified to God and become his peculiar people,
for Ismael, Esau and all the profane persons of Israel circumcised, were
partakers of the outward sign and Sacrament of circumcision, and yet were
destitute of the inward Grace signified; And in neither respect can
uncircumcision, or the person uncircumcised, nor Gentilism^, together with the
keeping the righteousness of the Law be counted truly for circumcision, nor
reckoned in the place of it; But here by circumcision is meant the circumcision
of the hear in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, for so the Apostle does
expound himself verse 29. the (word (...) shall be counted) signifies here in
a full sense judging, counting approving, accepting and using accordingly.

Now all laid together the meaning of the Apostle in these words is this, that
if a man uncircumcised do keep all the Commandments, and perform the
righteousness of the Law, his state of Gentilisme comprehending in it the
righteousness of the Law, shall be counted and accepted for the state of an holy
and righteous man circumcised in heart, and he though uncircumcised in flesh,
and a Gentile in outward estate, shall be counted of God a true Israelite
without guile, truly circumcised with inward spiritual circumcision of the
heart in the spirit, whose praise is not of men, but of God. This sense and
meaning of the words, and of this phrase is so clear and manifest, and so
perfectly agreeable to all true reason, that none can deny it, unless he will
set himself to rebel against the light; and this phrase being the same which
this Apostle does use again, where he mentions counting and imputing of faith
and believing for righteousness to Abraham, and to every true believer, does
give light for the discovering of the true sense and meaning of the words, the
phrase being the very same. Wherefore if we will follow the Apostle himself,
and tread after him in the same steps, being the surest guide, and best
expounder of his own words and meaning, we must by Abraham's believing by a
Metalepsis or double trope, with our learned Divines, understand Abraham
standing in the state of a true believer, united by one spirit unto God in
Christ, and having communion of his satisfaction and righteousness, which were
of force from the beginning to save and justify, and to make God the reward of
the believer. And by faith imputed or counted for righteousness, we must not
understand faith in a proper sense, but by a double trope, for the state and
condition of a true faithful man, and for that which faith comprehends and
includes in it, even the perfect righteousness and full satisfaction of Christ
God and man: By righteousness we must understand the state of a man justified,
or Evangelicall righteousness communicated to the justified man, and made his
for justification. And by counting and imputing we must understand the
accepting, approving, esteeming and judging of Abraham, and every true
believer, so soon as he appears faithful to be in the state of a man
justified, and Gods setting on his skore, and counting, and imputing to him
being faithful, the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, which is
indeed and in truth made his by spiritual union and communion with Christ.

Hear then the true paraphrase upon the Apostles words, showing the true sense
and meaning of them, Abraham upon a true inward spiritual sense of his union
and communion with Christ, did believe and was surely persuaded that God was
his reward, and this his belief and faith comprehending Christ for
righteousness, and containing in it after a sort the righteousness of Christ, God
counted it to him for righteousness; that is, set it on his skore, and reckoned
it to him for justification, and judged, esteemed and accepted him for a man
truly righteous, as indeed he was, and so whosoever does not rest on his own
works for justification, nor seeks thereby to be justified, but by faith
seeks that righteousness which makes him righteous by the communion of it,
when in himself by nature he is ungodly, his faith comprehending in it Christ
and his righteousness, is counted for righteousness, because it settles him in
the state of a righteous man; and Gods setting on his skore Christ's
satisfaction and righteousness, does accept him for a man justified.

A second argument confirming the exposition is drawn from the Apostles own
words in the fourth verse: now to him that works, the reward is not reckoned
of grace, but of d^bt, whereby it is manifest that the thing counted for
righteousness brings with it a reward, also to the believer which is counted,
not of debt, bu^ grace, now there is nothing which can bring the reward of
eternal life, and Glory to a believer, when it is counted to him and set on his
skore, but the perfect righteousness and satisfaction of Jesus Christ; that, all
grant to be meritoribus of eternal life to all that are partakers of it, and
because the communion and imputation of it is of Gods free grace, and the faith
by which we receive, apply and enjoy it, is Gods free gift, therefore the
reward, to wit, eternal life is of free Grace, and not of debt, as the Apostle
here says. Whereupon the the Conclusion follows, that the thing counted for
righteousness is the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith.

Thirdly, in the 6. and 7. verses the Apostle teaches expressly; that the
thing imputed by God is righteousness; and such a righteousness, as being
imputed, brings forgiveness of iniquity, and covers sins, and so makes the
believer blessed. Now there is no righteousness to be found among all mankind,
besides Christ's perfect righteousness and full satisfaction; and that is a
perfect propitiation for all sins, and an expiation of all iniquity to them
who by faith have put on Christ, therefore it is the true righteousness which is
imputed to every believer for justification.

Fourthly, that which is here said to be imputed to Abraham, and to every
believer, is for righteousness to justification, for the discourse of the
Apostle here, and in the 3. and 5. chap. is altogether of justifying, as
appears chap. 3. verse 20. 24. 26. 28. 30 and also chap. 5. 1. 16. 18, 19. in
all which places he mentions justification and justifying; And here in this 4.
chap. he brings Abraham's example, and David's testimony to show how we are
justified: now there is nothing which does serve to us for righteousness to
justification, but that which is found in Christ our Mediator, even his
righteousness and perfect fulfilling of the Law; so this Apostle does plainly
affirm and teach chap. 5. 19. and chap. 8. 3. 4. and Chap. 10. 3. 4. Therefore
this righteousness is upon the true believing of Abraham, and the faithful
counted and imputed to them, and set on their skore for their justification.

Fifthly, that exposition of a phrase or speech of Scripture, which is warranted
by other places of Scripture, wherefore that phrase is used, is to be judged
the best exposition; this none can with any reason deny, for the Spirit of God
speaking in Scripture, is the best expounder of his own meaning. Now this
exposition, that imputing or counting a thing for righteousness, is no more but
declaring a man thereby to be righteous, and giving him the Testimony of
righteousness, is warranted by other Scriptures wheresoever it is used.
Therefore this is to be judged the best exposition.

For confirmation of the assumption or minor we have that place of holy
Scripture, Psalm. 106. in which only and no where else, a thing is said to be
imputed or counted to a man for righteousness; viz. Phineas, his godly zealous
act of executing judgment on Zimri, and C^sbi, then Phineas stood up (says
the Psalmist) and executed judgment, and that was counted to him for
righteousness, now no man can understand, that this act was accepted of God for
righteousness to justification, for then a man may be justified before God by
one godly and zealous act of his own, which is that which the Apostle utterly
condemns for a gross error, and bends his whole discourse against it. The
true sense and meaning of this phrase is no more but this, that Phineas
performing such a godly zealous act, as is proper to a faithful righteous man
only, who has the Spirit of regeneration, and of sanctification dwelling in
him: uniting him to Christ, and making him by faith a true partaker of (...)
righteousness, God upon this act gave him the Testimony of righteousness: and
declared him to be a righteous man truly justified. Therefore the phrase of
imputing or counting faith for righteousness, signifies no more but this, that
the true believer is counted a righteous man, and God gives him the Testimony
of righteousness, because he is indeed partaker of Christ's righteousness, which
he has apprehended and applied by faith. If I should insist upon humane
testimonies, and the opinions of Orthodox expositours of these words both
ancient and modern for the further proof of this exposition, a large volume
would be little enough: for the particular rehearsing of them all, let these
five arguments suffice.

The Confutation of the false exposition made by Socinus, and other Heretics
his Disciples; as Wotton, Goodwin, and their Companions.
FIrst, whereas they hold, that faith in a proper literal sense; that is,
considered in it self without relation to any other thing, is counted to every
true believer for righteousness to justification, and God requires in and of
us, no other thing for righteousness, neither our works performed in our own
persons, according to the Law, nor Christ's perfect righteousness, and fulfilling
of the Law, made ours by spiritual union and communion, and accepted of God
for us. This I prove to be false, heretical, and blasphemous by these
Arguments following.

First, Faith taken in a proper sense, is a part of our conformity and
obedience to the Law of God, which above all things requires that we give
honor to God, by believing him and his word, and trusting in him as our only
Rock, and the God of our strength and salvation. They therefore teaching, That
faith in a proper sense is counted for righteousness, do teach, that we are
justified by a work of obedience to the Law performed in our own persons, and
that this is the only righteousness which God requires any way of us for
justification: Therefore their opinion is heretical, more impious then the
Pelagian and Popish Heresies concerning justification.

Secondly, that which was imputed to Abraham, and is imputed to true believers,
is righteousness, so the Apostle affirms, ver. 6. and 11. But faith is not
righteousness taken in a proper sense, for righteousness is a perfect conformity
to the Law, as sin is transgression of the Law: Therefore faith in a proper
sense is not righteousness.

Thirdly, that which charge God with error, and falsehood, in his judgment,
is blasphemy.

This opinion, that God counts faith for righteousness, that is, thinks,
judges, and esteems it to be righteousness taken in a proper sense,
charge God with error and falsehood, in his Judgment; Therefore it is
blasphemy.

If they plead, that God by his sovereign power, may graciously count that
which is not righteousness, for righteousness to the believer: I answer, that
God by his sovereign power, cannotly, nor err, nor Judge unrighteously, it is
contrary to his infinite and eternal Justice, which will not be satisfied
without fulfilling of his just Law, and perfect righteousness communicated, and
imputed to us: Therefore this is a base shift, and wicked pretense, devised to
cover their blasphemy, by that which is indeed, a greater blasphemy.

Fourthly that opinion which denies, and takes away the means by which God
is revealed to be infinitely Just, merciful, and wise, and makes the
satisfaction of Christ and his perfect fulfilling of the Law, a vain and
needless thing, is most Heretical, impious, and blasphemous.

This opinion, that God by his sovereign power can, and does count, and
accept, faith in a proper sense for righteousness to Justification, without
imputation of Christ's satisfaction, and righteousness, takes away these means,
and makes Christ's fulfilling of the Law, a vain and needless thing. Therefore
it is an impious heretical and blasphemous opinion. The means by which God is
revealed to be infinitely Just, merciful and wise, are these: Namely, First,
that he cannot be reconciled to man without a full satisfaction made to his
just Law by men's surety in their stead, and by him communicated to them, and
made theirs as truly as if they had fulfilled the Law in their own persons,
and though the satisfaction be of infinite valve, yet it cannot profit them
till they have communion of it, and be partakers thereof: this is that which
reveals God to be infinitely Just, and that his infinite justice being so
strict, he would mercifully give his own Son to become man, and in man's
nature, to make such a full satisfaction for men, and by his Spirit shed on
them through Christ, would unite them unto him in one body, and communicate him
with all his benefits and satisfaction to them, to be truly theirs, and to
satisfy for them. This reveals his infinite mercy, bounty, and wisdom: And
by these means, this opinion takes away Gods justice, while it sets God forth
to be such a one as can dispense with is justice and accept faith in a proper
sense for righteousness which is no righteousness, but only a weak imperfect
work and duty which we owe to the Law. If Gods justice may thus be dispensed
with, and a weak thing in frail man, counted for righteousness without any
communion, or imputation. What need was there of Christ's Death, suffering, and
obedience; God might as well have accepted the sacrifice of a Lamb, or the
suffering and obedience of a mere man, and so the full satisfaction of Christ
is vain and needless, and it was want of wisdom in God to spend so much of
Christ's blood and obedience in vain, when by his sovereign power he might
have accounted a less thing for man's ransom. Therefore this opinion is
blasphemy.

Fifthly, that opinion which overthrowes the sacraments of the Gospel, and the
true use of them, is heretical and blasphemous.

This opinion, that Christ's righteousness and obedience is is not imputed to the
saithfull does so; for the Sacraments are seals of our communion with Christ,
and the Lords Supper rightly received, is called, the communion of the
faithful; and when these her^ticks deny, that the righteousness of Christ is
imputed to the faithful, they deny their communion with Christ, for if Christ's
righteousness be communicated spiritually to them, and made theirs, God, whose
judgment is according to truth, cannot but impute it to them, and set it on
their skore, and count it theirs in his true Judgment: If he should not count
it theirs, and impute it to them, he should judge unjustly, and err in his
Judgment; and the Sacraments which are Seals of communion, are lying Seals,
if it be not communicated nor imputed. Therefore this opinion is heretical and
blasphemous.

Sixthly, that opinion which is invented and maintained by Heretics, who deny
the eternal God head of Christ, and tends to persuade men, that there is no
use of Christ's being God and man in one person, is Heretical, and blasphemous.
This opinion is such, and tends to take away the use of Christ's being God and
man in one person, and to persuade men there is no use of his being God and man
in one person; for all Orthodox Divines teach that it was necessary Christ
should be Go^ that the obedience and suffering of his manhood for a time might
be the suffering and obedience of God, and so of infinite value, and of more
worth then if the elect had suffered for ever in Hell in their own persons,
and that the fulfilling and obedience of him alone in our nature, should be of
more value then if they all in their own persons had suffered and obeyed as
much as he did: They also teach, that the satisfaction and righteousness which
Gods infinite justice required, and without which it could not be satisfied,
for the removing of so great an evil as Gods infinite wrath and eternal death
and torment in Hell, and for the bringing in of eternal righteousness and
making men worthy of, and fit for eternal glory in Heaven, which is an
infinite good, could not be performed by any but by him, who is God and man in
one person: And therefore the infinite evil which was to be taken away by
Christ's suffering, and the infinite good which was to be procured by his
obedience, and righteousness, required necessarily, that he should be God and
man in one person. But the authors of this opinion, by denying that Gods
infinite justice stands in strength and requires such a satisfaction, or that
every believer has need to have such a satisfaction communicated to him, made
his by spiritual union, and imputed to him, they take away the use of Christ's
Godhead, and the causes and reasons for which it was necessary that he should
be God, and in conclusion they deny Christ to be God. Therefore this opinion is
Heretical and Blasphemous.

Lastly, that opinion which is builded on Heretical and blasphemous grounds,
and is maintained and upheld by blasphemous Arguments, which shake and raze the
maine foundations of true Religion, is most Heretical and blasphemous: And
such is this opinion; for it is builded upon this blasphemous ground, That God
by his Sovereign power, may do and will, things contrary to his Justice; that
is, count, and accept that for righteousness, which is not righteousness, (...)
worthy to be counted one Act of perfect righteousness, (for such is the faith of
frail man taken in a proper sense) The arguments by which it is commonly
maintained, are also blasphemous, viz. That Christ's righteousness is not the
righteousness of true believers, neither is it imputed to them by God for
Justification: for they say, God cannot Justify one by the righteousness of
another, and therefore he cannot Justify us, by Christ's righteousness. What is
this but an express denial of the union of the faithful with Christ, for if
he be one with us, and we with him, then are our sins made his, and in him
satisfied, and his righteousness made ours, and we are Justified by it, as it is
ours, and not the righteousness of another, nor so different from us; but that
he and all his benefits are ours, and we have interest in them, and enjoy and
possess them so far as every one has need of them.

Secondly, they argue, that the righteousness of one cannot be sufficient for
all the elect, nor counted to them all for righteousness, which is in effect a
denying of Christ to be God and man in one person, for if they acknowledge him
to be God, they must needs acknowledge, that his righteousness and fulfilling
of the Law, is of more worth and value, then if all men in the world had
fulfilled the Law in their own persons, without failing in one point.

Thirdly, they argue, that if Christ's satisfaction and righteousness be so made
ours, and imputed to us, that the Law may be said to be fulfilled in us, and we
may be said to have satisfied Gods Justice in and by him our surety, and our
head, then is there no place left for pardon and free forgivenes of our sins,
for pardon and satisfaction are contrary. By which they overthrow the Doctrine
of redemption, and of Christ's satisfaction, and deny Christ to be our redeemer,
and to have paid our ransom, and made a full satisfaction for our sins to
Gods Justice contrary to the Scriptures, and the Judgment and belief of all
Christian Divines, which teach, that Christ has paid our ransom, and made a
full satisfaction, and so is properly our redeemer: and though Gods Iusti^^
exacted of Christ our surety, a full ransom, and did not abate to him the
least farthing of our debt, yet we are freely pardoned, and have free
forgiveness, and are freely justified by Gods grace, because he did freely
give Christ to satisfy and fulfill the Law for us, and does freely by his
grace, and by the free gift of his Spirit, unite us to Christ, and make us
partakers of his satisfaction, and imputing his satisfaction freely to us, does
for it freely forgive our sins, and justify us.

Fourthly, while they argue, that faith in a proper sense is all the
righteousness which the faithful have for Justification, and ye dare not
affirm that faith is any formal righteousness, but deny that any formal
righteousness is required in justification: Hereby they deny the Saints
justified to be righteous, contrary to the Scriptures, which call the faithful
Justified, the righteous, and the generation of the righteous, which they
cannot be without a formal righteousness, which does constitute and give being
to a righteous and justified man, as he is righteous and Justified; wherefore
this is a monstrous opinion, contrary to common sense and reason.

Fifthly, while they deny, that the faithful are constituted and made formally
righteous, by the obedience of Christ communicated, and imputed to them, (which
the Apostle in express words does affirm. Romans 5. 19. and 8. 4. and 10. 4.)
they fall into the heresy of the Pelagians, and are forced to deny that Adams
sin, and disobedience is communicated, and imputed to his posterity, and they
are formally sinners, by it; And rather then they will yield, that Infants
which die before they commit actual transgression in their own persons are by
death punished, because they are guilty of Adams sin, they do blasphemously
affirm, that God being offended, and moved to wrath by the sins of Parents,
will out of the magnificence of his Justice, destroy Innocent Babes, with their
sinful Parents, which is contrary to Gods word and Law, teaching us* that
Children shall not die for the sins of their Parents, unless they be partakers
with them, either by communion and imputation, or by imitation and approbation;
whereas they bring for instance, that the Children of Korah were destroyed with
their Father, though they were Innocent, and not partakers in the sin; here
in they contradict the Scriptures, which expressly affirm, that the Children
of Korah dyed not. Number. 26. 11. for they upon Moses his threatening, escaped,
and fled from their Fathers Tents in all likelihood, and only they perished,
who would not be admonished by Moses; to separate from the Congregation of
Korah, but adhered to him, and were partakers of his conspiracy and sin.

Sixt^y, when they for a color of their heresy confess in word, that Christ's
righteousness is the meritorio us cause of justification, and yet deny
communion, and imputation of it to believers; they fall into this horrible
opinion; That Christ by his righteousness, does justify Infidels, and
impenitent Reprobates, as much as he iustifies the elect, and faithful: For if
it be not communicated and imputed to believers in their justification, then
have they no more interest in the merit thereof, then Infidels, and damned
Reprobates; it is only meritorious, and of worth, value, and sufficiency, to
justify them, s it is to all mankind, even to Infidels; and what benefit, a
and merit of it they have, it is by their own free will making use of it,
which Infidels might do if they would, for they have the merit of it as much as
believers, can have without communion, and imputation of it.

Lastly, while they argue, that as in the first covenant, God required works
of the Law performed by every man in his own person, and this was the
condition which man was to perform for obtaining of life, and that covenant of
life was not free, but conditional; so in the new covenant, God requires in us
faith and believing, as the condition which we on our part must perform for
Justification, and so for the obtaining of eternal life and salvation. Hereby
they affirm the new covenant, to be a covenant conditional, and not of free
grace, for whatsoever is covenanted and promised upon a condition to be
performed, is not absolutely free, nor freely given, and so the faithful are
not justified freely b^ grace: whereas they plead, that justification and life
is promised upon condition of believing* (If you believe you shall be saved)
This is ^grosse and absurd mistake, for every conditional proposition does not
propound the condition of a covenant, for that whenever it is performed,
makes the thing covenanted a due debt, which the promiser is bound to give: But
oftentimes a conditional proposition propounds the means by which a free gift
is received, or the qualification by which one is made capable and fit to
receive and enjoy a free gift: As for example, it is often said in Scripture,
If y^^ will hear, and hearken, ye shall be saved, and not destroyed, your
Soul shall live, and ye shall ea^e the good of the Land. Isay 1. 19. Ier. 26.
3. and 36. and many other places. If we love one another, God dwells in us.
Ioh. 4. 12. If we walk in the light, we have fellowship one with another. 1
Ioh. 1* 7. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive. 1 John 1. 9. If a man be just, and do that which is right, he shall surely live.
Ezekiel. 18. 5. 21. in all which and the like places, there is no condition of the
covenant propounded, but only the means and the way to receive blessing or
the quality and condition by which men are made c^pable and fit to enjoy
blessing; and sometimes the effects, and fruits of them that are in a blessed
estate; and even so, when the Scripture says, If ye believe, ye shall be
justified: there is noe condition of the covenant propounded to be performed on
our part for justification, and salvation, but only the qualification by which
God does qualify us, and fit us by his free grace to be justified, and saved,
and the means by which he enables us to receive righteousness, and to lay hold
on sa^vation, which is freely given to us in Christ.

Upon these particulars severally observed out of their own words and
writings, I strongly conclude, that this opinion being builded upon such
blasphemous and heretical grounds, and maintained and upheld by such
blasphemous arguments, must needs be most impious, heretical and blasphemous.

Having already proved the S^cinian, and Arminian opinion to be most false,
impious, and heretical, and blasphemous, I proceed to discover the weakness
and absurdity of Mr. Goodwins Arguments, contained in the 2 Chapter of his
Socinian discourse, which he has attempted to publish in Print (as I hear.)
which arguments I^ am challenged to answer, and for that purpose he has with
his own hand delivered them to me: Against which I cheerefullie set my self,
and stand for the truth.

The maine ground upon which he pretends to build his Arguments, by which he
labors to prove imputation of faith in a proper sense, for righteousness, and
that faith, and not the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith is
counted for righteousness, is the 4th. Chap: of the Epistle to the Rom^ns.

Before his disputation he professes, that none by any wit of learning under
Heaven, is so fit to determinate what is imputed for righteousness in
justification as the holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures; and yet he says,
he leaves his meaning and intent in many things, unto men to debate, which they
only can declare to whom he reveals the secret of his counsel, and amongst
these being the true begotten of the truth: he seems to intimate, that he will
prove himself to be one, by some Stamp or superscription of a rational
authority, set upon him, though in common esteem he be but like other men, and
the nearer he is to the truth, the farther off he is from the approbation of
many men, greatest pretende^s to the truth.

Though the rude multitude of his Disciples give just offense, by proclayming
him to be the great light of Gods Church, revealed in these last times; yet in
him it is more scandalous and offensive, that he, professing the holy Ghost to
be the best judge for determining controversies, does immediately contradict
himself, by saying, that he leaves his meaning and intent, to be debated by
men, and makes such men as himself (stamped with a rational Authority) the
judges of his meaning: What is this, but the heresy of the Arminians, who
hold, that their right reason, (as they call it) and not the word of the spirit
speaking plainly in the Scriptures, is the best Judge of the spirits meaning
and intent in obscure places, and how scandalous, and offensive it is for him
to profes such excellent things of himself before hand, and in the whole
progress of his disputation to run so far from the Spirits meaning, and from
all right reason (as I shall prove by my si^^ing, and answering of his
Arguments) I leave to the Godly wise, and learned to Judge.

His first Argument.
FIrst, he undertakes to prove, That faith in a proper sen^e Argu.
is affirmed by the Apostle to be imputed for righteousness, and not the
righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, Because the phrase of imputing
faith for righteousness is once, yea twice, yea a third, and fourth time used by
the Apostle in this Chapter, and therefore has all the Authority and
countenance from the Scriptures that words can give, whereas the imputation of
Christ's righteousness has not the least relief either from any sound of
words, or sight of letter in the Scriptures.

Answer.
IN this Argument he shows himself as bold in affirming Ans.
manifest untruthes, as ignorant both of Rhetoric and Logic: In Rhetoric it
is counted an excellent ornament of speech to continue a trope, and it is
called an Allegory, (he is ignorant who knows not this.) In Logic he is
counted a boldlying Sophister, who holds that a Syllogism, a true and perfect
Argument has a proposition which is manifestly false. And what more gross
ignorance in Logic. then to hold two propositions to be negative and
affirmative, in respect of one another, which consist of diverse subjects, and
that an affirmative and the negative may both be true. All these absurdities
appear in this Argument.

First, in that he affirms the Apostles speech to be proper, and the sense to
be properly literal, because he uses the same phrase four times: hereby he
shows his Ignorance of the continuance of a trope, which Rhetoricians esteem
an elegant Allegory, and which is most frequent in the Scripture: For Jer. 26.
the Lord is said to repent 3 several times, viz. ver. 3. 13. 19. and yet the
speech is not proper, but improper; for God cannot properly be said to repent,
as appears Number. 23. 19. 1 Samuel 15. 29. Here then he shows as much Ignorance
of Rhetoric, and of the frequent use of rhetorical Allegories in the
Scripture, as he seems to show of Logic, when he makes his affirmative, viz.
Faith is imputed for righteousness; and affirms it to be true, and withal
says, that the negative int^parably accompanying it, is a truth also, when
Logic teaches, that if the affirmative be true, the negative must needs be
false. If by the negative he means this, viz. Christ's righteousness is not
imputed: He erres two ways from Logic, first by calling the negative
inseparably accompanying his affirmative. Secondly, by speaking ambiguously, a
speech which may bear diverse senses; which Logic abhorres in a disputation.
Secondly, he shows himself a bold lving Sophister, when he affirms most
falsely, and impudently (...) That no truth in Religion, nor article of our
faith, can boast of the Letter, that is, of the proper literal sense of the
Scripture more full, express, and pregnant, then that speech or proposition
which is four times used in one Chapter, For the contrary is most manifestly
true, as diverse places show, where one and the same thing is often affirmed,
and yet the speech is not proper, but tropicall: I will instance in one place
which is most convincing, viz. Gal. 3. where the word (Faith) is ten times used
in an improper sense, for the word of faith the Gospel, as it is opposed to the
Law carnally understood, viz. verse 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 12, 14, 22, 23, 25. Now the
maine proposition-of his Syllogism being so manifestly false, his conclusion
inferred from thence is certainly most false, viz. that this speech of Saint
Paul (Faith is counted for righteousness) is properly literal* and not improper
and tropicall

The second Argument co^ched under the other runs thus, if it be reduced into
a^ Syllogism. That which has 2. Arg.
not the least releife either from any sound of words, or sight of letter in
the Scripture, is an untruth and a mere fiction, the imputation of Christ's
righteousness has not the least releife, either from sound of words, or sight
of letter in Scripture. Therefore it is a mere fiction.

The Assumption or Minor of this Syllogism is most false, and therefore the
conclusion has no truth in it: I Ans.
prove it most false by the Apostles own words; for in the fourth v. he
says, that to the blessed man God imputes righteousness without works; and
verse 11. where he says, that as to Abraham faith was imputed before he was
circumcised, so God showed, that righteousness should be imputed to the
believing Gentiles though uncircumcised, In which two places he shows, that by
believing and faith imputed to Abraham and all true believers, the Spirit of
God means righteousness couched under the name of faith, and believing. Now
this righteousness cannot be faith it self in a proper sense; for every act of
faith is a work; but this is a righteousness imputed to us without works done
by us in our own persons, besides faith and all the believing of the most
faithful cannot make up one duty, or work of true and perfect righteousness,
such as God can impute to justification, for faith in the best believers (even
in Abraham himself) was stained with many doubtings and fears. But here must
needs b^e meant that righteousness in which the most just God can see no
imperfection, and therefore counts it for righteousness to justify all that are
partakers of it; And this can be no other but the righteousness which Christ
God and man performed in man's nature, therefore the contrary of the Assumption
is most true.

The third, which he calls his second main Argument or proof, is drawn from
the scope of the place, and the intent 3. Arg.
of the Apostle in his discourse of justification, here in these Chapters of
this Epistle, it runs thus being reduced into a Syllogism. The scope of the
place, and intent of the Apostle, is to hedge up as it were with thorns the
false way of justification which lay through works, and to put men by from
attempting any going that way; and also to discover the true way of
justification to them; that is; to to make known unto them; what they must
do, and what God requires of them for justification, and what he will accept
at their hands, instead of the works of the Law, and that is it which he hear
says, is imputed for righteousness. Now faith and believing in the proper and
formal signification is that which they must do and perform to their
justification, which also God requires of them inst ad of the works of the
Law, and will accept at their hands instead of them. Therefore it is faith in a
proper sense which is here by the Apostle to be counted for righteousness.

In the first proposition we have an heap of lies mixed Ans.
with contradiction, first, in that he says, the scope of the Apostle is to
put men from the false way of justification which lies through works, and to
discover the true way by making them know what they must do, and perform for
justification; here like a mad or drunken man he contradicts himself, for, who
does not see that the way of doing and performing is the way which lies through
works, and that if a thing done and performed by us be counted for
righteousness to justification, then the way of justification lies through
works done by us: which if they be just and lawful, are works of the Law:
Secondly, if he by the way which lay through works understands men's own
works done in obedience to the Law of God; it is true which he says; that
this is the false way; and that which he calls the true way; viz. by men's
doing and performing, is either the same with it, or else worse; and so he
speaks a most gross untruth, in calling it the true way, being the same with
the false way; but if by the way which lies through works he means seeking
after Christ's righteousness which consists in works of obedience to the Law,
then his words are most false, wicked and blasphemous, in that he calls this
the false way to justification.

Thirdly, in that he says, God requires something to be don, and performed by
men for their justification, and that is it, which the Apostle says is imputed
for righteousness, this is most false, neither does the Apostle intend any such
thing in this place, for this is to set up justification by doing, and works
of our own, which he altogether opposes, and his whole scope is bent against
it, and to show; that all which we are to look to, is to receive that which is
freely given of God, and imputed to us for righteousness, that is, the
righteousness of him who is God; as he often calls it in this Epistle, as Romans
3. 2. and 10. 3. here then behold how he makes the new covenant a conditional
Covenant, and not of free grace; promising justification and salvation upon
condition of men's doing.

In brief, besides the contradictions and other absurdities and untruthes in
this Argument before noted, I find these gross errors in the carriage of it,
One is; in that he says, God does not require of us the righteousness of Christ
for justification, this he required of Christ himself.

To which I answer; that God requires nothing of us for our justification, for
we are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ Romans 3. 24, that is, by the free gift and communion of the satisfaction
which Christ made for our redemption; but yet the thing which God requires in
our behalf, is that satisfaction and righteousness of Christ, and the
qualification of us for the receiving, applying and enjoying of that
righteousness for justification, is faith, which is not of our selves, but is
the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. for God works in us the will and power to
believe, and actual believing also, Phil. 2. 13. and all this by his spirit
dwelling in us uniting us to Christ, and so bringing us to communion of all his
benefits, even of his righteousness to justification: and this is the true
intent and scope of the Apostle, to draw us from seeking justification by any
work, which we can do, or which God requires of us for that end, and to make
us look up to the redemption which is in Christ; and in his satisfaction
apprehended by faith to rest for justification: as for this phrase, of Gods
requiring Christ's righteousness of us, it is harsh and unsavory, yea absurd; as
if one should say God requires, that the particular and individual act done by
another, be not done by him, but by us; which implies a contradiction; but
this, that God requires the righteousness of Christ, not for our justification,
but of Christ himself; this implies; that Christ had need of justification,
and was bound to fulfill the righteousness of the Law for himself; and savours
of Socinian and Samosatenian Heresy which denies Christ's Godhead; for if
Christ's humane nature being from the first conception most pure, upright and
holy, was personally united to his Godhead, and so the Son of God and Heir
of all things; who can doubt but that in himself he was worthy of all Glory,
at Gods right hand from his birth, as his taking of our nature upon him was
altogether for us, so his infirmities, sufferings, death, and continuance on
Earth for the performance of all righteousness and obedience to the whole Law,
was for us, and for all the Elect, who of old believed in him to come for them,
and who now do in believe him exalted to Glory according to his humanity, to
think or say that he had need to justify himself, and to merit by his
righteousness the state of Glory, is in effect to deny that he was God
infinitely worthy of all Glory, as he was the only begotten Son of God and
Heir of all things. Another gross error is, that he calls faith and believing
a thing don and performed by us, when as the Apostle affirms, and all
Christians confess, that our believing and faith is not of our selves, but the
gift of God, and the work and motion of his Spirit in us.

A third untruth and gross absurdity or rather blasphemy is in the last
words, where he affirms, that if the Apostle had said unto them, that they
must be justified by Christ, or by Christ's righteousness, this had been rather
to cast a snare upon them, then to have opened a door of life and salvation
unto them. Far be it from me and all true Christians not to detest, and
curse with the curse of Anathema Maranatha, that mouth which proclaims and
obstinately maintains, that teaching justification by Christ, and by his
righteousness is casting of a snare on men, and not opening adore of life and
salvation to them.

In the third place he lays down his arguments against the true Orthodox
interpretation of Saint Paul's speeches, concerning imputation of faith for
righteousness, which interpretation he goes about to overthrow, by several
circumstances or passages in the context.

The first Argument reduced into form runs thus, that the Apostle who desired
to speak to men's understanding, 1. Arg.
should in the weighty point of justification, time after time, and often
without ever explaining himself, or changing his speech, use so strange harsh
and uncouth an expression, and figure of speech as is not to be found in all
his writings, is a thing most unlikely and not to be believed: But this
interpreta ion viz. Fathers upon him such an harsh expression, and figure of
speech, without ever explaining of himself, as is not to be found in all his
writings, saying, that faith or believing is imputed for righteousness time
after time, without over changing his speech, and meaning, that indeed Christ's
righteousness is imputed, which was to speak rather that he might conceal his
mind then reveal it. Therefore this interpretation lays on the Apostle a
thing incredible, and is false and not to be believed.

To the Assumption I answer, that it is an heap of Ans.
manifest and impudent lies. First, it is no harsh, strange, and uncouth
expression to use a figure of speech, and by says and believing to mean the
state, or a man in the state of a true faithful believer, and by righteousness,
the state, or a man in the state of righteousness, or of a righteous man, and to
say that faith and believing is counted for righteousness, meaning that the
state of a believer having by faith spiritual communion with Christ, is a
state of righteousness, and the man which is in that estate, is reputed of God
in the state of righteousness, for this same expression and figure of speech,
the Apostle uses several times in the four last verses of the 2. Chapter of
this Epistle; where by circumcision he understands sanctification of the heart
in the Spirit, verse 29. and also 26. and also a circumcised Jew, v. 27. and by
uncircumcision he means an uncircumcised Gentile, and also the state of
Gentilisme, as Beza observes, and common sense teaches; and here is discovered
a second impudent lie, in that he says, this figure of speech is not to be
found in all the Apostles writings. A third bold lie and manifest falsehood is,
that the Apostle time after time uses the phrase of faith, or believing
imputed without ever explaining himself, or changing his speech, for that
which he calls faith and believing, and says it is imputed in the third and
5. ver. he explaining himself, and changing his speech both in the 6. and 11.
verses, calls it righteousness, and says, God imputes righteousness, and
righteousness is imputed.

Thus you see how he has bent his tongue and pen like a bow for lies, and
shootes them forth thick and threefold like poisoned arrows, as if his quiver
were the armory of the Father of liars, the Prince of darkness.

The second Argument is briefly this, that which is imputed 2. Arg.
for righteousness, is called his faith, first before it is imputed, verse 5. to
him that believes his faith is counted for righteousness; But the righteousness
of Christ cannot truly and properly be called his: who is a true believer
before it is imputed. Therefore the righteousness of Christ is not here to be
understood under the name of faith.

The righteousness of Christ by spiritual union and 1. Ans.
common with Christ: is as truly the true believers as his faith is his, for
Christ is made unto him righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and he is made the
righteousness of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 21. and that in order of nature,
before it is counted his righteousness. For God, whose judgment is according to
truth, does not count that to the believer which he has not before, or at the
same time does communicate to him.

Secondly I answer, that if faith which is here called 2. Ans.
(his faith) be faith in a proper sense, and be imputed for righteousness, then
is man justified by his own inherent righteousness, and by a work done and
performed in his own person, which is worse then Popery.

The object of that faith which is here said to be imputed, 3. Arg.
is God himself, or the promise of God, and not the righteousness of Christ:
for to understand, that the righteousness of Christ is meant by God, is to set
up a trope, which is not a figure of speech, but a monster of speech. Therefore
Christ's righteousness is not here said to be imputed.

The object of Abraham's faith was the promise of Christ, and that in Christ God
was his shield and his Ans.
great reward, Genesis 15. 1. Now no man can in believing by true faith, separate
Christ's satisfaction and righteousness from Christ himself: if he enjoy Christ
by faith, he enjoyes Christ's benefits also; and to believe God to be our
reward, is to believe that God is become our righteousness, and so our reward,
for the blessed reward is the reward of righteousness; and therefore this
argument rightly framed out of the 3. v. from Abraham's believing God, is strong
against him; Here again I note his ignorance in Rhetorical tropes, in that
he says, a double trope in one word, is a monster of speech; whereas
Rhetoric calls it a Metalepsis, and counts it an ornament of speech. I here
also observe his vain tergiversation; for he says, that the Holy Ghost in
the rehearsal of the things which belong to the object of faith and which are
believed, does never make the least mention of Christ's righteousness; and
immediately reckons many things which we are in Scripture required to believe;
amongst which is Christ himself, and the doctrine of Christ, and the promise
of Christ, the testimony which God has given of his Son; and the
resurrection of Christ, every one of which includes Christ's righteousness; for
if we believe in Christ aright, we cannot but believe in him as a fulfiller of
all righteousness; the Doctrine concerning Christ is, that he is made unto us of
God righteousness; that he is the end of the Law for righteousness to every
believer; The promise of Christ of old was, that Christ is the Lord our
righteousness, Ier. 23. 6. and that he would cloth us with the Robe of
righteousness, Isay 61. 10. the Testimony which God has given of him is, that
in him we have eternal life, 1 John 5. 11. which is the reward of his
righteousness, and therefore righteousness in him: His resurrection is the
evidence of his righteousness and perfect satisfaction, as the Scriptures
testify. And thus he says one thing, and after brings many Scriptures to
confute himself; and at last grants what before he denied; that Christ's
righteousness is to be believed: He says that some believe Christ's
righteousness who believe not Christ himself, which is indeed a Monster of
Speech, Sense, and Reason. In a word, when the Spirit of God teaches to
believe the righteousness of God for Justification, Romans 10. 3. and in many
other places, which can be no other but Christ's perfect righteousness, and
satisfaction, as appears Romans 3. 24. and again, calls this righteousness, the
righteousness of faith, he plainly shows, that it is believed, applied,
enjoyed, and possessed by faith.

Christ's righteousness can in no tolerable sense be called that 4 Arg.
faith whereby Abraham believed in God, that quickneth the dead, Therefore
under the name of that faith, it is not said to be imputed for righteousness.

God neither quickened Christ, nor raised him till he had fulfilled all
righteousness, neither does he quicken any Ans.
dead, but through his righteousness, and by his Spirit, communicating it to
them: and therefore under the name of such a faith, Christ's righteousness is by
a Metonymie said to be imputed.

Abraham's faith was that wherein he was not weak, 5 Arg.
neither doubted of Gods promise, ver. 19. 20. but Christ's righteousness is
not that faith, Therefore it is not here said to be imputed.

The more strong that Abraham was in faith, and far Ans.
from doubting and stag gering by unbelief, the more firmly was he united to
Christ, and had more full communion of his righteousness, and the more
steadfastly did he stand in the state of a righteous man: and more justly might
God count him for a righteous man. And therefore this Argument makes against
him.

Abraham's believing that God who had promised was able 6 Arg.
to perform, was the faith imputed. But this was not Christ's righteousness.
Therefore Christ's righteousness was not imputed.

The more that Abraham rested on Gods power and ability Ans.
to perform, the more communion he had of Christ's righteousness, and the more
justly did God count him for a righteous man, and impute Christ's righteousness
to him.

The faith which God imputes to us for righteousness, is 7 Arg.
our believing him which raised Christ from the dead. But this is not Christ's
righteousness. Therefore it is not imputed.

Our believing in God who raised Christ from the Ans.
dead, is our assurance that Christ had made full satisfaction for us, and
therefore the righteous God who raised him up is satisfied for us, and has
accepted his righteousness to be our righteousness, and does count us so
believing, and applying it to be in the state of righteousness. Therefore this
is for us and not against us.

The 8th. Argument is a bare affirmation, that to take 8 Arg.
faith in a proper sense, is more plain and clear, and better believing the
Apostle in this discourse, where he largely handles the point of justification:
Therefore he here means faith in a proper sense, for that is more comfortable
then to teach imputation of Christ's righteousness.

The Apostle plainly expresses, that faith imputed, is A
righteousness imputed. verse 6. 11. and it is more comfortable for us to rest
on Christ's righteousness, (besides which, there is no true and perfect
righteousness to be found performed in our nature) then to build on faith, which
in the best is mingled and stained with many doubtings often times. Therefore
the Apostle undoubtedly intends Christ's righteousness, and so he does express
in plain words, Chap. 5. 19. Chap. 8. 4. and Chap. 10. 4.

After these Arguments, he takes upon him to answer Arg.
those places wherein the word faith and hope, are used to signify their
objects, that is, the things believed and hoped for, and here he does use
notable tergiversation, and trifling. First, he grants, that the Apostle uses
such tropes of speech, for indeed, it is undeniable. Secondly, he opposes and
says, that the habit of faith, may be used to signify the object, but not the
act, whereas in the examples named, Gal. 1. 22. ^and 3. 23. and Colo. 1. ^5.
the habit and act, espescially the act of belief and hope are to be
understood, and indeed the Apostle does name the habit as often as the act in
this present discourse, where he says, faith is imputed for righteousness.

Thirdly, he grants that the act sometimes may be put for the object, but then
he flees to his old shift that Christ's righteousness is not the object of
believing, which I have before proved it to be:

Lastly, contrary to all reason he denies Christ's righteousness to be the object
of faith, as it is justifying, whereas it is indeed the only proper object of
it. Thus he shamefully trifles to show his impudency, and perversenes.

The fourth way of Confirmation.
IN the fourth and last place, he undertakes to confirm his opinion by
testimony, of learned Divines, both ancient Fathers and modern writers, even
from the primitive times, to the year 1500 after Christ: And here he
confesses, that he dares not upon his own reading be consident, that they
generally were of his opinion, but only rests upon another man's testimony,
whom he names not: Belike, it was some notorious, and infamous Socinian
Heretic, whom he is a shamed to name for his Author, and that his confession
is not out of humility, and modesty, but out of Satanicall subtilty, to vent
his poysonfull lies, under the person of another, as the Devil did vent his by
the Serpent, Genesis 3. I easily gather by his impudent boldness, in that, upon a
lying report, he dares charge his adversaries with calumny, and false report,
raised upon his opinion (unworthy the tongue or pen of sober and learned men)
to make either Arminius, or Socinus, the Authors of it; and that he is not
ashamed nor blusheth to affirm, that from the time of Luther, and Calvin, the
fairest stream of interpreters runs, as to water and refresh his
interpretation.

To the first I answer, That though the anciently condemned Heretic Peter
Anilard, (who was gelded for his incontinency, by a man whose Daughter he had
abused) laid the first ground of this opinion; that Christ's satisfaction is not
imputed for justification, as Saint Bernard shows, Epist. 190. yet the first
Authors who expressly affirmed, that faith in a proper sense, without a trope,
is by the Apostle said to be imputed for righteousness, were Socinus. Part 4.
Chap. 4. de Christo servatore, and Chap. 11. And Arminius in Epist. ad
Hippolitum de collibus. These. 5. And to his false pretense of the maine stream
of writers, since Calvin, and Luther, running to refresh his interpretation, I
oppose this challenge, that he cannot name one Orthodox Writer since that time,
which ever held, that faith in a proper sense, is imputed for righteousness,
and denied the imputation of Christ's righteousness. Socinus, Arminius, and
that heretical sect, are the only maintainers of that opinion.

An Answer to all his Testimonies.
TO his Testimonies, and his impudent boasting, of the general consent of
interpreters, I answer, first jovntly and in general: That of all the
Testimonies which he has cited, there is not one which either affirms, that
faith taken in a proper sense, is imputed for righteousness, or denies the
righteousness of Christ, to be imputed to us, and accepted of God for our
justification; yea, that all Divines, who are the most zealous opposers of his
interpretation may say the same words which his Authors say, and yet hold
justification by Christ's righteousness, imputed: yea, and in proving that truth
may with good reason, press the same words and speeches rightly understood.
So that a more odious example of impudency and folly, cannot be imagined, then
he here makes himself, by making his folly and absurdity to strive for
Mastership with his impudency.

Secondly, for the particular testimonies which he cites out of Tertullian,
Origin, Justin Martyr, Chrysostom, Augustine, Primasius, Beda, Haymo, and
Anselme, and out of later Writers, to wit, Luther, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Calvin,
Musculus, Bullinger, Gual^er, Aretius, Illyricus, Pelicanus, Humius, Beza,
Iunius, Pareus, they are no more but what Saint Paul says, and we all
acknowledge and embrace for truth, namely, that Abraham believing God, was
counted a righteous man, and faith was counted to him for righteousness, and
so are we all justified, not by our own righteousness, and works of the Law,
performed in our own persons, but by faith counted for righteousness; for
faith insted of our own works, lays hold on the righteousness of Christ, and
apprehending, and comprehending it, is counted for righteousness, not in a
proper sense, but as it comprehends Christ and his righteousness, which Calvin
calls apprehending the goodness of God, and trusting in it; And therefore it is
truly affirmed by Iustine Martyr, that Abraham obtained the testimony of
righteousness, viz. that he was a righteous man, not because of his
circumcision, but because of his faith; which words imply, That faith is not
the righteousness of the believer, but the evidence of his communion with Christ
in his righteousness and satisfaction.

The Testimony which he cites out of Musculus, is expressly contrary to his
interpretation; for the words are, Commendata esse debebat hac fides, no^
propriae qualitatis, sed propositi Dei respectu, that is, This faith ought to
be commended, not in respect of the proper quality of it, that is, Not in a
proper sense, but in respect of the purpose of God, whereby he has appointed,
that to believe in Christ, he will impute it for righteousness; propter ipsum,
that is because of Christ himself, in whom they believe: By which words it is
plain, that faith is not imputed in a proper sense to the believer, but in
respect of Christ, in whom he believes, and whose righteousness he applies by
faith.

The words which he cites out of Aretius, are also strong for us, against
himself, viz. That God imputed righteousness to Abraham, that is, so accepted
his faith, that hereupon he counted him for a righteous man, by imputative
righteousness, which righteousness cannot be any thing inherent (as faith and our
own works are) but the righteousness of Christ, besides which, there is no
righteousness to be found in all the world perfect and fit to justify man before
God.

Illyricus his words are as plain against him as our hearts can wish, viz.
That begging faith apprehending the righteousness of Christ, is imputed to him
in sted of his own righteousness: where note, that the reason why God does
impute faith for righteousness is, because it apprehends Christ's righteousness,
not because it of it self in a proper sense is fit to be counted righteousness:
being but a poor begging hand, and being inherent in the believer, which
imputative righteousness can in no wise be.

Thus in all his testimonies we have not one word to prove that faith taken in
a proper sense is only imputed for righteousness, and not the righteousness of
Christ; But many Testimonies by him cited prove directly the contrary
interpretation.

But because I will not have such a forger, and false suborner of witnesses go
away, without the brandes of forgery, and notorious impudency: I will bring in
the best learned of the Ancients, and also of late Orthodox Divines, even those
whom he calls to witness for him, and make them speak in the^r own words,
and testify to all the world, That by faith imputed for righteousness, they
understand not faith it self in a proper sense, but the satisfaction, and
righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, God and man, performed arcording to the
Law in our nature, and in our behalf.

First Justin Martyr testifies, that we being in our selves wicked, and
ungodly, cannot possibly become righteous, or be justified, but only in the
Son of God, (...). Now if only in the Son of God, and by union, and
communion with him, (which all have, who are in him) then, only by his
righteousness; (For as the same Author in the same place says) It is his
righteousness and nothing else which can cover our sin. Justin Martyr, Epist
ad Diognetum. And in his exposition of faith, he says, That Christ as well by
his exact conversation of life; that is, his perfect righteousness, as by his
undeserved death, has abolished, and covered our fall and failing, which came
in by Adam.

Irenaeus is so strict for our communion with Christ, in his obedience unto
death, and for our reconciliation, and justification thereby, that he imputes
Christ's obedience to us, and says, In secundo Adamo reconciliati sumus,
obedientes usque ad mortem facti. Lib. 4. adversus Haereses. cap. 14.

Athanasius in his 2 Tome, Page 270. of Comelius edition says, That it is most
necessary for us to believe Scriptures, that Christ who has freed us from the
curse, is the first fruits of the mass of mankind, who are by him redeemed,
and that the perfect fulfilling of the Law by him the first fruits, is imputed
to the whole mass, his words are in Greek, (...). And in his Book of the
Incarnation of the word of God he affirms, that we shall live and be saved,
because we are partakers of the righteousness without spot, which Christ, God in
the flesh, brought into the World.

Gregory Nyssen; Oration 2. in Cantic. Canticorum, says, Christ having the
filth or guilt of my sins, transferred upon himself, has communicated his
perfect purity to me, and made me partaker of that beauty which is in himself.

Ambrose says, as Adam is the pattern of death, because of sin, So is Christ
the pattern of life because of his ousnesse, Commentar. in cap. 7, Lucae Lib. 5.

Chrysostom says, If a Jew ask thee, how can all the world be saved by the
righteous doings of one Christ? Thou may answer even so, as all the world is
condemned by one Adams disobedience: cap. 5. ad Romans Homil. 10. That is, by the
communion and imputation of them.

Cyrill says, Lib. 11. in Joan. cap. 25. Christ being the author of the Law,
and yet subiecting himself to the Law by his obedience and righteousness,
brings the blessing and life unto us. And Lib. de recta fide, he says, It is
absurd to think, that we should be made heirs of the punishment of the first
Adam, by his disobedience, and should not be made partakers of the
righteousness of the second who does bring us back to life, by his most
perfect obedience.

Theodoret. Sermo. 10. de curat. Graec. affectionum says. It is very
convenient that he who so highly praised righteousness, should in his coming in
the flesh fulfill righteousness for men.

Augustine. Enchirid, ad Laurentium cap. 41. says, he was made sin, that we
might be made righteousness; not our own, but Gods righteousness; not in our
selves, but in him, even as he was sin, not his own sin, but ours, not in
himself, but in us: and in his 6. Sermon, de verbis Apostoli; God the Father
(says he) made him sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him. Behold here two things, the righteousness of God, yet our own; in him, not
in our selves.

Leo the first: in his 70. Epistle says, that by the innocence of one, we are
all made innocent; and that by righteousness, derived unto men from him, who
has taken man's nature upon him.

Bernard in his 190. Epistle says, as one has borne the sins of all, so the
satisfaction of one is imputed to all; It was not one which forfeited, and
another which satisfied, for the head of the body is one Christ. Also, in
Sermon. ad Milites Templi he says, Death is made to flee away in the Death of
Christ, and Christ's righteousness is imputed to us. And a little after; he who
has willingly bin incarnate, willingly suffered, and been willingly
crucified, will he keep back his righteousness only from us. And again; One
man sinned, and all are held guilty, and shall the innocence of one, viz.
Christ, be imputed only to one?

Anselme in Romans 5. says, that by the righteousness of one coming upon all the
elect, they come unto justification, that they may be justified by
participation of Christ's righteousness.

These with many other Testimonies which might be produced out of Ancient
Writers, from the Primitive times until Luther, do abundantly show, that they
all by faith imputed, never dreamed of faith imputed in a proper sense, but
only the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith.

But to descend to Orthodox Writers of this last age since Luther; It is well
known, that they generally held imputation of our sins to Christ, and
Christ's satisfaction and righteousness to us, to be the form of justification,
by which believers are justified.

Luther (if we may believe his own words) acknowledges that it was the
Doctrine of Saint Bernard, concerning justification by the righteousness of
Christ imputed, and not by our own works, which moved him first to loath the
popish Doctrine, and to grow into suspicion and dislike of that religion. And
in his Commentary on the Galathians, where he does most highly extol the
righteousness of faith, and debateth the righteousness of works, he tells us,
that faith being weak in many of Gods Children, cannot be accepted for
righteousness of it self, that is, in a proper sense; and therefore there is
necessarily required imputation of righteousness for justification, in Gal. 3. 6.

See further in the very words of Luther gathered out of his own writings,
and digested into common places by Fabricius, who cites the tome, and page for
every word and sentence, which are these, first concerning justifying faith, he
says, faith obtaines what the Law commands; and what is that but obedience and
righteousness, 1 Tom. page 32.

And again, by Faith Christ is in us, yea one body with us. But Christ is
righteous and a fulfiller of Gods Commandments, wherefore we all by him do
fulfill them, while Christ is made ours by faith, also Tom. 3. page 539. when
Paul ascribes justification to faith, we must of necessity understand, that
he speaks of faith laying hold on Christ, which makes Christ of efficacy
against Death, sin, and the Law: Also 2. Tom. page 515. Faith settles us upon
the works of Christ without our own works and translates us out of the exile
or captivity of our sins, into the Kingdom of his righteousness. And Tom. 1.
page 410. Sin is not destroyed unless the Law be fulfilled.

But the Law is not fulfilled, but by the righteousness of faith: And page
437. To keep the Law, is to have or possess Christ the perfect fulfiller of
the Law. And Tom. 4. Page 44. Faith iustifies, because it apprehends, and
possesses that treasure; viz. Christ. And Page 45. we say that Christ does
form faith, or is the form of faith. And Tom. 2. upon Genesis, The laying
hold on the promises is called sure and firm faith, and does justify, not as
it is our work, but the work of God. These speeches show plainly, that
Luther conceived Christ with his righteousness to be after a sort the formal
righteousness of the beleever^, though not formally inherent in him, yet
formally possessed and enjoyed by faith. Concerning this justifying
righteousness, Luther also teaches; that it is not in our selves, but in
Christ, even his fulfilling of the Law for us made ours and imputed to us Tom.
1. page 106. By faith (says he) are our sins made no more ours but Christ's,
upon whom God has laid the iniquities of us all, and he has borne our sins:
and on the other side, all his righteousness is made ours, for he lays his hand
upon us. And page 178. The righteousness of a Christian is another
righteousness, and comes to him from without; it is even Christ who is made unto
us of God righteousness, so that a man may with confidence glory in Christ, and
say, Christ his living, doing, and suffering, is mine no otherwise then if I
had lived, don, and suffered as he did; as the Married man possesses all which
is his Wives, and the Wife all the goods which are her Husbands, for they have
all things common, because they are become one flesh; and so Christ and the
Church are one Spirit, by faith in Christ, Christ's righteousness is made our
righteousness, and all his are ours, yea, he himself is ours. And Tom. 2. page
86. The righteousness by which we are justified before God, is not in our own
persons, but without our selves in God, because man shall have no cause to be
puffed up with an opinion of his own proper righteousness before God. And Tom.
2. page 385. A Christian is not formally righteous, by reason of any substance
or quality in him, but relatively, in relation to Christ in whom he has true
righteousness.

Melancthon in Epist, ad Romans 8. 4. says, wherefore Paul's meaning is thus to
be taken; That Christ is given for us, that we may be counted to have
satisfied the Law by him, and that for him we may be reputed righteous;
Although we our selves do not satisfy the Law, another fulfilling of it
freely given to us, and is imputed to us, and so the Law is imputatively
fulfilled in us, and so when the Apostle says that Christ is the end of the
Law for righteousness to every believer; that is, he that has Christ is
righteous, he is reputed to have satisfied the Law, and he imputatively has
that which the Law requires. And in chap. 10. 4. upon these words, Christ is
the end of the Law for righteousness, etc. he says, this is the simple meaning:
Christ is the end: that is, the fulfilling of the Law to the believer, and he
who has Christ, that is, believes in Christ, is righteous, and has
imputatively what the Law requires.

The Book of concord, subscribed by so many hundred Evangelical Ministers of
the reformed Churches in Germany, in the Articles of Justification says, that
when we speak of justifying faith, it is to be known, that these three
objects concur which are to be believed. 1. the promise of the benefit; that
is, mercy for remission or justification. 2. That the promise is most free;
which excludes our merits, 3. The merits of C^r^st, which are the price and
propitiation, and a little after, Faith does not justify because it is a work
worthy by it self; that is in a proper sense, but only because it receaves
the mercy promised. And again how shall Christ be our Mediator, if in
justification we do not use him for our Mediator, that is; if we do not
feel, that for him we are reputed righteous.

The Divines of the Augustine confession c^ndemne Osiander, who held, that the
righteousness of faith was the essential righteousness of God; And also them who
taught that Christ is our righteousness only according to his humane nature.
And in the Epitome of the Articles controverted by some, they with one consent
affirmed; that the righteousness of faith is remission of sins, reconciliation
to God, and adoption to be Sons of God for the obedience of Christ only,
which by faith alone of mere grace is imputed to all believers. Articulo 3. de
fidei iustitia. And this obedience of Christ which is imputed for righteousness,
they affirm to be the obedience which he performed both in his death and
passion, and also in his fulfilling of the Law for our sakes. Ibid. Artic. 3.
And concerning faith they teach, that in justification before God, it trusts
neither in contrition, nor love, nor any other virtues, but in Christ alone; it
is the only mean and instrument which apprehends, and receives the free grace
of God, the merit of Christ and remission of sins, and it rests on Christ's
most perfect obedience by which he fulfilled the Law for us, which obedience is
imputed to believers for righteousness, Ibid. Artic. 3.

Calvin is so zealous, and so clear and manifest in teaching and maintaining
the Doctrine of Justification: by the communion and imputation of Christ's
perfect obedience, satisfaction, and righteousness, that among Christians,
Calvin's Institutions, me thinks, the very Father of liars (the Devil
himself) should, if not blush and be ashamed, yet in policy be afraid, to
call Calvin for a witness against it, least all that hear him, should hate
him and hiss him for his open lying.

The Doctrine of Calvin concerning justification, consists of these special
Articles laid down plainly.

Institut. lib. 3. cap. 11. First, he affirms in plain 1.
words, that Justification consists in remission of sins, and imputation of
Christ's righteousness. Sect. 2.

Secondly, he shows what he means by remission of sins, sometimes he takes
remission of sins in a large 2.
sense, for that act of God by which he does communicate, and impute the full
satisfaction of Christ unto his Elect and faithful, that the whole guilt of
all sins, both of omission and co^ission is taken away, and they are no more
accounted nor appear in his sight as sinners: In this sense he calls remission
of sins totum iustificationis, in his Comment on Romans 4. and tot^m
iustificationem, whole justification. Instit. lib. 3. ca, 8. 4. For indeed when
the sins of commission are taken away by that part of Christ's satisfaction
imputed, which is called, his passive obedience, or voluntary suffering of the
penalties of the Law; and the sins of omission by his active obedience in
fulfilling the righteousness which the Law requires, which is the other part of
Christ's imputed satisfaction, so that the Elect are now reputed as righteous
men, who have the defect which came by Omission supplied, and have no more the
sins of Omission imputed to them; this is perfect and whole justification (as
he truly calls it) But sometimes he uses the word, remission of sins, in a
more strict sense, for that part of Gods act of communicating and imputing of
Christ's satisfaction, which respects the passive obedience of Christ, which
takes away the guilt of sins committed, but does not supply the omission of
righteousness, and in this sense he makes remission of sins but a part of
justification, and Gods imputing of the active part of Christ's satisfaction and
counting the faithful righteous by it imputed, he makes the other part of
justification in the words before cited out of his Institutions lib. 3. cap.
11. Sect. 2.

Thirdly, he constantly teaches and affirms; that 3.
there is no righteousness by which a man can stand before Gods Tribunal, and
be accepted for righteous in his sight, but only the full satisfaction and
perfect righteousness of Christ, which he the Son of God performed in the
nature of man, for that which is not entire and absolute, and without all
stain and spot: (such as never has been, nor shall be found in any mere
man) can never be accepted of God, but is with him slighted and vilified
beyond all measure; and whosoever prates of any righteousness in men's own
works or doings, they have no true thought, nor the least sense of the justice
of God, but make a mock of it, Institut. lib. 3. cap. 12. Sect. 1. and 3. and
11. 26.

Fourthly he affirms, that man is justified by faith, 4.
when he is excluded from the righteousness of works: and by faith lays hold
on the righteousness of Christ with which he being clothed, does appear in the
sight of God, not as a sinner, but as a righteous man. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Sect. 1. And in the same chap. Sect. 11. He says, Haec est mirabilis
iustific^i ratio, ut Christi iustitia tecti, non exhorreant iudicium quo
dignisunt, and dum seipsos merito damnant, insti extra se censeantur.

Fifthly concerning the Office of faith in justification, 5.
he teaches, that faith being in it self weak and imperfect, and of no
dignity or worth, price or value, is never able to justify us by it self, but
by bringing Christ unto us, who is given to us for righteousness, it is not our
righteousness: but makes us come with the mouth of the soul opened, that we may
be capable of Christ; and it is as a vessel or Pot; for as the pot full of
money enricheth a man, so faith filled with Christ and his righteousness is said
to justify us and to be counted for righteousness: and therefore he says; that
it is a foolish thing to mingle our faith, which is only the iustrument of
receiving righteousness, with Christ who is the material cause, and both the
Author and Minister of this great benefit. chap. 11. Sect. 7. And in the 17.
Sect. he says, that faith is hereupon said to justify; because it does
receive and embrace the righteousness which is ^ffered in the Gospel.

Sixthly he affirms; that the righteousness by which b^^eevers are justified and
stand righteous before God, is, 6.
not in themselves but in Christ, even his perfect obedience and righteousness
communicated to them by imputation Sect. 23.

Lastly he shows how this righteousness comes to be the righteousness of
believers; and to be so communicated 7.
to them, that God does justify, impute it to them for justification, and
accept as if it were their own; viz. by means of their spiritual union, and
communion with Christ; by which they are made partakers of Christ, and with him
and in him possess all his riches. Sect. 10. and 20. and 23.

This is the sum of C^lvins Doctrine concerning justification, briefly
comprised out of his own words, in places before cited, where the Reader may
be fully satified.

Beza in the doctrine of justification, by faith does perfectly agree with
Luther and Calvin in all the former Articles.

First he says; that faith is not any such virtue as does justify us in our
selves before God, for that is to set up faith in the place of Christ: who
alone is our whole and perfect righteousness, but faith iustifies as it is the
instrument which receives Christ: and with him his righteousness; that is; most
full perfection; and we say that we are justified by faith only, because it
embraces Christ who does justify us: with whom it does unite and couple us,
that we may be partakers of him and all his goods, which being imputed to us,
are sufficient that we may be absolved before God, and deemed righteous;
Confess: cap. 4. Sect. 7. in notis Romans 3. 2^. 24.

Secondly, that faith sends to Christ for perfect righteousness to
justification, and that it assures us of salvation, through his righteousness
alone, because whatsoever is in Christ, is imputed to us, as if it were our
own, if so be we embrace him by faith; and what the righteousness of Christ is
which is imputed to us, he fully expresses and describes to be that greatest
and most absolute perfection of righteousness: consisting in these two things.
1. That he has no sin in him. 2: That he has fulfilled all the
righteousness of the Law, cap. 4. Sect. 58. in notis Romans 3. 22. 26. and Rom 4.
5. in Phil. 3. 9. Romans 5. 12.

Thirdly he shows; that we come to have communion with Christ's righteousness:
by spiritual union and marriage with Christ. ff (says he) we be united and
joined together into fellowship with Christ by faith, nothing is more proper
ours, then Christ, and whatsoever is Christ's. Confess. 4. Sect. 9.

Fourthly he pronounces, that it is no less then wicked blasphemy, to deny
the mutual and reciprocal i^putations of the sins of true believers to
Christ, and of Christ's righteousness to true believers, in his book of
justification against Anonymus.

Fifthly he affirms; that righteousness which iustifies men before God: must be
both a full satisfaction for sin; and also a perfect fulfilling of Gods
Commandments in every part, in Romans 3. 20.

Our learned Whitakers work against Campion, in his answer to the 8. reason:
page 38. and against Duraus, lib. 8. page 176. 177. 182, 183. does stoutly and
p^thily dispute and maintain the Doctrine of justification, by the
righteousness of Christ imputed, which he proves to be the only perfect
righteousness, able to justify us before God.

Master Perkins also; in his golden Chain (called the order of the causes of
salvation and d^tion, chap. 37.) makes the translation of the believers sins
to Christ, and of Christ's righteousness to the believer: by a ^uall and
reciprocal imputation, the form of justification.

Polan^, in Sy^ate theologi^o Lib. 6. Cap. 36. does maintain the same
Doctrine, with Luther, Calvin, Beza, and Whitaker: and proves every point
fully, by plain testimonies, and invincible Arguments, out of the holy
Scriptures. In his Symphonia Catholica, he brings testimonies of Ancients,
affirming every Article of our Doctrine. And in his Theses de justify. he
shows the consent of Orthodox Divines of the reformed Churches.

And that M^sculus, Iunius, and other latter Divines, are grossly abused by
him, who brings their testimonies to overthrow the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, will plainly appear, if any be pleased to read Musculus upon
Romans 8. 34. and 16. 3. 4. where he expounds the Apostles words of the
fulfilling of the righteousness of of the Law in us, to be meant. First of all
imputatively by the righteousness of another, even of Christ which is also ^^rs,
For we are flesh, of his flesh, etc. And by the righteousness of God he
understands Christ's perfect righteousness imputed ^o us.

Also Iunius, These. 35. and 36. does affirm, that the righteousness of faith
imputed to believers, is the righteousness which the Law requires, performed by
Christ; differing only in this, that Legal is every man's fulfilling of the
Law in his own person, but this Ev^ngelicall, is the fulfilling of the Law by
Christ, God and ^an our surely and mediator.

Thus have I vindicated the Godly learned, both ^^cio^^, and modern Divines,
from the soul slander, most falsely laid upon them, by this impudent forger of
false witnesses: and by their own manifest testimonies, I have made manifest
their unanimous consent in the true Doctrine of justification, by the
righteousness of Christ, imputed to believers, and of them apprehended, and
applied by faith.

Now I leave it to all indifferent Readers, and zealous Christians, to
consider, whether it be not their duty, both to take heed to themselves, and to
admonish others, that they have no fellowship, with so openly professed Socinian
Sectaries as this man, and his followers are: you see the Doctrine which they
maintain, is wicked, and blasphemous Heresy: And after many admonitions given
by diverse grave and learned Divines, and often public confutations, and
censures, passed in public, they still persist in their pestilent heresy, and
are more mad to maintain and dispute it then before; and when truth cannot
help them, they flee for help to the Father of liars, and make lies their
refuge, and in forging lies they sin, being condemned of themselves, even
against their knowledge, and conscience; As the Apostle foretold concerning
Heretics, Titus 3. 11. How wilfully against the known truth, and his own
conscience, this desperate man, has Proclaimed Luther, Calvin, Beza, Musculus,
Iunius, and others, to be of his opinion, I have sufficiently proved; and if
ever he did but look into any of their writings, his own eyes would have
taught him how opposite they are to his Heresy.

As for his rude, impudent, and unmannerly followers, their own lying and
slanderous tongues, proclaim their pedigree from the Father of liers. Let this
my answer by way of disputation, and confutation, be a witness to free from
the false reports which they have dispersed even among diverse, who were eye and
ear witnesses, to the contrary, viz. That Mr. Goodwin did confute and confound
me of late, when he came to perform the challenge made by him, or at least,
boldly undertaken upon the request of his Disciples, who made and sent it to
me, and did so mightily convince me, by the power of his Arguments, that first
he made me rage through anger and fury, and after made both my Brother and me,
to yield, and to confess our former ignorance, and errors, and to embrace him
as one sent from God to turn us from darkness to light.

That (...) promised, and vowed, to renounce my former Doctrine of
justification, if ever God would give me liberty, and to Preach his Heretical
opinion: that we besought him and all his Followers to join with us in
thanksgiving to God for our Illumination, by their Divine Doctor; and in prayer
for the Grace of perseverance, in the light received. These reports of us are
in our eyes no other, then if they had reported, that truth was turned unto
falsehood, and the Devil become the Father of truth: From such Spirits, the God
of truth, defend his Church, and People, and grant a free passage to his
Gospel, and to his faithful Ministers a Door of utterance, that they may
Preach among all men every where, the unsearchable riches of Christ. To that
God of truth, I consecrate my tongue and pen, and do resolve with both, to
maintain his truth, by his assistance and grace, so long as life, breath, and
strength shall last: and to him give all glory, now and ever.

FINIS.

