Die Mercurij Januar. 29th. 1644.
ORdered, that Sir Thomas Dacres, and Master Whitacre, do from this House give
thanks to Doctor Wincopp, and Master Walker, for the great pains they took in
the Sermons they preached this day, at the entreaty of this House, at St.
Margarets Westminster, (it being the day of public Humiliation) and to desire
them to Print their Sermons: and they are to have the like privilege in
printing of them, as others in the like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint Nathaniel Webb to Print my Sermon. GEORGE WALKER.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, at their late
solemn Monthly Fast, Januarie 29th. 1644 Wherein these four necessary
Considerations are plainly proved and demonstrated out of the holy Scriptures,
viz.

1. The Bands of the brethren in iniquity, the pernicious Brambles, the Plague
and curse of a Land and Kingdom.

2. All the brethren in these Bands, sharp pricks of the cursed bramble,
sharers in the sin, and subject to the destruction thereof.

3 The righteous kept by God from the full sense and feeling of the mischief
which they are sharply set, and cruelly bent to bring upon them.

4. The terrible, sudden, and total destruction of the Bramble, and every
hurtful prick thereof, by Gods dreadful storm.

By GEORGE WALKER, Bachelor of Divinity, Pastor of John Evangelists, London,
and one of the Assembly of Divines.

Published by Order of the House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Nathaniel Webb, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard. 1645.

TO The Honorable House of COMMONS, Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Renowned Worthies,
WHEN I received your Message, sent to me by one of Your Worthy Members, that
you had appointed me to Preach before You, at the Monthly Fast then next to
come, mine Insufficiency, 63 years*
Age, and Weakness of Body, began immediately to put a just excuse ^^ my
mouth: But the strong obligation in which the whole Land is obliged unto You,
(being the only powerful Nehem 9.27. and Obad. 21.
Saviors under God, of Church and State, from ruin and destruction, when they
were already over-runne, and at the point to be swallowed up by the Bands of
Antichrist) did silence all Excuses. Besides, I was afraid to incur the blame
or suspicion of ingratitude to them who had delivered me from the paw of the
Lion, which thirsted after my blood; and had set me at liberty after two
years imprisonment, and Voted a just recompense of the wrongs done to me, and
a Satisfaction from mine Oppressors, for all my losses and damages, by their
malice sustained. Which recompense, through your favor and forwardness to
relieve me I had certainly received, if the multitude of Malignant spirits,
then too prevalent among you, but now expelled out of your Assembly, had not
opposed and hindered the transmission of my Cause in due time, to the Honorable
House of LORDS. I saw also a special hand of GOD in calling me to Preach to
so Honorable an Assembly, and his power and providence, in frustrating and
bringing to naught the Counsels and purposes of the proud persecuting Prelate
of CANTERBURY, Ianuar. 29. 1638.
who on the same day of the Week of the same month of the Year, six years
before, brought me to answer Ore tenus in the Star Chamber, with full intent
to lay a heavy Censure on me: And when the truth of GOD for which I suffered,
did bear me out against all his Slanders, and false Accusations, he most
proudly affirmed, and bid me assure my self of it, That I should never come in
a Pulpit to preach any more.

Upon these Considerations, I did cheerfully submit my shoulders to bear this
burden, though it seemed far heavier then my strength was able to sustain
and undergo. And now, Ye Worthies of GODS Israel, I humbly beg this favor
at Your hands, that You will accept of the willingness of the Workman to serve
You, not the worth of the Service it self: Look upon the pure, precious
matter here handled, chosen out of a golden Psalm of DAVID, the sweet Singer
of Israel, not on the weak handling of it. I conceived it very seasonable for
the Time and Occasion: For the present Calamities by which the LORD calls us to
public and general Fasting and Humiliation, proceed from the Bands of the
Brethren in Iniquity, which are so many cursed Brambles of several sorts,
pestering the whole Land, and stinging us with their hurtful pricks, which
abound in every Band, Sect, and Faction. The thing for which we seek unto
GOD by Fasting and Prayer, is Deliverance of our Church and State from the
mischief which they are sharply set to bring and inflict upon all that are
Righteous and Religious in the Land. This Deliverance cannot be fully and
perfectly obtained, till the Lord our God be pleased to cut down these cursed
Brambles, and to rid these three Kingdoms of them. And this the LORD will
do very speedily, so soon as he sees us made ripe for Deliverance by true
unfeigned repentance, and amendment of our lives: For then he will take away,
as with a Storm and Whirle-winde, not only the great Faction of the
Antichristian Papists, Atheists, and Malignants, banded together, and wageing
open War against us, but also all the Sects of Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Libertines, and Schismatic Separatists, who by opposing the Reformation, and
union of our Church, with the rest of the best Reformed Churches, both in
Doctrine and Discipline, according to the written Word of God, do act strongly
for Antichrist, and by raising up Divisions and Distractions, in the City,
Country, and all our Armies, do as much as in them is, to weaken us, make
breaches in our VValls, and to lay us open and naked to the violence and fury
of our open enemies: All these things my Text, as I have faithfully opened and
expounded it, does offer to your grave and wise consideration; and in this
Sermon I have proved every particular by clear testimonies out of holy
Scriptures, and in obedience to your command, I have committed it to the
Press, and here humbly present it to your Honorable Assembly, with my hearty
desire and prayer to God for you, that by it, and many other most godly and
more learned Sermons, which sound continually in Your cares, You may take
occasion to observe and note the danger in which our Land is, by reason of
those many Sects and Heretics, and Schismatics, which like so many cursed
Brambles grow up and increase daily, even to the over-spreading of the whole
Kingdom* which when you come to do once seriously; I doubt not but your zeal
will stir you up, to curb so many of them as are curable, and to cut off
those that are incorrigible: even such Thorns and Brambles as David describes
in his last words, saying, The sons of Belial are all of them as Thorns thrust
away, because they cannot be taken with hands. But the man that shall touch
them, must be fully fenced with Iron, and the staff of a Spear; and they
shall be utterly burnt with fire in the same place. 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. The great
God, who has so often, and wonderfully preserved You heretofore from the
secret treachery and open fury of these wicked men, be still your shield, and
your defense, and make his great work to prosper in your hands. So prays,

Your humble and hearty (though weak and unworthy) Servant in the Lords Work,
GEORGE WALKER.

A Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, at their late
solemn monthly Fast, Januarie 29th. 1644.
PSALM 58.9. Before your Pots can feel the Thorns, he shall take them away
as with a whirlewinde, both living, and in his wrath.

Or thus, according to the Hebrew Text*

Before they shall feel your sharp pricks, O Bramble, he will take away every
one of them as with a Tempest* or whirle-winde, as well the green as the dry.


IT is one of the Proverbiall sayings of the wise King Solomon, that if a Ruler
hearken to lies, all his servants, that is, Officers and Ministers (Meshart^^)
are wicked* His Father David, (...)
in the days of the reign of the wicked Tyrant Sam, had still experience of
this to his grief. For after that God had rejected Saul for his disobedience,
from being King over Israel, and had declared his purpose to him by Samuel, an
evil spirit of fury, jealousy, and tyranny came upon him, and made him look
upon his faithful servant David with an evil eye of envy and suspicion, so
that he hated him to the death, and all good men who did love and favor him
for his upright dealing: and his ears were open to hearken to all lies*
slanders, and false reports, which wicked flattering Courtiers* or other (...)
^^formers would bring against him. Hereby it came to pass* that D^^g the
Edomite, and Cush the Benjamite, and many others, even a whole band of wicked
men like unto them, came to be chief Counselors of State, Officers, and
Judges about Saul, chief executioners of his unjust and cruel commands, and
held the chief places of Judicature under him. David, and all the good people,
who had relation to him, and favored him, were sore afflicted, oppressed, and
persecuted by this wicked Band. But the Lord his God, unto whom he had
continual recourse by prayer, did comfort him inwardly, and revealed to him by
his Spirit, that though he suffered him to be persecuted; yet he would not
destroy him by these wicked instruments, but would preserve him from feeling
the evil which they intended, which was to cut him off. And hereupon he does
compose this golden Prophetical Psalm, (...)
the Title whereof is, (Thou will not destroy) and a golden Psalm of David*
for the chief Musician, In which:

First, he does as it were face to face, direct his speech to this wicked band,
and does chide and rebuke them in the two first Verses, saying Do ye^ (...)
speak^ ^^ghteousnesse* o band, or Congregation? (The word in the original
signifies, first, and properly, (...)
a sheafe of Corn, or herbs and flowers bound together in a bundle* and
metaphorically, a Band of soldiers, or of thieves and robbers combined
together in a bond, or league.) Do ye judge uprightly, o ye sons of men?
yea, in heart ye work wickedness, you weigh the violence of your hands in the
earth. That is, under pretense of holding the scales of justice in your hands*
you weigh out ^o Gods people wrongs, injuries, and violent oppression.

Secondly, he proclaims to the world their inward and habituated malice, and
iniquity in the third, fourth, and fifth verses. The wicked (says he) are
estranged (that is, alienated from God and all goodness) even from the womb,
they go astray as soon as they are borne speaking lies. (That is by custom
and continual practice of their naturally inbred malice, they get a habit of
lying, and falsehood, and increase their wickedness) their poison (that is of
spite and malice) is like the poison of a Serpent, they are like the deaf
Adder that stops her ears, which refuses to hearken to the voice of the
charmers, charming never so wisely. That is, they harden their hearts, and stop
their ears against all just reproves, wise Counsels, wholesome admonitions,
charming and alluring persuasions.

Thirdly, he breaks out into a Prophetical imprecation, in which he does by
way of wishing, foretell Gods just proceeding against them in judgment
several ways; as first, that though they be armed with power, and weapons of
cruelty, as Lions are with sharp and strong teeth; yet God will break their
power, and their strongest weapons in their hands, as if one should break the
teeth of Lions in their mouths, and dash out their great jaw teeth, verse 6.
Secondly, as waters which run continually melt and pass away, so shall they
vanish: and when they attempt to wound or slay the innocent, their purposes and
endeavors shall be frustrate like Arrows cut in pieces, as they are flying
out of the bow, verse 7. Thirdly, They shall be consumed as a Snayle that
melts away, and as the untimely birth of a woman, which never sees the light
of the Sun; so shall they never come to see the light of Gods savor, nor any
true blessing, ver. 8. Thus far he proceeds by way of Imprication. But in the
fourth place here in my Text, he turns his Speech again to that cursed crew
and band of wicked Counselors, and comparing them to that great Bramble, or
Bryar which is in the Hebrew called Atad, (...)
and in Greek Cynosbatos: That is the Dog-bryar, and of all Brambles is most
full of sharp hooked pricks, some hardened and dried with heat of Sun, so that
they rend and tear where they catch hold; and others, though very sharp, yet
are more green weak and tender: He tells them that before Gods people shall
feell the utmost extremity of their malice and fury, or before they can fasten
on them the mischief they intend; the Lord will destroy, scatter, and take
them away all and every one as with a storm, or whirle-winde, as well the
young and green as the old, dried and hardened in their malice and cruelty.

Fifthly, in the tenth verse, he comfort the Church of God with a Prophecy
of victory, and triumph which the righteous shall obtain over these
persecuting enemies. The righteous (says he) even every righteous man) shall
rejoice, when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the blood of
the wicked.

Lastly, he shows what shall be the end and issue of all, both of the
destruction of the wicked in the very height of their persecutions, and in the
heat of their rage and fury against the Church, and also of the deliverance of
the righteous, and of their victory, joy, and triumph over them: namely this,
That the world shall see, and earthly men shall say, Verily there is a reward
for the righteous, verily there is a God that judges in the earth. That is,
all shall turn to the glory of God at last; and the men of the world shall
acknowledge that nothing comes to pass on earth by chance, but in the most
troublesome times of greatest confusion, God overrules all by his wisdom and
providence, and has in store a good reward, which he will give to the
righteous, as a fruit of their faith and patience; and a just recompense of
revenge and judgment for the wicked* which he will render to them even here on
earth. This is the sum of this golden Psalm: And so I pass from the
Coherents to the Text it self, which in our new English Translation runs
thus; Before your Pots can feel the Thorns, he shall take them away as with
a whirle-winde, both living, and in his wrath.

In all the Book of God I do not remember any sentence so variously and
differently Translated, as this verse which I have chosen for my present Text.

The Greek Septuagints, and the vulgar Latin, which follows them verbatim,
do thus render the words, Before your Thorns can feel the Bramble he will
devour them, as it were alive, and as it were in wrath.

The Chaldee Paraphrase runs thus, When as yet the wicked are not made tender,
they grow hard as the great Bramble, as long as they are green, like an unripe
sour Grape, he will destroy them with a whirle-winde.

But the Translation which Hierome made out of the Hebrew Text, has the words
thus: Before your Pricks grow up into the great Bramble, a Tempest like wrath
shall snatch them, as it were alive.

Austine upon this place reads this verse thus, Before the Bramble bring forth
your pricks, as it were alive, as it were in wrath he swalloweth them up.

Pagnin thus Translates the words, Before your Pricks understand the Bramble,
so living, so wrath will with a Tempest snatch him away.

The old English Translation runs thus, Or ever your pots are made hot with
Thorns, so shall indignation vex him as a thing that is raw.

The English made at Geneva is thus, As raw flesh before your Pots feel the
fire of thorns: so let him carry them away as with a Whirle-winde in his wrath.

Tremelius and Junius come nearest of all to the original Hebrew Text, and
thus they render the words, When as yet your pricks, which are pricks of the
Dog-bryar, are not felt, he will destroy as with a whirle-winde every one, as
well the living, as the parched.

Ainsworth thus, Ere ever they shall perceive your Thorns of the Bramble, even
alive, even in wrath he will tempestuously whirle it away. That is, every
Thorn or prick of the Bramble.

This variety of Translations arises chiefly from the original Hebrew word,
Sireth, which in the Hebrew tongue signifies, First, Pots, or Caldrons, wherein
flesh is sod, (...)
as Ex. 16.3. and 38.3. Ezech. 11.11. Secondly, Thorns, and pricks of Thorns
and Briars, as Isa. 34.13. Hos. 2.8. Thirdly, because the pricks of the great
Bramble are very sharp and hooked: this word is used to signify fish-hooks,
Amos 4.2. In all our English Bibles of the old, new, and Geneva Translation,
and some Latin Bibles, this word is taken to signify Pots or Caldrons. But
the Septuagints, Hierome, vulgar Latin Austine, Pagnine, Tremelius, and all
others that I have seen take this word in the second sense, for the sharp
pricks of Thorns and Brambles. Here certainly this word signifies the sharp
pricks of the great Dog-bramble, which here in the Hebrew Text is Arad, and is
used, Judge. 9.14, 15. in Jothams parable, to signify the Bramble, which being
made King of the Trees, kindled a fire, which devoured the Cedars of Lebanon.
Now this Bramble in the body, and every branch of it is beset with sharp hooked
pricks, some of which are green, and have life, and moisture in them, and
though they be sharp, yet they are not so stiff and strong as to make any
deep wound in a man's flesh. Others are greater, more hooked, and hardened by
drying and parching with vehement heat of the Sun, and they strike to the
quick, and hold fast, or tear where they catch hold of man's skin, or flesh.
The first are here in my Text called (...)
living or green: The other are called (...)
dried, parched, and hardened; and the Prophetical Psalmist affirms, That God
who judges in the earth, will take away and destroy as with a tempestuous
whirle-winde, every one of them, as well the green, as the dry, as Tremellius
out of the original does most truly Translate the word. These things well
considered, lead us to the full sense and true meaning of the whole Text.
First, here is a manifest Apostrophe, that is the Psalmists turning of his
speech to the Band or Congregation of wicked Counselors, unjust Judges, and
violent persecutors, and oppressors to whom he spoke before in the two first
verses. For he speaks not of them only, but to them being a multitude in the
second person plural, saying, Before they feel your pricks. Secondly he calls
them, as they are a Band, Atad, which name signifies the great Dog-bramble, and
the word here is of the Vocative case, and may fitly be Translated, o ye
Bramble, whom I do by a Metaphor call a Bramble, for the resemblance and
similitude between it and you. Thirdly, he does not limmit and restrain this
Prophecy to himself, and his godly friends persecuted by Saul and his wicked
Band: but he extends it to all Gods people, persecuted by such Bands in all
future times. For he does not say, Before we, but before they feel: that is,
Gods people in general, of all ages do feel the fury of you, and such as
ye are. The Hebrew word in the Text contains so much in the full
signification of it. (...)
Fourthly he does resemble the several sorts of Persecutors in such wicked
Bands, to the several sorts of pricks in the great Bramble: for some of them
are green-headed, like the green Thorns, not so cruel, crafty, and able to
hurt. Others by long custom are hardened in their malice, and habituated in
cruelty, being masters in the art of persecuting. And fifthly, he foretells
their destruction, that God will scatter and destroy them all, even every one
of every sort, green, and dry, young, and old, weaker and stronger, in these
words, he will take away every one as with a whirle-winde, as well the green,
as the dry. And so the whole Text runs thus, Before they feel your thorns or
pricks, o ye Bramble, he will take away every one as with a whirle-winde, as
well the green as the dry. Before they, That is, the righteous whom ye hate
and persecute, do feel, that is, have a full sense and understanding of your
Thorns or Pricks: That is, of the sharpness, fury, and mischief which is in
the heart and hand of all and every one among you: for every one in your Band
and Congregation, is a grievous thorn, and sharp prick of the cursed Bramble,
sharply set and bent to do mischief in malice and fury to the people and
Church of God. He that is God who judges in the earth, (as it is expressed in
the eleventh verse in the last words) will take away as with a whirle-winde
(that is, scatter and destroy tempestuously) every one, as well the living and
green, as the dry and hardened. That is, all of every sort banded together, as
well the green-headed, and young persecutors sharp set, but not so strong to
hurt; as the old and dry who are hardened in malice by long custom, and in power
and policy are strong to do mischief. And so I have done with opening and
expounding of the Text. I proceed to the Doctrines which the words and phrases
thereof rightly understood do offer to us.

And first, in that here the Band of wicked Counselors, unjust Judges,
corrupt Officers, and violent oppressors, and persecutors of Gods Church and
people, is resembled to a Bramble, and is by the Spirit of God, which spoke by
David, called by the name of the Dog-bramble, which is the worst, 2 Samuel 23.2.
and most hurtful of all Briars and Thorns, which God laid as a curse upon
the earth for man's sin, Genesis 3.18. Hence this Doctrine naturally arises,
That every Band, Company, and faction of wicked men, whether evil Counselors,
unjust Judges, and corrupt Officers

Secondly in that all of all sorts more or less able to do mischief, viz.
That all persons in every such Band or faction, working together against Gods
Church and people, whether they be more or less pernicious, and able to do
mischief whether hypocrites, working under hand, or open professed persecutors,
they are all sharers in the same wickedness with the worst and most malignant
of that cursed crew, and shall perish in the same destruction.

Thirdly, in that it is here said of the righteous, that before one, both green
and dry, more or less grievous and pricking, and hurtful to them. Hence we
garher a third Doctrine, viz. That God is so tender and watchful over his
Church and people, that he frustrates the wicked Counsels and practices of
their enemies, and scatters and destroys their persecutors, before they
proceed and prevail so far, as to make them feel and undergo the evil and
mischief which they are sharply set, and cruelly bent to inflict and bring
upon them.

Fourthly, from the words which here threaten destruction to the sharp pricks,
that is, the enemies and persecutors of the God will take away every one as
with a whirlewind, a fourth Doctrine arises, which is this; That when Gods
Church is most dangerously beset, and assaulted by the bands of enemies, and
persecutors of several sorts, the Lord will terribly, suddenly, and totally
scatter and destroy them all, and none shall escape.

Of these four Doctrines I purpose to speak in order, and to prove and apply
them severally, as God shall assist, and time permit.

The first Doctrine which teaches us, That every Band and Faction of the
wicked, who consult, conspire, and work together against the Church and people
of God, is most hurtful, dangerous, and pernicious, even the plague and curse
of Lands and Kingdoms in which they are, is abundantly confirmed by
Testimonies and examples, which the holy Scriptures do plentifully afford and
minister to us. For clear testimonies we have all those places wherein all and
every one of these wicked men banded together, are called by the name as of
Briars, and Thorns, which are the curse of the earth; so also* of Serpents,
Scorpions, Wolves, Lions, Bears, and other hurtful and noisome Creatures, as
Mich. 7.3. the Prophet inveighing against the practices of such Counselors,
Judges, Officers, and other wicked persons banded together under an ungodly
Prince, says, They hunt every man his brother with a net, that they may do
evil with both hands earnestly, or cunningly: the Prince requires, and the
Judge also asks for a reward, and the great man utters the mischief of his
soul; so they wrap it up and twist it together: The best of them is a Bryar,
the most upright is more sharp and pricking than an hedge of thorns, or
Briars. Also the Lord by the Prophet Ezekiel, Chapt. 2.6. says of such men,
that they are Briars, Thorns, and Scorpions: And thou son of man be not afraid
of them, or of their great words, though Briars and Thorns be with thee, and
thou do dwell among Scorpions, be not afraid of their words, nor dismayed at
their looks, though they be a rebellius house: That is a Band and faction of
rebellious men. And in the Prophetical Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.32.33. It is
said of such men cleaving together, as Grapes in a cluster, That their Vine is
the Vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorah: their Grapes are Grapes of
Gall, and their clusters are bitter: their Wine is the poison of Dragons, and
the cruel venom of Aspes. And Ezech. 28.24. The Lord promising to remove the
plague and curse from his Land and People, says: There shall be no more a
pricking Bryar, nor any grievous Thorn unto them. When he riddeth his Land of
such grievous oppressors, persecutors, and such pernicious persons. Likewise
Isaiah ^9.4, 5. It is said of the men of this rank, who speak vanity, trust
in lies, conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity, that they hatch
Cockatrice Eggs, and weave the Spiders web; he that eats of their Eggs
dies and that which is crushed breaks out into a Viper. And Isa. 27 4. the
Lord says, that while he keeps the Church, his Vineyard of red Wine, these
enemies of it, are Briars and Thorns set against him in Battle. This holy
Psalmist does not only here in this Psalm, verse 4. call them deaf Adders,
and says, their poison is like the poison of a Serpent: but in other Psalms
also he calls them Dogs, and Lions, as Psalm. 22.16.20, 21. Many Dogs are come
about me, the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me, and verse 21. Save me
from the Lions mouth, and Psalm 57.4. though they be sons of men, yet they are
said to be soule-hunting and devouring Lions, like their Father the Devil,
and set on fire of hell. My soul is among Lions, and I lie among them that are
set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are Spears and Arrows, and
their Tongues a sharp sword. And Psalm. 140.2.3. He complains against them,
and calls them men of violence gathered together to do mischief, who have
sharpened their tongues like a Serpent, and Adders poison is under their lips.
And Ezech. 22.27. and Zeph. 3.3. they are called roaring Lions, and evening
Wolves, ravening for the prey, to shed blood, to destroy souls, and to get
dishonest gain. Besides these, with many like testimonies, we have also most
pregnant examples. In the Book of Judges, chap. 9. we read that Abimelech the
son of Gideon, by a Concubine, being assisted by a band of wicked Counselors,
who were prevalent, and leading men in Shechem; and by the help of vain and
light persons, which he hired to be his followers with money which they gave
him; did usurp the Kingdom after the death of his father, and slew his
seventy brethren, who had more right to reign than he; and what a curse and
plague by so doing they proved to him and themselves, and to their City and
Country, the event showed; for he was the Bramble in his Brother Iothams
Parable, and they the trees which anointed him to be King over them, and by an
evil spirit which God sent between him and them, they became Traitors to him,
and he destroyed their chief City, slew the inhabitants, beat down the walls,
and sowed salt in it, to make it a cursed place: and pursuing the rest of the
people who betook themselves for refuge to a strong Tower, he had his skull
broken by a stone which a woman cast upon his head: and lest it should be said
that a woman slew him, he caused his Armor-bearer to thrust him through with
his sword, and so he dyed desperately; and Iothams parable was verified in him,
and his Band of wicked Counselors, and abettors; they proved to be a most
pernicious and destroying plague to him, and a curse to their City, State, and
Country: and a fire came out from him, to devour them as in that Chapter is
showed at large. In the same book Chapter 20. we read that the banding together
of wicked Counselors, and men of Belial in Gibeah, the chief City of
Benjamin, proved destructive to the whole Tribe, and no small plague to all
Israel, who lost above forty thousand men in a bloody Civil war, which by Gods
Law they were bound to make and pursue against them for putting away
abominations, and destroying cursed Malefactors, out of Israel. Those unjust
Judges, and wicked Counselors, patrons of filthy abomination, refused to
deliver up to justice the sons of Belial, who had most villanously abus^d the
Levites wife unto death; and by their authority stirred up all the Children of
Benjamin to take up arms against all their brethren of the other Tribes, who
were commanded to execute justice in such cases under pain of a curse, and to
cut off such abominable sinners, though with great damage and bloodshed on
their own side. But in the end this proved an heavy curse to the whole Tribe,
which in that unjust cause which they maintained by the sword, was cut off, and
utterly destroyed, except only five hundred men, who escaped by flight unto
the Rock of Rimmon, and the wilderness. Saul also, the first anointed King
over all Israel, when God had rejected him for his disobedience, gathered to
himself a Band of wicked Counselors, corrupt Officers, and Judges, and other
instruments of his violence, and of his cruelty, to persecute David, and such
as favored his righteous Cause, as Doeg, and others, of whom the beginning of
this Psalm speaks. And mention is also made of them, 1 Samuel 22. By them he was
stirred up to pursue David his chief Champion against the uncircumcised
Philistims, the common enemies of Israel, to drive him out of his Land: So that
for want of his help, he was in his great straits and fears drawn to consult
with the devil, by the witch of Endor, to the destruction of himself, and of
those his wicked followers, by whose Counsels he was led: For with them, all
his valiant Sons were slain in Battle, the army of Israel routed and
smitten; and he himself so hotly pursued, that he had no hope to escape: and
in bitterness of anguish he fell desperately upon his own Sword, and dyed a
selfe-murtherer, 1 Samuel 31. and so this wicked Band proved a curse to him and
themselves, and a plague to all Israel.

It was a Band of wicked Counselors, among whom Achitophel was president,
which animated Absalom to become a Traitor to King David his own Father, and
to raise up in Rebellion all Israel against him: 1 Samuel 25.
which as it was an heavy plague to David, and a curse to his family and
Kingdom: so especially to themselves; for Achitophel the president hanged
himself, and the rest with Absalom were destroyed in Battle, and miserably
perished. The like misery did Rehoboams Band of heady Counselors, and
ill-affected followers, proud young men, bring upon him and his Kingdom, for
being led and ruled by their Counsel, his Kingdom was woefully rent, ten
Tribes forsook him, and great calamity fell upon him, and upon Jerusalem, the
royal City, which was by this rent left naked of defense, and Sheshak King of
Egypt robbed it, and took away all the Treasures which Solomon left in the
house of the Lord, and in the Kings house, and all the Shield of Gold which he
had made, 1 Kings 12. and 2 Chronicles. 12. Likewise the Princes and flattering
Counselors of Ioash King of Judah, who conspired together, and were authors
to draw the King to Idolatry, and to persecute to death the Prophet, who was
the son of that renouned Priest Jehoiadah, by whom he himself had been saved
alive, nourished, and set up in the Throne of the Kingdom; they were most
pernicious, they brought a curse on the King, his family, and Kingdom, and on
themselves: for they were destroyed by the small Bands of the Syrians, which
God for their sins raised up to cut them off, and their great Host, and the
spoil of them was sent to Damascus: and the King himself being left by the
enemies in sore diseases, was slain by his own servants: and this was the
plague and curse which his wicked Counselors, by whom he was led, brought on
him and themselves. 2 Chronicles. 24. we read also in the Prophecy of Jeremiah,
that King Zedekiah was altogether led and rul^d by a Band of wicked
Counselors, Princes, Priests, and false Prophets, which at length overawed
him, when they had brought him into great straits, Jer. 38.24, 25. These were
the men who persecuted Jeremiah for prophesying to them from God, laid wait to
catch him in his words, smote him, put him in the stocks, and caused the King
to cast him into the Dungeon. What cursed men these were, and what dreadful
vengeance and wrath of God followed them and their families, the Prophet
shows, Ierem. 18.21. and 20.11, 12. viz. That their children shall be
delivered up to the sword, their wives shall be widows, and a cry shall be
heard from their houses: Gods vengeance shall be seen on them, and their
everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten. What a plague and curse they
were to the King, to his sons, and to his City, and Kingdom, the same Prophet
testifies: They made him and his people reassume their dismissed
Bond-servants, and break the Covenant of God, Ier. 34 11. Yea, and the Oath of
God which he made to the King of Babylon, when he set him up to be King; and
they hardened him by their evil Counsel to stand out against the word of the
Lord, until God gave him and his sons, City, and Kingdom, into the hands of
the King of Babylon, who slew his sons before his face, then put out his
eyes, bound him in Chains till he dyed, took the City, laid it waste, burnt
the Temple, led the people captive, and left the Land desolate, as we read Ier.
39. But yet there was another Band and conspiracy of wicked Counselors, unjust
Judges, persecutiong Rulers, and ungodly Officers, and other instruments of
violence, more pestilent and pernicious then all these who were such a plague
and curse to their whole Nation, that they brought the wrath of God on it to
the utmost, and on all their posterity until this day; that was the great
Counsel of the Jews in our Saviors days, by which the publishing of the
Gospel was desperately opposed, the blessed Messiah persecuted and murdered,
his Apostles and Martyrs scourged, imprisoned, slain, and scattered, as the
History of the Gospel, and of the Acts of the Apostles testify. For they by
their pernicious Counsels and practices, brought a total destruction upon
their whole nation, people, City and Temple; so that a general curse cleaves
to their children, and they have for 1600 years been a byword, a reproach and
a hissing in all Nations where they are scattered. These dreadful examples are
so many loud voices proclaiming from God to our ears, and witnessing to our
hearts the truth propounded in this Doctrine, viz. That every Band, Company,
and Faction of wicked men, consulting to do mischief, and practicing against
Gods Church and people, are most pernicious and dangerous Brambles, the plague
and curse of Lands and Kingdoms.

I have been large in producing a multitude of examples, because I would have
you take notice, that wicked Rulers and Kings mentioned in Scripture, never
wanted pernicious Counselors, nor Bands of cursed instruments to spur and
drive them on to destruction, and to bring a curse on their Kingdoms. This is
no new, nor strange thing to be wondered at, and to dismay and astonish us. But
that, in times when Kings and Princes were Tyrants, oppressors, and back
sliders from true Religion to Idolatry, and had bands of wicked instruments,
and of men of violence at command, God was so merciful to his Nation, and
people of old, as to reserve to himself a prevayling party, and to put
wisdom and courage into the great Counsel of the Kingdom, to resist their
violence, to preserve Religion from ruin, the people from oppression, the Land
from spoiling, to oppose the bands of the wicked, to scatter them, and execute
justice on them: this we find not in the Book of God, in all the Histories
from the first to the second Adam: this is a mercy proper to the times of the
Gospel, and to those Nations and Kingdoms in which Christ rules by his holy
Spirit, and his Church is surely established, by the word of God faithfully
preached, and true religion is planted in the hearts of the people.

But now for the cursed Band of pernicious Counselors, and other agents of
violence and iniquity, which here I am to deal with. That we may see most
clearly what just cause all Nations and people have to hate, abhor, and spue
them out, as enemies of all righteousness and peace; and the plague and curse
of the Lands, states, and kingdom in which they rise up, and bear sway: I
will launch forth a little further, to discover the depth of their malice, how
pestilent and mischievous they must needs be, wheresoever they prevail, and are
countenanced; and this I will do by three reasons, draw. First from their
original and chief author. Secondly, from their actions and practices.
Thirdly, the unhappy events of their doing.

Belial, children of the Devil, and seed of the old Serpent, especially when a
faction of them is banded together, are most hurtful and dangerous to the
Church and people of God, and a plague and curse to the State in which they
rule and have power: For God has put enmity between them and the elect seed of
the woman, Christ, and his true members: there can be no peace, but perpetual
war with them, till their head be bruised, and their power scattered: which
victory for the most part does c^st Christians, as it did their head Christ,
the bruising of their heel, Genesis 3.15. What a curse the sons of Eli, who are
called sons of Belial, 1 Samuel 2.12. did bring upon the Land of Israel, and on
their fathers house, we may read at large, chap. 2.11. and chap. 4. The Ark of God could not secure them from Gods wrathful stroke, and visiting hand. And I
doubt not but the covetousness, theft, and treachery of Judas, who was a
Devil incarnate, do discover sufficiently what mischief abounds in the
children of the devil. Now wicked Counselors, unjust Judges, and all other
ungodly men banded together, to lie, to seduce, and to work mischief in their
hearts, are in the Scriptures proclaimed sons of Belial, children of the
Devil, and the seed of the old Serpent: So God by Moses calls them, Deuteronomy.
13.13. So David in his last words, and says, That they are all of them as
Thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands, 2 Samuel 23.6. And
our Savior tells the Jews banded together to oppress, hurt, lie, slander,
and persecute, that they are of their Father the Devil: they have their
original from Hell, the devil is the chief author of their malice, and
president of their conspiracy and counsel, John 8.44. And St. Paul calls
Elimas the Sorcerer, who labored to turn Sergius Paulus from the faith, the
enemy of all righteousness, the child of the Devil, full of all malice and
subtilty, Acts 13.10. For indeed the old Serpent the Devil, inspires subtelty
into men, suggests wicked counsels, and draws them into conspiracy in evil;
and the more they are banded together, the more he prevails in them, and
works more mischief by them: and therefore their original, and the author of
their Counsels demonstrates them to be such as this Doctrine teaches.

The second reason is drawn from their actions, and practices. First of all
their thoughts are against the righteous for evil, Psalm 56.5. They work
mischief in their hearts, verse 2. of this Psalm, devise it on their beds,
Psalm. 30.4. they glory and boast in it, Psalm 52.1. they consult together to
cast down the righteous from his excellency, they delight in lies, bless with
their mouth, but curse with their heart, Psalm. 62.3, 4. In the balance of
Justice which they hold as Judges in their hands, and under color and pretense
of judgment, they weigh out the violence of their hands, (that is, wrongs and
injuries) in the earth. Psalm 58.2. They plot against the righteous, Psalm
37.12. They lie in wait for blood, Psalm. 64.5.
Mich 7.2. they talk together of laying snares for the innocent, they consult
with one consent, and take crafty Counsel together against Gods people, even
his hidden ones, who are his jewels and his treasure: they are confederate
against God himself, Psalm 83 3.5. they judge unjustly, accept the persons of
the wicked, Psalm 82.2. And in a word, there is no evil action, or unjust
practice, which men of wicked counsels, banded together, will not do
earnestly with both hands, Mich. 7.3. Let Abimelechs example by evil counsel,
and aid of wicked instruments, slaying his 70. innocent brethren, Judge. 9.
Doegs accusing first, and after murdering the Lords Priests, 1 Samuel 24. and
such like, be an evidence of this. Now what state is not miserable where a
Band of such wicked Counselors rule and judge? What man can securely enjoy his
lands, goods, liberty, or life? what peace or safety can be to any righteous
man, if God does not stop these Lions mouths, and extraordinarily protect him?
Every good man may say with David, My soul is among Lions, and I lie among
them who are set on fire, even the sons of men, etc. Psalm. 77.4. O that I had
wings like a Dove, etc. Psalm. 55.6. and Ier. 9.2. Therefore this Doctrine is a
certain truth.

David upon certain knowledge of the evil and mischief which follows them,
proclaims the man blessed that has not walked in their counsel, Psalm. 1.1.
First, they bring woe and misery on themselves; as it is reported of the
Dog-bramble, that in hot Countries, being vehemently shaken with the wind, and
one branch dashed against another, it tears and grates it self, till it sets
it self on fire, and the woods round about it: so these men by consulting
wickedly together, and by their restless rage, they mutually inflame one
another, and the Lord against whom they set themselves, conspiring against his
anointed holy ones, will speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his hot
displeasure, Psalm. 2.2.5. He will destroy them, and make them fall in their own
imaginations, Psalm. 5.10. And when they associate themselves, and take counsel
together, their counsel shall come to naught, and they shall be broken in
pieces, Isa. 8.10. and the fruit of their Counsels which they seek deep to
hide, and of their works which are in the dark, is woe, Isa. 29.15. Secondly,
they involve in the same misery and destruction with themselves, the City and
State wherein they act with power, and all those who walk in their Counsels;
they bring the sword on their City with Captivity and slavery, Hos. 10.6. The
Counselors of the King of Assyriah, and of proud Babel, brought them down to
hell and destruction, Isa. 10.15. and 47.13. And in all the examples before
mentioned, as of Abimelech, of the men of Belial in Gibeah, of Saul, Absalom,
Rehoboam, Ioash, and of the wicked Princes, Priests, Rulers, and people in the
days of Zedekiah, before the captivity to Babel; and in the days of Christ
and the Apostles, before the destruction of City, Temple, and Nation of the
Jews by the Romans: we may see as in a clear glass the cursed fruits, and
woeful events of the evil counsels, and actions of the wicked banded
together in an evil cause: And upon these premises the Doctrine follows as a
necessary conclusion: That the bands and factions of the wicked associated to
consult and act against justice, religion, and the Church and people of God,
are pernicious and dangerous, a plague and curse to Lands, States and Kingdoms*

not by way of exprobation, but of exhortation: for you are the chosen worthies
of this Land and Kingdom, the representative body of the Commonwealth: And it
has been the ancient Privilege of the great Counsel of this Kingdom, the
high Court of Parliament, whereof you are Members; by the supreme power of
judicature given you in your Election, to call to account all unjust Judges,
corrupt Officers, and the wicked Counselors of your Kings, to depose them from
their Offices, to strip them of their power and authority, to dissolve their
Courts, and for treacherous Counsels and attempts against the Laws,
Liberties, and Religion, sometimes to cut them off by the sword of Justice. I
hope that you who are so vigilant over others, will be as watchful to keep all
such out of your assembly; or if any such be discovered, to note and observe
them, and upon the first occasion and opportunity, to remove them, lest they
band themselves together, make divisions, and prove pricking Briars, and
grievous thorns among you. And it is my hearty desire, and prayers to God for
you, that no Prophet, Preacher of the Word, or faithful Messenger of God, may
have any cause or color to speak to you, as here the Prophetical Psalmist
does to King Saul's great Counsel, in the two first Verses of this Psalm, Do
ye indeed speak righteousness, o Congregation? do ye judge uprightly, o ye
sons of men. Yea, in your heart ye work wickedness, and weigh the violence
of your hands in the earth. I dare be bold on the contrary to speak to you,
and that in the common voice of all that are godly, and well-affected to
Religion and Justice. O ye Honorable Assembly, the great Counsel of this
Kingdom, and noble Worthies of this Land, that ye have not only spoken
righteousness and upright judgment, but also by your zealous Votes, as by the
voice of Thunder, you have scattered the Bands of wicked Counselors, and
corrupt Offices, dissolved some tyrannical Courts, hurled down unjust Judges
from the seats of justice, who had set up wickedness for a Law. You have
driven away as with a whirle-winde all those malignant and factious spirits
from among you, who have opposed your godly and religious endeavors to relieve
the oppressed, to reform both Church and State, and to purge out all
corruptions, and intolerable geievances out of both. And you have for the
terror of the present, and future Ages, cut off many malignant and desperate
instruments of violence, rebellion, and treason hy the sword of justice and
war. The Lord is with you, the mighty men of valor go on in this your
might, and Gideon-like ye shall save from destruction this perishing State,
and shall set up the Kingdom of Christ over us. Though you meet with many
difficulties, and great opposition of crafty, subtle, fierce, and cruel
enemies, yet be not discouraged; but persuade your selves, that these are the
days of the devils rage, who has great wrath, because he knows that he hat
but a short time. While he fights against you in the form of a great red
Dragon, with all the power of the beast, and assailes you openly on all sides,
with all the forces of the Romish Antichrist, raised up at home, and from
abroad; he sends in among us grievous Wolves in sheeps clothing, who by fair
shows of more refined Religion, piety, and godly life, seek to insinuate
themselves into your favor, and under pretense of new light, and tender
consciences, to purchase at your hands liberty to live as they list, under no
rule or government, but every company and particular Conventicle to do what
seems good in their own eyes, without control of any superiors: others rise
up daily, and speak perverse things, that they may draw Desciples after them.
The several Bands of Anabaptists, Antinomiaur, Familists, Libertines, and
Separatists, are so multiplied, that they begin to threaten, and speak big
words. And besides these we have blasphemous Heretics, or rather Atheists, who
begin to gather Assemblies, and to teach people, that one Spirit rules in all
living Creatures, men and beasts; and the Spirit which dwells in the Saints is
no other but the same which works in the children of disobedience. And that
the Doctrine concerning the person of Christ, God and man, as it is preached in
all Orthodox Churches, is but a fiction; for every man, by the Spirit of new
light coming into him, becomes a Christ, God and man in himself. That men's
souls dye as beasts do with their bodies, and live not till the day of
resurrection: As for hell, damnation, and differences of Elect men blessed, and
reprobate cursed, they hold them to be Dreams, fictions, scar-crowes, and idle
fancies. There is also a new Sect of Seekers, who renounce the Scriptures as
blind guides, and wait for new lights to lead them to the true Religion* which
(as they conceive) is not yet to be found, while the Temple is full of smoke:
and in the mean time they will seek, and suspend, and fasten on no Religion,
till the new lights appear. But such is the efficacy of Satan in all these
Sects, of so contrary opinions, that in the maine they are not divided: but all
agree in this, that with lies, slanders, revilings, and reproaches they strive
to over-lade, tear and rend the true Orthodox reformed Churches, and spare not
Christ's pure redeemed flock: but by flatteries, forgeries, and new fangle
opinions, draw away many well-meaning people, and steal away and destroy the
sheep of his fold. Now these many factions and Sects, with all their favorers
and abettors, (if any such should rise up among you) they are the Bands of the
wicked, and the Brambles of which my Text speaks: which I have in the Doctrine
now in hand proved to be most pestilent and dangerous, even the very curse of
the land in which they get footing, and increase. And ye renowned Worthies, as
ye tender the good and welfare of your Country, and of those who have
entrusted you with defense and safety of their Religion, Laws, Liberty, and
Lives, and as God has called you to the highest place and Court of Judicature:
so let it be your first care and work of Reformation, to remove all such
Brambles out of the way: and because some are but green thorns, or pricks,
seduced and drawn into the faction by the sleights and subtelty of deceivers,
have compassion on them, and put a difference, pulling them out of the fire, by
the hand of justice tempered with mercy: and by the rod of correction; but
others who are men of Belial, hardened in their malignity, such as David in his
last words resembles to Thorns, thrust away, because they cannot be taken with
hands, but the man that will touch them, must be fenced with Iron, and the
staff of a Spear, and they shall be burnt with fire in the same place: cut
them down with the sword of Justice, root them out and consume them as with
fire, that no root may spring again; let their mischief fall upon their own
heads, that the Land may be eased, which has a long time, and does still
groan under them, as under an heavy curse. I do not use this exhortation, as
a Spur, but as an encouragement to you, who are wise, and of your selves
willing and forward; that when you are put in mind, and have it set before
your eyes, what a plague and curse such bands of wicked men are in a laud, and
to what misery and mischief all their counsels and doings tend; and what
woeful events follow their cursed designs; you may proceed with courage to
quell, scatter, and destroy them, never doubting, but that in so doing you do
the work of God, and judge, and execute justice for him, and he is with you in
the judgment, and by cutting off such Achans, you turn away his wrath from
the Land.

Secondly, this Doctrine serves for wholesome admonition to us all this day; For
by discovering to us the evil, and mischief of wicked Counsels; and what a
plague and curse the Bands of the ungodly are in a Land, when they are combined
together to work wickedness in their hearts, to oppress and persecute Gods
people by injustice and violence, and to oppose necessary Reformation: It puts
us in mind of the plague and curse which still presses sore, and lies hard
and heavy upon the Kingdom at this time; and of our sins which have procured
all this evil unto us, which great sins we have not yet subdued, neither
have so washed our hearts from wickedness by true and sound repentance, as to
make our selves ripe for deliverance. Although the Lord by our Parliament has
wrought wonderfully in scattering the bands of wicked Counselors, unjest
Judges, and corrupt Officers, in removing them from their Assembly, and from
the seats of Justice, and Courts of judicature: yet they are still combined
together to do mischief in several parts of the Land; they have raised up,
and do still maintain a most unnatural bloody civil war, and have brought
upon us the great and sore judgment of the sword: they have also subservient
Bands of malignants, who do work for them secretly underhand, and are ready
upon every occasion to help forward their cursed design: we have but few
garrison Towns, or fortified places, wherein they have not had some Band of
combined Traitors, plotting to betray them, as we have seen in many former and
late discoveries. And as the whole Kingdom groaned under the pressure of those
tyrannical Courts lately dissolved; so many parts of the Land are still
miserably oppressed by their scattered Bands, and we all sigh and groan with
our oppressed brethren, and have a fellow-feeling of their calamities* Surely
our great sins have pulled this plague and curse upon the Land; and it is
still continued, because we continue in our sins. The unclean spirits which
vex us are not to be cast out, but by faithful fervent prayers, and such holy
Fasts as God has chosen, and we have not kept. For we have not loosed the
bands of wickedness, we have not undone the heavy burdens, nor relieved the
oppressed, nor broken every yoke. Many people in the Country are intollerably
eaten up with free Quarter of our Soldiers, and yet have as heavy taxes laid
on them as any others. The laborious Ministers are robbed of their livelihood
by bands of Anabaptists, Separatists, and other profane covetous persons; and
have no relief, nor remedy, but that which is worse than the disease: And yet
when any tax is laid on their parishes, they are assessed more deeply, than
some of double and trible ability. This I speak, not that I have any cause to
complain, but I am grieved to see the palpable wrongs, and to hear the
complaints of my suffering brethren. The Church of Christ is woefully rent and
torn by the bands of of Schismatics, and blasphemous Heretics, who when they
have robbed the folds of the Pastors, and stolen away their sheep, do raise up
Hue and Cry against them, for demanding their own: and while they persecute
with the sword of their slanderous tongues all godly Orthodox Ministers, who
desire to walk in the beaten way of all Reformed Churches, and to be guided
therein by the clear light of Gods word and spirit: they cry out, persecution,
persecution, worse than Prelaticall; we are persecuted, imprisoned, banished,
for our Consciences, and not suffered to enjoy Christian Liberty. Indeed if
heresy, blasphemy, mutiny, raised up in the Church and State, and open
affronts offered to this religious Parliament be Christian Liberty and
Conscience: some of them have been lightly imprisoned for such doings a few
days; but of any other persecution for Conscience, we have not yet heard.
These great and scandalous sins, with horrid blasphemies belched out against
Christ, the Gospel, the Law of God, and the holy Scriptures, while they are
not punished by the Magistrate, nor by the offenders repented of, nor generally
mourned for by us all, nor with godly grief and sorrow bewailed, they provoke
God to continue our plagues, and to strengthen the hand of the wicked against
us, and his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
Besides, it is to be feared, that we have not thoroughly repented, nor so
grieved, and bitterly mourned for our iniquities, which provoked God to give us
in his wrath tyrannical Lords and Lordly Prelates to rule over us with rigor:
neither have we humbled our souls as we ought, even to shame our selves by
public confession, and open detestation of those offenses and crimes whereof
we are generally guilty in one measure or other, in that out of cowardly fear
we yielded our necks to the Antichristian yoke of Prelaticall Tyrants,
receiving without contradiction, or resistance, their Popish Ceremonies,
superstitious Rites, and Idolatrous Innovations, and too many soothed them in
their usurped power, and Lordly dominion over Gods inheritance, fathering it on
them by Divine Right. Some have out of wilful ignorance, and some out of
flattery, some out of ambition, and a covetous desire of preferment by their
means been instruments to confirm them in their pride, and power unlimitted:
As the Lord by the Prophet Jeremiah complained against the Jews, in a time
when their Church and State were desperately corrupt, and incurable, ready to
be wholly ruined, Jer. 5.30.
saying: A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, the Prophets
prophecy falsely, the Priests rule, and take power into their hands by their
means, and my people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end
thereof. So it might have been truly said of us, our Prophets prophesied
falsely, they preached for the pomp and Lordly power of Bishops, and
Metrapolitanes, proclaimed them to be Lords over men's consciences, and the
only Pastors of all the Churches in their Diocesses and Provinces, and all
other Ministers to be no Pastors, but only their Curats and slavish vassalls,
bound by oath to obey their Dictats and Canons. By this means they took into
their hands the whole power of Church and State: they tyrannized, and Lorded it
in their high Commission Courts, not only over Ministers and their flocks, but
also over the Nobility and Gentry, who were compelled to crouch to them: they
haled men to prison, and by hard and close imprisonment murdered the
innonocent, they robbed men of their estates by arbitrary fines, they overawed
Judges, Counselors, and Officers of state, so that by them they made their
own will and lust law, just judgments were restrained, and wrong judgment
proceeded at their command, the wicked were favored and promoted, and all
godly people, especially faithful Orthodox Ministers were hated and hunted
after with nets; and the people loved to have it so: for they were ready to
seek their favor by accusing and slandering their Preachers, exposing them to
their fury, and betraying them into their merciless hands: And what remained
then for us to do, but in anguish of soul to cry out and complain in the
words of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 59.11, etc. We roar like Bears, and mourn
sore like Doves: we looked for light, and behold obscurity, justice is turned
backward, equity cannot enter, truth fails, and he that departs from evil
makes himself a pray. And except the Lord of Hosts had left unto us a small
remnant of faithful praying people, we should have been as Sodom, and we
should have been as Gomorah. But when he saw our afliction, he looked on us
with compassion, and seeing that there was none to help, his own arm brought
salvation to us, and his righteousness it sustained us; he put on garments of
vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as with a Cloak; and according
to their deeds, accordingly he has repayed fury to our oppressors, and
recompense to his and our enemies: he has broken rheir nets, and we are
delivered.

Here if any object and say, If the Lord be with us to deliver us, why are we
thus troubled and vexed still with fears of open enemies; and with dangers of
Malignants among us? I must say again, I fear we have not rendered to God
thanks and praise, with the slaughter of our sins and lusts, and the
sacrifice of new obedience, and the honor due to his name for these beginnings
of his mercy: neither have we sorrowed and mourned to amendment of life: our
former sins and iniquities are too many and great to be with so few tears
and sighs washed and blown away: If we could weep tears of blood for them,
and rend our hearts with godly remorse, and be ashamed, and confounded in our
selves for our unthankfulness to so gracious a God, so bountiful a Father,
and so merciful a Lord and Judge, al is too little. Let us therefore in these
our public Fasts, both Ministers and peope, power out our souls in humble
confession of our vileness, and by aggravating our unworthiness, let us
labor to make our selves and others more sensible of the greatness of his
mercy to us, and the praise of his goodness and bounty to such vile sinners
more admirable and glorious: Let us loose the bands of wickedness, and the
more cowardly, rnd fearful we have been, like Peter in the days of trial,
the more bitterly let us weep with Peter: the more share and hand we have had
in soothing Prelates, and promoting their pride, the more zealous let us be in
trampling their pride under foot, and in abhorring all appearance of it, and in
showing open detestation of all their Iniquity, Superstiton, and Idolatry.
David was a man after Gods heart, and when through fleshly frailty, he had
fallen into great and scandalous sins, adding to his adultery, murder;
though upon his confession of his sin, the Lord forgave the iniquity of it; and
the Prophet told him, that the Lord had taken away his sin, he should not dye,
nor undergo any destroying punishment of wrath and vengeance: yet he rested
not in confessing, fasting, mourning, and praying for a day; but out of
loathing, and abhorring his sinful corruption, he afflicted his soul seven
days, lying upon the ground, fasting, weeping, and making supplication with
strong cries, and saying, Have mercy upon me o God according to thy loving
kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out all my
transgressions: wash me thoroughly from my wickedness; deliver me from
bloud-guiltinesse, create in me a clean heart, restore to me the joy of thy
salvation, Psalm. 51* And again, O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, I am
troubled, I am bowed greatly, I go mourning all the day long: As we may more
at large see in his penitential Psalms, in which his sorrows are engraven and
recorded to all posterities. And all this repentance proceeded not from horror
of conscience or fear of death and hell, as that of Ahab, and Judas did: but
out of true remorse and godly sorrow, for that he had sinned against a God, so
gracious and full of tender compassion: His own words show the true ground of
his grief, where he says, Against thee, thee only have I sinned. It was his
love of God, and sense of Gods love and mercy to him, which made him so hate
his sins, and loath himself. And indeed this is true Evangelicall
repentance, which works effectually to the mortifying of the old man, killing
the body of death, and subduing the rebellious lusts of the flesh: this makes
our former sins hateful and grievous to us; and terrifies us from falling in
to the like again. O how happy should we be, if we could thus repent, if we
could thus humble our souls in these our Fasts, Gods bowels of compassion
would yearn toward us, as the bowels of tender parents do over a dear child
when they see him grieving at the heart, and mourning for his offense of them,
and disobedience to them, When the Lord our God sees us thus penitent, he will
answer us graciously, meet us, and embrace us with love, make us behold his
face with joy in the righteousness of Jesus Christ, accept his ransom for us,
and will say to your souls, I am your salvation. His scourging rod, the cursed
Bramble, with all the Thorns and Pricks thereof, all the bands of the wicked
which trouble us, shall be thrown away into the fire, burnt and consumed.

I proceed to the second point, which is the resemblance of the several sorts
of ungodly, malicious, and ill-affected persons banded together to consult,
devise, and practice evil against the Church of Christ, and to oppress,
persecute, and do mischief to Gods people, unto the several sorts of pricks
on the great Bramble, of which some are green and more tender, others dried and
hardened, but all sharp pricking and hurtful, and are all to be taken away as
with a whirlwind. This ministers to us the second Doctrine.

That all persons combined in any Band or faction, consulting and working
together against Gods Church and people, whether they be

This is further confirmed by Gods own words, Psalm. 50.16, etc. But unto the
wicked said God, what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, and to take my
Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my word
behind thee? when thou saw a Thief thou consentedst to him, and have been
pertaker with the adulterers, thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue
frames deceit: thou sit and speak against thy brother, and slanderest
thine own mothers son. In which words I observe, that some wicked men make a
profession of Religion, declare Gods Statutes, and take his Covenant in their
mouth. Secondly, that they hate instruction, oppose Reformation, and break
their Covenant with God. Thirdly, that by sitting in Counsel with persecutors,
speaking evil with their mouths, and framing deceit with their tongues, and
consenting to the deeds of evill-doers, they are pertakers of their sins.
Fourthly, that Gods wrath is kindled against them, and if they do not repent
he will tear them in pieces, and none shall deliver them. And Psalm 26.4.5.
The holy Psalmist pleading immunity from sliding, and that God will not take
him away, nor gather his soul with sinners, nor his life with men of blood, in
whose hand is mischief, because he has not sat with vain persons, nor gone
in with dissemblers, but has hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will
not sit in Counsel with the wicked; does necessarily intimate, that all they
who do join in counsel with the wicked, and help forward their designs, are
pertakers of their sins, and shall perish with them. And to the same purpose
the Prophet Jeremy speaks, Ier. 15.17.
saying, I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced: why is my
pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuses to be healed? which
words import, that they who are of the Band of Scorners, and rejoice in their
evil doings, are pertakers of their wickedness, and their wages shall be
perpetual pain and wounds incurable. All in Corah's conspiracy, Numb. 16.
even women and children, were found guilty before God of that rebellion and
perished in it. And in a City falling away to Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.
all in it, young and old are guilty, and to be cut off.

And indeed there is good Reason grounded on the word of Exodus 20.5. by the
express words of the Law, where the Lord says, He will visit the sins of the
Fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation: which sins they
had no finger in when they were first committed; but only approved them by
imitation, or did not sorrow and mourn for them; nor show open detestation, nor
make restitution. Therefore much more they who join in Counsel with the
enemies of Gods Church, and further and help forward their malicious designs,
let them seem never so moderate and zealous for Religion, and the welfare of
Church and State: they are all hurtful and dangerous pricks of the cursed
Bramble, brethren and companions with the malignant in their mischief, guilty
of the same sins, and shall perish in the same destruction, if they do not
repent, and separate themselves from their Congregation.

The common Law of Nations also confirms this, which makes accessaries, though
not desperately cruel, nor so hardened

This Doctrine is of good use. For it serves to admonish us Belial, who are so
many thorns and pricks of the cursed Bramble, yea far more dangerous; for
their teeth are Spears, and Arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. Psalm
57.4. They do not only catch and wound, and tear all that come within their
reach, and touch them, as the Pricks of Brambles do: but they have bent their
tongues like a Bow for lies, and shoot forth their poisoned arrows, bitter
words of slander, to hurt and wound at a distance, Psalm. 64.3. The Prophet
Jeremiah living in a dangerous time, in which there were many assemblies of
such treacherous men, cried out in great fear and anguish, O that I had in the
wilderness the lodging place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people,
and go from them. Jeremiah 9.2.3. David also, beset with such Briars, as a man
possessed with horror, and trembling, wished that he had wings to fly away. O
that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away and be at rest: Lo,
then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. Thus Gods dear
servants were more afraid of these pricking Brambles than of the briars and
thorns in the wilderness: wherefore let me exhort you in the words of the
Apostle, to see that ye walk warily and circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5.15. Let us not be deceived with the
fair shows of those instruments of Satan, who are outwardly Saints and
Angels of light, professing abundance of new light, every sort and Sect of
them, but inwardly are ravening and grievous wolves, not sparing the flock of
Christ, his true Church planted in this Land, and like stinging and tearing
pricks of the bramble wounding and tearing the high Court of Parliament, and
the Assembly of Divines, with the spears and arrows of bitter words. Although
the great Band of wicked Counselors, Judges, and Officers, which did tyrannize
over our souls, as much as our bodies, and was like a great Bramble
overspreading the whole Land, darkning our light with the shadow of it, is by
Gods mighty hand working with this happy Parliament, hurled out of all high
Courts of Justice, and removed further from us, and some noisome and dangerous
pricks thereof broken off and destroyed: yet let us not dream of peace, nor
suffer security to creep upon us: for it does get root and strength again in
other places round about us, and does prevail to do misciefe, not a little in
the North, the South, the West, and middle Countries: And the Lord calls us to
fasting and prayer, and to great humiliation, that we seeking to him may find
deliverance from the cruelty of that devouring Bramble; the sharp hooked
pricks whereof do sting, wound, catch, and hold whatsoever comes within their
reach, as appears by their robbing and plundering, and haling men to prison,
slaying and murdering many harmless people where they come: yea, this Bramble
shrouding it self under the shadow of the great Cedar of Lebanons regal power
and presence, rules over many great trees and Oaks of Bashan: and therefore
still troubles us, and puts us in fear, and Satan, and Antichrist foreseeing
the fall of their Kingdom in the full, and destruction of it, combine all
their forces to support it: And hence it is, that besides foreign forces,
Satan has raised up from among our selves bands of Malignants, Anabaptists,
Antinomians, Libertines, Schismatic Separatists, all which are so many
treacherous enemies at home, and do all work together to strengthen the popish
Faction, and to lay us open and naked to their fury and violence, by opposing
and retarding the blessed work of Reformation, deviding us among our selves,
and rending the Coat of Christ without seame. And every one in these several
factions, is like a sharp venomous Thorn or Prick of the cursed Bramble,
stinging and wounding the Church and Commonwealth, and all that are faithful
in both. And therefore to me it is not grievous, but to you it is safe to
admonish you again in the words of the Apostle, to beware of these Dogs, to
beware of these evil workers, to beware of the concision: never had we more
need to be firmly united in hearts, souls, and affections, that with joint
strength, and one shoulder we may labor and strive to dissolve these wicked
Bands, and to scatter them: for they are a heavy curse to all our Land.

Secondly, this Doctrine serves as to stir us all up as to beware Belial, who
are combined together in hurtful Counsels, and practices catch hold of us to
hurt us; so also it gives a Caveat to all men to take heed, that they be not so
deceived with the seeming moderation and fair shows of any sort of them, as
to seek or hope for any help from them, either for resisting the Popish
faction, or for furthering the true reformation of the Church, and settling of
the Land in peace. For certainly, whether they be of the Band and Sect of
Anabaptists, or Antinomians, or Libertines, or separating Schismatics, or
Seekers of new light, they are all of them hurtful pricks of the cursed
Bramble, and all their counsels and designs tend to cross and hinder all
sound Reformation, and to further the grand Antichristian faction, in their
desperate attempts to ruin Religion, Church, and Commonwealth. Can any be so
blind and void of understanding, as to expect any blessing or good at all from
them who are the curse of the land? will the pernicious enemies of Reformation,
and peace, contemners of Laws, and lawful authority, cordially join to
defend our Laws and Religion, and help forward the reformation of the Church
from corruptions, errors, and abuses, which abound chiefly in themselves, and
they are the authors and abettors of them? Is there any hope that they who
exclude and cast out from their Communion, as unclean Dogs, all reformed
Churches, will fight for any Reformation which comes near to them, though it
be never so well warranted and held forth in the Word of God? We read of
Manasseh, the King of Judah, that when the Captains of the host of the King of
Assyria, came against him, they took him in the thorns, bound him in chains,
and carried him to Babylon, where he was in great affliction, 2 Chronicles. 33.11.
When the City could not defend him, he fled for shelter into the Briar bushes,
and there he was caught, and held fast by the hooked pricks, for the enemies to
take him: and even so it will be with us, (...)
if we trust in these pricking thorns, and betake our selves to them for
help, they will betray us into the enemies hands. Wherefore let us set our
hearts to rest wholly on our God, and to seek to him with fasting, prayer, and
humiliation for deliverance from these Briars, and Thorns, and from their
hooks and snares. And because while we regard iniquity in our hearts, the Lord
will not hear us; let us confess our sins with mournful hearts, and forsake
them, and the Lord will forgive the iniquity of them, and will be our refuge
and strength, and a present help in all our troubles. For if we could but
prepare our hearts, and fit our selves for deliverance by obtaining mercy to
have our sins and transgressions blotted out, and could wash our hearts from
wickedness, and put away by repentance our sins which do strengthen the
hands of our enemies against us, God would quickly scatter all them that rise
up to vex us, and not spare nor endure them for one moment, they are all even
the best of them, the hateful pricks of the cursed briar, fully ripe for
destruction. Sin is that which brought them for a curse upon the ground; and
repentance and putting away of our sins is the only way to rid the land of
them; the Lord is ready and waits for our amendment, that instantly and
without delay he may scatter them as with a whirlewinde both the green and the
dry.

The third point in my Text is; That God will not suffer the righteous to feel
the evil and mischief intended and plotted against them, by the bands of
their enemies and persecutors, but will most timely and seasonably take away
and destroy all and every prick of that cursed bramble and spare none, neither
green nor dry. There are two kinds of feeling; one is by outward and bodily
sense of things which touch us, and we touch and handle them; this is expressed
in the Original Scriptures by an Hebrew word which implies bodily touching;
The other is the inward sense of feeling by knowledge and understanding. (...)
This feeling reaches beyond bodily sense of the flesh, even to the soul and
spirit, and it is expressed in the Original by the hebrew words Iadagh and
Iabin, (...)
which signify to know and understand the thing bodily felt. Of this feeling
we read Prove. 23.35. where it is said of a drunken man; That he is stricken,
and yet is not sick of his blow; he is beaten, but he feels it not. It is
certain his flesh feels it, and the stripes leave a print behind; but he has
not for the present the use of his reason to know and understand, because his
spirits are drowned in drink, and oppressed with moist vapors. Also Eccles.
8.5. it is said; that he that keeps the Commandment shall not feel evil,
that is, not evil as a plague or curse reaching to the soul, nor as an evil
of wrath and revenge, for so the righteous do not feel any evil, though they
feel in the flesh many afflictions of trial and chastisement, which are not
evil but good to them. We read that Isaac did bodily feel Jacob by touching
his hands and neck, but he did not know nor understand that it was Jacob whom
he felt, and so he had a feeling of him in part only by bodily sense, but not a
full and perfect feeling of him in soul and spirit by knowledge and
understanding. Here my Text speaks of a full sense and feeling, as well
inwardly in soul and spirit, as outwardly in the flesh; (...)
For the word Jabi^u, which signifies such a feeling is here used: the words
thus opened minister the third Doctrine, viz.

That God out of his tender love and watchful providence over his Church and
people, does frustrate the wicked counsels and purposes

The full Scope and intent of this Doctrine is to show, and to hold out unto us
these 3 things,

First, that God is ready to prevent the evils intended against his Church and
People by their enemies, and delivers them from them oftentimes before they
have any sense or feeling of them at all. Secondly, that though the Lord
suffers the wicked to afflict his Church, and to be his rod to scourge his
People, either for their sins by way of sharp correction, or for trial of
their faith and patience; yet he never leaves them in their hand to feel their
worst, nor gives them to their lust, rage and fury to be devoured and swallowed
up of them, or to be put to sense and feeling of pain intolerable. Thirdly,
though the cruel enemies of Gods Church, and persecutors of his people, may
proceed so far as to kill their bodies with sense of outward torment and
violence done to the flesh; yet they shall never reach to their souls and
spirits, nor prevail so far as to make them feel the evil and mischief
intended against their inward man, the soul and spirit. For the confirming of
this Doctrine in all these particulars, we have clear testimonies, and
pregnant examples in the sacred Scriptures. First, that God prevents the evil
intended by the enemies against his people, so that they do not feel it,
neither does it touch them at all, it is plainly affirmed, Psalm 91.2, 3.
where it is said of them that trust in the Lord, and make him their refuge,
that he will deliver them from the snare of the Fowler, and from all other
evils which are most terrible, so that no evil shall befall them, nor plague
come near their dwelling: only with their eyes shall they behold, and see the
reward of the wicked their enemies. Also Psalm 27.2. When the wicked, even
mine enemies, says David, came against me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled,
and fell. And Psalm 37. The wicked plotteth against the righteous, and
gnasheth upon him with his teeth, he has drawn out his sword, and bent his
Bow to cast down, and to slay such as be upright: but the Lord shall laugh at
him, for he sees that his day is coming. His sword shall enter into his own
heart, and his Bow shall be broken. Thus when they have traveled with
iniquity, and conceived mischief, they bring forth falsehood, and when they
have made a pit and aiggedit, they fall into the ditch themselves, and their
mischief returns upon their own head, Psalm 7.14. and in the net which they
hid is their own foot taken, and they are snared in the work of their hands,
Psalm* 9.15, 16. Besides these, and many such testimonies, we have pregnant
examples, as that of Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. when three nations were banded
against him and his people, and they had no might to resist, neither knew what
to do, they betook themselves to seek the Lord with fasting and prayer: and
the Lord set ambushments against the enemies, and made them slay one another
till they were all destroyed: so that Iehosophat and his people had no need to
fight, but did only stand and see the salvation of the Lord. Another example is
that of Hezekiah, when the Assyrian King Senacharib came against him to besiege
Jerusalem, and by Rabshekeh, threatened to drive his people to that extremity,
as to eat their own dung, and to drink their own piss, 2 King. 18.27. The
Lord suffered him not to come to the City, nor to shoot an arrow into it, but
sent a blast upon him, and by his Angel slew in one night, 185. thousand in his
host, and drove him back with shame.

Secondly, though the Church and children of God, may be sore afflicted by the
Bands of the wicked, yet before they feel that destruction and misery which is
intended and plotted against them, and Lord will send deliverance by
scatrering, and destroying their cruel persecutors. We see this verified in
the Israelites, who saw and felt much affliction in Egypt: but when it came to
the upshot, that Pharaoh and his Host pursued them to cut them off, and destroy
them with the sword, God overthrew them all in the sea, and suffered not his
people to feel their cruel hand, Exodus 14. Also in the days of the Judges,
the Israelites were often oppressed and afflicted by diverse enemies, which
sought to cast them out and destroy them: but before they felt this evil which
their enemies attempted with all their power, the Lord delivered them, and
scattered and destroyed their oppressors. In the 83. Psalm mention is made of
many Nations which were consederate against Gods Church and people, and said,
Come let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no
more in remembrance: but when they invaded the land, and began to cast fire
into their Sanctuaries, God made all those Nations as stubble before the wind,
and persecuted them with his storm, and scattered them, before his people felt
the evil which they conspired to bring upon them. David and his followers were
pursued for their lives, and suffered hard things at the hand of Saul, and his
wicked Band, but the evil which they chiefly sought, which was to kill and
cut them off, they could never bring upon them, nor make them feel, for they
themselves were first destroyed. In a word, God so arms his people with
patience and courage, that they go through all the sharpest afflictions, and
persecutions of the enemies with joy, and that peace which they have with God,
makes them rejoice in tribulations, and the inward spiritual comforts which
fill their souls, do swallow all pains and sorrows, that they have no such
sense and feeling of them as others have.

The third particular in the Doctrine is, that though the Bands of the wicked
do persecute the Saints for their true faith in Christ, to their own
destruction: and are permitted to afflict and torture their bodies, even to the
murdering and killing of them: yet they can never bring them under the sense
and feeling of soule-murther, by compelling them to deny the faith, and to
embrace Idolatry, or any soule-killing errors and heresies. This is consonant
to the words of the Apostle, Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or peril, or sword, or life, or
death, (as it is written for thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are
counted as sheep for the slaughter.) Nay in all these we are more than
Conquerors, through him that loved us. And Heb. 1^. we have a Cloud of
witnesses who were tortured, and had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings,
and of bonds and imprisonment, and were stoned, sawn assunder, and slain with
the sword, and yet they felt no evil in their souls, which in all these
temptations did remain untouched: Though the stiff-necked Jews were cut to
the heart at the hearing of Stevens words, and they gnashed on him with their
teeth, and ran upon him all at once, with purpose to destroy him soul and
body, yet his soul was not touched with the sense and feeling of their malice
and fury, and being commended into the hands of Christ, whom it saw and enjoyed
in death, it ascended triumphantly into glory.

Belial, and in a land so overspread with the curse and plague of Briars and
thorns. First, in that he keeps many of them from being caught or touched at
all. Secondly, in that he supports them when they are caught, and arms them
with strength, faith, patience, and courage, to go through the Briars and
Thorns, without any sense and feeling of the sting and venom of their sharp
pricks: as we read of one of our blessed Martyrs, who professed that in the
midst of burning flames, consuming his body, he felt no more pain, than if he
had layn on a feather-bed. Thirdly, in that he limits and restrains the power,
rage, and fury of the sharpest, and most cruel pricks of the cursed Bramble,
that they cannot strike and wound them to the quick, that is, not reach unto
their soul. Of this the Church and people of God in this land have had
heretofore, and have at this day most comfortable experience. First, in the
year 88. when the floods of Belial made us afraid, and the armed Bands of
Antichrist came against us with an invincible Armado, (as they proudly boasted)
armed with sharp hooks, stabbing knives, and all weapons of cruelty, and
instruments of death, Exodus 15.
the Lord did blow upon them with his mighty whirlewinde, scattered them upon
the face of the great deep, the sea covered them, and they sunk as Lead in the
mighty waters, and so he saved us from the sharp hooks and pricks of the
enemies, their murdering and destroying weapons and instruments of cruelty did
not touch us at all. Likewise in the Powder Treason, and many other treacherous
plots of late time, when we were encompassed in the net, ready to fall into
the Briars, and to be caught in the snares of the wicked, the Lord suddenly
brake the snares, and we were delivered, before their hooked pricks could
fasten upon us, or tear us. Secondly, though the Lord has suffered us for our
sins, and for the trial of our Faith, to fall of late into the Briars, and
we have undergone sharp and cruel prickings in this bloody civil war kindled
in our Land, yet he has so armed us with Faith in Christ, and strengthened us
with courage, and with confidence, and with full assurance of his love, that
we go through all cheerfully and comfortably, as if we felt no hurt: yea in
all the afflictions we feel no stroke of wrath and revenge at all, but only
chastisements of love, fatherly corrections and trials, which are the
faithful wounds of a lover, better and more safe then the deceitful kisses
and embracings of our enemies. Thirdly in the midst of Thorns and Briars, when
the Lord suffers the swords of the enemies to cut our flesh, and to wound and
kill our bodies, and to shed our blood, that they may fill up to the full the
measure of their iniquities; yet he suffers not their violence to reach unto
our souls, we stand firm and steadfast in faith; and so far are we from
wavering in Religion, inclining to Popery, forsaking the cause of Christ, and
suffering our souls to be betrayed, wounded, and slain, that we have renewed
our Covenant with God, and have bound our selves to stand for a more full
Reformation of Church and State, and to maintain the true Reformed Religion
with our bodies, lives, and goods, and to oppose popery, and all other Sects,
and Opinions, contrary to true godliness, O how are we bound to admire the
love, mercy, bounty and goodness of the Lord our God in all these notable
passages of his providence, watchfulness, and provident care over his Church
and people in this land: how ought we to love* honor, serve, and obey him to
seek continually to him for help, and to call upon his name, and to humble our
selves even to the dust, for our many sins and provocations, by which we have
most unthankfully borne our selves toward him, and ill-requited all his
kindnesses to us. Let these our monthly Fasts heave us up every one a step and
degree higher in our devotion, zeal. and reformation of life: and the oftener
we are put in remembrance of Gods mercies to us, and our sins against his holy
Majesty, the more let us be humbled, the more let us cry mightily to God in
confession, prayer, and supplication, which if he gives us grace to do, we
shall have no need to fear or doubt, but may be confident, that he will
scatter the bands of our enemies, and all the cursed pricks of the cursed
Bramble, he will take away every one as with a whirle-winde; as my Text here
speaks.

Secondly, this Doctrine is of use to strengthen the faith of Belial are
multiplied within us, and round about us on every side. Gods love to his
Church, and his care for his people, and watchfulness over them, does not
always consist and appear in suffering no hurtful Briars to be at all* (or
if such happen to grow up and increase) in ridding the land of them speedily:
for this is the way to make us grow secure, and cold in prayer and seeking to
him: sin not corrected will increase, and faith not tried nor exercised, will
grow rusty, and there will be no manifestation of them that are approved. But
herein especially is Gods love and care for his people manifested, when he
suffers Briars and Thorns to grow up and multiply in the land till they grow
terrible, and dangerous, and yet preserves his Church as a Lilly among thorns,
safe and untouched, and his people from all sense and feeling of any hurt from
them; or if the sharp hooked pricks catch hold of them, they cannot enter so
far, nor strike so deep as to wound them mortally, and to make them feel the
smart of a wrathful and revenging stroke, because they are girded with the
whole Armor of God: or if they wound them mortally in their bodies, and in
their frail flesh; yet in their soul and spirit they feel no hurt at all:
they are so firmly built on Christ the Rock, and sustained by his
righteousness, and by his spirit, that they cannot waver, nor be moved from
their steadfastness. Hereby God does manifest himself to be our refuge and
strength, and a present help against all troubles, never failing, no^
neglecting us in time of need, and firm friend in all adversities. Wherefore
let no man's heart fail because of the Bands of the wicked, Papists, or
profane Atheists, gathered together to make open war against us, or malignants
working under hand, or heretics and Schismatics, making rents and divisions
which tend to weaken us, and to expose us to the rage and fury of Antichrist,
and his Bands. But let us all put on courage and strength in these perilous
times, and the more that evils and dangers increase, the more stout and
resolute let every man be to resist them in his place and rank, and according
to his ability. Fear not them that can kill the body, and can do no more, but
fear him rather, who can destroy both soul and body in hell, Matthew. 10.28.
Cowards and fearful persons have no place in the new Jerusalem, but are shut
out with unbeleevers, and the abominable, and murderers, and whore-mongers, and
sorcerers, and idolaters, and liars, which have their portion in the Lake which
burns with fire and brimstone for evermore. Rev. 21.8.

The fourth and last point in my Text, is the destruction of the enemies and
persecutors of Gods Church and people, in these words, He will take them away
with a whirle-winde, as well the green as the dry. The Doctrine which hence
arises is:

That when God Church is most dangerously beset, and most fiercely

First, he will terribly scatter and destroy them, as with a tempestuous
whirle-winde, which comes with great violence and terror, as we all know by
experience.

Secondly, he will destroy them suddenly: for nothing rises up, nor rusheth in
more suddenly than a whirle-winde.

Thirdly, he will destroy them totally, all, and every one, as well the green as
the dry. As all have a share in the persecution of the Saints, and in opposing
true godliness, so all shall perish in the same destruction.

First, that the destruction of the wicked, who band themselves together
against Gods Church and people, shall be dreadful and terrible, the Scriptures
abundantly testify: For the day of Gods vengeance on them is said to be a
woeful day, Ier. 17, 16. A day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day
of wastnesse and desolation, a day of thick darkness, clouds, and gloominesse,
Nah. 1.15. All which are dreadful and terrible. The Prophet Isaiah ca^ls it
devouring by that fire wherewith God devowreth his enemies: the fire of thine
enemies, o Lord, Isa. 26.1^.
shall devour them. The Lord is said to whet his sword, and bend his bow, and
prepare the instruments of death, and ordain his Arrows against the
persecutors, Psalm. 7.12. He will make his arrows drunk with their blood, and
his sword shall devour their flesh, and he will render vengeance to them, and
give them the reward of his enemies, Deuteronomy. 32.41. And in a word, the soul of
the Lord so hates these wicked men which love violence, that he will rain upon
them snares, fire, brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the
portion of their cup, Psalm. 11.6.

Secondly, that their destruction shall come suddenly, the Lord himself
testifies, Deuteronomy. 32.35. saying, To me belongs vengeance and recompense,
their foot shall slide in due time (that is, there fall shall be sudden, as
the fall of a man when his foot slideth, and down he comes at once) the day
of their calamity is at hand, and the things which come upon them make haste.
And Psalm. 64.7. It is said of them that bend their bow to shoot at the
perfect, that the Lord shall shoot at them with his swift arrow suddenly,
suddenly shall their stroke be: And the wise preacher resembles the fall of the
wicked in the evil day, Eccles. 9.12
to fishes taken in an evil net, and to birds that are taken in a snare before
they know and be a ware, and their snare and destruction falls suddenly upon
them. The Prophet Isaiah says, that the multitude of the terrible ones, shall
be as chafe which passes away; and it (that is their scattering) shall be at
an instant suddenly. And because they hate preaching of the truth, and desire
that God may cease from them, and that they may no more hear of him, and trust
in oppression and perverseness, Therefore their fall and breach shall be
suddenly as the swelling in an high wall, the breaking whereof comes suddenly
at an instant Isa. 30.13. And for an instance he brings in Babylon the type of
Rome. And of the Kingdom and Faction of Antichrist, and the pattern of the
whole body of the enemies of Gods people, and persecutors of his Church Isa.
47.1. Whose destruction comes on her suddenly, and she shall not know from
whence it rises, and desolation shall come on her suddenly when she shall not
know, nor be aware. And in this respect, the Lord coming to take vengeance on
the Romish Beast, and on all his agents, says, Behold, I come as a Thief,
that is, suddenly and unexpected, Rev. 16.15. And when the wicked say, Peace,
and safety, then shall destruction come upon them suddenly as travail upon a
woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5.3.

Thirdly, that their scattering and destruction shall be total of all, and
every one of all sorts the Psalmist testifies, Ps. 62.3. How long (says he)
will ye imagine, or devise mischief? ye shall be slain all of you, as a
bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence. And Ier. 11.12. and 18.21.
and diverse other places. An utter destruction is denounced against all of all
sorts, who are banded together against God and his people, men and women, young
and old. Priests and Prophets. And it is the Lords commandment, Deuteronomy. 13.15.
That the whole City following the Counsel of the wicked, and taking part with
them to set up Idolatry shall be destroyed, and all the inhabitants slain by
the sword. The whole family of Achan, the troubler of Israel was destroyed, Ios
7 24. Corah, and all that conspired with him, of all ages and Sexes were at
once swallowed up, Number 16. And of all Ahabs fam^ly, and persecuting house,
there was not a man left to make water against the wall. Nor one man of all
Baals Priests escaped, but were cut off. And of all the wicked Faction which
conspired against Jeremiah, the Lord says, Cast them out of my sight, let them
go forth, such as are for death, to death, and such as are for the sword to
the sword, and such as are for the Famine to the famine. And though Moses and
Samuel stood before me, says God, my mind could not be toward them, Ier.
15.1, 2. Besides these testimonies, we have also good reasons to confirm this
truth, all grounded on the word of God.

First, it is the way and course of Gods proceeding, so to deal with men as
they deal with others, to pay them home in their kind, and punish like with
like: Adoni bezek felt this, and had full experience of it: for as he had cut
off the Thumbs, and great Toes of seventy Kings; so his Thumbs and great Toes
were cut off, and then he, though an heathen King, confessed and said, Judge.
1.7.
As I have done, so God has requited me. The Law which God gave to Noah and
his sons, that whosoever sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, is
also a proof of this assertion; besides many examples in Scripture. Now the
enemies and persecutors of Gods people, they are called the terrible ones, Job
27.13. and Isa. 29.20, because they exercise cruelty, that they may be a
greater terrrour to the meek Saints: they count it their glory to be terrible,
and band themselves together for that purpose: And therefore just it is for
God, and his justice requires it, that he shall lop them off with terror, and
consume them all togegether, branch, rush, and root most terribly.

Secondly, when the wicked set themselves against God, and are at open defiance
with his Majesty, his honor is enraged, and his great name will be blasphemed,
if he does not speedily take terrible revenge: yea, his jealousy will break
out like a fire, and his anger will smoke against them, and move him to destroy
them, as we see by his own words concerning Pharaoh, Exodus 14.17. and
Senacharib, Isa. 37.29. Now when the bands of the wicked set themselves against
Gods people, they set themselves against God, and touch the apple of his eye,
where he is most tender, and cannot abide to be touched, Zac. 2.8. And if he
should suffer them any longer, and not scatter them when they are swollen with
malice, pride, power, and like raging waves, and proud waters, are ready to
overflow and drown his people, what would become of his servants? how would
the enemy rage more against his holy Majesty? and what would they do to his
great name; but blaspheme it, and say, Where is their God? or what is he that
we should stand in awe of him, Therefore the Lord for his names sake, as well
as for his tender compassion to his people, will suddenly and totally scatter
them, and destroy them with terrible destruction.

Thirdly, terrible wrath and vengeance are laid up in store with God for the
wicked, who provoke God every day, and multiply their provocations without
repentance: and they, after their hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heap
to themselves wrath against the day of wrath and visitation, Romans 2. And such
are all the enemies and persecutors banded against Gods Church and people: they
are all impenitent persons, they do not persecute ignorantly, as Paul did, out
of blind zeal for God and his Law. But of purpose, and with counsel, being
banded with desperate enemies, and men of Belial, and of the same faction, and
there is no hope of mercy to them, that they may repent as Paul did. Therefore
all of them being pricks and thorns of the cursed Bramble, they shall perish
and be terribly destroyed, even the best as well as the worst, as well the
green as the dry.

Fourthly, it is Gods wisdom, will, and delight, so to do his great works,
that he may show his justice and power in them, and may have the glory to
himself. This he testifies abundantly, Iud. 7. and in diverse other places.
Now when he scatters the enemies, and persecutors suddenly, terribly, and
totally, in the height of their pride and power, it appears to all to be his
work, and the honor and glory redounds wholly to his Majesty. Therefore it is
the Lords wisdom and delight so to scatter and destroy them.

First, this Doctrine is a singular antidote and preservative against the
poison of envy, impatience, fretting, and grudging Ieremies spirit was so
stirred up in him at the sight hereof, that he expostulated with God, but yet
in an humble and submissive way, Ier. 12.1, 2. Righteous (says he) art thou, O
Lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments:
Wherefore does the wicked prosper? and why are they blessed that deal
treacherously: Thou have planted them, they have taken root, they grow and
bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, but far from their reins.
Hab. 1.2, 3
The Prophet Habakkuk uses greater boldness, saying, O Lord how long shall I
cry unto thee, and thou do not hear? even cry out of violence, and thou do
not save? Why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for
spoiling and violence are before me, and there are that raise up strife and
contention. Therefore is the Law slacked, and judgment does never go forth,
for the wicked does encompasse about the righteous. But the hypocrites, and
carnal professors used more stout words against the Lord, Mal. 3.14. and said,
It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinance, and walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts. And now we call the
proud happy; yea they that work wickedness are exalted: and even they that
tempt God are delivered. And this holy Psalmist David was overtaken in this
kind, as himself acknowledges, Psalm 73.2 3, etc. But as for me, my feet were
almost gone, my steps had welnigh slipped: for I was envious at the foolish, when
I beheld the prosperity of the wicked: for their strength is firm, they are
not in trouble, pride compasses them as a chain, violence covers them as with
a garment; they speak wickedly concerning oppression, they set their mouth
against heaven. And it is an infirmity unto which we are all subject. But this
Doctrine is a remedy to cure this disease: It teaches the same lesson which
David did meet with in the house of God, viz. that God will terribly* suddenly,
Verse. 18, 19
and totally destroy them: He sets them in slippery places, and casts them
down into destruction. How are they brought into desolation as in a moment,
they are utterly consumed with terrors. Psalm. 2.7.
And when the wicked spring as the grass, and the workers of iniquity
flourish, is then that they shall be destroyed for ever. Wherefore let us bear
this lesson in mind, that we may not be over-taken with envy and fretting at
the pride and power of ungodly persecutors for a little while, but tremble
rather to think of their woeful end. And if we have slipped in this kind, let us
here see our folly, and condemn our selves, as David did, saying, verse 22. So
foolish and ignorant was I, as a beast before thee.

Secondly, this Doctrine, which speaks nothing but terror that God will take
them all away, both the green and dry: none shall escape. If there be any
failing, or any delay, the fault is in us: because we have not put away our
sins, we bind Gods hands that he cannot strike, as he would speedily do, if we
were as fit to receive, as he is to give deliverance. Wherefore for a
conclusion, let us call upon the Lord, and sue unto him earnestly in these
days of public fasting, prayer, and humiliation, for the assistance and grace
of his Spirit, that we may fast from sin, and by true repentance wash our
hearts from wickedness, that we may be saved. We cannot more earnestly desire
and long for the downfall and destruction of our desperate and deadly enemies,
those hurtful and dangerous Thorns and Brambles, which are the plague and
curse that lies heavy upon our land, nor more heartily wish for full
deliverance from their rage and fury, than the Lord wishes and desires, that
we by repentance, holy obedience, newness of heart, and uprightness of
spirit, were ripened, and fitted for deliverance: so he himself shows and
testifies by his own words, Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such an heart in
them, that they would fear me, and keep my Commandments always, that it
might be well with them, and with their children for ever. And Deuteronomy. 32.29. O
that they were wise, and understood this, that they would consider their latter
end. How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight. And
Ps. 81.13, 14. O that my people would harken unto me, and Israel would walk in
my ways. I should soon subdue their enemies, and turn my hand against their
adversaries. And now, seeing the Lord is so ready, so willing, and so desirous
to save us: Let us take heed, lest by not putting away our sins, and amending
our lives, we put away salvation from us, and judge our selves unworthy of it:
and so provoke the Lord to turn away his face, and favor from us, and leave
us in the hand, and to the will of them, who are so ready to swallow us up in a
moment, and whose will is to cut off the name and remembrance of us from the
face of the earth. From which heavy curse and judgment the Lord deliver us,
for his mercies sake in Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

