THE RESULT OF False Principles: OR, ERROR CONVICTED By its own EVIDENCE.
Managed in several DIALOGVES. By the Author of the Examination of Tylenus
before the TRYERS.

Ex veris possit nil nisi vera sequi.

PSALM. 64. 8. So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves.

Whereunto is added a learned Disputation of Dr. GOADES, sent by King JAMES to
the Synod at Dort.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Crown in Fleet Street, between the two Temple-Gates. 1661.

DIOTREPHES HIS DIALOGUES: WHEREIN It appears, beyond all possible Evasion,
That the Doctrine of Gods Decrees, and the Articles annexed, whether as it is
dressed up by the Supra-Lapsarians, or as it is espoused (after a little finer
triming) by the Infra-Lapsarians, is I, Not practicable in the exercise of the
Ministerial Function. II. Not serviceable to the interest of souls. III. And
not according to Godliness.
WITH An Additional Dialogue, to satisfy the Doubts of Conscience, affrighted
at (that which Mr. Calvin both made and called) The horrible Decree of
Reprobation.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.Prove all things: hold fast that which is good. Whereunto is
added a learned Disputation of Dr. GOADES, sent by King JAMES to the Synod at
Dort.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at the sign of the Crown
in Fleet Street, between the two Temple Gates. 1661.

ERRATA.
PAge 19. marg, r. de potentia absoluta*: p. 21. marg. r, Statui, and tum Deus:
p. 23. marg. r. in Sva. Conc. p. 31. l. 23. r. them to such: p. 32 l. 2. r.
Metaphysieal: p. 38. and 39. twice read, not serviceable, not practicable: p.
46. l. 14. r. efficacy, p. 64. r. not serviceable, not pructicable, and l. 8.
r. rigid Supra-L^psarians: p. 71. l. 8. r. Gospel: p. 82. l. 28. r. add: p.
83. l. 34. r. Sec: p. 100. l. ^6. r. decreeingthese: p. 131. l. 5. r. if they
be: p. 138. l. 2. r. may: p. 214. l. 11. r. Causal: p. 222. l. 24. r.
alleadgeable: p. 229. l. 36. r. should not lie.

In the Disputation, p. 11. l 12. r. debase.

READER,
IN that distinction of Grace into common and saving (p. 196.) I speak
according to the sense of some Calvinists, and so it is Argumentum ad hominem.
For though it be true, that there is a Divine light and power, which may be
called Common Grace, vouchsafed even unto Heathens; yet that Grace of Christ's
purchasing, which is recommended and offered to us in the Gospel is (...), Tit.
2. 11. That it is not eventually saving in most men is, because they do obicem
ponere, vid. Luke 7. 30. Acts 13. 46. Jude verse 4. 2 Cor. 6. 1. H^br. 12. 15.

THE PREFACE.
THat the Reader may not take offense at the running Title over the head of the
following Papers, He is desired to take notice that by Calvinism, We understand
that Doctrine, or Scheme of Gods eternal Decrees, ( with the Articles depending
thereupon) which was Calculated and drawn up by the devise of Mr. Calvin.
Wherein, (notwithstanding the exactness of his method, and clearness of his
expressions in other matters) He carries himself so doubtful and obscure, that
a Right Reverend Person Dr. Sanderson Bishop of ^^ncoln in Dr. H. Ham.
Paci^ick. Discourse p. 10.
of great learning and judgment has professed He could not certainly inform
himself, from his own writings, whether he were a Supra-lapsarian (as most
speak him, and he seems often to incline much that way) or a Sub-Lapsarian,
as sundry passages in the Book ( of his Institutions seem to import.

Yet that is the Book, that has been commended generally, Ibid. page 9. Ibid.
to all young Scholars, as the best and perfectest Systeme of Divinity, and
fittest to be laid as a groundwork in the study of that profession.

How advisedly, and with what success this has been done (as to the influence
it has had upon this Church of England) I shall not determine. I will not say
of this Book, what Episcopius says of his Writings in general, that it is a
question, whether they have done more good or hurt in the Church of God? But I
must subscribe to the judgment of that excellent person* even now mentioned,
That (I verily believe) it might have been Ibid.
much more useful, if the honor of his name had not given so much reputation
to his very Errors. For what Vincentius Lirinensis says (as I remember*) of
Origin and Tertullian, That they were Magna tentatio, a great temptation, I may
not without reason, affirm of him; And such is the temper and complexion of
th^se his Institutions, They require to be read with a good preparative, (that
I Ibid.
say not, Antidote, to use the same Reverend Bishops words,) such as he found
that excellent piece of learned Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, to have been
unto himself.

There are Doctrines, not only amongst the Romanists, but amongst such also as
pretend to Reformation, which, though they do not raze the very Foundation, are
yet very apt to frustrate the wisest Method, that can be prescribed for the
improvement of holiness, apt to obstruct, or intercept the cordial
superstructing of Christian life, or renovation, where the Foundation is duly
laid; as is observed and irrefragably evinced by that Reverend and most learned
Of Fundam. p. 108.
Dr. Hammond.

He does instance in the persuasion of the Solifidian, and the Fiduciary, which
I shall not here insist upon. For p. 115. 120.
that Doctrine of Christ's dying for none but the Elect, He makes it evident,
That the use of the Ministry is made (...) p. 135.
void and of none effect where this Doctrine is espoused, That all attempts,
whether for the Reformation of the vicious, or the comfort of the disconsolate
despairing Christian, are vain and fruitless, if he has once gotten into
this hold, and remains fortified in the belief of it.

That the Doctrine of Irrespective Decrees of Election and Reprobation, with
that of the Predetermination of all events, is of as ill consequence, noxious
and destructive to practice, H^ makes appear too by solid argumentations;
Proving how they take off the force, 1 of Ibid. 147. etc.
Promises; 2 of Terrors, 3 of Commands; ( those three common standing
inducements and engagements to obedience) That they offer us a very fair and
great temptation, to intermit our watch, to slacken our diligence, to give a
Supersedeas to all industry in working out our salvation.

For, (to produce the judgment of another very worthy and learned Person, whose
writings would be more highly M. Herbert Thorndike his due way of composing*
etc. p. 16.
valued, and more eminently useful, could they meet with more studious
Readers;) They (against whose Opinions we contest) under the Title of Gods
Free Grace, do maintain, that the Promises of the Gospel, and our right in
them, depends not upon the truth of men's Christianity. As if God, says he,
were not free enough of his Grace, if he should reserve himself a duty of being
served (as by Christians) upon those to whom he tenders life everlasting, upon
such terms. It is no new thing in England ( as he goes on) to hear of those
who profess, that God sees not, nor can see any sin in his Elect; so that it
will undeniably follow from their opinion, that there is no mortal sin but
repentance; because that must suppose, that a man thought himself out of the
state of Grace; by the sin whereof he repents, etc.

Having backed his reason with some examples, that, ( according to this
Doctrine) a man may presume of his own salvation, not supposing that he
believes and lives as a Christian. That Reverend Author proceeds thus, [The
same is the consequence of a Position, I will not say enjoined by any Party,
but notoriously allowed among us; That Justifying Faith consists in believing
that a man is one of them that are Predestinate, whom God sent our Lord Christ
to redeem, and none else. For, how can he think himself obliged to make good
the profession of a Christian, who thinks himself assured of all that he can
attain to, by so doing, not supposing it [to be done]? Indeed it may be said,
that our Antinomians and Enthusiasts, and other Sects among us (whom no conceit
without this could have seduced to their several frenzies,) do think themselves
justified from everlasting, by Gods Decree to send Christ for that purpose;
whereas this opinion dateth justification from the instant that God reveals
the said Decree by his Spirit; in which Revelation they think that Justifying
Faith consists. And certainly there can be no reason why God, receiving men
into Grace only in consideration of Christ's obedience, should suspend their
reconcilement upon that knowledge of his purpose, which he gives them by
Faith. For what can be more unreasonable, than that God should justify a man,
by revealing to him that he is justified? But the opinion is not the less
destructive to Christianity, because it is the more unreasonable. Now it is
possible that the effect of this position may be stifled, and become void in
some, by reason of other truths, which (contradict the same indeed, and yet)
are believed by them, not seeing the consequence of their own persuasion. But
those, who, besides this position do pertinaciously hold absolute
predestination unto glory, those I maintain are in an error destructive to
Christianity, that is, in an Heresy. And therefore this Doctrine being such,
it is no way enough, that it is no way enjoined to be taught, but it is
requisite that it be disclaimed, by those that pretend to recover the unity of
a visible Church. For there can be no Church where any thing destructive to
Christianity, ( which the being of the Church supposes) is notoriously allowed
to be taught. This is the judgment of Master Thorndike.

If you would enquire into the judgment of that Oracle of learning, (the
present Bishop of Lincoln, you have the Ubi supra p. 11.
Result of his thoughts and studies about these controversies, delivered in his
own letters, printed by Doctor Hammond, with his own approbation, [I made it my
business (says he,) to take a survey of the several different opinions
concerning the ordering of Gods Decrees, as to the salvation or damnation of
men. -- Which opinons, the better to present their differences to the eye, uno
quasi intuitu, for their more easy conveying to the understanding by that
means, and the avoiding of confusion and tedious discoursings, I reduced into
five Schemes or Tables. -- Having all these Schemes before my eyes at once, so
as I might with ease compare them one with another, and having considered of
the conveniences and inconveniences of each, as well as I could, I soon
discerned a necessity of quitting the Sub-lapsarian way ( of which I had a
better liking before) as well as the Super-lapsarian, which I could never
fancy.] Thus that most learned and Reverend Prelate.

Had other men the like learning, judgment and temper, they must needs see the
like inconveniences, and would then, I hope, acknowledge (with that worthy
Bishop) a like necessity of quitting those so noxious Opinions. Which how much
they may contribute to the obstructing of good life, and the growth of sin,
and the evacuating the power of Christianity it self, judicious persons may
easily discern, if they will not shut their eyes, but give themselves the
liberty impartially to consider these ensuing Dialogues; Wherein I have
endeavored, with all possible perspicuity, to discover their dangerous
consequences, with those gross and palpable absurdities, which attend them.

For in the first Dialogue, (wherein many of the most ^ notty Controversies of
Divinity, are cloven asunder, and made fuel, that will serve as well to warm
as to enlighten the most weak and feeble minds) I have showed, how, according
to those opinions, it will be neither matter of advantage, nor disadvantage to
an Infidel, to embrace the Profession of Christianity. In the second, I have
demonstrated, how impossible it is, for a man that understands how to manage
these Principles, (by reducing them to practice) to be convinced of a
possibility to become better. And this follows with so great evidence, that, I
remember, that profoundly learned and judicious Doctor Thomas Jackson, desired
only these two Concessions [That God has Free Will to do good, and man
Free Will to do evil.] For the confutation of his Opposites, who frame such an
absolute Decree as deprives God himself as well as man of all Liberty to do any
thing otherwise, than it is now eventually done.

From hence it follows unavoidably that all care and industry is unnecessary,
and consequently, the third Dialogue does evince this Doctrine to be a
Sanctuary for the secure, and a Supersedeas unto Duty; for if all things come
to pass unavoidably, as the Reverend and learned Dr. Thomas Goad In his Diput*
concerning the Necessity and Contingency of Events etc. M. S.
argues, What need I care what I do? Yea, if I shall care, I shall care,
whether I will or no.

And this Engine is of so strange a force (as is declared in the fourth
Dialogue) That though it lulls a man securely asleep in a placid course of
sinning, yet it preserves his State, of Grace, and Salvation immovable. Mr.
Thornedike has given us some remarkable examples to this purpose. Vbi supra p.
16.
I think, says he, I am duly informed of a Malefactor dying upon the Gallows,
that professed, to the strengthening of his Brethren, that he had overcome all
temptation to repentance, acknowledging that since his being in prison, he had
been strongly moved to repent. And that one of Hackets three Conspirators, when
he was come to himself, continued to profess, that he thought himself in the
state of Gods Grace all the while. And he quotes a Pamphlet, (written to
satisfy the godly party in Wales, being offended at the late Usurpers O. C.
proceedings) which alleges, That we are not to be judged at the last day,
either by our Works, or by our Faith, but by Gods everlasting purpose
concerning each of us; By virtue whereof Christ being alive at the heart, the
violation of all his engagements to them, by usurping over them as over Ibid.
page 17.
others, made no difference in his estate toward God. And this, that execrable
Regicide and Usurper Himself caused to be published.

Nay, such is the power of this Doctrine, it provides the Presumptuous
Miscreant of a Charm to secure him even against Security it self; For says
Rutherford Exercit. Apol. p. 54. E.
, Securitatem non cadere in regenitum credimus, quippe cui Deus ex foederis
gratiosi promisso diserte promisit inditurum in cor ipsius timorem sui, ut non
recedat a Deo. And he abuses the holy Text [Jer. 32. 40.] (as if it were an
absolute promise,) to make it good. What care needs he take, that believes,
it is as possible for God to lie, as for himself to fall into Security.

By the fifth Dialogue, it appears impossible to improve the use of the
Ministry, for the satisfaction and comfort of a poor dejected and despairing
soul, that has imbibed these Doctrines. And this we may observe to be
exemplified in the Relation of Franciscus Spira.

And now I must assure the Reader, I have managed the Pretensions of our
Opposites, with all the fidelity and skill I could, to make them serve those
ends for which they have designed them; And if I have left out any thing that
might be said to their advantage, it was not want of will, but memory. I am
sure, they cannot justly accuse me of a Design to render their Opinions
odious, by misreporting them; For I produce nothing but what they have
delivered in their public writings; And in their favor, I think, I have said
somethings, which they have not said, with so much advantage, for themselves.

What the issue of this undertaking will prove, let the Reader judge. But if I
be not mistaken, he will find that the Dagon of Error is fallen prostrate
before the Arc of Truth, and has done deserved execution upon it self, while
the head and hands thereof, have, by a lawful kind of stratagem, been employed
to cooperate to their mutual and irrecoverable destruction.

The Writings which I have most frequently made use of, are those of Mr. Baxter
and Dr. Twisse, ( for [That consideration of the Doctrine of the Synod of Dort
and Arles reduced to practice] (though he has not put his name to it, and has
mistaken Arles for Alez, as Tilenus writ it) is undoubtedly his, as appears by
sundry Indications in the work it self) These writings, I say, I have most
frequently made use of, to make it appear That the sharpest pens are not able
to cut these Controversies by an even thread, when they follow either the
Supra-Lapsarians, or the Sub-Lapsa^ians Method.

I have therefore added a sixth Dialogue, wherein I have made use of a Systeme
of more rational and solid principles, to satisfy the doubts of the
Disconsolate, ( represented under the person of Desolatus,) and to rescue him
from those sad affrights, wherewith Mr. Calvin' s Scheme of the Decree of
Reprobation, had astonished him.

To this end, the most considerable Texts of holy Scripture, that afford matter
of objection, are likewise explained and cleared. And all this is performed, I
trust, in a way of Discourse so familiar, and conteins so great a variety of
matter, that it will invite the Readers* Fancy, and give him ease, and delight
in the perusal, and make a greater impression upon his judgment.

I have but onething more to do, to end the Readers trouble, and that is to
enter my appeal to the Court of Heaven, against all possible clamours of any
prejudiced and engaged party, and with it my Protestation, That I have no
design to continue the breaches of the Church, much less to make them wider.
God knows it is my grief to see them so wide as they are, and men's spirits
generally so averse and obstinate to all probable expedients for the healing of
them.

My only aim is to vindicate, 1. The honor of the Divine Attributes, which
are so much eclipsed; and 2. The usefulness of the sacred Ordinances, which
are so much made frustrate; and 3. The necessity of our Duty, which is so much
evacuated, by the intervention and influences of these Doctrines.

And though Truth conveyed in such a way of intercourse, comes like a Receipt
with a Probatum est stamped upon it; yet because some men may be so confidently
quick-sighted, as to imagine themselves in a capacity to wipe off that soil,
that has falled upon those Perfections, and to remove that contempt that lies
upon these Dispensations, and to recover and reinforce the life and vigor of
Christian Duties, and to perform all this upon the account of those opinions
we contest against; He is therefore earnestly invited (whoever he be) to apply
himself to this great affair, and to lay aside all Animosites, and to pretermit
all unhansome reflections, that it may appear he consults nothing in this
enterprise, but the Glory of the ever blessed Trinity, the peace of Christ's
Church, and the interest of immortal Souls. And he that gives not a fair
reception and welcome to such a performance, if it brings any degree of
satisfaction with it, I shall, for my part, look upon him, as one that loves
not the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore let him be Anathema, Maranatha.

THE GENERAL ARGUMENT.
THose Articles of Religion, which are unprofitable for Doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness, are not practicable in the
exercise of the Ministerial Function, not serviceable to the interest of souls,
not according to godliness.

The Articles of Religion, concerning Gods Decrees, with their appendages,
whether as dressed up by the Supralapsarians, or as they are (after a little
finer trimming) espoused by the Sub-lapsarians, are unprofitable for Doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.

Therefore The Articles of Religion concerning Gods Decrees, with their
appendages, whether as dressed up by the Supra-lapsarians, or as they are (after
a little finer trimming espoused by the Sub-lapsarians) are not practicable in
the exercise of the Ministerial Function, not serviceable to the interest of
souls, not according to goodlinesse.

The Major is evident, from the Apostles enumeration of the several uses of
Holy Scripture 2 Timothy


The Minor is evidenced, beyond all possible evasion, in the ensuing Dialogues.

THE FIRST DIALOGUE BETWIXT DIOTREPHES and PAGANUS.
PAganus. Good day to you Sir, it is now so long since your Arrival in these
Parts, that I hope it will not be unseasonable to ask you how the Climate
agrees with you; how you like this Soil, and the situation of the Country;
and I shall add this request to you, that you would take the freedom, as if it
were the place of your Nativi^y, to acquaint me with your wants, that I may
take order for your further Accommodation.


Diorephes. Sir; I am much obliged to you for your Civility; for which I return
my hearty thanks, and shall be ready to serve you in the capacity of a
stranger. I am much affected to this Climate, and the more, because it agrees
so well with my constitution; and most of all, for the extreme Civility I find
amongst the Inhabitants. Sir, you have a fruitful Soil, and therein you see
much of the riches of Gods bounty; and you have a sweet light, and warm
influences; and these, as they serve to discover somewhat of his Wisdom and
Beauty to you, so they serve to bring his Blessings to maturity and ripeness
for you: But Sir, as your own observation prompts you to the notice, how fading
and unsatisfactory all these things are; so let me tell you (for indeed it is my
Office, and the best instance of my Gratitude and Charity) that I can give you
Intelligence of a better Country; for the furnishing whereof, to the
unspeakable joy and glory of the Inhabitants, the Almighty has been pleased to
disburse the richest treasures of his Bounty; and the Fruits that grow there,
do never fade, but administer a durable satisfaction, and are perpetuated to an
everlasting enjoyment; for indeed in their passages thither, they that obtain
an interest in it, have all their Rags of infirmity stripped off, and are
clothed with Immortality.


Paganus. Such a place Sir would invite a huge ambition to make a Voyage, if
the journey were not too far to travel thither: But perhaps, unless one could
procure a happy settlement there, the thoughts of a return would allay the
sweetness of the pleasure while one converses there.


Diotrephes. Sir, such as are bound for that Place, make no Return. If they be
accounted worthy of admission into that Society, as their hearts are immediately
settled upon the state of Bliss, wherein they are swallowed up; so do they
receive possession of their several Mansions that are established to all
Eternity.


Paganus. I pray, in what part of the World is this Kingdom situated?


Diotrephes. Not in this World Sir, it is above all Heavens!


Paganus. But where should we find a Ladder long enough to reach up thither to
convey us to it?


Diotrephes. Almighty God has made a Ladder for us himself, and sent it down
to convey us thither.


Paganus. That is a great Mystery to my understanding. I pray what may that
Ladder be made of? We have no Trees that are long or strong enough for such a
service.


Diotrephes. This Ladder is made of the Tree of Life that grows in the Paradise
of God. Indeed it is the Son of God himself; who is therefore styled, the Way,
the Truth, and the Life; for so God loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have life
everlasting.


Paganus. What need was there of such a Dispensation? could be not have made us
happy otherwise?


Diotrephes. God did make man upright at his first Creation, and allowed him a
communion with himself, and fair hopes, upon the proof of his constant
obedience, of further happiness; but, upon the temptation of the Devil, he
violated the Command which his Maker had given him, and so betrayed himself,
and all his Offspring to a state of misery, sin and ruin: But it pleased God,
that his own Son out of his love to man, should interpose himself for our
Redemption. To this end he clothed himself with our nature, and became
obedient, not only in a way of action to the whole Law of God, but in a way of
suffering too; for he humbled himself to the death of the Cross, that suffering
in the flesh, he might satisfy Gods justice, and purchase a people to himself
by the price of his own dearest blood; and as many as will heartily submit to
him, and faithfully believe in him, shall be endued with his Spirit; and
finally, inherit Eternal Life in his Kingdom.


Paganus. This I confess a wonderful Condescension of the Divine Compassion;
but that God should send his Son, and so much debase him, and all to exaltus;
This is a Mystery so far above the pitch of my apprehension, that Humane Reason
cannot entertain it upon the account of a naked Proposition. That you may gain
Credit therefore to this Doctrine, you had need produce good evidence for the
proof of it.


Diotrephes. Without controversy great is the Mystery of godliness; God was
manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the World, 1 Timothy 3. 1^.
received into glory. While he conversed here on Earth, he confirmed his
Doctrine by a World of Miracles; and after he was put to death, he rose again
from the dead the third day; and ascending into heaven, he sent down the Holy
Ghost to inspire his Apostles; who being so instructed, foretold things to
come, struck hypocrites dead with the word of their mouth; and by the same
power raised up others from the dead, suffered all the affronts and indignities
a wicked World could inflict upon them, at the instigation of the malicious
Spirit; and for no advantage in this world, but only upon the assured hopes of
their Masters promises, that relate to another life, and the world to come; at
last having finished the course of their Ministry, with an invincible patience
and alacrity they sealed their Doctrine; and the Testimony which they held
concerning the Savior of the World, with their heart- blood. Hereupon the
great Apostle, who himself was offered up upon the Sacrifice and Service of
this Faith, cries out to us in these words, How shall we escape, if we neglect
so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him, God also bearing them witness, both
Hebr. 2. 3, 4.
with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will!


Paganus. I must acknowledge that these Arguments which you allege (supposing
your Tradition for the matter of Fact unquestionable) are highly credible: B^t
if I assent to your Gospel, and embrace the Christian Re^igion, will the Faith
that is begotten in me upon these Motives, be a Divine Faith, and sufficient
for my salvation?


Diotrephes. I am loath to deliver any thing to you for sound Doctrine without
good warrant; and therefore I shall say nothing to that part of your Quaere,
whether a Faith of this extraction may be called a Divine Faith or no: But our
Learned men do usually call such a Faith an Historical Faith, and distinguish
it from that Faith which is saving. To this purpose, I remember a great Divine
denying that it is Gods purpose to give the Reprobates Faith, he adds, [yet
you will say, God punishes them for refusing to believe; I grant he does; for
this refusal (says he) is the free act of their wills; and by mere power of
nature, they might abstain from this refusal, and have believed, as well as
Simon Magus did, as well as profane persons do, as many an hypocrite do, which
is only Fides acq^isita; and it is well known, they believe many a vile legend.

But then he will say, such a Faith shall never save them; and I willingly
confess (says he) it shall not; for it never brings forth any love of the
Truth, any conformity thereto in their lives; yet are they never awhit the less
inexcusable that refuse to believe. Dr. Twisse Considerat. of the Doctrine of
the Synod of Dort and Arles reduced to the practice. page 47.


Paganus. What benefit will this Historical Faith do me? If I cannot be saved
by it, why should I embrace it?


Diotrephes. By this you know the Object of Faith in General, what you are to
believe of God and Christ, and the Holy Ghost; what Christ has done, and will
do for you; and what he commands you to do for him, and what you may expect
from him; and all this you assent to by an Historical Faith.


Paganus. Will this Faith do me no hurt or disadvantage, if ^ obtain not the
other, which you call a saving Faith?


Diotrephes. Yes, it will make you guilty of a greater condemnation; for it is
better not to know the way of Truth, than to turn from the holy Commandment
delivered to you; and the last state 2 Pet. 2. 19, 2^2 21, 22*
of such persons is worse than the first.


Paganus. Are not this Saving, and that Historical Faith always assoc^ated and
linked together? For if not, then it were better, if one cannot have the Saving
Faith, to be without the Historical too, rather than have this alone to our
greater condemnation.


Diotrephes. They are not always in Conjunction; yet we must not neglect this,
when God affords us the Revel^tion, and the Means of it; for this makes way for
the other, which cannot be had without it.


Paganus. Are all men then (to whom he is preached) bound to believe in Christ
the Redeemer?


Diotrephes. Yes; for when he sent out his Apostles to preach the Gospel, he
gave them this Commission; Go ye into all Mar 16. 15, 16. Do any of our Divines
deny that God commands all in the Church, all that hear the Gospel to believe,
whether Elect or Reprobates? Dr. Twisse ibid. John 3. 35, 36.
the World, and preach the Gosp^l to every Creature. He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned. And
again, The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hands. He
that believes on the Son, has everlasting life; And he that believ^th not the
Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.


Paganus. Did the Son of God dye for all, and redeem all, that they should
believe on him?


Diotrephes. No; but it pleased God to give unto Christ his Son from all
Eternity, a people to be his seed, and to be by him in time redeemed, called,
justified, sanctified and glorified; neither are any other redeemed by Christ.
The Declaration of the Congregational Churches, at the Savoy, Chap. 8. n. 1.
with Chap. 3. n. 6.


Paganus. How can God in justice oblige those to believe in Christas their
Redeemer, for whom he died not, and therefore were not redeemed by him? Does he
tie them to believe a lie?


Diotrephes. All men that live under the dispensation of the Gospel, are tied
to believe in Christ, but for several ends Hence the Ministers of Emoden, call
this command in respect of the Elect, Mandatum obedientiae; but in respect of
the Reprobate, Mandatum probationis. De Gratiae and Meriti Christi Universal.
Quest. 8. Act. Syn. Dor. Page 122. Part 2.
; his people and seed are tied to believe, that by believing, they may be made
partakers of the benefits of his death, and obtain salvation through him: The
rest are tied to believe, that by not believing, they may be the more
inexcusable, and liable to the greater condemnation.


Paganus. This is a strange kind of Faith! But suppose these men that are not
of that seed you speak of, should believe in Christ, what would the issue of
their Faith be? For though they should in that case beli^ve in Christ, they
should not be rewarded, because they believe a lie; and yet they could not be
justly condemned, because in so believing, they should obey Gods command.


Diotrephes. You suppose a thing impossibl^ to come to pass; for those men you
speak of, cannot savingly believe, grace sufficient and necessary to the
production of such a Faith being denied them; and yet they shall be punished
for not believing.


Paganus. I am not satisfied how it can consist with Gods justice to bind his
Creatures to impossible performances. And I should think, his goodness would
rather incline him to reward, than punish them for refusing to believe a
falsehood. But if you say God may lay such unreasonable commands upon us, I
shall not dispute against it, though they seem to my apprehension, to be a very
great impeachment of his jus^ice and sin^erity: But I pray, may not I take a
little more time to deliberate about the business? I see it is a business of
great importance, and I am loath to overshoot my self in it: I hope it may be
sufficient, if I believe at the last moment of my life.


Diotrephes. There is no more ready way to over-shoot your self as you speak,
than by your delays; Hereupon the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your heart; and, To day, while it is called to day; lest your
heart be hardened through Hebr. 3.
the deceitfulness of sin; wherefore he says, I have heard thee in an accepted
time, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee! 2 Cor. 6. 3.
Behold, now is the accepted time! behold, now is the day of salvation! And if
you read the disputations of right to Sacraments, you will find By Mr. Baxter.
Disp. 2. page 43
that saving-faith is (defined to be) a sinners assent to the truth of the
Gospel in the Essentials, and a sincere consent that God be immediately our only
God, and Christ our only Savior, and the Holy Ghost our only sanctifier, and
we his people in these Relations. Isay immediately, that is at present, because
if it be only a consent to be such hereafter, it is not saving: And therefore
in certain directions to prevent miscarrying in conversion By Mr. Baxter p.
381. to 439.
, the advice that is given you (Direct. 11.) is this, If you would not have
this saving-work miscarry, Turn then this present day and hour, without any
more delay.] And this advice is backed and fortified with no less than Mr.
Baxter ib. page 381. and page 439.
fifty such moving Considerations and Reasons as will certainly convi^ce you,
if you be not unreasonable, of the folly of delay, and show you that it
concerns you presently to return and believe.


Paganus. Well then, if the present time be Gods accepted time, and the day of
salvation, I am content to take Gods time; and the happiness that comes along
with it being so transcendent, as you have represented it, the sooner, the
better: But all the question now is, whether it be in my power to return and
beli^ve?


Diotrephes. No, by no means; for you are yet in your natural state, and the
natural man receives not the things of the 1 Cor. 2. 14.
Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned: Nay, the carnal Romans 8. 7.
mind is enmity against God.


Paganus. How then comes this Faith to be wrought in him?


Diotrephes. It is not of himse^f, but it is the gift of God; he does infuse it
irresistibly, and works it in us without us, and that by an op^ration for
mightiness not inferior to that whereby he created the World, and raise^h up
the dead. Synod of Dort. Chap. 3. and 4. Art. 12. and Reject. 6.


Paganus. If Faith be the gift of God, and wrought in us after such an
irresistible manner; and likewise if now be Gods accepted time, and the day of
salvation as you have told me; why is not that Faith even now wrought in me?
The delay seems by your Discourse to be rather on Gods part, whose work this
is, than on mine, to whom it is impossible without him. I hope you would not
have me persuade my self that I am not of that seed of Christ you mentioned, in
whom this work you say is peculiar.


Diotrephes. No Sir, I would not have you disheartened; for a whole Synod of
Divines have determined, That those who as yet do not effectually perceive in
themselves a lively faith, or a sure confidence of heart in Christ, the peace
of conscience, an endeavor of filial obedience, a glorying in God through
Christ: and nevertheless use the means b^ which God has promised that he will
work these things in us, such as these ought not to be cast down at the mention
of R^probation, nor reckon themselves amongst the Reprobate; but must
diligently go forward in the use of those means, and ardently desire, and
humbly and rev^rehtly expect the GOOD HOUR of more plentiful grace. Synod of
Dort. Chap. 1. Art. 16.


Paganvs. Expect the good hour did you say? why this is a perfect
contradiction to what you said before, viz. that [ now] is the accepted time,
and the day of salvation. And if I be commanded to believe [ now] certainly to
make that Command just, and much more to make it not grievous, but light and
easy (as the Gospel-commands are said to be) there goes a power along with
that command to make it possible [ now] and so my duty; else what will become
of your fifty moving Considerations to convince men of the folly of delay? But
I remember you said, it was every man's duty living under the d^spensation of
the Gospel to believe. Now if to make a man believe, be Gods irresistible work,
and accomplished by his Almighty power, not inferior in mightiness, to that
whereby he did create the World, and raises up the dead, How can this be a
poor Creatures duty? Could we think it equal in a good man, or consistent with
his goodness, to impose an insupportable burden upon a child's shoulders, and to
whip him, because he does not carry it; when such is his weakness, that he
sinks under it? Sure we should account this extreme severity; and shall we
attribute the like to God? God forbid!


Diotrephes. God may give what Laws he please; for his Sovereignty is
absolute, his Dominion incontrou^able; he is bound to none, and gives account
of his actions to none.


Paganus. I know Sir, it is impossible God should be obliged to his Creature,
whether upon the account of any Law made by it, or of any benefit received from
it; but yet the very nature of God, and that natural equity which is
supereminent in him, God esteems as a Law to himself, and does never transgress
the dictates of it. And besides, God does freely enter into Bond unto his
Creatures, as well by giving them a Law, as by making them a promise; for if he
prescribes a Law, he is (in his own natural equity) bound to bestow grace and
assistance necessary to the observation of it; and if he promises a thing
absolutely, he ought absolutely to perform it; if he promises a thing
conditionally, the condition being fulfilled, he is tied upon the honor of his
truth and justice to make that promise good, as appears plainly by that which
you call and value as his own Word, Mat. 25. 24. Hebr. 6. 10. 1 John 1. 9.


Diotrephes. I beseech you Sir, have you been instructed in Gods Word?


Paganus. I shall deal ingenuously with you; I have been long acquainted with
your Bi^le, which you make the ground of your Religion: And I observe, it
speaks very much of Heaven, and glorious things of a life to come, and calls
upon you very earnestly to despise the World, and lay up your hearts and your
hopes in Heaven; but observing withal, what insatiable avarice, ambition and
luxury there is amongst you that profess Christianity; and how much more
carefully (notwithstanding your demure pretense;) you lay out your selves for
Earth than Heaven, and what Factions you drive on to compass your ends; I have
been drawn into a suspicion, that few of you do cordially believe your own
Religion; or else that you think it is such a Religion as will save you by a
verbal profession, though your practice be at utter defiance to all the Rules
and Precepts of it. Besides, I have stumbled at some Doctrines which I have
found in other of your Books; and it has given me no small scandal to read
(what I now hear from your mouth) that the God you worship should make such a
severe Law (as you say he has) for the regulating of his Creature, and yet
deny that Creature a sufficient ability to perform it. How this can consist
with that Justice by which the true God is supposed to govern the World, I
confess I understand not.


D^otrephes. God help us! in many things we offend all. But you must not impute
the fault to our Religion, which is holy, just and good; but to the Professors
of it, who refuse to square their practice according to the Gospel-institution:
But for the offense you take, that God injoyns a Law, which is become
impossible, you must know, we hold the justice of God excusable in this case;
because he gave all mankind a sufficient power in their first Parents, whom he
created after his own Image in righteousness and true holiness; and had they
persisted in their obedience, their Posterity had been furnished with the same
abilities, and had had the same image stamp't upon them in as full and fair a
Character as they had; but because upon the suggestion of the Devil, they
prevaricated the Covenant of their Maker, therefore were they punished with the
loss of that Image, Original Justice, and Supernatural abilities; and this sin
of theirs being imputed to their whole offspring, the very same penalty is
also derived unto them upon that account.


Paganus. When sin is committed, and a guilt contracted, admit, God be not tied
to his own Creature, yet he may be tied to his own natural equity to proportion
the penalty to the crime, and not to aggravate the affliction beyond the
Creatures demerit: And therefore if they became Delinquents in the person of
another, that the penalty may hold correspondence with the fault, they should
also receive their punishment in the person of another.


Diotrephes. The punishment, as I have already ^inted to you, was imposed upon
another person, even upon the Son of God; for God laid upon him the iniquity of
us all, and he was wounded for our than gressions, he was ^ruised for our
iniquities; the chastisem^nt of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we
are Isa. 53.
healed.


Paganus. But Sir, I remember you said, He died according to the Counsel and
Purpose of his Father, only for a certain seed which he had given to him. The
rest he did no redeem, or die for; and yet he commands them to believe in him,
and rely upon him, and denies them power to do it too; which I cannot but think
to be extreme severity.


Diotrephes. I told you before, that the justice of God is excusable, because
He gave them power to believe in their first Parent, in Adam; and to this
prodigality they must impute this their impotency.


Paganus. The tenor of your Discourse has led me to look upon [ Faith] or
which is all one [ Believing] under this notion; viz. A laying hold upon Christ
the Mediator, as the means to help us out of sin and misery; and if it be so,
I am apt to conclude, That as Adam had no need, so neither had he power,
(though he had so much as was suitable to his condition) in his state of
integrity to lay hold on Christ: And if I apprehend your sense aright, Faith
contains, or implies a power to arise after our fall: If therefore Adam before
his fall had this power; then after he was fallen, he might have elicited, or
drawn it forth to his restitution; and so there should have been no need of
that omnipotent and irresistible operation of God unto this work, which for
mightiness, is not inferior to the Creation of the World, or raising up the
dead, as is pretended. Besides, the question is not concerning the Historical
Belief of a Mediator, in case God had made the Revelation upon supposition of
the fall (as he did not) but whether Adam had a power to believe in Christ
savingly? This he could not do, because saving faith implies a renouncing of
ones own works, and a relying upon Christ's merits and mediation for grace and
pardon. This in the state of Innocence Adam could not do, because God had given
him a command, and tied him in a Covenant to do otherwise: And I observe, that
the Son of God has sealed a new Covenant for Mankind with his own blood; and
he invites all men to subscribe it. Now this is called, I perceive, a Covenant
of Grace; but as it is established upon better promises than the former; so I
find that more dreadful threatenings are annexed to it also. I must profess my
dissatisfaction herein; I think it very hard, that Almighty God, after he has
deprived them of original righteousres for the sin of their first Parent, which
they could no way be guilty of, but by his own positive constitution; I say, I
think it very hard, that after this, he should engage them in a new Covenant,
and tie Mankind to new conditions, and not vouchsafe a competent strength to
perform them; especially being tied to this performance under a severer
penalty; and how this can be called a Covenant of Grace, I profess I cannot
sufficiently understand.


Diotrephes. We s^tissie our selves in an humble submission to Gods
incontrolable Sovereignty, and a modest veneration of his most free
Beneplaciture; considering that the Redeemer himself does check the objections
of Repiners with this short reprehension, Mat. 20. 15. Is it not lawful for me
do what I will with my own? And the Great Apostle of the Gentiles argues thus
against such Disputants, Romans 9. 18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth: And ver. 21. Has not the Potter
power over the Clay, of the sam lump to make one Vessel unto honor, and
another unto dishonor; what if God willing to show his wrath, etc. And this is
that unfordable, and unfathomable Abyss, which put the wits of that great
Vessel of Election to a stand, and makes him cry out in an ecstasy of
astonishment, Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out?


Paganus. If Almighty God intended his holy Scriptures (which are opened for
all men to examine) for their instruction and benefit; sure it is possible for
a reasonable creature, using his utmost diligence, to gain some measure of
understanding in them. And truly, if I be able to apprehend any thing, the
place you last mentioned, affords as strong an Argument against you (if you
take the Context with it) as one could imagine; for what I pray, is the ground
of that (...) Quae profundae divitiae sapientiae, in co positae esse possunt,
quod Deus velit minimam hominum partem salvare, and maximam perdere? Solum
illud tantum in co locum habet, Sic volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ration voluntas,
Episcop. Romans 11. 32.
? Is it not the contrivance (as I may say) of his Counsel, whereby he designed
a general mercy (would they but embrace it) to all Mankind? without doubt, you
will be forced to acknowledge it with me, if you reflect upon his Assertion
that ushers in that Exclamation; for this it is, God has shut them (both Jews
and Gentiles) all up together in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all;
and then it follows, O the depth, etc.

And though it is said in the other Text alleged, He will have mercy on whom he
will have mercy; and whom he will, he Romans 9. 18, 21.
hardneth; yet if you interpret that saying, by a Collation of it with other
places, where he makes a further Declaration of his meaning, you will find it
comes far short of a pregnant evidence to serve your purpose; for the Psalmist
tells us, The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them
that fear him, and think upon his Commandments to do them, Psalm. 103. 17, 18.
Exodus 20. 6. And by this great Apostle he has sufficiently revealed what his
will is in this kind, even to have mercy to the salvation of them that believe
1 Cor. 1. 22.
: And what Authority or Example can you produce to prove, that ever God did
actually harden, or had a will to harden any, but such as had formerly rebelled
against the fight, abused his patience, and despised his gracious dispensations
Romans 1. 22 26
? Because when they knew God, they did not glorify him as God, etc. for this
cause God gave them up, Romans 1. 21. with 26. and Psalm. 81. 11, 12. But my
people would not hear my voice, and Israel would See also Luke 7. 30. Acts 13.
26, 40, 41, 45, 46. Hebr. 2. 3.
not obey me, so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts. We find that the
Lord (though he had foretold what would be the issue of Moses Ministry to him)
is not said to have hardened Pharaoh, till he had multiplied his Rebellions, and
dallied with five plagues: The last whereof, when Moses undertakes the removal
of it, he gives him a fair warning of his danger. Exodus 8. 29. I will entreat
the Lord; but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more: And because he
neglected to quit himself of the danger upon this hot Alarm, therefore with
the sixth plague this judgment came upon him also; it is said, the Lord (then)
hardened the heart of Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 12. and ver. 14. with the judgment
following; the Lord threatens, I will at this time send all my plagues upon
thine heart: Therefore do not resemble God to a mad or ^nwise Potter, that
lays out his cost and skill in making up a Vessel for no other purpose, but
only to make ostentation of his power, will and liberty to break it. Perhaps
the Apostle by that comparison takes upon him to demonstrate, not what God will
do, but what he can; for he says, What if God willing to show his wrath, etc?
Besides, God is compared to the Potter, and men to the Mass, or Lump of Clay;
but what men are they that are entered into this comparison? not innocent men,
or men made guilty by imputation only (as your Doctri^e supposes them) but men
corrupt, through their own v^luntary pollutions, as such. This is evident from
the Apostles Discourse in the three first Chapters of that Epistle. He declares
then, that out of this Mass (or Lump) it is lawful for God, according to his
own Beneplaciture, to select some unto life, namely those who would believe in
Christ upon his being tendered to them Romans 9. 30, 31, 32. Chap. 11. 20. See
also John 3. ult.
; and to harden the rest, and reserve them to wrath; that is to say, those who
would augment the number, and mount the heap of their other sins, by the
addition of a wilful unbelief. This to my sense is most clearly, that liberty 1
Cor. 1. 21.
which the Apostle asserts, and vindicates to Almighty God in that present
juncture and current of his Providence over Jews and Gentiles; though the
Jews cried it down with utter detestation, as a violation Romans 11. 1.
of those signal promises which he had anciently made unto their Nation.

For your other Allegation; Matthew. 20. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I
will with my own? It can conclude nothing, but that God may distribute equal
portions of reward to those whose labors in his Vineyard have been unequal;
for when he that has done most, receives the utmost they did contract for, why
should he repine at the Lords bounty, which is no injury to him, though a
benefit to others? But what is all this to the vindication of Gods justice?
when he invites men to a new Covenant, wherein he promises to proceed with
them upon a gentler account, and ties them to new conditions; and yet denies
abilities sufficient to perform those conditions; though he binds them to that
performance under the commination and peril of a soarer penalty. And I ask't
you further, in what sense this Covenant with Mankind could be properly called
a Covenant of Grace; which demand (and I conceive it a material one) you were
pleased to take no notice of in your last Reply.


Diotrephes. You must know Sir, that your natural Reason, without a
supernatural illumination, is no competent Judge of the sense of holy
Scripture, which contains the mind of God; yet I shall not now reply to your
interpretations, but address my self to give you satisfaction to your l^st
demand; which is, in what sense the Covenant, which God has sealed to us, in
the blood of Christ, is styled a Covenant of Grace. To this end, you must
understand that there are a certain number of persons predestined unto life
and glory, and these are called the Elect: These Elect, God Almighty, before
the foundation of the World was laid, according to his eternal and immutable
purpose, and the secret The Declaration of the Congregational Churches at the
Savoy, Chap. 3. n. 5, 6, 7.
counsel and good pleasure of his will, has chosen in Christ unto everlasting
glory, out of his mere free grace and love, without any foresight of faith, or
good works, or perseverance in either of them, or any other thing in the
Creature, as conditions or causes moving him thereunto, and all to the praise
of his glorious grace. (And) as God has appointed these Elect unto glory, so
has he by the eternal and most free purpose of his will foreordained all the
means th^^ unto; wherefore they who are elected, being fallen in Adam, are
redeemed by Christ, are effectually called unto faith in Christ, by his Spirit
working in due season, are justified, adopted, sanctified, and kept by his
power through faith unto salvation. All these benefits are infallibly and
irresistibly conveyed to those Elect, by virtue of the said Covenant; and upon
this account I hope you will allow it to be very fitly entitled a Covenant of
Grace.


Paganus. I do readily allow of the title, in respect to those Elect you speak
of; but I pray satisfy me in this particular; what interest have the rest of
mankind in Christ, and this Covenant? Do not the benefits you have now
mentioned, belong to them?


Diotrephes. For your satisfaction, you may assure your self it is the
Determination, and PUBLIC FAITH of the new Congregational Churches in England
Ibid. n. 6.
agreed upon, and consented to by their Elders and Messengers, That not any
other are redeemed by Christ, or effectually called, justified, adopted,
sanctified and saved, but these Elect only.


Paganus. I pray to what end did God create the rest, and what Acts has he
passed against them? and what Providence does he exercise toward them?


Diotrephes. There is a Text of holy Scripture that says thus, Before the
children were born, and when they had neither done good nor evil, that the
purpose of God according to Election might stand, Romans 9. 11, 1^, 13.
not of works, but of him that calls, it was said, The elder shall serve the
younger; as it is written, I have loved Jacob, and have hated Esau. Out of
which words a Renowned Divine does conclude, That Gods ordaining men unto
salvation, proceeds merely according to the good pleasure of God, and not upon
consideration either of works or faith: And he adds, As touching Reprobation,
that it is no more of evil works, than Election is of good works; forasmuch as
before they were born, they were equally incapable of the one, as well as of
the other; and the doing of evil is expressly excluded as well as the doing of
good; whence it follows manifestly, that Gods ordaining men unto damnation,
proceeds as much of the mere pleasure of God, and with as little consideration
of sin; as Gods ordaining men unto salvation, proceeds of the mere pleasure of
God, and without consideration of any righteousness in man. Dr. Twiss. ubi
supra. page 38.


Paganus. To design men to destruction or torments, though but temporal,
without fault, for ones mere pleasure, is such a severity as we usually brand
with the title of Tyranny, when we find it in any man, though he were the
greatest Emperor in the world; and truly I dare not entertain such thoughts of
God.


Diotrephes. We must distinguish in this Decree, the Act of God decreeing, and
the things decreed by him (says the same great Doctor Ubi supra, page 41.
) The things decreed by Reprobation, are,

1. The denial of grace (by grace I mean) faith and repentance, whereby that
infidelity and hardness of heart, which is natural to all, is cured.

2. The denial of glory, together with the inflicting of damnation.

As touching the first of these, look what is the cause of Reprobation, as
touching the Act of God reprobating, that, and that alone is the cause of the
denial of grace, to wit, the mere pleasure of God.

But as touching the denial of glory, and inflicting damnation, God does not
proceed according to the mere pleasure of his will, but according to a Law,
which is this, Whosoever believes not, shall be damned: And albeit God made
that Law according to the mere pleasure of his will; yet no wise man will say,
that God denies glory, and inflicts damnation on men according to the mere
pleasure of his will; the case being clear, that God denies the one, and
inflicts the other merely for their sins, who are thus dealt withal: And to
this Doctors opinion agrees, not only the Confession of the Congregational
Churches, but that also of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, who ( chap.
3. n. 7.) do declare concerning the Reprobates, whom they style the rest of
Mankind, That God was pleased, according to the unsearchable counsel of his own
will, whereby he extends, or withholds mercy as he pleases, for the glory
his Sovereign power over his Creatures, to pass by, and to ordain them to
dishonor and wrath for their sin, to the praise of his glorious justice.


Paganus. Truly Sir, as far as I am able to understand by the process of your
Discourse, the whole matter of Reprobation, as well touching the things
decreed, as touching the Act of God decreeing, is finally resolved into Gods
mere pleasure, to show his Sovereign power; for you say he makes a Law to bind
men to repent and believe under pain of damnation; and this Law he makes for
his mere pleasure; you affirm also, that he decrees to deny sufficient and
necessary grace to enable men to repent and believe, and this of his mere
pleasure too; and from hence it does undeniably follow, that he does ordain
sin, and the introduction of it, as the means of damnation, and that of his
mere pleasure too.


Diotrephes. That he who intends an end, does also intend the means, the very
light of nature suggesteth unto us, says Dr. Twiss Ibid. page 73.
, but I confess there is a little difference amongst Divines in this Article.
Piscator In Axiom. de praedest. etc. cap. 5.
says roundly, Reprobi prius ad poenam destinati sunt, tanquam ad sinem,
deinde etiam ad pecca^a, tanquam ad media; that is, the Reprobates are first
destinated unto punishment as the end; afterward to sin, as the means: But Dr.
Twiss says, We know God has given us means of grace; as for means of
damnation, we know none; Sins can neither be called man's means, nor Gods means,
says he; not man's means, Ibid. page 56.
or intended Though he does not intend this directly, yet indirectly and
interpretatively he may; and so a man is said to love death. Prove. 8. 36. and
chapter 15 32. Vid Thom. 12^. q. 79. a. 2. ad 2m. Ibid. page 73.
by him as Means, forasmuch as the intention of Means arises from the
intention of the End; but no man or devil intends to bring upon himself
damnation as the end whereunto he intends to sin. Not Gods means, forasmuch as
means are intended but by him who is the Author of them; which God (says he)
cannot be. This acute Doctor therefore does determine the Point thus, [The end
that God aims at, is his own glory; for he made all things for himself. And if
he means to manifest his glory on any in the way of vindicative justice, it
stands him upon both to create them, and permit them to sin, and finally to
persevere therein, and to damn them for their sins. Here (says he) we have the
end and the means intended by God.]


Paganus. Gods end, you see, is the Glory of his vindictive justice; His means
is, to create man, to permit him to sin, and persevere in it, etc. I pray Sir,
let me understand what you mean by Gods Permissive Decree; I should think it
does not import an absolute decree in the Will of God concerning the thing
permitted; but only a Negative Act whereby God is understood neither to will
the being of that thing, nor to nill it Non deo v^lente vel nolent,, sed non
v^lente ^iun^ mala. Magister. 1. D. 46. F.
. And consonantly when God decrees to permit sin, he decrees not to hinder it,
but to leave it in man's power, that sin may come to pass, or not come to pass,
whether it does eventually come to pass or not.


Diotrephes. You take the word permission in a sense too restrictive and
limited. For Man being created after Gods image, in a state of integr^ty,
endued with free will, and a sufficient ability to abstain from sin; If God had
permitted sin in that sense only (that you speak of) for all such a Decree, it
was possible Implicat contradictionem ut aliquis effectus sequeretur
infallibiliter ex causa defectibili and impedibili per concursum aliarum
causarum, hoc est, ex anteced^nte, quae aliter atque aliter potest se habere.
Alvar. de Auxil. cap. 7. and Ames. ubi infra.
for Man not to have sinned; and then God had lost his end, [the Manifestation
of his Vindicative Justice.] It stands neither with the wisdom nor the power of
God to make Decrees whose success is doubtful and event uncertain. Deus enim
successiva decreta and incerti eventus condere non potest, quia ut
potentissimus est, ita and sapientissimus, qui decretum de fine non facit, nisi
decretum de mediis ei aeque sit certum. Sapientiae enim non congruit, ut
decretum de fine, quod per media exequendum est, fine Mediorum certa
limitatione statuatur. Resp. Ant. Wallaei ad censur. C^rvini page 138.
As the Decree for the illustration of his own Glory is absolute and
irresistibl, and therefore not to be defeated; so the Means for the Execution
of that Decree is certainly ordained, and to be accomplished inevitably; and
therefore not suspended upon so contingent a thing as Man's Free Will is, if
left to its own determination.

Hereupon the Westminster Assemblers, and the Congregational Churches (treading
in their steps, unless it be where they thought those tread awry) do tell us,
That Gods Providence is Chap. 5. (...). 4.
extended even to the first fall, and all other sins of Angels and men 3* and
that not by a bare permission, etc. So that this permissive Decree is very
pregnant and teeming, it brings forth in its season, as is said by the Prophet
of Gods Decree concerning a temporal judgment, Zeph. 2. 2.


P^ganus. Do you think that God allows, and approves of sin then? for this
permission (as you define it) imports something to that purpose, as I conceive
it.


Diotrephes. No; we do not speak of a moral permission, which is a concession;
but of a physical permission, which is no-impedition, a not-hindring; but such
as does determine the infallible futurition of sin: Nam Dei decretum de
permittendo pec^ato, ponit quidem illius infallib^lem f^turitionem, c^m debeat
sie^i and evenire quod Deus decrevi^ permittere ut fiat, says In sua Hydra
So^in. Expug. Tom. 1. p. 353. and 354.
Maresius; and a little after he says, By the effective D^cr^e, man
determinately and certainly was to be ^ntire, to be endued with free-w^ll, and
pe^cable; and by his pe^missive Decree, that p^ccable man was to sin, (ultro
and sponte) of his own ac^o^d, and freely; but yet determinately, certainly,
and infallibly. Hereupon Piscator says, Decretum Ubi supra. c. 3. Ibid.
permittendi p^c^ata, necessit at pecc^^a, quia se us frustra ^sset: The Decree
of p^rmitting sin does necessitate sin; for otherwise it were to no purpose:
And ^gain, Decretum permissivum etiam est cau a ^fficiens su^^ob^ect^, ^. e.
peccati. The permissive Decree is also the effici^nt cause of its object; that
is, of sin: And upon this account the Divines of Wedderau at the Synod of Dort
De Artic. 3, and 4. mihi. page 154. part 2.
, do conclude, That sins do come to pass necessarily, in respect of the
permissive Decree: And some English Divines do affi^m, That Gods Decree is not
less efficacious in the permission of evil, than in the production of good But
some say. (...) as permissiva effic^^ est; non quoad product^^nem, sed quoad
illationem. So R. B. (...) ^ect. 2 de (...) Med. p. 30. ^per. in Fol.
. Dr. Twiss says, That sin comes not to pass, but by the most efficacious
Decree, and Ordinance of God. I^id. p 88.


Paganus. This does confound Gods Decree of permission, with his Decree of
effection or operation.


Diotrephes. They do but trifle Calv. In^it. lib. 1. cap. (...). Sect. 1.
, and play the fool, that substitute a bare permission instead of Gods
Providence, as if God sat only as a spectator, expecting the for^uitous and
casual events of things, and so his judgment should depend upon man's free will.


Paganus. Have you any good proof that Gods Decree does certainly determine the
futurition of sin.


Diot^ephes. Our Divines do prove it out of Pet^rs Sermon, Acts 2. 22, 23.
where he thus bespeaks his Auditors, Ye men of Dr. Twiss. ub^ supra. p. 89, 90.
Israe^, hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you,
by miracles, wonders and signs; -- Him being delivered by the determinate
counsel, and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
cr^cified and stain. In the same breath (says Dr. Twiss) both conv^cting them
of crucifying Christ, and withal, acknowledging that he was delivered by the
determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God; the meaning whereof is fully
set down, Acts 4. 28. to this effect, namely, That what contumelious outrages
soever they committed upon the person of the Son of God* in all this, they did
but that which Gods hand, and Gods counsel had predertermined to be done.


Paganus. Cum ad productionem actus mali concurrit Deus, eatenus concurrit,
quatenus muneri auctoris naturae de patientia absolutae deesse non oult,
impediendo per substractionem sui concursus usum libertati^ creatae, ac
propterea concurrit, quatenus sinit, ut influxus oblatus ab ipso in actu prim^
ad opposita, p^r libertatem creatam determinetur ad ^anc actum secundum, quem
quantum est ex se, hoc est, voluntate Antecedente nollet esse.
God might out of his mercy ordain, that his Son should be made a Sacrifice for
the sin of the World, and he might freely determine his own will to deliver him
up to that purpose; and out of his foreknowledge, that the will of his
malicious Crucifiers would f^e^ly apply and determine it self to that wicked
Act of crucifying him; he might, as the Author of Nature, and to perform the
office of the first cause, determine to uphold their power of acting, and not
to hinder the use of their natur^l l^berty by the withdrawing of his concourse,
but to afford the simultaneous influence thereof, that they might freely act
what they had most wickedly determined.


Diotrephes. We do hold with Alvarez Ibid.
, That God Apud. Ames. Bell. Enervat. Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 2^. 4. p. 23.
by his Eternal Decree, and by his Absolute and Effectual Will, has
predetermined all our acts in particular, and that before the prevision of
them, and independently to any middle knowledge of our future free cooperation
upon supposition; and Amesius *has given the reason of it, because the
firmness of Gods Decree does not properly depend upon the contingent and
mutable will of man.


Paganus. This overthrows the liberty of the will to my weak apprehension, and
turns man, whose natural property it is to act freely, into the condition of a
necessary Agent.


Diotrephes. No, you are mistaken; for seeing not only every action of the
Creature, but also the manner of that action depends upon Vid. Ames. Bell.
Enerv. Tom. 4. l. 3. c. 3. n. 4. ex Alvar. Synopsis Pur Th^ol. Disp. 11. These.
11.
the efficacy of the Divine Will, it follows that the Providence of God does
not destroy the liberty of humane actions, but establish it, as the Belgic
professors have observed; for God so rules his Creatures, that he suffers them
also to act and exercise their own motions, as Austin has it: Though God be
the cause of the action in one kind Dato quod voluntas sit causa actionis
liberae (addam si placet totalis) in suo genere; ergone Deus ejusdem actionis
non est causa in suo genere? Mr. Hickman in Br. Refut, Tilc^i ad ^inem.
, yet man is the cause of the same action in another kind. God preserves his
Creatures in their nature and properties; he moves them also, and applies them
to act (or work) agreeably to their nature. He affords them his concourse; and
so concurs with them, and so immediately influenceth the action of the Creature
with his action, that one and the same action is said to proceed from the first
and second cause, i^asmuch as [ unum (...)) one production (or work) derives
its existence from them both; in which work, if there be any thing inordinate,
it is from the action; not as it is the Crea^ors, but as it is the Creatures:
Thus the Belgic professors, Ibid. These. 13.


Paganus. If God, as the first Cause and Author of Nature, to conserve that
order and manner of working, instituted in second causes at their first
Creation, does afford his general concourse Deus enim ^t Author naturae tenetur
se voluntati crea^^ paratum praebere ad concurrendum ad opposita, ut ipsa uti
possit sua naturali liberate. Hence they say, Actus pravus quaten^^ Ens, est
(...) Deo, non ut indu^en^e ad illu^, sed ut non subtrahente suum necessarium
concursum vol^ntati, quae dum ad illum se determinat, abutitur sua liberate
and influxu divino in actu primo ad opposita sibi ^blato. Et id (...) magis
proprie dicitur D^us conger^ voluntati in talem actum causando, qua^ voluntas
dicatur coagere Deo. Vid. Greg. in 2. d. 34. and 37. q 1. ar. 3 ad 8.
( ad opposita) that his Creature may have power and liberty to do good or
evil, and suffer the will of man to determine its self freely to the evil act,
and then (foreseeing it so determined upon supposition of his concourse) does
yield his simultaneous influence to the production of that evil act; then it is
possible to conceive how a man may avoid sin, notwithstanding that Divine
influx; for in this case, man does abuse his own liberty, and the Divine
concurse offered to him ad opposita, and so does freely determine himself unto
the sin, when he might do otherwise; and God should cooperate with the created
will, as the Author of nature, according to the exigence thereof, rather than
the will cooperate with God as its first determiner.


Diotrephes. That opinion does cast fetters R. B. P. ubi supra. p. 27. Hoc unum
asserimus, hunc concursum, quicunque tandem is est, male statim subordinatum,
aut posteriorem influx^^ voluntatis in actum suum; quia cum Deus non ^sset
causa p^ima omnium entium, sed secunda, deinde quia voluntas in primo motus sui
initio non dependeret a Deo, sed contra Deus a primo initio mortuu^^
voluntatis. R^sp. A. Wallaei. ad Censur. Co^vini. page 103.
upon the Divine Liberty and Providence; for if man's will does freely determine
itself before the Divine Determination; then it would follow, that the power
and providence of God can dispose nothing, till the assent of the created will
be expected and first had, with which it may concur as a partial cause to
produce the effect; and so God should not be the first, but the second cause of
this act; and the will should not so much depend upon him, as he depend upon
the first motion of the will.


Paganus. If God preserves to his rational Creature its natural propriety and
manner of working, I suppose he does ordinarily allow it the liberte of a
self-determination: And I understand not how this should be any derogation to
Gods Power or Providence; for the Creature still acts, not only under the
general concourse of his Providence, but also under the special egressions of
it; and God can and does, as it seems good to him, put in an immediate and
extraordinary finger of power to overruled and order the actions of it; the
Creature therefore is not exempted from the conduct of his Providence by this
means, as you pretend.


Diotrephes. We look upon all created beings, as so many emanations from the
first cause, upon which they depend in Ibid. page 2^.
esse and operari, in their being and working, as the Rays depend upon the
Sun; neither is the intellectual Creature in the actions of free will exempted
from this order Synops. Pur. T^col. ubi supra. These. 10.
; for it is necessary, that every Creature, and every action of it, and every
mode, and perfection of every action of it, be reduced unto God, as unto the
first most perfect, and therefore most effectual cause. We conclude therefore,
That Mr. Bagshaw. Pract. D^sc. page 3.
Our wills are tied up so close to the will of God, that like lesser w^e^ls
they move only as that great mover does guide them.


Paganus. Methinks this Doctrine should be very apt to tempt men to believe,
that God does very much promote and assist them in their most prodigiously
sinful courses.


Diotrephes. The Acts of Gods Omnipotency are carefully to be distinguished
from his Legislative Acts; by these last God always forbids sin; but by those
former, he secretly incites Deus homines ad suas pravas actiones incit^t,
seduct, tra^it, jub^t, indurat, deceptiones immittit, and quae p^cc^ta gravia
sunt, efficit. Mart. in Judic. 3. 9.
men unto it, either by moving their wills, tongues and members unto sin, or
else by not moving them to the contrary virtue; but withdrawing his grace and
necessary assistance; whence it comes to pass, that they cannot but sin.


Paganus. This makes God the Author of the sinful act, and consequently the
cause of all sin in the world.


Diotrephes. Though it sounds ill to weak and tender ears, yet Mr. Calvin
Instit. lib. 1. Cap. 18. Sect. 3. (mihi) p. 128.
has openly avouched it, Satis aperte ostendi, says he, Deum vocari cor^m
omnium Authorem, quae i^ti c^nsores volunt otioso tantum ejus permissu
contingere: I have clea^ly showed that God is called the Author of all those
(sins) which these censurers would have come to pass only by his idle
permission: But that we may clear God of all imputation, We are taught to
distinguish (when we speak of sin) betwixt the act and the malice; Dr. Twiss.
ubi supra. page 73.
or betwixt the act which is sinful (called by some the materialty) and the
sinfulness thereof (which is called the formality) God is the cause of the
former, but only the permitter of the latter.


Paganus. This permission then, by which you endeavor to free God from the
imputation of being the Author and Cause of sin, must not be an action by
which God makes us to operate; but only negatio impedimenti, the denial of his
impedition, or hinderance, in respect of that operation, which depends upon our
free determination.


Diotrephes. As I told you formerly concerning Gods permissive Decree; so now I
must tell you concerning his actual permission; if there were no more in it,
but the bare negation of an impediment; it were possible for man (especially in
his state of integrity) to forbear the sin to which he is thus permitted; and
so God should fall of his means for the accomplishment of his end, the
manifestation of his vindictive justice.

To give you therefore our full sense and meaning, when we speak of Gods
permission of sin, it imports, 1. That God does subs^rac^ Pol^n. Synt. Theol.
lib. 6. cap. 6. page 326. E. Maccov. Cell. Disp. 8. de stat. prim. Romans (mihi)
page 86.
, or withdraw his grace and divine assistance, suffi^ient and necessary to the
avoiding of sin; and that as well from the Angels, and our innocent first
Parents, as from their lapsed posterity. 2. That he does influence the sinful
act after a twofold manner. First, in moving and pred terminating For that is
now the prevailing opinion. Mr. Baxter of saving ^aith* pag^ 29.
the will unto that wicked work, by some previous reality received into it; and
this is that which Amesius Ubi supra. n. ^5. (...) etiam lib. 3. cap. 3. (...).
Ex Alvar.
approves of in Alvarez, when he says, D^us moti^ne praevia ^fficaciter
applicat voluntatem, etc. God does by a previous m^tion eff^ctually apply the
cre^t^d will, to work free^y and inf^ll^bl^, as he also applies other se^ond
caus^s to w^rk natur^lly. And he gives it us in his own words, thus, D^um non
otiosa, aut mere nega^iva p^rmissione circa, e^c^ti existentiam versari; Ibid.
n. 3.
That G^d is conv^rsant about the existenc^ of sin, not by an idle and mere
negative permissi^n (but) permissione v^luntatis, eventum ipsum praesinientis;
by such a p^^m^ssion of will, as (...) fore-determine the very event it self.
And this is not all; for secondly Pet. aS. Jos. in Evan. Concord. p. 597.
, God has his influ^nc^ together with the will into the same wicked work, by a
concomita^t, or ast^ey call it, a simultaneous concourse. To this purpo^e Mr.
Calvin says, that man does effect Instit. lib. 1. cap. 18. sect. 1. Ibid.
Sect. 4. (mihi) p. 130.
nothing, Nisi^a^can^ Dein^tus -- ar^ar^a ua directione; but by the secret
direction and motion ^f Almighty God; nay, that he does that which is not
lawful, justo illius im^uls^, by the just impulse of God.


Paganus. If this be the nature of Gods actual permission, I cannon see how it
frees him from the imputation of being the Author and Cause of (...); for
whatsoever sinful act a man commits, it is ^bsolutely unavoidable, because God
applies and predetermines his will unto it, and that insuperably, and produces
the act, and that ^mmed^^tly; otherwise the man, according to your Doctrine, is
not able to commit it.


Diotrephes. I perceive you have little skill in the Metaphyphysicks. Therein
we are taught, that Ens and bonum convertuntur; every thing that has a being
is good, and from God, and of his production; and therefore we must, as I said,
distinguish betwixt the act, and the sinfulness of it: For example; in
Adultery, Mr. Hickman.
Sodomy, Bestiality, Murder, Treason, Blasphemy, the hating of God; though the
obliquity and malice be foul and heinous, and therefore from man only; yet the
act it self is very good, and therefore from God, and of his determining and
production.


Paganus. Is there any good in Adultery, etc? why then do good men generally
pray against it, and declaim Censores nobis dati, qui libidinem,
intemperantiam, and caet^ras animi pestes e Civitate profligent; qui certe
intolerabiles essent, si haec omnia essent bona. Nunquid enim stipendia
conducendi, qui bonitatem etc civitate proscribant? Tho. Raed. Pervigil.
Metaphys. in Perv. Jovis.
against it (before the commission of it?) for if it be good, it is desirable,
and to be commended; and after commission, why are the criminals enjoined
penance, rather than obliged to give thanks, that God has prevented them with
such sweet mercies! And amongst men why are such severe Laws continued against
Adulterers, to cut off the spurious brood from their fathers inheritance?


Diotrephes. This severity is practiced in detestation of so foul a sin, and to
deter men from it.


Paganus. If the act of God be principal in the production (as I must needs
conclude from your Doctrine that it is) I hope that it is very clean and
innocent; else a holy God would never have made such an ineluctable Decree
about it, much less would he predetermine man's will (without any prescience of
his own free and previous inclination) to it: And forasmuch as such an absolute
predetermination makes the act unavoidable, that inevitability makes the
penalty unjust, that is inflicted to deter from it.


Diotrephes. It cannot be unjust to enforce the observation of the righteous
Laws of God; and we know, though he does predetermine the will of man, to the
production of the act it self, yet he forbids the sinfulness of it under a
severe penalty.


Paganus. By this Doctrine you will make as well the commands Nunquam ad hoc
Deus potuit praedestinare, quod ipse disposuerat praecepto prohibere. Fulg.
lib. 1. ad Mo^im.
of God, as the prayers of men against the foulest sins to be unjust,
irrational and absurd; for, according to this Doctrine, God ties men to
impossibilities of his own making, he ties them to divide things that are
inseparable, either of their own nature, or by his divine constitution. In
blasphemy, and the hatred of God (for example) the formal malice, and the
material act are inseparable; let the real entity of these acts be determined
by the will, acting with judgment and liberty, it is impossible even to the
absolute power of God, but that the formal malice, or sinfulness should follow
it: If therefore God does absolutely and effectually fo^e-^rdain, and
intrinsecally predetermine the will of man to the real entity of the act of
blasphemy, or the hatred of God, and yet tie him to avoid sin in these acts, he
ties him to absolute impossibilities; nay, he ties him to do that which is
impossible to his own Omnipotency; because it implies a contradiction, that in
these sins, the act should be without the pravity, the entity without the
malice; for these actions are evil antecedently to any positive Mr. Hickm. p. 9^
Law; evil, ex genere and objecto, intrinsecally and essentially evil.

And this opinion makes our prayers against sin no less irrational and absurd,
than Gods commands; for what God does in time, that he decreed to do from all
Eternity. Suppose then that God has decreed to produce the act of Adultery,
Blasphemy, hating of God in me; in praying against these, I must pray either
that God would rescinde his own Decree for their production in me, or that he
would separate the sinfulness from the entity of them, which is impossible.


Diotrephes. But I told you, though God does produce the act, and predetermine
the will intrinsecally unto it, yet he does but permit the malice or sinfulness
of it.


Paganus. You may as well say, he does but permit the burning of the flax, who
does actually throw it into the fire; and the Adulterer, assuming the act of
his uncleanness upon himself, might with as much show of Reason, protest that
he was but the permitter of the obliquity of it. Some of your greatest
Schoolmen do affirm, Potest fieri oppositum ejus quod permissum est, quod tamen
fit secundum permissionem, quia permissio respicit potentiam Thom. in 1. d. 47.
q. 1. ar. 2.
causae ad utrumque oppositorum se habentem; unde neutrum oppositorum contra
permissionem est; sed utrumque secundum eam: That the divine permission does
not tie a man up to one of the opposites, that is, to evil; but leaves his will
at liberty to make choice of either; that is, of the evil act, or the good one
opposed to it. This is impossible for him to do under the arrest of such an
absolute Decree, and intrinsecal predetermination, and simultaneous concourse,
as your permission imports. Again, what God permits, doubtless it is in his
power to hinder; but admit the real entity of an act intrinsically evil, freely
elicited, the power of God cannot hinder it, but a moral pravi^y will attend
it; because it implies a contradiction, that an act intrinsecally evil, as of
blasphemy, and the hating of good, should be freely elicited, and not be
depraved with the adhesion of a moral vitiosi^y. He therefore that is thus the
Author of the material act, he cannot be the permitter; he must be the Author
also of the sinfulness that is inseparably annexed to it.


Diotrephes. It seems you will not distinguish Gods permission from his
operation and efficiency, nor allow him to be Author of any act, but he must be
charged with those imperfections also which it contracts through the deficien^y
of the second Cause.


Paganus. You are very much mistaken; for I think Gods permission ought by all
means to be distinguished from his efficiency; but you do most shamefully
confound them: And I do acknowledge th^^ ^ome acts are of that nature, that the
act it self may be from God, and the vi^iosi^y from the Creature; as in the act
of Pray^r and Almes-giving, God may stir up a man to pray, or give an Alms,
and yet he may perform it with a mixture of vainglory, Matthew. 6. 2. But in
acts that are intrinsecally evil in themselves, filthy and uncle^^, the
vitiosity in those cannot be really distinguished from the act, (...) the act,
so long as the Law that makes it sin, stands in force, be separated from the
vitiosity, unless it be by a mere mental abstraction, as Adultery, Blasphemy,
hating of God: In these, he that is Author of the act, must needs be Author
also of the vitiosity. He that is Author of the inequality of the Legs, or of
the motion in such as are lame, is Author likewise of the halting. He that is
Author of the Antecedent, is Author of that which does nec^ssarily follow from
that Antecedent, whether it be positive, or privative. He that is Author of the
Sun, is Author also of the Light. He that is Author of the interposition of the
Moon betwixt the Sun and the Earth, is also Author of the Suns E^lipse, and the
darkness that follows it; Quod est causa causae, est causa causati.
for that Rule holds here, He that is the Cause of the Cause, is Cause also of
the effect, or that which is caused.

But give me leave to put one question to you; when God commands [ Thou shall
not commit Adultery] Is this the sense of that precept? Take heed, lest while
you produce the free act of Adultery, any moral pravity or sinfulness should
attend it.] Or is this the meaning of it* [ Ab^ain altogether from the free act
of Adultery, because the malice or pravity that deforms it, is inseparable.] Is
it the very act of Adultery, Murder, Blasphemy, hating of God, that is
forbidden by the Law of God, or only some defect or inordination superadded to
it, and distinct from it; If some defect or inordination only, you may do well
to discover it, that the Adulterer being taught to distinguish, may take the
pleasure of the act, and yet keep himself innocent from the transgression; but
if the act it self be forbidden by the Law, and as such an act, then the Author
of the act, is Author of what the Law forbids, which is the sin.

Where it is impossible to divide them in the commission [as in Adultery*
Blasphemy, hating of God] why should you distinguish them in the imputation?
You say the first cause so concurs with the second, that they produce but one
and the same action; that the first is the principal, immediate and
predeterming cause; If then the sinfulness of the action (produced betwixt
them) be as inseparable from it, as heat from fire, and that action be
avoidable to the first, but unavoidable to the second; nay, if the first cause
ordains that action, and as it is sinful too (for otherwise it will not serve
his turn) to glorify his vindicative justice, and impells the second cause to
commit it; I pray consider impartially to whose account this action ought
rather, in equity, to be imputed.


Diotrephes. But the second cause is not compelled, but consents freely to the
sinful action, and takes pleasure in the commission of it.


Paganus. Indeed though you say the will of man is Gods Amesius ub^ supra.
(...) 6. p. 24
Instrument, yet you add, that it is not a pure and mere instrument, but a free
one: But wherein do you place this liberty? not in a free determination to
produce, or not produce the entity of the act (wherein certainly true liberty
Causa libera potest agere and non agere, qui^quid quantum, and quando lubet.
Burgersdicii. Inst. Logic. Lib. 1. cap. 17. De causa efficiente. Theorem. 12.
consists) but in the consecution (which is necessary too) of that m^ral
pravity about which the free power is conversant only by accident, and through
the intermediation of the entity of the act; if God therefore does premove and
predetermine the will to the sinful act ( hic and nunc) and produce it in him,
the man cannot be made culpable by cooperating, to this unavoidable production,
with freedom and pleasure; because this is the property and manner of working
which God was pleased to concreate and preserve in him. Besides, where there is
an extrinsecal impulsion, he that is insuperably acted by it, is equally
blameless Quaecunque ista causa est voluntat is, si non ei potest resisti, sine
peccato ei ceditur; si autem potest, non ei caedatur, and non p^ccabitur: An
forte fallit incautum? Ergo cav^at ne fallatur: An tanta fallacia est, ut
caveri omnino non possit? Si ita est, nulla peccata sunt: Quis enim peccat in
^o quod nullo modo caveri potest? Peccatur autem. Caveri igitur potest. Aug.
lib. 3. de lib. Arbit. cap. 18.
, whether that impulsion be through flattering insinuations, or open violence,
if they be equally irresistible: So that this Doctrine leaves a very fair plea
to excuse w^ckedness, and inables the Malefactor, when he is upbraided with the
enormity of his crimes, to return the exprob^tion upon the inavoidable
predetermination and impulse of this Maker; for it is not in his power to make
his own ways either good or evil. He cannot perform one evil act, unless God
does first apply and predetermine his will unto it; and whereas there are so
many several sorts of sinners in the World, this difference comes to pass, not
more by Gods restraining of some to less, than by his predeterming of others
unto more wickedness. Insomuch, as to my apprehension, you make God to have as
great a hand in the production of sin, as of virtue Et vos quidem necessitatem
physicae praedetermination is urgere soletis, tum ex dependentia, tum ex
naturali indifferentia voluntatis liberae: quo posito, sequitur eandem
determinationem necessariam esse, tam ad eliciendam actum moraliter atque
intrinsece malum, quam bonum; coque and actum malum aeque ac bonum in Deum
refundi, ut primam ejus causam: quam ^n^m voluntati naturalis sit
indifferentia, ^oque tam ei insit ad actus malos, quam ad bonos; and in
utriusque tum mali, tum boni actus productione Deo subordinata sit, ut causae
primae: Necesse est eam tam ad mali, quam ad boni actus productionem a Deo
praederminari, etc. -- Si vero ista, quam vos u^get is, praedeterminatio,
voluntati non debetur ex dependentia and subordinatione ejus ad Deum ut causam
primam; Ergo nec Deus, quoties eam efficit in voluntate ad actum peccat^,
toties circa eam non peragit munus causae primae, s^d potius insidiatoris a^
seductoris, ut, qui citra omnem necessitatem and conditionem humanae
voluntatis, non modo generali influxu, sed and speciali quadam cura and auxilto
scilicet praedeterminante, concurrat ad hoc, ut eam ad malum actum inducat and
deteriorem reddat. Dissert. Theol. inter Amesium and Grevinch. 383, 384. and
page seq. Q^um Deus non praedeterminet voluntatem hominis ad actum malum, ex
necessitate, sed ex liberate, dic quamobrem ad istum po^ius actum ex se malum,
quam ad alium determinet, nisi ex mera voluntate, affectu and complacentia in
hoc actu potius, quam in alio? At, qui malo actu delectatur, and ex
delectatione ejus influxum suum, bominisque voluntatem determinat ad actum
talem, is quoque illius actus causa moralis est, and mortaliter agit malum.
Vid. quae sequuntur.
; and this is the opinion of Mr. Baxter, who says [ If no free Agent can act
without the predetermination of God, as the first immediate physical cause, I
cannot see why all our acts good or bad are not equally by infusion; Mr. Baxter
of saving faith, page 29, 30.


Diotrephes. We distinguish of things; such as are naturally good, God effects
by a single influence Dr. Twiss. ub^. supra. p. 91, 92.
; what is spiritually good, by a double influence; one general unto the
substance of the act; another special, as touching the manner of performing it,
says Dr. Twiss: Or, as the same Author has it elsewhere As Mr. Hickcites him.
p. 97. of his Justif. of the Fathers.
; Every good work n^eds a twofold help; one of general influence, as it is a
work; another of special grace, as good; but an evil work requires only the
concourse of general influence, as it is a work; but that it be evil, no more
is required than the denial of special grace. In every good work, God does not
only influence the will to work, but also to work well; but in our evil works,
he does influence the will only to work, and not to work ill.


Paganus 1. I desire you to consider, that the moral goodness of our works does
not follow the entity of them, as they proceed from God; but only as they
proceed from the will of man, working freely Sic enim vo^ libertatem arbitrii
cum decreto Dei efficaci conjungere soletis. -- Voluit ergo and decrevit actum
blasphemiae libere produci.-Ergo and malitiam ejus voluit; quippe cujus malitia
sormaliter consistat, in co, quod tali modo, nempe libere and cum rationis
judicio producatur. Dissert. Theol. inter Ames. and Grevincho. page 390.
according to the Rule prescribed him: Hence it is, that the same act for
substance, as it flows from a man distracted, wants that moral goodness that it
has, when it is produced by a sober man, though God affords the like concourse
and influence unto the entity of them both: If therefore God be the cause of
our good act, because he makes us conversant with perfect knowledge about a
lawful object; in like manner he must be accounted the cause of our evil act,
because, according to your Doctrine, he does predetermine us with the like
advertency of Reason, to be conversant about the unlawful object.

Object. 2. I pray resolve me, touching the acts of Adultery, Blasph my, hating
of God; are they therefore sinful, because they want some perfection which they
ought to have? and will they cease to be sinful, when they have all the
perfection which they ought to have, as Mr. Hickman Ibid. page 84.
disputes it? Is it only Gods special influence into the manner of performing
them, that is wanting in them? Is there any modification that can possibly
hallow them? Will the help of special grace separate the moral pravity from the
real entity in these acts? Then I wonder not so much that Mr. Baxter makes
Adultery in David, etc. so exceedingly different from the like fact in a
graceless man Prof. to his Grot. Relig. Sect. 18.
. In good earnest; if you know any qualifications sufficient to refine and make
such acts innocent, it would be much for your advantage, I am persuaded, to set
up School, and teach men, how they may be Adulierers, Blasphemers, haters of
God, and yet not sinners.

Some of your Casuists Amesius de conscient. l. 5. c. 10. q. 1.
do resolve, that Social causes do communicate in the fault and guilt of those
sins, to whose production they contribute their common assistance. Now shall he
that assists, or commands, or persuades me to commit Adultery or Murder, be
faulty; and he that predetermines my will to it, and that insuperably; he that
produces the act, and that immediately, shall he be blameless? What is this but
to condemn an accessory, and acquit the principal?


Diotrephes. But there is a great difference betwixt Gods concourse unto our
good and evil works; to good works, he concurs not only efficiently, Ex part
Potentiae, predetermining the very faculty to the work; but also morally, Ex
part Objecti; in that he does counsel, command, persuade and a^^ure us unto
the lawful object. In sinful acts, he does only the first, and not the latter;
so that of our sinful actions he is the physical cause only, not the moral; but
of our good, he is as well the moral, as the physical.


Paganus. You should consider, that moral motion does not give God the honor
of a true and proper cause, but only of a Metaphorical; for the influence it
has into the Agent, is not [ ipsum agere] the very act it self; and
consequently the effect does not follow that motion: If therefore God should
move us no otherwise, than after such a manner, your Partisans do conclude,
that while we work, God should not discriminate us, but we should discriminate
our selves from such as work not; therefore though God concurs unto the good
act by a physical predetermination, and morally too; but unto the evil act by a
physical predetermination only; yet there remains the same manner of working
(in respect of good and evil) in that, which is chiefly considerable, and by it
self alone, attributes the true and proper nature of a cause to God, and
assigns him the first and perfect original of that determination, that this act
should rather be, than not be.

But 2. What is this moral motion, and from whence, and what does it work upon,
in its seduction of us to an evil work, be it in the understanding, or the
will; in the imagination, or the sensitive appetite? if you allow it to be an
act, you must confess (according to your principels) that it is from God, and
of his product on; seeing therefore that the total sum of Gods concurse unto
the act of sin amounts fully to thus much (in your own account) [ That he
predetermines man to produce the whole entity of it, and the whole reality also
of every other act prerequired unto it; that besides, he predetermines and
applies the Devil, Imo^^ne ipse quidem Diabolus quicquam potest nisi
determinante Deo. -- Proinde pro certo tenendum Dominum omnes actiones
dec^rnere, atque agendo concurrere suo sancto modo, and cooperari quando
peccatum est in (fi^^i) etc. Malcom. Com. ad Act. 4. 24. Passio Christi in
individuo fuit a D^o praedefinita, praedefinitione perfecta: Ergo omnes
circumstantiae, quae concurrunt ad individuationem illius praedeterminatae sunt
aeterno De^ decreto; sed ad talem individuation in etiam concu^rit in^^^sio
actus, and extensio ad tales personas. Alvarez. Disp. 22. 19. C^tance and
approbante Amesio. i^ Bell. ener. Tom, 4. lib. 2. cap. 2. n. 12. p. 27.
and every other cause (de facto) con^urring to propound the unlawful object,
and allure to it;] since he predetermines the will, and directs the intention,
and provides the object, and applies the Tempter, and addresseth all other
circumstances that concur to the individuation of the sinful act; there seems
to be no moral or physical causality wanting; that God should therefore be said
to produce men's evil works, otherwise than he effects their good works.


Diotrephes. But the efficiency of God, though he be Author of the act of sin,
does not reach the formal malice of it.


Paganus. No more do Men nor Devils in their most importunate contrivances,
solicitations, and actings toward the sins of others; notwithstanding they
communicate in the fault Quatenus incredulit adhab^t rationem peccati -- Deus
illam non efficit, sed Diabolus; juxta illud 2. Cor. 4. 4. Piscator. Apol.
Resp. Amicae Collat. Oppos. cap. 3.
and guilt, by impelling to them such acts as are inseparably attended with a
moral pravity; neither does any man produce the formal malice of his own wicked
act, but inasmuch as he produces the entity of that act Aquin. 12ae. q. 79.
ar. 2. 2.
, to which that malice is annexed If the resolution of your Casuist Amesius ubi
supra.
, lately mentioned, be authentic, he does indirectly cooperate, and so
communicate in the sin of others, who is deficient in his diligence to prevent
it; and he is sufficiently diligent to prevent sin, who does predetermine the
will to it.


Diotrephes. Now I have freed God so fully from having any hand in sin, by a
Metaphorical distinction; you endeavor to make him communicate therein, by a
moral interpretation; but that one may be accounted the Author of sin, he must
be culpably deficient, says Dr. Twiss Ubi supra. p. 72.
; and thus man may beguilty, says he, either by doing what he ought to omit,
or by omitting what he ought to do; but this cannot be incident to God. He
could, I confess, says he, keep any Creature from sin, ^f it pleased him; but
if he will not, and does not, he commits not any culpable defect; for he is not
bound to preserve any man from sin: Therefore all that can be inferred from
hence, is this R. B. Pride. ubi supra. p. 13.
, That man does necessarily fall (into sin) if God does not uphold him; not
that God sins, because he does not give what he does not owe him.


Paganus. You grant then, that God is the cause of man's fall, though
inculpable; but your Doctors do acknowledge, That to love God in such a
measure, as to contemn our selves in comparison of him, and his service, is
above the power of nature. A Dr. Twiss. nbi supra. p. 49.
man mvst be endued with heavenly grace, and the Spirit of God to enable him
hereunto; and that accordingly, God created our first parents in a state of
grace, and endued them with the Spirit, that in this capacity, such a law of
love might be justly imposed upon them. Now I would fain be satisfied, with
what equity God could withdraw *, from his innocent creatures (and such were
our first parents before the fall) Si Deus hominem sibi obedientem a pietate
deturbat, and been currentem cadere facit, ergo pro bonis mala retribuit, and
injuste punit, quod ut fiat, impellit. Quid tam perversum, quid tam insanum
dici aut cogitari potest? Prosp. Aquit. ad 12. Gal. Object.
that supernatural and necessary assistance; and yet being thus (without any
fault in them) stripped off their abilities, leave them under the obligation of
that (now become an) impossible Commandment, that they might inevitably fall,
and perish; yet this he did, as you concluded above, out of your Divines.


Diotrephes. We satisfy our selves, in that God did this for a greater good;
and that we may have no cause to complain, our Divines conclude Maccov. Col.
Disp. Col. 2. Disp. 9. and ult.
, That our state of Reparation, is in several respects, better than our state
of integrity. We are now under a better Covenant, which is established upon
better promises Hebr. 8. 6.
.


Paganus. This answer does not satisfy my demand, concerning the justice of
Gods proceedings in the case mentioned; for I remember, amongst the Rules of
his own Law, this is one; [ Not to do evil, that good may come of it;] neither
will it excuse him, should a man commit Theft with a pure intention to expend
all his gettings this way, to the glory of God, in alms, and pious uses.


Diotrephes. God makes Laws not to bind himself, but his Creature Hereupon
Huld. Zuing. says, When God makes an Angel or a Man a Transgressor, he himself
does not transgress, because he does not break a Law. In Ser. de Prove. cap. 5.
and 6.
.


Paganus. Grant this; yet if he does not confer a strength upon his Creature
proportionable to that burden of duty which he lays upon it, his impositions
will be grievous and intolerable; and this is an oppression which Christ
himself thought fit to condemn in the Pharisees, where he says, They bind
heavy burdens, Matthew. 23. 4. Luke 11. 46.
and grievous to be born, and lay them on men's shoulders, but they themselves
will not touch them with one of their fingers.


Diotrephes. You must know, that God is not obliged to his Creature, he acts
all things both in mercy, or otherwise, according Mr. Bagsh. Prac. Disc. p. 2
to the dictates of his absolute, Sovereign, and uncontrollable will.


Paganus. Though God has no Superior, to whose Laws he should be subject; yet
in a sort, he is a Law unto himself See Lactant. lib. 4. cap. 23.
inasmuch as he is tied by an intrinsecal rectitude, neither to cause, nor to
will any thing, but what is consonant to the Rules of his own wisdom; that
wisdom dictates him to be the chief good, chiefly to be beloved, and that
nothing is to be procured contrary to such a goodness; from this Rule and
Dictate God should dissent, if, of himself, he should predetermine any man to
the hatred and contempt of his goodness. True, his greatness is so
transcendent, he can be accountable unto none; yet if he be unrighteous, how
then shall he judge the world? shall not the Judge of Romans 3. 6. Genesis 18. 25.
all the Earth do right? This is spoken of destroying the righteous with the
wicked; and it will hold also in withdrawing grace from the innocent, that they
may fall into destruction; which certainly is punitive, and a sad act of
judgment, whereof an innocent creature is not the proper Ephesians. 5. 6.
object?

But since we are returned to speak of the New Covenant, I pray inform me, how
that can be styled a Covenant of Grace, in respect of the Reprob^tes? and in
what sense their condition is better under this, than it was in the state of
innocence?


Di^trephes. Under this Covenant, says Dr. Twiss Vbi supra. (...). 23 Mr.
Baxter's Pres. to G^ot. Rel. Sect. 9.
, men are called upon to believe; and promised, that upon their faith, they
shall obtain the grace of remission of sins and salvation; and these graces may
be said to be offered unto all upon condition of faith, -- though faith it
self, in no congruity, can be said to be offered; but as for Suasion and
Exhortation unto faith, this grace the Reprobates, in the Church of God, are
partakers of, as well as Gods Elect: And I conceive, for these considerations,
this Covenant may not unfitly be called a Covenant of Grace, in respect of them.


Paganus. Are those graces of remission and salvation offered to the Reprobates
(under this new Govenant) in jest, or in earnest? Does God intend to save or
delude them in this offer? Did you not say positively ere while, that it is
impossible the Reprobates should savingly believe? A Legacy under an impossible
condition, the Learned in the Laws do account unworthy a wise Testator; and
therefore they conclude it ought in justice to be paid absolutely, as if there
were no condition at all added to it: But a stipulation, and any other contract
under an unperformable condition, is accounted null; and are such Covenants
beseeming the Majesty, or the Goodness, or the Sincerity of God? Does it not
savor too much of hypocrisy, to offer pardon and eternal life, upon terms
impossible? Suppose you and I were near a very fair Palace, into which there is
no way possible to enter, but over one narrow Bridge; should you promise me ten
thousand pounds upon condition I followed you into that Palace; though you
invite and call me never so importunately, and stake down never so many solemn
vows and protestations to signify your reality and earnestness; yet, if
pretending to lead me the way, you should draw the Bridge after you, and so
make my following you impossible, there is none but a mad man would think your
invitation, or your promise serious.

But I pray deal ingenuously with me, Do you really believe that the Ministry
of the Covenant is intended for the benefit of these Reprobates or no?


Diotrephes. Because you are so desirous of information, I Will tell you the
opinion of a person of great worth and learning, In Respon. ad Disput. 1.
Taufreri. ad Syllog. 5. p. mihi. 23.
Jo. Piscator; he says, Ministerium Verbi and Sacramentorum, quod attinet ad
majorem vocatorum part^m, ex intention Dei ineffcax, imo plane exitiosum esse:
That the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments is not only uneffectual, but
mischievous and deadly to the greater part of those that are called, and that
according to Gods intention too; and that he may not be thought to speak
without his Book, he produces sundry Texts of holy Scripture for it.


Paganus. Are the Reprobates then invited unto grace, and called to engage
themselves in this Covenant, when the Ministry thereof is by Gods own
intention, so dangerous and deadly to them?


Diotrephes. Gods invitation unto grace, is no other than by professing, that
by Faith and Repentance they shall be saved; without Faith and Repentance they
shall be damned: And Dr. Twiss^ ubi supra. p. 54.
hereupon by his Ministers he commands them, entreats them, beseeches them
that they will believe and repent, that they may be reconciled unto God, and
saved; and this grace the Reprobates in the Church of God are partakers of, as
well as Gods Elect.


Paganus. What difference do you observe betwixt the Elect and Reprobates, as
to their respective Concernments and Engagements in this Covenant?


Diotrephes. The Reprobates are called and obliged (as I may say) to subscribe
this Covenant, and engage themselves to perform the conditions of it, and are
generally promised the benefit of pardon and salvation upon that performance,
as well as the Elect: But here is the difference; when the Elect do actually
engage themselves in Covenant with God, though they be thereby obliged to the
conditions of that Covenant, yet they have God reciprocally obliged by his
promise to them; and his fidelity stands so ^ar engaged to effect the
conditions of this Covenant in them, and to secure them from the violation of
it, that it is impossible upon this account, they should either finally or
totally fall Mr. Baxter Disp. of R. to S^^ram. Disput. 4. p. 422. M.
from it: But when the Reprobates do by their external engaging act, oblige
themselves in Covenant to God, He keeps himself disingaged still, and is not
actually obliged by promise to them, for affording such assistance (without
which the conditions are impossible to them) and hence it comes to pass that
these Reprobates do prevaricate and break Covenant, and fall totally and
finally from God, which the Elect cannot do.


Paganus. But why does Almighty God, being so merciful and gracious as he
proclaims himself Exodus 34. 6.
, invite and woe them so earnestly to engage themselves in this Covenant,
seeing he will not vouchsafe them grace sufficient and necessary to perform it?


Diotrephes. You must remember God has other Attr butes to glorify as well as
his grace and mercy; he knocks at the hearts of the Reprobates by the outward
Ministry, because they are mixed amongst the Elect, upon whom he works
effectually by this dispensation; and sometimes he moves them inwardly, Ut
intelligant beneficium oblatum, officium debitum, and p^ccati sui gravitatem,
says Amesius Bell. Ener. Tom. 4, l. 3. cap. 2. n. 7. mihi. p. 55
: That they may understand the benefit offered to them, the office due from
them, and the heinousness of their sin; God does this, as others See the Apol.
for Tilen p. 189. and 190.
are pleased to express it: 1. To convince them of their negligence: 2. To
render them inexcusable: 3. To improve their induration: And 4. to augment
their torments. In short, God in these his proceedings, declares his own
liberty and pleasure, the absoluteness of his Dominion and Sovereignty; and in
fine, his justice too, because hereby the Reprobates are left inexcusable; and
violating that Covenant wherein they have voluntarily tied themselves, they are
at last proceeded against as contemners of the divine grace, and the great
salvation.


Paganus. I confess, I have heard of a horrible Decree Nec justitia justa
dicetur, si puniedum reum non invenit, sed fecisse dicatur. Major vero ^rit
injustitia, si lapso Deus retribuit poenam, quem stantem praedestinasse dicitur
ad ruinam. Fulg. ad Mon. lib. 1. c. 22. Dr. Twiss. ubi supra. p. 43, 44. and 50.
, and of a hard saying; but of none so hard and horrible as these in all my
life: And if this be your Covenant of grace, sealed, as you say, with the blood
of Gods only Son, you must hold me excused, if those Laws by which I have been
governed from my childhood in matters of mutual commerce and contract, keep me
unsatisfied touching the equity of it.


Diotrephes. Why, what is it you stumble at? All the learned confess, that it
is in the power of God to annihilate the holiest Angel in heaven, and that in
the execution hereof, he should execute no other than a lawful power; and as he
is Lord of life and death (though not as a Judge) they conclude he has power
to inflict any pain upon the creature, be he never so innocent.


Paganus. To annihilate is one thing, to impose torments another; where there
is no desert, God no doubt may take away what he has given without injustice:
If in taking away his Creatures life, he inslicts a pain that is finite, not
exceeding those pleasures of life it has enjoyed, who doubts of the equity of
such proceedings? But to inflict everlasting torments in hellfire, in
proportion so much above all the good either conferred upon the Creature, or
made possible to it, is (to say no worse) a severity too extreme to be
attributed to a good God: And if your principles be such (as I think they are)
that according to them, the design of the whole Affair, must be finally
resolved into his mere pleasure, to set for^h his Sovereign power, the
imputation will be so much the more abominable. To say (as some of you have
done Dr. Twiss. ib. a. 48.
) it is better to be in hell, than not to be at all, is such a Paradox, that
besides the common sense of all the World, it is expressly contradicted by Christ
himself Mat. 26. 24.
.

As for Gods Sovereignty, I have no desire to dispute the limits Vide Steph.
Curcellaeum De J^re Dei in Creaturas.
of it; but as I take him for my Lord, so I take him as he has declared
himself, for a Lord merciful and gracious Exodus 34. 6.
; and as he shall be my Judge at last, so I am confident he will proceed
according to Laws that are much more reasonable than those Decrees and
Covenants which you have been unfolding to me.

But I pray inform me whether those Elect and Reprobates you spoke of, shall be
infallibly saved, and damned respectively, as you say is decreed?


Diotrephes. Without doubt they shall; for the Decree is past from all
Eternity, as well for the benefit of the one, as for the ruin of the other.


Paganus. Do you think there has been any of those Elect in former Ages, in
these (which you call) Pagan Countries? and if there were, what became of them?


Diotrephes. Whether there were any of that number amongst your Ancestors, is
too hard a question for me to answer; but if there were any such, I am certain
they were saved by some emergency of providence or other; for it is not
possible that the Elect, whom God has chosen to eternal life, should perish.


Paganus. I shall give you the trouble but of one question more; which is to
know your opinion, whether there be any such Elect here amongst us now?


Diotrephes. Sir, I love not to pry so far into Gods secrets; this is a mystery
locked up in the Cabinet of his own Counsel. I had rather therefore you would
betake your self to some more profitable Discourse.


Paganus. I have heard, it is the opinion of some of your greatest Divines, that
this absolute Election is the very foundation of Christianity; and if it be so,
then a matter of that great moment is very fit to be inquired into, in order to
my espousing that Religion: If therefore you think there be any such amongst
us, I would know whether they shall per^sh for want of your administration? for
if you say, they shall, you contradict your self, and then you are not fit to
be believed: If you say, they shall not perish for want of it, then they will
stand in no need of your Ministry; but if you say there are no such Elect
amongst us, then I must enquire further, whether your preaching can procure us
to become Elect? if you say it may procure us to become such, then it seems you
can by your preaching procure new Decrees to be made in heaven, and new
immanent acts to be produced in Almighty God, and the number of the Elect to be
increased; all which Assertions as I have been informed, are contrary to the
judgment of your own Divines: But if your preaching cannot procure us to become
Elect (if we are not such already) then to what end should we admit of it?
Seeing therefore you conclude us all to be absolutely either Elect or
Reprobate, and that neither the Elect can perish, nor the Reprobate be saved; I
shall satisfy my self that I am better without your Ministry, than with it;
because though it cannot beget a saving faith in me ( that being (as you
affirm) a gift of Gods immediate and irresistible infusion) yet it may conduce
to aggravate my sin and condemnation; and in this resolution I shall take my
leave of you.


THE SYLLOGISM.
THose Articles which rightly understood, are discouragements to the embracing
of Christianity, are unserviceable to the interest of souls, unpracticable in
the exercise of the Ministerial Function, and not according to godliness.

The Articles which the Calvinists maintain against the Remonstrants, rightly
understood, are discouragements to the embracing of Christianity. Therefore

The Articles which the Calvinists maintain against the Remonstrants, are
unserviceable to the interest of souls, unpracticable in the exercise of the
Ministerial Function, and not according to godliness.

The Major is evident of it self; the Minor is proved by the former Dialogue.
Colasterion.
Romans 2. 24. The Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you.
Falsum est, Deum non opus habere peccatore; nam etsi eo Other proofs of the
Minor.
non opus habet ad suam beatitatem, quo respectu nulla creatura opus habet;
tamen opus ea habet ad patefaciendam gloriam suam, videlicet tum gloriam
Justitiae in peccatore non resipiscente damnando, tum gloriam Misericordiae in
peccatore r^sipiscente servando. Piscator contra Schaffman. These. 34.

Deus non vult omnes vocatos servari, and in Christum credere. Idem in Trip.
Rese. ad Amic. C. V. Duplic. e. 4. page 155.

Mandato credendi etiam illi tenentur, qui per Decretum Dei impediuntur ne
credant. Idem. p. 188.

Deus hoc consilio Reprobos credere jubet, ut eos per incredulitatem reddat
inexcusabiles. Ibid.

E^ce vocem ad eos dirigit, sed ut magis obsurdescant; lucem a^cendit, sed ut
reddantur coeciores; doctrinam profert, sed qua magis obstupescant; remedium
adhibet, sed ne sanentur. Calv. Institut. Lib. 3. Cap. 24. Sect. 13.

THE SECOND DIALOGUE BETWIXT DIOTREPHES and ANIMALIS.
DIotrephes. Well met Neighbor Animalis; what earnest business makes you post
so fast this way, and so early?


Animalis. Sir, I am going to my Counselor for his advice about a purchase. We
live in an Age so full of hypocrisy and fraud, we had need take all the care
we can to make things sure, and prevent the machinations of Deceivers.


Diotrephes. I cannot blame you, that you are so cautious in your transactions
for the world; for by this prudent course you may prevent much trouble and
suits of Law, which otherwise might emerge and spring forth out of your
purchase, and be entailed upon your posterity, at least devolve upon them with
the land it self. But Neighbor, there is another thing, I am afraid, you are
too careless in; That Unum Necessarium, that great Concern, which calls for our
supreme care and diligence; Give diligence to make your Calling and Election
^ure. Here is the inheritance that is worth the purchasing indeed; an Estate of
Freehold for ever. All the service we do for it, is but the instance of our
Liberty, and the Preface of our Joy, and our preparation unto glory. To secure
our interest in this (wherein we have subtle enemies, that are vigilant and
industrious to undermine us) is worth our daily travel, our morning thoughts,
and our night watches too. How welcome should you have been to me, and how
happy an hour should I have esteemed it, had your present address been to me,
with that question of the Publicans and Soldiers in your mouth; [ What shall I
do to be saved?]


Animalis. Sir, you pretend you are an Ambassador for Christ, (I shall not
question your Commission) and you have often importuned me, amongst the rest of
your Charge, in the Name of Christ, that I would be reconciled unto God! But
sir, is it possible you should think me averse to that motion? Alas, what
advantage can I propound to my self in being at Enmity with him who is My God,
My Conservator, and withal Omnipotent? I have more reason, considering how vile
a wretch I am, to be jealous of the distance of his Love to me. The fear hereof
is so great a discouragement, that if not removed, it may frustrate all further
attempts to gain assurance of it. I would be satisfied, whether God has a real
purpose and intent to save me; for if he has from all eternity rejected me,
then I am passed over to be carried on in another channel that leads finally to
Hell; and then it is to no purpose to be solicitous for salvation, seeing
whatever applications I make to him, it stands not with the im^u ability of his
Counsel to accept me unto Mercy.


Diotrephes. That the carnal mind is enmity against God, is Romans 8. 7^ ^*
the affirmation of the Apostle; and therefore there is no doubt to be made of
it; and if you be not sensible of this enmity, in your self, against God, his
ways and dispensations, the greater is your carnality and your misery.


Animalis. It Is somewhat strange there should be enmity in the mind, and the
man not conscious of it. It must needs be very impotent and harmless, and as
good as quite disarmed, if there be no knowledge to draw it forth. I know the
best men are not without their infirmities. They are constant Attendants upon
our Condition of Mortality. But there may be involuntary trespass, and trespass
for want of sufficient circumspection, when there is no hostility professed, or
opposition directly made against the Law or Authority of the Almighty. But I
pray sir, what do you resolve me concerning Gods purpose to save me? If you be
able to declare All the Counsel of God, as Saint Paul Acts 20. 27.
did, (and A Guide of souls, sure, ought to be so) then you can give me
satisfaction in this particular.


Diotrephes. If you do unfeignedly believe, you need not doubt of Gods purpose
to save you; for whosoever believes in him, shall not perish but have life
ev^rlasting. Joh. 3. 16.



Animalis. Is Gods purpose to save men grounded upon the intuition or
praescience of their Faith?


Diotrephes. No; If Faith be wrought in you, you owe that production to the
gracious efflux and effectual Egressions of that his purpose, and good
pleasure, to save you.


Animalis. This does somewhat confound me; because to my apprehension it
inverts the method of holy Scripture; for the Scripture says (as you alleged
i^ even now) He that believes shall be saved; (which affords a fair en
ouragement to believe); but your Doctrine inverts the Proposition, and
concludes, [ He that shall be saved, shall believe.]


Diotrephes. The Scripture argues by way of ascending from the Effect to the
Cause: but we infer in a way of descending from the Cause to the Effect.


Animalis. However, Sir, you have lodged the Cause at so remote a distance,
that I perceive the Effect is not in my Power.


Diotrephes. If by Power you understand a faculty, or a strength (and it is most
commonly and fitly taken in this sense) by which a man can do his duty, if he
will; This Physical Power you have, and the worst of sinners have, while they
are Men on Mr. Baxter.
Earth. Sermon. of Judgment. Answ. to Exc. 22. mihi page 240.


Animalis. Sir, I suspect a Fallacy in this part of your discourse: but I pass
it over with this reply; That a man had as good want a power to his will, as a
will to his power. That Christ has so far redeemed mankind as to restore a
power to them to do their duty, if they will; and yet that to will is still
impbossible for them; is not this liberty a fine purchase? If the New Method
with Evidence affords not, See Mr. Baxter Disput. of Right to Sa. ^ram. in the
Preface, p. 15.
not a more Rational account of those Points in Controversy, then this amounts
to, I am afraid it is not so sovereign as it is boasted, for healing the
divisions of the Christian world. Besides, Is not to will a part of a
Christians duty? without doubt it is. If then a man has a power to do his
duty, he has a a power to will; and it being his duty too, to will spiritual
good, after a gracious manner, He has a power to do that too, if your Doctrine
be true; But good Sir, let me have your opinion freely in this point; Do you
think a man has Free Will to spiritual Good, without the assistance of
supernatural Grace?


Diotrephes. I pray let us not befool our selves with opinions. Let the case be
your own. If you have an Enemy so malicious, that he falls upon you, and beats
you every time he meets you, and takes Mr. Baxter.
away the lives of your children, will you excuse him, because he says, [I
have not free will, it is my nature; I cannot choose, unless God give me
Grace.] If you have a servant that robs you, will you take such an answer
from him? Might not every Thief and Murderer that is hanged at the Assize, give
such an Answer? [I have not free will; I cannot change mine own heart: what can
I do without Gods Grace?] and shall they therefore be acquit? A Call to the
Unconverted, page 232.


Animalis. Sir, if your instances be pertinent, your Answer to my Question is
Affirmative; for the Law presumes such false servants and malicious enemies to
have free will in those Actions, and so a power to omit them; else it would not
bind them over to punishment, but hold them excused, as we may collect from the
indemnity allowed to arrant fools and mad men committing the like Facts. But to
turn from the power of darkness, to serve the living God, to believe in Christ,
and perform other Evangelical duties, requires an irresistible operation on
Gods part, not inferior for mightiness, to that power whereby he created the
world, or raises up the dead; as the Synod at Dort has determined.


Diotrephes. You could turn, if you were but truly willing: and if your Will it
self be so corrupted, that nothing but effectual Mr. Baxter.
grace will move it, you have the more cause to seek for that Grace. A Call to
the Unconverted, page 231.


Animalis. Sir, it seems to be a Contradiction, that a man who is not actually
willing, should seek for grace to make him willing; for where there is a
seeking, there is a desiring; and where there is a desiring, there is a
willing; so that you prescribe such an use of means to procure effectual Grace
to make one willing, as supposes him willing without that Grace; which most,
if not all our Divines account impossible. But I pray tell me, Sir, Whether an
insuperable impotency to be converred and become Gods servant, does not render
a man excusable?


Diotrephes. If you were willing to be the servant of Christ, and yet were not
Able, either because he would not accept you, or because of a want of Natural
faculties, or because of some other Natural difficulty which the willingest
mind could not overcome, this were some excuse: Sermon of Judgment. Mr. Baxter.
page 241.


Animalis. I bless God for the use of all my Natural faculties: But whether
Christ will accept of me, is to be resolved according to his eternal purpose,
which is not certainly to be understood, but by his ownspecial Revelation, or
his effectual work of Grace, without which it is impossible to be his acceptable
servant; and to obtain that work is a difficulty which the willingest mind in
the world, of it self, cannot overcome.


Diotrephes. But God has appointed certain means for the ungodly, which they
are bound to use, in order to their Conversion; and if they will not use them,
they are without excuse. Directions to prevent Miscar* in Convers. p. 265. Mr.
Baxter.



Animalis. Sir, when a man is made captive, and kept manacled and fettered in
prison, though you command the Prisondoors to be all opened, and invite him to
come forth with all the Rhetoric and earnestness you can, and give him ten
thousand keys to unlock his fetters, yet if you keep the right key from him,
no man will look upon you as any other than a deluder; Nay though you put the
right Key into his hands too, yet if his hands be so manacled, and his sinews
so benumbed and stupefied that he cannot use it; if you do no more for the
restitution of his Liberty, your offer of it, will be but a perfect piece of
Mockery. I pray therefore do not conceal the right Key from these poor
Prisoners, the bondmen of corruption: but give us a prescription of such means
as are sufficient and effectual for the work.


Diotrephes. See that you be constant Readers and Hearers of the Word; and that
it may not slip out of your hearts, meditate diligently upon it, and confer
frequently about it, especially with your Teachers; be strict in the
observation of the Lords Mr. Baxter.
day; and constant in duty with your Family; and importunate with God in your
prayers; that he would pardon your former Rebellions against the Motions of his
Spirit, and give you a sense and feeling of your needs, and a thirst after the
supplies of his Grace and Righteousness. These are the means that God has
appointed to bring you into a state of saving Grace. Treatise of Convers. page
238, 239.


Animalis. I pray God we have the right Key yet! Here are but two to speak of
in the whole bunch, Prayer, and the Word; and it is well if we do not find the
first to be a Key without Wards; and the second, one that will not fit the
Lock; well! let us try; and to begin with prayer.

1. Dr. Twiss Against Tilenus, ubi supra, page 85.
makes a mock at it, and upbraids D. Tilenus for seeming to attribute something
to the power of prayer, in order to our conversion. His words are these, [ This
Author seems by his discoursing here of prayers, either to be poorly exercised
in antiquity, or richly exercised in the contemning of it; for he would have
men to be effectually called by virtue of their prayers. The Apostle says, How
can they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? But this Author is able
by his prayers to obtain faith: In his judgment (you see) prayers signify
nothing to the obtaining of faith or conversion.

2. I have read in the Writings of Mr. Baxter Direct. ^^ Prev. Miscar. in
convers. page 265.
, That the first special work of Conversion, God has not promised conditionary
or absolutely to any individual person that has it not; he has bound all to
repent and believe, but has not promised to make them do it; (only) he has
revealed, that there are certain persons so given to Christ, as that they shall
be infallibly drawn to believe. Sir, that act of grace (you know) was past
before I was born; and so it is too late for any address of mine to procure my
name to be put into the Donation; if it be there already, I am then of the
surer side, I shall be infallibly drawn to believe: But if God has made no
promise ( absolute or conditional) of that special work, what encouragement can
I have to pray for it? Will not a prayer without a promise prove to be a Key
without wards, as I said? it is only the prayer of faith that finds acceptance;
and (not to speak of an unregenerate man, into whose heart that faith is not
yet infused) such a prayer it cannot be, unless it be established upon some
promise Oration formalis actus est fidei and spei. Ames-Medulib. 2. c. 9. th.
62. p. 308. Et Spes est virtua qua inclinamur ad expectationem eorum, quae Deus
nobis promisit. ib. 6. 6. th. 1. p. 277.
; for ('it is Mr. Baxters Doctrine two or three pages after the place mentioned,
page 269.) When men say they believe that which never was promised, -- this is
presuming, and not true believing: And whatever prayer be (according to your
Doctrine) I am sure presumption is none of the means that God has appointed to
bring me into the state of saving grace.


Diotrephes. Though he has made you no promise to give you saving grace, yet
he has revealed it to be his sacred will, that you repent and believe in order
to your salvation, 1 Timothy 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9.


Animalis. I have read in the Author mentioned, That Gods will is sufficient to
cause the thing willed; from whence I Mr. Baxter's. Preface to the Gro. Rel.
Sect.
suppose I may rationally infer, that either God does not will my conversion;
or if he wills it, that his will has caused it also; and then why should you
so sharply reprehend me for my nonconversion?


Diotrephes. We must distinguish of Gods will; it is either secret, and this is
sufficient to cause the thing willed, and never fails to accomplish whatever it
pleases; or else it is revealed; and this has no other sacrifice than what
consists in the manner of signification (by commands, persuasions,
exhortations, etc.) which may be, and oftentimes is rejected. When I say God
wills you to repent and believe, I understand it, not of his secret, but of his
revealed will, whereby he declares what shall be your duty to do, though by his
secret will he has determined the contrary. To this purpose Dr. Twiss says,
By his Commandment God signifies what is our duty to do, but by his purpose he
decrees ^bi supra. p. 58.
what shall be done, or not done; God commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son
Isaac, and thereby made it his duty to offer Isaac; but withal he determined
that Isaac should not be sacrificed.


Animalis. I shall not ask you how it can consist with Gods sincerity, to
profess to will one thing, and secretly to will another: But I shall only
observe, that since this revealed will of God is nothing but his external word,
repudiable, and for the most part eventually rejected, it must needs be, as I
said, a Key that will not fit the Lock; I mean it is no fit and adequate means
to bring us into the state of grace, though you say God has appointed it to
that purpose. Insomuch as Dr. Twiss affirms, That the execution of Gods
goodness toward a man is not hastened by his harkening to Gods Word; for though
men do hear it daily, yet are ^bi supra. p. 84.
they not forthwith brought to faith.

For this word is but a moral instrument, whose whole energy is exerted, and
put forth only by precepts and instructions, exhortations and persuasions,
promises and threatenings (as was intimated even now) such inducements as happily
may conduce somewhat toward the inciting of a soul (already) alive and active,
but can confer nothing toward the exciting of a soul that is dead of those two
great spiritual diseases, wilfulness and blindness; and therefore it seems very
irrational to undertake her Resurrection by such feeble and incompetent
applications.


Diotrephes. But you must remember this is such a death as has a natural life,
and a reasonable soul, and moral virtues, and common graces conjoined; and by
these the dead may be disposed. Mr. Baxter.
Of saving faith. p. 39.


Animalis. If you think the undertaking is not rational, I pray what is the way
you would prescribe in order to the cure of these diseases?


Diotrephes. The means of cure are the persuasions, with the revelations of the
Gospel. Men have the natural powers of understanding and willing; but they want
that right disposition, Mr. Baxter.
which we call the habit, or moral power; which is no more than to say, They
are habitually blind and wilful. It is so far from being unreasonable to teach,
and persuade men that are under such an impotency as this, that there is
nothing in the world that does more be speak our teaching and persuasions; for
this is the natural and instituted way to cure them, and give them power. What
means of overcoming ignorance like teaching? And what means of overcoming
habitual wilfulness, like persuasion, added to informing truth? We do not use
to reason men out of a natural impotency; nor to persuade them to do that, for
which they have no faculties, or object; but it is the very means of overcoming
a moral impotency, and making men willing of the good which they rejected.
Direct. to Prev. Miscar. p. 266.


Animalis. Now Sir, you begin to put me in some good hopes, that it is possible
for me to obtain a cure of these diseases, which I brought into the World with
me, and have much heightened by my own neglect and custom of evil doing. I pray
therefore proceed to acquaint me further, what are the most considerable
motives to persuade this willingness.


Diotrephes. No other than the signal benefits procured for us; the advancement
of our nature, by its union unto the person of Christ; his meritorious
Sacrifice and Conquest over Satan, the Mr. Baxter.
World, and our other enemies; his Sovereign power to rule us, and deal with us
on terms of grace; upon which account he daily puts by the strokes of justice
from us, and restores forfeited mercies to us; the offer of Christ and life so
freely to us, on condition we will accept them; his employing a Ministry to
make this offer by the promulgation of the Gospel, which affords most excell^nt
precepts and instructions, and exhortations, and other helps to bring us to a
willingness, that salvation may be ours. To which also is added abundance of
outward providential helps, to further the working of the Gospel, as seasonable
afflictions and mercies of diverse sorts; and with these is usual^y concurrent
some inward motions and assistance of the Holy Ghost, as knocking* at the door,
where he is not yet let in, and entertained. Ibid. p. 243, etc.


Animalis. These are all excellent moral inducements, and Topics of
persuasion; to which you have added some concurrent motions of the Holy Ghost:
But Sir, have you a Commission to tender these in order to my souls benefit? or
is your design hereby, only to aggravate my sin and condemnation?


D^otrephes. It is Life, and not Death, that is the first part of our Message
to you; our Commission is to offer salvation, Mr. Baxter.
certain salvation, a speedy, glorious, everlasting salvation to every one of
you; to the poorest Beggar, as well as the greatest Lords; to the worst of you;
even to Drunka^ds, Swearers, Worldlings, Thieves; yea, to the Despisers and
Reproachers of the holy way of salvation. We are commanded by the Lord our
Master, to offer you a pardon for all that is past, if you will but now at last
return and live: We are commanded to beseech and entreat you to accept the
offer and return; to tell you what preparation is made by Christ; what mercy
stays for you; what patience waits on you; what thoughts of kindness God
has toward you; and how happy, how certainly, and unspeakably happy you may
be, if you will. A Call to the Unconverted. p. 70, 71.


Animalis. But Sir, I am told by a great Divine, no other than Dr. Twiss, That
when God sent Ez^k^el to his people, Ubi supra. page 128.
it seems by that we read Ezekiel. 2. 3, 4, 5. He sent him not to better them; but
that they might not say they had no Prophet among them, and to cut off that
excuse.


Di^trephes. (I tell you) We are not only (tied by our Commission) to offer you
life; but to show you the grounds Mr. Baxter.
on which we do it, and call you to believe that God does mean indeed as he
speaks; that the promise is true, and extends conditionally to you as well as
others; and that Heaven is no fancy, but a true felicity. If you ask where is
our Commission for this offer? among an hundred Texts of Scripture, I will show
it you in these few! First you see it in Ezekiel. 33. 11. Say unto them, As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way, and live. Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil
ways; for why will ye dye, O house of Israel? And the following verses, and in
the 18th. of Ezekiel, as plain as can be spoken; and 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18, 19, 20,
21. you have the very sum of our Commission; [ If any man be in Christ, he is
a new creature; old things are past away, behold all things are become new; and
all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and
has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their trespasses to them, and
has committed to us the Word of Reconciliation: Now then we are Ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled unto God; for he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, etc.] You see by
this time that we are commanded to offer life to you all, and to tell you from
God, that if you will turn, you may live. Here you may safely trust your souls;
for the love of God is the Fountain of this offer, John 3. 16. And the blood of
the Son of God has purchased it; the faithfulness and truth of God is engaged
to make the promise good: Miracles have sealed up the truth of it; Preachers
are sent through the World to proclaim it; the Sacraments are instituted and
used for the Solemn Delivery of the Mercy offered to them that will accept it;
and the Spirit does open the heart to entertain it, and is it self the earnest
of the full possession; so that the truth of it is past controversy, that the
worst of you all, and every one of you, if you will but be converted, may be
saved. Mr. Baxter, ubi supra. page 75. to 78.


Animalis. Are these glad tidings, with the motions of Gods Spirit (which you
speak of) administered in such a serious, congruous and energetical manner, as
is sufficient to cure those diseases of blindness and wilfulness forementioned?


Diotrephes. Why! Do you think that man, who after all this, shall refuse to
turn to God, and after all this shall remain unconverted, will have any just
excuse before the Lord? Or Mr. Baxter's Treat. of Convers. page 225.
will he not be left speechless, and under the condemnation of his own
conscience for ever? Is it any pity to cast away that man, that will without al
pity cast away himself? and no saying will serve him, and no reason will
satisfy him? or when he is convinced and silenced, yet for all that will not
be converted? when it is their own doing, and they were their own undoing; and
when God did not spare for cost and persuasion to have done them good; and when
he shall say after all, as in Isa. 5. 4. What could have been done more to my
Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Now I hope you may satisfy your self
from Gods own mouth.


Animalis. I can satisfy my self well enough of Gods meaning, but not of
yours; for if we speak of such as live under the Ministry of the Gospel, I
doubt not, you will be ready to say, that all the benefits forementioned, are
administered to the worst that perish Mr. Baxter's Preface to the Grot.
Religion. Sect. 8.
: And I conclude, not only from thence that they are ineffectual; but also
because I find those of your judgment do add Idem in his Directions to prevent
Miscar. in Convers. page 267.
, That with this means God does set in, and infallibly cause it to be
effectual; and to whom? only [ to his chosen.] And Dr. Twiss Vbi supra. page
116.
does readily acknowl^dge, That God, unto the outward Ministry of the Word,
does not, for the most part, add the efficacy of his Spirit, to work m^n unto
Faith and Repentance, (which is the actual cure of their blindness and
wilfulness.) So that this zeal and earnestness you hold forth in a way of moral
persuasion, with that uneffectual assistance of the Spirit, flies at no higher
an aim, than to render men inexcusable, if it can amount to that; for whatever
cure it may work upon his blindness, it leaves his disease of unwillingness
still unmastered; and so in fine, you leave me but where you found me, in my
insuperable stat of death still, after all these applications; and though you
call it but a moral impotency, yet it is such, it should seem, as is not to be
cured by moral means, though some motions of the Holy Ghost concur with it;
what therefore can you prescribe me further, that I may, if it be reasonable,
submit to it?


Diotrephes. You must diligently go forward in the use of those means, and
ardently desire, and humbly and reverently expect the good hour of more
plentiful grace; so that famous Synod Synod. of Dort. Cap. 1. Art. 16. Mr.
Baxter.
does advise you: And though you be dead in your trespasses and sins, yet you
know, a condemned Traitor that is dead in Law, may by humble supplication do
somewhat to dispose himself for pardon and life. Of saving faith. p. 39.


Animalis. Sir, I doubt you contradict the Doctrine of the Synod, if it does
not (in this point) contradict it self; for they infer, that an unregenerate
man is properly and to^^lly dead in sins, and destitute of all strength tending
to spiritual good; that he is not able to hunger and thirst after
righteousness, or everlasting life; or to offer the sacrifice of an humble and
contrite heart, such as is acceptable to God. Syn. Dodrac. cap. 3. and 4.
Reject. 4.


Diotrephes. You must betake your self daily to God in hearty prayer;
b^seeching him to open your eyes, and show you the greatness of your sin and
misery, till you be unseignedly humbled; Mr. Baxter.
and that he would show you the need of his grace in Christ, till you can
thirst after him and his righteousness; and that he would show you the
certainty and excellency of his glory, till your hearts be s^t upon it above
all. Treat. of Convers. page 239.


Animalis. We heard before that such prayers of the unregenerate have no
promise to bottom on, and how then can they be made in faith? But besides, the
Assembly of Divines, and the Congregational Churches tell us Cap. 16. n. 7* Of
their Confess. and Declarat. respectively.
, That works done by unregen^rate men, although for the matter of them they may
be things which God commands, and of good use both to themselves, and for
others; yet because they proceed not from a heart purified by faith, nor are
done in a right manner, according to the Word; nor to a right end, the glory of
God; they are therefore sinful, and cannot please God, nor make a man m^et to
receive grace from God; and yet their neglect of them is more sinful and
displeasing unto God. The last clause of which Th^sis seems to oppose the
opinion of some other Divines of the same combination, who say positively, That
all works done before Regeneration, are rather hurtful, than profitable; but
indeed they are coincident; for if they cannot make us meet to receive grace,
nor please God, but are sinful; then it will undeniably follow, that they are
more hurtful than profitable to our salvation: So that upon the matter, after
all the Rules you prescribe, and the advice you give to the unregene^ate, you
allow him but the choice of a lesser evil to bring him into a state of grace.


Diotrephes. You may mistake those Assemblers, and the Elders of the
Congregational Churches; I find them declare in the Chapter of Free Will (chapter
9. n. 3.) That a natural man being altogether averse from that (spiritual) good
(accompanying salvation) and dead in sin, is not able by his own strength to
convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto. Observe, they say, he cannot
prepare himself by his own strength; but if common grace be added to their own
strength, I suppose they will not deny, but by the accession of such
A^xiliaries, a man may dispose himself for conversion; for tha^ common grace is
preparatory to s^ec^al, is so commonly held by Protestants (especially
practical Divines) and so plain in Scripture and Reason, that I shall not
trouble you with many words about it.

1. He that ^ eth Gods appointed means as well as he can, is more disposed f^r
the blessing of those means, than the wilful Mr. Baxter.
despiser, or neglecter of them.

2. He that is nearer Christ, is more disposed to come to him by faith, than he
that is at a further distance.

3. He that does not so much resist the Spirit, but with some seriousness
beggeth for the Spirit, and for saving grace, is better disposed for it, *than
such as obstinately resist and sc^^n it. Of saving faith. page 39.


Animalis. Sir, I have those two Assemblies against you: For mark their Reason
why they say, the works of an unregenerate man are sinful, and cannot please
God, nor make him meet to receive grace from God; their Reason is, not because
those works are wrought by his own strength, and not by comms^ grace; but
because they proceed not from a heart purified by faith.

2. The Synod of Dort is clear against you; for they say, All men are untoward
to all good tending to salvation, forward to evil; and neither will nor can
(without the Holy Ghost regenerating them) set strait their own crooked nature;
no nor so much as dispose themselves to the mending of it; Chap. 3. and 4. Art.
3. They do not say, men cannot dispose themselves by their own strength without
common grace, to the amending of their crooked nature; but they cannot dispose
themselves to it, without the Holy Ghost regenerating them.


Diotrephes. But you should consider withal, what those Divines add in their
16th. Arti^l, where they say [As by the fall, man ceased not to be man, end^ed
with understanding and will; nor did sin, spreading it self through all
mankind, abolish nature with us, but corrupted and spiritually slew it; in like
manner this regenerating grace of God works not upon men as if they were
stocks and stones.]


Animalis. It Is true, they say, Grace does not work upon men as stocks and
stones, because it finds them endued with a will and understanding; but if you
observe it, they tell us also, that that will and understanding do contribute
as little to the work, as if God should of stones raise up children unto
Abraham; therefore they compare our Regeneration to that powerful work of God,
whereby he gives being to this our natural life; (ib. Article 17.) Now in
conferring our natural life, God imposes no duty upon us toward the
possession of it; and it is absurd, and a contradiction to say, we should
address our selves by any way of preparation or disposition, to the production
of our own being. God indeed makes a providential use of our parents; but they
say, Marriages are made in heaven, and the whole process of the affair, in
order to our natural birth, is extrinsecal to us; and because it is impossible
we should either resist or further it, therefore it is no part of our duty to
regard it: So we are taught also to believe concerning our Regeneration, or new
birth; for when God works true conversion in the El^ct, He provideth that the
Gospel may be outwardly preacked to them, and powerfully inlightneth their
minds by the Holy Ghost, that they may understand aright, and judge of the
things of the Spirit of God; and not only so, but by the effica^y of the same
regenerating Spirit, he also pier^^th into the most inward parts of man; whose
heart being close shut up, he open^th it; being hard, ^e ^oftneth it; being
uncircumcised, he circumciseth it; and as for the will, he i^f^seth new
qualities into it, and makes it of a dead heart lively, of an evil good. ib.
Art. 11. and Art. 14. God does not only give a power of believing, and then
expect the consent or act of believing from the will of man; but he works the
willingness and act it self of belief; and this he works in nobis, sine
^obis; in us, without us, [Art. 12.] Irresistibly by his Omnipotent strength:
[Reject. 8.] So that this operation, for the mightiness thereof, is not
inf^riour to the Creation of the World, or raising up the dead. (ib. Artic.
12.] And therefore all the actual resistance a man can or does make, cannot
prevail to the defeating of his own Regeneration: [ibid. Reject. 8.] This Sir,
is the express Doctrine of the Synod of Dort; in submission and reverence to
whose Determination, I must conclude, That this regenerating grace of the Hely
Ghost comes so freely, that I should but disparage its freedom, in being at any
cost or charge to make provision for it; for the Holy Ghost brings his own
entertainment, and having a power Sovereign and Paramount, he will wheresoever
he comes, make his own welcome.


Diotrephes. Well! whatever be the opinions of that Syno^, and the Assembly at
Westminster, and the Messengers of the Congregational Churches, in their
meeting at the Savoy; I am very well satisfied that common grace is truly
preparative and dispositive to saving grace; not as one degree of the same
species in morality disposes to another degree (for this we are agreed
against.) But, 1. As it is a less unpreparedness and undisposedness Mr. Baxter.
than a worse estate. 2. As it removes many and great impediments. 3. As it is
a use of the means appointed by God for obtaining his saving grace. 4. As it is
in tantum, or secundum quid, a thing pleasing to God, and loved by him; yea,
and as he loves such as have it, more than those that are without it, with the
love of compl^cency and acceptance, so as it is a state much nearer Christ,
than other men's of obstinate wickedness are in; in these five respects I think
it prepares and disposes to saving grace. [Of saving faith. p. 45. and 46.


Animalis. Sir, what are your own Reasons, though assisted by the concurrent
judgment of some Protestant Divines? I say, what are they that they should turn
the scale against the de^isions of a Synod Mr. Baxter's Pref. Sect. 11.
, of so many truly learned and worthy men, and an Assembly, and the Declaration
of so many Congregational Churches? But to gratify your opinion and zeal, I
shall in this, subscribe to your Reasons, and those alleged by some of the
Divines of the forementioned Synod, rather than pay a blind obedience to the
others naked votes, and proofl^ss Propositions. I pray what advantage will you
make of this concession?


Diotrephes. By this means I shall be able to demonstrate, that all the
unconverted are inex^^sable; and as their impe^itency and unbeli^f are wilful,
so their damnation also is just.


Animalis. That will be some advantage to your Ministry indeed, if you can make
it good; but how can you make that evident to us?


Dio^rephes. I remember Christ has assured me, that of the many that are
called, few are chosen; and that most men perish, Mr. Baxter*
for all the mercy that is in God, and for all that Christ has done and
suffered, and f^r all the grace that is offered them in the Gospel; and I
consider the Reason, even because they will not receive this grace, nor
entertain Christ and the mercy of God, as it is offered to them. Treat. of
Convers. page 2.


Animalis. I pray Sir, were those few chosen, because they did receive this
grace, and entertain Christ and the mercy of God, as it was offered to them
when they were called? and was the ref^s^l of grace, and the non-reception of
Christ and mercy, the Reason of their Non-election, who do finally perish?


Dio^rephes. I do not affirm it.


Animalis. You cannot, unless you turn Remonstr^nt; according to your
principles, Election is the Fountain of all saving grace, and Non-election the
denial of it. How then will you (as you have undertaken to do) render the
unconverted inexcusable, and their imp^nit^n^y wilful, and consequently their
damnation just; and all upon this account, because common grace is preparative
and dispositive to special grace?


D^o^rephes. Why? their impenitency is wilf^l, and therefore in x^^^able; and
their damnation just, because they receive the grace of God in vain.


Animalis. How is this possible, to speak properly? for what grace is it you
mean? If you mean saving grace (which is called eff^ctual) then if this may be
received in vain, it is resistible; and this being peculiar to the Elect, if
they have none but resistible grace to work upon them, they may receive it in
vain, and may finally perish: But I am taught otherwise (by one of your Mr.
Baxter^
persuasion, when you keep to your principles, who says) That God is pleased
by effectual grace to draw the Elect to his Son, and make the Gospel successful
to their Conversion, insup^r^bly teaching and charging them by his Spirit, and
causing them to repent, and believe in Christ, and to perform the conditions of
his promises; that love that brought the Lord on Earth, that clothed him with
flesh, that lifted him up upon the Cross, does stream forth in his season into
the hearts of his Elect, and touches them with a changing power, and wins
them to his Father and himself, and droppeth into them those heavenly
principles, which will grow up in them to everlasting life. [Directions to
prevent Miscar. in Convers. page 247.] So that this saving grace is not only
irresistible, but there is also the good hour (as the Interpreter of those
Canons Synod. Drodr. Cap. 1. Ar. 16. So says Dr. Twiss. Ubi supra. p. 116.
calls it) or (as Mr. Baxter has it) his season set, wherein it shall be
insuperably streamed into the hearts of the Elect; and they can be converted
neither sooner nor later, than this good hour or season; and therefore to say
this grace is received in vain, is erron^ous, and you ought to upbraid none
with it.


Diotrephes. But the common grace may be received in vain; and because that is
preparative and dispositive to special saving grace; therefore the want of
special grace, and the imp^nitency which continues through want thereof, are
both wilful, and the damnation just, that does attend upon th^e privations.


Animalis. Sir, before you can charge any man that he has received common
grace in vain, you must define the nature, measure, and degrees of its energy
and operation; it is unreasonable to expect a thing should act above the sp^ear
of its activity; will you expect a Watch should go four and twenty hours, when
the spring was made to go but twelve? Or that a Gun should carry a thousand
yards, when the charge that is given it, will carry but five hundred? If you
think I should arrive at a state of holiness and acceptance with God, by the
help of common grace alone, you expect I should fly an Eagles pitch with Batts
wings.


Diotrephes. I must tell you, God will justly require more than he gives; that
is, the improvement of his gifts, as Mat. 25. Mr. Baxter.
14. to the 30. shows: He gave Adam but a power to persevere, and not actual
perseverance; yet did he justly punish him for want of the act; even for not
using by his own will, the power which he had given him. Ser. of Judgment. Ans.
to Exc. 30. p. 249.


Animalis. And I confess this was most justly; for if God gives a man the
power, it then becomes his own duty (under Gods concurse and influences) to act
that power; and God does not more than what is equal, having disbursed his
Talent's, and allowed time and opportunity to improve them, if he requires at
the day of account, that they be returned with interest: But Sir, if God
commits to my trust and stewardship but talents of silver, sure his justice
cannot expect that I should turn them into gold; he knows his poor creature
has no Philosophers stone of such virtue; he expects but an improvement in the
same kind of talents. Common grace you know, and teach, does specifically
differ from regenerating or saving grace: And you may as reasonably expect,
that a man should beget an Angel, as that he should turn common grace into
Regeneration. To this purpose we have the judgment of the Belgic Professors
[inserted amongst the acts of the Synod of Dort, par. 3. page 154. th^s. 4.]
Quanquam habenti seu donis recte utenti, dabitur corundem incrementum: non
propterea tamen Deus post lapsum iis, qui naturalibus imaginis Dei reliquiis,
recte fuerint usi, supernaturalem ac salvisica^ gratiam largi^tur; quia gratia
haec non secundnm opera, sed secundum merum ac liberum Dei beneplacitum
confertur: That is, Although to him that has shall be given; an increase of
the same gifts shall be administered to him that makes a right use of them; yet
notwithstanding after the fall, God will not bestow supernatural and saving
grace upon those that use the natural relics of Gods Image a^ight; because
this grace is not conferred according to works, but according to the mere and
free beneplaciture of God. And what these say of the relics of Gods Image,
others of them say of all common grace, that it cannot be improved to saving
grace; because the difference (say they) is no less than specifical.


Diotrephes. I do not think that this same commong grace is the very thing that
is turned by any improvement of ours, or elevation of the Spirit into saving
grace. Of saving faith. p. 46. and p. 96. Common gifts are not work't up to be
special Mr. Baxter.
grace; one species is not turned into another: This is true; Imperfection is
not turned materially into perfection; the dawning of the day is not materially
turned into the greater light at Noon; but a greater light superveneth, and is
added to the less. I say therefore, It is long of your self, if God did not
give you grace to believe; it was, because you wilfully refused some
preparatory grace! Christ found you at a great distance from him, and he gave
you grace sufficient to have brought you nearer to him than you were; you had
grace sufficient to have made you better than you were, and restrained many
sins, and brought you to the means, when you turned your back upon them: Though
this were not sufficient to cause you to believe, it was sufficient to have
brought you nearer to believing; and through your own wilfulness became not
effectual; even as Adam had sufficient grace to have stood, which was not
effectual; so that you had not only Christ offered to you, if you would accept
him; but you had daily and precious helps and means to have cured your will,
and caused you to accept him; for neglect of which, and so for not believing,
and for all your other sins, you justly perish. Ser. of Judgment. A^s. to 30.
Exc. mihi. page 249, 250.


Animalis. Sir, you dare not affirm that I am restored to that liberty of will
that Adam had before the Fall Primo homini datum est posse perseverare, non
autem perseverare. Aug. de Cor. and great. c. 11. Vult Aug. Primum homin^m
habuisse gratiam sufficientem ad actu perseverandum, non tamen actu
perseverasse, idqu^ non ex defectu ipsius gratiae, sed ex mera homiuis
liberate, qui auxilio dato uti noluit. Pet. a S. Joseph. Id. Spec^. lib. 4.
cap. 7. Resol. 2.
; nor that the grace which is vouchsafed to me, is as sufficient to enable me
to rise, as his was to enable him to stand.

2. That I have Christ offered, I do most thankfully acknowledge; but whether
th^se daily and precious helps and means (not yet administered in the season or
good hour) were sufficient to cure my will, and cause me to accept Christ, is
doubtful; that they are not so to all in their unregenerate condition will
appear anon.

3. Whether I have received grace sufficient to make me better, is a question.
They who maintain, that man can do no more good, nor omit more evil than he
does, must and will deny it.

Lastly, Whether I have refused any preparatory grace (though that might fall
into the same account with the former, yet I add) that is more than you are
privy to; and therefore I pray be not so uncharitable in your censures: And now
give me leave to ask you a question or two.

First, Whether it be possible to improve that preparatory grace to the height?
if it be not possible, that impossibility will so far excuse the
non-improvement; but if it be possible to improve it to the full height, which
perhaps may be granted, because a man can do what he can do; and sure whatever
God may do in justice, yet in goodness he will require nothing above our
abilities.

Then my second question is upon supposition, that I do not refuse, but
embrace, and to the utmost of my power improve that preparatory grace that is
offered me; whether in that case you have any Commission to warrant me, that
God will confer his saving grace upon me?


Diotrephes. I am satisfied, That God has not entered into Covenant or promise
with any unregenerate man to give him saving Mr. Baxter.
grace, upon any condition to be performed without it. Of saving faith. page 46.


Animalis. Then, as was said before, he has no promise to make his prayer for
saving grace, to become a prayer of faith in this particular; but though there
be no promise, yet happily these preparatory dispositions (as hearing the Word,
etc.) have a certain and infallible connection with salvation, and that may be
some encouragement.


Diotrephes. No, we do not say they have; for that affirmation denies the
power of the Potter over a Non-believer thus qualified, and so sins against the
freedom of the Sovereignty of God and Christ, in making God a debtor of mercy
before his time. Norton. Orthodox. Evangelist. page 186. f. with 190. M.


Animalis. While you are so careful to reserve to the Almighty a power to damn
even poor humbled and prepared sinners; you seem to be more tender of his
Sovereignty, than of his Goodness, Mercy or Justice: But to let this pass; I
pray upon these grounds what encouragements can you find to incite the
unregenerate to the improvement of preparatory grace?


Diotrephes. God has commanded him to use certain means to obtain saving
grace, and to avoid the resistance and hindrances; Mr. Baxter.
and a very command to use such means as means, is a strongly encouraging
intima im, that God will not deny men the end and blessing, that use the means
as well as they can; for it is certain that he appoints no means in vain. Of
saving faith page 46.


Animalis. But Sir, now you have brought me thus far, the great and stumbling
objection is behind still; for Mr. Norton tells us, that these preparatory
works are really to none but the Elect only Orthod. Evang. p. 164.
; as for the Reprobates, all the water of life runs quite besides their Mill;
all gifts whatsoever are unprofitable to them; so says Martinius, one of the
most moderate of the Synod of Dort. [De Morte Christi pro soli^ Electis. These.
4. and 5. Act. Syn. Dord. par. 2. p. 107. By this it is evident, that your
daily and precious helps and means to cure the wills of the unregenerate, and
cause them to accept of Christ, are al^ogether unsufficient, whatever you
pretend to the contrary. And this as great a Clerk Mr.* Baxter. in his account
of persever. page 14.
as your self, was very sensible of, when he peremptorily denies, that the
Rep^^bates may be sanctified; and consonantly the Congregational Churches do
declare ingenuously In their Declarat. chapter 10. n. 4. p. 8, 9. Dr. Twiss. ubi
supra. page 122, etc.
, That they who are not e^ected, although they may be called by the Ministry of
the Word, and may have some common op^rations of the Spirit, yet not being
^ffectu^lly drawn by the Father, they neither do, nor can come unto Christ, and
therefore cannot be saved.


Diotrephes. However, they are damned for contemning Gods Word, and not
harkening to his gracious admonitions; it is true, they could do no otherwise;
but what impotency is Mr. Baxter delivers himself almost in the very same words.
this? Is it anywhere else than in their wills? It Is not a natural, but a moral
impotency; were they willing to hearken ( and come to Christ) but could not,
then indeed their impotency were excusable; but they please themselves in their
own, and in their obstinate courses; and if they would do other wise, I make no
question, but that they should have no more cause to compl^in of their
impotency to do that good which they would do, than the servants of God have,
yea, and holy Paul himself h^d. -- Do they deplore this (their) impotency? Does
the consideration hereof humble them? Nay, rather they delight in it, as the
Prophet notes, J^r. 6. 10. Their ears are uncircumcised ears, and they cannot
hearken; behold the Word of God is as a reproach unto them. Thus far Dr. Twiss.


Animalis. That men may accustom themselves to a course of carnality, till
they arrive at such a state of impiety and obduration, I make no question; but
all are not of that temper: There are some, who are as far abased in the
feeling of their sin and misery, and humbled by attrition, and cry out of their
sin and Mr. Baxter of sav. says. page 43. 44.
folly, and day and night do beg for grace and mercy; as common grace will
carry them to do. They like the word and ways of God, and think his servants
the best and happiest men, and have many a wish that they were such themselves,
and that avoid as much of gross and wilful sinning, and continue as much in
hearing, reading the Word, enquiring, consideration, as common grace may bring
them to do; and have as much belief of the Gospel, and as much desire after
Christ and holiness, and heaven, and as much love to God and the Redeemer, and
the Saints, as common grace can lead them to: And withal, that have a
knowledge that yet they are short of true Christianity, or at least are much
afraid of it; and therefore are under a prudent impatiency, till saving grace
comes in, and the Spirit have sealed them up to the day of Redemption, and are
crying out, What shall we do to be saved? Now I demand, whether you have any
promise that assures their interest in saving grace to such as are thus
disposed for it?


Diotrephes. I told you already that I am satisfied, that God has not entered
into Covenant or promise with any unregenerate Mr. Baxter. (...). page 46.
man to give him saving grace upon any condition to be performed without it.
However I am confident, that no man can stand out and say, I did the best that
ever I could to obtain saving grace, and yet went without it, because God would
not give it me.


Animalis. (If that Author does not contradict himself, yet) they that hold a
man can do no more good than he does, will confront your confidence; and as far
as I can yet apprehend, all they who think that God does predetermine the will,
and produce every act, and every real positive modification, must be of that
opinion; but Sir, may not all the Reprobates say, They go without saving grace,
because God would not give it them? I pray what is negative reprobation, or
preterition? Is it not voluntas de non concedend^ poenitentia and side? Gods
will to deny grace sufficient and necessary unto faith and repentance? Has not
the Synod of Dort Cap. 1. Reject. 8.
concluded, That God decreed to leave all the Non-elect in the fall of Adam,
and common state of sin and damnation, and to pass them over in the
communication of grace necessary unto faith and conversion! May I not add, that
the Reprobates may say, I went without saving grace, because God could not
bestow it upon me? for his hands were tied up by an immutable Decree to the
contraty before ever I had breath or being; and therefore (to be constant, that
is, to be himself) he could not have mercy upon me though he would.


Diotrephes. But you must know the Rules amongst Divines is, [ Praedestinatio
nihil ponit in praedestinato] Gods Decrees are acts immanent in himself, and
make no change in the Creature.


Animalis. You may know too that those Divines do say Mr. Norton his Orthod.
Evang. page 126.
also, That Gods Decree is the Rule of his efficiency; and although his In e^t
or Decr^e be an immanent work, and causes no alte^ation in the Creature; yet
the execution of that Intent and Decree, is a transient work, and causes what
alteration God pleases to effect. Now by Gods Decree, he has determined to
deny unto the Reprobates grace sufficient and n^cessary to salvation; and
consequently he is, according to that Doctrine, Defic^ens in necessariis.
Hereupon Dr. Twiss does confess, That though a man would, he cannot shun his
damnation; Ubi supra. p. 74.
and yet, says he, We do not like this comparison, that a man can no more
abstain from sin than shun his damnation. He professes he does not like the
comparison; and yet he maintains the Doctrine, as it appears from hence: (1.)
In that he says, God fore-knows nothing but what he has Decreed; and (2.) In
that he makes Gods permission efficacious in the most horrid sins that ever
were committed Ib. p. 18, 19, 20, 49, 66, 67, 71, 90.
; from which two Assertions it will follow, That a man can no more shun sin,
than his damnation.

So that I must freely acknowledge, I can see no truth in that Doctrine of Mr.
Baxters In his Directions to prevent Miscar. in Conversion. p. 265.
, where we are told even of the Reprobates (for he speaks of the ungodly, as
contradistinguished to those certain persons so given to Christ, as that they
shall be infall^bly drawn to believe) That if they will use the means appointed
(for the begetting faith and repen^ance) They have v^ry much encouragement from
God; both 1. In the nature of the means which are fitted to their ends, and are
mighty to bring down all oppositions; and 2. In the commands and institution of
God; whose wisdom and goodness may easily r^solve us, that he will not appoint
us means in vain, nor set his Creatures on fruitless labors; and 3. Also from
the issue; for no man can stand ^orth and say, Such a one did his best in the
use of means, and yet could not attain the end, but fell short of the grace and
glory of God. But if our Doctrine be calculated right, this is so far from
truth, that it is Cujus contrarium verum est A(...) vero sunt, reprobum esse and
bona opera praestare. Wolleb. Christ. Thcol. lib. 1. cap. 4. in Expll^. Can.
16. page 27.
. Here is no hing all along but matter of insuperable discouragement; both 1.
In the nature of the means, which being moral and resistible, is not fitted to
the production of an irresistible, supernatural effect; and 2. In the commands
and institution of God; whose wisdom and goodness may easily resolve us, that
he will not appoint his Creatures means, nor exact their fruitless labor in
the use of that means, for the attainment of one end, when he has immutably
destined them to another; and 3. Also from the issue; for if a man does perform
his best, and stand forth to allege it, yet he is sure to come short of glory;
for at last, saving grace is made a propriety to a certain ^ul^'d-out number of
persons: Hence Dr. Twiss concludes, That were a man so exact both in natural
morality, and in an outward conformity to the means of Ubi supra. p. 48*
grace, as not to fail in any particular, as he has power to perform any
particular h^reof naturally; in this case (he says) if there were any such, he
should be in the same case with those that are guilty of no sin, but sin
Original, which yet the Word of God (says he) teaches us to be sufficient to
make all men to be born children of wrath. I beseech you therefore to forbear
your upbraiding me for my impenitency and non-conversior* and you may suspend
your directions and exh^^tations too, to promote the work of my new birth; for
if I be of the Elect, God will infuse the very act of belief, as well as the
power of believing into me, and will produce Synod. Drodra^.
my Regeneration in me, without me, by his omnipotent strength, so that it
shall not be in my power to hinder it; and if he please to have it done by
means, he will at the good hour appointed, provide that Gospel to be preached
to me, that shall infall^bly effect it. In the mean while, it will be
imp^rtinent and fruitless to be solicitous, or consu^t about it. On the other
side, if I be none of that number, all the industry I can use, will not be able
to turn common grace into saving grace; and besides, after all my humiliation,
care and travel, Almi^h^y God by his immutable and eternal Decree, has as well
debarred himself of a power to give, as me of a power to receive, that grace
that does accompany salvation. If you can solve this Objection, I shall be glad
to entertain another Conference with you; In the mean while I shall take leave,
and have recourse to my Couns^llor at Law, who, I hope, will not leave me so
entangled; but give me better satisfaction about my Purchase on Earth, than you
have done about my Portion in Heaven.


THE SYLLOGISM.
THAT Doctrine which makes salvation not only uncertain, but also impossible to
the greatest number of souls, how diligent soever to obtain it, That Doctrine
is unserviceable to the interest of souls, unpracticable in the exercise of the
Ministerial Function, and not according to godliness.

The Doctrine of the Calvinists, as well as that of the more moderate
Sublapsarians, as that of the more rigid Sublapsarians, does make salvation not
only uncertain, but also impossible, to the greatest number of souls, how
diligent soever to obtain it. Therefore

The Doctrine of the Calvinists, etc. is unserviceable to the interest of
souls, unpracticable in the exercise of the Ministerial Function, and not
according to godliness.

The Major is evident, because it highly concerns the Ministerial Function, and
the power of godliness, and the interest of souls, to have some assurance that
salvation is possible to all such (at least) as are diligent to obtain it; for
Martinius (at the Synod of Dort) concludes, That the command and promise of the
Gospel are disanull'd (which evacuates the Ministerial Function, and the power
of godliness) if there be not such a sufficiency of Redemption, as is (really)
sufficient for all (and that) according to the will and intention of God and
Christ; for (says he) Quomodo, ex beneficio sufficient quidem, at mihi non
destinato per veram intentionem, deducetur necessitas credendi, quod illud ad
me pertineat? De Morte Christi pro omnibus. These. 8, 9, 10. Inter Acta Syn.
Not. Dordr. par. 2. page (mihi) 105.

The Minor is apparent from the whole Discourse of this second Dialogue.

Colasterion.
Matthew. 23. 13. Luke 11. 52. Ye shut up the Kingdom of heaven against men, and
have taken away the key of knowledge; and them that were entering in, ye
hindered. Piscator. Trip. Resp. ad Amic. C. U. Duplic. cap. 7. Other proofs of
the Minor.
Non procurat Deus illis omnibus media salutis sufficienter, quorum
Conversionem in S. literis expectare dicitur. Item.

Deus omnibus quidem vocatis gratiam and salutem foris in verbo offert; non
tamen animo ipsos omnes convertendi. Cap. 4. Item.

Per Deum stat, quo minus omnes vocati credant and resipiscant, h. e. per
defectum gratiae sufficientis. ibid.

Marlorat. in Joan. 15. 2. Stat igitur firma sententia, quemcunque Deus ante
conditum orbem elegerit, eum non posse p^rire: quem vero rejecerit, eum non
posse salvari, etiamsi omnia sanctorum opera fecerit; usque ad^o irretractablis
est sententia. Jacob. Triglandius. (A Synodist.) In Defens. Doctrinae and
Honoris Eccles. Ref^r. and Doctor. Haec Dei sententia adeo firma est and
immutabilis, qua rejicit reprobos, ut impossible sit eos salvari, etiamsi
omnia sanctorum opera fecerint: Ideoque verum non est, eos qui culpa sua
pereunt, per gratiam potuisse salvari, si laborem obedientiae salutari gratiae
non subtraxissent. Haec ille. THE THIRD DIALOGUE BETWIXT DIOTREPHES and SECURUS.
DIotrephes. Well overtaken Sir; I pray how far are you traveling this way? if
you be for Canterbury, I shall be very glad of your company.


Securus. That is the place I am bound for; and if your occasions lead you
thither, we are well met indeed; for a good Companion is like a Chariot that
carries one along with ease and delight to his journies end: And such advantage
I promise my self in this expedition, whilst the tedicusness of the way is
beguiled by the charms of your acceptable Society add Conversation.


Diotrephes. I am glad you are so pleasant Sir; but if you will make me happy
in the benefit of your Company, I must entreat you not to Ride too much upon
the Spur; we shall have day enough to accomplish our Journey; why therefore
should we Tire our Selves and our Horses to no purpose?


Securus. I beseech you excuse me Sir, I Ride at the easiest Rate the
importance of my Affairs will allow of; and although a slower pace may very
well comply with the indifferency of an Arbitrary Visit (which I presume to be
the design you are now engaged upon) yet if you consider how great a vivacity
and cheerfulness of spirit is stirred up even amongst brute Creatures by
Company; and much more amongst Men, where the benefit is improved by the
reciprocation of Discourse; I persuade my self you are so prudent, you will
choose rather to mend your Pace, that we may Troop on together, than disband
your self, and withdraw into the uncomfortable condition of a solitary
Traveller.


Diotrephes. Sir, I must submit my sense and judgment to the power of your
Reason: But Sir, give me leave (for we should make a spiritual use of all
occurrences we meet with) give me leave therefore to unfold my wishes to you,
and the earnest desire of my soul; which is, That we were all most eager in the
pursuance of those Concerns which are really of most importance to us.


Securus. What Concerns do you mean?


Diotrephes. The great Concerns of our Souls; the Concerns of Eternity; that we
would post more hastily to Heaven, than after the World.


Securus. I am jealous Sir, that in the way you speak of, there are a great
many who make more haste than good speed; their zeal out-runs their knowledge
and discretion.


Diotrephes. We must not discourage zeal for Gods Cause, and Gods glory; and
things should be esteemed and pursued according to their excellency: Is not the
soul incomparably more precious than the World? And is not Heaven infinitely of
more value than Earth? Or can we do too much for God, who has done so much for
us?


Securus. Sir, we know God is so freely bountiful, he does not set his goodness
out to sale before his Creatures. Besides it is evident, men may be so
passionate and eager, that they may run down the Laws and Lives of men that
stand in the way of their pretended zeal; and yet (as we say) they may be early
up, and never the near; they may slatter and please themselves in such things
as God is not pleased in at all. The time will come ('it was one of the
predictions of our Savior) when they that kill you, will think they do God
service. Sometimes this zeal miscarries; the child is come to the Birth, and
there is no strength to bring forth; and then the furious Zelot, making himself
obnoxious to the Law and Power of the Civil Magistrate, brings upon himself a
swift destruction, and so perishes with his burden. Hereupon the Preacher
gives us sober advice, Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self
over-wise, why should thou destroy thy self? Eccles. 7. 16.



Diotrephes. Rash men, it is true, may over-shoot themselves: but the Apostle
does commend zeal and fervency of Spirit in Gods service; it is good (says he)
to be zealously affected always in a good matter; and he exhorts the Romans,
to Gal. 4. 18.
be fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. Romans 12. 11.



Securus. I shall not need to tell you that other Copies read it, not serving
the Lord, but serving the time; and in this, you have no reason to complain of
men's slothfulness; but I am afraid most of that which is called fervency of
Spirit in Gods service, are but heats of the flesh; such I am sure are hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
Gal. 5. 20, 21. (...).
etc. And yet I do not deny, but as the Apostle says, it is good to be
zealously affected in a good matter: But as he says of faith; [ Have thou
faith? have it to thy self before God:] So I say of zeal; Have thou zeal? have
it to thy self before God; Romans 14. 22.
and let it not break out to set thy Neighbors house on fire; for God has no
need of thy service to that purpose.


Diotrephes. Sir, I am sorry you should so much forget how odious luke-warmness
is to Almighty God; you may find this by that expression which carries along so
much detestation with it against the Angel of the Church of Laodicea; I know
thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot, I would thou were cold or hot;
so then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will Rev. 3.
15, 16.
spue thee out of my mouth. A father is exceeding angry when he wishes his
child cold in the mouth; yet God does so here by the Laodiceans: He wishes
them cold in the mouth (as I may say) rather than lukewarm; and he threatens
to spue them out of his mouth; he is not able to digest those that are of that
temper; they offend his soul, and make his stomach recoyle, and his heart rise
against them; and when he has once spued them out, certainly his purity is
such, he will not return to resume this loathsome vomit.


Securus. I suppose Sir, (being a Divine as I conceive) you cannot be ignorant,
that such threatenings concern none but the Non-elect; at least, they can
damnifie and endanger none else: As for those persons whom God has chosen out
to be Vessels of mercy, Mr. Baxter. In the Saints rest. Part. 3. Sect. 26
and has given them the cream and quintessence of his blessings, when the rest
of the World are passed by, and put off with common and temporary, and
left hand mercies; they have the blood of Christ given them, and the Spirit for
Sanctification, Consolation, and Preservation; and the pardon of sins, and the
adoption to sonship, and the guard of Angels, and the mediation of the Son of
God, and the special unchangeable love of the Father, and the promise and seal
of everlasting rest. These are engraven so deep upon his heart from all
Eternity, he can never spue them out of his mouth. The foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his. I 2 Timothy
2. 19.
hope your judgment is settled upon better principles, than to think the Elect
can fall away.


Diotrephes. I know Sir, the El^ct cannot fall from grace; those threatenings we
say, do not imply, that they are in any such danger; but these threats are used
as a means to preserve them from falling, by quickening them up to holy duties;
and those peculiar privileges (which you have now reckoned up) that belong to
the Elect, are so many engagements upon them to abound in the work of the Lord,
and show them why they above all men should be laborious for heaven; and that
there is a great deal of Mr. Baxter.
reason, that though all the World besides do sit still, and be careless, yet
they should abhor that laziness and negligence, and should lay out all their
strength on the work of God: And this is the use made of that Doctrine in the
place where you found it, Saints Rest. Par. 3. Sect. 26. p. 127. Edit. 3.


Securus. But good Sir, give me leave to ask you for my better satisfaction,
How you can prove this convincingly to be their duty.


Diotrephes. Mr. Baxter. in his Directions to prevent Miscar. in Convers. page
374, etc.
If a Feast be prepared and spread before them, a good stomach will not stand
to ask; How can you prove it my duty to eat? but perhaps the sick that loath
it, may do so: If the Cup be before the Drunkard, he does not stand on those
terms [How do you prove it my duty now to drink this Cup, and the other Cup?]
No, if he might have but leave, he would drink on, without any questioning
whether it be a duty: If the Gamester, or the Whoremonger, might be but sure
that he should 'scape the punishment, he would never stick at the want of a
precept; and ask, Is it my duty? If there were but a gift of twenty pound a
man, to be given to all the poor of the Town; yea, and to all the people in
general, I do not think I should meet with many people in the Town that would
draw back and say, What Word of God commands me to take it? Or how can you
prove that it is my duty? And why is all this? but because they have an inward
love to the thing; and love will carry a man to that which seems good for him
without any command or threatening. Directions to prevent miscarrying in
Conversion. page 373, 374.


Securus. I beseech you Sir, be not transported into passion at my Discourse
with you; for that will as little benefit me, as become your self; and 'twill
make our Conversation become a burden, which we entertained to another far
different end, [for a mutual Levamen, and Solace in our Travel) give me leave
to demand of you for my better Information, Would you have men do things in
order to Gods service, hand over head? Is such an implicit faith, and blind
obedience commendable, and to be embraced, as carries them on in a credulous
prosecution of that work, which they have no assurance to be their duty? We are
sure it cannot be acceptable unto God, if it be not a good work; and a good
work it cannot be, if it be not of Gods prescription; for so the Assmbly (in
their Confession Chap. 16. n. 1
, and the Congregational Churches in their late Declaration) have determined,
That good works are only such as God has commanded in his holy Word, and not
such as without the warrant thereof are devised by men out of blind zeal, or
any pretense of good intention: And a very Reverend Assembler, in that
threefold Diatribe Triplex. page 44.
Cord of his against Dr. Hammond, tell us, That the sum and scope of the second
Commandment in the affirmative part, being this; God must be worshipped with
his own prescribed worship; and in the negative And Mr. Baxter seems to be of
this mind toc. Vbi supra. p. 377.
part to forbid all devised worship of God by the wit or will of man, the very
name (he says) of will ( of man) put to worship of God, as opposed to the will
of God, the only Rule of worship, is as a brand in the forehead of it, to
characterize it, as condemnable in all. Would you against the concurrent
suffrages of these Divines, tempt men to will worship? and inflame them to be
zealous in the performance of such works as they are not satisfied to be part
of their duty! What shall they say to the Lord, when he comes to check them for
these oblations of their blind zeal? saying, Who has required these things at
your hands? In short therefore, seeing such as play the Voluntier's in Gods
service, find so little acceptance from him, it is a madness in any man to
trouble himself about any spiritual performances, till he finds sufficient
grounds to convince him, that God prescribes and requires them as conditions
subordinated to his salvation. If they be not of faith, they are sin, Romans 14.
23.


Diotrephes. Why I wonder Sir you can find none of these, when God has chosen
Faith with the fruits thereof [a diligent prosecution of holy duties] to be
such conditions; and accordingly you may find them indispensably required in
every page of the Holy Ghost.


Securus. Whatever be the judgment of your private spirit, the Synod of Dort
has resolved otherwise, and their Authority I hope you will yield to; and that
Authority has rejected it Cap. 1. de Divina praedest, Reject. 3.
as a pernicious Error, That the good pleasure and purpose of God from among
all possible conditions, or out of the (order, or) rank of all things did
choose as a condition unto salvation, the act of faith in it self ignoble, and
the imperfect obedience of faith, and was graciously pleased to repute it for
perfect obedience, and account it worthy of the reward of everlasting life.


Diotrephes. I presume, the Smod intended to explode it as an Error, that
there was [ no election of persons, but of qualities] and methinks their words
seem to incline toward this sense; for they reject (in that Article) the
Errors of those who teach, That the good pleasure and purpose of God, whereof
the Scripture makes mention in the Doctrine of Election, does not consist
herein, that God did elect some certain men rather than others, but in this,
viz. that among all possible conditions, God did choose the act and obedience
of faith as a condition unto salvation, etc.


Securus. If this were all they aimed at in that Rejection [to reject it as an
Error in those that taught there was no Election of persons, but of things]
they rejected just nothing; for it was an Error so far from troubling the
Belgic Churches, that it was never taught by any man amongst them; that which
they rejected therefore, was this, That faith, and the obedience of faith were
chosen by Almighty God as a condition unto salvation; and the following proof
makes it evident; For by this pernicious Error (they add) the good pleasure of
God, and merit of Christ is weakened; and that of the Ap^stle is out-faced as
untrue, 2 Timothy 1. 9. God has called us with a holy calling, not according to
our works, but according to his purpose and grace, which was given to us
through Christ Jesus before the World began.


Diotrephes. I will not spend time to vindicate the sense of the Synod in that
Article of Rejection; but this is the plain truth in few and easy words (if I
am not mistaken) That [ Faith, which is an effectual acceptance of, and
affiance in Christ, as Christ, was chosen and ordained by God the condition of
justification and Mr. Baxter.
life. -- By this faith (so constituted the condition) we are actually
justified as it is the performed condition of Gods promise. Disput. of Justific.
p. 312. To the same sense the British Divines delivered their Suffrage at the
Synod, in these words, Non negamus esse ejusmodi beneplacitum Dei in Evangelio
patefact^m, q^o statuit fidem eligere in conditionem conf^rendae salutis: id
est, quo actualem salutis adeptionem, saltem respectu adultorum, ex fidei
praecedentis condition suspensam esse voluit. We do not deny (say they) such a
good pleasure of God to be revealed in the Gospel, whereby he determined to
choose faith for the condition of conferring salvation; that is, whereby he
would have the actual obtaining of salvation, at least in respect of the Adult,
suspended upon the condition of foregoing faith; and this is that joyful and
salutary tidings that is to be promulgated in the Name of Christ among all
Nations. Thus those Divines.


Securus. Methinks this is repugnant to that inference of the Apostle; So then,
it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that sh^weth
mercy. Si divinae misericordiae exerendae, seu exertae causa sola sit liberrima
Dei voluntas, (says Romans 9. 16.
Mr. David Dicson.) If the sole cause of the exertion or egression of the
divine mercy, be the most free will of God, then the Ad locum.
cause thereof is not in the will of man, nor in his good works or actions, but
in God alone. It is not of him that wills, says he; therefore it is not of
the free will of man: It is not of him that runs, says he; therefore it is
not from the actions or endeavors of man, that any man is beloved, elected, or
that he obtains mercy and the blessing; and consequently it depends upon God
alone, who shows mercy. And Deodati his Note upon the place, is this, [
Seeing that the Election is of pure mercy, it cannot be attributed to any will
or endeavor of man.]


Diotrephes. To my apprehension Mr. Baxter's Treat. of Convers. page 295, 296.
, the meaning is not, that our salvation is not in him that wills, or in him
that runs, the Apostle talks of no such thing; but it is about the giving
of the Gospel, or the first special grace to them that had it not. -- For Mr.
Baxter. ib. page 296. (...)
if you ask the reason of men's salvation, it is not given in Scripture barely
from the will of God, but from the faith and obedience of men; for it is an act
of rewarding justice, as well as of paternal love and mercy. And therefore we
must distinguish very warily betwixt the Decree of God, and the execution of
it: Election unto salvation is absolute, it respects no condition or
qualification in the person to be elected; but salvation depends upon the
condition of faith and obedience.


Securus. If unbelievers, disobedient, and rebellious persons be chosen to
salvation, and it be not in Gods power to revoke that Election (as the Hassien
Divines concluded at the De persev^r. Aph. 5. p. 215, par. 2.
Synod at Dort) I can see no necessity of faith and obedience; for if God
chooses us unto salvation, that is, if he wills to have us saved, being
disobedient; what reason is there, why he should not be able to make us
partakers of salvation, being disobedient? Is not Election the Decree of
saving? and does not God execute his Decree for the same reason for which he
made it? If so, why can he not actually save us without faith and obedience, as
well as Decree, or will to save us without them?


Diotrephes. He decrees to save us merely for his good pleasure; but he will
actually save us in a way of justice mingled with mercy; and therefore he has
chosen Ephesians. 1. 4.
us in Christ; now 2 Cor. 5. 17.
he that is in Christ, is a new Crea^ure.


Securus. It seems then that the ex^cution of the Decree is not exactly
conformable to the Decree it self, but contains something else besides it; and
then how is that true of the Apostle, [ Romans 9. 11.
That the purp^se of God according to the Election does stand, not of works,
but of him that calls?] I am afraid you have gotten a tang of the
Remonstrants Doctrine by your expressions Vt enim Electio ad gloriam absoluta,
in Christo facta dicatur, quatenus Christus Deus est unios cum Patre and
Spiritu Sancto, absurdum est: quia^^sic Electio etiam in Spirit^ S. quaten^s
unus cum Patre and Filio De^s est, facta fuerit, quod contra Scripturae stylum
est.
; For can any man be in Christ, but a believer? I am sure none but a b^liev^r
can be a new Creature; in affirming therefore (crudely as you do) that God has
chosen us in Christ; and adding upon it, that [ He that is in Christ, is a new
Creature] you do plainly imply, that the object of Gods Election are the
faithful and sanc^ified; which the Synod at Dort will tell you is a pernicious
Erro^r.

The Bishop of Winchester delivering his judgment about the second Lambeth
Article, as it was amended by the Bishops, and other Divines there; whereas the
Article says, Causa move^s aut efficiens praedestinationis ad vitam non est
praevisio fidei a^t persev^rantiae, aut bonorum operum, aut alius re^, quae
insit per^onis ^^tic. Lamb. p. 13.
praedestinatis, sed sola voluntas beneplaciti Dei. The moving or efficient
cause of predestination unto life, is not the foresight of faith or
perseverance, or good works, or any other thing which is in the persons
predest^nated; but the sole will of Gods good pleasure. Bishop Andrews makes a
Quaere concerning that Particle [ S^^a Voluntas benep^^citi) the sole will of
Gods (...). page 23, 24.
good pleasure] whether it does include Christ, or se^lu^e him; that is,
whether the Act of predestination be a^solute or relative? For my part (says
he) I think it is relative; neither do I think there is any good will of God
toward men; that is, a will, whereby he is well-pleased toward men, but in
his Son, in whom he is well-pleased; nor that any one is predestined either
before, or without re^^ect to, or intuition of Christ: But (as the sacred
Scriptures have it) Christ is ^ore-known in the first place; 1 P. t. 1. 20.
then we in him: Romans 8. 29. Christ predestined, Romans 1. 4. then we by him,
Ephesians. 1. 5. And not we in the first place (as some think) He in the last, and
for us; for we cannot be predestined unto the Adoption of sons, but in the
natural son; nor can we be predestined, that we should be conformable to the
image of the Son, unles^ the Son be first appointed, to whose image we should
be made conformable; hereupon that Bishop would have it added (to that
Article^) [ the good pleasure of G^d in Christ.] And though in King Edward's
Articles (of (...) Articulo cuperem addi, Beneplacitum Dei in Christo. ibid.
1553.) the 17th. Article runs thus, [ Constanter decrevit, eos, quos elegit ex
hominum genere Which words are mistaken by Mr. Be^^anus.
, a mal^dicto and exitio liberare.] Yet in those of Queen Elizabeth's, and King
James', 1616. we find this addition [ In Christo] quos in Christo elegit: And
consonantly hereunto, those Articles of King Charles of blessed Memory,
whereunto He prefixed His Declaration, 1631. do run thus, [ He has constantly
decreed to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of mankind.]

But this you see overthrows absolute election; to avoid which, the Synod
(though it says, elegit in Christo) has established the good pleasure of God
toward sinners on this side, or before Christ's Mediatorship and Reconciliation
Act. Sys. (...) cap. 1. de pr^d. Art. 7. and 9. Christum pro i^^ quos Deus
sum dilexit and ad vitam aeternam elegit, Mortuum esse dicun^. Cap. 2.
Reject. 7. Christus est causa meritoria salutis, sed non causa electionis.
Causa quaerenda est (...) Dei beneplacito, and amore gratuito, qui ordine
antecedit intercessionem filii. P. Molin. Consess. inter Act. Syn. Dord. par.
1. p. 290.
; for Election is resolved by them to be the first benefit, and the fountain of
all the rest, upon which depends the designation of the Mediator himself.


Diotrephes. Sir, I am perfectly of the Synods judgment in this point, however
you mistake me; I do not say Christ is the cause or foundation of the Decree,
but of the things decreed; not of Election, as to be established, but as to be
executed; not of election to be decreed through him, but of salvation to be
obtained by him; he comes under the Decree not antecedently, but consequently;
not as the cause of that love, wherewith God has embraced us unto salvation,
but as a means underlayed to that love; and therefore Christ was not given to
men, that they might be elected by him; but then, when they were elected, he
was given, ut si^e justitiae suae dispendio nos ad gloriam adduceret (as
Sphanhemius Disput. Ina^gur. These. 5.
has it) That God might bring us unto glory, without any detriment unto his
justice.


Securus. You do acknowledge then that God has elected us unto glory without
any regard to faith, or any good work whatsoever in us; and that upon the
intervention of Christ, he may bring us into the possession of that glory,
without any detriment or impeachment of his justice; therefore as I said from
the beginning of our Discourse, there is no need at all of our endeavors after
good works, or after a course of holiness and righteousness.


Diotrephes. Sir, you must not mistake us here; though God do not choose us for
this antecedent reason, because we were hely, yet he chose us to this
cons^quent end, that we should be holy; so the Synod have determined in these
words, [ This said Election was made not upon foresight of faith, and the
obedience of faith, holiness, or of any other good quality, or disposition (as
a cause Cap. 1. Art. 9*
or condition before required in man to be chosen) but unto faith, and the
obedience of faith, holiness, etc. And therefore Election is the fountain of
all saving good; from whence faith, holiness, and the residue of saving gifts,
lastly everlasting life it self do flow, as the fruits and effects thereof,
according to tha^ of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us (not because
we were, but) that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.


Securus. Sir, I hope you understand that holin^ss imports a state of
sep^^^ion, which does not always imply an infusion of good qualities, or any
inherency of them.

But (1.) A sequestration from common use, as the Temple, and the Vessels that
did belong to it, were said to be holy.

(2.) A s^paration from that danger wherein others are inevitably involved, as
the word seems to be used, Rev. 20. 6. Now I am apt to understand the Text (
Ephesians. 1. 4.) in this sense, That God has chosen us in Christ that we should
be holy; that is, That we should be separated from the danger of eternal
destruct o^, through his free love, and have (...) blame laid upon us for cur
sins; and this agrees very well with the benefit we have in Christ Jesus, as
the Apostle sets it down. Col. 1. 14. In whom we have redemption through his
blood, even the forgiveness of sins. As it is impossible we should be profitable
to him Job 22. 2.
, because he stands in no need of our service Ecclus. 15. 12. and Luke 17. ^10.
; so it is impossible he should p^^p^se to put trouble upon whom he entirely
loves Lam. 3. 33.
, because he delights in mercy Micah 7. 18.
. Therefore unless you can give me some good Reason why God should enjoin us so
strictly (as you pretend) to be holy in all manner of Conversation, and rich in
good works; see^ng he has elected us without any intuition or consideration of
them; and through the satisfaction of Christ, he may actually save us, and put
us into possession of glory without any impeachment to his justice; I must
conclude there is no such necessity of an industrious qualitative holiness as
you imagine; nay, that it would more derogate from the freeness of his grace,
then any way contribute to the advancement o^ it.


Diotrephes. Sir, we need seek no further for a Reason hereof, than the holy
Nature of God, which the Prophet has respect unto, when he says Habac. 1. 13.
, Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can ^ot look on iniquity;
and the Psalmist to like purpose Psalm. 5. 4, 5.
; For thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil
dwell with thee; the foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all
workers of iniquity.


Securus. Sir, I perceive you have been too conversant with the Remonstrants
Writings; and you are very apt to slide into their opinions ere you are aware
of (...): Indeed they say, though God loved us before he gave his Son for us,
as it is expressed, John 3. 16. yet he did not will us eternal life by that love;
but he wil^'d us that in consideration of believing in his Son. On the
contrary, the Orthodox say, That the Election of men to Eternal life, is the
willing of Eternal life to them; and that this Election is made of persons to
whom Christ is not given, but as, and after they are elected; and what manner
of persons are they when they are elected? Qualium est Electio, says Bucan
Loc. Com. de praedest. qnaest. 20.
? Immundorum and impiorum in conspectu Dei. The Election is made of persons
unclean and wicked in the sight of God; and so Spanhemius (alleged even now by
your self) Christ (says he) is not the cause of that love where with God
embraces us unto ^^ernal salvation. The holy Nature of God therefore (which
could not only brook us so well, but also embrace us wi^h so flagrant and
immutable a love at our Elect on, that) certainly cannot obstruct the way to
our salvation, requiring that our multitude of good works should make a t^rong
and crowd in to open the door for us.


Diotrephes. I am sure Sir, whatever you think of the holy Nature of God, the
holy Will of God, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ require it, as a condition and
means of our salvation.


Securus. It Is somewhat strange, since we make the Decree of Election to be
absolute, and inconditionate, and irrevocable Election is Decretum est
d^finitum, inconditionatum, completum, irrevocabile, immutabile. Theol. Magn.
Brit. Sentent. de prim^ Artic. These. Ortho. 4 Inter Acta Syn. Dor. page 5. par.
2.
, that we should stand (so) much upon a subordination of means in order to the
execution of it. To my apprehension it is very absurd to say such a thing is
done absolutely, and then to affirm that such and such means are prescribed for
the accomplishment of it: It is as if one should say, That Titius had
absolutely given Radulphus an inheritance; but he bath tied Radulphus to
perform certain conditions upon which it is suspended; he must do him faithful
service by the space of forty or fifty years for it: But I would fain learn how
the subordination of such a conditional Decree to that absolute and
inconditionate Decree can consist with Gods immutability? Do they not make God
inconstant, one while destinating men unto salvation absolutely, presently
willing not to save them, unless the condition of faith and holiness be perfor
med? I see nor (as I said) how Gods purpose according to the Election can stand
with this variation that you make betwixt the Eternal Decree, and the final
execution of it.


Diotrephes. To salve the immutability and constancy of God, I suppose it may
be considerable, That though Election unto salvation, and the means of
salvation may be distinctly considered Synops. Pur. Theol. Disp. 24. These. 18.
; yet our Divines say, they are not diverse acts in the Decree of God; because
God by one only and simple act did de termine all these things; even as by one
only and simple act he knew all things from all Eternity I do not affirm, That
in any moment of nature the Decree of salvation does go before the
consideration of faith and obedience. The Decrees of giving faith, and crowning
it with salvation, I make to be not subordinate one to another, but
simultaneous and coordinate o^e with another. Dr. Twiss ubi supra. page 13.
: We propound them distinctly after our manner of consideration, in regard of
the mul^itude of objects which are comprehended in this one act of electing;
and some order is to be acknowledged amongst those objects too from all
Eternity: But God determined all at once; and therefore there could be no
mutability or inconstancy in him herein.


Securus. Sir, you seem to say something toward satisfaction in this
difficulty, but it does not remove it; for to elect Peter unto salvation, is to
will to save him: Now that God should in one and the same simple act, will to
save Peter, an unbeliever, unclean, ungodly, and yet will not to save him, but
as a believer, holy and obedient; I say, that God should will both these in
one, and the same simple act, looks so like an implication of contradiction
Vide Grevinch. Dissertatio Theologica. De Duab. quaest. ag. 188, etc.
, that the wit of man can hardly reconcile or understand it.

(2.) Let me ask you seriously, Can God Decree salvation and glory to P^ter
without any faith or holiness in him? and can he not bring him to glory without
them? Certainly this is either against the wisdom and justice of God, if he
Decrees any thing which he ought not to execute; or against his Omnipotency, if
he cannot bring it to execution, when he has Decreed it.


Diotrephes. Sir, It becomes not us to dispute the wisdom, justice, or power of
God; our duty is to regulate our selves according to his will; and if we look
for the reward of eternal life, it is our part to fulfill those conditions which
he has prescribed us in his his holy Gospel to that purpose.


Securus. Sir, I observe your Discourse many times borders upon dangerous
Errors; sometimes you recede from the Synod of Dort, and approach the
Remonstrants; and here you leave them, to gratify the Church of Rome. Eternal
life is not given as a reward, but as an inheritance; not upon any conditions
performed, but of grace freely promised. To this purpose we have the judgment
of the Deputies of the Synod of Gelderland (and it is inserted amongst the Acts
of the Synod of Par. 3. page 30. pr.
Dort) in these words, [ Vti gratis f^lii simus, and jus haereditatis
acquirimus, it a and in possession^m haeredi atis mit^i mur plane gratis,
miseric^rdit^r, ind^^ite. Perperam ergo dicit^r vitam aeternam a Deo ^eu
praemium decerni, and dari ^s qui conditiones, quas ipse praescrips^^,
impleverit: Nam d^re vitam ut praemium, praestita jam condition, sub qua
decr^ta erat vita illa, ut praemium, non est omnimodo gratis et ex (...) dare
vitam, sed ex debito:] That is, As we are made sons, and obtain the right of
the inheritance freely; so are we also most mercif^lly and freely put into the
possession of that inheritance; therefore it is ill said, that Eternal life, as
a reward, is decreed and given by God to those that fulfill the conditions
which he has pres^ribed; for to give life as a reward upon the performance of
a condition, upon which that life was decreed as a reward; (this) is to give
life not altogether freely, and of good pleasure, but of debt. Thus far those
Deputies; where you see they disclaim all conditions necessary unto salvation;
and good reason; for if we were absolutely elected ( Bucan and a^ii; ut supra^
) while we were ungodly; and if Christ died ( Romans 5. 6, 8.
) for us, while we were ungodly; and if he justifies ( Romans 4. 5. For Dr. Twiss
and Mr. Pemble do make Justification an immanent act in God; and therefore from
Eternity, as Mr. Baxter does charge them: Aph^risme of Justif. in Append. page
163, Therefore it is before Faith, and consequently of such as are ungodly.
) us, while we are ungodly; what shall s^parate us from this free and
unchangeab^e love of God? what shall hinder, that we may not be saved also,
while we are ungodly? For if when we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son; (and why were we reconciled by the death of his Son, but because he had
formerly and freely loved us, and out of that love elected us unto salvation,
and from that election sent his Son to dye for us? and now having dyed for us)
much more (nay, if any duty were required on our part, more than to our
election and justification, it should be much less, and not much more) being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his l^fe, Romans 5. 10.


Diotrephes. Sir, D^vines observe a great difference betwixt those three
benefits, Election, Justification, and Glorification. Election is absolutely
free without any qualification in the person whatsoever. Justification is by
his faith, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus; but salvation is not
ordinarily attainable, but through sanctification unto obedience in all good
works whatsoever.


Securus. You will find that amongst Evangelical Divines, the more sound, and
such as keep the greatest di^tance from Popery and Arminianisme, do deny ^aith
to be the cause or condition of Justification; their reason is, because
otherwise Justificatio non est gratuita, sed ex nobis, says Wendilin from
them: Justification should not be fre^, Christ. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 25. Exp.
These. 6. (mihi) page 609. Which he does not recite as his own opinion. Dr.
Twiss seems to be of this opinion; ubi supra. p. 142, 143. And so Mr. Baxter
charge him. Ap. to Aphor. page 163.
but of our selves; hereupon they conclude that it is called justifying faith,
not because it justifi^th, or ant cedeth Justification, sed quod justificatis
conferatur; but because it is conferred upon such as are justified, and in
order, if not in time, is after Justification. Postquam nos justificavi^ Deus,
creat in co^dibus Electorum sid^m, says Macc^vi^s Colleg. Theol. Disp. 8. de
Justificat. (mihi) p. 153.
; God cr^ates faith in the hearts of his El^ct, after he has justified them.
And why is this? only to give them a comfortable testimony* of their Election,
and Gods love toward them; it does not justify us [ conditionally] before
God, but declaratively to our own consciences; and thus he expounds those
Texts, [ A man is not justified but by the says of Jesus Christ; we have
believed in Christ, that we might be justified, Gal. 2. 16. Chap. 3. 24. That
we might be justified by faith.] That is, Fide cognosein^u^ and sentimus nos
esse jus^os coram Dco; by faith we know and perceive that we are justified
before God, who has forgiven our sins, and given us a right to eternal life,
for the satisfaction sake of Christ, and his righteousness imputed to us.


Diotrephes. I profess I am not of those men's opinion; it is my judgment that no
man is actually justified, till he does actually believe; and that faith
justifies as it is the performed condition of Gods promise, as was said above
out of Mr. Baxter.


Securus. I remember you said, That Faith is an effectual acceptance of, and
affiance in Christ as Christ.] Now Christ as Christ, is a King and Prophet, as
well as a Priest; and so you must effectually accept of him, and rely upon him,
in his capacity of Kingship, and your Faith must be a principle, and an
effective principle too of obedience; and if such a faith be the condition of
Gods promise, and we shall not be justified but upon the performance of such a
condition, then ( Faith, and Evangelical obedience (in general) being
co-ordina^e in their conditional^y unto this work) what is become of the
Apostles free justification? May you not as well deny a free election? and say,
a man is elected and justified both by the obedience of good works, and by the
faith that is in Christ Jesus! But how contrary is this to the judgment of the
Deputies of Gelderland mentioned above! yea, how contrary to the Apostle, who
professes knowingly that a man is not justified by works Gal. 2. 16.
! Being justifi^d freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ Romans 3. 24.
: And that you may not pretend there is more required unto our salvation, than
unto our justification, the same Apostle tells us plai^ly otherwise; F^r by
grace are ye saved, says he, through faith, and that not Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
of your selves; it is the gift of God; not of works, l^st any man should
boast. Would you have your wedding garment of your own spinning? Are you
desirous to be sound having on your own righteousness Cum venerit Deus ad
judicium, non nisi r^nunciando meis merit is inveniri po^ero in Christo,
d^stitutus omni siducia in m^^rum operum inhaer^n^e justitia, and indutus
impu^ata illa Christi just^tia, quae a Deo great is da^ur, and per sidem nobis
applicatur. Dicson. Ad Phil. 3. 9. See the Notes of Beza and others, on Phil.
3. 9.
? Or as you are clothed in the sweet smelling raiment of your elder brother?
Has not Christ a twofold ri^hteousness? and are they not both imputed to the
Elect? What then? Are we afraid his active obedience is less sufficient to
adorn and dress us up for glory, than his passive is to secure and shelter us
from shame and torment? If the holy Scripture proclaims our salvation to be as
free a benefit, as either that of Justification or Election, why should we give
our selves the temptation of a needless trouble by distinguishing them? and
what says the Scripture of the three? Election stands not upon works; but in
the purpose and good will of him that calls (Romans 9. 11.) not of works, but
by grace (Romans 11. 5, 6.) And it says the same of justification too Qui
dicunt, quod Deus fidem ipsam and fideiobedientiam imp^rfectam, pro p^rfecta
legis obedientia reputet, and vitae aeternae praemio gratiose dignam enseat: Hi
contradicunt Scripturae, Romans 3. 24, 25. Et cum impio Socino, novam and
peregrinam hominis coram Deo justificationem, contra totius Ecclesiae
consensum, inducunt. Syn. Dordr. cap. 2. Reject. 4.
(Romans 3. 24. with Gal. 2. 16.) Being justified, not by the works of the Law,
but freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. And it
says no less of salvation (Ephesians. 2. 8.) For by grace y^ a^c saved; and the
Apostle does oppose works to mercy in the business of salvation, Tit. 3. 5. Net
by works of righteousness which we have done, but acc^rding to his mercy he
saved us: And therefore he says ( Romans 6. 23.) Eternal l^fe is the g^ft of
God; and what is freer than g^f^?

I find this comfortable Doctrine held forth exactly by Dr. Spurstowe, in his [
Wells of Salvation opened] where he says, Were the way which leads to Heaven,
a Ladder of duties, and Page 51, 52.
not a golden Chain of free grace, I could not but fear, that the higher I
climb, the gr^ater would my fall prove to be; every servi^e being like a
br^ttle round that can bear no weight; and the whole fr^me and ^eries of duties
at the best, f^r short of the L^dde^ (...) Jacobs vision, which had its foot
standing upon the E^r^^, an^ its ^op reaching to Heaven; bu^ the whole way of
salvation from first to last, is all of mere grace, that the promise might be
sure, Romans 4. 16. Every l^nk o^ the golden Chain is made up of fr^e merry;
Election is free, Ephesians. 1. 5. Vocat^on free, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Justification free,
Romans 5. 34. Sanctification free, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Gl^^ification free, Romans 6. 23.


Diotrephes. Eternal life is not given but to such persons as are antecede^tly
qualified by the performance of such conditions as God has prescribed in order
to it.


Securus. Have I not already sufficiently overthrown your conditions by most
plentiful and irrefragable Authority? But I will and this, God promises, Ezekiel.
36. 26. A new heart will I give you: And Matthew. 13. 11. To you it is given to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, says our Savior, who is also
said to give Repentance, Acts 5. 31. And in many other places Faith and
Repentance are said to be the gifts of God (as Phil. 1. 29, Acts 11. 18. 1 Timothy
2. 26.) From these and such like Texts, and the expressions used in them (of
Gods giving, etc.) Our Orthodox Censura Confess. cap. 17. par. 3. page 236. and
Amesii Cor^^. p. 257, 258
Divines do infer not only the absolute Decree of Election, but also a most
free, inconditionate, and irresistible collation of what is promised or
affirmed in them respectively, and that to be performed [ in nobis, sine nobis]
as the Synod of Dort determines. Now eternal life being the special gift of
God, as well as the new heart, faith, repentance, etc. If you suspend the
obtaining of that (gift) upon any condition to be performed by us, you will
much endanger the purest Orthodox Doctrine, and give advantage to the
Remonstrants, by the force and example of such interpretations, to invalidate
those Arguments which are drawn from the said Texts, to prove those absolute
Decrees, and such an irresistible conversion.


Diotrephes. Sir, I hope you are not so great a stranger to the Book of God,
but that you know good works are called for in every page, and upon all
occasions.


Securus. That is not the question, called for, or not called for; but how, and
to what end they are called for? Inter Act. Sy^. Not. Dord. par. 43. page 213.
I remember well the Divines of Drent, in their Examen, and judgment upon the
third and fourth Articles of the Remonstrants, they tell us a main end, why
common grace and gener^l g^f^s are bestowed upon men, is, Ut s^ci^tas humana
and poli^ia conserventu^; for the benefit of humane society; and to this
purpose indeed I find the Apostle directs Titus, That they which have
believed in God, might be careful to maintain good works; (adding his Reason)
th^se things are good and profitable unto men: But the Apostle may understand
lawful Trades and Callings by good works in that place; but they are not such
which you contend for in order to salvation.


Diotrephes. Nay Sir, more then so; we are exhorted to be rich in good works,
in order to our own assurance and comfort, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 10. Give diligence, add
to your faith, virtue, etc. Wheref^re the rather give diligence to make your
Calling and Election (...). And Maccovius, who defen^s Justification before
Faith; yet he says, Vbi supra.
Quo magis cr^sc^t sides, ^o magis etiam Justificationis sensus seu fructus
ub^rior emergit, Romans 1. 17. The more our Faith increases, the more sweet and
plentiful will be the sense and fruit of Justification that springs up to us.


Securus. For that assurance, and those relishes and consolations upon it, I am
persuaded they are more boasted than felt Mr. P. Baine professed he never felt
any of those Suavities.
; when we set those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word
of God, and the powers of the World to come Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6
, may and do fall away totally and finally; whereupon we are taught (according
to our Doctrine] to believe they lay under the immutable Decree of Reprobation,
How can we (if it be not made so by Gods Decree already) by our industry make
our Calling and Election sure? And therefore I think it prudent, quietly and
patiently to submit the event of our lives and souls, with the same resolution
they submitted the event of the Apostles expedition to Jerusalem, saying Acts
21, 14.
, The will of the Lord be done.


Diotrephes. Remember Sir, it is a part of Gods will, that you should work
Phil. 2. 12. Cap. 1. Art. 13.
out your salvation: And the Synod of D^rt, having set down the nature of Gods
free Election, with the excellent fruits thereof, they add, That out of sense
and certainty of this Election, the children of God daily draw more and more
matter of humbling themselves before God, of ad^^ing the depth of his merci^s,
of purifying themselves, and of loving him fervemly, who first loved them so
much.


Securus. What sense and certainty men (that pretend to it) have of their
Election, I know not; but if they have it, whatever they draw out of it, will
afford no less matter of ease, carelessness, and security ordinarily, than of
gratitude; for the certainty of the end, excludes the use, at least all care of
the means.


Diotrephes. I deny that Doctrine, and we find the contrary by plain Scripture,
Practice, and Experience Jer. 29. 10, etc. Dan. 9. 2.
: Was not Daniel informed of the Jews deliverance by Gods Word and Promise?
and Christ John 8. 20.
certain his death should be deferred, till the final accomplishment of his
Office and Ministry in his state of humiliation? and Peter Luke 22. 32.
propped up in his hopes, by our Lords prayer and promise that his faith should
not fail? Did they therefore neglect the means? nay, did they not forthwith
address themselves earnestly to the use of them?


Securus. Though the instant deliverance of the J^w^s from captivity was
revealed to Jeremiah, yet uncertain to begin the computation (as is observed by
Commentators upon Dan. 9.) Daniel knew not whether those seventy years were yet
expired, or whether God might not defer the Redemption of the people for their
sins; for Daniel knew by the same Jeremiah, That at what instant God speaks
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to build, and to plant it; if it
does evil, and obey not his voice, then he will repent of the good wherewith he
said he would benefit them, Jer. 18. 9, 10. He had read the oath of God in the
Book of Numbers, Ye shall not come into the Land concerning which I swear to
make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of
Nun; but ye shall know my breach of promise, Numb. 14. 30, 34. Daniel therefore
had good reason to make prayers unto Almighty God out of a holy fear, least God
for their sins should lengthen out the term of their captivity; and thus when
ever an end is intended conditionally, and a promise made to that purpose; the
performance of the promise being suspenced upon the performance of the
condition, in this case the means is to be puriued with diligence, that having
fulfilled the condition, we may have a title to the promise; but when the end
is intended, and the promise of it made absolutely, that gives us a supersedeas
to all further care about it.


Diotrephes. In Pe^ers case, I suppose the end [ That his f^i^h should not
fail] was absolutely i^tended, and the promise and prayers of our Savior of
that import.


Securus. You may as well conclude the promise and prayer of our Savior did
import he should not sin at all; for our Savior prayed (though not that his
Father should not take him out of the World, yet) that he would keep him from
the evil of it, John 17. 15. Yet we see he was not so kept, but he fell into
evil, and fell under it too. Our Saviors prayer therefore, and his promise
were conditional; his faith should not fail, if he did repent, and bewail his
fall; hence the Lord said to him, And thou, when thou art converted, strengthen
thy Brethren, Luke 22.


Diotrephes. But this is not applicable to our Saviors own case; the end was
absolutely intended [ His preservation to the last period] till he had
accomplished his Ministry (so far as concerned his state of humiliation) he
could not possibly be out off; and this he was assured of.


Securus. Christ was certain that the Ministry committed to him should not want
a happy success; yet so, as if he did diligently fulfill all the parts of his
office and duty. He was certain his death should be deferred even to that very
hour which his Father had prefixed (though some deny that hour to have been
precisely determined of his Father) if he took his frequent advantages to
escape the hands, and malicious machinations of his enemies, which we find him
careful to do upon all occasions: And here that observation may take place of
the truth of a logical connection betwixt the Antecedent and the Consequent,
when both of them taken apart, are false. It was true, certainly true, that if
Christ had fallen sooner into their malicious hands, he had been sooner cut
off; but (considering his care and prudence to avoid it) that he should fall
into their hands, or be cut off sooner, were both false.


Diotrephes. However Sir, it is most certain, God has decreed the salvation of
the Elect, by tying the end and the means together; for whom he predestined,
them he also called; whom he called, them he also justified; whom he justified,
them he also glorified, Romans 8. ^0. Therefore when it is objected to us (say
the Belgic professors) that the ordination of means is sup^rfl^cus, Synops.
Pur. Theol. Disp. 24. These. 19.
if the Elect, by some Antecedent act, be absolutely destinated to salvation,
this arises from the mere ignorance of the Orthodox Doctrine; for God did
never choose any man absolutely unto salvation, if by [absolutely] we exclude
the means which God has ordained for the obtaining of salvation; but that
ordination unto salvation in the purpose of God, has always from Eternity in
the very same act, con^oyned with it a consideration of those means which are
necessary unto salvation. Whereupon Saint Paul also says, 2 These. 2. 13. God
has from the beginning chosen you unto salvation through sanctif^cation of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth; and Sa^nt Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2. To the El^ct
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of
the Spirit, unto obedience, and the sprinkling of the blood of Christ.


Securus. If the end be absolutely intended, then either there are no means
required; or if they be required, they are absolutely by an irresistible
strength to be wrought by him, who absolutely intends the end; for if God
absolutely intends an end, and leaves it to be accomplished by contingent and
f^llible means, that means may be deficient, and so God should fail of his end;
which were absurd.


Diotrephes. This is that which the Synod of Dort affirms of Faith, and the
work of Regeneration; for, they say, This is a work, to the production whereof,
God employeth his omnipotent strength; (chap. 3. and 4. Reject. 8.) A work, for
the mightiness thereof not inferior to the Creation of the World, or raising
up the dead which God works in us; but (not with us, but) without us; an
operation so carried on, that when God has done his part, it remains not in
man's choice to be, or not to be regenerated; to be, or not to be converted;
(Art. 12. and Reject. 8.) To this purpose Mr. Norton having laid it down for a
Rule (in his Orthodox Evangelist) That [ Though the Decree be absolute, yet the
(...) of the Decree in the Gospel is conditional.] Page 85, 86.
He adds, [ yet here carefully observe, That by a condition we are always to
understand not a condition properly so called, but a consequent condition;
scilicet, such a condition, the performance whereof is not left unto the Elect,
but is undertaken for by the Elector; and therefore is not only not opposite
unto, but is both an effect and argument of an absolute D^cree, and also of an
absolute Covenant of Grace.


Securus. These passages have reference to the infusion of faith, and the work
of our first conversion; and perhaps this Doctrine looks no further, and Am sii
Co^onis. page 258. f. Ex condition proprie dicta, qua aliquid confertur in
casum dubium and incertum eventum alienae voluntatis, and quae praestita movet
velantatem judicis ad praemium, ex tali condition si pende^ent promissiones
Dei, actum esset de nostra salute, ^licet ^riremus.
then there is not sufficient provision made for the infallible accomplishment
of an end that is absolutely intended; though the Regeneration of the Elect be
absolutely, immediately, and irresistibly wrought by the strength of Gods
Omn^potency; yet if the work be left in the hands of the same Elect, as their
duty to be continued, such is their frail^y and fallibility, they may possibly
m^scarry in it, and so God should lose his end for all that; which is very
absurd to be affirmed of an end which he has absolutely intended.


Diotrephes. You need not fear this; for as God begins the work, so he carries
it on irresistibly by the same power, to the very last stage and period of our
lives. Hence Cornelius Dungan says Pacific. p. 172.
, Such as the operation of grace is in the beginning, such it is also in the
progress: And Dr. Twiss Ubi supra. p. 178.
says, Gods Omnipotency no Creature is able to resist; and therefore if God
will have any man to believe, repent, do this or that good work, it is
impossible it should be otherwise; and that God is he who works in us that
which is pleasing in his sight, is as true, as the Epistle to the Hebrews is a
part of the New Testament: And page 182. We do require that God should
immediately and irresistibly work all our good works in us, and we acknowledge
this to be necessary unto every good act, and no grace without this sufficient
ad velle and agere; though there may be without this, a grace sufficient ad
posse.

To this purpose it is very remarkable, what the These. Heterod. quas rejicim. 3.
page 200. par. 2.
British Divines (who were accounted stuper mundi) have delivered in their
judgment concerning the fifth Article (of perseverance) at the Synod of Dort,
Falsum est, say they, Persevera^tiam esse donum sub condition oblatum. It Is
false, that perseverance is a gift offered upon condition; for it is a gift
absolutely promised of God without any respect of condition. The Reason is
this, the promises of God, some are concerning the end, others concerning the
means to that end. The promises concerning the end; for example ^ak^,
concerning salvation are conditional; Believe, and thou shall be saved; be thou
faithful (or persevere) unto the death; and I will give thee a Crown of life:
But seeing no man is able to perform the conditions, God has also made most
free and absolute promises for bestowing the v^ry conditions themselves; which
he eff^c^eth in us, that by them, as the means, we might attain unto the end.
To this purpose they urge that Text Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will
circumcise thine heart, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart; and with
all thy soul, that thou may live. Upon which words, they thus dilate, The end
here promised, is life; which the Israeliees could never attain, but by the
performance of this condition, namely, the loving of God; but here God
absolutely promises, that he would give them that very condition. Seeing
therefore the promises of faith, and perseverance in the faith, are promises
concerning the means, they are (promises) of absolute gifts, whereby God,
considering men's inability as well to attain the end without means, as to
perform those means or c^nditions of themselves, has promised he would effect
it, that they should perform those condi^ions. God promises life to those that
constantly fear him! the promise concerning life is conditionate; but (the
promise) concerning the constant fear (of God) is absolute. I will put my fear
in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Thus those Divines; and
the Canons of the Synod are of the same tenor and importance.


Securus. I thank you Sir for this part of your Discourse; wherein you have
most clearly proved by the Doctrine of the Synod, the Divines thereof, and
others, that the opinion I have been all this while disputing for, is exactly
true; that is to say, [ It Is altogether needless for any man to take care to do
any thing for his salvation?] for though it be true that the end [salvation] is
conditional; yet the means to that end, is granted absolutely and irresistibly
to the Elect. It Is true, none but believers and Converts shall be saved; but
it is as certainly true, that all the Elect shall first or last (at Gods
appointed time) one way or other (by Gods appointed means) be irresistibly
brought to rep^nt and believe: But the Non-elect being past by in the state of
sin, as Adam left them, and the saving grace of Faith and Repentance denied
them; they can never be saved, first or last, by one means or other, God having
appointed neither time nor means (effectual) to that purpose, (why then should
they trouble themselves about it?) And this is the more unquestionably certain,
in that God has from all Eternity, irrevocably established these Decrees, to
illustrate and set forth the glory of his good pleasure, Sovereign power, mercy
and justice.


Diotrephes. I wish you would remember that great day of Revelation, which will
be a day of discrimination too; when God Romans 2. 5. Mat. 25. 32*
shall separate the precious from the vile, and divide the Sheep from the
Goats; you would be glad to find mercy of the Lord in that day 2 Timothy 1. 1^.
: You must separate your self from the communion and practice of the wicked in
this life, if you would be divided from their portion in the life to come; if
you do not distinguish your self from them here, you will never be
distinguished from them hereafter. You must abandon the company of the wicked,
and associate your self with the godly, and conform your judgment and opinions,
your life and conversation unto theirs; and then Hebr. 4. 16.
you may be sure to obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need: The
Prophet Malachi tells you of a Book of remembrance Mal. 3^ (...)
that was written before the Lord; but for whom? for them (only) that feared
the Lord, and that thought upon his Name; and they shall be mine, says the
Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jewels; and I will spare them, as
a man spares his own son that serves* him.


Securus. Sir, I am sorry to see you so far inclinable to a dangerous Error;
for you speak, as if it were in man's power to See Dr. Wards Twelve Arguments,
in concione ad Clerum. ad Phil. 2* 13*
contribute somewhat toward his own discrimination; and if you think so, it is
evident you do at least favor the Popish Doctrine of Free Will, if you have
not perfectly espoused it: And this you know is diametrically opposite to the
Apostle, whose words are these; for who makes thee to differ from another; and
what have thou that thou did not receive, etc? Here we are instructed, 1.
Cor. 4. 7.
Ut quas Deus nobis largitus est dotes, meminerimus non nostra esse bona, sed
(...) Dei bona, says Mr. Calvin Instit. l. 3. c. 7. n. 4.
, That what endowments soever Almighty God bestows upon us, we must remember
they are not our goods, but Gods free gifts. Non inscite Augustinus (says Mr.
Calvin Citante Amesio in sua Coron. Art. 4. mihi. page 369.
) hoc testimonjo saepe contendit adversus Pelagianos, quicquid excelle^tiae est
in homimbus ex mera and gratuita ejus miser^cordia manare. h. e. Austin does
often make use of this testimony (of the Apostle) against the Pelagians,
contending thereby, that whatever excellency there be in men, it flows from
the mere and free mercy of God: So Peter Martyr also, si quis propius accedat;
vide^it Augustinum recte admodum existimasse: nam sicut inter Ministros Ibid.
Ecclesiae non est nisi Deus qui unum donis coelestibus aliis praestare faciat,
ita in r^generatione, electione ac reparatione, D^us unus author est
agnoscendus. Austin was in the right; for as amongst the Ministers in the
Church, it is (not Study, Learning or Industry) none but God, that makes one to
excel another in those Celestial Endowments; so in the work of Regeneration,
Election and Reparation, God is to be acknowledged the only Author. And Mr.
Calvin makes this yet more evident in his Institutions, Apud centum eadem fere
habetur concio: A hundred L. 3. c. 24. n. 12.
men hear the very same Sermon, twenty of them do cheerfully receive it with
the obedience of faith; the rest either do not regard it, or deride it, or
explode and abominate it. If any man allege this diversity Quis enim te
discernit? inquit; nunquid per haec dona, quae omnibis sunt communia? possit
quippe dicere homo inflatus adversus alterum, Discernit me fides mea, justitia
mea, vel quid aliud: talibus occurrens, cogitationibus bonus Doctor, inquit,
quid autem habes quod non accepisti? Aquo nisi ab illo, qui te descernit ab
alio, cui non donavit, quod donavit tibi* Aug. Citante Amesio. contra Grevinch.
proceeds from the malice and perversity of the men, this gives no
satisfaction, because the same malice had possessed the nature of the others
also, if God had not corrected it by his goodness; and therefore we shall
always be entangled, if that of the Apostle does not relieve us, Quis te
discernit? Who makes thee to differ from another? Quo significat, non propria
virtute, sed sola Dei gratia alios aliis praecellere: Whereby he signifies,
that it is not by any virtue or power of their own, that some do excel others,
but by the sole grace of God. Cur ergo, test Apostolo, says he, Coronantur
fideles? Quia Domini misericordia, non sua industria, and electi sunt and
vocati, and justificati. Why therefore are the Idem. l. 2. c. 5. n. 2.
faithful crowned according to the testimony of the Apostle, not in regard of
any endeavor of their own, but because by the mercy of God they are both
elected and called, and justified? from whence it appears clearly, that as
there is no possibility, so there is no need that a man should contribute to
his own discrimination.


Diotrephes. I confess a man is able to do nothing toward the differencing of
himself; but yet he is so frequently called upon to repent and believe, that I
cannot but conclude there is some duty incumbent upon him to this purpose.


Securus. Sir, this is all one, as if you should say, you grant the Premises,
but deny the Conclusion. As for the giving, or denial of Faith and Repentance,
Dr. Twiss tells us, Herein we willingly profess, that God carries himself
absolutely throughout; Vbi supra. page 42. Hereupon he concludes, that in the
work of Regeneration. -- We are merely passive. Ibid. p. 27.
not only decreeing these according to the mere pleasure of his will, without
all consideration of ought in man; but giving them also unto some, and denying
them unto others, according to the mere pleasure of his will, without the
consideration of ought in man. Why then should you tell me of any duty
incumbent upon me to the procuring of these graces? Can it consist with the
wisdom or justice of God (much less with his goodness) to tie me to endeavor
after them, when he has not suspended the bestowing them upon the performance
of any such conditions, but wills, and has decreed to give them absolutely?


Diotrephes. I pray who tells you, that it is Almighty Gods good pleasure to
bestow Faith and Repentance absolutely, without any condition performed on our
part?


Securus. I gave you the Authority of Dr. Twiss even now for it; I will also
add his Arguments for your satisfaction. One of his invincible Arguments (for
all his are reputed for such) Vbi supra. p. 6^
is drawn from Bradwardine's Demonstration, that no will of God is conditional,
but absolute throughout. The Demonstration is this; if there be any conditional
will in God, the condition of that will of God is either willed by God or no.
If not willed by him, then that must be acknowledged to come to pass in the
World without the will of God, which he holds for a great absurdity; but if
that condition be also in some sort willed by God, then either absolutely or
conditionally; if absolutely, then also the thing conditionated, shall be
absolutely willed by God. As for example; if God does will that a man shall be
saved, in case he believe, and withal does absolutely resolve to give him
Faith, and make him believe, this is in effect absolutely to resolve to save
him: But if it be said, that the condition spoken of, is willed by God, not
absolutely, but conditionally; then a way is open to a progress in infinitum,
which all disclaim: For, as touching that second condition, I will renew the
former Argument, enquiring whether that be also willed at all by God, or no;
and if it be, whether it be willed absolutely or conditionally; so that either
we must subsist in something that is absolutely willed by God; and
consequently, all that depend thereupon, as conditionated, shall in like manner
be absolutely willed by God; or a progress from one condition to another, and
that without end, cannot be avoided. This is Dr. Twiss his demonstration, taken
from Bradwaraine; and Mr. Baxter In his Preface to the Grotian Religion. Sect.
9.
triumphs in the use of it, against the Author of the Examination of Til^nus.

But this is not all; for the Dr. has another irrefragable Argument, to prove
that Faith and Repentance are not conferred by God upon man conditionally; to
wit, upon the performance of some condition by man; for (says he Vbi supra. p.
161. and 152.
) if it were so, then these graces should be conferred according to men's works,
which is clearly and undeniably stark Pelagianism. So that all endeavors after
Faith and Repentance, are not only impertinent, but it is heresy also to
maintain, that the bestowing of them depends upon any of our performances.


Diotrephes. Sir, if you will receive what that Reverend Dr. holds forth in
another place, you will understand his opinion more fully. He is not against
the use of means for the obtaining Faith and Repentance, take his words at
large. God (says Vbi supra. p. 195, 196, etc.
he) has regard both of our Faith and Prayers; not that upon the foresight
hereof, he did elect us; but in that as he did ordain us unto everlasting life,
by way of reward of our Faith, Repentance, and good Works; so likewise he did
ordain us to the obtaining of Faith, Repentance, and good Works, to be wrought
in us; partly by the Ministry of his Word, therein speaking unto us; and partly
by our prayers, seeking unto him, to bless his Word unto us, and fulfill the
good pleasure of his goodness toward us, and the work of Faith with power; for
God does expect, that we should ^eck unto him by prayer for this, as we read,
Ezekiel. 36. 37. Neither do we maintain that God does ordain any man of ripe years
unto eternal life, in any moment of nature, before he ordains him to Faith,
Repentance, and good Works; and that to be wrought in him by the Ministry of
the Word, with Gods blessing thereupon, according to the prayers in common,
both of the Pastor and the People. This is the Drs. opinion fully.


Securus. If the Dr. will contradict himself, who can help it; and it is
evident, he does contradict himself, if he suspends the bestowing of Faith and
Repentance, upon our hearing and prayers, as conditions imposed upon us for
obtaining them.

2. If to hear and pray be a work of ours, it is Pelagianism in the Drs.
opinion, to say, that God gives Faith according to them; for supposing Tilenus
his meaning to be [That God is ready to work Faith in man upon a condition;] he
disputes against Ubi supra. p. 46
it in these words; Now, what is that condition! can it be any other thing,
than some work of man? And what follows here hence, but that God gives faith
according to men's works? which (says he) is pure Pelagianisme, condemned for
heresy in the Church of God from time to time.

3. And therefore elsewhere this Dr. declares the invalidity of the Word to
this effect, and slights the use of prayers in order toward it, in these
scoffing words, [ Ibid. p. 84, 85.
This Author would have men effectually called by virtue of their prayers.]

4. Hereupon I shall satisfy my self with that resolution of the point, which
I find given by Dr. W. Spurstowe The Wells of Salvation opened. Cap. 7. Sect.
1. Rule 2. page 67.
; having propounded a distinction concerning the promises, which is this; There
are promises of grace, and there are promises which are made to grace. The one
(says he) are so absolute, as that they do not depend upon any grace in us
foregoing, or suppose any good qualifications in us to be partakers of them;
such are the promises of Conversion and Regeneration, in which grace makes way
for it self, and works all the initial preparations, without any concurrence or
activity on our part, we being as fully passive in our second birth, as we are
in our first birth, in our Regeneration, as in our Generation.


Diotrephes. But the same Dr. tells us in the same place, That the absolute
promise of Conversion, and giving of spiritual Ibid. and seq.
life, though it have a kind of opposition unto conditional promises, in not
requiring that aptitude and qualification of the subject by grace for the
fulfilling of it, as the other (promises of pardon, glory) do for the
performance of them; yet is it not absolute in opposition to the use of
external means, which God has appointed us a necessary way to obtain
converting grace; for as the Decrees of God, though peremptory and
unchangeable, do not exclude the endeavors of the Creature, and the working of
second causes; no more does the absoluteness of Gods promise in Conversion shut
out, but rather include the u^e and exercise of all means that lead to the end.
Thus Dr. Spurstowe.


Securus. How far the absoluteness of Gods promise does shut out the use of
means, we shall further see hereafter; in the mean while, I pray what is the
means you think so necessary to be exercised in order to our Conversion?


Diotrephes. I shall give you my Answer in the words of Dr. Twiss; I know no
industry of man (says he) required to his effectual Vocation (which is
conversion) but the hearing of Gods ^upra p. 84.
Word.


Securus. He required hearing of Gods word and prayer too even now; and has he
cashiered half his means already? But to let that pass, I pray resolve me
whether it be possible for a man without faith, to hear after such a gracious
manner as will be acceptable to Almighty God? For if he cannot perform the duty
graciously, he may instead of obtaining grace, come under that reprehension
(even given to performances under precept, for want of such a gracious manner
in the circumstances) Whohath reqisired this at your hand, to tread my Courts?
Isa. 1. 12.



Diotrephes. Some natural actions are required, without which a man cannot be
converted, says Dr. Twiss. As for example; it is required a man should be
acquainted with Gods Word, which alone is the ordinary means, whereby the
Spirit Vbi supra. p. 99.
works in man's Conversion. Now it is in the power of man to hear the Word; and
albeit he cannot hearken unto it in a gracious manner pleasing unto God, yet
shall not that hinder the efficacy of Gods Word, if God be pleased to show
mercy on him: No, though he comes to the hearing of it with a wicked mind. As
they that came to take Christ, John 7. yet when they heard him, were taken by
him, and returned without him, saying, Never man spoke as this man speaks. So
is it in the power of a man to read the Word. Now suppose he exercises this
power, and that with a mind averse from it; yet may this Word prove a Word of
power to the changing of his heart. Thus far Dr. Twiss.


Securus. Why! this is a full confirmation of what I have been contending for,
that it is impertinent and needless for a man to take care for his salvation;
it is no matter with what affections he addresseth himself to the means of Faith
and Repentance; for though he does it with a wicked mind, with a mind averse
from it, yet shall not that hinder the efficacy of Gods Word, if God be pleased
to show mercy on him. He has no Reason therefore to trouble himself about
laying aside all malice, and all guile, 1 Pet. 2. 1. James 1. 21.
and hypocrisies, and envy, and all filthiness, and superstuity of
naughtiness, and to receive with meekness the engrafted Word, which is able to
save the soul. But I remember, you told me long since, that God ordains men to
Faith, Repentance, and good Dr. Twisse ut supra.
Works; and that to be wrought in them by the Ministry of the Word, with Gods
blessing thereupon, according to the prayers in common, both of the Pastor and
the People. Now Sir I would fain be satisfied, whether if a man does carefully
join himself unto these Ordinances, he may be assured of his Conversion?


Diotrephes. No, the execution of Gods goodness toward him is not hastened by
a man's harkening to Gods word; for though men do hear it daily, yet are they
not forthwith brought to faith; says Doctor Twisse Ibid. p. 84, 85
.


Securus. If a man cannot promise himself a blessing in his careful attendance
upon the Ordinances, and affording his presence to hear the Word, to what
purpose (as I said) should he trouble himself about it?


Diotrephes. Doctor Spurstowe Ubi supra*
tells you, though these be such actions which have no immediate influence to
the begetting or working of grace, yet are they so far necessary, as that no
man can promise unto himself that ever he shall be converted, who does either
neglect or refuse the using of those means, in which God is pleased to dispense
his free and undeserved grace. Thus Dr. Spurstowe.


Securus. As he cannot promise himself to be converted without this means; so
neither can he promise himself to be converted with it; because, as you say,
from the Doctor, it has no immediate influence to the begetting or working of
grace. Upon the whole matter therefore, it comes all to a reckoning whether he
applies himself to the use of this means, or no,


Diotrephes. Not so, for though Conversion be wholly and only from God himself,
yet it is ordered by him to be effected in the Dr. Spurstowe ubi supra p. 70.
use of means. As Physicians put their physic in certain syrups and liquors,
which are Vehicula Medicinae, not at all of themselves operative, but
serviceable to the medicine that works the cure: So does God by his Ordinances,
which are Canales gratiae, Channels and Conduit-pipes designed for grace to run
in, convey and dispense the precious blessing of a new and spiritual life to
those upon whom he is pleased to bestow it. And therefore the plea of those is
both weak and impious, who contemptuously turn their backs upon the preaching
of the Word, and other external helps, as needless and unnecessary to
conversion, it being Gods sole work.


Securus. I pray resolve me this question; whether hearing the Word be of
absolute necessity to conversion?


Diotrephes. I shall give you my opinion in Dr. Twisse his words. We willingly
grant (says he) that information of the understanding Vbi supra p. 115
is necessarily required both to faith and to repentance, otherwise they were
not acts rational; but that this information should be made by the Minister,
that is, I confess, ordinarily required by the virtue of Gods Ordinance, but
not necessarily; and he upbraids Tilenus as little sensible of any such
distinction.


Securus. Seeing God has determined not to bestow his (saving) grace at all,
upon the greatest number of manking; and before Dr. Twiss ubi supra p. 128.
he has bestowed faith and regeneration upon them, it is utterly uncertain by
ordinary means, both whether he has determined to p. 116.
bestow any such grace upon them, and whether Christ died for the procuring of
any such benefit unto them; and seeing the exhortation of the Word without a
more special operation of Gods Spirit, is no provocation at all to believe, and
God does many times work p. 117.
faith without the ministry of the Word (which are the affirmations of that
great Divine) why may I not as well depend upon the extrardinary (which when it
comes, is likely to work upon me insuperably) as wait upon the ordinary means,
which I have no assurance at all, that it shall be effectual?


Diotrephes. When God will give any man saving grace, ordinarily he will do it
by the means of grace. He that has appointed his Ordinances to that end, will
so far stand to his own ap^^^tment, and honor his own Ordinances, as to work
by them, and not ordinarily without them. If men therefore will not use Gods
means, no wonder if they go without his grace. For first, such are out of the
way of grace, and when they avoid the Causes, they cannot in reason look for
the Effects. Secondly, And moreover, they do provoke God to withold and deny
his grace when they set so light by it, as that they will not so much as use
the means to get it. Treatise of Conversion, page 229.


Securus. Here are so many infirmities in this piece of your discourse, that it
will be a trouble to repeat them. (1.) You intimate, that Grace flows from the
use of the Means, as the Effect from the Cause, which is no less contrary to
experience, than to the judgment of Doctor Twisse. (2.) You would insinuate
that God denies his grace only to such as provoke him by their neglect of the
means; Whereas Doctor Twisse says, he determined the denial of it, for his
mere pleasure, without any consideration of any thing done by man. So that a
man may be very diligent in the use of means, and yet fail of the grace of
God, merely because it is not Gods pleasure to give it him. (3.) You inform
us, that God will stand to his own Ordinances, because of his own appointment;
and for their honor, when he will give any man saving grace, he will work it
by them. Is it worse to absent ones self from those Ordinances, then to present
ones self to them with an averse and wicked mind? This (says Dr. Twiss) cannot
hinder Gods operation; and why should that, especially seeing (as you imply)
God has his extraordinary ways to dispense his grace, as well as ordinary?


Diotrephes. Our safest way is to take our President and Direction from the
Apostles Admonition to Timothy. The servant Dr. Twiss. ubi supra. page 134.
of the Lord must instruct them with meekness that are contrary-minded, if so
be at any time God will give them Repentance, etc. Therefore it becomes us
continually to wait for this time, and not to prescribe unto God. And why may
not this present be the time? Why (then) should you defer Page 84.
the hearing of Gods Word, whereby alone is our Calling (ordinarily) wrought?
For this being Gods appointed means, if a man hears it, though with a purpose
only to oppose it either in general, or in some particular truth thereof; yet
(he may receive the Grace of Conversion for all that) this humor of opposition
cannot hinder Gods Word, and the operation of his Spirit where he will, in
spite of their conceits, who thought the Apostles were filled with new wine,
when three thousand were converted that day. But Ibid. 181.
how is it possible that God should bring a man to a Sermon, while he lies lazy
in his Bed? Such a one is out of the way of Grace; and as Mr. Baxter Vt supra.
has it, when he avoids the cause, he cannot in Reason look for the effect.


Securus. I pray Sir, answer me to a few questions in order to my further
satisfaction in that we discourse about; and the first I shall propound to you
is this; [ Whether God has not exactly prefixed the punctual time for the
Conversion of every one to whom he intends his effectual grace?]


Diotrephes. Yes, this time is prefixed of the Lord, unalterably, as is
resolved by I. R. in his Christian Subject Page 12.
, Approved and Licensed by Mr. Edm. Calamy. This time is called Hora Uberioris
Gratia Cap. 1. Art. 16
, by the Synod of Dort, The Hour of more plentiful Grace; by Mr. Baxter But
how does this consist with his so moving considerations to convince men of the
folly of delay? ut supra.
Gods season; by Dr. Twiss, the time appointed.


Securus. My second question is, Whether God has not also precisely appointed
the individual means, for the conversion of such persons to whom his effectual
Grace is designed?]


Diotrephes. Yes, When God executes his good pleasure in the Elect, or works
true Conversion in them, he does not only procure the outward means, but also
applies the inward efficacy of the regenerating Spirit; as the Synod of Dort
has determined, Cap. 3. and 4. Artic. 11. see it at large.


Securus. My third question is, Whether God can fail in his time prefixed, to
accomplish that work of Conversion in such persons?]


Diotrephes. He cannot, because he is wise and constant. To this purpose Dr.
Spurstowe Vbi supra. p. 63.
his observation is considerable; If the wisdom of God (says he) has to
common mercies wherein his enemies have a share, set such appointed times, as
may make them more useful and beneficial to his Creatures: Certainly he will
not fail to perform to his people the promises of his free grace in that season
and fullness of time, which may best suit with their welfare, and his glory. He
makes Conversion one of those promises. ibid. page 66, 67.


Securus. My fourth question is this, Whether God can be disappointed of his
means or no?]


Diotrephes. No, the Reason is plain; He is not only Wise, but also Omnipotent.
Gods Omnipotency (says Dr. Twiss Vbi supra p. 178.
) no creature is able to resist; and therefore if God will have any man to
believe, to repent, to do this or that good work, it is impossible it should be
otherwise. -- And that God is he who works in us that which is pleasing in his
sight through Jesus Christ, is as true, as the Epistle to the Hebrews is a
part of the New Testament.


Securus. My fifth question is this, [ Whether any of them,] for whom effectual
grace is designed, be able to resist that grace, when the season or good hour
is come; or to receive it sooner, if they should endeavor after it?]


Diotrephes. This Quaere consists of two Branches; but I shall satisfy them
both in the words of Dir. Twiss Vbi supra. p. 115, 116.
, who has taught us thus to distinguish. We willingly confess (says he) that
as often as men are found to resist these Exhortations Divine, (to Faith and
Repentance) though delivered by Gods Minister, they may justly be said to
resist God working morally, and beseeching them, as the Apostle speaks, 2
Cor. 5. 20. As though God through us did beseech you. So the Jews with their
Fathers resisted the Holy Ghost, Acts 7. 51. Forasmuch as the words delivered
unto them, and which they resisted, were sent by the Lord of Hosts in his
Spirit, by the Ministry of his Prophets, Zach. 7. 12. And accordingly God is
said to have protested among them by his Spirit, by the hands of the Prophets;
but they would not hear, Nehem. 9. 30. But they do not resist, nor can resist
the Holy Ghost, working immediately, and physically upon their wills the Act of
Conversion, and physical, or rath^r hyperphysical transmuta^ion. We willingly
confess (as the Dr. goes on) that the Elect resist neither, tending to their
first Conversion, provided the time be come which God has appointed for their
Conversion; till then they resist all Exhortations tending thereunto, as well
as others; but as for any Divine Act for a physical transmutation of their
wills, they are not made partakere thereof, till the time of their effectual
calling. Thus far Dr. Twiss.


Securus. Give me leave to ask you a sixth question, [ Whether in the
designation either of time or means, God had any consideration of any
qualification as wrought, or to be wrought in man, or of any compliance in him,
that at such time such means might be the more congruously applied for his
Conversion?]


Diotrephes. No; for that were stark Pelagianism, a giving of grace according
to man's works. To avoid which, We willingly profess (as I told you already from
Dr. Twiss) that God carries himself absolutely throughout; not only declaring
these (...) 42
(graces of Faith and Repentance) according to the mere pleasure of his will,
without all consideration of ought in man; but giving them also unto some, and
denying them unto others, according to the m^er pleasure of his will, without
the consideration of ought in man.


Securus. I pray resolve me one question more; Is it possible for any man, by
any means, or any diligence in the use of that means, to attain unto these
graces, when God has decreed to deny them to him; o^ is it possible for any
man, through any perverse opposition to fail of them, when God has decreed to
bestow them upon him?]


Diotrephes. To this I shall answer you in the very words of Mr. D. Dyke In his
Mystery of self-deceiving. p. 245.
; he propounds a shift that is rife (as he says) in the mouths of the profane,
That it is vain and bootless to take any pains in godliness; for if they be
ordained to destruction, it will nothing advantage them, they shall lose all
their labor; if to salvation, though they live never so wickedly, it shall
nothing prejudice, or disadvantage them; they must needs come to their
appointed end. To which shift he applies these words, by way of Antidote, [ But
these must know, that it is impossible, either for a Reprobate to live godly,
or an Elect always to live lendly and loosely; for the same God that ordains
the end, ordains the means. And Dr. ^wiss Vbi supra p. 74
says as much; for he confesses, it is impossible for them (Reprobates) to
shun damnation; and for the Elect Ibid. p. 84.
, he confesses also, it is impossible for them to disobey, or not to be
industrious, when God will have them to be industrious.


Securus. Sir, You have most plentifully confirmed, what I have been all this
while attempting to prove unto you, [ That all endeavors, whether to obtain
life, or avoid destruction, are utterly impertinent and needless; for who
Matthew. 6* 27.
, but a Fool, or a mad man, will trouble his brain, or spend his labor about
impossibilities?


Diotrephes. But Sir, without a special revelation (which is rare and
extraordinary) a man cannot be certain of his Election, (and consequently
cannot enjoy the comforts of that apprehension) but by and through his
effectual calling, the means whereof he is therefore carefully to attend.


Securus. That alters not the case at all; for if the man be a Reprobate, his
knowledge of that Estate, though it may torment him before the time, it cannot
enable him to avoid so sad a destiny: And if he be elected, though the
assurance of that condition be attended with never so much happiness, yet that
assurance is not attainable before his effectual calling (as you confess) and
the time hereof is prefixed unalterably; so that he cannot be regenerated,
repent and believe, sooner or later. If you should therefore address your
Exhortation to him to repent; he replies to you, If I be elected to the end
[Salvation] I am elected to the means too. What that means is, extraordinary or
ordinary, I know not; whether affliction, the voice of Gods Rod; or preaching,
the voice of his Word; whether your Sermon, or another man's: But God knows
which (infallibly) and has as infallibly decreed to bring me to it; and I am
no more able to absent my self from that means, than to rescind, and alter Gods
immutable Decrees. Why then should I not stay, and expect the good hour, till
God by such an irresistible efficacy, draws me unto that end, through the means
of his own appointing? I am sure neither my neglect of Ordinances, nor my
flagitious crimes can cancel the Decree of my Election. You may think it
impossible that a profane careless wretch should be saved; but it is no less
impossible that an Elect V^ssel, how profane and careless soever, should be
damned. The Divines of great Britain Vbi supra p. 193.
, have determined this most judiciously, in their Suffrage (upon the fifth
Article of perseverance, Expl c. These. 4.) It is impossible that Paul elect
should perish; it is impossible also that Paul a blasphemer of Christ, and an
unbeliever, if he dies in this state, should not perish; so it is impossible
that David elect should perish; it is also impossible that David an Adulterer,
and Murderer, if death arrests him in his impenitency, should not perish. Sed
hunc nodum Divina Provdentia and Misericordia facile solvit; curando ut nemo
Electorum in eo statu moriatur, in quo a vita aeterna juxta aliquam Divinae
Voluntatis ordinationem excluderetur. They say, That the Divine Providence and
Mercy does easily unty this knot; by taking care that none of the Elect shall
dye in that state, wh^rein according to any ordination of the Divine Will, he
should be excluded from eternal life. This is the judgment of those profound
Divines.


Diotrephes. Those Divines I am sure do conclude (and in those very passages
to) that the end is not to be attained but by the use of the means; and Gods
acting in that means does not exclude, but assist and encourage ours. Nehemiah
therefore does thus exhort the Nobles, Rulers, and the rest of the people, Be
not ye afraid, remember the Lord which is great and terrible, and fight for
your Brethren, your sons and your daughters, your wives and your houses; (for)
our God shall fight for us, Nehem. 4. 14. with ver. 20.


Securus. The question (now) is not concerning the conjunction of the end and
means; but concerning the n^cessity of man's care about the use of that means
Etiamsi fidem and resipiscentiam a suis confederat is requirat Deus, nequaquam
tamen propterea voluntas ejus conditionata est, neque ab impletione illarum
conditionum voluntas Dei meritum Christi applicandi dependet, cum impletio
harum conditionum purum putum Dei donum sit, qui dat velle and perficere, and
nullo modo homini tribui possit ac debeat. Embdensium examen de Gratiae and
Meriti Christi Univers. Quest 7. Page 121. Par. 2. Syn. D.
. I grant the first, but deny the last: Why should I less trust God with the
means, then with the end? Are they not alike absolutely intended? If any
advantage be, it is on the part of the means; for (as you cited the words of the
British Divines) the end [ eternal life] is designed and promised, but
conditionally [if we do believe] but the means [Faith and Repentance] are
promised absolutely. And seeing God has by his immutable Decree, absolutely
undertaken for that means; and that not only as to the kind, but also as to the
irresistible application and working of it; it is so far from being a duty,
that it seems to be a sinful distrust to be solicitous about it. We ought not
to distrust Gods power (for the accomplishment of salvation in the Elect) for
that is Almighty; nor his Will, for that is immutable. To doubt of either, is
to sin against his Omnipotence or Immutability. If Christ passes his word for
Peter's security, in walking upon the surface of the water, as weak as the
foundation is, his Faith is weaker, and too blame, if he fears sinking. When
the means is absolutely determined, and the application and working of it
absolutely undertaken for by Almighty God, his Revelation that it is so, gives
us a Quietus est about it. In that Battle where the watchword is [ The Sword
of the Lord, and of Gideon] there, that Exhortation is no less needful then
seasonable; [ Be not dismayed, Judge. 7. 18, 20.
fight; for the Lord fights for you:] We must (in this case) blow our
Trumpets of Rams Horns, and break our empty Deuteronomy. 20. 3.
Pitchers, and advance our lights; if God promises victory but upon condition
only, we must dutifully address our selves to the performance of that
condition, though to our apprehension it contributes little or nothing to the
event or blessing promised: But where God absolutely intends and promises a
victory, there the word is, [ Ye need not fight in this Battle; Fear not, stand
still, and see the salvation of the Lord which he will show to you; 2 Chronicles.
20. 17 Exodus 14. 13, 14
the Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.) And they that
should lay hold upon the Sword and Spe^r, and stand upon their own Guard, and
postures of defense in this case, deserve as sharp a reprehension, as that our
Savior gave to his Disciples, (not trusting his Divine presence as sufficient
to bridle and curb Matthew. 8. 26. and chap. 14. 31.
that tempest) Why are ye fearful or doubtful, O ye of little faith?


Diotrephes. That Gods promise of the end does not acquit us of the use of the
means, we may see in the example of King Hezekiah; he was sick unto death, but
upon his devotions, his prayers and tears, God was pleased to send his Prophet
to him with a joyful message of his Restitution, Behold, I will add unto thy
days fifteen years, Isa. 38. 5. And yet to show they should not rely upon Gods
intent and promise for the end, without the use of the means, the Prophet
commanded, Let them take a lump of figs, and lay it for a plaster upon the
Bile, and he shall recover. And the example of the Apostles Voyage is very
Ibid. ver. 2^.
memorable, Acts 27. wherein being in extreme danger by Reason of the Tempest,
the Angel of God (at last) appears to Paul, saying, Fear not, God has given
thee all them that sail with thee, (ver. 24.) yet (to show the use of means was
necessary for obtaining the end [the safety] here promised) the same Paul (when
he saw the Ship-men about to flee out of the Ship) said to the Centurion, and
to the Soldiers, Except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved, ver. 30*
31.


Securus. In these examples it is evident, by the very letter of the Text, that
as well the several ends intended, as the promises about them, were suspended
upon several conditions, and those conditions not absolutely undertaken (as are
those for the salvation of the Elect) to be performed by God himself, but
prescribed and left to the care of those concerned in them; and had not that
plaster of figs been applied by those about him, Hezekiah had not recovered;
and had not the Cen^u^ion and Soldiers kept the Seamen in the Ship, they had
suffered Shipwreck: But if the Lord had absolutely decreed the recovery of
Hezekiah by such a plaster, and had absolutely promised too, that he would
infallibly apply it himself, the Prophet had been (at least) impertinent in
prescribing the app^i^ation to be made by others that attended on him.

In like manner, had the Lord absolutely decreed the safety of all the
passengers in the Ship, upon condition of the Mar^ners presence and labor in
it, and had absolutely promised to make good the condition also, that is,
insuperably to cause those Mariners to abide and labor therein, (which is the
very case in the matter of salvation) Paul's jealousy of the Sea-mens
departure out of the Vessel, had been Verba Pauli, Acts 27. 31. Manifest
continent comminationem hypotheticam, quae irrefragabiliter arguit Revelationem
ei factam non continuisse decretum aut promissionem absolutam, sed
conditionatam. -- Aut falsa fuit comminatio Pauli, si promissio Paulo facta
absoluta erat, and came absolutam esse intellexerat: Aut, si vera fuit Pauli
comminatio, promissio Paulo facta non fuit absoluta, sed conditionata. Episcop.
culpable, and his motion to the Centurion and Soldiers impertinent; nay, his
advice and acting herein had been so far from prudence and a du^y, that it had
argued in him a piece of infidelity, a distrust of Gods power and faithfulness;
that Naaman may be cleans^d, he is enjoined to wash seven times in the waters
of Jordan; but had God absolutely promised to cut a Channel, to bring those
waters into his Bedchamber, he had at least been improvident, to take so long
a Journey, when he might have had the same benefit of cure in his own Lodgings.
Let me offer you but one example to illustrate the case touching Gods absolute
promise; it was Gods special command, Exodus 34. 23, 24. Thrice in the year
shall all your men-children appear before the Lord: But how shall their Land be
secured in the mean time (when all the fighting men are drawn away?) God makes
an absolute promise to defend it: For (says he) I will cast out the Nations
before thee, and enlarge thy Borders; neither shall any man desire thy Land,
when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice in the year. Be
not afraid to leave your Cities and your Houses without watch or defense, to
come to my Temple to serve me; for I will defend you from all assaults Annor.
Diodati.
. Sure in this case it had been a piece of distrust and infidelity in them to
have provided guards against any invasion of the enemy.


Diotrephes. Sir, I pray give me leave to open my mind freely to you; (for I am
almost at my Ne plus ultra, and ready to take my leave of you:) Why do you not
consider what madness it would be to argue about men's bodies, as you do about
their souls? It is as true that God has decreed how many years and days you
shall live, as that he has decreed whether you shall be Mr. Baxter's Treatise
of Conversion. p. 292, 293.
saved; and I will refer it to your own Reason, what you would think of the wit
of that man, that would give over eating and drinking, and say, [God has
decreed how long I shall live, and if he have decreed that I shall live any
longer, I shall, whether I eat and drink or not; and if he have not decreed
that I shall live, it is not eating or drinking that will keep me alive?] What
would you say to such a man but this? That God decrees no man to live, but by
the ordinary means of living; and therefore ordinarily if you will give over
ea^ing and drinking, it is certain that you will give over living; and that God
has made no Decree to save you alive, whether you eat and drink or not! So if
a man should have a journey to go on life or death, What would you think of
that man that will say, If God have decreed that I shall come to my journeys
end, I shall do it, whether I go or not; and if he have not decreed it, I shall
never come thither, though I travel never so hard? This is true; but if you
hence infer, that therefore it is as good sit still as go, you will show your
own folly, and not p^ocure an excuse for your neglect: Why even so it is in our
present case; if you will say, if God have elected me, I shall be saved; and if
he have not, I shall not, whatsoever I do, and therefore I may spare my pains;
it is no wiser, than to give over eating and drinking, because God has decreed
how long you shall live; or to give over traveling, because God has decreed
whether you shall come to your journies end; will you be thus mad about the
matters of your Trades and Callings in the World? why do not all the Weavers in
this Town, th^n give over their Trades, and say, [If God have decreed that I
shall live well and be rich, I shall be so whether I labor or not; and if he
have not, my labor will not serve?] Why do you not give over plowing and
sowing, and say, If God have decreed that I shall have a Crop, I shall have
one, whether I plow and sow or not; and if he have not, I shall not, whatsoever
I do? If you will needs be Fools, let it be about these worldly things, which
you may better spare: Try your own opinion awhile, and give over eating and
drinking, and working; but do not befool your selves about the One Thing
Necessary; and play not the mad men about the flames of hell, and do not in
such jest threw away your salvation; it were an hundred times a wiser course
for a man to set his house on fire, and say, [If God have decreed the saving of
it, the fire shall not burn it; if he have not, it will perish whatsoever I
do.] I tell you again, God has not ordinarily decreed the end without the
means; and if you will neglect the means of salvation, it is a certain mark
that God has not decreed you to salvation: But you shall find that he has
left you no excuse, because he has no thus predessti^a^ed you. Treatise of
Conversion, page 292, 293.


Securus. Sir, I perceive this Discourse has much inflamed you, you melt so
much upon it; and I believe you are pleased with it, as a piece of Rhe^orick
that you hold convincing and irrefragable: But for my part, I must tell you
seriously, I never heard a more confident piece of impertinency in my whole
life. To reflect a little upon your last passage, in the first place you say, [
God has not ordinarily decreed the end without the means:] What is this to the
purpose? yes, for then as you go on, [ If you neglect the means of salvati^r,
it is a certain mark that God has not decreed you to salvation.] And who can
help it? it is your own doctrine out of the Synod, and the Divines thereof
lately mentioned; that whom he was pleased to decree unto salvation, he
absolutely decreed to it; at least, he absolutely decreed to make the means of
salvation irresistibly effectual unto them Dei enim praedestinant is Decretum
non in hanc formam concipitur, Ego Petrum, si contiger^t eum credere and
perseve rare, eligam ad vitam aeternam: Sed poti us hoc modo, Ego eligo Petrum
ad vitam aeternam, quam ut infallibiliter consequatur, Ego^ci dabo fidem
perseverantem. Theol. Mag. Brit. Sentent. De primo Artic. In Explicat. Orth.
These. 4. Inter Acta. Synod. Par. 2. page 5. See the Ministers of Embden, D.
Gratiae and Meriti Christi Un^vs sal. Q^aest. 7. ibid. page 121. ut supra.
; for the rest of mankind, poor wretches! they are passed by, and left in the
common state of misery, under the conduct of the Decree of Reprobation, to be
fitted for the Triumphs of Divine Justice, at the great Assize and Day of Doom:
Well therefore may they play the mad men (if they list) about the flames of
hell; but it is no more in their power to escape them, than it is for them, [ in
jest to throw away salvation] whereof they never had so much as a possibility.
As God decreed them to another end, so doubtless by your Doctrine to other
means; for he [ has not ordinarily decreed the end without the means] you say,
and [ ^f you neglect this means] [you shallfind that he has left you without
excuse (you say) because he has not thus predestined you.] I pray of whom
speak you this? of the Elect? Are they left without excuse? Or can they neglect
the means of salvation? Then they may perish for all their predestination. Or
do you speak it of the Non-elect? Are they predestined thus? Either to the
end, or to the means of salvation? How came they to fall then from that end?
and how comes this means to be ineffectual to them? But if God has
predestined them, neither to the one, not to the other, how shall they find
that he has left them no excuse, because he has not thus predestined them?

But you demand, why men do not try their opinion about their bodies, states,
and secular affairs, as well as about their souls? Then (you say) they would
soon perceive the folly and mad^e ^s of it. Shall I give you a Reason? I think
I need not, you know the power of ^elf-love and interest; and the advantage
that sensual objects have to insinuate themselves, through the neighborhood of
their abode, and the sutableness of their pleasures to flesh and blood: But in
relation to eternal life, self is to be denied, and interest to be laid aside,
and lust to be mortified, and pleasure to be abandoned; many and great
difficulties there are to be contested against; and all this for an inheritance
invisible, at a great distance; for a reversion laid up for us in another
World. You see Sir, the state of the soul comes upon many disadvantages to
engage a man's affections and endeavors, after the use of means for her
salvation, in comparison of the body. If Mr. Baxter.
this be not sufficient, you may find perhaps better satisfaction in that
Sermon, [ of making light of Christ, page 15, 16.] But the plain truth is (set
aside some few Hypocondriac^^ persons, or such as are Distracted) men do not
make this experiment upon their bodies, because they are not of that opinion
generally, having had few or no Sermons preached, concerning the fatal period
of life, to instill such Doctrine into them. Will you affirm, God has
precisely decreed the final period of the Malefactor See Eccles. 7. 17. Job 15.
32. Chap. 22. 16. Psalm. 55. 23. Jer. 17. 11. and Prove. 9. 11. chapter 10. 27. Exodus
20. 12. and many others.
Will it not follow them, that he has no less precisely decreed the crime that
brought him to it, [ to his end at the Gallows?] How then will you free God
from being An^hour both of his sin and ruin?

For your instance of eating and drinking, it is not very apposite to this
purpose: Meat and Drink are a certain known means to preserve life, while God
pleases to continue it; and we have natural appetites Meats for the belly, and
the belly for meat.
, in proportion to the needs we have of such provisions, and faculties that
never fall, while they are in temper, to digest those provisions, and turn them
into the very substance of our bodies, to refresh and strengthen them: But for
the means of salvation, that has no such essential property; it was never
designed to feed the soul of any non-elect person to eternal life; no nor yet
the Elect neither (though they frequent it never so diligen^ly) till that good
hour comes, wherein God has precisely decreed, by the strength of his
Omnipotency, to make it irresistibly effectual. Besides, if God did intend and
promise absolutely to feed us (as he does to save the Elect) in that case, we
need take no thought, saying, What shall we eat, or what shall we drink? but
might rely upon the nursery of his secret Providence knowingly, and with
confidence, for the preservation of our lives, as well as we did unwittingly
depend upon it, for our nutriment and formation, in our mothers womb. Sir, I
hope you are of opinion, that a man must honestly earn, or buy his bread,
before he eats it; but he were a very idle person, that should go to Marke^,
and a mad man, that should seek his bread with the peril of his life, as they
did, Lam. 5. 9. If God had absolutely promised, That the Barrel of meal should
not waste, nor the Cruse of oil fail 1 King. 17. 14
; or that he would command an Angel 1 King. 19. 5, 6 Chap. 17. 4.
, or a R^aven to feed him, in his private Cell. If God does absolutely
undertake to feed us, whatever our wants be, it is an Act of infidelity to tempt
God, saying, Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness Psa. 78. 19, 20
?

For your Traveller, I need not bare him company very far in this expedition.
If the Lord makes it a part of Philip's duty to baptize the Eunuch, he commands
him, saying, A rise, and go toward the South; and go near, and join thy self
to this Chariot, Acts 8. 26, 29. But if he absolutely intends to have him at
Azotus, to officiate thereabouts, he takes care to conduct him by the Ministry
of his own Spirit, ver. 39, 40. When God absolutely undertakes our passage (as
it is said he does in our way to heaven) it is our duty to trust him at the
Helm, and not presume to put our own hands upon it. And for your other
instance of plowing and sowing; though in our ordinary course of husbandry, he
that does not plow and sow, shall not reap; yet when God has made an absolute
promise (as 2 Kings 19. 29.) Ye shall eat this year such things as grow of
themselves, and the second year that which springs of the same. He does not
dutifully comply with Divine Providence, that will plow and sow for all that,
and not rest satisfied in a thankful expectation of the fruits of so gracious a
promise and dispensation. To come to your last, and maddest instance of all; I
cannot allow it a wise course, for any man to set his house on fire, that he
may gain a proof whether God has (in that case) passed a Decree to save it
from burning. I know God grants us no such license; and if we take it of our
selves, it is a presumption in us to dream, that he will prevent the mischief
that is like to ensue so gross a folly. But in our case, the house was set on
fire by our first Parents, many thousands of years before we were born, and
nothing but the blood of Christ is of sufficient force to quench it. That your
comparison may be pertinent, we may frame it thus: Suppose all the houses of
your Town were set on fire, and God had absolutely decreed that all but six
should be burnt to ashes, and that the use of all means whatsoever should be
utterly uneffectual to their preservation; nay, and for the preservation of
those six too, till his Omnipotent power did determine those your six
Neighbors irresistibly to use that means, to extinguish the fire in those
their six houses: If you should proclaim this to your whole Town, as a truth,
from the mouth of God, and they find grounds to believe you, How many, though
you should call never so earnestly upon them, would be so ridiculously
diligent, as to fetch their Ladders and Buckets, and attempt to quench the
flame?


Diotrephes. That the end and the means are tied together, you do not deny; and
that Gods work in providing and applying the means, does not exclude ours in
the use of it, I shall sufficiently confirm, by that earnest Exhortation of the
Apostle, Phil. 2. 12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling; for it
is God that works in you to will and to do, of his good pleasure.


Securus. The question is ( de modo) whether God has undertaken to perform
this work absolutely and irresistibly, or conditionally only? That is, in other
words, whether those that are thus exhorted, be really in any danger of
miscarrying under this work of God in them, for want of their own cooperation
and diligence therein? We suppose the men to be Regenerate by the Character the
Apostle gives of them; and if they be in no danger of miscarrying, then what
need they be solicitous? Let them cast all their care upon Gods good pleasure,
who works to will and to do in them: All they have to do, is to take up this
Resolution, the will of the Lord be done: For Gods absolute undertaking to
perform the work, does discharge us from all duty and care about it, as our
Savior has taught us in that instance, Luke 21. 14, 15. Settle it therefore
in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer, for I will give
you a mouth and wisdom, which all your Adversaries shall not be able to
gainsay, nor resist. In like manner, if God does absolutely undertake to
effect our conversion and perseverance, it will be our part to settle it in our
hearts, not to be careful about it.


Diotrephes. I confess I dare not so far question the wisdom and sincerity of
that holy Apostle, as to think he would put his Disciples in fear, where no
fear is, he would not delude them with a vain shadow of terror; neither would
he be so vehement, if we were not in some danger of seduction. His frequent and
earnest Exhortations unto Caution, Circumspection and Vigilance do imply a
possibility of defection. Why should he else make such inferences as these
(upon the Apostasy and backslidings of others) let him that (truly) thinks
he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. and Romans 11. 20. Be not
high-minded, but fear. These, and a multitude of the like expressions, are
sufficient evidence, that God intends not to discharge us of our duty; but by
all possible means to oblige us to it, and secure our diligence in the
performance of it.


Securus. Very good Sir, I perceive whatever you be in your opinion and
doctrine, you will be a Remonstrant at last, in your application and practice.
I have brought you to your journies end, and you are welcome to Canterbury: But
my affairs call me further; I commend you therefore to Gods protection, and
leave you to reflect upon that Discourse, that has passed betwixt us.


Diotrephes. I pray God be with you, and send you good speed in your affairs.


THE SYLLOGISM.
THAT Doctrine that is insufficient to convince the secure of the necessity of
their endeavors after conversion and holiness; and tends rather to lull them
asleep in their security, than awaken them out of it, That Doctrine is not
according to godliness.

The Doctrine maintained by the Calvinists in opposition to the Remonstrants,
is insufficient to convince the secure of the necessity of their endeavors
after conversion and holiness, etc. Therefore

The Doctrine maintained by the Calvinists in opposition to the Remonstrants,
is a Doctrine not according to godliness.

The Major is evident of it self.
The Minor is proved by the Discourse in the precedent Dialogue.
Colasterion.
Matthew. 15. 6. Thus have ye made the Commandment of God of none effect.
Supponere antecedenter ad fidem, ipsamque Conversionem salutarem aliquid
discrimen inter probitatis studiosos, and alios, est valde Other proofs of the
Minor.
absurdum: Cum m^e di crimenfaciat gratia Convertens, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Mares. in
Hydr^ Socin. Tom. 2. page 264.

Tantum ab^st, ut Deus in inchoand a regeneratione ad praevias disposition s
respiciat, ut contra alienissimi quique a regno Coelorum vo^entur, and quisunt
altioribus tenebris them rsi. Maccov. in Colleg. M^s^el. Q^^st. Disput. 1. page
394.

Non efficit Deus fid min assentientibus, and gratiae cooperantibus, s^d in rel
^tantibus, etc. Piscat. in Trip. Resp. ad Amic. C. V. Dupl^. ca^ 4. page 156.

D^us nabis r^luct^nt, bus (ut olim reluctanti Paulo) fidem infandit. ib^d.
p^g. 1^0.

Non est opus nostr^n^ quod credimus, sed solius Dei. page 157.

D^^iq^^ valde absurd sides, sanctificatio, perseverantia, ad conditiones
potestativas re ^rrentur quoad eos qui servantur, cum non s^ipsos discernant
test Paulo, 1 Cor. 4. 7. and eximia sint ac singularia Dei beneficia, in eos
demum per gratiam efficacem collata, ex eodem illo decreto quo Deus determinate
and absolute decrevit illis salutem confer. Mares. in Hydra Socin. Tom. 1.
page 617.

Non vult Deus ut homines plus boni faciant, quam reipsa faciunt; aut plus mali
omittant, quam omittunt. Piscat. ubi supra. cap. 1. page 177. Item Maccov. ubi
supra. Disput. 2. per totam Disp.

Omnia fiunt ex Decreto Dei irresistibili, etiam impia quaeque scelera, eoque
necessario omnia fiunt. Piscat. ibid. page 168.

Omnia quae fiunt, necessario fiunt, quoad Dei voluntatem, tanquam primam
causam. ib. page 191.

Et bona and mala opera omnia, ex decreto Dei fiunt necessario. ibid. 212.

De his quae eveniunt necessario stulta (est) plane omnis consultatio Vide
Aristot. in 3. Ethic.
D. Burleigh. Histor. Artic. Lambeth. page 6.

Haec sententia and lapsis curam resurgendi adimit, and sanctis occasionem
torporis adfert, eo quod in utramque partem supersluus labor sit, si neque
rejectus ulla industria possit intrare, neque electus ulla negligentia possit
excidere: Quoquo enim modo se egerint, non posse aliud erga eos quam Deus
definivit accidere, and sub incerta spec^rsum non posse esse constantem, cum si
aliud habeat praedestinantis electio, cassa sit annitentis intentio. Removeri
itaque omn^m industriam, tollique virtutes, si Dei constitutio humanas
praeveniat voluntates, and sub hoc praedestinationis nomine fatalem quandam
induci necessitatem, aut diversarum naturarum dici Dominum conditorem, si nemo
possit aliud esse quam factus est. Prosper in Epist. ad Augustinum.

THE FOURTH Dialogue BETWIXT DIOTREPHES and PRAESUMPTUOSUS.
PRaesumptuosus. Sir, the occasion of my waiting upon you at this time, is to
request the benefit of your Ministry; God has been pleased of his good
Providence to give me a Child, which was yesterday brought forth into the
World, and I desire the next Lord's Day to have it baptized.


Diotrephes. I am not satisfied that I may administer the Sacrament of Baptism
to your Child; for Mr. Baxter.
the Right of the Infant to Baptism is merely on the Parents account, and on
supposition of his Right to Membership of the universal Church; if the efore
the Parents Right be justly questioned, and he susp^nded, then the Infants
Right must be questioned, and it suspended on the same ground. Disput. of Right
to Sacram. Disp. 3. page 341.


Praesumptuosus. Sir, I hope you have so much charity at least, as to think it
probable that I am a Christian. A considerable part of your present
Congregation, are able to testify that I was baptized into the Christian Faith.


Diotrephes. I do not hold (for my part) Mr. Baxter.
That a Dogmatical Faith gives Right to Baptism. And yet, We have abundance of
people that have not so much as a Dogmatical Faith; that know not who Christ
is, nor what he has done; nor are they in most places (since the Directory was
in use) called to profess their Faith when they offer their Children to
Baptism. Ibid. page 316.


Praesumptuosus. Sir, I have been informed that at my Baptism, the Minister
repeated the Apostles Creed; and when he had done so, he demanded of my father
(who stood ready to answer for me) whither he would have me baptized into that
Faith, and he answered yes; whereupon the said Minister proceeded ^o the
Solemnization of the Sacrament, and baptized me in the Name of the Father, and
^f the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.


Diotrephes. That is but the profession of a Dogmatical Faith, not a Saving
Faith.


Praesumptuosus. May not a Parent justly claim Baptism for his Child upon the
profession of such a Faith?


Diotrephes. Whatever Parents claim out of a pretended Right, Mr. Baxter.
Ministers may not baptize their Children upon the profession of any other
Faith that comes short of Saving Faith. Ibid. Disp. 2. page 41, etc.


Praesumptuosus. What is that Saving Faith you would have a man to profess?


Diotrephes. I would have him seriously profess to believe all the essential
Articles of Christian Religion, and to consent to take Mr. Baxter.
God for his only God and Portion, Christ for his only Red emer, and the Holy
Ghost for his Sanctifier, renouncing the World, Flesh and Devil. Ibid. Disput.
3. page 34^.


Praesumptuosus. Methinks this is all one with that Promise and Vow which was
wont to be made by Godfathers and Godmothers, in the behalf of those children
for whom they were then Sureties: For I remember that to this question of the
Catechism in the English Liturgy [What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then
(in your Baptism) promise for you?] the Child is instructed to answer thus [
They did promise and Vow three things in my name. 1. That I should forsake the
Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of the wicked World, and all
the sinful lusts of the flesh. 2. That I should believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith. And 3. That I should keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and
walk in the same all the days of my life And in the charge to the Godfathers,
etc. Seeing this Child has promised by you, to forsake the Devil, etc. to
believe in God, and to serve him.
: And more distinctly concerning the Articles of the Christian Faith; the Child
being Catech^zed therein, does tell us, he is taught; 1. To believe in God the
Father, who has made me, and all the World. 2. In God the Son, who has
redeemed me, and all Mankind. 3. In God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and
all the Elect people of God. Certainly this does amount to as full a profession
of Saving Faith, as that you require (with some alteration of words and
phrases.)


Diotrephes. Mr. Baxter.
If a man have made the same profession (I mentioned) and after long
continuance in the Church does offer his Child to Christ in Baptism, and offer
to renew that profession, and enter his Child into the same Covenant, I shall
suppose his claim just, till some sufficient Reason be brought to prove it
unjust. Ubi supra. Disp. 3. page 343.


Praesumptuosus. For the time of my continuance in the Church it is sufficiently
known; the Di^ectory by which I was baptized (if we may believe so late a
Tradition) was not born long before me: And I hope you will not account my
Baptism N^ll for want of such a profession of Saving Faith as you intimate to
be of necessity to make my claim of Baptism just on my Child's behalf. If that
profession made in my name were defective, and came short of Saving Faith, you
cannot say that either I or my Parents sinned in it. My father I presume was
guided by the Minister, and he observed the instructions in the Directory;
wherein if you are not satisfied, I am contented to renew my Profession,
together with such enlargements as your Christian Prudence shall think fit to
add for a fuller Explication.


Diotrephes. When I asser: the unlawfulness (to admit persons to Baptism upon
the profession of any Faith that comes short of Saving Faith) I do not intend
thereby to assert the Mr. Baxter.
Nullity of all such Baptism, when performed, though unlawfully; for though it
may be N. ^.
Null or vain, as to the special uses and benefits, yet it follows not that
therefore it is Null, as to the true Form and Being of the external Ordinances;
nor that this is to be reiterated. Ubi supra. Disp. 2 page 53.


Praesumptuosus. What hinders then but my Child may be admitted unto Baptism?


Diotrephes. I am unsatisfied upon another account. Mr. Baxter.
If the Parents do either produce no Title to the baptizing of their Child;
that is (if they) do not seem Christians or godly; or if they give us grounds
of a violent presumption, that their profession is false and counterfeit; in
either of these cases, as we are to exclude them from Christian Communion, so
are we to refuse the baptizing of their Children; that is (we are) to supsend
both, till such a Title be showed, or till the grounds of that strong
presumption be removed. Ubi supra. Disput. 3. page 340.


Praesumptuosus. Sir, I hope such is your Charity, you have a better opinion of
me, than to reckon me amongst the number of the ungodly. I assent firmly to all
the essential parts of Christian Religion, and am able to give an account of
them: And I am ready, if you please to call me to it, to profess my consent, to
take God for my God, Christ for my Savior, the Spirit for my Sanctifier, the
Word for my Rule. I profess to esteem the Kingdom of heaven before this present
World. I do not deliberately venture on Gods displeasure, much less profess, I
had rather forfeit my interest in heaven, than forsake the pleasures of sin. I
thank God I am not so much in love with any gross sin; but I can, and do
frequently pray against it, and desire Almighty God, not only to pardon, but in
his due time also to mort^fie it. In the mean while, I take it kindly at their
hands, that do in love and meekness admonish and reprove me. It cannot be
objected against me, that ever I endeavored the disgracing or extirpation of
godliness; neither is it my custom to deride or slander, or persecute the
generality of godly men about me, for their apparent godly practices in matters
of weight in Religion. I am sufficiently convinced of the manifold advantages
of a godly life, and have adhered to the godly party, and joined with them in
Fasting and Prayers, and other holy duties, both in public and in private; and
it is a trouble to me that you should now deny my Child the benefit of Gods
Ordinance. See Mr. Baxter of Right to Sacram. Disp. 3. page 345, etc.


Diotrephes. My judgment is, Mr. Baxter.
They that live constantly in the Commission of gross sins, though they profess
Repentance, and promise Reformation; yet (if they) have over and over broke
their pro^ise, and still continue in the sin; such men's words are not any more
to be credited (else all Discipline may be ^luded) ^ill they actually reform.
Ibid. page 347.


Praesumptuosus. Sir, I have read in the Writings of a person not inferior to
yourself in point of reputation, both for learning; and godliness, who
certifieth the World upon his own personal knowledge (to the great comfort of
the godly, who suffer infirmity through the violence of temptation) in these
words Of Right to Sacram. Disput. 3. page 29, 30.
, Mr. Baxter.
[ We know many that we s^e great signs of grace in, and that are well reputed
of as eminent for godliness, that do frequently com^it as great sins, as some
kind of rash swearing seems to be: For example; It is too rare to m^et with a
person so conscionable, that will not frequently ba^kbite, and with some malice
or e^vy speak evil of those that differ from them in judgment; or that they
take to be against them, or that they are fal^n out with; they will ordinarily
censure them unjustly, and secretly endeavor to disgrace them, and take away
their good names, and love those that ^oyn with t^em in i^: So how many
Professors will rashly rail and lie in their passions? How few will take well
a Reproof, but rather de^end their sin? How many in these times, that we doubt
not to be godly, have been guilty of disobedience to their Guides, and of
Schi^m, and doing much to the hurt of the Church? A very great sin! The same
person Mr. Baxter.
says also, That a man may be o^t drunk, and often commit fornication, he knows
not justly how often, and yet have true grace Ib. page 329.
: Nay, he does conclude (though he subjoyns some Cautions to avod scandal) That
Solomon (whose sin was more heinous than Drunkenness, For^ication, yea, or
Murder it self (as he confesses Ib. p. 327, 328*
) was not unsanctified, but had true grace; and norwithstanding his Sensuality
and Idolatry, that he did in other things contin^e his worship of the true God.
I hope I am not in a worse state than Solomon.


Diotrephes. Had we such a man as Solomon in his sin to d^al with, we ought to
use him as an ungodly man. I think (says the same Party, whose Authority you
insist upon Mr. Baxter. ib. page 347.
) So those that have lately committed scandalous notorious sin, and will not on
sufficient persuasion manifest any satisfactory Repentance for it; we must
presume them ungodly, till they will manifest Repentance; for we know, except
they repent, they shall perish; and an undiscovered Repentan^e is to us as
none: And our Divines at Dort conclude, That though a godly man lose not his
Justification by gross sinning, yet he contracts such an incapacity of coming
to heaven in that state, that that must be removed, or else he could not be
saved.


Praesumptuosus. It seems strange to me, that persons who for the present have
a real actual interest in Christ (as all justified persons are supposed to
have) should at the same time have no Right to his Institutions, and be in an
incapacity of salvation. Is Christ Theirs, and are not his Sacraments Theirs
too? Are the Ordinances more sacred and precious than the Redeemer? But they
are incapable of salvarion, you say. Does not this make a foul flaw in the
Apostles Chain, Romans 8. 30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified? But Sir
(though your words sound that way) I hope you do not hold, that a Child of God
can fall totally from the state of grace.


Diotrephes. We do not maintain that the Children of Dr. Twiss. ubi supra. p.
29, 30.
God cannot fall from grace, albeit they should let the Reins loose to their
lusts to commit sin, and that with greediness; but to the contrary we teach,
that God keepe^h them from falling away, by putting his fear into their ^earts,
according to that, Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall never depart away from me: So that the right state of ou^ Tenet is not,
that God will keep them from falling away in spite of their presumptuous
courses; but that he will keep them by him through an holy fear; which is as
much as to say, he will hold them fast by him, by keeping them from
presumptuous courses; and accordingly David, after he had prayed that God would
cleanse him from his secret faults, he entreats God that as touching
presumptu^us sins, he would keep him from them, that so he might be innocent
from the great offense. And as this was David's prayer, so answerable hereunto
was Paul's Faith; He will deliver me from every evil 2 Timothy, 4. 17.
work (to wit, either by Obedience, or by Repentance, or else from every
presumptuous course) and preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom. And accordingly
the Saints of God, as they are styled his called ones, his sanctified ones, so
likewise are they denominated his reserved ones in the Epistle of Jude; for his
course is to make them meet partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light; not to save them in spite of their unfitness for it, but to make them
first fit for it by holiness, and then to make them partakers of it. Thus Dr.
Twiss.


Praesumptuosus. The Children of God then are always free from, at least a
course of presumptuous sins; Paul's Faith, and David's Prayer (which are theirs
too) do secure them from sins of that nature: But should they commit such sins
as would make so foul a ^law in their state of salvation, as to put them into
an incapacity of Heaven, I doubt whether it could be soader'd up again by
Repentance: Repentance is a metal so het^rogeneous and different, I am afraid
it would never hold; for as nothing in the World but Christ, and that
Evangelical Grace of his procuring, can put us into the state of salvation; so
certainly nothing el^e can restore us to it, if we make a recession from it.


Diotrephes. Why, Repentance is a part of the Gospel, and one of the conditions
of the Covenant of Grace.


Praesumptuosus. I am taught otherwise by the Deputies of the Synod of Gelders,
and their Judgment is recorded amongst the Acts of the Synod at Dort De Artic.
secundo. page 100. par. 3.
, wherein they declare, That Repentance is not always prescribed with an
intention of salvation; that it has not C^r^st for its foundation; and that to
be called unto Repentance, is not the grace of the Gospel. Nam haec in solo
Christo, and propter solum Christum offertur, cum intention semper salutis
aeternae; for this (grace of the Gospel) is offe^ed in Christ alone, and for
Christ a^on^, and alway^s with intention of eternal salvation. So is not
Repentance, as they say.


Diotrephes. It is not sufficient to consider how the grace of the Gospel is
offered; but we must consider withal how it is to be received, and ho^ to be
kept.


Praesumptuosus. I suppose there is little dispute about that amongst the
Ort^odox; Faith is concluded to be the sole instrument or condition of
receiving and pres^rving this grace. To this purpose it is delivered with great
approbation, as a Branch of Modern Div^nity The Marrow of Modern Div^nity page
119, Edit. 3.
, That [ In the Covenant betwixt Christ and his, there is no more for man to
do, but only to know and believe that Christ has done all for them.]


Diotrephes. This must be a lively active Faith, not a dead one; and such we
ought to conclude his to be, who lives in gross sins. I nothing doubt (says
Dr. Twiss Ubi supra. p. 102.
) but a Carnal Christian may be Orthodox throughout, and persuade himself of a
Dr. Twiss.
true Faith: But if his life be not answerable, we will be bold to tell him
that his Faith is vain; for true Faith works by love, Gal. 5. And Faith
working by love, is as much as a new Creature, Gal. 6. And whosoever is in
Christ, is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. And they that are Christ's, have crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5. 24. Therefore where such such
a new Creature is wantng, where the flesh is not crucified with the affections
and lusts, they are not Christ's, nor in Christ, nor have any faith working by
love.


Praesumptuousus. Whatever Dr. Twiss says in his passion against his
Adversary; I am confident he is far from affirming, That the Children of God do
lose their Faith, as often as they commit the works of flesh. The Divines of
Drent De persev. examen. These. 4. p. 275. par. 3.
(at the Synod of Dort) tell us very roundly, it is false; and that not only in
respect of the habit of faith, but in respect of the act of faith too. Ille
saepe manet, etiam dum h^mo pec^at. The Act of Faith does oftentimes remain
even then when a man sins. And a little after, Quid vetat, quo minus sancti,
dum ipsa actualia pe^cata, and quidem crassiora committu^, simul actum fidei
sentiant? What hinders the Saints, that they should not feel the effect and
acting of their faith at the same time, when they commit the grossest sins?


Diotrephes. Sure you cannot think, they can believe unto salvati^r, at that
time of their gross sinning, when they contract such a guilt and incapacity of
coming to Heaven, that if it be not removed by Repentance, they cannot be
saved; as you had it before from the Divines of England Reatum damnabilem
contrahunt; praesentem ad Regnum Coelorum ingrediendum aptitudinem am^ttunt. De
pers^ver. quoad ipsos Electos. These. 3. vid. etiam These. 4. and 5. inter Acta
Syn. Not. Dord. page 192, 193. par. 2.
, at the same Synod.


Praesumptuosus. Sir, I wonder you or they should offer to say, That the Saints
or Godly may fall into such a state, wherein they cannot be saved; when there
is such an absolute Decree past for their salvation, as neither themselves, nor
sin, nor hell, nor Devil can frustrate; nay, the power of God himself is not
able to rescind it. This is the judgment of the Hassien De persever. Aphor. 5.
page 215. par. 2.
Divines. at the Synod of Dor^^ They say, It is Gods immutable Counsel to
preserve his Elect in the true Faith, even unto the end; and through that
(Faith) to bring them ad aeternam salutem necessario and infallibiliter,
infallibly and necessarily to eternal salvation; which Counsel of God cannot be
made void by any Creature; Nec ab ipso Deo, propter ipsius immutabilitatem,
revocari unquam poterit; no nor ever be revoked, in regard of his immutability,
by God himself. And this Sir, is the only Sanctuary that I flee unto for
Refuge, this the only Rock that my hope anchors on.


Diotrephes. But you must first be sure to be set upon this Rock, before you
can prudently build your hopes and confidence upon it.


Praesumptuosus. Sir, I have good assurance that I am of the number of the
Elect; and the Decree of Election lays a certain ground of perseverance; and
the faithfulness of God is by his promise engaged for it on their behalf.
Account of persever. By Mr. Baxter.
page 3 3, and 37.


Diotrephes. I would not have you too confident of your own state; it is the
advice of the Apostle, Let him that thinks he 1 Cor. 10. 1^.
stands, take heed lest he fall.


Praesumptuosus. Such as have no other evidence Am^sius says, Non ad timorem
rejectionis exhortatur Scriptura veros fideles; quamvis nonnullos professione
fideles, qui videntur stare, 1 Cor. 10. 12. hortatur ne nimis fidant suae
professioni externae. Bell. Ener. Tom. 4. l. 6. c. 3. th. 1. n. 2. p. 173.
, but their own conjectures and seemings, that they are in a state of grace,
have reason to be jealous: But I hope you will not offer to lead me into an
opinion that the Elect can fall totally and finally from the state of
salvation; for Mr. Baxter.
that is an Error of dangerous consequence, against the grace and fidelity of
God; if not against his wisdom and his power, and against the peace of the
Saints; and therefore is to be carefully avoided and resisted, by those that
would not wound their faith. Ubi supra. page 14.


Diotrephes. That is not the thing I tempt you to; I am certain if you be
elected, you shall be saved; but I would have you be upon sure grounds, before
you pretend to so great an assurance of your Election; that you have obtained
this assurance by an immediate Revelation and Testimony of the Spirit, I hope
you will be more modest than to affirm.


Praesumptuosus. Sir, I do not pretend to any Enthusiastical assurance; a
certainty of Election may be had, and the Synod of Dort (at least, most of the
Divines thereof) do conclude, That every Elect person has it sooner or later
before his death See the Apology for Tilenus. page 493.
; and it is the Faith of the Congregational Churches expressed in their late
Declaration Chap. 3. n. 8.
, That men attending the Will of God revealed in his Word, and yielding
obedience thereunto, may from the certainty of their effectual vocation, be
assured of their eternal election. So also say the Westminster Assemblers.


Diotrephes. I shall not dispute that with you; I know it is the general Tenent
of the Orthodox: But you must remember the Apostles Exhortation, Give diligence
to make your Calling and Election sure. Your effectual Calling, make that sure
first, and then you need not doubt your Election; for none are effectually
called, but the Elect only, as the Congregational Churches Chapter 3. N. 6. and
Syn. Dort. Cap. 2. Art. 8.
have declared.


Praesumptuosus. Sir, I am able to tell you not only the man, but the very Text
he preached upon, with the day and hour when I was effectually called. I
confess time was, when I lay among those loose corns that were very fit to have
been blown off, but such a Fast Sermon did I hear from N. N. as melted my heart
and spirit into that frame and temper, that I shall never forget it. This
Sermon was a preparation to the Solemn League and Covenant; and I was so fit
for the impression at that time, that I made no objection or scruple at it. And
having upon this Call espoused the [ Good Old Cause (though I say it) I have
been true to it ever since, according to the several degrees of light which I
have received. How constant I have been in frequenting public and private
meetings; How much I have contemned the World, and laid out my self upon this
account; nay, how much I have suffered for godliness in evil times, and in the
sharpest trials never shrunk; these things are not so fit for me to relate, as
for some of my Neighbors, that have been very well acquainted with them.


Diotrephes. There are many which make fair shows, and yet have no sound root
of grace in them, in time of temptation they fall away; and I wish you to
consider what the Lord says by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 18. 24. When the righteous
turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does
according to all the abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? All
his righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned; in his trespass
that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he
dye.


Praesumptuosus. Divines do conclude from the freeness of Gods grace, and the
absoluteness of his power, and the unchangeableness of his Counsel, and the
greatness of his Wisdom, that he will not suffer any of his Elect Syn. Dor.
cap: 1. art. 11.
to miscarry, and these are the pillars Dr. Spurst. ubi supra. p. 46. Dr.
Twiss. ibid. page 172.
I am taught to lean upon. And John 10. 29. Christ plainly gives us to
understand, that his sheep are in the hands of his Father, and that none is
able to take them out of his hands: And accordingly St. Peter says, 1 Pet. 1.
that they are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation; yet when
we say that this faith cannot be lost, we deliver it upon supposition of Gods
purpose to maintain them in that state of grace, against all the powers of
darkness; which purpose is manifest by his promise, I will put my fear in their
hearts, Jer. 32. 40. Ezekiel. 18. 24.
that they shall never depart away from me. As for that Text which you allege,
it makes nothing to this purpose, as the Professors of Leyden Censura in
Confess. cap. 18. ad sinem. page 254.
have learnedly observed, [ Quia eo loco non asseritur absolute quod vere
justus aliquando deficiat; because it is not absolutely affirmed in that place,
that one truly justified may fall away; but what will become of him if he does;
that so by this commination, the Prophet may make those cautious, who are
running the Race of Righteousness, and fright them from defection: But he knew
well enough their defection is impossible; for the gifts and calling of God are
without Repentance, Romans 11. 29.


Diotrephes. I must tell you from the Prophet, That Account of persever. p. 27^
the heart of man is deceitful above all things; who (besides God and himself)
can know it? Common grace may carry a man far; but your frequent relapsing into
sin, is ground enough to question your sincerity; and if that be doubtful, so
is your effectual calling and regeneration too; and till you be certain of
this, you can (in an ordinary way) have no certainty of your Election.


Praesumptuosus. Though there be a great affinity and likeness betwixt the
Elect of God, and such as are endued only with a temporary faith; Vigere tamen
in solis electis fiduciam illam quam celebrat Paulus, ut pleno ore clament
Abba, Pater, says Mr. Calvin Just. l. 3. c. 2. Sect. 11.
: Yet the gift of prayer, whereby they can with boldness approach the Throne of
grace, and in all their needs cry Abba, Father, This is vigorous in the Elect
only; and by the privilege of this gift, I am confident of my Election. I
suppose you do not think that the Elect, when once regenerate, are forthwith
impeccable; and for sins of infirmity, which the regenerate daily falls into,
through inadvertency or negligence, they do not interrupt his state of
Justification, nor cut off his haereditary right to the Kingdom of heaven, as
the British Divines have determined at the Synod of Dort De Art. 5. page 192.
par. 2.



Diotrephes. The sins you are reported to be guilty of, are too gross to be
called sins of infirmity.


Praesumptuosus. The Divines of the Synod at Dort See the Apol. for Tilen. p.
380, 381.
, do put the sins of reg^n^rate persons upon the account of their ignorance and
infirmity; and there is good reason for it, because they happen always upon
Gods destitution, and the withdrawing of his grace Ibid p. 382.
: Hereupon Dr. D^m^an (one of the Scribes of that Synod) says, That the
Regenerate cannot omit the performance of what is required of them, if God
p^forms what he has pr^mised to them; and when God does his part, we cannot
omit ours.


Diotrephes. I would advise you to consider what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6.
9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God!
Be not deceived; neither For^icators nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor alusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Cov^tous,
nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Exto^io^ers, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
And Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like; of which I tell you
before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Now I appeal to your own conscience,
whether you be not guilty of some of these sins, which (you hear the Apostle
says) exclude men from a portion in Gods Kingdom.


Praesumptuosus. I will not go about to justify my self It is true, the
Children of God may sometimes be overtaken with some foulsin, as David was and
they may continue in it to long, without bringing forth so clear and full
evidence of Repentance and satisfaction to the Church of God, as the condition
of their sin requires; and in this case they may be for a time, as Trees in the
Winter. Dr. Twiss. ib. p. 103.
in all particulars there mentioned by the Apostle; but he puts [ Variance,
Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings] into the same
Catalogue; and says, that these are of like force with the rest, to exclude
men out of the Kingdom of Heaven: And yet you heard even now the Judgment of
that painful Divine Mr. Baxter, who affirms, That many in these times, whom we
doubt not to be godly, are guilty of these things; and that a man may be often
drunk, and often commit Fornication, he knows not justly how often, and yet have
true grace: And therefore lest you should vilify and disgrace the godly, you
must not understand those Texts of the Apostle, of the guilt of some particular
sins Nec irrita redditur justificatio interveniente reatu particularis peccati,
licet atrosis and conscientiam graviter sauciantis. Nam huic justificationi e
d^ametro opp^nitur non quilibet reatus cujuscunque poccati, sed reatus
universalis omnium peccatorum noadem expiatus. Theol. M. Brit. de persev.
Elect. Th. 6. Act. Syn. Dord. page 194. par. 2.
; but of their habituated state and trade of life in a prosecution of all sins.


Diotrephes. I would not have your soul miscarry; and therefore I must say with
the Apostle Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of
these things comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience.


Praesumptuosus. I pray good Sir, observe the expressions of the Apostle; he
says, Because of the^e things, the wrath of God comith upon the Children of
disobedience Those Divines do add in the place now alleged, Nec reatus
cujuscunque personae (justificationi opponitur) sed reatus incredulorum Christi
sanguine nondum ablutorum, nec cujusvis mensurae reatus, sed reatus tales,
prepte^ quem odium Dei hostile pe^souae reae superincumbit. Qui semel vera side
justificatus est, nunquam erit postmod^m hoc modo reus. Haec. Ibid.
: He does not say, because of these things, the wrath of God comes upon those
Elect persons, whom he has accepted in the Beloved, and adopted into the
number of his Children; sin has not the same effect in them, as it has in the
Children of wrath.


Diotrephes. What do you make the same Fact for nature, quality and substance,
to be a little sin in one man, and a grievous out-crying sin in another?


Praesumptuosus. So we are taught by our Orthodox Divines; Nullum certe est
peccatum contra and primam and secundam legis Inter Acta Syn. Not. Dord. par.
3. page 282. f. Justificati quandoque suo vitio incidunt in atrocia peccata.
Theol. M. Britt de 5. Articulo. ib. page 192. par. 2.
divinae tabulam, etc. Say the Deputies of the Synod of Groningen, in their
Judgment given in at the Synod of Dort (de Artculo quinto) There is no sin,
whither against the first or second Table, except that one sin against the Holy
Ghost, but the Elect may, and oftentimes do fall into it; but there is a great
difference betwixt the regenerate and unregenerate; for though they commit the
same sins, yet the reason, mode and exit hereof is far different. So say the
Hassian Ib. par. 2. page 216. these. 8.
Divines too, and those of Embdin Page 240. these. 13, etc.
. But what need we go so far for Authority? we have Mr. Baxter, who is instar
omnium; and he says in the Preface to his Grotian Religion (Sect. 18.) that
the sin of Peter, David, etc. was exceelingly in regard of manner, ends,
concomitants, etc. different from the like fact in a graceless man A few sharp
passages of exact truth, amount to a greater guilt in some men, than Adultery,
Murder, Perjury, the denial of Christ do in others, by Mr. B's Doctrine.
: And to the like purpose ( Sect. 30.) where he makes the uncharitable passages
(as he calls them) in Mr. P. his very learned Book, with his other failings, to
be more heinous sins (though not materially) and of more dangerous consequence,
than the sins of David and Peter.


Diotrephes. The Scripture says, There is no respect of persons with God.


Praesumptuosus. That passage of Scripture (as often as it is repeated) must be
understood in a restrained and limited sense; for God looked upon all men in
pari statu and condition, in a parity of condition, they lay exactly levelled
in a state of equality, when he elected some to life, and reprobated the rest
to destruction. It was the naked entity, and person only, not any quality that
he respected in them, according to the Synod at Dort: And there is no sin so
small See the Declar. of the Congregational Churches. cap. 15. n. 5.
, but it brings damnation to these Reprobates; and yet there is no sin so
great, that can bring damnation to those Elect.


Diotrephes. The Apostle tells you plainly, That if you live after the flesh,
you shall dye, Romans 8. 13.


Praesumptuosus. It Is very true, if you understand it of the unregenerate, who
were never sanctified; but for the regenerate, the Divines at the Synod of Dort
do conclude See the Apology for Tile^us. page 86, 87. Mr. Baxter says, Because
Gods purpose is unchangeable, he will keep them from such sins as are
inconsistent with habitual grace. In his Preface to the Grot. Relig. Sect. 16,
17.
, That although they fall into most foul and heinous sins, that do directly
waste the conscience, yet is the seed of Regeneration with all fundamental
gifts, without which the state of Regeneration cannot possibly consist,
preserved safe and sound in them; so that they have a saving faith, and the
Holy Spirit, and Gods special favor; insomuch that their universal
Justification, state of Adoption, and right to the Kingdom of heaven, do yet
remain uncancel'd, unviolated, and immovable. The Synod in their very Canons
Chap. 5. Art. 6.
has determined, That the Regenerate cannot commit the sin unto death, or
against the Holy Ghost; so as to be altogether forsaken of God, and throw
themselves into everlasting destruction. And the Divines of great Britain See
the Apology for Tilenus. p. 385.
, have observed, That their most grievous sins are so far from disturbing the
Justification and Adoption of the faithful, that practical Divines especially,
do resolve, that God does often permit such sins in them, that their
Justification and Adoption may be the more confirmed to them: And other
Orthodox Mr. Norton. Orth. Evang. page 56. f.
Divines, do make sin a part of the means in order to the execution of the
Decree of Election.


Diotrephes. Sure the regenerate cannot live in any known sin.


Praesumptuosus. Then they cannot sin against conscience, which is false. Does
not the Apostle profess Romans 7.
, What I do, I allow not; he knew what he did Indeed none sin more against
knowledge, than the godly when they do sin. Mr. Baxters Directions for peace of
Conscience. page 464. Edit. 2.
, though he could not approve of it. And this he does not speak (by a fiction
of Law) in the person of the unregenerate, as the Remonstrants erroneously
teach; but he speaks it of himself (as all the followers of Mr. Calvin do
maintain) and yet this Apostle was regenerate without all peradventure.


Diotrephes. I am sure God has made a promise concerning the Regenerate Romans
6. 14.
, That sin shall not have dominion over them.


Praesumptuosus. We must distinguish of these three things (says Diodati
Annot. ad Romans 7. 17.
, one of the Synod sent from Gexeva) the Kingdom, the dwelling, and the
opposition of sin; the first is annihilated, and brought to nothing in
believers; the other two remain for their exercise and humiliation; and of that
complaint of the Apostle, O wretched man that I am, ver. 24. he says, It is an
exclamation for his misery of being under the bondage of sin. When the Apostle
therefore says, Sin shall not have dominion over you, the meaning is, sin
shall not have authority to destroy you; but it may have power to tyrannize
over you; and then it is not so much your fault, as your affliction.


Diotrephes. But the Apostle says in the same Chapter, Let not sin reign in
your mortal bodies, that you should obey it in the lusts thereof; for who thus
commits sin, is the servant of sin; and such a one is not at that time, the
servant of God; for Christ says, A man cannot serve two Masters, which are so
opposite as God and sin are.


Praesumptuosus. Sir, you are much deceived. Mr. David Dicson Ad ver. 25. cap.
7. ad Roman.
proves this, for the consolation of the faithful, from the example of the
Apostle, Romans 7. 25. So then, with the mind, I my self serve the Law of God;
but with the flesh, the Law of sin. As if he had said, Now (that for the
consolation of those who bewail their sins, I may summarily recollect, what I
have said concerning my self) I profess I have not attained unto that measure
of holiness to which I aspire; but together with the rest of the Saints, I go
on bewailing and striving, under hope of deliverance; and as it were divided
from my self, the Spirit and the flesh striving between themselves in me, with
my mind indeed, or that part of me which is spiritual, and renewed, I do with
delight serve the Law of God; but with the flesh, or that part of me, which is
not renewed, as it were a Captive brought under the yoke, I serve the Law of
sin, or the prevailing inclination of corrupt nature. And Mr. Baxter Of saving
Faith. p. 92.
grants as much, by affirming that the same man having flesh and spirit, may
have two contrary ultimate ends. To this I may add, That there is a great
difference betwixt a sin that is invited and espoused, and so reigns by our
free election and suffrage, and a sin that gets possession by Gods officaci us
permission and order; he withdraw^ng his assistance, and our guards to make way
for it.


Diotrephes. I pray have a care you do not forget your self, and lay your sins
upon God; for to impute your faults to him, is blasphemy.


Praesumptuosus. Sir, I shall take care to confine my self within the limits of
such expressions as are consonant to sound Doctrine. What think you of the
Elders and Messengers of the Congregational Churches? I hope their faith being
the Confession of the Assembly double refined, will pass for current with you;
and they declare (as the Assembly had done before them) That Gods de erminate
Chap. 5. n. 4.
Counsel extends it self, even to the first Fall, and all other sins of
Angels and men, and that not by a bare permission: That God ordained whatsoever
comes to pass Chap. 3. n. 1.
, without excep^ion: And Mr. Norton says, That God is the fore-determiner of
the sinfulness of the action to his own glorious and blessed end Orth. Evang.
page 63. f.
: And you may remember the words of Dr. Damman, That when God does perform his
part, we cannot omit ours.


Diotrephes. Methinks you are departed from the Subject of our Discourse;
neither can I see to what end you allege the former passages.


Praesumptuosus. I follow the thread of our Discourse as evenly as I can; and
these Allegations are to let you understand, that the Regenerate are not so
much to be blamed for their omissions and lapses, as you imagine, because these
fall out according to Gods own will, and by his special order.


Diotrephes. I know you may do more good than you do, and omit more evil than
you omit, if you will; and through your default herein, you show your self very
disingenuous in grieving the good Spirit of God, and hereby you incur his
displeasure in a very high degree.


Praesumptuosus. Gods displeasure I know is dreadful to such as lie under the
burden of it; but a Professor ought not to give himself so great a temptation
as to fear it; this is the judgment of Mr. Caryl, Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Strong,
Mr. Sprig, Mr. Pretty The Marrow of Modern Divinity. page 201 Edit. 3.
: for they have commended a Book wherein I am taught thus, [In case you be at
any time, by Reason of the weakness of your faith, and strength of your
temptations drawn aside, and prevailed with, to transgress any of Christ's
Commandments, beware you do not thereupon take occasion to call Christ's love to
you into question; but believe as firmly that he loves you, as dearly as he did
before you thus transgressed; for this is a certain truth, As no good in you,
or done by you, did or can move Christ to love you the more; so no evil in you,
or done by you, can move him to love you the less.] To which purpose I
consider, That he chose me to salvation, when I was yet in my sin; and if my
sin could not provoke his displeasure against my person then, when I was
without Christ; much less can it do so now, when he has made me accepted in
the Beloved. Ephesians. 1. 6.


Neither can the Spirit of God be grieved at my infirmities; and that upon this
account; for a wise person will not be grieved, but either for omitting what he
would have done, or for committing what he would have left undone. How then can
the Regenerate grieve Gods Spirit? For as to every good Act, he does determine
our will to that, and produce it by an irresistible efficiency; and this being
good, and according to his will, it cannot grieve him. As for every evil Act,
his determinate Counsel extends it self to that too; and that not by a bare
permission only Declar. of Congreg. Chapter ut supra.
; nor as the Author of nature (that he may not be wanting to his charge of
Providence) affording such a simultaneous concourse as the nature of the second
cause requires that it may use its natural liberty; but by way of
predetermination; and a most efficacious Decree Dr. Twiss. ib. page 88. 89, 90.
; to that 1. He is the Author of the Act wholly. 2. He is the fore-determiner,
order^r and governor of the sinfulness of the action to his own glorious and
blessed end, says Mr. Norton; th^s herefore is according to his good pleasure
too, and how then can it be said to grieve him? especially seeing he has his
own glorious and blessed end in it, for which he fore-determines it? And every
sinful Act being thus ordered and fore-determined, it is impossible a poor
Creature should avid it, and consequently I can omit no mo e evil than I do
omit; neither can I do any more good than I do; for the Orthodox do conclude We
do require that God should immediately and inresistibly work all our good works
in us; (and) we acknowledge this to be necessary unto every good act. Dr.
Twiss. ubi supra. p. 182.
, That every good act is immediately from God, and of his irresistible
production; if therefore I can do some good more than I do, I can do some good
that is not immediately from God, nor of his irresistible production, which they
account absurd; that I do all the good that God irresistibly produces in me,
appears from hence, because otherwise God should irresistibly produce something
which is not produced; and consequently it should be, and not be, and be
resistible, and irresistible, which are plain contradictions. That this is no
singular opinion, you may assure your self from hence, that it is consonant to
the faith of the Congregational Churches Chap. 16. n. 3.
, who declare concerning Believers, That [ their ability to do good works, is
not at all of themselves, (...) wholly from the Spirit of Christ; and that they
may be enabled thereunto, besides the graces they have already received, there
is required an actual influence of the same holy Spirit, to work in them to
will and to do of his good pleasure.


Diotrephes. You would have cited the Thesis entire, if it had been for your
advantage, but it was not; for they add in the very next words, [ Yet are they
not hereupon to grow negligent, as if they were not bound to perform any duty,
unless upon a special motion of the Spirit; but they ought to be diligent in
stirring up the grace of God that is in them.


Praesumptuosus. I omitted this Clause, not only because it was not to my
purpose, but also because I conceived it very absurd, if not contradictory to
the former words. For 1. What does that [ diligence in stirring up the grace of
God in them] signify? if it signifies either to will, or to do; that
(whichsoever it is) is not to be performed (as they declare) without an actual
influence of the same holy Spirit; and then it is absurd to say, they are bound
to it without a special motion of the Spirit. For 2. If they bound to perform
such a duty without a special motion of the Spirit; and yet are not enabled
thereunto without an actual influence of the same holy Spirit (as they declare
they are not) then are they (even in a Covenant of Grace too) bound to
impossibilities, which is absurd. And 3. Why ought they to be diligent? for if
an actual influence of the Spirit be required hereunto, then their diligence
without it, is impertinent, if not impossible; and when that actual influence
of the Spirit is upon them, if it works irresistibly (as the Orthodox maintain
it does) then all diligence is utterly superfluous unto such an operation. And
4. In this case Believers cannot be negligent; for neglect certainly is the
pretermission of some possible performance; which cannot have place here; for
the good work cannot be performed without such an actual influence; (therefore
it is not possible without it) and with that actual influence it cannot be
omitted; for that influence is irresistble.


Diotrephes. You seem to lay the sin of the Regenerate upon Gods deficiency in
affording grace necessary to avoid it.


Praesumptuosus. This is no more than what is done by our Orthodox Divines. Do
they not conclude that he did withdraw from As was showed above in the first
Dialogue.
Adam grace and light sufficient unto his perseverance? and so he does when he
pleases, from the regenerate too God may withdraw his grace, as he did from
Peter and David in their sin. Mr. Baxter's Directions for peace of Consc. page
465. Edit. 2.
; which is the reason of their several lapses and failings; for as Mr. Baxter
tells us (in his Preface, Sect. 16.) the Synod of Dort say, That if you speak
of power in them, the Regenerate cannot stand. And, that they are not always
so led and moved by God, as to be preserved from the seducements of
concupiscence, but by his just permission are carried away into grievous and
heinous Chap. 5. Art. 4.
sins. It Is by the power of God only that they stand; their ability is not at
all of themselves; and besides the grnces they have already received, there is
required an actual influence of the Spirit, and that irresistible; when this
power is withdrawn, they must needs fall; and therefore Dr. Damman (as was
observed before) tells us, That when God does his part, we cannot omit ours.


Diotrephes. But God does not withdraw his gracious assistance, but upon man's
provocation and neglect to cooperate with it.


Praesumptuosus. Yes, God has liberty to do it for his mere pleasure, being
tied by no Law unto his Creature. Thus he did by Adam in his state of
innocence, and he has several good ends in it, his own glory, and their
benefit, as the Divines of See the Apology for Tilenus. page 385.
Drent determined at the Synod of Dort. The British Divines say (as you heard
even now) that their Justification and Adoption are thereby confirmed: And
those Divines of Drent add further, That those sins which in the wicked have
the nature of punishment, have in the faithful the nature of fatherly
castigation. Ibid.



Diotrephes. But will they not be bitterness in the latter end think you, as
the Prophet Jeremy has it? Chap. 2. 19.


Praesumptuosus. To the unregenerate, to whom they are damnable, they must
needs be so, but not to the Elect; whose slips and falings, Mr. Perkins In
Armilla Aurea, cap. 37.
tells us, are privileges annexed to their adoption and paternal castigations
for their benefit; and as a remedy against doubting or desperation of our
Election, and Gods mercy, he prescribes this meditation amongst others [ Lapsu
non telli gratiam and fidem, sed illustrari] That sin does not take away grace,
but illustrate, and make it brighter. Now I hope you would Ibid. cap. 42.
not have a man to be in anguish and bitterness of spirit, for suffering
chastisement, which is derived to us as a special favor from God, a great
testimony of the love of our heavenly Father; for what says the Apostle from
Solomon, Hebr. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8, 12. My son, despise not thou the chastning of
the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord loves, he
chastneth; and scourges every son whom he receives: If ye endure chastning,
God deals with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chastneth
not; but if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye
bastards, and not sons. Wherefore (says the Apostle) lift up the hands which
hang down, and the feeble knees. The Apostle turns it into an use of
Consolation to the faithful.


Diotrephes. Admit the slips and falls of the faithful be paternal castigations
(according to the Judgment of those great Divines) and so from Gods special
Favor and Providence (as all other paternal castigations are) yet the Apostle
says in the place alleged by you Ver. 11.
, That no chastning for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; and
therefore you ought to be grieved, and to mourn upon this account.


Praesumptuosus. The Apostle in those words tells you, how chastisement is
usually resented according to the judgment of the flesh, Ex carnis judicio
nulla castigatio videtur esse materia gaudii, sed tristitiae tantum; as Mr. D.
Dicson does expound it; and (as the most Learned and Reverend Dr. Hammond
paraphraseth the words) it is true indeed that there is in all affliction, that
which is ungrateeul to flesh and blood: But such as have made a further
progress in Christianity, and are advanced to a higher state of spirituality,
they can glory in Tribulations Romans 5. 3.
; and if the Apostles, being beaten Acts 5. 40, 41.
, could re^oyce, that they were counted worthy to suffer shame, in that kind
for Christ's Name; much more may they rejoice and glory in those other paternal
castigations (their sweet sins) which are altogether agreeable to their sensual
appetites.


Diotrephes. The Apostle says, That without holiness no man shall see the
Lord, Hebr. 12. 14.


Praesumptuosus. Is not the Apostles injunction for following peace with all
men, as strict as for following holiness? Do you think this duty necessary to
salvation too? But to praetermit that, I hope Gods paternal castigations are
not such enemies to holiness, but they may very well be reconciled, and dwell
together.

2. Dr. Twiss Ubi supra. p 20 See also what i^ cited out of hi^ above in the
Margin. ibid. p 116
tells us, That the very Children of God have savage lusts, and wild affections
in t^em (he takes the observation from David's prayer, Psalm. 51. 10.) the curing
and mastering whereof, is no l^ss work, then was the work of Creation, or ma
king of the World. He says also, that after their effectual Calling, They have
cause sometimes to expostulat with God, for hardening their hearts against his
f^ar. Whatever you alleged before out of this Dr. as del vered in his passion,
you see his judgment in cool blood; nay, Mr. Baxter Of Right ^^ Sacram. Disp. 3
page 326, 32^
delivers it as the opinion of most of our Divines, That a man that is
unsanctified, must be a greater sinner than Solomon was.

3. Our Right and Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, and consequently to the
Vision of God, is not derived from any actions of our own, or placed in them,
or built upon them; Inter Acta Syn. Not. Dord. page 194. par. 2. Theol. M.
Brit. Judic. de Artic. quinto.
but it is placed in a free adoption, and in our conjunction with Christ. And
therefore our right unto the Kingdom, is not taken away, unless that be taken
away wherein it is founded. If sons, then heirs; heirs of God, and coheirs
with Christ, Romans 8. 17. Manente ergo adoptione and in Christum insitione,
extra viam regni aberrare potest fidelis, at jure regni haereditario excidere
non potest: Therefore the faithful, his adoption and engrafting into Christ
remaining, may wander out of the way of the Kingdom, but he cannot loose or
fall from his hereditary right to it Thus the British Divines at Dort.
: This is that which supported the deathbed faith of his late Highness, O. C A
Collection of several passages concerning his late H. O. C. in the time of his
sickness. page 6.
. who speaking (then) of the Covenant, is reported to say [ Whatsoever sins
thou have, do, or shall commit; if thou lay held upon free grace, you are
safe; but if you put your self under a Covenant of Works, you bring your self
under the Law, and so under the Curse, then you are gone:] For holiness
therefore (to appear before the presence of God in) Deus providebit, God will
take care to put it upon us. The Elect (with that blessed Apostle) desire to be
found in Christ, not having in their own (inherent) righteousness Renouncing
all Righteousness in my self by the works of the Law, and having only
confidence in that which is by Faith: Non in meorum operum i^ haerente
justitia, sed in illa Christi imputata, quae a Deo gratis datur. Dicson. ad
Phil. 3. 9.
; but that which is (imputed) through the faith of Christ, the righeeousness
which is of God by faith, Phil. 3. 9.


Diotrephes. I am of that opinion, that the dominion of any one sin is
inconsistent with saving grace and justification. Mr. Baxter's Account of
persever. page 40.


Praesumptuosus. Though your Author be a singular man, yet I will not say that
that is but one Doctors opinion; but I am sure St. Paul found it otherwise by
experience, at least if our ablest Calvinists do rightly interpret him; for he
says, Romans 7. 14. I am carnal, sold under sin; that is (as Deodati Ad locum.
expounds it) altogether subjected as a slave, bought for a certain price of
money; and he alleges to this purpose, 1 Kings 21. 20. where it is said of
Ahab, Thou have sold thy self to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord. To
whom agrees Mr. D. Dicson upon the place, Cogor meipsum carnalem agnoscere --
I am constrained to acknowledge my self carnal, and as a slave sold, that I
might be subject to sin, out of whose Fetters I cannot free my self, but am
often carried whether I would not. This is acknowledged to be the Apostles
condition, who doubtless was in the state of grace and justification. If by the
dominion of sin you mean something else; then I demand,

2. When may we conclude that sin has dominion over a man? David you know,
after he had been wounded with the beauty of Bathsheba, he sent Messengers to
court and woo her for his entertainment; when she was brought, he lay with her;
after that, he sent for her husband from the Leaguer to cloak his shame; but
because he could not tempt him by shows of pity, and other fair means to go in
to her, he made him drunk, that in that distemper he might serve the ends of
his lust upon him; and because this device would not take neither, he conspired
his death, and sent an express Order to Joab, to take a special care to murder
him, though many gallant men were exposed to the slaughter to bear him company.
Notwithstanding all this, our Divines do conclude, That sin had not dominion
over David (at that time;) his state of justification was not dissolved or
interrupted, and his 2 Samuel 11. 15, 17. Act. Syn. Not. Dort. p. 194. par. 2.
adoption remained immovable; for such as are once regenerated, sin can never
have dominion over them (to their condemnation;) they are not under the Law
(where sin has dominion to that effect) but under grace Romans 6. 14.
; the Spirit, which is given them at their new birth, abides with them for ever
John 14. 16
; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 178


Diotrephes. He that has not more hatred, than love to any sin; and that had
not rather be rid of it, even in the use Mr. Baxter.
of Gods means, then keep it, in regard of the habituated state of his will is
under the dominion of sin, and in a state of damnation. Account of persever.
ubi supra.


Praesumptuosus. (1.) Is this consistent with such a man as David, his having
two contrary ultimate ends?

(2.) There is a combat betwixt the inward and the outward, the spiritual and
the carnal, the new and the old man, which they only do understand, who feel it
in themselves, Et vim peccati, etiam sanctissimas actiones, aliquo modo
polluentis, and vitae suae telam totam, long late que pervadentis experiuntur;
and have experience of the power of sin polluting in some measure, their most
holy actions, and spreading over the whole course of their lives, says Mr. D.
Dicson Ad Romans 7. 22, 23.
.

(3.) But such as are under such conflicts, you say, will use Gods means, etc.
What are Gods means? Are they not his holy Ordinances? He that does diligently
frequent th^se, that hears the Word, and delights in Religious Conferences, and
is constant at his Devotions and Prayers, does use Gods means; and thus did
David, says Mr. Baxter Pref. to the Grot. Relig. sect. 19.
; [ I verily think that after his sin, David went on in his ordinary course of
Religion and Obedience in all things else (abating in the degrees;) and blessed
be God, so do I; and this is evidence sufficient of the habituated state of the
will.

(4.) If a man cannot get rid of his sins upon this account, at least, he may
comfort himself (as to the event) that God sends them for fatherly
chastisements, as Mr. Perkins speaks, and raise his soul up with this
meditation, [ Lapsu non tolli fidem and gratiam sed illustrar^;] sin serves
rather to furbush our faith, and the divine grace in us, than to expel it. To
this purpose Dr. Twiss says, [ That all things work together for the good of
them that love God, is as true, as the Apostle Paul's Epistle to the Vbi supra.
page 103, 104.
Romans, is the Word of God: And Bishop Cooper, a Scottish Bishop (says he)
applies this to men's sins amongst other things, showing how they also do work
for a man's good. And in another place speaking of himself, the Dr. has these
words, [ I take notice of Gods hand sometimes hardening me against Page 95.
his fear, yet God knows I take no comfort in it, but rather in this, that God
knows how to work it for my good; according to that of Austin, Audeo dicere,
utile est superbis in aliquod apertum ^anif stumque cadere peccatum, etc. And
when I find that my sins do not make a final or a total separation between my
soul and God, this may well tend to the Corroboration of my faith, and persuade
my soul that nothing shall be able to separate me from the love of God in
Christ Jesus our Lord; and I have good cause to take comfort in this, says
that learned Dr.

(5.) But suppose a man should feel some pleasure in the act of sin, as to the
flesh and outward man, yet he has no need to fear the dominion of sin, or
state of damnation Mr. Baxter says, that David chose fleshpleasing for it
self, as his ultimate end. Of saving faith, ubi supra.
, if he carries a hatred toward it in his spirit, and inward man; for this is
exactly the case of the regenerate, if you will allow (with our Divines) that
the Apostle speaks for ^h^ir comfort, no otherwise then as he found by
experience in his own person, Romans 7. 14, etc. I am carnal (says he) sold
under sin; for that which I do, I allow not; for what I would, that do I no;
but what I hate, that do I; (which he would not have done, had he not found
some pleasure in it:) If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the
Law that it is good. Now then it is no more I that do it; but sin that dwells
in me; for I know that in me, (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing:
For to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good, I find
not; for the good that I would, I do not; but the e^il which I would not, that
I do. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me. From which Discourse of the Apostle, Mr. D. Dicson Ad locum.
draws several Arguments of Consolation. From the 16. verse (he says) the
Apostle comsorts himself, and other combatants with these Arguments.

1. Ego ipse Apost^lus, etc. I my self an Apostle, am in the number of th^se
who bewail the Lacta^ius brings in a person thus excusing himself. Lib. 4. Cap.
24. Volo equidem non peccare, sed vincor^ indutus sum enim carne fragili, and
imbecilla: haec est quae concupiscit, quae irascitur, quae dolet, quae mori
timet. Itaque ducor invitus, and pecco, non quia volo, sed quia cogor.
imperfection of their holiness, and feel in my self the same combat and
trouble with them, from the imperfection of my obedience; therefore such as
b^wail the imperfection of their holiness, have consolation, seeing they suffer
nothing but what other Saints, yea, and the Apostles themselves are subject
unto.

A second Argument of Consolation is this, That out of this conflict there
arises a sign of Sanctification begun in such a Combatant; and a consent to
the Law of God, that it is good and holy: For if I do what I would not, then I
consent to the Law of God that it is good: And all that bewail the imperfection
of their obedience, have the same sign of their Sanctification.

A third Argument of Consolation to all such Christian Combatants, he draws
from ver. 17. and 20. in that the sin which they commit, who do thus bewail
their imperfection, and disallow of it, and condemn it, shall not be imputed
unto them, but to the corruption of their nature, and to that habitual sin that
dwells in them, etc. Thus Mr. Dicson.

Thus it was in the Falls of David and Peter; that David hated sin habitually
(and so many other sinners do as well as he) for all his A^ul^ery and Murder,
we may conclude from his indignation against the Oppressor, expressed at the
hearing of Nathan's Parable 2 Samuel 21. 5.
: H^reupon you know how favorably some of our Godly Reforming Divines have
declared their Judgment: [ It is not imaginable (says one Mr. Baxter in his
Pref* to the G^o^. Relig. sect. 19.
of them) that this sudden prevalency of sensuality did so far change the
judgment of David or Peter, that hereupon they habituall^ esteem^d the Crea^ure
above God, and valued the pleasures of sin before the pleasing and the favor
of G^d. It Is true, that actually in the time of sinning, the power of
sensuality prev^iled against the act of charity; and so it does in every sin
that m^n commi^, acc^rding to the measure of the sin: But that hab^tually God
was afterwa^d s^t l^ss by than the sensual pleasure by the^e ^oly men, is
n^terl^ improbable. Thus that Author Mr. Baxter.
.


Diotrephes. That Author tells you elsewhere, [ He that is thus resolved and
affected against a gross sin, or any known sin, that is under the power of his
will, is not like to live in, or give up himself to it. Account of Persever. p.
40.


Praesumptuosus. That was well put in, [ sin, that is under the power of his
will;] but is it as well under the power of the Regenerate man's will, to avo^d,
as to commit sin? No O wretched man! ( Diodati tells us) is an exclamation out
of the feeling of this misery; (...). e. of being yet under the bondage of s^^.
Annot. on Romans 7. 24*
, it is not; and therefore though he be r^solved and aff^ct^d (with hatred)
against it, yet he may live in it.

But 2. In this case the Regenerate is never said to give himself up to sin,
but to be carried cap^ive by it, and (as slaves Altogether subjected as a slave
bought for a certain price of money, 2 Kings 21. 20. Diodati. Annot. ad Romans 7.
14.
were among the Romans) to be sold under it: Does not that excellent Vessel of
Election acknowledge as much? Romans 7. 22, 23. For I delight in the Law of God
after the inward man; but I see another Law in my Members, warring against the
Law of my mind, and bringing Causes me to be inevitably driven into sin.
D^odati. Annot. ad (...).
me into captivity to the Law of sin which is in my Members; and ver. 14. He
says, I am carnal, sold under sin; and yet at that very instant he triumphs in
his deliverance through Jesus Christ.


Diotrephes. That Author forementioned, adds in the (...) place, That he
w^o is thus affected against sin, cannot commit it without renewed resolutions
against it, and a restless importunity of soul to be delivered, which will
prevail. Mr. Baxter in his Account of persever. p. 40.



Praesumptuosus. What you mean by [ a restless importunity of soul] I do not
well understand; I find no such r^stl^ss importunity of soul in David after his
Murder and Adultery, unless it were a restless importunity of soul, to get full
possession of the fair woman into his bed and bosom. I grant the Regenerate,
when they sin, they do often resolve against it, and pray against it, as the
Apostle 2 Cor. 12. 7.
did against that Thorn in the ^le^h Motio sci^icet concupiscentiae ali qua, ad
porr^ p^ccandum ^endens. D. Dicson. ad locum.
, which was a Messenger of Satan, sent to buffet him: But when they see it is
not Gods pleasure to remove it, I suppose it is their dut^ to bear it with
^quanimity, as a part of Gods fa^herly chastis me^t for their good; and to
comfort themselves with that O^acle of the Lord to the said Apostle, My Grace
is s^ff^cient for the to sustain thee in thy con^^ict, and cleanse thee from
all such poll^^ions as thou d^st contract in it, as Mr. D. D^cson expounds it.
And in this sense, and to this purpose it is true, the Regenerate by their
renewed resolutions and importunity, shall prevail: But if you mean a
prevailing so far forth as to be freed from the cap^^vity of sin, you may be
deceived; for you know not how long it will be, ere they shall preva^l to this
purpose. I^ it judged by Divines, that David lay a twelvemonth in his sin of
Adultery and Murder unrepented of: How long Asa or Solomon sinned, we know not:
Nor can any m^n possibly determine just how long a man may live in the pr^ct^ce
of such a sin, and yet have true special grace, Mr. Baxter.
and a s^ate of Justification, says Mr. Baxter in his Disput. of Right to
Sacraments, Disp. 3. page 331. and page 337. He says, it is exceeding hard to
determine how great, many, or long, the sins of a true Believer may be.


Diotrephes. God we are sure is faithful, and will not suffer his Children to
be tempted above that they are able, 1 Cor. 10. 13.


Praesumptuosus. I conceive Sir, that is spoken of their persecutions; but yet
we see God suffers some of his Children to be tempted in that kind, even Was
God ever the less faithful to David, for permitting him to fall into Adultery
and Mu^der? Will you blame his fidelity, when he leaves his Children ^o be
chastised by their ow^ infirmities?
unto death; and that is the only way he vouchsafes them to escape by. Rev. 6.
9. They were slain for the Word of God, and for the testim^ny which they held.
And under paternal castigations of another nature, we see there are many, whom
God is pleased should dye of the r^medy, and yet are happy. 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31.
For this cause many are sick and weak am^ngst you, and many f^ll asleep. -- But
when we are (thus) judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the Wo^ld. Seeing then that the sl^ps and falls of the
Regenerate, are by the Orthodox, accounted to be of the same nature, fatherly
chastisen e^ts too; why may no^ Almighty God, to advance his own fre^-grace and
pardon, suffer his Children to be held captive under th^s^ (infirmit^es) and
afford them no way but death, to escape from them?


Diotrephes. You may remember the Mr. Baxter. Disput 3. page 347. Dei immota
ordinatio ^ostulat, ut fidelis sic exorbitans per renovatum fidei and
poenitentiae actum prius redeat in viam, quam ad viae metam, h. (...). Rgnum
coeleste, perduci possit. Th. Brit.
Author of those D^spu^ations of Right to Sacraments (as I told you at the
beginning of our D^scourse) has observed, that our Divines at Dort conclude,
That though a godly man lose not his Justification by gross sinning, yet he
contracts such an incapacity of coming to Heaven in that s^ate, that must be
r^moved by Rep^ntance, or else he could not be s^v^d. Hereupon that Synod Cap.
5. Arti^. 7.
has determined, That in these s^^ps, God preserves in them that his immortal
seed (by which they were once born again) that it die no^, nor be lost by them;
afterward by his Word and Spirit, ^e effectually and certainly renews them
again unto Repentance.


Praesumptuosus. If God preserves that immortal seed in them, and does
^ffectually and certainly renew them again unto Repentance, then they may cast
away all care; for they are in no danger of mis^arrying: Though they fall into
grievous sins, whereby they impair their graces, and harden their hea^ts, and
wound their consciences, hurt and scandalize others, and bring temporal
judgments upon themselves; yet they are, and shall be kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation. This is the Faith of the Congregational Churches
D^clar. c. 17. (...). 3.
; and the Assembly of Divines In their C^nsession of Faith chap. 17. n. 3.
(...).
do suppose, That amongst the Temporal Judgments which they may bring upon
themselves, Death may be one, as appears by their quoting that
Scripture-example, 1 Cor. 11. 30, 32.


Diotrephes. Suppose then that this Judgment of Death should come sudde^ly, and
surprise such a man in his sin, before the renewing of his Repentance, to
remove that present incapacity of salvation which he has contracted, what a
sad case were he in (...).


Praesump^uo^us. Sir, you are much deceived; for either it is imp^ssib^e he
should die without such a renewing of Repentance (which if it be necessary, God
will effectually and certainly work in him) or if God cuts him off without it,
it will be to his advantage. This is the Judgment of our often mentioned
Au^hour; If you can prove it profitable for such a man to be su^denly ^ut off
before Repentance, and that such a thing will be; I should incline (says he)
to think that he would be fully Mr. Baxter at the end of his 3. Disput. of
Justificat. p. 398.
pardoned at the instant of death, and so saved. Indeed if it were not so, what
would become of those that we doubt not to be godly (as Mr. Baxter speaks)
who are guilty of disobedience to their Guides, and of Schism, and doing much
to the hurt of the Church? A very great sin (as he confesses Mr. Baxter of
Right to Sacraments. Disput. 3. page 29, 30.
) yet we sec, they are so far from repenting of their Schism, and returning to
their obedience, that they take all advantages to pursue the contrary; which
certainly they would not do, if they were not taught to believe, [ They are in
no danger for want of Repentance.] Restitu^ion has been eagerly pressed to by
many* yet who makes any conscience to perform it?

This confirms my belief, and I thank God I can triumph in it: For I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor lif^, nor Angels, nor princ^palities, nor
powers, no^ things present, nor things to com^, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creat^re, shall be able to separate Romans 8. 38, 3^.
us from the love of God, which is Christ J^^us our Lord.

But Sir, time calls me away; I pray therefore let me know your Resolution
concerning the baptizing of my Child.


Diotrephes. I desire a little time to consider of it, and then you shall have
my final Answer.


Praesumptuosus. I shall send once more to know your Resolution. For my
spiritual condition, which you so uncharitably scrup^e at, I doubt not it is as
^ood as yours; for I know whom I have believed, and h^ is able to ke^p that
which I have 2 Timothy 1. 12.
committed to him, against the great day. And so Sir, I take my leave of you.


THE SYLLOGISM.
THAT Doctrine tha^ is n^^t to bring the presumptuous to Repentance, but tends
rather to confirm, than humble them them in their presumption, That is a
Doctrine not according to godliness.

The Doctrine maintained by the Calvinists, in opposition to the Remonstrants,
is not apt to bring the presumptuous to Repentance, but tends rather to
confirm, than humble them in their presumption. Therefore

The Doctrine maintained by the Calvinists, in opposition to the Remonstrants,
is a Doctrine not according to godliness.

The Major is evident of it self.
The Minor is proved by this Dialogue.
Colasterion.
Jer. 23. 14. I have seen in the Prophets an horrible thing; they strengthen
the hands of evil doers, that none does return from his wickedness.

Fideles saepenumero and horribilit^r se p^ccatis c^ntra Deum and legem ipsius
pollaunt; quinimo in Ido^ola^riam superstitionem, falsam Other proofs of the
Minor.
doctrinam, haeresin, altercationes, Christi a^negation^m, securitatem,
diffidentiam, licen^iam viven^^, s^perbiam, rebel onem, homicidium,
adulterium, proditionem, ali^que similia p^o^^^untur: and nihilominus tamen
credimus, and hisce non obstantibus persuasum habemus, cos nec totali^^r
excidere, nec excidere po^^^ ex paterno amore and gratia Dei. Smoutius in suo
Pater noster.

Nulli viri fideles possunt per ulla p^ccata relab^ ex Dei Gratia. Sebast.
Damman ( Scriba Syn. Dordrac.) in suo consensu.

Fide^es a carne, mundo, and Satana, in p^ccata etiam gravia and a^rocia
interdum abripiuntur: Quibus Deum valde ^^fendu^t, reatum m^rtis incurrunt,
Spir^tum S. contristant, fidei exercitum interrumpunt, c^ns^i^ntiam gravissime
v^lnerant. Deus tamen Spiritum S. (ab iis) non prorsus aufert; nec ^ousque ^os
prol^bi sinit, ut gratia Adoptionis, ac Justificationis statu excidant, aut
p^ccatum aa mortem committan^. Syn. Dord. De persever. Sanct. Art. 4. 5, 6.

THE FIFTH DIALOGUE Begun betwixt DIOTREPHES and SAMARITANUS: And continued
betwixt DIOTREPHES and DESOLATUS.
DIotrephes. Sir, what is your business with me, that you come so unseasonably,
at a time when you know, I usually sequester my self from all Conversation?


Samaritanus. Sir, you may conclude the Affair I come about, is of no mean
importance; otherwise common Civility would have taught me (being so well
acquainted with your orders) to have permitted you to your accustomed
Retirement: But Sir, if my own compassion has so far transported me, as to
violate the Laws of good behavior toward you in this Address; I hope your
charity will prevail with you to pardon it, as soon as you shall understand the
ground of this interruption I presume to give you.


Diotrephes. Sir, your modesty and prudence are so well known to me, that I
cannot deny you access at any time, when you shall think fit to afford me the
benefit of your company: But I ^onjecture by the manner of your Application,
that at this time, the occasion that brings you forth is extraordinary. I pray
in short, (...) ^^tter?


Samaritanus. Sir, the trouble I do now take the boldness to give you, is in
the behalf of my dear friend Desolatus, a poor disconsolate soul, God knows,
that has for some time lain a bleeding under the sense of those wounds which
(as he complains) his sins have inflicted upon his conscience, and gasping
after comfort.


Diotrephes. It can be no trouble to me to be invited out upon such occasions;
and I must tell you, I am not sorry to hear him fallen into this distemper; for
till men grow sensible of their disease, they think not of the Physician; at
least, they will not value his prescriptions; which made our S^viour say unto
the Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 9. 12, 13.
, The whole h^ve no need of the Phys^^ian, but the sick; and I came not to call
the right^o^s, but sinn^rs to Repen^ance. And what sinners were they think you,
but such as found themselves weary and heavy laden: nay, ^^st, and at the very
point of perishing? and therefore altering his phrase, though he speaks of
persons under the same qualification, He says, (...) Son of m^n came t^ see^
^n^ to save that which was lo^^ Matthew. 18. 11.
: It Is no discouragement to me but rather an invitation and inducement to
minister to the needs of his soul. God himself has professed, He delights to
dwell nowhere sooner than in the poor and empty receptacles of an humble and
broken heart Isa. 57. 15. and 66. 2.
. A broken and contrite heart, O God, thou wi^t not d^spis^ Psalm. 51. 17.
: But S^r, that I may gain a little better notice of his condition, give me
leave to enquire further after him. I am confident your charity, that brought
you thus far to me on his b^half, did also prompt you to suggest such wholesome
directions as you thought most suitable to his capacity, in reference to the
temptations he lies under.


Samarit^nus. Sir, Had my Abilities been answera^le to my Compassion, my
Applications for his recovery out of this sad estate, might have been much more
effectual than they were: But you may assure your self, his wounds were dressed
with the best wine and oil my stock afforded.


Diotrephes. You are so well principled in general, and especially so well
versed i^ Cases of Conscience, and the practical part of Christianity, that you
are able to speak a word in season: But seeing as I conceive, he lies under the
Arrest of the soi^it of bond^ge, it may be a question, whither it be yet
seasonable or convenient to give him Bail. Humiliation is the ground*work of
Conversion; and the deeper the foundation is dug, the stronger will be the
building that is erected upon it. None are conducted to Heaven with more
assurance, than they that have passed by the Gates of Hell; and the longer he
stands at those Gates, the greater will be his affrightment from the ways that
lead thither; and the greater his thirst after the joys of Heaven, when they
are offe^'d to solicit him into the ways of Righteousness. If it be upon the
surprizal of some late wasting sin, or the reflection upon former ^oul crimes,
that this present tempest is raised i^ his conscience, let him be tossed a
while, till he takes in a little more salt water, and b^^ome more Sea* sick;
that being tumultuated in the hurry of his own distracted thoughts, he may be
driven to act the Physicians part upon himself; or with those Marin^rs, to cast
lots to find out the Crimin^l, in whose pro^^cution that storm was sent out by
the Div^ne Displeasure; that so Jonah being thrown overboard, the Wind and Sea
may be becalmed, and the Passage made secure for the time ensuing. It is fit
the Law should ^^y on her full load upon soul sinners, till their shoulders be
wrung and pinch't, and force them to cry out. It Is the severity of that Ush^r
that makes men willing to sub^it to the Discipline of Jesus Christ.


S^mari^a^us. I am not satisfied that this is the best method for the cure of
D^^^latus; gentler applications may be more proper to re^^^^ie and ^ettle the
^umours that are stirred in him. It is not a draught of deadly p^yson lately
swallowed, that has brought these ^^^s upon him; nor the fresh apparition of
long buried crimes, newly raised up from the dead, by the power of an esp^c^^l
Providence (though it is most certainly true, and verified in his complaints,
that every little sin will fall a buffeting the conscience, when it is too weak
and ^eeble ^o make resistance, yet) I say, it is no such horrid spectre of
guilt: but on a sudden, he sinks in his hopes, and is at a loss for his
assurance, and doubts his sinc^rity, and consequently his interest in the
merits of Christ, and in Gods love and favor. And the temptation heightened by
the subtilty of the Tempter, taking advantage of his own fears and jealousies,
is grown so strong and violent, that he is hardly persuaded to the patience, to
have it undermined or opposed. And I perceive it is the Apost^sie of these
present Times that has given him this scandal, and betrayed him to that
dissatisfaction that afflicts him.


Diotrephes. Why, what does he infer from these sad emergencies of Providence?


Samaritanus. He makes sad reflections upon them, and then applies them to his
own discouragement; insomuch, that whereas he was wont formerly to discourse of
the Doctrine of the certain perseverance of all the sanctified, with much
feeling and consolation, saying, It was to his spirits as a Well of water
springing up to everlasting life; Now on the other side, having such examples
before his eyes, he apprehends the same Doctrine as the waters of Ezekiel or
Marah, he can find nothing but matter of strife, and relish nothing but a taste
of bitterness in it: For (says he) if I could have any assuran^e that I am
truly sanctified, the Doctrine of certain perseverance of all such would be
comfortable to me; but I am brought now into such doubts of Mr. Baxter's
Account of persev. p. 25, 26
it, that I fear I shall never attain to such assurance, being rather induced
to conclude myself certainly unsanctified: For I never reached so high, as some
that I have known that have fallen away; I have known diverse that have been
judicious and effectionate, and constant, and lively in duty, and of very up
ight careful lives, and so great contemners of the World, that they would not
have omitted an opportunity for their souls, for wordly gain; yea, theywere
persecuted, and suffered very much for godliness in evil times, and in the
sharpest trials, never sh^u^k, when others did; and laid out themselves almost
altogether in doing good. Their prayers and conferences were very holy and
heavenly, and affectionate, and their lives agreeable; so that they were
incomparably beyond me in all these qualifications One would have thought it
next to an impossibility, that such men (the highest Professors of Religion)
and so many of them, could ever have been drawn to do that against the Church,
against that Gospel Ministry, and Ordinances of God (which once seemed dearer
to them than their lives) which has since been done, and which yet we fear!
Mr. Baxter's Directions for peace of Conscience, in the Epistle to the poor in
spirit.
; and yet some of them now do deny the Godhead of Christ, and the Holy Ghost;
some deny the Scripture, and that there is any Church or Ministry; some are
turned Quakers, and some Licentious, if not Infidels; and therefore certainly
have now no saving grace. Now before I can ever be sure that I am justified, I
must be sure that I go further than any of these did, or any other that ever
fell away, whereas I find my self far short of many of them. And I am in a
manner certain, that some of them did not dissemble; both by my observation of
their whole course, being intimately acquainted with them, and by the plainness
and openness of some of their hearts, which they manifest even to this day in
the way that they are in, being unapt for dissimulation. This Sir, is the
ground of his dejection.


Diotrephes. And I pray, what Antidotes have you given him against these
infusions?


Samaritanus. I have fortified him as prudently as I could, by those
Apostolical Counsels.

(1.) To be wise unto sobriety, and not to lean too much to his own
understanding.

(2.) I have added that of St. John, Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try
the spirits, whether they are of God, because 1 John 4. 1.
many false Prophets are gone out into the World. And that of St. Peter, Ye
therefore Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, 2 Pet. 3. 17.
beware lest ye also being led away with the ^r^our of the wisked, fall from
your own stedfasiness: But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And that of St. Paul, Now I bes^ech you Brethren, Mark them which
cause divisions Romans 16. 16.
and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have lea^ned, and avoid them;
for they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly;
and by good words, and fairspeeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. I have
advised him further:

(3.) As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him;
rooted and built up in him, and established Col. 2. 6, 7.
in the faith, as ye have been taught. To which end I have commended to him,
that of the Author to the Hebrews, Remember them which are the Guides, that
have the Rule over you, who Hebr. 13. 7, 17. Vide D. Hammond. Dissert. 1. cap.
12. sect. 13. p. 40. Hebr. 10. 23, 25
have spoken to you the Word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of
their Conversation. Obey them, and submit your selves; for they watch for your
souls, as they that must give account. And let us hold fast the profession of
our faith without wavering, not forsaking the assembling of our selves
together: But building up our selves on our most holy faith [which was once
delivered unto the Saints] praying in the Holy Ghost (and Ep. Jud. ver. 4. 20,
21.
by this means) keep our selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of
our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And to take off the scandal, I have
wished him to remember that our Lord Jesus Christ has foretold how much the
temptations of the world and flesh would prevail upon the hearts of many
professors; and that false Prophets, and factious Teachers should arise, and
draw many Lis^^ples after them; and by their fair shows, and specious
pretenses should deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect. If he observed
these Predictions, and followed these Rules, I told him, I was very well
assured, he should find such an assistance and establishment, as might give him
encouragement to say with the Apostle, We are not of them who draw back unto
p^r^ition, but of them that believe to the saving of the soul. Hebr. 10 39.



Diotrephes. Your advice was good and seasonable, had you sorborn your
insi^u^tion, that the old way is the safest to be insisted on; for that may
hinder, or at least retard the intended Reformation: But what satisfaction did
he find in your Discourse?


Samaritanus. He harp'd much upon that passage, They should deceive [of it were
possible, the very Elect.] Ai, the Elect, says he, they are the only men that
shall be preserved from seduction; for they have a special aiffer ^oing grace
conser'd upon them by an ir^^sistible operation, and that is preserved to them
by the same omnipotent strength that did at first (...) it. I demanded of him,
why he might not assure himself of such a grace? His Answer was, That seeing
many great and (...) Professors, whose virtues were fat more eminent than any
he could, or durst pretend to, have fallen so low, that their condition was
reputed hopeless; this made him more carefully to bring his grace unto the test
and balance to examine it; and if true, yet he must conclude it many grains and
^crupl^s. too light; and this (says he) begets so great a jealousy of mine
own sincerity. If those, says he, whom I have looked upon as stars of the
first Magnitude, have made all that luster, by the emissions and beams of
common grace, which God in the Decree of Reprobation, has associated with the
efficacious permission of sin, to make up one perfect Medium, to carry that
Decree on to its final execution in them; what presumption were it in me, to
think that that grace in me is of a higher pitch, or nobler extraction? And if
it be not, what is become of that certain perseverance, which I have thus long
claimed a title to? Thus the miserable Desolatus divides his time betwixt his
complaints and doubts, and thinks there is no balm so sovereign as to heal his
bruises.


Diotrephes. Have you applied no salve to this soar in him?


Samaritanus. Yes; 1. I have expostulated with him to this purpose; [ Must the
Lord set up love and mercy in the work of Redemption, to be equally admired
with his Omnipotency Mr. Baxter's Directions for peace of conscience, in the
Epistle to the poor in spirit.
manifested in the Creation? And call forth the World to this sweet employment,
that in secret and in public it might be the business of our lives? And yet
shall it be so overlooked or questioned, as if you lived without love and mercy
in the World? Providence does its part, by heaping up Mountains of daily
mercies, and these it sets before your eyes. The Gospel has eminently done its
part, by clear describing them, and fully assuring them; and this is proclaimed
frequently in your ears, and yet is there so little in your hearts and mouths!
Do you see and hear, and feel, and taste mercy and love? Do you live wholly o^
it, and yet do you (...) doubt of it, and think so meanly of it, and so hardly
acknowledge it?]

To this he a swers* that for Gods g^^^^al mercy (which concerns not the life
to come) he readily acknowledges it is over all his works; but for his saving
mercy, that is restrained to a certain number, whom he has chosen to glory,
without respect to any qualification in them: And this Dt. ^wi^s Ubi supra. p.
51 Romans 9. 15.
concludes from those words of the Apostle, He has mercy on whom he will have
mercy; for the rest, he hardens them, and that for the mere pleasure of his
will.

2. I have represented to him the advice of S^. James, If any of you (mark, any
of you) do lack wisdom, le^ him ask it of Mr. Baxter. ib. page 39, 40.
God, who gives to all men liberally (without desert) and ^phra^deth not (with
our unworthiness or former faults) and it shall be given him, Jam. 1. 4. If you
that are ev^l, can give good gifts to your Children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to them that ask i^? Luke 11. 13. Suppose
your life were in the hands of your own husband, or your childrens life in your
hands, would it not exceedingly comfort you or them, to consider whose hands
they are in, though yet you had no further assurance how you should be used?
God is a Father even to the wicked; and to convince men of his fatherly mercy
to them, he often so styles himself: He says by Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. to a
wicked Generation, whose spot was not the spot of his Children, Do ye thus
requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? Is not he thy Father that
bought thee? Has he not made thee, and established thee? And the Prodigal
could call him Father for his encouragement, before he returned to him, Luke
15. 16, 17, 18. For my own part, I must needs profess, that my soul has more
frequent support from the consideration of Gods gracious and merciful nature,
than from the promise it self.

To this he returns a ready Answer, That God is the Father of the rain, Job 38.
28. and of all Creatures, as he is their Maker, Ephesians. 3. 14, 15. But if we
speak with reference to salvation, Dr. Twiss Vbi s^pra. p. 53
says, The dealing of God is with his Children (he means the Elect) only
Father-like, not with others.

3. I have signified to him, That this disquietness (in him) does manifes^ly
argu^ a desire to believe (as Dr. Twiss Ibid. p. 138.
observes;) and God has promised to fulfill the desire of them that fear him.
Ibid. p. 158.
And see^ng a^^iction, especially when it is of a spiritual nature, is the
ordinary introduction into the state of grace, in the coarse of Gods
Providence, like as the Valley of Ac^or was a door of hope u^ to the Children
of Israel; and our Savior in going to Jerusalem (the vision of peace) did
continually take Bethany (the house of mourning) in his way, we have cause to
conceive good hope, that these pangs may be as the pangs of Childbirth unto an
afflicted soul.

To this he replies, That common grace will carry a man so far as to be abased
in the feeling of his sin and misery, and to be humbled by attrition (as the
^Pap^sts call it) and to cry Mr. Baxter, of saving says. p. 43, 44.
out of their sin and folly, and day and night to beg for grace and mercy. He
may like the Word and ways of God, and think Gods servants the best and
happiest men, and have many a wish that he were such himself; he may avoid
gross and wilful sinning, and continue in hearing, reading the Word, enquiring
consideration; he may have a desire after Christ and holiness, and heaven; he
may have love to God and the Redeemer, and the Saints; and withal, he may have
either a knowledge that he is yet short of true Christianity, or at least, be
much afraid of it; and therefore be under a prudent impatiency, till saving
grace comes in, and the Spirit has sealed him up to the day of Redempti^n, and
he cry out, What shall I do to be saved? This a man may be brought unto by
common grace, which has no promise of saving grace made to it, nor any
necessary connection with it; and consequently (says he) these pangs may be but
the beginning of greater sorrows.

4. I have assured him, that if he does believe in Christ, a Fountain of
Consolation is then opened to him Dr. Twiss. p. 148.
. In this case we can assure him, not only of the favor of God for the
present, but also of final perseverance therein, and of Election, and of
Salvation, as Dr. Twiss Ib. p. 150.
affirms.

To this he replies in the words of the same Dr. Ibid. page 47, 48.
, That a man may believe by an acquired faith How can such a Faith, clothed
with all moral virtues, be distinguished from an infused Faith?
, and perform the acts of all moral virtues, and have an exterior conformity
to the means of grace, and so proficere ad exteriorem vitae emendationem; and
yet not be acceptable to God for all this! Nothing but a Divine Faith will save
us.

5. I have told him, Albeit he has not this Faith to day, notwithstanding he
may have it in good time Dr. Twiss. ib. 150,
; and that there is no cause of desperation, or to conceive himself to be a
Reprobate; Ib. 138.
forasmuch as his condition is no worse than Saul's was before his calling; yea,
and the holiest servant Mr. Baxte^'s Directions for peaee of Conscience. page
463.
of God. Therefore (said I) what if you have no grace? Do you not hear God
daily offering you Christ and grace? Does he not entreat and beseech you to be
reconciled unto him? (2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.) And would he not compel you to come
in? ( Mat^h. 22.) Do you not feel some unquietness in your sinful condition,
and some motions and strivings at your heart to get out of it? Certainly
(though you should be one that has yet no grace to salvation) yet these
continued offers of grace, and striv^ngs of the Spirit of Christ with your
heart, does show that God has not quite forsaken you; and that your day of
grace and visitation is not past.

To this he finds an answer to; and tells me the question is, whether there be
any such day of visitation allotted for him or no. He is sure those s^rivings
betwixt the flesh and natural conscience portend no such; forasmuch as there
may be such a conflict in the very Reprobate. He wonders I should say, that God
does b^seech him to be reconciled, and would compel him to come in; for his
Conversion must be (if ever it be at all) of Gods irresistible working, and
saving grace of his immediate infusing; and he being omnipotent, if he were
pleased to have it so, it must needs be accompl^sh't in him presently.

6. I have entreated him after this manner [When the Devil clamours in your
ears [ Christ and Salvation is none of th^ne] let that voice of God be in your
memory [ O take Christ Mr. Baxter, ^bi supra. page 37.
and life in him, that tho^ m^^st be saved.] When you would fain have Christ
and life, and you are afraid that God will not give them to you, remember then,
that God stands by beseeching you to accept the same thing which you are
beseeching to give. God is the first Suitour and Sollicitour; God prays you to
take Chr^^, and you pray him to give you Christ; what have you now to do, but
to take him? And here understand, that this taking is no impossible business;
it is no more but your hearty c^^se^ting. And ( page 56.) when God in the
Gospel bids you take Jesus Christ, and beseeches you to be reconciled Ibid.
page 56.
to him; if your heart answers, Lord, I am will^ng, I will accept of Christ,
and be thankful: why then, the match is made between Christ and you; and the
Marriage Covenant is truly entre', which none (...) dissolve. If Christ were
not first willing, ^e would not be the S^ito^, and make the motion; and (...)
he be willing, and you be willing, what can break the match?

To this he answers, he is much unsatisfied that I seem to make it so easy a
matter to believe, when others of the Orthodox do heighten the diffi^ul^y of
the duty. I^ it implies no more than an acc^pt^nce of Christ and life, how come
so many that Mr. Norton. Orthod. Evang. p. 206, etc.
pretend to Christ, and rely upon him, and c^aim an interest in him (which sure
they would not do, if they did not consent to have him) how come so many of
them (says he) to be deceived, and disclaimed at last, and their faith to
perish with them? ( Mat. 7. 21, 22.) All may seem fair (says Dr. Twiss Page
102.
) no reigning sin appearing, whereby the Conversation is de^^led; yet a man may
deceive himself. O how many have thought that Christ was most dear to them, and
that the hopes Mr. Baxter's Direct. for peace of consc. in the Epist. Dedicat.
of heaven were their chiefest hopes, who have left Christ, though with sorrow,
when he bid them let go all (as Mr. Baxter has observed;) who does hereupon
conclude, [ I shall never be so confident of any man's ^idelity to Christ, as
not withal to suspect that he may possibly forsake him; nor shall I boast of
any man's service for the Gospel, but with a jealousy that he may Ibid.
drawn to do as much against^ it.] Alas Sir, your saving faith is not of a
common extraction, it is a special Donative, merited by Christ but for a very
few, as Dr. Twiss Vbi supra. page 152.
tells us; and peculiar to the Elect, as our Divines conclude from Tit. 1. 1.

7. I have told him, That God has under his Hand and Seal made a full and free
Deed of gift, to him and all sinners, of Mr. Baxter. ib. page 43.
Christ, and with him of pardon and salvation; and all this on condition of his
acceptance or consent. That it was comfort to know ^e might have Christ if he
would, and to find this to be the sum of the Gospel: Rev. 22. 17. Whoso^ver
will, let ^im take of the water of life freely.

To this he readily answers out of Dr. Twiss, That till a man believes, ^t is
not known either to himself, or any other Ibid. page 164.
man, that he shall have any benefit by the death of Christ; only God knows
from everlasting, who shall have benefit by the death of Christ, and who not;
forasmuch as he has determined to give faith in Christ to some, and not to
others; and accordin^ly has sent Christ into the World for their sakes.

8. I have told him, That the Scripture it self, by the plainness and fullness
of its expression, makes it as clear as the light, Mr. Baxter. ib. page 32.
that Christ died for all.

At this he cries ou^, What has the death of Christ to do with my Election or
Reprobation? Dr. Twiss tells us, That Dr. Twiss. ubi. supra. page 139.
God in his D^cree, did no more consider the death of his Son, than the faith
of the Elect.

9. Here I expostulated with him in these words, Is it Mr. Baxter. ib. p. 42.
nothing that a sufficient Sacrifice and Ransom is given for you? This is the
very foundation of all solid peace. I think this is a great comfort, to know
that God looks now for no satisfaction at your hand; and that the number or
greatness of your sins, as such, cannot now be your ruin.

To this he confronts that of Dr. Twiss; If Christ made satisfaction for all
the sins of all and every one, in such sort Dr. Twiss. ibid. page 141.
that Gods justice is thereby satisfied; I demand how it can stand with Gods
justice to exact satisfaction at the hands of so many (as he does) for their
sins, and that by eternal damnation in hellfire? For whether Christ's death and
passion be satisfactory for all sins, for all and every one, by its own nature,
or by the constitution of God, or by both; I comprehend not with what justice
God can put the damned persons to satisfy for their own sins in the flames of
hellfire, etc.

10. I have told him of a world of comfort, which even the graceless may gather
from universal or general mercy. To this purpose I find that Scripture
alleged, John 3. 16. God Mr. Baxter. ib. page 38, 43.
so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes ^n him, should not per^sts, but have everlasting l^f^.

Here he interposeth a distinction of Dr. Twiss^'s, The love of God and of
Christ to all goes no further (says he) then this, That whosoever believes in
him, shall not perish, but have everlasting Dr. Twiss. ib. p. 164.
life: But Gods special love to his Elect, is to send Christ into the World to
merit, not that only for them which is to be co^fer'd upon the condition of
faith; but to merit faith also for them, which is conferred upon them
absolut^ly, and upon no condition.

11. I have advised him to get clear apprehensions of the freeness, fullness,
and universality of the New Covenant, or Law of Mr. Baxter. ib. p. 33.
Grace. No man on Earth is excluded in the tenor of this Covenant; and
therefore (said I) certainly you are not excluded; and if not excluded, then
you must needs be included.

But he returns this Answer, he understands not how the Covenant of Grace can
extend to such as God did implacably hate upon the account of Adams sin, and
decreed to pass them by in the communication of grace sufficient and nec^ssary
to Faith and Repentance, without which there is no Adoption or Pardon.

12. I told him, God invites all without exception to mercy and salvation, and
therefore there was no reason why he should doubt of it.

He replies, Gods invitation is no other than by professing, that by Faith and
Repentance they shall be saved; without Faith and Repentance they shall be
damned Ib. page 54.
; as Dr. Twiss resolves; and he tells Page 51.
us moreover, that Austin has long ago professed, that to say God would have
all to be saved, and none to perish, is to deny the First Article of our Creed,
concerning Gods Omnipotency.

13. I have represented what abundance of Comfort General Mercy or Grace may
afford the soul, before it perceive (yea, or receive) any special grace; for
Mr. Baxter. ubi supra. p. 46, 47.


1. All the terrifying temptations which are grounded on misrepresentations of
God (as if he were a cruel destroyer to be fled from) are dispelled by the due
consideration of his goodness, and the deep settled apprehensions of his
gracious, merciful lovely nature (which indeed is the first work of true
Religion, and the very Master Radical Act of true Grace, and the chief
maintai^er of spiritual life and motion.)

2. All these temptations are yet more effectually dispelled, by considering
this merciful Divine Nature dwelling in flesh, becoming man, by condescending
to the assumption of our humane nature, and so come near us, and assuming the
office of being the Mediator, the Redeemer, the Savior of the World.

3. All our doubts and fears that proceed from our former sins -- have all a
present rememdy in the fullness and sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction, even
for all the World; so that no sin is so great, but it is fully satisfied for,
etc.

4. All our doubts and fears that arise from an apprehension of Gods
unwillingness to show us mercy, and to give us Christ and life in him, arise
from the misapprehension of Christ's unwillingness to be ours; or at least from
the uncertainty of his willingness; these have all a sufficient remedy in the
general extent and tenor of the New Covenant.

From which principles our Divines do infer:

1. A possibility of your salvation. Ib page 43.


2. Nay, though you were yet graceless, you have now this comfort, that your
salvation is probable as well as possible; you are very fair for it. The terms
be not hard in themselves on which it is tendered; for Christ's yoke yoke is
easy, his burden light, and his commands are not grievous.

3. Yea, this exceeding comfort there is, even for them that are graceless,
that their salvation is conditionally certain, and the condition is but their
own willingness.

But all this gives Desola us no satisfaction: As to the greatest part of
Mankind, he finds in God a general unwillingness of their salvation; for, as if
he were a cruel destroyer (according to the Synod of Dort) he cast them off
without any vincible fault of theirs (for the sin of Adam) and out of an
immutable hatred against them, he decreed to withold from them all grace
sufficient unto Faith and Repentance; and hence it follows, that Christ
procured no such grace for them; and consequently, that his merit is
insufficient Distinctio qua Christus dicitur mortuus sufficienter, non
efficaciter, pro omnibus vana est; nom illud aut notat vice, aut bono omnium
mori; sed nec hoc, nec illud: Ergo nullo mod^, etc. Maccovius. in Th^ol. polem.
cap. 14. Qust. 15. (mihi.) page 98.
: And therefore if pardon and salvation be tendered to them, it cannot be done
seriously, and in earnest, but in mockery and delusion. Hereupon he concludes,
that pardon and salvation being offered only upon such condi^ions as are
impossible, the obtaining them is so far from being certain, that it is neither
probable nor possible.

Lastly, I have conjured him not to think of Gods mercifulness Mr. Baxter. ib.
page 18.
with distinguishing, extenuating thoughts, nor to limit it by the bounds of
our frail understandings; for the Heavens are not so far above the Earth, as
his thoughts and ways are above ours. I bid him still-remember, that he must
have no low thoughts of Gods goodness; but apprehend it as bearing proportion
with his power. As it is blasphemy to limit his power, so it is to limit his
goodness. I advised him to consider, that even under the terrible Law, when God
proclaims to Moses Ibid. page 17.
his own Name, and therein his Nature, Exodus 34. 6, 7. the first and greatest
part is, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin: And he has sworn that he has no pleasure in the death
of a sin, but rather that he return and live.

For this he finds an evasion too out of Dr. Twiss, where in Answer to the Text
now alleged, he replies thus, As for that of swearing by himself, that he wi^
not (for so the Translatour Vbi supra, page 52, 53.
of Tilenus had rendered it) the death of a sinner, there is no such Text at all
(says he;) the most Authentical Translation of our own Church reads it, [ I
have no pleasure in the death of a sinner.] And as Piscator observes, A man may
will that wherein he takes no pleasure; like as a sick man takes no pleasure in
a bitter Potion, yet he is willing to take it to recover his health: So is a
man willing to lose a Limb (though he takes no pleasure in it) to save his
life. And then again, as the words lie, they are directly contrary to Christian
reason; for does not God inflict death on thousands? and does not the Scripture
testify, That God works all things according to the counsel of his will?
Ephesians. 1. 11. And albeit he takes no pleasure in the death of the sinner, yet
the Scripture is as express in acknowledging that God delights in the execution
of judgment, as well as in the execution of mercy. I am the Lord which shows
mercy, judgment and righteousness in the Earth; for in these things I delight,
says the Lord, Jer. 9. 24.

Having proceeded thus far, I saw so little probability of success, that I
resolved to have him treated with the best advantage I could; and therefore I
have called in your assistance, that the Authority of your Office may add some
weight and force to such Arguments as you shall think sit to produce for his
Restitution. And now Sir, that you are acquainted as well with the Disease, as
with the Patient, I beseech you to bestow a charitable visit upon him.


Diotrephes. I will bear you company to his Chamber.


Samaritanus. I am as good as my word you see, my Desolatus; my friendship is
so fast, and so unfeigned, it will not suffer me to be long from you: But here
is another worthy friend of yours, Mr. Diotrephes, come to visit you; I hope
his Company and Conference will administer a great deal of satisfaction and
comfort to you; to his Charity therefore I commend you for a while.


Diotrephes. Being informed that you lay under some pressures upon your spirit,
I took this opportunity to show my readiness to do you the best office of kind
ess I am able; and now my prayer is, That the God of hope would fill you with
all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope through the power
of the Holy Ghost. Romans 15. 13.



Desolatus. Sir, you are very kindly welcome; and I heartily thank you for your
presence, and your prayers; though I have too much Reason to conclude, that I
shall reap no fruit or benefit by them.


Diotrephes. Do not draw such uncomfortable Conclusions against your self: I
cannot think you have any premises from which such a Conclusion does
necessarily follow. You know what the Psalmist says of Almighty God, He
heals the broken in heart, and gives medicine to heal their sickness; and he
lifts up them that be bowed down: And one end of the institution of our
office, is, that we should be helpers toward the joy of Gods people; 2 Gor. 1.
24.
and that as well to blow it up to a recovery when it is lost, as to kindle it
at first where it is wanting. Be of good cheer therefore; for I doubt not,
there will come a comfortable voice out of this Cloud (to give you notice that
God will own you, as he did our Savior*; though as the Disciples then, so you
at this present be amazed to find your self overshadowed, and fear as you Luke
9 34, 35.
enter into the Cloud: Though it be thus with you at this instant, yet I say
there will come a voice out of the Cloud, saying, This is my Beloved Son; God
will say unto your soul, I am thy salvation.


Desolatus. Oh Sir, time was, when I had the same resentments of Gods favor
with your self; I could (as I flattered my self) by the eye of faith discover
the cheerful countenance of a Father looking upon me, through the most dismal
Cloud that overshadowed me; and I have been able to say with the Prophet, This
was my comfort in my affiction, that thy Word has quickened Psalm. 119.
me: I had received such a measure of illumination from Heaven, I thought my
self able to afford eyes to the blind, and light to such as sat under the
darkest shades of desertion: But now it is my sad fate to suffer a total Eclipse
of comfort. Gods Rod has smitten the waters of my Cistern, and turned them
into blood, and it is become a frightful serpent to me.


Diotrephes. I beseech you do not call it your fate; there is a gracious
Providence in this Dispensation you lie under; and Hebr. 12. 11.
though it be grievous for the present (as all afflictions are) being designed
for your humiliation; yet the fruit of it being an Isa. 32. 17.
increase of righteousness, will be attended with peace and assurance for ever.
In the mean while consider, though the waters of your Cistern be turned into
blood; yet those in the fountain are sweet and clear still; God can turn them
into wine for you; though your Cistern be quite dry, the Rock that should
supply it, is inexhaustible; and out of that Rock. God will satisfy you with a
Breuvage as sweet as honey. Your Sun will gradually get up, and Psalm. 81. ult.
overlook the dark umbrage of this interposition; and when the Eclipse is over,
his influences will return upon your soul with interest in a satisfactory
duplication of your comfort.


Desolatus. As my feeling of the refreshments of the Spirit is gone, so are all
my hopes departed with it; if there be but so much as a smoke, we may
conjecture at least that it is possible there may be some fire; but --


Diotrephes. Give me leave good Sir to interrupt you; to my apprehension there
is so much smoke and heat too, that I must conclude the fire cannot be
extinguished: If we should determine men to be dead upon every depravation of
sense in them, we should become not only unchristian, but inhumane, and bury
many men alive: Because the night is very dark, should we put out the Candle
too? and instead of betaking our selves to our natural rest in Bed, should we
^ep into our Coffin, out of an opinion that the Dayspring will never return to
visit us? And because we observe that the Trees are unclothed in Winter, and
have lost their Verdure and their Beauty; were it not madness therefore to take
an Axe, and cut them down for Fuel, as if it were impossible the Sap should
everascend to make them bud and blossom, and become fruitful any more? Were you
not alive in your mothers womb, and in a thriving condition? yet sure you will
not pretend then to have had any sense of it. I pray therefore be you
satisfied, this is but a L^thargy, not a Death; it is but your Winter; Summer is
a coming on; it is but your night; your heaviness will march away with it; and
then joy will come upon you in the morning. Though the poor sheep may be
bewildered, and lost in a state of desolation, yet such is the care and
compassion of the good Shepherd, he will seek it, and fetch it home Luke 15.
upon his own shoulders.


Desolatus. Sir, were I sure I did belong to his Fold, I should not doubt of
his care over me; for he has promised in behalf of all his sheep, That he will
give them eternal life, and that they shall John 10. 28.
rever perish, neither shall any pluck them out of his hand.


Diotrephes. Why should you doubt your relation to him! his Fold is his Church,
and his sheep are said to be those that hear his voice, and follow him; they
are known by that ear-mark, and John 10. 27.
by the strait path they walk in after his precepts and example.


Desolatus. I know Sir, that his Church is his Fold; but there are many in it,
that are not of it; and though they hear his voice, and fellow him for a
season; yet they draw back at last Hebr. 10. 38. John 6. 66.
unto perdition, as many did, that are said to have believed on him; they only
are secured in point of Christ's care and custody, who have an interest in his
promises.


Diotrephes. You know it is the promise of the Gospel, That whosoever believes
in Christ crucified, should not perish, but have life John 3. 16.
everlasting. And it is the resolution of that famous Synod at Dort, That this
promise, together with the injunction of Repentance and Faith, ought
promiscuously, and without distinction, to be declared and published to all men
and people, to whom God in his good pleasure sends the Gospel. [ In the Chapter
of Redempt. Art. 5.


Desolatus. I am not ignorant Sir, that the Gospel is Gods revealed will, and
that the promises thereof are general; at least, promiscuously to be preached;
but the Decree concerning every man's salvation, is not made or calculated
according to the Revelations thereof (which are not Gods will in a strict and
proper sense) but according to his secret Will or Beneplac^ture; so that many,
yea, most to whom those promises are declared, are not at all concerned in the
ben^fit that is promised.


Diotrephes. Though that Synod has not expressly defined any thing in this
question; yet some of the Members of it, and Martinius by name says, That the
Redemption by Christ is universal; and that the benefit is not only sufficient,
b^t a so truly Act. Syn. Dord. 2. par. page 104, 105. De morte Christi pro
omnibus. Th. 10, 11.
intended and destined for every ore; otherwise, says He, we could not infer a
Nec^ssity of every Man's Believing that it belongs to him; and this would exempt
most men from the chief duty of the Gospel.


Desolatus. But Sir, I find even that man that goes so far, falls back again,
and spills all the Milk of Consolation he had given down in those Theses; for
soon after he puts in his excep^ions, and enters such a Caveat against the
greatest part of Mankind, See These. 16, etc.
as does infallibly keep them out of possession of the benefit; for, says he,
this universal Redemption must be very circumspectly handled (as to point of
satisfaction and merit;) and a double exception he propounds to limit them. One
respecting the things, another the persons. Christ, he says, has not
satisfied for a permanent impenitency, much less for a persevering contumacy;
and hence it comes to pass, that the wrath of God abides upon unbelievers; and
all their sins, original, actual, against Law and Gospel, are imputed to them:
And yet (O strange subtilty!) he has merited grace for all, even for the
impenitent and unbelievers: But what grace? why, Remission of sins, and Eternal
life, under the condition of faith and repentance; but not grace sufficient and
necessary unto that faith and repentance. From hence you will conclude, that he
must put in another exception, a Caveat against persons too, and it is this,
That although Christ has promiscuously so satisfied for all men, that their
sins may be remitted, ( viz. if they repent and believe; that is, (when they
are invited to take Christ's easy yoke) if they perform an impossible
condition) yet in truth he has procured the sins of the Elect only (in whom
that condition is effected by an irresistible grace and operation) to be
remitted eventually: So that Christ having made no satisfaction for the sin of
final impenitency, and having decreed to let them fall inevitably into that
state, by withholding grace sufficient and necessary to keep them from it, what
advantage I beseech you do these poor wretches receive from his merits and
satisfaction?


Diotrephes. But the Synod declares their sense more fully in this Article,
That many being called by the Gospel, do not repent, nor believe in Christ, but
perish in infidelity; this comes not to pass ( say they) through any
insufficiency of Christ's Sacrifice; for that is a most perfect sacrifice and
satisfaction for Chapt. of Redempt. Art. 3, 4, 5, 6.
sins, of infinite price and value, abundantly sufficient to expiate the sins
of the whole World; and that it is therefore of so great value, because the
person that was offered up, was the only begotten Son of God; and because his
death was joined with a feeling of Gods wrath, and of the curse which we had
deserved by our sins; and they declare this to be Gospel, That whosoever
believes, shall not perish, but have life everlasting.


Desolatus. It Is true [ if they believe] upon that condition: Mr. Baxter's
Preface to the Grot. Relig. sect. 9. Syn. Dord. ib. A t. 8.
But did God purpose* to cause in men this condition or not? In the Elect he
did, upon whom only it was the most free counsel, gracious will and intention
of God the Father, that the efficacy of that Sacrifice should stream ^orth to
the production of faith in them, by an irresistible operation, as that Synod
has more at large declared: So that a man must have the work of special grace
wrought in him, and the Spirit of Christ abiding with him, before he can have
assurance of his interest in Christ.


Diotrephes. It Is very true, They that have not the Spirit of Christ, are none
of his Romans 8. 9.
; but you could not so much as say, That Jesus Christ is the Lord, but by the
Holy Ghost 1 Cor. 12. 3.
; yet this I know is your steadfast profession; and because ye are sons, God
has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Can you
not pray to God too, as well as profess to believe in him?


Desolatus. It Is most certain we should not have believed Christ to have been
the Messiah, and the Son of God, if the Holy Ghost had not sealed the
Revelation to us, and confirmed it with a world of miracles: But having this
Revelation by us, Christ may be acknowledged to be the Lord, without the
special inhabitation of his Spirit to prompt us to it; and his influences may
be sufficient to move us unto prayer, when they are insufficient to ren^w us
unto salvation; and therefore not every one that says Lord, Lord; not every
Supplicant, shall enter into the Kingd^m of he^ven; but he that does the will
of the Father which is in he^ven, M^^. 7. 21.


Diotrephes. Hold you close to this principle, that heaven shall be allotted for
a portion to him that does the will of God; for the Lord loves judgment, and
forsak^th not ^is Saints (or his Psalm. 37. 28.
that be godly) they are pr^served for ever.


Desolatus. It Is not enough to do Gods will, for the substance of the work;
that may be done by the unsanctified: But it must be done after a spiritual and
gracious manner also Dr. Twiss. ib. p. 48.
; and so ^one but the Saints, and truly godly do it; and they are called [ his]
by a peculiar ^^^le of Election, and are sure to be preserved for ever.


Diotrephes. I remember you have been looked upon as a person eminent for
god^^ness; and forward, not only to do the will of God; but when the will of
God required it, to suffer also for your well-doing. Now St. Peter tells you,
and he prefixeth a kind of Oath to his Asseveration, saying, Of a truth I
perceive that God is no respecter of persons; but in ^very Nation he that
fears Acts 10. 34, 35.
him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him.


Desolatus. Sir, the sense of that Text must admit of a limitation; for as the
Synod at Dort has declared, God has chosen in Christ unto salvation a set
number of certain men, Cb. 1. Art. 7. with 15.
neither better, nor more worthy than others; but equally lost and lying in the
common misery with others, whom he passed over unto everlasting destruction.
And therefore Deodati tells us in his Annotation upon that Text, that Peter
speaks not here of that Original of the will and pleasure of God, by which he
takes into favor one, who of himself is as unworthy as the other, Romans 9. 11.
1 Cor. 4. 7. Do these Texts serve the interests of the Sullapsarians, or
Supralapsarians, or both, or neither?
But of that consequent degree of his love toward the work of his grace, in
what Nation or quality of person soever it be found, to maintain, increase, and
make it up. This is his sense.


Diotrephes. But that learned man does conclude, you see, that where God has
begun his work of grace, he will not fail to maintain, increase, and make it
up; and this is that very thing whereof the Apostle is so confident, That he
which has begun a good work in you, will perform (or finish it) until the day
of jesus Phil. 1. 6.
Christ.


Desolatus. This persuasion of the Apostle, is but the result of his charity
toward those Philippians, as appears by the next verse. Where God begins a
good work, he is willing and ready (in a way suitable to his wisdom, justice and
mercy) to accomplish it; but when the work is to be a duty, he expects from his
Creature a voluntary cooperation to it, without which it cannot be such; but
if he carries on the good work to its final period irresis^ibly, so that
neither the neglect nor the p^rversity of man can hinder it, how comes it to
pass that so many are guilty of Apostasy, and draw b^ck unto p^^d^tion? Hebr.
10. 38.



Diotrephes. What do you troubling your self about temporary Professors and
Hyp^crites, whose faith is false and unsound, and their grace counterf^it? Many
great Divines have told us, That the least See the Declaration of the
Congregational Church^s. cap. 14. n. 3.
measure of true grace, is a se^d of Regeneration, and implies the man that
has it, to be sanctified and justified; and then you know your estate is
unchangeable, you are sealed up with the Holy Spirit unto the day of
Redemption. In the mean while, the foundation of the Lord stands sure, having
this seal; the Lord knows them that are his. 2 Timothy 2. 19.



Desolatus. I suppose Sir, you deliver not your own judgment, if you say, That
the faith of Back-sliders is false, and their grace counterfeit See Mr. Baxter
of saving faith. page 16.
. You cannot forget the Parable, that tells us, the faith that withers upon
trial, springs out of the same seed of the Word, with that which is
indefectible; all grace is true; what is counterfeit, ought not to be honored
with so good a title. The grace that does not sancti^ie, does not fail of that
effect, because it is not true, but because it is too little; for the least
degree of grace is not a seed of Regeneration, not sufficient to sanctify and
entitle us to a state of justification, and an indefectible perseverance. To
this purpose a man much of your own judgment, has delivered himself in these
words, As I know of no such degree of habitual grace in this Mr. Baxter's
Account of persever. page 33.
life, which would preserve men from Apostasy without Gods continued,
tutelary, preserving grace; so I know of no such thing as true Sanctification
and Justification, without that grace which is radicated in the soul, and so
may be called a confirmed state, and without the Antecedent and Concomitant
Decree of Gods Election, which lays a certain ground of perseverance. Here
then is the foundation with the seal of God upon it: But who can break open
this Seal, and give me a sight of my own name engraven upon that foundation.
The Sovereign Elixer that can cure my disease, lies in no other but this very
Cabinet.


Diotrephes. The Seal is broke open at your effectual Calling, when God sends
you down a Transcript or Copy of the Original Record, with some bread of
comfort from his own Table, to refresh you, and give you assurance of your
communion with him. To this purpose, the Spirit says unto the Churches, To him
that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a
white stone, and in that stone a new Name written, which no Rev. 2. 17.
man knows, saving he that receives it.


Desolatus. Sir, I observe many men of your profession, very apt to adulterate
the Gospel, to serve the present exigence of the Patient, to whom they are
called to administer. Here now you do more than insinuate, that the effectual
Calling is a privilege so prop^r to the Elect, that a man needs no other
Argument than that, to conclude his absolute Election; but when you treat the
Reprobates, under the Title of unregenerate, you urge them to believe that they
are all comprehended in the act of grace, and so much within the reach of an
effectual Calling, that it is none but their own fault, if they lose the benefit
thereof. The blessed Spirit in that place quoted by you, speaks of a heavenly
Collation after victory; but what is that to my comfort? for should my
arrogance inlist me amongst such Conquerours, I should soon find it Cowed, and
utterly defeated, when I come to pass the Muster. I do wish with some passion
that I could taste the bread of that blessed Communion; but I know it is a Manna
that falls immediately from Heaven, and it is not yours, but a more secret hand
of Providence that must convey it; but it is a bread so peculiar to the
Children, that the Dogs are not allowed so much as any Crumbs of it: And
therefore in suggesting this Divine Repast, prepared for the entertainment of
Gods special Jewels, while you think to ravish my appetite, you do famish it,
and procure me really the sense of such torments as were inflicted upon
Tantalus but in Poets Fiction. Alas Sir, what do you telling me of that white
stone, unless you could enable me to see it, and read the superscription? which
is impossible, till I first receive it. The finger of Gods Spirit has not yet
written out that Transcript upon the Tabl^s of my heart; and I am sure there is
no other S^cretary can do it, neither have I any Reason to expect it from him;
for as that Manna falls not every day, nor upon every Tent of the Congregation;
so neither do those white stones pave the common streets, nor bear our ordinary
Christian, much less our Sirnames imposed upon us by Traduction. Such as have
an interest in the Book of Life, indeed (they say) their title is absolute,
their names being written therein, out of Gods mere free grace and pleasure,
without respect to faith and obedience, or any good quality whatsoever in them.
Upon this Account I may acknowledge with Modesty enough, that no man can be
fitter than my self to have a place in that eternal Schedule: But when I
reflect upon those millions, not so much as one single thought worse than my
self, left out of it, I find the odds so great against me, that I cannot yield
to flatter my self into a belief of it.


Diotrophes. There is no Reason in the World, the sense of your sins, how many,
or how great soever, or the opinion of your mere nothingness, should discourage
or detain you from a persuasion of your Election. Had your virtue been a motive
or inducement to Almighty God, to put you into his Decree, in that case, if you
brought your virtue to the balance, and found it light, you should have Reason
to return jealous of your state, and sorrowful: But seeing God has considered
no such thing in you, but put you freely into such a Decree as comprehends and
provides all means and requisites whatsoever for your irresistible
sanctification, perseverance and glory; the apprehension of this, methinks
should scatter your fears and doubts, and make you rejoice with joy unspeakable
and glorious 1 Pet. 1. 8.
. Now that this is a most unquestionable truth, we have the determination of
the Synod at Dort Chapter 1. Art. 8.
, which declares, That God has chosen us from eternity both unto grace and
glory, both unto salvation and the way of salvation, which he has prepared,
that we should walk therein. So that God has not only immutably decreed the
end, but also the means by which it is to be insuperably accomplished.


Desolatus. I wonder not at all at their complacence in the opinion of such an
absolute Election, who (as their Doctrine pretends) are carried on by an
irresistible operation, to presume or rely upon it. Who would not be glad of so
much security, that he might disband his fears and anxiety, and care of duty;
and be able to sing a requiem to his soul, and wrock her asleep with such a
charm as this [ Soul, thou have sufficient provisions for thy eternal welfare,
laid up in the Decree of thi^e Election; and this shall be infallibly disburs'd
to serve all thy needs, in thy several stages of Conversion, Sanctification,
and Perseverance, till thou do arrive at gl^ry.] But souls, in the temper of
mine, conflicting with doubts and jealousies; (if God were pleased to reverse
that absolute Decree) might find more encouragement in a promise of acceptance
in the Belov^d, that is in an Election upon Faith and Repentance; for then
(Gods ordinary concourse, and gracious assistance continued) the possibility of
obtaining would put life into their hopes, and their hopes would quicken them
unto action: But on the contrary, the thoughts of an impossibility, which the
Decree of absolute Reprobation must needs suggest to the considerate, do strike
all hopes dead, and put all good endeavors into a Lethargy, or a state of
languishing. This is like a plucking off our Chariot Wheels, and yet urging us
with threatenings, and severe Discipline, to drive through the red Sea, that we
may gain a passage into Canaan: As for that provision of means you mention,
what comfort can be reaped from it, to a person that suspects himself debarred
the end, and that immutably? Though the same showers fall providentially upon
the Tares, in regard of their commixture with the wheat, yet this can as little
prevent their doom, as change their nature; for all that, They shall be bound
up in bundles, and be cast into the fire. Matthew. 13. 30.



Diotrephes. Your mind and discourse run altogether upon the account of
Reprobates; but what if they abuse the outward means, employed for their
Conversion, and perish for their contempt of it? God has his chosen, whom he
will compel to come in Mr. Baxter's making light of Christ. p. 4.
: That is, in the good hour, the Ministry of the Word shall be attended or
seconded by an effectual Declar of the Congregational Churches. Chap. 20. n. 4.
, irresistible work of the Holy Ghost upon their whole soul, for the producing
in them a new spiritual life; and being thus regenerated, their estate (as you
cannot deny) is then (as to the object or thing) immutably and infallibly
certain.


Desolatus. The new Birth, or effectual Calling (which is inseparable to a
lively faith) I perceive is the only Phial that contains the Aqua vitae, to
cure these fainting Fits of Fear and Desperation; but grant a true Child of
God, shall never be permitted so far to play the Prodigal, as to be
disinherited; what comfort will this aford him, though his life be competently
upright and regular, who to deal ingenuously, cannot boast of omnipotent
infusions, which he never felt, nor pretend to any Reformation wrought in him
irresistibly in an instant; but to such only as the Holy Ghost in Scripture,
has produced by rational Motives and Arguments, and upon deliberate advisement
too? for that instantaneous and irresistible Regeneration, I am persuaded,
there are very few that feel it, even of those passionate disputers for it: But
were they reduced to a state of desolation (as I am) I am confident their
Arguments would appear Sophistry to themselves, and vanish into nothing. Some
loose and vicious persons finding themselves by some happy Providence brought
on a sudden out of love with their crimes, may possibly impute their change to
such an irresistible operation of the Holy Ghost: But this opinion many times
betrays them to new dangers, while they conclude, They are carried by the
same, or like impulsion, when they make choice of some other By-way, and run
into new Exorbitances; yet I will not deny, but the Holy Ghost may use that
short method upon some special occasions (as in the Conversion of Paul, and
perhaps Austin:) But when he does use it, it is very rare and extraordinary.
Otherwise being conscious to no such manner of production in my self, I shall
yet have more ground to disbelieve my own Regeneration.


Diotrephes. God forbid I should go about to add wound to wound, or affliction
to affliction, by raising new doubts in you; I Dr. Twiss. (...) 158.
desire rather to be calm, and satisfy such as are raised already: However
you may remember, it is the general opinion, that this doubtfulness of your own
sincerity, may very well consist with the state of grace; and it is a very great
sign you fear God, and value his love and favor, that you are so much troubled
upon your jealousy, that you want it.


Desolatus. These marks Sir, whatever assurance they may give us for the
present, they are not so infallible, but they may deceive us; yea, and all
other marks whatsoever. I may have a notional knowledge of Christ, and the
necessity of his blood, and of the excellency of salvation, and yet perish. I
may weep at the History of his Passion, when I read how he was Mr. Baxter's
Sermon of making light of Christ. p. 55, 56
used by the Jews, and yet perish. I may come desirously to his Word and
Ordinances, and yet perish. I may in a fit of fear have strong desires after a
Christ to ease me, and save me from Gods wrath, and yet perish. I may obey him
in many things, so far as will not ruin me in the World, and escape much of
the pollutions of the World by his knowledge, and yet perish. I may suffer, and
lose much for him; some parcels of my pleasures and profits I may part with, in
hope of salvation, and yet perish. I may be esteemed by others a man zealous
for Christ, and be loved and admired upon that account, and yet perish. I may
be a zealous Preacher of Christ and Salvation, and reprove others for their
neglect of both, and lament the sin of the World with most bitter and
passionate expressions, and yet perish. I may verily think that I set more by
Christ and Salvation, than by any thing else whatsoever, and yet be mistaken,
and perish everlastingly. Again See Mr. Baxter's additional sheet at the end of
his Treatise of saving Faith.
, By common grace a man may not only know, but love God also; and love him as
merciful and gracious, as better than the Creature, as best for him; yea, he
may love God under the notion of the chiefest good, and most desirable end, in
whose sight and fruition everlasting happiness consists. And by common grace
he may believe in Christ, or desire him as a Savior to free him from every
sin; and from sin as sin, or as it is against God. This is the Doctrine of a
person Mr. Baxter.
of great Note, as you your self very well know; and I pray what can a
Regenerate man do more? and how then shall he discriminate his saving grace
from that common grace?


Diotrephes. That person tells you withal in the same Treatise Page 94. Prop.
13.
, That the Act of Love or Faith are considerable. 1. Physically, 1. In general,
as Faith and Love. 2. In special, as this Faith and Love about this object, the
Father and the Son. And thus by common grace men may have true Faith and Love;
that is, such as is physically a true or real Act. 2. They are considerable
morally; and that 1. Either as duty answering a precept [believe and love God)
and thus they have an analogical defective morality in them, and so are thus
far, sincere or true; but not that same true Love or Faith, in specie morali,
which the command requires; for it commands us to love God above all, etc.
3. They are considerable as conditions of the promises, and evidences of
spiritual life in the soul, and thus wicked men by common grace are never made
partakers of them. They have not the things themselves; their faith and love is
not the same thing which has the promises made to them in the Gospel; and so
are not true or sincere. This is the full Declaration of that person you
mention.


Desolatus. Why Sir, here is very cold comfort, if this be the best you can
administer; this is the grand Objection I have against my self, and makes me
doubt the sincerity of my grace. I love God, and I believe in Christ, and this
belief and love are physically true, they are real acts, and have a being: but
they are morally defective, and insincere; not the same thing which has the
promises made to them in the Gospel; and consequently are no evidences of
spiritual life in my soul; so that all you have done, has rather tended to
cancel all my evidences for life and salvation, than to clear them up for me.


Diotrephes. The most certain judgment a man can make of his state and
condition, is to be collected from the end he propounds to himself in his
designs and actions; for every man has one only prevalent ultimate end, which
is to be called finis Mr. Baxter. is. Propos. 10. and 11.
hominis, or is the chief ultimate end of the habitual predominant inclination
or disposition of his soul, and of the tenor or b^nt of his course of life.
All godly men make choice of God for this their end; but all the wicked make
choice of the Creature, and Carnal-self for theirs; so that we may judge best
whether men be regenerated or carnal by the end that rules their hearts, and
has the greatest interest in them.


Desolatus. Sir, I am now as much to seek as ever; for you said even now, That
a man may so love God and Christ, that he may verily think he sets more by them
than any thing else, and yet be mistaken. Grant that I have accustomed my self
to that easy yoke, that Christ ordinarily lays upon the shoulders of his
Disciples, and can carry it to my thinking handsomely; yet should Christ try me
with a harder imposition, as he did that young man in the Gospel Mark 10. 16,
17, 18.
, How can I be able (having never been called to the like trial formerly) to
secure my own sincerity in that case? I may retreat and flinch back as he did,
and depart sorrowful from my Savior. How can I be assured Many have shrunk in
greater trials, that past through less with resolution and honor. Mr. Baxter.
ibid.
of the strength of my grace, and the proof of my sincerity, if I should be
called to suffer Mattyrdom? Though I come off in my active, I may fall in my
passive obedience. And yet suppose I should hold out here, the Apostle does at
last insinuate, That a man may give all that he has unto the poor, and his
body to be burned, and yet want charity. And experience does teach us, that men
may lay down 1 Cor. 13.
their lives in justification of their Schism and Rebellion, and yet be
confident of their state of grace and salvation; so that all this while a man
is not able to distinguish Hereupon says Mr. Baxter [I much fear least many
Learned, Civil, Orthodox men, do take common grace to be special, and so delude
their own souls, in the trial of themselves.] Of saving faith. page 49.
, whether it be common or special grace that he is acted by; which makes the
Apostle say, I know nothing by my self, yet hereby am I not justified; but he
that justifies m^, is the Lord, 1 Cor. 4. 4.


Diotrephes. Although temporary believers, and other unregenerate men may
vainly deceive themselves with false hopes, and carnal presumptions, of being
in the favor of God, and state of salvation, which hope of theirs shall
perish; yet such as truly believe in the Lord Jesus, and love him sincerly,
endeavoring to walk in all good conscience before him, may in this life be
certainly assured that they are in the state of grace, and may rejoice in the
hope of the glory of God; which hope shall never make them ashamed. So the
Congregational Churches have determined in their Declaration, chap. 18. n. 1.


Desolatus. No doubt, while men walk in all good conscience, they may be
assured for the present, that they are in a state of grace; so much the
Remonstrants will allow us; but not that they are in such an indefectible
state, as is pretended to flow from an absolute Election; and yet they will
allow men in that state too to rejoice in hope of the glory of God; and that
hope shall not make them ashamed: But if they show not the same diligence Hebr.
6. 11.
, (as at the beginning of their Conversion) to the full assurance of hope unto
the end; if they leave their first Rev. 2. 4.
love (as the Angel of the Church of Ephesus did;) their backsliding will make
them ashamed, though their hope does not. And if they who were once inlight^ed,
and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6.
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the
powers of the World to come; if they may fall away, then let them who boast of
a more special and insuperable grace, not Romans 11. 20.
be high-minded, but fear. Remember what expressions the clear evidence of
truth (for matter of Fact) has extorted from the pen of Mr. Baxter Disput. of
Right to Sacram. page 337. m.
, in these words, [ It is exceeding hard to determine how great, many or long,
the sins of a true Believer may be.] And if those sins be Adultery, Murder, or
the like, and long continued in, shall that Believer be certain still of his
Election? Shall he nor rather suspect it was but common grace that wrought him
to that belief? He has Reason certainly to suspect it, unless he adds
presumption to his other crimes; so that upon the whole matter, without a
special Revelation, a man cannot till his Doomsday be certain of his Election,
because he knows not what temptation he may fall into, nor how he shall demean
himself under it; and if he perseveres till then in his obedience, the
Remonstrants will secure him of his Election as well as you.


Diotrephes. We say, True Believers may have the assurance of their salvation
diverse ways shaken, diminished and intermitted, as by negligence in preserving
of it, by falling into some special sin which wounds the conscience, and
grieveth the Spirit, by some sudden or vehement temptation, by Gods withdrawing
the light of his countenance, suffering even such as fear him to walk in
darkness, and to have no light; yet are they not utterly destitute of that seed
of God, and life of Faith; that love of Christ and the Brethren, that sincerity
of heart, and conscience of duty, out of which by the operation of the Spirit,
this assurance may in due time be revived; and by the which in the mean time
they are supported from utter despair. Declar. of the Congreg. Chur. chap. 18.
n. 4.


Desolatus. It seems then, that once true Believers, though they fall into some
special sin which wounds the conscience, and grieves the Spirit (for the other
branches I shall not insist upon;) and though that sin, or sins be never so
great, and long continued (for it is hard to determine how great, how many, or
how long those sins may be, as was confessed even now) yet they retain the seed
of God, and the life of Faith, and the love of Christ with sincerity of heart
and conscience of duty; and out of these, by the operation of the Spirit, their
assurance is sure to be revived. Then David addressed a needless Petition, to
have a new heart created, and a right spirit renewed in him, if that seed of
God, and life of Faith, and sincerity of heart were still in him before: Is it
not rather that great Engine of an absolute Election, that scrues such
Believers up again after those desperate falls It is not from the mere nature
of inherent grace that it cannot be lost; but from the Divine Decree, Love and
Engagement. Mr. Baxter of saving faith. page 49.
? But the Non-elect, though by the help of common grace, and their most
diligent improvement of it, they lead never so strict and severe a course of
life; yet if being led into temptation by an efficacious permission, they
miscarry under it, they fall not forward (as those Believers are said to do to
their advantage) but backwards, and can never rise again to any hope of
salvation or pardon, but must break their Necks irrecoverebly; nay, though he
walks never so uptightly under the conduct of this grace, it can neither bring
him to Heaven, nor procure saving grace for him. What encouragement is this to
the greatest part of Mankind, even amongst Christians, who are said to five
under no other influences than those of common grace?


Diotrephes. We are confident that such as are truly sanctified, can never fall
totally and finally; as for those other falling stars, how glorious soever
their luster was, we know they were never fixed in the Firmament.


Desolatus. Whatever your confidence is Sir, such examples make so great an
impression upon my spirit, I cannot but with trembling reflect upon that
Apostolical Caveat and Exhortation, [ Let him that thinks he stands, take
heed lest he fall.] 1 Cor. 10. 12.



Diotrephes. God has ordained such admonition as a means to promote the grace
of perseverance in all that are true Believers.


Desolatus. But that I am one of that number, is not yet made out to me; for
there is nothing can really make me such, but that special irresistible grace
that flows from the Fountain of an absolute Election, as the fruit and effect
of it, as the Synod of Dort declares: And unless I be planted in that Soil by
Gods most free and unchangeable love, it is impossible I should partake Chapter 1.
Art. 9.
of the fatness of it. And this is my unhappiness, I cannot meet a man that
has taken so exact a survey of that state, as to be able to secure my interest
therein. The truth is therefore, after all your applications to remove my
jealousy, I am still as much afraid of the state of Reprobation, as at our
first meeting.


Diotrephes. The Synod of Dort Chapter 1. Art. 16
tells us, That they who heartily desire to turn unto God, to please him only,
and to be delivered from this body of death, though they cannot make such a
progress in the faith and way of godliness as they wish; yet ought they not to
be terrified with the Doctrine of Reprobation; for our merciful God has
promised that he will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the shaken reed.


Disolatus. He that can quench 1 These. 5. 19.
the Spirit, may quench the smoking ^flax, though God does not. In this matter
I am not afraid of God, but of my self; and that in regard of the Decree of
Reprobation, which denies all grace sufficient to set the flax on fire, though
it smoaks till it makes the heart to bleed, as well as the eyes to water.


Diotrephes. If you be afraid of your own insirmities, I hope you have
sufficient security against them, in the intercession of a merciful and
compassionate High Priest, who implied all, when he spoke to Peter, and made
him this promise [ Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that he
may ^^ft you as Luke 22. 31, 32.
wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.


Desolatus. Alas, Sir, that concerns the El^ct Christ professes he prayed not
for all, but only for those whom God had given him, John 17. 9. or should
hereafter believe, ver. 20. and for them alone he sanctified himself, ver. 19.
that is, offered himself upon the Cross. Dr. Twiss. ibid. page 143.
, who are the only persons that have an interest in that High Priest; for we
are told in the name of all the Congregational Churches, That (though the
Reprobates were then in Adams loins as well as the rest) God was pleased to
give the promise of Christ, the seed of the woman to the Elect (only.) And that
his intercession belongs peculiarly unto them, is the affirmation of many
Members of the Synod of Dort; and as touching the efficacy of it, it is the
sense of that whole Convention. Besides, that promise concerns the true
Believers, and so no ground of comfort to such as want a true Gospel-faith for
the morality of it: But grant I have an interest in Christ so far forth as
concerns the impetration of grace; that is, of pardon and salvation upon this
condition, [ If I repent Vid. Act. Syn. Dord. par. 2. page 4. these. 7, etc. and
page 117. these. 2, 3, 4.
and believe] (as Martinius and Ludovicus Crocius do acknowledge, because they
saw the glory of God, his veracity in calling, his equity in commanding, his
justice in threatening could not be defended otherwise) yet if I have no
interest in his merit and intercession, as to the application of it, that is,
for procuring grace sufficient and necessary unto the begetting of that Faith
and Repentance (as they say Reprobates have not) what will it avail me?


Diotrephes. That impetration being made for all in general, as the greatest
Divines do confess (to whose Judgment I must subscribe for many weighty
Reasons;) the application you know, is to be accomplished by means. What the
ordinary means is, you are not ignorant; you must attend upon that, and wait
the good hour with patience; you have many comfortable expressions for your
encouragement: Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost. If you be
amongst that number, and sensible of your lost condition, you have
encouragement from that passage, Christ came not to call the righteous, but
such lost persons, sinners to Repentance.


Desolatus. That I am amongst the number of those lost souls, I am sufficiently
sensible; but that Christ came intentionally to seek and save me, is not so
evident; yet I have been taught to believe, that he came to save all upon
condition; that is, [if they repent and believe.]


Diotrephes. And not only so; but he has appointed a Ministry to make a
general offer of Christ, Pardon and Salvation upon that condition; and to call
upon them seriously and earnestly to perform it; that is, to repent and
believe, that they may actually receive forgiveness of their sins, and an
inheritance amongst them that are sanctified.


Desolatus. It Is somewhat strange how he should seriously offer life and
pardon, or seriously call to Faith and Repentance, such persons as he was
pleased, for the glory of his Sovereign Power, to Decree from all Eternity, to
withold his mercy from, to pass them by (in the Decree of communicating grace
sufficient and necessary to Faith and Repentance, and to permit them
efficaciously to fall into sin) and to ordain them to dishonor and wrath for
their sin, to the praise of his glorious Justice, as the Congregational
Churches have declared. How can it consist I say with Gods sincerity, equity
and justice, to call, command and threaten unto Chap. 3. n. 7. See chapter 5. n. 4.
The Doctrine of the Assembly, and that of Dort differ but little from this in
effect, though it be somewhat more plauble in appearance.
Faith and Repentance, upon promise of pardon and salvation, those very
persons, whom his own immutable and everlasting Decree has put under an
inevitable necessity of impenitency and unbelief, that he may have an
opportunity to glorify his justice in their eternal condemnation? A dejected
soul cannot cast anchor upon such deluding offers and invitations.

I shall therefore trouble you no further, good Mr. Diotrephes, but sum up the
grounds of my present doubts and disconsolation, and leave them to be more
deliberately weighed in the balance of your mature judgment.

1. It Is most certain there is no man shall be saved without Regeneration.

2. It Is resolved, Do a man what he can to the uttermost, in the improvement of
common grace; yet there is no promise extant to assure him, that special grace
shall be conferred upon him; but only,

3. Certain Revelations, that this work of Regeneration shall be accomplished
irresistibly, in a set number of persons called the Elect. And

4. Because those persons are designed and culled out already, without respect
or foreknowledge, whether of Faith or Repentance, or any good quality
whatsoever in them, as antecedent to their election; therefore I am sure no
performance of mine can procure me to be elected.

5. It is impossible upon these grounds, to come to the knowledge of it a
priori, whether I be elected or no, without such a special Revelation, as is
granted very seldom, and if ever, to very few.

6. It is so difficult likewise to collect any certainty a posteriori, the sins
and duties of the Elect and Reprobate, are so symbolical and alike; the first
(their sins) proceeding from the common infirmity and corruption of nature
which has infected all: And the second (their duties) being the effects of
that grace ( common or special respectively) which, whatever it be in the
political or moral capacity, is but gradually distinguished in the physical or
natural; and especially seeing that degree of grace, which is saving in one,
perhaps is not so in another.

7. We observe even in the purest times, whiles the Holy Apostles (those
foundations Rev. 21. 14.
of the new Jerusalem) were yet alive, that many who shined as glorious stars
in that Firmament, were notwithstanding drawn out of heaven by the tail of the
Red Rev. 12. 4.
Dragon, and cast down to the Earth; which event (as we are taught to believe)
is a sufficient indication, they never had a real interest in Christ's merits
and intercession to procure saving grace for them; and for abusing that common
grace, which had advanced them so high (though higher it was not able) they
were cast so much the lower into shame and torments.

Lastly, This absolute Election being, (as some of the Synod at Dort affirm)
Deput. Syn. Geld. Act. Syn. N. Dord. page 30. par. 3.
the foundation of Christianity and salvation, and the Root Suffrag. Genevens.
ibid. page 57. par. 2.
or Fountain of solid consolation in this miserable life, and my self not able
to make out my interest in it; but finding much objection to the contrary: Hinc
illae lachrymae; it seems for all such miserable comforters Job 16. 2.
and Physicians of no value Chap. 13. 4.
I must sit down in my confusion by these waters of Babylon, and weep bitterly.


Lam. 1. 16. For these things I weep; mine eye, mine eye runs down with
water; because the Comforter that should relieve (or bring back) my soul, is
far from me.
THE SYLLOGISM.

THAT Doctrine that can afford no solid grounds of hope to encourage a desolate
spirit in the ways of godliness; That Doctrine is nor serviceable to the
interest of souls, nor practicable in the exercise of the Ministerial Function,
nor according to godliness.

The Doctrine as well of the Sublapsarians, as that of the Supralapsarians, can
afford no solid grounds of hope to encourage a desolate spirit in the ways of
godliness. Therefore

The Doctrine, as well of the Sublapsarians, as the Supralapsarians, is not
serviceable to the interest of souls, nor practicable in the exercise of the
Ministerial Function, nor according to godliness.

The Major is evident, because it is for the interest of souls to be filled
with all joy and peace in believing, and to rejoice in hope of the glory of
God; and therefore it is a part of the Ministers duty to be helpers of the
peoples joy, that they may serve God with gladness of heart, Romans 5. 2. Chap.
14. 17. and 15. 13. 2 Cor. 1. 24. Deuteronomy. 28. 47.

The Minor is proved in this fifth Dialogue. Read also the Relation of the
fearful estate of Francis Spi^a.


Colasterion.
Ezekiel. 13. 22, 23. Ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not
made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return
from his wicked way. -- Therefore ye shall see no more vanity.

Etsi in fidem non illuminantur, nec Evangeli^ essi aciam vere Other proof^ of
the Minor.
sentiunt nisi qui praeordinati sunt ad salutem; (...) tamen ostendit reprobos
interdum simili fere sensu a^que ^^ectos ^ffici, ut ne suo quidem judici
quicquam ab electis differa^. Q^a^e ^^^il absurdi quod caelestium donorum
gustus ab Apostol, and temporalis fides Hebr. 6. 4. Luke 8. 7.
a Christo ill^s adscribitur; non quod vim spiritualis gratiae solid
percipiant ac certumfidei lumen: sed quia Dominus, ut magis convictos and
inexcusabiles reddat, se insinuat in horum mentes, quatenus sine adoptionis
Spiritu gustari potest ejus bonitas. Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 11.

AND now (Reader) I appeal to all the World for judgment, whether men that have
espoused such principles, be not like to march out upon a very hopeful
Expedition, in their enterprise for Reformation, while they continue such
Forces under their Regiment, as are so apt upon all occasions to Face about,
and give fire upon themselves, instead of aiding them in carrying on the War
against Vice and Wickedness? They may Magisterially dictate their Prescriptions
for a Form of Godliness; but doubtless in the profession of these principles,
they do shamefully evacuate, if not utterly deny the power thereof.

But some man may demand, If these Doctrines be so pernicious unto godliness,
What is the Reason that such as do embrace them, do not run headlo^g after
their unbridled lusts, into all manner of wickedness? To which I answer:

1. That doubtless too too many do take liberty to pollute themselves with the
foulest sins, and flatter themselves that they shall be saved harmless upon the
account of these Doctrines.

2. Some dissemble their crimes for other advantages, or excuse *, or
extenuate, or adopt them into the Family of Virtue. Q^aere, Whether men of
those rigid opinions, do think all those sins mentioned in the Apostles
Catalogue, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. to be damnable, and make a like conscience to
avoid them all?
Did not Mr. Knox call it a godly Fact in James Melvin, when he murdered the
Archbishop of St. Andrews. And do not others now adays, account such Facts
the work of God, and a doing God service, John 16. 2.
as well as Mr. Knox.

3. Men may be very resolute to do and suffer much, to gratisie the pride of
their opinion. Maccovius De Atheis. in Cor^l.
mentions one Luciolus in France, who endured to be burnt for Athei^m.

4. There are many (and God be blessed there are so many) that lead a very
godly life, not discerning the pernicious consequences of those Doctrines which
they do maintain.

And 5. As Cicero writes of the Disciples of Epicurus, so I may say of these,
It is not the Gen^us of their Doctrine, but the honesty of their Nature, and
the Goads of Conscience, that do prompt and incite them to a good life. To
which I may add,

6. The power of some other principles, whereby the Divine Grace does act in
them.

Lastly, If they of another persuasion can clearly and solidly defend the
honor of the Divine Attributes, viz. Gods Mercy and Justice, his Holiness,
Truth and Sincerity; and justify the Necessity, Use and Exercise of the
Ministerial Office upon their own grounds, I do unfeignedly promise to
subscribe: But if they be not able to perform this, then as Vincentius
Lirinensis has it, Dediscant been, quod dedicerunt non been: and ex toto
Ecclesiae dogmate quod intellectu capi potest, capiant: quod non potest,
credant. Commonit. cap. 25. ad finem.

AN ADDITIONAL DIALOGUE BETWIXT SAMARITANUS and DESOLATUS: Designed to satisfy
the DOVBTS of CONSCIENCE, Affrighted at (that which Mr. Calvin both made and
called) THE HORRIBLE DECREE OF Reprobation.

JER. 8. 22.Is there no Balm in Gilead?

ISA. 35. 3. Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.

1 THESE. 5. 14. Comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak.

LONDON, Printed by E. M. for William Leak at the Crown in Fleet Street,
between the two Temple-gates. 1661.

THE SIXTH DIALOGUE BETWIXT SAMARITANVS and DESOLATVS.
SAmaritanus. How now my Desolatus, what solitary still? has Mr. Diotrephes
lest you alone?


Desolatus. All alone Sir, to my self, and my own sad thoughts.


Samaritanus. I hope he has left you satisfaction behind him, and then he
might take his leave with confidence.


Desolatus. Yes, he has given me satisfaction, and I thank him for his labor.


Samaritanus. I am very glad of that; but why so pensive and dejected still, if
you have received satisfaction?


Desolatus. I perceive his Doctrine contains no cordial of hope for one in my
condition, that is all the satisfaction I have gained; and sure you must needs
think there is but cold comfort in that.


Samaritanus. Whatever his Application have been, I know it is impossible the
Father of Mercies should be defective in his provisions for healing the sad and
broken soul; for he says, To this man will I look, even to him that is poor,
and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word. And to what end does he
look Isa. 66. 2.
to persons of this frame and temper of spirit; but to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones? Chapter 17. 15.
In confidence therefore of his compassion toward you, and his assistance to
my self in this charitable enterprise, I desire to renew my Discourse with you,
in order to your better satisfaction and comfort. And let me tell you, as the
groundwork from Mr. Baxter, That all the terrifying temptations which are
grounded on misrepresentations of God (as if he were a cruel destroyer Direct
for peace of Consc. Dir. 7. page 46.
to be fled from) are dispelled by the due consideration of his goodness, and
the deep settled apprehensions of his gracious, merciful, lovely nature (which
indeed is the first work of true Religion, and the very Master-radical Act of
true Grace, and the Maintainer of spiritual life and motion. If you think of
God as one that ia glad of all advantages against you, and delights Ib. page
18, 19.
in his Creatures misery, it is impossible you should love him. The love of our
selves is so deeply rooted in nature, that we cannot lay it be, nor love any
thing that is absolutely and directly against us. We conceive of the Devil as
an absolute enemy to God and men, and one that seeks our destruction, and
therefore we cannot love him: And the great cause why troubled souls do love
God no more, is, because they represent him to themselves in an ugly odious
shape. To think of God, as one that seeks and delights in man's ruin, is to
make him as the Devil; and then what wonder, if instead of loving him, and
delighting in him, you tremble at the thoughts of him, and fly from him! As I
have observed Children, when they have seen the Devil painted on a Wall in an
ugly shape, they have seen the Devil painted on a Wall in an ugly shape, they
have partly feared, and partly hated it: If you do so by God in your fancy, it
is not putting the Name of [ God] on him when you have done, that will
reconcile your affections to him, as long as you strip him of his Divine
Nature. Remember the Holy Ghosts description of God, 1 John 4. 16. God is love.
Write these words deep in your understanding.


Desolatus. Sir, Were the Author you have cited, present with me, I would
desire him to resolve me how he could demonstrate it, that God is love (as he
has described him) to the Reprobates; when he has from all Eternity abandoned
them to sin and hell torments for his mere pleasure, or to show his Sovereignty
and Power over them? But you may be pleased to proceed in your own method of
discoursing.


Samaritanus. I doubt not to satisfy you in this particular, before we part.
But I shall pursue that encouraging observation of St. Peter, where I left you
at our last conference [That God is no Respecter of persons, etc. To which you
made me no Answer, and so I thought fit to withdraw my self from you. Acts 10
34, 35



Desolatus. I remember very well the passage; for Mr. ^i^trephes was pleased to
revive the memory of it; but as little to his purpose, as to my comfort; for
(as I told him) Interpreters do put in such exceptions in their construction of
that Text, that it signifies nothing at all to my advantage. God it seems has
^ull'd out a set number of persons, without regard to any good quality in them,
upon whom he has immutably decreed to confer his grace, and they shall be
insuperably conducted unto glory; for all the rest (who make up the far greater
number) not a whit worse than those, he has passed them over, and decreed to
give them neither grace nor glory; but to let them fall (and that not by a bare
permission into sin, and to leave them in that sin to their final condemnation;
and this for the glory of his Sovereign Power over his Creatures: If I be not
of that set number, do I what I will or can, I shall find no acceptance at the
hands of Almighty God.


Samaritanus. Can you be induced to subscribe to such interpretations of
Scripture? you may with as much color of Reason say, That when our Savior
commands us, when we pray, to say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. His
meaning is, we should not say it at all; or when the Apostle says, Let every
soul be subject to the Higher Powers; that his meaning is, we should take up
Arms against them; St. Peter's sense is clear enough, that Gods respect is not
so much to the naked Entities, or Beings of men, as to their persons so
capacitated or qualified: He that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him: To this man will I look, says the High and Lofty One, as
you Isa. 66. 2.
heard even now. To this purpose the Lord, in his Expostulation with Cain
says, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? That is, without doubt
thou shall. Genesis 4. 7.



Desolatus. But the Scriptures do assure us, That God loves first Romans 10. 20.
, and makes himself known to those that make no inquisition after him John 15.
5. Psalm. 59. 10.
; and without Christ, and his grace, man can do nothing*.


Samaritanus. You say the very truth, the God of our mercy does prevent us, as
the Psalmist has it. But the love of God is exhibited to us in holy Scripture
two manner ways; either as Antecede^t, which goes before Faith and Repentance,
or as Consequent; which follows the obedience of Faith. God bears a general
good will to Mankind, before he loves them with a love of complacency; and out
of that love of good will, though he does not grant them salvation immediately,
yet he affords them light and means to lead them to salvation: This love is so
great, that the Apostle says of it, God commends his love toward us, in
that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. It was through Romans 5. 8.
the bowels of the mercy Luke 1. 78. Tit. 3. 4.
of our God, that this dayspring from on High did thus visit us: But upon the
intervention of our Faith, when we entertain this light, and receive Christ
into our hearts, there follows a love of complacency in God toward us, which
embraces us, as in the Neighborhood of salvation; of this love our Savior
speaks, John 14. 23. If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father
will love him; and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.


Desolatus. But the disposal of men as to their final state of salvation or
damnation; the Apostle makes it an Act of Gods Sovereign Power, Romans 9. 21.
Has not the Potter power over the Clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel
unto honor, and another unto dishonor?


Samaritanus. The Wiseman (who ere he was that wrote that Book) tells us of the
Potter, That employing his labors lewdly, he makes a vain god of the same
Clay. Sure God cannot do Wisd. 15. 8.
so; similitudes therefore must not be stretch too far Nasus nimium non est
emungendus, ne sanguis eliciatur. Dr. Pride. Lect. 8. de Salut. Eth.
: But suppose the Potter could give life and sense to his Vessels, and
perpetuate that life to millions of Ages; should he, merely to show his
Sovereign Power over them, inflict uncessant and excessive torments upon them;
what opinion would you have of such a man? Would you not think it an Act of
extreme cruelty, contrary to that natural love which every Creature bears
toward its own production; and contrary to natural equity thus to torment the
harmless!


Desolatus. I must confess I could have no good opinion of such a person in
such a case, for exercising so much inhumanity.


Samaritanus. If this were Gods practice, a man might justify himself upon the
account of such a President. It could be no sin for a man (in such a case) to
follow Gods example in disposing of his own: But God, as his own most gracious
Micah 7. 18.
nature abhors it, so his Law forbids all such intolerable cruelty: And as a
good man regards the life of his B^^st* Prove. 12. 10. Jonah 4. 11.
, so does our good God too: But unto men he is a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.
19. Who will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth.
1 Timothy 2. 4. Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance; the end and means too, Salvation and Repentance: And extends the
riches Romans 9. 22. with chap. 2. 4.
of his goodness and forbearance, and long-suffering to lead them to it: And
Hebr. 6. 18.
that by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we may
have a strong consolation, in flying for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us: He has confirmed his promise by an Oath, Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live,
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the
wicked turn from his way, and live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for
why will ye die, O House of Israel? Gods goodness or equity makes him have a
desire to the work i^ his own hands. It Is Job 14. 15.
the extreme provocation and incorrigible obstinacy of sinners, that makes the
Prophet denounce such a fearful doom against some of them, Isaiah 27. 11. For
it is a people of no understanding; therefore he that made them will not have
mercy on them; and he that formed them, will show them no favor.


Desolatus. Does God cast off none but such as cast off him first, and d^spise
his goodness. See 2 Kings 13. 23.



Samaritanus. Not a man that I can find, according to the Holy Scriptures Imo
divinae dereliction is eae apertissime designatur ratio, quod Deus ab hominibus
peius descratur. Prove. 1. 24. Theol. M. Britt. ^^ 3. and 4. Artic. These 4. vide
sequent. inter Act. Syn. Not. Dord. page 129. par. 2.
; for so the Lord has declared himself.

(1.) In the Old Testament: Prove. 1. 24. to 31. Because I have called, and ye^r
f^^s^d; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at
naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your
calamity, etc. And to the same purpose, Ezekiel. 24. 13. In thy filthiness is
(...), because I have purged thee, and thou w^st not purged; thou shall not be
purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon
the^.

(2.) In the new Testament, Acts 13. 26. The Apostle addresseth his Ministry
unto them in these That the displeasure of God is only against the refractory
and disobedient, see Heb. 10. 38. 1 Cor. 10. 5. Heb. 3. 17, 18, 19.
expressions: Men and Brethren, Children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever
among you fears God, to you is the Word of this salvation sent. And he gives
them warning, Ver. 40, 41. Beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is
spoken of is the Prophets; Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; and
because they did despise, contradict and blaspheme the Gospel, and reject Luke
7. 30.
the Counsel of God against themselves; therefore the Apostle took the boldness
to tell them, Ver. 46. It was necessary that the Word of God should first have
been spoken to you; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves
unworhly of everlasting life, ^^ we turn to the Gentiles. The Talent Talentum
gratiae a Deo semel concessum nemini eripitur, nisi qui prius suo vi. tio illud
sepelivit, Matthew. 25. 28. Hinc monemur ^^ Spiritum resistamus, n^ Spiritum
extinguamus, n^gratiam Dei frustra recipiamus, ne deficiamus a D^o, Hebr. 3. 7.
Theol. Britt. ibid. vide.
is never taken away, till it be first abused, or at least neglected; hence
Hebr. 2. 3. How shell we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? Reprobation
is therefore thus defined by the Learned and Orthodox [Gods immutable Decree,
whereby he has determined to leave them under wrath, for their sin and
unbelief; and to damn them eternally, who will not repent, and believe in
Christ.] This De^^^i^ion is most exactly true, if God reprobates such only as
he damns; (and if he does otherwise, there is not an exact conformity betwixt
his Decree, and the Execution of it, which is absurd) and the Scriptures
express it in See Mark 16. 16. John 3. 36. Acts 13. 46. Romans 11. 20.
every page; but especially we may take it from the words of our Savior
Christ, John 3. 18, 19. He that believes not, is condemned already; because he
has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. And his is the
(cause of) condemnation, that light is come into the World, and men loved
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. In which words, we
have not only the way, but the cause also of condemnation propounded; viz.
unbelief, and the love of darkness, proceeding from a custom of evil-doing.


Desolatus. My Friend, I am afraid you forget your self in this point; for you
know Divines do distinguish here, and make a wide difference betwixt the Decree
of Reprobation, and the Execution of it. Although, say they, God does destine
whomsoever he please to hatred and destruction, without any respect to any
quality in them, yet he is not unjust; because betwixt his Eternal Decree, and
the Execution of it, sin and infidelity are subordinated, as the cause for
which he justly damns them.


Samaritanus. I remember this distinction very well; but I cannot allow it for
current, because it does not free God from injustice; for if the execution be
therefore just, because it supposes a cause or ground for the infliction of
that evil upon man, which was destinated to him by the Decree; the Decree
therefore for the infliction of that evil is unjust, because that excludes such
cause or ground; for if it be not lawful to inflict evil without cause; neither
is it lawful to will the infliction of it; for the injustice, we know, is not
first and principally in the insliction, but in the will to inflict; for
rectitude is, primo and per se, in itself first and chiefly in the will, in the
execution only by ext^insecal denomination. But 2. If there be such a diversity
in the execution from the Decree; this Execution is not the Execution of that
Decree, but something else, as was intimated before. Besides, how is sin
subordinated to that Decree, and by whom! Is it by Almighty God? Why, then
(whether that subordination be by a positive or privative action) that sin is
intended of God, as a means inservient to that Execution; and this will double
the injustice of i^; for what is this else, but first to will that a harmless
person be made miserable; and then, to will that he be made a sinner, that he
may be made miserable, as it were, in a way of justice; and far be it from us
to ascribe such proceedings to the righteous Judge of all the World.


Desolatus. If this be all the account you can give of the Decree of
Reprobation, I pray what will you make that power and liberty to consist in,
which the Apostle does assign to Almighty God, in the Act of Election and
Reprobation, under that similitude of a Potter?


Samaritanus. A liberty to dispose of the same lump, for several ends and uses,
as he finds it more stubborn or pliant under his hand upon a second working;
for we must conceive, the Apostle speaks of such a lump of Clay as was first
marred in the hands of the Potter (Jer. 18. 4. Read that Chapter throughout.
Romans 3. 23. Ver. 12.
) Hence he concludes, that all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God:
Sinned, I say, not in the loins of Adam only, but personally and actually; for,
he says, They are all gone out of the way, they are together become
unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. Now in the disposal of
this lump, God declares his Power and Sovereignty.

(1.) By assigning glory to some part of it; that is, to Believers; (for it
pleased God to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. and this is the Election
of grace, Romans 11. 5.) And,

(2.) By awarding shame and destruction to others, viz. to unbelievers (who are
therefore said to be broken off because of unbelief, Romans 11. 20.) And this is
exactly consonant to the resolution of our Savior, to whose hands the Regiment
of the Church is committed, John 3 35. 36. The Father loves the Son, and has
given all things into his hand; he that believes on the Son, has everlasting
lif^; and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of
God abides on him: And indeed this is the very Key that the Apostle has put
into our hands, to open his meaning in those Chapters to the Roman, chap. 9.
30, 31. What shall we say then? or what shall we conclude? That the Gentiles
which followed not after righteousness, have ^ttained to righteousness, even
the righteousness which is o^ faith; but Israel which follow^d after the Law of
righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness; wheref^re?
because they sought it not by Faith, etc.


Desolatus. The Apostle speaking of the Elect, says, God has predestined
them unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ, according to the purpose
and good pleasure of himself, who works all things after the counsel of his
own will, Ephesians. 1. 5, 11. where he attributes the Election and Adoption of such
persons to Gods mere good pleasure, purpose, and the counsel of his own will;
and the counsel of God that shall stand.


Samaritanus. To satisfy you in this, there is no more to be considered, but
wherein this good pleasure, purpose and counsel of God consists, and it is in
this, That whereas mankind was ^nthral'd to Satan, sin and death, Christ
(established to be a Mediator and Savior, in the execution of those Offices
of King, Priest, and Prophet) had Commission to proclaim a great spiritual
Jubilee for the liberty and salvation of as many as were willing upon his terms
to accept of their Redemp^ion. To this purpose, you may at your leisure,
consult these Scriptures [ Isa. 42. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. and chap. 49. 1. to 10.
and chap. 61. 1, 2, 3. and Zach. 6. 12, 13.] Hence the Apostle says, There is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. and Colos. 1. 27.
Christ in you the hope of glory: And because the terms which Christ propounds,
or the condition which he requires of us, in order to our actual Liberty and
Redemption, is Faith (in the Gospel-sense See and compare these three parallel
places. Gal. 5. 6 (Jam. 2. 22.) 1 Cor. 7. 19. Gal. 6. 15.
) therefore the same Apostle says, Ye are all the Children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 26. For as many as received him, to them gave he power to
become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name, John 1. 12. who
are therefore said to be chosen in him, Ephesians. 1. 4. But, on the other side, such
as despise the Benefit of this Jubilee, or Acceptable year, and will not have
Christ to reign over them: but being fond of their old Master and Service,
continue in the obedience of his laws and lusts, they shall die and perish in
their thraldom, Exodus 21. 5, 6. Romans 6. 16. 2 Pet. 2. 19. Luke 19. 14. with
27. This is clearly Gods whole pleasure, purpose, and counsel, in the Gospel;
and This shall stand. Whereupon the Apostle says, If an Angel from Heaven
preaches any other, let him be accursed. Gal. 1. 8, 9.



Desolatus. What will you say to that of the Apostle, ascribing all to God's
Will; Romans 9. 18. Therefore has he mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom
he will, he hardneth?


Samaritanus. I shall not insist to tell you in what sense God is said to
harden; It will be sufficient to enquire a little further into God's Will in
these particul^rs [of showing mercy Pro^s^s cu^us vult miseretur and ^u^m vult
inducat: Sed haec voluntas Dei injusta esse non potest: venit enim d^
accul^iss^^nis meritis; quia and ipsi peccatores, cum prop^er ge^er^^e peccatum
unam m^ss^m f^cerin^, non tamen null ^^st in^er ^os diversitas: praec dit ^^go
aliquid in pec. catoribus, quo qu^mvis nondum sin^ justificati, digni
efficiantur justificatione: and item ^re^ dit in ali^s peccatoribus, quo digni
sint obtusion^ Aug. Lib. quaest. 83. Quaest. 68.
and hardening respectively] And (as was declared even now) it is God's
absolute Will to have mercy upon Believers as such, and to harden Unbelievers,
as such. So the Apostle, Romans 11. 7. What then? Israel has not obtained that
which he seeks for, but the election (that is, Believers, represented by
those who had not bowed the knee to Baal, verse. 4.) has obtained it (mercy
unto justification and life:) and the rest (unbelievers See Romans 3. 3.
, who going about to establish their own righteousness, did not submit
themselves to the righteousness of God, Chapter 10. 3. The righteousness which is
of God, through the faith of Christ; as it is styled, Phil. 3. 9. These) were
blinded, or hardened. See Rom 9. 30, 31, 32.


Desolatus. But forasmuch as Faith is a work, (as our Savior witnesses, John
6. 29.) the Apostle seems to exclude that utterly, in this Election of Grace:
For he Argues thus, Romans 11. 6. If by grace, then is it no more of works:
otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it be of Works, then is it no more
Grace; otherwise work is no more work.


Samaritanus. You must observe, Though Grace and works Viz. Such as go before
faith, as T^^ 3. 3, 4, 5. and such as pretend to reward upon the integrity of
their perfe ction, Romans 4. 4. Not such as flow from faith; for Jam 2. 14, 26. 1
Jo^. 3. 7. for faith does establish grace, Romans 4 16.
be opposed, yet Grace and Faith are subordinated in the Gospel, Romans 4. 16.
Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by grace. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. For by grace
are ye saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift of
God: Not of works, l^st any man should boast. And what is it that is said to
exclude works, but that which excludes boasting too? which is Faith, Romans 3.
27. Now as the Apostle says in another case, 1 Cor. 15. 27. When he says, All
things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all
things under him. So here; when the Apostle says, Works are excluded, it is
manifest, that Faith is excepted, which did exclude them. And hereupon we are
s^id, to be saved by Faith, to be justified by Faith, to be adopted Joh 1. 12.
Gal. 3. 26.
by Faith; and to be chosen in Christ Ephesians. 1. 4.
too, in whom we cannot be but by Faith Ephesians. 3. 17.
; Hence the Apostle uses that Title, To the faithful in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1.
1. For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
confidence stedf^st unto the end, Heb. 3. 14. See 1 Timothy 2. 15. and Romans 11.
20, with 22.


Desolatus. I have yet more to object out of the Apostle, who says, Romans 9.
16. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy. And in the next verse he adds a most dreadful example of God's
severity and judgment upon Pharaoh, of whom, the Scripture (as the mouth of
God) says, Even for the same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show
my power in thee, and that my Name might be declared throughout all the earth.


Samaritanus. That raising up of Pharaoh is not to be understood of his
Creation, or Birth; as if God brought him forth into the world on purpose to
make him a spectacle of his Wrath and Fury; (For the word the Apostle uses
has no such importance:) but of raising him up from the Gates of death,
rescuing him from that destruction by the Pestilence, which (his measure of sin
being then filled up) had seized upon him, had not God reserved him by a
special power, to serve other ends of his providence. The Original Text has it
clearly to this sense; For so it runs ( Exodus 9. 16.) And in very deed, for
this cause have I made thee to stand So the Marginal reading, according to the
Hebr.
, for to show in thee my power, and that my Name may be declared throughout all
the earth; which, we see, was accordingly accomplished, not only amongst the
surviving Egyptians, (Exodus 14. 17, 18.) but amongst the Philistims also, 1 Samuel 6. 6. and other Nations.

When the Apostle says (which is your other Objection) [ it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runneth]

1. We are told by Mr. Baxter Treatise of Conversion. p. 295 f. V^d. Disserta^.
Theologic. inter Ames. and G^evinch. p. 23.
, [ that the meaning is (...), that our salvation is not in him that wills,
or in him that runs: the Apostle talks of no such thing: but it is about
the giving of the Gospel to them that had it not, and taking it from them that
had forfeited it by their sin] Indeed he speaks not of salvation or election
unto glory: but of giving the Gospel, and calling men unto Christianity, who
were in no capacity, much less in any forwardness, to enquire after it, till
they were prevented by the Revelation and light thereof, as the Apostle recites
it from the Prophet, Romans 10. 20. But (...) is very bold, and says, I was
found of them that sought me not: I was made manifest unto them that asked not
after Me.

2. The Apostle in the place mentioned, speaks of such as will and run after
their own phant^sies and Humors, as the Jews did Romans 10. 3.
, against whose principles and practice, he disputes; (For who had required
I^a. 1. 12.
these things (to which they addicted themselves under the Gospel) at their
hands?)

But 3. That God shows mercy Ecce misericordia, and judiciu^; misericordia in
^lection^ quae conjecuta est justitiam Dei, judicium vero in caeteris qui
excaecati sunt, and tamen illiquia volu^runt, cred^derunt, illi q^ia noluerunt,
non crediderunt Aug. lib. de praedest. S. S. c. 6.
unto s^lvation to none (I speak of the Adult) but such as do bo^^ will and
run, according to his own prescription in the Gospel, is every where apparent.
To this purpose are those exhortations, Hebr. 12. 1. [Run with patience the
race that is set before you. (1 Cor. 9. 24.) So run that ye may obtain.] And
such ^s desist, faint, or step aside in the course of Christi^nity, are
reprehended for it, Gal. 5. 7. Ye did run well; who did drive you back, that ye
should not obey the truth? There is the same Reason for [ Willing,] which the
Scripture inculcates with no less importunity; insomuch as it is said Apoc. 22.
17.
, [ Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely; And, If any man
will Joh. 7. 17.
do his (Gods) Will, he shall know. And such as remain in their unbelief are
reproved upon this account, because they would not come to Christ Joh. 5. 40.
, they would not be gathered Mat. 23. 37.
by Christ. If God's purpose were to show mercy to us unto salvation, without
our willing and running, (according to those Laws, and those abilities, he has
been pleased to give us;) why are we so earnestly exhorted, to walk worthy of
our calling; To give diligence to make our Calling Ephesians. 4. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Phil. 2. 12.
and Election sure: To work out our own salvation with fear and trembling?


Desolatus. But sure there is something more in it; else why does the Apostle
(discoursing upon this profound Article) silence all Objections with his [ O
h^mo, tu quis es?] Nay, but O man, who art thou, that replyest against God? He
resolves Romans 9 20.
the whole reason of the aff^ir into the Will of God, and will have us dispute
no further.


Samaritanus. You must understand, that exclamation, [ O man, who art th^^?]
Non succumbentis est, sed indignantis, ac c^rripientis hominis responsatoris
audaciam; as St. Austin Vid. Aug. lib. 83 quaest. Quaest 68.
and others have observed. The Apostle out of indignation, does use that
expression to repel the sauciness of an insolent Replicant; For it is such a
one, that is introduced in the former verse, uttering these words [ Why does he
yet find fault? For who has resisted his will?] This was enough to stop the
mouth of such a bold person; but not all the Apostle had to say by way of
Answer; for he gives a clear decision of the point, verse. 30, 31, 32. Not
according to that principle of an irrespective election and Reprobation; but
upon the account of Faith and Unbelief respectively; For such as were now
rejected from the let of God's people, were broken off, because of their
unbelief; and such as were elected to it, did stand by faith, Romans 11. 20. And
this is to be resolved wholly into the Arbitrament of God's Will, who was
freely pleased thus to determine and ord^in touching the sons of men, That
whosoever believes should have eternal life, He that believes not, should be
c^ndemned, Joh. 3. 16, 18, 36.

So that if you ask a cause of this Constitution, it is the sole Will of God;
Therefore he chose Peter and Paul, etc. whom he fore-knew would believe;
because out of the mere pleasure of his gracious Will, he would save Believers:
He reprobated the Jews, whom he foresaw would not believe: because according
to the pleasure of his own Will he determined to condemn Unbelievers. The
prescription of Faith unto salvation is therefore of the free will of God
alone, who did so appoint it.


Desolatus. I have been taught, That we are chosen to salvation and glory not
as holy or believers; but to the end we may be made such. Our election does not
presuppose Faith or Holiness in us, but procures them for us; according to that
of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation
of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love. And
the same Apostle tells us, that all men have not faith; and he makes Faith a
Propriety, calling it, 2 These, 3. 2. Tit. 1. 1.
the faith of God's elect.


Samaritanus. We may consider a twofold election; one to grace, and another to
glory; but the more profoundly learned have observed, that throughout the whole
book of Scripture, there is not one single Text, wherein the word [ election]
or [ chosen] signifies, without controversy, Election, or Chosen unto glory.
And because in that of Ephesians. 1. 4. The Apostle says, God has chosen us in
Christ, and that we should be holy; They think it most agreeable to interpret
it of God's choosing us, through Christ, unto the state of grace, to the end,
we may lead a holy life, to his praise and glory, according to the 6 verse. And
because it is said (in the Praeterperfect tense) He has chosen us, before the
foundation of the world; therefore they understand it of God's decree of
election, by a Metonymie very frequent in Holy Scripture, which assigns the
name of the effect to the counsel or decree it self; as you may further observe
in those Texts, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Titus 1. 2. Ephesians 2. 5, 6.

Whereas you allege out of the Apostle, Tit. 1. 1. That faith is appropriated
to the Elect; That, if rightly understood, is no way opposite to our
pretensions; For by Faith, in that place, we are not obliged, by any cogent
Argument, to understand Faith properly so called, Fidemqua Creditur, The virtue
of Faith whereby we do believe: but Metonymically, that Faith, [ quae creditur]
The Doctrine of Faith, which is believed; and thus it is to be understood
according to the usual style of holy Scripture, as you may see in the 4 verse
of this very chapter, and Jude ver. 3. Act. 6. 7. Romans 1. 5.

2. By the word Elect, we are not bound to understand in that place, such
persons, as were, from all eternity, chosen absolutely and by name to glory.
For that word [ elect] is not always a Participle, but sometimes a Noun; and
such a Noun, as does, as well in the Old as New Testament, connote some*
excellent and remarkable quality, by reason whereof a thing is said to be
elect; As v. g. elect or choice Trees, for their tallness, Jer. 22. 7. Ezekiel.
31. 16. Elect or choice men, for their valor, 1 Samuel 26. 2. Jer. 48. 15. Elect
or choice Cities for their strength and beauty, 2 King. 3. 19. And it is very
agreeable to this sense of the word to say, that men are called elect, or
choise-men, in regard of their Probitie of mind, and their promptness of
assenting to the Revelation, and following the conduct of the Gospel; and the
denomination of the elect of God, may be given unto them in regard of their
constancy of faith, and their eminency of obedience amongst the rest of the
Faithful: To which purpose you may consult those Texts of holy Scripture,
Matthew. 24. 31. Mark 13. 27. Luk 18. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 10. Romans 8. 33. Col. 3. 12.
Apoc. 17. 14.

If by the elect in that place, you understand, elect to glory, yet it does not
follow therefore, that they were so elected unto glory before they did believe.
For then by the same reason, it would follow, that sanctity goes before faith,
because we read Apoc. 13. 10. Here is the patience and faith of the Saints; and
in S. Jude's Epistle verse. 3. Contend for the faith that was once delivered
unto the Saints. And we might conclude with equal Authority, that vocation does
precede election, because, Apoc. 17. 14. they are s^id to be called, and
chosen, and faithful. But by elect (in that place) we may understand such as
are elect to grace, or called unto the faith by a gracious divine election, and
obey that call.

In short then, the faith of God's elect may very well be expounded of the
Doctrine of faith, which was willingly embraced and entertained by such as did
yet retain the docile and honest heart, and so were choice men, and fearing
God: But profane and perverse, absurd and unreasonable men are said not to have
that faith; because they reject the counsel of God against Luke 7 30. 2 Cor. 6.
1. Heb. 12. 15. Jude ver. 4.
themselves, receive the grace of God in vain, and turn it into lasciviousness.


Desolatus. It is Dr. Twiss his observation, That a man may hear the Word of
God with a purpose to oppose it, either Ubi supra. p. 84.
in general, or some particular truth thereof. Yet this humor of opposition
cannot hinder God's Word, and the operation of his Spirit where he will, in
spite of their conceits, who thought the Apostles were filled with new wine,
when three thousand were converted that day; and Austin acknowledges, that God
converteth not only aversas a vera fide, but adversas verae fidei voluntates.
We read in the 7 of John, that some who were sent to take Christ, were taken by
him.


Samaritanus. You must consider that there may be more secret opposition in the
heart, to the word of grace, upon the account of interest, prejudice, or false
principles passionately espoused, where the life is less scandalous, and the
opposition is the more obstinate, and consequently, the more hard to be
conquered according to the ground upon which it is made. How Joh. 5. 44.
can ye believe, says our Savior to the Jews, who seek honor one of another?
And he tells the Scribes and Pharisees, That the Publicanes and Harlots entered
into the Kingdom of heaven before them. And Solomon invites us to this
observation, saying, S^est thou a man that is wise in his own eyes, there is
more hope of a fool (that is, a wicked man) than of him Prove. 26. 12.
.

The dispens^tion of the Gospel, which is the Ministration of the Spirit, goes
forth doubtless with a mighty power of conviction, but how far it works upon
particular persons, affected under the influences of it, is not so easy to be
resolved. There are in the conversion of sinners cases extraordinary, which
must not he drawn into example, nor prejudice the general Rule; as in S. Paul,
Austin, etc. But ordinarily, that there is some disposition and temper of
spirit more apt than others to receive the effectual impressions of it, is most
certain. Such is the honest and good heart in the Parable, such are the humble,
and meek, Psalm. 25. 15. Joh. 3. 21. Joh. 7. 17. Mat. 11. 18. Joh. 10. 28. Mat.
11. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 2. Joh. 8. 47 1 John 4. 5, 6. Joh. 6. 45.
and the p^or in spirit; such as do the truth, and the Will of God, (so far
as their information serves them;) such are the weary and heavy lad^n, and the
like: They are resembled to sheep, and to babes, and are s^id to be of God, to
have learned of the Father, and to know him; These are said to be ordained,
that is, disposed, and in a sit posture for eternal life, Acts 13. 48 and of
this ingenuous and noble temper were those Bereans, Acts 17. 11. They were, as
it were in the Suburbs or Confines, not far from the Kingdom of God; and upon
the first call by the word of grace, they obeyed, and stepped into it.


Desolatus. But by what means may a man obtain to be thus disposed or qualified
for faith and conversion?


Samaritanus. Mr. Baxter tells you very truly, that common grace is truly
preparative and dispositive to saving grace; so Of Saving Faith. p. 39, 41, 46.
that if we employ and improve the first, we may be confident we shall obtain
the other; Not by any merit, or causolity, force or efficacy of our work, or by
any natural connection, but merely Dr. Jacks. p. 3109, etc.
by God's grace, by the counsel of his holy and irresistible will; by which it
has pleased him to appoint, the one as a necessary consequent of the other.


Desolatus. Have you any grounds for this assertion?


Samaritanus. Yea; that ground so often laid down by our Savior, in the
Parable of the Talents, Habenti dabitur, To him that has, [made use of grace]
shall be given, and he shall have more Mat. 25. 28, 29.
abundance.


Desolatus. That is, he shall have more of the same kind, if he employes his
Talents of common grace, he shall have an addition of common grrce; if he
employes talents of saving grace; he shall receive a greater measure of saving
grace.

Samaritanus. Nay, God's bounty will be extended further Mat. 25. 21, 22. Thou
have been faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler over much.
; upon the emprovement of common grace he shall receive saving grace; for to
him that had emproved his talents, he says, Be thou Ruler over so many Cities
Luke 19. 17, 19
; The remuneration is in a matter of a higher nature. And this God does
vouchsafe, not of debt, or condignity, or congruity; but of grace
Praecedaneorum illorum rec^^or ^s^s causae ration^m non habet, qua Deus tanquam
justus Judex and (...) impulsus est ad majo^em gratiam communicandam: sed
tanquam mitissimus pater, etc. (...) col. inter D. Tilon. and Camer. p. 35.
; and mercy still.


Desolatus. Suppose two persons alike affected in mind and body, exposed to the
like temptation, and attended with equal assistances of grace; whether is it
possible for one of these to stand impregnable, while the other miscarries
under this trial? And if he may, whence is this difference in the issue and
event of this combat?


Samaritanus. Take the Totum Complexum together, and there can be no other
cause assigned, but the liberty of the will; for grace cannot be the cause why
any man does fail of his duty; but the will assisted by grace, is a Partial
cause of that man's standing in his integrity, and the total cause of this
man's falling from it. Thus S. Austin has determined the question: Si aliqui
duo aequaliter affecti animo and corpore, videant unius corporis Lib. 12. de
civit. cap. 6. apud Grevinch.
pulchritudinem, qua visa unus eorum ad illicite fruendum moveatur, alter in
voluntate pudica stabilis perseveret, quid putamus esse causae, ut in illo
fiat, in illo non fiat voluntas mala? Respondet; si eadem tentatione ambo
tenentur, and unus ei cedat atque consentiat, alter, idem qui fuerat,
perseveret, quid aliud apparet, nisi unum voluisse, alterum noluisse a
castitate deficere? unde, nisi propria voluntate, ubi eadem fuerat in utroque
corporis and animae affectio, amborum oculis paritervisa est eadem pulchritudo,
ambobus pariter institit tentatio? Of two persons alike affected in soul and
body, alike assaulted by the temptation of the same beauty; why one of them
should prostitute himself to the temptation, while the other perseveres in his
chastity, Austin could assign no other reason, but their own will; the one
would, the other would not violate his Sacred chastity. 2. If you take the Case
apieces, Prosper De vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 26.
answers distinctly to the several parts, and renders the cause exactly well,
Quod gratiae opitulatio a multis refutatur, ipsorum est nequitiae, quod autem a
multis suscipitur, and gratiae est divinae and voluntatis humanae; That the
assistance of grace is rejected of many, it is solely of their own naughtiness,
but that it is embraced of many, it is both of the divine grace, and the humane
will.


Desolatus. But Sir, that good use, and that cooperation of the will, are pious
actions, and savingly good; and therefore should be ascribed wholly to the
grace of God, and not at all to the will of man.


Samaritanus. That good use, and that cooperation of the will, are to be
ascribed to Grace, as the Principle and Primary cause; but yet as they are
moral actions, they do derive their efficacy and virtue from the will, and not
from grace wholly; which may be clearly evinced by this Dilemma of the
Remonstrants, Examen censuraep 180. b.
Usus ille bonus gratiae aut est actus officij nostri, qui virtuosus dici
meretur; Aut non est: Si est, quomodo itaque efficacis gratiae effectus in
solidum est? Si non est, quid ergo est? Viceris, si dixeris quid sit, ut
intelligi ab eo possis, qui communi tantum sensu praeditus est.


Desolatus. Sir, I am scrupled at this Doctrine; for to my sense, it argues,
That a man does something to discriminate himself, in the work of grace; which
to me, seems directly contrary to the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7. where he says, Who
makes thee to differ from another? And what have thou, that thou have not
received? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory, as if thou had
not received it?


Samaritanus. I confess, I have, sometimes, had the same scruple about that
Text: but upon better consideration, I find (according to the judgment of the
most learned Expositors) that the Apostle there speaks not to our purpose: For
(if I may take De gratia gratis data, non de gratia gratum faciente.
that liberty so to render the School-distinction) he speaks not of
sanctifying, but of edifying grace, I mean, such as was given to those
Teachers, not so much for the private good of themselves, as for the public
benefit of the Church, as appears, 1 Cor. 3. 5.

Christ had no Universities then to breed Apostles in; and finding very few or
none fit for the work of the Ministry, which he had occasion to employ them in,
he was fain to make them fit by miracle; And being qualified upon that account,
the Apostle justly checks their arrogance, for glorying of such gifts, as were
not acquired by their own study and industry, but inspired into them
immediately of the Holy Ghost: Which abilities therefore were not rewardable,
nor commendable in them that had them, as to the manner of possession 1 Cor. 9.
16, 17. Gal. 1. 11, 12.
; but only so far forth as they did employ and improve them for the
edification of the Church. [Such in general were all those diversities 2 Cor.
12. 4, 5, 6, 7.
of gifts, and operations dispensed amongst the faithful upon the first
promulgation of the Gospel.]

This light of the knowledge of Christ brake in upon them irresistibly; for
which cause the production of it in them, is fitly resembled to the production
of light, at the first Creation, 2 Cor. 4. 6. But it is otherwise in the gifts
of saving faith and holiness, whereof the possession is a matter of free choice
and acceptance, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Luke 10. 42. Prove. 1. 29. This light may be
excluded and resisted, Joh. 1. 5. c. 5. 35. Job 24. 13. Joh. 3. 19. Such
therefore as do embrace this light, may very well be said to difference
themselves from such as do reject it.

When our Savior tells Martha [one thing is needful: Mary has chosen the good
part] does he not commend Mary for such a discrimination? But if this had been
made in her by the sole irresistible operation of divine grace; Martha might
very easily have excused her self, and have charged the fault (that she had not
made the like choice) upon his deficiency in a matter so needful to her.

When the great Jubilee is proclaimed, and the prison-doors set all open, and
the Officer employed to knock off all the prisoners setters; does not he who
rejoices at the Proclamation, and accepts of liberty, and goes forth of the
prison, do something Exodus 21. 5, 6. Isa 6^. 1. Cap. 49. 9. Cap. 42. 7. Luke 1.
79. Romans 6. 14. with ver. 16.
to difference himself from him that suffers his ears to be boared through, not
accepting deliverance, and delights to be a slave still? Do but compare and
weigh the quotations in the Margin, and make the application to the state of
sinners under the promulgation of the Gospel, at your leisure.

Why was our Savior so transported with admiration at the faith of some, as
well as at the unbelief of others Mal. 8. 10.
, if that Faith were wrought so irresistibly, that the believer contributed
nothing toward it? It Is certain, some do neglect the gift that is given them,
and bury their talents, and receive the grace of God in vain, and are wanting
to it, and fall from it, and turn 2 Cor. 6. 1. Heb. 12. 15. Jude ver. 4. Heb.
12. 28.
it into lasciviousness: others are careful to retain, and stir up, to employ
and improve what they have received, do not these, by this means, cooperate to
their own discrimination? He that obeys God, certainly differs exceedingly from
him that obeys not, and does not his obedience (which is his own act and duty,
performed by the assistance of Gods grace) help to make the difference? Nothing
can be more evident.

S. Austin found nothing in this Text 1 Cor. 4. 7.
to contradict it, but a man might cooperate to his own discrimination. For De
Spiritu and litera, cap. 34. (which book, amongst others, was opposed to
Pelagius) having started this difficulty, That if the will to believe, be
therefore ascribed to God, because it is said by the Apostle [ What have thou
that thou have not received?] it seems upon alike account that sin may be
attributed to him also; because that is derived from the free will, which we
received from him at our Creation: Out of this difficulty the Father winds
himself in these words: Attendat and videat, non ideo tantum istam voluntatem
divino muneri tribuendum, quia ex libero arbitrio est, quod nobis naturaliter
concreatum est; verum etiam quod visorum suasionibus agit Deus ut velimus, and
ut credamus: sive extrinsecus per Evangelicas exhortationes, ubi and mandata
legis aliquid agunt, si ad hoc admonent hominem infirmitatis suae, ut ad
gratiam justificantem credendo confugiat: sive intrinsecus, ubi nemo habet in
potestate quid ei veniat in mentem, sed consentire vel dissentire propriae
voluntatis est. His ergo modis, quando Deus agit cum anima rationali, ut ei
credat, (neque enim credere potest quolibet libere arbitrio, si nulla sit
suasio vel vocatio cui credat) profecto and ipsum velle credere Deus operatur
in homine, and in omnibus misericordia ejus praevenit nos: Consentire autem
vocationi Dei, vel ab ea dissentire, sicut dixi, propriae voluntatis est. Quae
res non solum non infirmat quod dictum est, Quid enim habes quod non accepisti?
Verum etiam confirmat. Accipere quippe and habere anima non potest dona, de
quibus hoc audit, nisi consentiendo: ac per hoc quid habeat and quid accipiat,
Dei est: accipere autem and habere utique accipientis and habentis est. So
that, if there be any difference betwixt receiving and not receiving, retaining
and not retaining, improving and receiving in vain; then he that does receive,
and retain and improve, does something to difference himself from him, that
improves not, retains not, receives in vain, or receives not at all.

If man can do nothing to difference himself,

1. Why does God give so many commands to him for his renovation and
improvement Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Jer. 4. 4. Ezekiel. 18 31. Ephesians. 4. 22. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
?

2. Why does he render praise and glory to his Saints Numb. 14. 24 Job 2. 3.
Romans 2. 29. Mat. 25. 23.
, and so often commend them, saying, They are worthy Rev. 3. 4.
?

3. Why does he so earnestly incite them unto duty by promises and threatenings
Romans 8. 13. Isa. 1. 19, 20. Romans 26, etc.
? Why does he upbraid unbelievers, for rejecting the counsel of God against
themselves, Luke 7. 30.
, and judging themselves unworthy of eternal life Act. 13. 46.
? And finally brands them with shame, confusion, and eternal torments? All
these Topics will afford us most pregnant proofs that men may, and many times
do, act something toward their own discrimination.


Desolatus. But will not this abate the accounts of thankfulness in Believers,
if they receive no more than Unbelievers do?


Samaritanus. The Faithful do receive such assisting and following Grace, as
the Unregenerate receive not, though their Preventing Grace be equal. Quando
enim unus istorum pro suae liberate convertitur, jam auxilium praeveniens ipsi
collatum, habet in co insluxum gratiae cooperantis, quem non habet in altero:
neque enim Deus ita movet voluntat^m praeveni^n^o, ut i^si conversionem
actual^m relinquat pro sola sua liberate, qua voluntas in actu pr^mo
co^stituta, scipsam sola redic^t ad actum secundum, sed corp^ratione gratiae
efficacis. D^scrimen ergo ex part non-conversi, totum o^itur ex sola arbitrii
liberate: tota enim ratio ob qu^m Deus illi non da^ novum insl^^um grat^ae
cooperantis, est, quia ipse homo pro liberate ju^ non vult co^s nsum opera^,
^ui alioquin D^us ex se paratus ^rat ad cooperandum: Sic Augustine. l. 2. de
pec. mer. and remis. cap. 17. Gratia Dei hominum adjuvat voluntates, qua ut non
adjuv n^ur, iniosis causa est, non in Do, etc. S^cus Deus desereret hominem,
denegando ei auxilium essi^ax, an^^q^^^ homo deserat Deum. Dissert. Theolog. de
du^b. quaest. inter Ames. and Grevincov. page 204, 205.
But besides, am not I obliged to be thankful to my Benefactor, because others
do undervalue and slight his Bounty? Shall not the children of Sion be joyful
in their King, and sing Hosanna to the Son of David, because others cry out, [
We will not have this man to reign over us?] The short is, we owe our
discrimination (be our own concurrence what it will) to the Divine preventing
and assisting operation. And 2 Gods grace and mercy does follow us all the days
of our life; and 3 finally he crowns our cooperation with eternal joy and
glory. And sure here is seed enough to bring forth a full Harvest of
Thanksgiving.


Desolatus. Methinks this seems to lay a ground sor glorying, which the
Apostle would by all means have excluded in the work of ^race.


Samaritanus. The Gospel allows us to seek f^r glory and honor as well as sor
immortality, Romans 2. 7. Indeed our Savior blames Romans 2. 29. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Gal.
6. 4.
the Jews for that they did receive honor one of another, and no seek for that
honor that comes from God only, Jo^. 5. 44. To glory in what we do as done
by the stock of our own strength; and to glory in what we receive, as being
received upon the account of our own merits, is wicked arrogance, and condemned
by the Apostle: But we are allowed, yea, we are required, to glory in the Lord;
and we may glory also, that we are able to do all things (if we glory that we
do it upon this Gospel-account.) through Christ that strengthens us. For the
will of man (in what we do graciously) does not confer any power upon Grace,
but rather Grace confers the power and propension uponthe Will, and moves it to
determine it self, and has, besides its prevention and excitation, a
co-efficiency into the determination of the will.


Desolatus. My dearest Samaritanus, seeing you have taken the trouble upon you
to discourse me (if you can) into satisfaction of all my doubts and scruples, I
must beg your patience to hear out all my Objections. There is one more in that
9th. to the Romans verse. 11. For the children being not yet born, neither
having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to the election
might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, It was said unto Rebecca
(concerning those Twins with whom she was conceived) The elder shall serve the
younger; As it is written, Jacob have I l^ved, but Esau have I hated.


Samaritanus. I am so desirous of your satisfaction, that I entertain it as a
contentment, when you afford me the opportunity to administer unto it. And now
you offer me that Objection I have long expected from you, to which I answer,

1. That St. Austin himself concludes the Election and Reprebation of These
very Persons, Jacob and Esa^, to proceed upon God's ford-knowledge of what they
should do respectively; for thus he writes, Nemo eligitur nisi jam distans ab
illo, qui rejicitur. Vnde quod dictum est [quia elegis nos Deus ante mundi
constitutionem Ad Simpl. lib. 1
] non video quomodo sit dictum nisi de praescientia fidei and op^rum pietatis.
Et mox, Jacobus non electus est ut fieret bonus, sed bonus factus eligi potuit.
No man is chosen unless he differs from him who is rejected. So that I know not
how to interpret that saying, [ That God has chosen us before the foundation
of the world] but by understanding it of his * Fo^eknowledge See Romans 8. 29.
and chap. 11. 2. 1 ^er. 1 2.
of Faith and works of piety. Jacob was not chosen that he might be made good,
but being made good he was in a capacity to be chosen. And in the same Book he
attributes Esau's Reprobation to his own actual miscarriages; for thus he
writes. Noluit ergo Esau, and non cucurrit. S^d et si voluisset and
cucurrisset, Dei ad utorio per ven sset, nisi vocatione contempta reprobus
fieret. Esau would not, and did not run. Had he willed; and had he run, by the
help of God he had attained: but by a contempt of the Divine call he was made a
Reprobate.

2. But whence does it appear that Esau was a Reprobate? Is the proof of it in
those words, [ Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated] But 1. the Apostle
produces them but as a verification of what was alleged before from the
Oracle to R^becca, [the elder shall serve the younger] which sure imports not an
eternal Reprobation. 2. For God to love and hate persons to such effects,
without respect to some qualifications in them, would argue injustice, even by
St. Austin's own confession; for he says, Numquid In E^chirid. c. 98.
iniquitas est apud Deum? absit. Iniquum enim videtur, ut sine ull s bonorum
malorumve operum meritis, unum Deus eligat, odiatque alterum. Is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid. For it seems unjust that God should love
one and hate another without any merits of good or evil works. But grant
Almighty God his liberty to love freely, as no doubt he may do; yet the Apostle
tells us, He is so just, His wrath comes (only where he finds sin, a
sufficient cause to send it) upon the children of disobedience. Ephesians. 5. 6.
Col. 3. 6.
That Their Progenitors, or God upon Their account, have entailed that Title
(with the wrath annexed) upon Them Jer. 31. 29. Ezekiel. 18. 2. Jon. 4. 11.
, (and never cuts it off) (in a matter of this everlasting concernment) ought
not to be affirmed without great authority. Those who are said to be children
of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. are not said to be so by the nature they were
born in, but by the nature The word [ nature] is put for custom. 1 Cor. 11. 14.
they walked in, which was their evil custom, and course of trespasses and
sins, verse. 1, 2.

3. Grant Esau a Reprobate in his Mother's womb, and what certainty can the
Faithful (for such without doubt was Isaac when he begot Esau) have of the
salvation of their dearest Babes? So sad an Oracle (had she met with such
interpreters) would have been more heavy to Rebecca, than the double burden
she traveled with. But,

4. There was no such word in the Oracle to Reb^cca, Genesis 25. 23. nor any such
heard of, till the time of the Prophet Malachi, of which I shall give a fuller
account anon. So that Esau in his own person is not like to be concerned in it.

5. If the Oracle had spoke to her in that very phrase and language, it would
have been capable of a milder construction, than to signify his eternal
Reprobation. For when the Scripture speaks of hatred, it does not always mean
that which is Absolute,, but many times that which is Comparative, which is no
more than a less degree of love: And so God may hate the Innocent, that is,
love him less then another Innocent; for God is not bound to love all alike,
and with an equal degree of love. That the word hatred is frequently used in
this sense, you may observe as you read the Scriptures, Genesis 29. 31. the Text
says, The Lord saw that Leah was hated; yet in the former verse it is only
said, that Jacob loved Rachel more than Leah. So Luke 14. 26. our Savior
says, If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, etc. which
signifies but to lov^ them le^s, as St. Matthew does record it, Mat. ^. 10. 37.
See also to this purpose Dut. 21. 15. Prove. 13. 24. Joh. 12. 25. with Mat^h.
10. 37. And i^ can have no other sense when applied here to Esau, or rather to
his Posteri^y.

6. Were it meant of Gods Decree of Reprobation, I would fain understand
wherein the Execution of that Decree consisted? It must consist in the
abandoning Esau to a state of t^mpo^al servitude Genesis 25. 23.
and his Hell must be an Earthly Wilderness. Mal. 1. 3.
, and his own Brother (the Elect Jacob) assig^'d him for his Torm ^tor Genesis 27.
29.
, against whom he had a promise too, that he should finally prevail Genesis 27. 40.
over him. What gross Absurdities these are, who wants a judgment to discern?
Yet all these are parts of the Oracle or Appendages in the process of the
Affair, as you will find by consulting the Sacred Text to this purpose.

Lastly, there is no ground to conclude that Esau was a Reprobate, for it does
not appear probable that (in his person) he fell off from God to serve Idoll^;
and for that prophareness imputed to him, Hebr. 12. 16. it consisted but in the
divesting himself of a privilege Genesis 25. 29, to the end
annexed to his Primogeniture: and what Sacredness soever was in T^is, he was
sup^lanted chap. 27. 36.
by his Brother's policy, and induced to part with it in a case of extreme
necessity chap. 25. 32.
, to save his life, his Brother being so unnatural that he would relieve him
upon no other terms verse. 31, 33.
; and Esau repented of This ill bargain too chapter 27. 36, 38. Heb. 12. 17.
. For the Fornication associated with Profaneness by the Apostle in that place,
it is no part of Esau's Character, but belongs to the Apostates of those times,
from the imitation of whose practices the Hebrews are there so earnestly
dissuaded. As for the hatred Genesis 27. 41.
he did bear a while toward his Brother, though it were kindled upon an
exceeding provocation, it was not implacable; for such was his kindness to him
at Their meeting, that Jacob tells him Genesis 33. 10.
, I have seen thy face as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast
pleased with me.

He was not so happy as to please his Parents in his first Marriage, his wives
were distasteful to Isaac and Rebecea Genesis 26. 35.
, but upon what account is not so easy to determine. If we say with Diodati
and others, that it was for their Idolatries, this was no more than that guilt
that stained the practice and education of Jacob's Wives also, as the sacred
Story does record it Genesis 31. 19. 30, 32. Josh. 24. 2.
. However, if herein he were guilty of some undutifulnesse too his Parents, yet
that the Elect, and after their Regeneration to, may fall into as foul and
fouler sins than that amounts to, and likewise continue in them, God knows how
long, we have the opinion of a person of some note Mr. Baxter. See his
Disputations of Right to the Sacraments, page 327, etc.
amongst us. And besides, that he intended the displeasure of his Parents in
those Matches is not probable; that he endeavored their satisfaction
afterward (an undeniable instance of his repentance) is evident from Genesis 28.
8, 9. where we read, that when he saw the daughters of Canaan pleased not his
father, (by his forbidding Jacob to match himself amongst them) then went Esau
unto Ishmael, Abraham's son (who was as near related to Isaac as Laban was unto
Rebecca) and took his daughter to be his wife; and this was done without doubt
to comply with the temper and desires of his Parents.

Who then dares condemn Esau for a Reprobate? Though P^reus exercise this
intolerable severity, M^llrus durst not, O^colampadius durst not, Dr. Pridea^x
durst not. Ex Genesi ve isimiles conjecturae sumi possunt, quae ostendunt
Esavum non ita re^ectum esse a Deo, ut (...) damnatus, says M^llerus In Malac.
1.
; Many probable conjectures may be collected out of Genesis to show, that Esau
was not so re^ected of Almighty God, as to be eternally damned. Where In Malac.
1. 2, 3.
Oecolampadius also says, Non ausim ipsum Esau propter hoc dictum d^cere
Reprobrum, I dare not say Esau was a Reprobate for all that saying of the
Prophet Malachi; but rather, that things spiritual are represented in a figure
by things temporal. To which Testimonies Dr. Prideaux Lect. 8. de Salut. Eth.
post princ.
adds, Canaan fuisse Typum Coelestis Patriae, Canaan was a Type of Heaven. Non
inde tamen concludendum, (quemadmodum habet corruptus in aliquibus editionibus
Psalmorum apud nos Rythmus) omnes illos a coelo fuisse exclusos, quibus Deus in
istans typicam requiem negavit introitum. Nam ita Mosis and Aaronis
deploratissima esset conditio. But (says he) we must not conclude from thence,
(as the corrupt Rythme in some of the Editions of our Psalms does) that all
those were excluded out of Heaven, to whom the Lord denied entrance into that
typical rest; For so we should conclude Moses and Aaren to be in a very sad
condition.


Desolatus. I am very much satisfied to hear such comfortable news of Esau, for
I thought he had hard measure to be supplantted of his Birthright by the
practice of an unkind Brother, and afterward to be cheated of his Fathers
Bl^ssing by a Confederacy betwixt Him and his Mother, and to be damned
eternally too. For I took him (as far as I was able to discover by the Story)
to be a downright honest man (in the general) and we see (after all his
unhandsome usage) he professed himself content with his condition, Genesis 33. 9.


Samaritanus. That the Oracle of God gave a Prediction to Rebecca concerning
the prelation of Jacob before Esau, we have a clear and infallible evidence;
but whether the Means used by Jacob and his Mother to compass that Prelation
were warrantable, I shall not dispute. Sure I am, a Prediction of what will be,
does not legitimate every Means for the completion of it. Jeroboam had as fair
a Title to the Crown of those Ten Tribes as one could wish, if Prediction were
a good Conveyance See Calvin. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 18. sect. 4. page 129.
, 1 King. 11. 11. 29. to 39. yet God disclaims the Inauguration Annot. ad Hos.
8. 4.
of him, Hos: 8. 4. They have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made
Princes, and I knew (approved) it not. Which words are thus interpreted by
Deodati*, [ The people of their own proper motion, without enquiring after my
will, or staying for my command or permission, have chosen and made Kings of
their own heads, separating themselves from the lawful rule of David's
Posteri^y.] For so it was, as appears, 1 King. 13. 20. Upon which Text, the
same Deodati his Note is, [ Though this came to pass by a secret providence of
God, and according as it was foretold, yet was it condemned, Hos. 8. 4. because
the people was induced to do it by evil and illegal motives, and staid not for
Gods declaration concerning the time and means, as David had done in succeeding
Saul.] To apply this to Jacob's case; We find not that God had declared any
thing concerning the Time or Means of his obtaining Dominion over his Brother
Esau; and that his Father Isaac d^sliked the way of his Advancement, we may
gather from his indignation upon Jacob's surprisal of him in the matter of the
Blessing, Genesis 27. 33. And if the Oracle Gen 25. 23.
of God be to be understood of a Personal Dominion granted to Jacob over Esau,
why should we not conclude, that he did forfeit his personal right by
outrunning his Commission? For, that actually he exercised no such Dominion is
evident: Nay, so far was he from assuming that Authority, that we see he does
rather pay Homage to Esau, for he courts, and calls him his Lord, presents him,
and bows himself seven times before him at one address; which argues, that the
Princely Spirit was yet more in Esau than in Him. See Genesis 33. 3, to 16.


Desolatus. It seems then, that that Oracle to Rebecca had not, at least, its
primary completion in the Persons of Jacob and Esau.


Samaritanus. No, it had not; the full accomplishment was in their Posterities
2 Esdras 6. 9. Finis enim hujus seculi Esau, and principium sequentis Jacob.
. To this purpose is the burden of the word of the Lord to Israel (the
posterity of Jacob) by Malachi, [I have loved you, says the Lord; yet ye say,
Wherein have thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord? yet I
loved Jacob, and hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for
the Dragons of the wilderness, Mal. 1. 1, 2, 3.] And most expressly in the
Oracle it self, Genesis 25. 23. For, he Lord said unto Rebecca, Two nations are in
thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels, and the
one people shall be stronger then the other people; and the elder shall serve
the younger. This is the Oracle.


Desolatus. But suppose this Oracle does not so much concern the Persons of
Jacob and Esau as their Posterities; yet may there not be an Absolute Election
of the one, signified by the word [ Loved;] and an Absolute Reprobation of the
other, signified by the word [ Hated?]


Samaritanus. No, we may not so understandi^^; for then it would follow, that
All the Israelites were absolutely elected, (which is contrary to the event
attested by Scripture, 1 Cor. 10. 5. and Heb. 3. 19.) and the whole Posterity
of Esau precisely destinated to damnation, which appears to be false by the
example of Job and other holy men that lived in that Nation. Besides, that
servitude of Esau's Posterity, relating clearly to a Temporal state, as Malachi
does expressly expound it, how i^congru^us is that interpretation that
understands it of a Reprobation to eternal death? And that the Apostle did not
think the Jews of his time, and of whom he writes, under such an irrecoverable
state of misery, as the Decree of Absolute Reprobation imports, I conceive
sufficiently evinced in The Examination of Tilenus, from page 111 to 116. to
which I refer you, if need be, for further satisfaction.


Desolatus. I can peruse that at my leisure. In the interim, whereas the
Apostle says, The children being not yet born, neither having done any good or
evil, that the purpose of God according to Romans 9. 11.
the election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, it was s^id,
The elder shall serve the younger.] I pray, does not that imply most clearly,
that this prelation of the younger before the elder, was an act of grace and
undeserved favor, without any foresight or respect to Qualifications in Their
persons.


Samaritanus. This is most undeniably true, it is the very scope of the Apostles
discourse, and the thing he labors so much to make good.


Desolatus. What use then does the Apostle make of it, having so fully asserted
and proved it?


Samaritanus. The use he makes of it is this, To declare, that in the present
Age under the Gospel, God was likewise of his mere grace and favor pleased to
invite and call men unto Faith, and upon their Faith to Adopt them into the
privilege of his children; and this not out of r^spect to any m^rits in them,
for so many and so great generally were their transgressions, that they
deserved nothing but perdition: Therefore this their Election (unto grace and
the means of salvation) proceeds not of works, but of ^im that call^th; since
God, when he might have damned them justly among other sinners, was pleased
notwithstanding Romans 9. 11.
to call them unto Faith; and believing upon that Call, to choose them for his
children. And this is that Election of Grace to which at least the Apostle
alludeth, Romans 11. 5.


Desolatus. I desire you would give me a view of the Apostles Discourse upon
this subject in one short entire sum, that I may the better comprehend it.


Samaritanus. I shall do it most readily, because I know it will be of much
advantage to your understanding of the point. You apprehend already, that the
Apostle is disputing with the Jews, whose privileges were very glorious, and
they knew it well enough. To them pertained the Adoption, and the Glory, and
the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the
Promises: Theirs were the Fathers, and of them, as concerning Romans 9. 4, 5.
the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. By so many
signal acts of Grace they concluded, God had tied himself so fast to them, that
they must needs inherit the Blessing. Though their zeal in adhering to the Law
was blind and pertinacious, yet they plead their Title to righteousness and
Life upon that account, and resolve they shall be Heirs, as is intimated, Romans
4. 14. Otherwise they alleged, God should unjustly cast away his own people,
Romans 11. 1. and cancel his own Promises, and make his word of none effect,
Romans 9. 6. and so become unfaithful; yea, if he should adopt the Gentiles, who
were no way zealous of the Law, and besides (as they thought) greater sinners
than themselves, if God should adopt them to be his children, upon their faith
and submission to the Gospel: and reject those his ancient people, who did so
earnestly contend for the honor of his own Law, and would seek Romans 9. 31, 32.
Gal. 5. verse. 2, 3, 4.
for righteousness and life no where else, but from the observation of that;
If God should deal thus, if he should after this manner prefer the unworthy
Gentiles before the Jews, who at least were not more unworthy, he should become
unrighteous too as well as unfaithful, as is implied, Romans 9. 14. To this the
Apostle replies, 1. In general, that the Law of Moses (as it abstracts from
Faith in Christ) could not bring in Justification unto life, (by reason of sin,
which had overspread all Romans 3. 9. 10 the 22.
) and that it was never intended to that purpose, ( Romans 3. 19, 20, 23.) But
that such Justification was to be obtained upon the accounts of Grace, and
consequently by Faith, (which does establish Grace, and not destroy it, Romans 4.
16.) and that this Dispensation of Grace for Justification unto life was
extended freely to All Nations, Gentiles as well as Jews, without difference.
This the Apostle asserts, Romans 3. 21. to the end. And in the next Chapter he
proves both branches by instancing in Abraham, who (1.) was not justified by
the Law, but by Faith, Romans 4. 3. etc. and (2.) he was justified while he was
in the condition of a Gentile, uncircumcised; Whence he concludes, that the
Blessedness of Justification unto life does belong also to the Uncircumcision,
that is, to the Gentiles, Romans 4. 9 See chap. 10. throughout.
. etc. And this was Gods constitution four hundred and thirty years before the
Law of Moses was given, as the Apostle alleges in handling the same
Controversy to the Gala^ians Gal. 3. 17. Vide Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 16.
sect. 13, 14.
. This is St. Paul's reply in general. Then (2.) more particularly, he tells
them, though God did now cast off them for their unbelief, who were formerly
his renowned people, yet he could not justly be charged with unfaithfulness
Romans 3. 3.
, or breach of promise therefore; Because when he promised he would be the God
of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, and the God of their Seed, he did not
renounce his own Supreme Right and Power, in all times to restrain and
determine And the scope of the Apostle in his Dispute with the Jews, is to
prove, that the Faithful were designed to be that Seed. Romans 4. 11, 12, 13. and
Romans 9. 8.
, at his own pleasure, the signification and Title of that [their S^ed] to
whom, and to what manner of persons he would. Th^s Liberty God always reserved
to Himself, and exercised it in the Family of Abraham, preferring Isaac before
Ishmael his elder brother, Romans 9. 6. to 10. And more signally he used this
l^berty in the Family of Isaac, (whereof those Twins (that had done nothing to
dis^rimina^e themselves, being yet in their Mothers womb) that this his liberty
and good-plea^ure might be established, He freely preferred the younger before
the elder, (verse. 10, to 14.) And these present proceedings of Gods providence,
[ in accepting the Gentiles upon their submission to ^he Faith, and rejecting
^ou for your unbelief] which you so much dispute against. This, says the
Apostle is but the same exercise of His Supreme Right and Power, who had
proclaimed to Moses (your great Leader) I will have Romans 9. 15.
mercy on whom I will have m^r^y. And this is the very point he pursues, and
presses the equity of so hard on Gods behalf, in the rest of that Chapter; And
this is a perfect account of that Election and Reprobation which are there
handled by the Apostle. And as this Reprobation cuts off the Jews no longer
than they continue in unbelief, Romans 11. 23. so that Election comprehends the
Gentiles no longer than they continue in the Faith, Romans 11. 22.


Desolatus. Sir, I thank you heartily for your pains in unfolding that, which,
to me, especially of late, has been such a hard Chapter. But, Sir, there are
some Texts which trouble me, because they seem to import, (and many learned men
do so interpret them) that some men are under an absolute Decree of
Reprobation; and that the sins, for which they are at last condemned, come to
pass by Gods most efficacious Decree, Ordinance, Dr. Twisse ubi supra p. 90.
pp. and 95. f.
and Pre-determination; and if it be so, then their damnation and the sin that
procures it, are inevitable. And yet, as I said, they have Scripture for this,
for it is said, that those wicked murderers of our Savior did no other thing
than what Gods hand and his counsel determined before to be done, Act. 4. 28.
and chap. 2. 23.


Samaritanus. This Text has exercised the wits of the most learned. They say,
1. This (of Act. 4 27, 28.) is not spoken of what was formerly done to Christ
in his Person, but done to him now, in his Disciples, as in Act. 9. 4, 5. Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? 2 It Is not said, [ To do those things which thou
did determine that they should do: but which thou had determined to be
done. And 3. That God, foreknowing their malice was such, that their hearts
were bent upon it, to execute it, if they were not violently hindered, He
determined his own will to a permission, that they might freely execute this
wickedness. But 4. Some, to make all clear, do resolve, that those words, [
both Herod, etc. were gathered together] should be read as a Parenthesis; and
so they make the meaning to be, as if the words were placed thus, [ For of a
truth both Herod, etc. were gathered together against the holy child Jesus,
whom thou have anointed, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel, etc.
And the words following seem to favor this Interpretation, or reading, [And
now, Lord, behold their threatening, and (seeing they are so violent in
opposing, what thou were anointed to institute and accomplish) grant unto thy
servants, etc. This reading ought not to seem strange to you, for the Learned
observe such Trajections See Act. 20. 32.
and Parenthesis to be usual in Scripture, as Luke 2. 34, 35. Act. 13. 27.


Desolatus. Sir, I am satisfied in the sense you have given of that Text. But I
pray explain that of S. Jude, verse. 4.
[ There are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to
this condemnation. How are they said to be ordained to it?


Samaritanus. This does not imply an Absolute Reprobation. The word is, (...),
praesc^ipti, as the vulgar Latin and Beza read it. But not to trouble you with
Criticisms about the word, such ungodly men as are there mentioned, [ that turn
the grace of God into lasciviousness, and deny the only Lord God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ]; they may be said to be foreordained to condemnation in a
threefold sense. 1. Sententia juris, by Gods general D^^ree, or the Sentence of
the Law, which is the rev^lation of that Decree. For God being Essentially
holy, cannot take pleasure in wickedness, Psalm. 5. 4. nor will he clear the
guilty, Exodus 34. 7. He has therefore from all Eternity made a general Decree,
to render to every man according to his works, Romans 2. 6. Heaven is awarded to
such as (upon the stock of a lively faith) o^ntinue patient in well doing,
ibid. but Hell to the workers of iniquity. By reason of such an Eternal Law or
Decree immutably established in Heaven, every such wicked wretch may be said to
be foreordained to condemnation. Not that this Decree, being an Immanent act
in God, does produce any real effect, answerable to it self, either for the
Creature before he was made, or in the Creature after he was made, until he
has of himself, freely made up that measure of sin, unto which Hellfire was
awarded by the said Decree. But the measure of sin being made up, then (as the
Lawyers speak) Judicium transit in rem judicatam: The Eternal Sentence
produces a Trans^ent effect in the guilty creature. As amongst us, we say, the
Malefactor is a dead man before either the Judge has given Sentence, or the
Jury brought in their Verdict; that is, he is dead in Law, dead by a Decree
made concerning such crimes, many hundred years (perhaps) before this
Malefactor was born. But (as on Earth, so in Heaven) the Decree, or Eternal Law
of God, does not necessitate any man to commit th^se crimes against which it is
established. The Law made and provided against Felony is so far from
necessitating any man to commit it, that it serves All men for a Preservative
against it. Neither is any man liable to the Condemnation of the Law, till he
be found guilty, and convicted of the voluntary breach of it. The Eternal
Decree of God concerning Sin being promulgated into a wholesome Law against it,
is of the same Nature. But in regard of such a general Decree, he that has
sinned himself up to his full pitch, may be said to be foreordained to
condemnation; and in this sense, the ( finally) unbelieving is condemned
already Joh. 3. 18. and 36.
.

2. In praedictione; Proscribed in some Prediction, or public Record: And this
Notation is more proper to the word in St. Jude than that by which it is
rendered, [ ordained]; for (...) signifies any thing pasted up upon a door, to
be exposed to public view and notice Gal. 3. 1. (...).
: so Christ is said to be set forth before the eyes of the Gallatians, He was
pasted up upon the pillar of the Church, exposed to public view in the holy
Ordinances. So were these Seducers St. Jude speaks of, and all such as follow
their pernicious ways, posted up, set forth to condemnation, in those
predictions of our Savior and his Apostles, (to which St. Jude alludes, as
appears, verse. 17, 18. Remember ye the words which were spoken before of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that they told you there should be
mockers, etc.) Luke 21. 8. 21. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. etc. That St. Jude speaks of such
a prediction or prescription of them appears by the 14 verse, And Enoch also
the seventh from Adam (as Moses and others had done) prophesied of these,
saying, Behold the Lord comes, etc. In this respect also the ungodly may be
said to be foreordained, or rather set forth before unto condemnation.

3. This may be done [ in effigie] in some Exemplar Type or Pattern. Thus St.
Jude says, that the Sodomites were set forth for an example, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire, verse. 7. St. Peter says, They were made an ensample
unto those that after should live ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 6. For our Saviors Rule
is, They that are parallel in the sin shall be so also in the judgment, Luke
13. 3. Hence the Apostle, having declared how the Israelites had a promise of
inheriting the land of Canaan, yet upon their multiplied provocations were cut
off by Gods Oath See Numb. 14. 21, 22, 34, 35.
from all hope or possibility of enjoying it, he gives a caveat unto Christians
to avoid the like sin, lest they fall under the like irrevocable sentence of
Reprobation; Heb. 3. 18. with chap. 4. 1, 11. And 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11. he says,
The judgments of God upon that people were our Types, Figures, or Ensamples,
and written for our admonition.

Lastly, St. Jude Jud. Epist. verse. 11.
says of that covetous, seditious, and bloody Sect of Gnostics in his time,
that went in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for
reward; he says, They perished in the gainsaying of Corah. But you will ask,
how could that be, when the Rebellion of Corah was in Moses time, and these men
lived many hundred of years after in St. Jude's time? Why, they perished in
effigy, in their Types, Patterns, or Representatives. Thus you see in what
sense men may be said to be foreordained, or set forth aforehand unto
Condemnation, though their persons be under no such Decree of Absolute
Reprobation.


Desolatus. Does not God foreknow that men will sin, and continue obstinate in
it to their last period, and so incurr the guilt of condemnation according to
his Eternal Law, though he has not absolutely ordained them to sin and
condemnation?


Samaritanus. They that say, God fore-knows nothing but what he has ordained
to come to pass (making his Prae-science ^^ depend upon his Decree) they
derogate from the glory of Gods foreknowledge, (which yet we see the
Scriptures celebrate even with admiration.) For what praise shall the
prescience of God have, if he fore-knows nothing but what himself has decreed?
seeing we can scarce find a Mortal so brutish as to be ignorant of what himself
has determined. The knowledge of our God, we are assured, is unsearchable, and
therefore without passing a Decree for their Commission, he fore-knows sin and
all such contingencies as, for their obscurity, are most remote to human
understanding. But there is this further difference betwixt Gods Prae-science
and his Absolute decree (were there any such) in this case. Such a Decree, in
order to its Execution, does introduce an Antecedent, Casual, and Inevitable
Necessity of sinning and being damned. Prae-science is but a looker on in the
whole process. Prae-science is but a Perspective, through which God discovers
a man's voluntary motion, till he arrives at that horrible Lake of fire and
brimstone: But That Decree is such a Boat or Engine as transports Him thither,
will He, nill He, irresistibly.


Desolatus. I shall consider, that this piercing Eye of God is always open and
upon me, to observe my steps; and make it a motive and enforcement to steer my
course so much the more exactly. But you must give me leave to ask you two or
three Questions more: And first, deal ingenuously with me, Does God give Grace
sufficient unto Faith and Repentance to such as perish for the abuse and
neglect of it?


Samaritanus. God gives, or is ready to give (if we make no new obstructions)
that Grace, that is sufficient to the obtaining of Faith; perhaps, not
immediately, but grace sufficient to use the means, grace to do more than we do
in order to the obtaining of it. You may reflect upon what was said above upon
Habenti dabitur.

That some men may perish who receive sufficient grace to bring them to
salvation, if they would persevere in it, appears plainly from hence that our
Savior says to his Disciples, Matthew. 24. 13. He that shall endure to the end
the same shall be saved. And, If ye continue in his goodness -- Romans 11. 22. Ye
shall not be cut off See 2 Ep. Joh. 8. Gal. 3. 4.
. Can a man arrive at a place that is not in the direct way that leads thither?
He must be instructed to turn, and not exhorted only to continue in it. And
how could St. Paul say of some, that they made shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Can that be shipwrack'd that was never in the Vessel?
and can that be called a shipwreck, which though preserved entirely, would but
bring us to predition?


Desolatus. But should a man, through his sinful improvidence, make shipwreck
of this grace, may his damage be recovered?


Samaritanus. Yes; how else could the Apostle give order, To deliver the
Incestuous Corinthian unto Satan for the destruction See Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22.
of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus? 1
Cor. 5. 5. If there be no restitution for persons that have once wasted that
portion of grace that was put into their hands, then there can be no right
Prodigals but our first Parents. What think you of David, Peter, Solomon, and
others, whose falls were most lamentable, and yet they were restored by a new
Conversion?


Desolatus. The Apostle says of some, that if they fall away, it is impossible
to renew them again unto repentance, Heb. 6. 4, 6.


Samaritanus. The word [ impossible] does many times signify no more but ['tis
extremely difficult] but in that place to the Hebrews, the Apostle speaks of
such as do not only fall away, but add persecution of the Gospel of grace to
their Apostasy from i^; For they tread under foot the Son of God, and count the
blood of the covenant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy thing, and do
despite to the Spirit of Grace. Though we may not give that which is holy unto
dogs Matthew. 7. 6.
, nor cast our pearls before swine, who will rample them under their feet, and
return and rent us; yet we are assured the fatted Calf is killed Luke 15. 23.
and made ready to entertain the returning Prodigal. Sinners are therefore
every where exhorted to return, and God has promised to heal their back
slidings, Hos. 14. 1, 2, 4. Repentance is Secunda Tabula post naufragium. And
Christ has invited all that act heavy laden with their sins to come unto him,
M^tth. 11. 28. And, if they come, we have his promise, He will in no wise cast
them out, Joh. 6. 37.


Desolatus. This is a very encouraging Invitation, but I suppose it concerns
none but such as He died for; and because so many do flatly deny Universal
Redemption, and the holy Scripture it self seems sometimes to restrain his
death to a ce^tain number, as where it says, [ He gave his life a Ransom for
many Matthew. 20. 28.
] Therefore I would gladly be satisfied about the extent of that death of His,
whether the Satisfaction and Merit of it were for All; I mean not All Sorts
only, but All Individuals.


Samaritanus. You have asked a very material Question; for seeing there is
salvation in no other but Christ, such as are not redeemed by him, (if there
were any such) can receive no benefit Act. 4. 12.
(as to matter of salvation) from him, nor have any comfort really administered
unto them. But if we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is
greater: and this is the testimony of 1. Joh. 5. 9.
God which he has given of his Son.

1. That He came to seek and to save that which was lost (a): That God laid
upon him the iniquity of us all (b): That He died for the ungodly (c), for
sinners (d), for his enemies (e), for All (f), for every man (g), for the world
(h), for the whole world (i), for the unjust (k), and finally disobedient (l).
( a) Matthew. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10. ( b) Isa. 53. 6. ( c) Romans 5. 6. ( d) Romans 5.
8. ( e) Romans 5. 10. ( f) 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. chap. 4. 10. ( g) Heb. 2. 9. ( h) Joh.
3. 16. chap. 1. 29. chap. 6. 33, 51. ( i) 1 John 2. 2. ( k) 1 Pet. 3. 18. ( l)
ibid. verse. 20.

2. That he died for as many as are dead in Adam. Romans 5. 12, 18. 1 Cor. 15.
22. 2 Cor. 5. 14.

3. That he died for as many as are bound to believe in him. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
with 20. See The Examine. of Tilenus, page 168, 169, 170.

4. That he died for as many as are bound to adore and serve him. 1 Cor. 6. 20.
2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. with Romans 14. 9.

5. That He died for as many as we are obliged to pray for in Christ's Name. 1 Timothy 2. 1. with 5. 6.

6. That He died for such as do deny him, and crucify him to themselves
afresh, and finally perish. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. chap. 10. 29. 2 Pet. 2. 1. See
also Romans 14. 15. 1 Cor. 8. 11.

These All are those Many in St. Matthew; unless you will say, He gave His Life
a Ransom for Many, because they are not All, but A Many that will Accept of it;
and consequently that in the Event, they are not All, but A Many that are
actually Redeemed, the rest losing the benefit of the general Ransom through
their wilful infidelity and neglect to make Application of it.

But for the spiritual peace and comfort of poor Souls, Mr. Baxter has found
it very necessary to tell them this great Truth, Direct. for peace of Consc.
Dir. 5. page 32, 33.
That the Scripture, by the plainness and fullness of its expressions, makes it
as clear as the light, that Christ died for All. And, says he, If Satan would
persuade you either, that no Ransom or Sacrifice was ever given for you, or
that therefore you have no Redeemer to trust in, and no Savior to believe in,
and no Sanctuary to fly to from the wrath of God; He must first prove you,
either to be no lost sinner, or to be a final impenitent Unbeliever, that is,
that you are dead already; or else he must delude your understanding, to make
you think that Christ died not for All: And then I confess, (says he) he has
a sore advantage against your Faith and Comfort.


Desolatus. I have but one scruple more that disturbs me, and it is this;
Whether (as it is abundantly evinced that Christ died for All, so) He does make
Intercession for Grace for All; For if this part of his Priestly Office be
limited and restrained to some certain number, His Death for the Rest (without
his Intercession for Grace to apply the fruits thereof) will be of no
advantage, nay, a great disadvantage Contrary to what himself says of his
Exhibition. Joh. 3. 17. Baxt. ibid. at 29. Certainly, and quod preced, and seq.
to them.


Samaritanus. You say very true, therefore we do not separate His Death from
his Intercession. Which Intercession he makes unto his Father, that He would
please, in a Way and measure, most suitable to his own Wisdom, associated with
Mercy and Justice, to communicate Grace necessary and sufficient for the needs
of All men. If he made Intercession Isa. 53. 12. Luke 23. 34.
for so great Transgressors as were his bloody Murderers, (in whose behalf he
said even in the heat of his sufferings, Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do.) Who can doubt of an interest in his Intercession? Besides, His
Intercession is grounded upon his Propitiation, and that is for the whole
world; which is St. John's great Cordial for our Infirmities, 1 John 2. 1, 2.


Desolatus, But I have heard one Text alleged which has much dejected me in
my hour of temptation; it is S. Joh. 17. 9. where our Savior is making his most
solemn and pathetical prayer, that we find recorded amongst all the
Evangelists; and some say, it is as it were a copy of his Intercession now in
Heaven; yet there he says, I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for
them which thou have given me, for they are thine.


Samaritanus. This Text, I confess kept me long in suspense about this
Article; but upon better advisement I observe several and distinct parts of
that Prayer of our Savior: which observation unlockt the secret, or the doubt
rather, and gave me a clear notice of the sense of the whole Prayer: The first
and greatest part whereof is spent in the behalf of his Apostles, for whom He
prays, That his Father would preserve them in truth and unity, verse. 11, 17.
That he would give them patience and courage to endure the malice of the world,
and support their spirits under the persecutions of it, verse. 14, 15. That he
would bless their Ministry, and make it successful to the conversion of the
world, verse. 18, 19, 20. This part of the prayer being especially designed for
the Apostles, an intercession for the prosperity of their Office, and the
perseverance of their persons in the faith. In this part of his Prayer He
inserted these words very fitly, [ I pray for them, I pray not for the world.]
But having discharged this part, he then prays more extensively, even for All
that should believe through their Ministry, ^ers. 20. And because an Unity in
Faith, and Charity in Doctrine and Affection is so emiable, that it is a great
motive to induce Strangers to embrace that Religion, that is calculated to
preserve such Unity amongst the Professors of it: Therefore he prays for this
Unity amongst Believers, that it may gain credit to the Gospel they profess,
and procure the Ministry thereof to be the more effectual to the unbelieving
world, verse. 21. The whole Prayer (as to these branches) runs (...). 2^. 21.
thus, [ Neither pray I for these (Apostles) alone, but for them also which
shall believe on me through their word: that they also may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. N. B. That
the wo^ld (of unbelievers) may believe that thou have sent me.]

Here you see clearly our Savior prays, that the grace of of Faith may
mediately (through the Ministry of the Word, and the Christian-like
conversation of Believers) be bestowed upon the whole world. And forasmuch as
our blessed Lord does here intimate, that unity amongst Christians would be a
mean, hugely conducible thereunto, therefore consider how much all that
profess His great and glorious Name are obliged to lay down all Animosities
begotten betwixt Pride, Covetousness, and Faction, and to endeavor earnestly
to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4. 3.



Desolatus. My dear Friend, I do now most heartily thank you, and my gracious
God for you. Blessed( 1 Pet. 1. 3.
), and for ever blesed b^ the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy has begot^en me again unto a lovely hope,
through the universal ( Romans 3. 22, 23, 24.
) Redemption that is in Christ Jesus; whereby I am now restored to my peace and
comfort, and enabled to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory ( 1 Pet.
1. 8.
).


Samaritanus. And Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4.
to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our
selves are comforted of God. This is our duty upon our Emergency out of any
other sadness, as well as out of grievous lapses, by virtue of that obligation
laid on Peter, [And thou when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.]

I shall add no more but this Exhortation, See that you walk worthy of the Lord
unto all pleasing, and as be^omes the Gospel of Col. 1. 10. Phil. 1. 27. Ephesians.
4. 1. Phil. 3. 14. Jude epist. verse. 20, 21. Gal. 6. 9. 1 Cor. 15. the last.
Christ, and the price of your high calling: Building up your self on your most
holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, keep your self in the love of God,
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life: And be not
weary in well-doing, for in due season you shall reap if you faint not.
Therefore my beloved Desolatus, be you steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord.

And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God your whole
spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved blameless 1 Thessalonians. ^* 23, 24.
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calls you,
who also will do it.

Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding Judes epist. verse.
24, 25.
joy, to the only wise God our Savior be glory and majesty, dominion and
power, now and ever, Amen.


S. Luke 10. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. A certain man fell among thieves, which
wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead.

But a certain Samaritan had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up
his wounds, pouring in oil and wine.

1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness is profitable unto all things. 2 Cor. 4. 1, 2.
Therefore seeing we have this Ministry, as we have received mercy we faint not:
But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness,
nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth,
commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. Prosper ad
objectionem Vincentii septimam, quae sic habet: Quod haec sit voluntas Dei ut
magna pars Christianorum salva esse nec velit, nec possit. Respondit: Si de his
hoc dicitur qui pictatem Christianae conversa^ionis and fidei deserentes in
profanos errores, aut in damnabiles mores irrevocabiliter transierunt, non
dub^^m est quod talem voluntatem habentes, salvi esse nolunt, and quamdiu salvi
esse nolunt; salvi esse non possunt. Sed nullo modo credendum est hujusmodi
homines in hanc desperationem ex Dei voluntate cecidisse; cum potius allevet
Dominus omnes qui corruunt; and erigat omnes elisos: Nemo enim nisi illius
Gratia erigitur; Nemo nisi illius Gratia stabilitur. Dei ergo voluntas est ut
in bona voluntate maneatur, qui and prius quam deseratur, neminem deserit; and
multos desertores saepe convertit. Certissime noverimus nullum fidelium a Deo
non discedentem relinqui, neque cujusquam ruinam ex divina esse constitutione
dispositam: sed multis qui jam iudicio rationis utuntur, ideo Liberum esse
discedere, ut non decessisse sit proemium, and ut quod non potest nisi
cooperante spiritu Deifieri, eorum meritis deputetur, quorum id potuit
voluntate non fieri: quae voluntas in malis actionibus sola esse potest, in
bonis autem sola esse non potest. Scriptor. de vocat. Gentium, lib. 2. cap. 12.
A BRIEF ACCOUNT Of the SYNOD at DORT. Taken out of the Letters of Mr. Hales and
Mr. Belcanqual, written from Dort to the Right Honorable Sr. D* Carleton, Lord
Ambassador then at the Hague.
Out of which the Reader may observe with me,
1. THAT (generally speaking) the Synod were an adverse Party to the
Remonstrants and their Doctrine; the evidences 1.
hereof are so many, I know not well where to begin my calculation: I will
content my self with some few Testimonies.

1. The Presidents jealousy (which without all question proceeded from some
guilt in himself) that this was the sense of the Remonstrants, and made them so
unwilling to submit their cause to so unequal a Decision. The Presidents words
are these, Pretend you what you will, the true cause of this your indisposition
is this, That you take the Synod for the adverse part, and account your selves
in equal place with them; this conceit has manifested it self in all your
actions. Letter of 5 / 15 Jan. page 62.

2. The Dean of Worcester discovered no less in his Latin Sermon in the
Synod-house, wherein he came at last to exhort them to stand to the former
determinations, which had hitherto most generally past in the reformed Churches
in these points; and told them it was a special part of his Majesty's
Commission to exhort them to keep unaltered the former Confessions. (Here Mr.
H. referrs it to the Ambassador, saying) How fit it was to open so much of
their Commission, and thus to exp^ess themselves for a party against the
Remonstrants, your Honor can best judge. Letter of November. 19 / 29 page 11.

3. It Is probable the Lord Ambassador gave them a check for this betraying
their Commission; for we find them standing more carefully upon their guard
afterward. It was proposed that there should be (amongst some others) Scriptum
Didacticum, a plain and familiar Writing drawn, wherein the doctrine of the
five Articles, according to the intent and meaning of the Synod, should be
per^picuously expressed for the capacity of the common sort. But the English were
altogether against it, their reason was, Because it seemed in^ongruous that any
writing concerning the Doctrine of the Articles should be set forth, before the
Synod had given sentence. And indeed I must confess (says Mr. Hales) I see no
great congruity in the proposal; whilst matters are in controversy, Judges
walk suspensly, and are indifferent for either party; and whatsoever their
intent be, yet they make no overture of it till time of Sentence come. All this
business of Citing, Inquiring, Examining, must needs seem only as acted on a
stage, if the Synod intempestively beforehand bewray a resolution. But
notwithstanding any reason allegible against it, the thing is concluded. And a
little after he relates, that the President advised those who were to undertake
this, That they should have an eye to the inclination of the Synod, and beware,
as much as might be, that they touched not there where any man was sore.
Whatsoever the pretense is (says Mr. Hales) the mentioning of these Books,
before the determination of the Synod be formally set down, must needs be very
unseasonable. It will make the world to think, they came resolved what to do,
which though perchance they did, yet it is no wisdom to confess it. Letter of
Feb. 7. 1619. page 78, 79.

I will add but one testimony more, which is this of Mr. Belcanqual (in his
Letters to the Lord Emb^ssador of Febr. 23.) Sess. 89. Febr. 22. (says he)
There were read 57 pages of the R. monstrants Book, which concerned their
opinion of Reprobation, in which they did lay open the harsh opinions of many
of our men, which unless the Synod do condemn, as well as the opinion of the
Remonstrants, I see not how they can give the world satisfaction touching their
indifferency. (Of Mr. B^ll. Letters page 12.) But the British Divines, etc. who
urged it very vehement^y, could not so much as get this opinion rejected, [
Nem^n^m posse plus b nifacere quamfacit.] Nor this, [ Deum movere hominum
linguas ad blasph^mandum.] page 39, 40.

This leads me to my Second Observation, viz. That the Provincials were a
passionate and factious (if not a malicious) Party. 2.


For evidence hereof, (1) Consider the temper of some of them, and how they
flew out into passion, beyond all measure, especially when any thing was spoken
that seemed to favor the cause of the Remonstrants. Upon this accoun^ grew
that great animosity of Goma us against Martinius mentioned in Mr. Hales his
Letters of Jan. 15 / 25 1618. page 72. and more fully discovered in Mr.
Bel^anqu^l'* Letters of Febr. 18. page 8. where he tells the Lord Ambassador,
In truth I must needs say, that some of the Provi^c^a^s do^use Martinius very
uncivilly, and all the ^orr^i^n D^v^nes do begin to take it evil at their
hands: They use him w^^h so much discourtesie, as I will assure your Lo^dship
he has been very near leaving of the Synod, and his Colleagues were half
purposed to go with him. What a blow this would give to the credit of the
Synod, any man may easily perceive; the P^ovi^cials in this take not the right
course. Though one be against the R^monstr^nts in all the five Articles in
S^bsta^ce, yet if h^ ^ffer from them but in manner of ^^eaki^g, they hold him
as not sound. And in his next Letters (of F^^r. 23. page 9, 10, 11.) he relates
of a plot laid ex composito, for ^isgra^ing of these Bremenses, and how the
Br^t^^^ Divines drew the indignation of those Provincials upon themselves, by
interposing (though it was do^e by the Lord Bishop of Landaff with gravity and
sweetness) to ^llay their contentions. Insomuch that (in his Letters of March
25. page 23.) he tells the Lord Ambassador, That Sibrandus and Gomarus keep
their fits of madness by course; the last fit before this came to Gomarus his
turn, and this day Sibrandus flew out, but with such raving and fierceness of
countenance, such unheard bitterness against our College, as I desire no
other revenge on him than the very speaking of the words; which (says he a
little after) if they had come from a wise man's lips, had been above the
strength of patience. If these men flew out thus passionatly against some of
their own Party, for their gentleness and moderation, (which was the only
provocation of their choler) what temper may we expect to find them in, in
their proceedings toward their Adversaries? This we may collect from Mr.
Belcanqual's Letters of Febr. 13. (misplaced amongst Mr. Hales's, page 60, 61.)
where he reports the matter thus: [For the Provincials, for any thing I can
see, they are so far set against the Remonstrants, I wish not their persons as
well as their opinions, that I am afraid they will not like well of our
Moderation. For the D^smission of the Remonstrants, since your Lordship is
pleased to take notice of it, I hope I may without offense say, that it was
such as certainly did the Synod much wrong. On Friday when they seemed to
yield, then the Exteri Theo^ogi could not be heard for the continuing of them
in the Synod. Nay, the trick which was put upon them was a little too palpable,
For the Delegates had their Decree of Dismission written, before they came into
the Synod; yet our voices were asked, hoping it should have been answerable to
their Decree; but finding it was otherwise, without so much as laying their
heads together for consultation, they published a Decree which they brought
written with them into the Synod. This was resented so ill by some of the
Foreign Divines, that when (according to the custom) repetition was made of the
Act for the Remonstrants Dismission, Lud. Crosius of Breme (which perhaps began
their indignation against these Divines) signified, That he perceived that Mr.
Praeses in that business had been paulo commotior, and had let slip verba
quaeda ac rba, which might well have been spared; that in so great an act as
that was, a little more advice and consideration might have been used. The
Synod ought to have been consulted with, and a Form of Dismission conceived and
approved of by all, which should in the name of the Synod have been pronounced
and Registered; whereas now the Synod stands indicted of all that unnecessary
roughness which then was practiced. It had stood better with the honor of the
Synod to have held a more pea^eable and passionless order. Mr. Hales his
Letters of Jan. 6 / 16 page 64, 65. See also page 70. and the Letters of Jan.
12 / 22

And this will not only lead our way to it, but also clear our Third
Observation, viz. That this Factious Provincial Party 3.
swayed matters in this Synod as themselves listed. That they were able to do
so is evident, because they made up two parts of three, and so could out-vote
the rest at their pleasure; and that they did so, appears, not only by what is
alleged already* but also by Mr. Hales his Letters (of Jan. 6 / 16 page 64,
65.) where he says, [The foreigners think themselves a little indirectly
dealt withal, in that it being proposed to the whole Synod to pass their
judgment concerning the behavior of the Remonstrants, the Provincials were not
at all required to speak, and by these means the envy of the whole business was
derived upon the Foreigners. Whereas on the contrary, when the like question
was proposed formerly, and the Foreigners had spoken very favorably in the
Remonstrants behalf, the Provincials struck in, and established a rigid
Sentence against the Foreigners liking; So that there is little regard given
to the judgment of the Foreigners, except they speak as the Provincials would
have them.

This will lead us to our Fourth and last Observation, viz. How matters were
carried by them; which may easily be resolved by the former passages: But for
further satisfaction, the Reader 4.
may take it in these Instances following,

1. Mr. Belcanqual in his Letters of March 25. ( page 32.) tells the Lord
Ambassador, That [the President would take upon him more than ever any
President did, to make Canons, and pass them by Placet or Non-placet, and then
he has so many of the Provincials at command to pass what he will. I cannot, I
confess, yet see how it can consist with the dignity of any, much more of some
of the Members of the Synod, that the President should dictate Canons, and the
rest, especially a Bishop write after him; so that he makes the Canons and the
whole Synod are called, Non ad Consilium, sed tant^m ad consensum. (And a
little after he says) The President and his Provincials have no care of the
credit of Strangers, nor of that account which we must yield at our return,
unto all men that shall be pleased to call for it; Their Canons they would have
them so full charged with Catechetical Speculations, as they will be ready to
burst, and I perceive it plainly, that there is never a Contra-R^monsirant
Minister in the Synod, that has delivered any Doctrine which has been
excepted against by the Remonstrants, but they would have it in by head and
shoulders in some Canon, that so they might have something to show for that
which they have said. And yet he tells the Lord Ambassador ( March 16. page
26.) That the Geldri were too too rigid in many things; that the North-
Hollandi had many things, which we thought not only to be rigid but false;
that the Drentani delivered many false and absurd propositions. And (in his
next Letters of March 17. page 28.) he says, In good faith some of the
Provincials, especially the Geldri and the North- Hollandi, who are, of all in
the Synod, greatest in the President his books, have delivered such
Propositions in that (second) Article, as I dare say never any Divine in the
world dreamed of but themselves; for my own part, I had rather lose mine hand,
than subscribe them. And ( page 36. in his Letters of March 25.) he says, What
trouble we have had in these last Sessions, none can conceive but those who
were present at them; and what strange carriage has been in them, especially
on the President his part it is toopalpable; he has deceived all men's hopes of
him very far. This matter of the personal censure, which was a thing of great
consequence, we were never made acquainted with, before the very instant in
which it came to be read; and because the Delegates must not be stayed from
their going to the Hague, therefore all the Synod must say Amen to it. Between
the fore-noon and the afternoon Session there was strange laboring with the
Exteri for getting their consant to it, yet we meddled not with it. All I can
say is, Me-thinketh it is hard that every man should be deposed from his
Ministry, who will not hold every particular. Canon; never did any Church of
old, nor any Reformed Church, propose so many Articles to be held, sub poena
excommunicationis, etc.

2. They m^sreported and perverted the sense and Doctrine of the Remonstrants;
For Mr. Belcanqual (in his Letters of Febr. 9. page 1, 2.) informs the Lord
Ambassador, That one of the Transinsulani took it evil, that we took the
Remonstrants meaning in their opinions, where they spoke best and soundest; but
he would have their meaning to be gathered out of all places in their Books,
where they spoke most absurdly, which we thought was very far besides the Rule
of Charity. And in his next Letters (of Febr. 15. page 4.) where he relates the
reading some part of a huge Volume, which had been presented to the Synod by
the Remonstrants; his words are these, [ I must needs say, the Remonstrants had
no favor; for I will assure your Lordsh^p, that the President picked out the
worst part of it: There were some five leaves read, which contained nothing but
a bitter Satyr against Calvin, Beza, Pareus, Piscator, Whitaker, Perkins,
Bogorman, Festus, and twenty more. But in truth, though unhappily, yet finely
penned, me-thought it was Episcopius his tongue.] And (in his Letters of April
9 / 19 page 35, 36.) he informs thus; [They are so eager to kill the
Remonstrants, that they would make their words have that sense which no Grammar
can find in them. Upon Tusday in the afternoon we had a Session, in which were
read the Canons of the first and second Article, and were approved, except the
last of the Second Article, which were never heard of till that hour, and the
second Heterodox in that same Article; what they were Dr. Davenant will inform
your Lordship; The last was such, as I think no man of understanding would ever
assent to. Then speaking of the last Heterodox; Wherein; says he, our College
maintained dispute against the whole Synod; They condemned the thing it self as
a thing most curious, and yet would have it retained only to make the
Remonstrants odious, though they find the very contrary, of that they would
father upon them in their writings.

3. They would not (at the most earnest importunity of the British Divines and
some others) condemn any of the most horrible expressions and phrases, that had
been used by the Calvinian Doctors (as was noted above) no nor so much as these
two, [ That God moves the tongues of men to blaspheme;] and [ That a man can do
no more good than he does.] See after Mr. B. Let. p. 39, 40.

4. When it was moved by Dr. Davenant, That the Collegiate Suffrages might be
read publicly (that the Auditors might take notice of their ingenuitie, in
condemning no more in the Remonstrants, and something in the
Contra-remonstrants too; because (we know, says Mr. Belcanqual) the
Provincials in forming of the Canons will carry us down by voices, and no words
of ours that sound that way shall be expressed;) This was refused upon very
trivial pretenses; but the real ground was, that the Auditors might not take
notice of this their Moderation and Impartiality, which would have too much
employed the want of them in others. See Mr. Belcanqual's Letters of March 9.
page 27, 18, 19.* See Mr. Hales Letters of Jan. 15 25 page 72, 73.


5. The Canons were drawn up in private, and as it were, dictated by the
President, as was noted above, and complained of. See Mr. Belcanqual's Letters
of March 25. page 32, 33. and page 37. a. f.

All which passages duly considered, I shall upon the whole matter make a few
Queries, and so conclude the Readers trouble.

1. Whether (for all the Lord Ambassadors care to prevent it) that were not a
true Prognostication of Mr. Belcanqual, in these words, [ If your Lordships
care do not now most of all show it self for procuring of good counsel to be
sent hither for the constitution of the Canons, we are like to make the Synod a
thing to be laughed at in after ages?] Letter of March 25. page 33.

2. Whether that observation of D. Tilenus has not as much Truth as Acrimony
in it, (in his Notes and Animadversions upon the conclusion of the Canons of
the Synod of Dort, page 181.)? His words are these, Aristidem narrant historiae
in private a vita ita se gessisse, ut Justi Cognomentum obtinuerit; interim in
Reipub. administratione multa praeter jus and aequum ad misisse, dum patriae
rationibus sese accommodat, quam (...) aiebat. Politicum hoc sophismadignum
imitatione visum est Dordracenis qui aliis in rebus justitia and veritati
litandum rati, in hoc negotio, Victoriae spem in fraudis, injuriae, and
calumniae artibus, tribunitiisque ejusmodi molitionibus repositam esse viderunt.

3. Whether Malderus had not too much cause to pass that Censure upon the
Faith of the Synod, which he does in these words? Non absre Synodus in
Praefatione sua testatur Sancto jurejurando se promisisse initio, solam se
scripturam sacram pro judicii norma habituram, and vncausae hujus cognitione
and judicio, bona integraque conscientia versaturam esse: quod etiam per
singularem Dei gratiam, maxima diligentia, fide ac conscientia se perfecisse,
and omnium ac singulorum consensu hoc judicium absolvisse, persuadere admodum
serio conatur. Vix credo quenquam, partium studio non praeoccupatum, fidem
adhibiturum, bona integraque conscientia versatamesse in hac arena Synodum,
veram verboque Dei consentaneam sententiam de quinque doctrinae controversae
capitibus protulisse, and falla verboque Dei dissentanea rej^eisse. Jaan.
Malderi Anti-Synodica, cap. 16. page 308, 309.

4. Whether these Letters of Mr. Hales and M^. Belcanqual do not sufficiently
justify all the complaints of the Remonstrants, expressed in their Historical
writings? See Acta and Scripta Synodalia Remonstr. in Script. Histor. and
Brevis Narratio, and Anditotum in Prafat. and D. Toleni. Not. in Can. Synod.
Dordrac. in Epist. ad Lectorem.

5. Whether the Remonstrants had not just cause to except against the
incompetency of these Judges? as they did. Mr. Hales Letter of December. 1 / 11
1618. page 33.

6. Whether, when the President dismissed them, after a most bitter speech in
these words, [ Quamobrem vos deligatorum and Synodinomine dimi^to, exite] Sapma
had not reason to say, Ex^o ex Ecclesia Malignantium? Mr. Hales Letter of Jan.
5 / 15 1618. page 64.

7. Whether that Synod be not Null by Mr. Belcanqual's own confession, in his
Letters of Febr. 13. (amongst Mr. Hales Letters, page 61)? His words are these,
They (the Remonstrants) were called in and dismissed with such a powdring
speech, as I doubt not but your Lordship has heard with grief enough; I
protest I am much afflicted when I think of it. For if the Remonstrants should
write, that the President pronounced a Sentence which was not the Sentence of
the Synod, they should not tie. The Civil Lawyers and Canon of Fra^ch, who
write much about the Formalities omitted in the Council of Trent, urge
exceptions of less moment than these; so neither was there above a third art
of the voices asked, Ex quibus sent^ntia ferri nequit: Neither was the Sentence
in w^it, and approved by the Synod, and the bitter words in the Sen^ence were
not the words of any of the Suffrages, unless that some of them were spoken by
one man one^y.

8. La^ly, Whether it be not ^vident, that the Doctrine and Judgment of the
Church of England are not at all concerned in the ^emerarious Decisions of this
Synod. For (1) whereas it was declared in the Conclusion, that that was to be
accounted the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, which was contained in those
Canons, the British Divines moved to have it altered, professing, that they
being deputed by the Kings Majesty, and not by the ( English and Sco^ish)
Churches, they had no authori^y to explain the Confessions of their Churches;
that they deliv^r^d their own priv^^e ^ud^ments only, which they thought were
true; that they had concluded many things in their Canons as true, of which the
Con^^ssions of their Churches had determined nothing, etc. After Mr.
Belcanquals Letters, page 40.

(2)Whereas there was a ^ifference amongst those of the B^i^tish Col^edge about
the sense of the words of our Confession (which relate to the se^ond Article of
the Remonstrants) That Christ died for the sins of all manki^d; or, for the
sins of the whole world] The Question was, Whether th^se words were to be
understood of all particular men, or only of the Elect, who consist of all
sorts of men. (Mr. Belcanqu^ls Letters of Febr. 9. page 2.) This Mr. Belcanqual
thought a matter of so great consequence, that he propounded it to the Lord
Ambassador, to procure them advice from England what course to follow. And what
that advice was, we may collect from his Letters of March 17. ( page 28.) where
he tells the Lord Ambassador; I must needs say, That the Directions which your
Lordship has sent from Secretary Nanton, do seem to will us to be as
favorable to the general Propositions as may be, giving as little offense to
the Lutherans as we can.

3. Had they differed about any other Article, and sent into England for
advice, in all probab^lity their instructions would have tied them to have had
a very tender regard to the Doctrine of the Lutherans in that also. This they
understood well enough at last, and therefore, Sess. 137. After Mr. Belc.
Letters, page 42.
. they vindicate the Lutherans to be part of the Reformed Churches; and because
these Canons of Dort were not consonant to their Doctrine, therefore they
object against their personal Censure, wherein they declared, Their Synodical
Articles were according to the judgment of all the Re^ormed Churches; Itaque
addita est ista vox Nostrarum. Therefore is that word [ ours] added, as Mr.
Belcanqual's Notes report it: But I can find no such words as Nostrarum added
in the E^ition (of those Acta Syn. Not. Dor.) in fol. 1620. But if the
President could dictate Canons privately, or insert them, when they never had
been heard of till that hour, wherein they were tendered for Approbation (as it
appears by the former passages that he could.) He might take the I berty to
expunge matters of greater weight and importance than was such a word as
Nostrarum. And so (as Mr. Hal^s M^. Farindons Letter to Mr. Garthwait, printed
before Mr. Hales his Remains.
d^d (upon occasion) by Mr. John Calvin) I bid the Synod of D^rt ^ood-nigh^.

FINIS.
(...), etc. Lucianus in Jove Confutato. Quod Latin redditum sic sonat.
Quae versio est Vincentii Obsopaei.
Q^oniam nos homines nihil voluntarii facimus, sed quadam necessitate
ineluctabili compulsi. Quod si vera sint illa, quae prius admisisti, quod Parca
sit omnium causa; si quis occiderit aliquem, ea (i. e. Parca) est Homicida. Si
quis sacrilegium admiserit, impositum sibi perpetrat. Quare, si Minos justum
judicaverit puniet Fatum pro Sisypho, and Parcam pro Tantalo. Quid enim injuste
fecerunt illi obedientes mandatis? etc. STIMLVVS ORTHODOXVS; Sive GOADUS
REDIVIVVS. A DISPUTATION Partly Theological, partly Metaphysical, concerning
the Necessity and Contingency of Events in the World, in respect of God's
Eternal Decree. Written above twenty years since by that Reverend and Learned
Divine, THOMAS GOAD, Doctor of Divinity, and Rector of Hadleigh in Suffolk.

printer's device of William Leak, featuring a crown (not in McKerrow) IN
DEFENSE


LONDON, Printed for William Leak, at the Crown in Fleet Street, between the
two Temple Gates. 1661.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
THIS Piece which I here propose to thy view, was the only Remain ( that I
know of) of that Reverend Divine, whose name is prefixed to it. A Work
certainly worth two or three hours time to peruse. It came to my hands by
buying some of the Books of his deceased Amanuensis. I need to make no Encomium
either of the Author, or the Work; the one was very well known to, and is still
remembered by some; and the worth of the other needs not beg our Commendation.
This our Reverend Author was one of the most eminent Divines at the Synod of
Dort, when the subject matter of this ensuing Disputation, and matters of the
like nature, amongst other controverted Points, were incontest. Whether our
Author was then of that judgment, which he declares in this Disputation, I am
not certain. However, if his after thoughts (which commonly are the (...)
best) inclined him to the truth, and swayed his belief, we have reason to
bless the God of Truth for the discovery. And I heartily wish, that all men,
who are entangled in the briars of these prickly Disputations, (as our Reverend
Author calls them) would lay aside all prejudice, and suffer their judgments to
be ravished to the embracing of Truth by the argumentative allurements of
Scripture and Reason. Tho^ wilt find the singular use of this ensuing Piece in
affording thee l^ght to, and carrying thee through those obscure intricacies
controverted betwixt the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants. And that it may
be of this singular use (...) benefit, is the hearty prayer of

Thy Friend and Servant in Christ, J. G.

A DISPUTATION, Partly Theological, partly Metaphysical, concerning the
Necessity and Contingency of Events in the World, in respect of God's Eternal
Decrees.
The Sum of the controversy is this.
1. WHETHER or no all things that ever have or shall come to pass in the world,
have been, or shall be effected necessarily, in respect of an irresistible
Decree, by which God has everlastingly determined, that they should inevitably
come to pass?

2. Whether or no many things have not been done contingently, or after such a
middle manner between impossibility of being, and necessity of being, that some
things which have been might as well not have been, and many things which have
not been might as well have been, for ought God has decreed to the contrary?

An happy composing of this int^icate Controversy will be of excellent use,
not only in guiding us safe through the briers of these prickly Disputations
of Predestination, Free Will, the Cause of sin, etc. (which at this day have
set Protestants, Papists, Lutherans, Armi^ians, Puritans, together by the ears)
but over and above in easing us of many scruples and perplexing cases, which
daily arise in our minds, concerning God's special Decrees, and particular
Providence, in respect of the passages of our life.

But the singular uses of this Disputation will best appear when it is
finished; and therefore without any further Preface, I betake my self unto it,
purposing to carry such an equal eye to brevity and perspicuity, that the
Reader shall have no just cause to say, that I am either obscure or tedious.

I have already divided the main Question into two particular Q^eri^s. Many
Divines completely Reverend, both for their knowledge and practice of Religion,
(and therefore deservedly 1. Opin.
of precious esteem in the Reformed Churches) have subscribed affirmatively to
the first Quaerie; maintaining, that whatsoever any creature does, Man or
Beast, Plants or Inanimate Elements and M^teors; God from all eternity has
decreed, that they should necessarily do it; so that a man does not so much as
spit without a Decree: yea, they say, that there falls not so much as a drop
of rain, or arises a blast of wind, sine speciali Dei jussu.

Contrariwise, some others of as good (though perhaps not of so great) a name
as they, both for their Learning and love of 2. Opin.
Orthodox Religion, have subscribed affirmatively to the second; teaching, that
as God in his wisdom has ordered, that some things are impossible and cannot
be; some things necessary, and cannot but be; so also has he poised some
things in such an equal possibility of being or not being, and left it to his
creatures choice to turn the scale, that in respect of him they fall out
contingently; it being as possible for his creatures to have omitted them, as
to have done them.

I have a good while halted between these two opinions, I have Sceptically
hovered over them, to see where I were best to light. Sometimes I have sent out
my assent like Noah's Dove, but she misliking her footing, speedily withdrew
her self back again, till at length she finding better entertainment amongst
this second company, she has returned now at last with an Olive branch in her
mouth, with that emblem of peace, Uniting my distractions.

The Arguments by which Truth first courted, and at last ravished my assent,
are those which both confirm the second, and confute the first opinion.

The first manifestly discovers an Heathenish Error, lurking implicitly in the
opp^site opinion: Our Adversaries indeed do Arg. 1*
disallow it explicitly, and I know they heartily mislike it; but it will too
evidently appear, that if that error be Paganism, their opinion is little
better, which I prove thus; It was the conceit of the ancient S^oicks, that all
things were governed and brought to pass by an inevitable Destiny, all things
falling out by a fatal necessity, in spite of men and (according to the
addition of Poet*s)of gods also. Now do not our Opp^sites in this Controversy
impose a fatal Necessity on all things? yea, they go further in this point than
some Stoics; for (as it may be collected out of some of their writings) though
they subjected the main Events and ends to irresistible Destiny, yet they
supposed the means (by which a man might, though vainly, endeavor to cross
those ends) arbitrary in man's choice. But our Opposites impose a necessity on
all things whatsoever, not only upon Ends and events, but also upon the means.
For example, according to their Doctrine, God has not only decreed that I
shall, or that I shall not escape this infection, but he has also decreed that
I shall, or I shall not use the means to escape it. So that all the Absurdities
that dog the Sto^c^l dream of fatal necessity at the heels, are inseparable
attendants of this Opinion. For I may not only say, If I shall die of the
Infection, I shall; if I shall not die, I shall not; and therefore I need not
use means to avoid it: But also, if I must use means, I must; if I must not, I
must not: Seeing Gods decree necessitateth as much to use or omit the means, as
to obtain or lose the end. For if their opinion be true, all things whatsoever,
end or means of little or great moment, come to pass necessarily and
unavoidably, by reason of Gods eternal Decree.

Here they have two Evasions.

The first is this, A beit (say they) God has most certainly determined what
shall, or what shall not be done concerning us, Evasio 1.
yet his Decree is hid from us, and we must use lawful and ordinary means, for
the obtaining of such and such good Ends, keeping on the ordinary course which
he has reveal^d to us.

See the vanity of this shift; our Opposites teach, that whatsoever God has
decreed shall be d^ne, and whatsoever is omitted Confutatio.
shall be undone. If therefore God has determined that we should not use such
and such means, it is impossible for us to use them; i^ he has decreed that we
should, it is impossible that we should omit them. And therefore it is more
than ridiculous to say, that although God in his secret will has determined,
that we should not do such a thing, yet we are to do it, seeing his decree,
though it be s^cret, yet it will have its effect, and it is absolutely
impossible we should do that, which God has determined we shall not do.

Howsoever (say our Opposites) our opinion is far from Stoicism, for the
Sto^cks thought, that all things came inevitably to pass, by reason of an
indissoluble Chain and Connection of natural Evasion 2.
causes: but we teach, that all events are irresistably necessary, by reason of
Gods everlasting d^crees, and His Omnipotency daily executing them.

This reason is so poor a one, and yet so much made on by some worthy men, that
I am more troubled to wonder at it, Confutation.
than to confute it; yet that I may satisfy it distinctly, I will divide the
opinion of the Sto^cks into two particular Tenets.

1. They hold, that all things come to pass inevitably. 2. They thought the
reason of this inevitableness of events to be an unchangeable connection of
natural causes.
Our Opposites stiffly maintain the former of these Tenets. Now let the Reader
observe, that the most prodigious absurdities accompanying this Stoical error,
follow the first part of their opinion, though sequestered from the second. For
if all things come to pass unavoidably, what need I care what I do? yea, if I
shall care, I shall care whether I will or no; and a thousand the like horrid
conceits follow the opinion of the necessity of events, whatsoever we make to
be the cause of this necessity.

It is a great point of Turkish Divinity at this day, that all things are done
unavoidably, and they with our Opposites make Gods will to be the cause of this
unavoidableness; and therefore they judge of Gods pleasure or displeasure by
the event. Yet there is no Christian but abhors this Turcism, and gives it
no better entertainment than Anathema Maranatha.

Its too apparent therefore, that albeit our Adversaries are true Christians,
yet in this point their opinion is guilty by reason of its consequence, both of
Stoicism and Turcism.

Again, if we consider the second part of the Stoics opinion, we shall
perceive, that the opinion which we confute cannot be minced, but that it will
be complete Stoicism. The Stoics thought the connection of causes to be the
cause of the necessity of events, its true; but what did they think to be the
connection of causes? doubtless the eternal Laws of Nature, which they supposed
to be a Deity. It is very probable they thought the Fates to be but Natures
Laws, but whatsoever they meant by the Fates, its evident they made their
decrees to be the cause of the connection of causes. How often read we both in
Philosophers and Poets of Fatorum Decreta, Parcarum Leges, etc. Yea, the word
Fatum it self is as much as a Decree; as Edictum from Edicere, so Fatum from
Fari. Quid aliud est Fatum quam id quod Deus de unoquoqu^ fatur? says
Minutius. Well then, to apply. Do not our Adversaries in this point suppose an
inviolable linking of all things together, one necessarily following in the
neck of another? Do they not make the cause of this linking to be Gods
irresistible decree? Do they not defend complete Stoicism? What part of
Stoicism do they disclaim? Do they not maintain inevitable necessity, Do they
not teach an indissoluble connection of all things? Do they not believe divine
decrees to be the cause of this connection? Certainly they must needs confess
themselves Stoics in this point, unless we will give them leave to grant the
prezmises, and deny the conclusion. I know the Stoics had mis-conceits
concerning the Deities, (as accounting those to be Deities which are not) whose
decrees they made the causes of all things; but they were the common errors of
Paganism, and are beside the point in hand: And truly these set aside, I see
not wherein our Adversaries differ from the Stoics. I have prosecuted this
Argument more copiously, because it includes many others, I mean, all those
which Scripture or Reason furnish us with, against the error of the Stoics,
and they are many; for I think verily, there are few opinions which have a
grea^er retinue of ridiculous and erroneous consequences, than this of the
unavoidable necessity of events: Some of them may make one laugh, and some of
them may make one tremble. I omit the former, because they are obvious to every
man's conceit, and I would not willingly make sport of so serious a matter. Of
the last sort I will specific one in a second Argument.

That opinion, which being admitted makes God the Author of sin, is gross and
erroneous, that I may say no worse, but so (I Arg. 2.
speak it with horror) does the Opinion of our Opposites. I know they are
renowned Christians, and as they abhor Stoical errors, so they hold this
damnable doctrine, (which is worse than ever any Heretic held) which
transformeth God into a Devil, to be most accursed: yet so the case stands,
that as the Sea this Argument confirmed in the Answer to the 4th Objection.
error of fatal necessity, so this of the cause of sin, fatally follows their
opinion; which I prove thus.

They teach, That nothing is done in the world, nor can be done, but what God
has decreed to be done. Now it is too certain, that three quarters of the
things which are done in the world are sins, therefore according to this
opinion, God is the principal cause of sins, Devils and Men are but His
Instruments.

The usual Answer is, That God is the cause of all the actions Evasio.
that are sinful, but not of the sirfulness of the actions; of all our works,
but not of our obliquities and imperfections: As one that rides upon a halting
Jade is the cause of his motion, and yet not of his halting.

Its a hard case when they have but one frivolous distinction to keep God from
sinning: Might I here (without wandering) discourse Confutatio.
of the nature of sin, I could prove sin it self to be an action, and confute
this groundless distinction that way; but I will keep my self as much to the
purpose as I can, and so answer it thus, or rather confute it.

That which is a principal cause of any action, is a cause of those events
which accompany that action necessarily. This Rule is most certainly true.
Therefore if God by His decrees do force Concomitants.
us to those actions which cannot be done without sin, God Himself (I am afraid
to rehearse it) must needs be guilty of sin. For example. If God decreed that
Adam should unavoidably eat the forbidden fruit, seeing the eating of the fruit
which he had forbidden must needs be with a gross obliquity; I do not see how
this distinction will justify God: for Adam sinned because he ate the fruit
that was forbidden; but they say, God decreed that he should eat the fruit
which was forbidden, necessarily and unavoidably. The conclusion is too
blasphemous to be often repeated.

The Reader may see how well that common distinction holds water; yea, if
this nicety were sound, man himself might prove, that he committed no murder
though he stabbed the dead party to the heart; for at his arraignment he might
tell the Judge, that he did indeed thrust his dagger into his heart, but it was
not that which took away his life, but the extinction of his natural heat and
vital spirits. Who sees not the wild frenzy of him who should make this
Apology, yet this is all our Adversaries say for God. They say, His decree was
the cause that Adam took the fruit, and put it into his mouth, and ate that
which he had commanded he should not eat. Yet they say, He was not the cause of
the transgression of the commandment.

The example of the halting Jade is a mere impertinency; for suppose it were
(as it is not) appliable to us, who halt naturally; yet Adam, before this
action, was sound; and therefore God necessitating him to such an
inconveniency, dealt with him as if one should drive a lusty Nag into rough
passages, where he must needs break his legs. Neither is it (as I said)
appliable unto us the lame posterity of Adam, for he who rides an horse that
was lame before, although he be not a cause of the impotency which he finds
in the horse already, yet in urging him to motion, he is now a cause of the
actual imperfection in the motion, and so perhaps a cause of increasing the
impotency for the future, though he were not the cause of his lameness, yet he
is of his limping at that time. Let the horse stand still, and see whether he
will halt or no. Marry if the horse go of himself, then the Rider is no cause
of his halting, and so we may say, that all our haltings are from our selves
without any instigation from God.

I know our Opposites have another shift, teaching, that God uses to punish
one sin by making us to commit another; so that although we sin, He does but
punish.

Albeit I do not believe this to be true, as it is commonly expounded, yet I
abstain at this time from a farther examination of it, because it weakens not
my Argument about Adam; for his sin was the first that ever he committed, and
the original of all that ever followed; and therefore if Gods decree were the
cause that he ate the forbidden fruit, as our Adversaries teach, its apparent
whom they make the Author of all sin. These two Arguments well scanned, are
sufficient to make any (not fore-stalled with pre-conceits) to be afraid of
that opinion which believes all things to come to pass necessarily, by reason
of Gods irresistible decree, and therefore they shall suffice for the
confutation of it.

Moreover, seeing it is clogged with such monstrous consequences, methinks out
opinion should be far more amiable, which gives no countenance to such hideous
misshapen errors, as it will appear by the process of this disputation.

Now I proceed to the confirmation of our opinion, concerning the contingency
of some events in respect of God, by two Arguments more.

The first is this, That God has decreed that all his creatures ordinarily,
and for the most part, should work according to their Arg. 1.
several kinds and endowments, by which he in the Creation distinguished them:
For illustration they may be ranked into three several forms.

In the lowest stand the mere natural Agents, inanimate and senseless creatures;
to these God has given certain instincts and 1.
inclinations, by which they are determinately swayed to these or these certain
effects and operations, unless they are out wardly hindered: for heavy bodies
cannot choose but descend, fire cannot choose but burn, etc.

In the second stand the Sensitive creatures, four-footed beasts, 2.
fouls, and fishes; to these God has given sense and knowledge to discern what
is good for their nature, and what is bad; and amongst diverse goods to prefer
that which is best. He has given them also a free appetite or a kind of
sensitive will, by which they may either ^re^ly prosecute, or avoid such
objects as they like or mislike; not determinately tied to this or that certain
operation, as the other were. A stone cannot choose but descend, but a beast
may as well go up hill as down, etc.

In the upper Form are Men, reasonable Creatures, whom God has made more
volun^ary than the other, by giving them 3.
greater* freedom of choice, and presenting unto their more elevated knowledge
a great variety of objects. Now then, without doubt, God distinguished thus his
creatures in abilities and faculties, that they might operate in their several
kinds, that the natural agents might work naturally, the voluntary voluntarily,
as that eloquent Frenchman Du Vain has well explained this point. The truth
of all this no man will deny explicitly: Well then, let them hearken to the
consequences of this truth, so common both in Logic and Metaphysics, among
those who handle of natural and voluntary causes. If God has decreed that many
things should be done voluntarily by his creatures, then also has he decreed
that many things should be done contingently, in respect of him; but the first
is granted truth, therefore the second should be. The connection I prove thus.
All things are done contingently in respect of God, which for ought he has
decreed might with as much possibility not be as be: But all things which are
done by the crea^ures voluntarily, may as well not be done, as done; therefore
if he has decreed that many things should be done voluntarily, He has also
decreed that they should be done contingently. The Minor is evident, because if
the creatures may not as well omit them as do them, they do them not
voluntarily but necessarily.

This Argument both confirms and explains our Opinion, showing how and why many
things come to pass contingently in respect of God; yea, it makes it
questionless, that God has decreed that many things should be done
contingently, or after such a resistable manner, that they might without
frustrating His decree have been l^f^ undone: yea, we see now, that contingency
it self is necessary in respect of Gods will, who will have many things done
voluntarily. Otherwise to what purpose did God give his creatures will^, if he
will not suffer them to use them?

See again the inconveniences of the former opinion, which confounds all
sorts of creatures, and makes a man to operate with no more freedom than a
stock or stone. For according to our Opposites, I eat, or drink, or walk with
as much necessity, as Lead sinketh down. God has decreed that that should
sink, and therefore it must; and so God has decreed that I must walk a mile,
and therefore I must.

Here they have a starting hole, but it is so poor a one, that it does not
relieve but disgrace them. They say, That Gods decree Evasion.
does not compel any man's will to any thing, that he should do such a thing
whether he will or no; but he so disposes and works it, that it shall desire
that which God would have done. And therefore, they say, Man has use of his
will, because whatsoever he does, though necessitated to it by God, yet he does
it willingly.

This slim-slam would move any man's patience, but I will be serious. The
prerogative of a voluntary Agent consists not Confutation.
in doing that which it desires to do, or rather in desiring to do that which
it does, (for according to them, man desires the thing because it is to be
done, yet it is not to be done because he desires) in freedom from ^oaction
and violence; but in a liberty of cho^c^ to do or not to do this or that, and
so in freedom from the necessity of immutabil^ty. So that still for all this
shift, they make man no more voluntary than a stone. A stone has a natural
propension or kind of appetite to fall downward, yet because this appetite is
restrained necessarily to this term, so that the stone must needs fall down, it
cannot be said to descend voluntari^y, in any propriety of speech. Is not this
just a man's case according to them? A man drinks, they grant he does it
volun^arily; yet they say, his will is so restrained by Gods decree to this
action, that it was not ^ossible for him to omit it. What difference is there
now betwixt the will of a m^n and the will of a stone, only that God employeth
a man in more actions, which alters not the case? Surely if this be true, it
was no wonder Deucalion and Pyrrha got stones turned into men so fast.

This Argument does so in^angle our opposites, that although in the Question
about particular providence they are peremptory for the necessity of all events
in respect of God; yet when they come to the question about Free Will, and more
particularly in free will about natural matters, as walking, sleeping, riding,
etc. they speak so off and on, that one may plainly perceive how they have a
wolf by the ears: Sometimes they do yield Free Will in such things, not
considering how they contradict what they said before about particular
Providence; sometimes they yield it, they say, not so much because they yield
it to be true, as because they will not contend about such petty matters; a
very sleeveless put off! sometimes they stiffly deny it, but they are unwilling
o^ unable to produce any Arguments worth a rush.

That opinion which makes Gods knowledge absolutely infinite, and most
glorifieth His omnisciency, must needs be better Arg. 2.
Divinity, than that which supposes by its consequence Gods knowledge to be
but fini^e. Now our opinion does the first, our opposites the second;
therefore. The Minor Proposition I justify thus. An absolute infinity in
knowledge must be either in respect of the number of objects, or in respect of
the manner of comprehending them. Now according to their opinion, in these
respects Gods knowledge is but finite. Ergo.

For the first respect, to speak exactly, it cannot make knowledge completely
infinite; for seeing there cannot be an exact infinite number of Objects,
seeing that all things that ever were, or ever shall be, cannot be truly
infinite in number; it is impossible that any knowledge whatsoever should be
properly termed infinite in this respect. Yea, seeing the vastest number, and
most incomprehensible to our mortal Arithmetic, may in it self be doubled and
trebled, it is an infallible truth, that any knowledge in ^his regard may be
trebled also, and yet remain finite, if we speak not vulgarly or unlargely, but
Metaphysical exquisitions. Well, come to the second Respect, here also our
Opposites do much debate Gods knowledge, making it but finite, and that not of
the largest sort; for while they teach, that God has decr^ed how all things
shall infallibly come to pass, they require indeed of God an infinite power,
whereby to execute his decrees, but seeing all things shall be effected as He
has decreed they should, a finite knowledge may well serve the turn. What
wonder is it if God foreknow what will be done, if he can but remember His own
decrees? It requires indeed a large memory, but not an infinite knowledge.

Suppose a man had but that power to bring to pass what he determined, it would
be no strange matter if he could foretell future ev^nts: He would make a hard
shift with his Hypomnemata, Registers, and Records, and the Art of Memory, but
he would remember what he had con^rived should come to pass, in such and such a
Country.

Wherefore in the second Respect, viz. in the manner of comprehending of
things, they make the Divine Praescience to be but finite, whilst they teach,
that God knows how all things shall come to pass; because the same knowledge
is the cause, by virtue of decrees, of whatsoever shall be effected in the
world.

Now that our opinion attributes unto God a knowledge exactly infinite, and
makes His Praescience more wnoderful, it will plainly appear. God, say we, ab
aeter^o, has ordered that such Agents as he created voluntary, should have a
double liberty in their operations, viz. a liberty of contradiction, to do, or
not do* as a Painter may choose whether he will work or no: and a liberty of
contrariety, to do a thing after this or that manner; as a Painter may use what
colors, in what quantity, after what fashion, he pleases.

Now then, God leaving to His creatures free liberty, to work or not to work,
after this or that manner, so that for any necessity imposed upon their actions
by Him; whatsoever they omit, was as possible to be done, as what they did: And
yet from all eternity fore-knowing whatsoever his creatures would do, or not
do, his foreknowledge must needs be infinite, and most admirable. Infinite, I
say, not in respect of the number of objects, for so, as I said before, no
knowledge can be infinite: but in respect of the omnipotent and boundless
manner of actual comprehending those things with an infallible foresight,
which in respect of God were contingent, their not being being as possible as
their being. And indeed this foresight of future contingents, is the true
character and Royal prerogative of Divine knowledge: and Ergo in the 41 of
Esaias, God upbraideth the Pagan Deities with this privilege peculiar to
Himself, though juglingly pretended by them in their lying Oracles, verse. 21.
The Lord bids them produce Gnatzumotheken, the strongest Arguments by which
they could prove themselves Gods; and in the next verse he particularizeth, and
thrice bids them tell, if they can, what shall happen in the times to come. Its
worth the observing, how that there was never any sort of Diviners Artificial
(I speak not of Devils, Witches, Gypsies, and such palpable Impostors) that
undertook to foretell future contingents: for if you prove those things which
Astrologers and Physiognomers undertake to foretell, to be mere contingent in
respect of the Horoscope or Complexion, and no way to depend on them as natural
causes; you have proved their Arts to be but Impostures. How much then do our
Opposites dishonor God in this case, making the great miracle of his foresight
of future contingents to be as much as nothing? seeing they say, that albeit
they are contingent in respect of us, yet they are necessary in respect of Him.
When any man has answered any of these four Arguments, then will I change my
opinion. In the mean time I proceed to the vindicating of it from such
exceptions and objections, as our enemies in this case make against it. The
dissipating of those mists wherewith they endeavor to obscure this opinion,
will not only clear the truth of it, for belief; but also the sense of it, for
understanding.

First, they say, That while we avoid their Stoicism, as we term Obj^ct. 1.
it, we fall into flat Epicurism; for while we make so many things in the world
to fall out according to the inconstant bent of voluntary Agents, we Deifie
Chance, and make Fortune a goddess; we do in effect deny Gods providence, which
they say makes all things come to pass according to a most wise and constant
method.

I will be as forward as any man to Anathematize him, whosoever he be, who
holds any thing to fall out fortuito in respect Answ.
of God: I will make it most evident, that our opinion makes no Chance in
respect of God, and most sweetly illustrates Gods Providence.

First, There is a vast difference between Contingency and Casuality.
Contingency is an equal possibility of being or not being* (...)
Casuality is the coming to pass of an event eximproviso, beside the
forethought, as I may say of the thing. Now it is our assertion, that many
things fall out contingently in respect of God, because he imposed no necessity
upon their being, but left them to the pleasure of the inferior causes, that
they might as well not have been, as been. But we say withal, that nothing
falls out accidentally or casu^ll^ in respect of God, because nothing comes
to pass without his most certain and unerring foresight; he knowing from all
eternity what his creatures would do, though he left it to their pleasure to do
what they list.

In events there is a great difference between Contingency and Casuality of
events in respect of men; for most things we do, we do contingently, we being
not bound by any inevitable necessity to do them; yet as long as we do them
upon certain persuasive reasons, for certain ends, we do them not by chance.
The same events yet are not after the same manner contingent in respect of God,
as they are in respect of us; for He out of the Prerogative of His Deity
fore-knoweth them; but we, by reason of our mortality, cannot have infallible
foresight of them; and what foresight we have, is in a very little distance.

And indeed, if this point be punctually canvased, we shall perceive, that in
that same proportion we have any knowledge of them, they are not contingent but
necessary: for every thing, so far forth as it is in existence, or in near
preparation for it, is necessary.

Contingency is the middle point between necessity and impossibility of being;
and therefore so much as any thing inclines to existence it is necessary. The
want or neglect of the distinction between contingency and casualty, has been
a great cause of the error we confute: for our Opposites still taking fortu^to
and contingenter
for Synonyma, because they would have nothing casual in respect of God,
therefore they would have every thing necessary; not discerning the middle path
which we walk in between Epicurism and Stoicism.

Concerning Gods Providence we teach, that although according to that ordinary
course (which we call nature) which he 2.
has prescribed for the operation of his creatures in the decree of Creation,
many things fall out according to the free choice of voluntary Agents, no way
by Him necessitated; yet God is still busy with a double providence. The first
is universal; by this, whatsoever natural Agents do contingently, He fore-se^th
most clearly, and orders it most wisely, according to His glory, the
preservation of the Universe, and good of His creatures. The second is
particular; by this He puts in oft-times a miraculous finger into such
cont^ngent business as respects his Church, and oft-times so works the heart
of the voluntary Agent, that sometimes he does that which (if he had been left
alone to himself) he would not have done; and sometimes is secretly diverted
from the doing of that, which otherwise he would most willingly, and (in all
likelihood) could most easily have done.

And here our Opposites may please to observe, how our opinion is so far from
denying particular Providence, that it only maintains a Providence properly
termed Particular: for that particular Providence which our Opposites so much
talk of, if it be well looked into, will appear to be in no better sense
particular, than the Roman Church is universal.

They say, That there is not any numerical act performed by any creature,
without an eternal decree from God; this they call particular providence. Alas!
this is the general which concerns all the actions performed by all things,
or at least one mixed of general and particular. As for example, Because it
raineth to day, God so ordering that it should, is it any sense to say, This
rain was by the particular providence of God, unless we espied extraordinary
matter in it? We therefore call that universal providence, whereby God
directs whatsoever His creatures do, according to their natural propensions,
for the preservation and good of the Universe. We term that particular or
special providence, whereby God interposing his extraordinary power amongst
the contingent affairs of Commonwealths, or private men, sometimes by sensible
miracles and prodigies, sometimes by His secret omnipotency, sensible only in
the Event, manifests His Mercy or Justice, to His own Glory, or good of His
Church.

This is properly termed special providence, and in this sense it is taken by
La Vosino the Italian, in his Tract, De particulari Providentia; and by those
who have wrote of that subject. Well then, I will now specify my faith
concerning Gods Providence.

First, it is very probable, that petty trivial matters, such as are
indifferent, not only in respect of themselves, but also of their
consequences, fall ou^ altogether contingently, without any necessitating
decree. These matters of lesser moment are of three sorts.

1. The toys and trifling vanities of voluntary Agents, such as the Italians
term Badalucii, or Ballocametti: What a company of idle gestures and sporting
tricks use we every day, which doubtless for ought God has decreed, we might
have as easily omitted?

2. The petty consequences of the main actions of natural Agents: for example,
though the main drift and scope of the operations of the Elements and Meteors
be according to the method eternally prescribed them by God; yet some
particular events accompanying their operations, some circumstances
questionless were not prefixed by a particular decree; as now and then it
happens to rain when the Sun shines, I cannot believe that there is any special
decree concerning this.

Hear I would have the Reader observe how these events are not so properly
called contingent, as those other are; for they were swayed by no decree either
general or special, from the middle point between necessity and impossibility
of being. But these, though they are contingent in respect of a particular
decree, and may as well not be as be, for ought God has precisely determined
concerning them; yet in respect of the general method prefixed to natural
Agents, they do necessarily come to pass, because their main office cannot be
performed without these circumstances and consequences.

The last sort are mixed of the two former, and include all such even^s as
result from the contingent concourse of natural 3.
and voluntary Agents; as when the wind blows off ones hat, etc. to say that
God particularly decreed such trifles, I think it injurious to the Majesty of
His Determinations. But here by trifles I mean such matters (as I said before)
which are indiff^rent, not only in respect of themselves, but also of their
consequences.

I believe, that things of greatest moment are done necessarily, by the
immediate power of God, either by swaying men 2ly.
from their own proper inclinations, or by supernatural means quite crossing
their enterprises. So we read in the Scripture and Church-stories, how God has
sometimes quite changed the hearts of men for some great purpose concerning his
Church and glory.

I believe that the middle sort of events in the world, such as are neither
trivial nor yet extraordinary, the ordinary serious 3ly.
matters which concern Religion, Commonwealths, the temporal and spiritual
good of private men, the preservation from confusion, etc. Of these, I say, my
belief is, that though ordinarily men and unreasonable Agents do things
contingently, yet God does so manage this contingency, daily and hourly
interposing His power according to His Mercy or Justice, that very few matters
of consequence are merely contingent. For example, Because I see Marriage for
the most part to be either a great curse or a great blessing This may so happen
upon the post-fact.
, I am so far persuaded of the truth of the common saying, that I think that
Marriages for the most part are made in heaven Sure David's was not, a Sam. 11.
27.
, before they are on earth. Let a man diligently peruse any story, and he shall
find many things done ordinarily according to the natural bent of particular
persons, and so contingently in respect of God; and yet let him join all things
done by all the Actors in the story together, let him accurately observe how
one thing follows upon another, he shall find, that still at the last there
will be something from the singer of God manifesting the glory either of His
Mercy or Justice. If we read the History of the Reformation; begun by Luther
and other Divines of Germany, we shall perceive many things done by the natural
humors of men, by the guidance of Divine wisdom made admirable furtherances of
the Reformation. The like may be said of Henry the 8th. his Marriage (which set
most Universities in Christend^m a Disputing) and the dissolution of Abbers.
The like indeed may be observed in any History, especially if it concern
Religion or a Christian Commonwealth; for I conceive that Gods Providence is
more or less remarkable in a place proportionable to the profession of
Religion. Let a man but diligently observe the prime passages of his own times,
let him mark how the chief Actors in them do all things according to their
particular bents and private humors; yet let him note the upshot, he shall
perceive, that there was some secret guide which directed all to God's glory,
though men do what they li^t according to their own pleasure. The best
Demonstration of this most useful and delightful truth every man might best
make to himself, if he would but seriously and circumspectly consider the whole
course of his own life, and mark how (whatsoever he hat done out of the
absolute freedom of his choice) his actions have been turned and winded now and
then contrary to his intent, now and then beyond it, now and then beside it;
sometimes to his grief, sometimes to his comfort, always to be examples of Gods
Mercy, or His Justice; he will easily perceive, how excellently the Divine
Providence works upon Contingencies.

If men would be basied upon such contemplations, they would not shuffle away
so many good hours with those waking dreams of fantastic solitary
discoursings, which Charron and others have wisely taxed.

Here the Reader may see how I suppose some things necessary, some things
contingent, some things mixed, by reason of diverse circumstances of both kinds;
by no means undertaking precisely to determine how many things are done
contingently, or how many necessarily, etc.

Now as we have formerly showed how our opinion does most exactly Blazon the
Divinity of Gods infinite knowledge, by which He simply knows all things; so
also it does most clearly set forth the honor of His active wisdom, by which he
governs all things; for, to order all things in an harmonious concord to
good, (whatsoever the confused distracted discord of choices in inferior causes
produce) is a more glorious and superlative act of wisdom, than first to decree
how all things shall be done according to certain platforms, and to see them
effected according to them: Yea, this conceit (though it be Stoicism in it
self) yet it opens a greater overture to Epicurism than ours; for Ep curus
and his fellows believed there were gods, but they imagined that they encumbered
not themselves with the ordering of sublunary matters, but suffered matters
here below to go for the most part according to the natural and eternal
customs. Even so, if according to the opposite Tenet, God has ab aeterno
prefixed an irresistible tenor and method agreeable to which all things should
for ever necessarily come to pass. God might ab aeterno also, from the same
instant He made His Decrees, let all things alone (according to Epicurus his
conceit) For our Opposites say, Quae Deus decrevit sponte flunnt.
seeing all things must come orderly to pass, by virtue of His Decree, though
he slept all the while.

But our Doctrine (they say) contradicts the Scriptures; our Savior tells
the Apostles, that the hairs of their head were Object. 3.
numbered, that not so much as a contemptible Sparrow falls without his
Father. Therefore the pettiest matters in the world are determined by God
Himself.

I remember the Marginal Note indeed in the Protestant Italian Bible upon
Matthew. 10. 29. upon these words, [ Yet not one of them falls to the ground
without your Father] says thus, [ Che nou'intra venga it decreto ela volenta
sua, etc.] i. e. But so that His decree and will came between: But this gloss
is impertinent. The meaning of the place is this, Not one of them falls
without Gods privity and permission. The scope of our Savior was to comfort
and encourage his Disciples, whom he was now sending abroad into the world as
sheep among wolves; to this purpose he tells them, that the hairs of their
headwere numbered, etc. the number of them was known to God, without whose
permission they could not lose one of them. That not so much as a Sparrow
falls without their Father, etc. i. e. without the knowledge and permission
of Him who was their loving Father: And therefore he bids them not to be
afraid, seeing if such trifles could not be without Gods permission, doubtless
God, who was their more special observer, would not suffer men to meddle with
them, more than should be for His glory and their good. So that it cannot
without absurdity be hence concluded, that God has made any special decree
concerning Sparrows; for, (as St. Paul says) Does God take care for Oxen? so
say I, Does God take care for Sparrows? Here it is worth the observation, that
the Arguments (for the most part) which our Opposites produce for the necessity
of all events, and their kind of particular providence, are such which (as one
says) Aut nihil concludunt, aut nimium, conclude either not so much, or more
than they would have them; being much like the garments which were made for the
Moon, either too big or too little for their conclusions; for either they are
drawn from particular examples, and prove nothing at all, (as when Calvin
proves that there arises no wind without a special decree from God, because
he caused the South Wind to bring the Israelites Quails, and sent the tempest
which caused Jonas to be cast into the Sea) or else they are deduced out of
such reasons and Scriptures, which (as they handle them) prove God to be the
Author of sin, and so a great deal more than they are willing they should.

But our opinion may seem to patronize the proud error concerning Object. 3.
Free Will; for if God does not Necessitate our Actions, but leave them to our
inclinations, so that it is in our power to work or not work; we have freedom
of will to do or not to do, whatsoever we do contingently.

These words [ which we do contingently] are well put in; for we say many
things are done contingently in respect of God, yet Solution.
many we say are done by Gods special determination. But it is most certainly
true, that good duties, properly so called, (to which we are tied pro hoc
statu) are never performed without choice and freedom. Which therefore (amongst
other privileges of Christ's purchasing) are restored under the spiritual
Jubilee of the Gosp^l, and instated on us by the holy Ghost as one special part
of our Redemption. I^ the Son make you free, then are you free indeed. And,
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

In answer then to the Objection, I say, That, for our natural actions, as
eating, walking, etc. I believe that ordinarily we perform them freely and
contingently in respect of God. Likewise I doubt not, but as the ancient
Heathens Aristides, Socrates, Cato, Fabritius) so many now a days perform many
things civilly and morally good, being left alone I do not reject the opinion
of rest^ingent grace, if it be well expounded.
to their contingent educations and complexions. But for matter of grace and
salvation, I confess, to the glory of God, that in us (being dead in sins and
trespasses) dwells no good; That we cannot so much as think (much less do)
any good, unless the holy Ghost gives us the power both to will and to do it.

Adam before his fall The opposite Tenet allows not Adam Free will in his
innocence, as I could easily prove, and is partly affirmed already by the third
Argument.
was equally poised between perseverance and defection; but he falling by the
freedom of his choice, lost those perfections which made him free: so that if
his posterity do anything truly good, it is from God, not from themselves;
whatsoever bad they do, it is from themselves not from God.

Here it may be noted, that we may do many things contingently in respect of
God, which yet we do not freely but necessarily in respect of ourselves; as our
sins are contingent in respect of Him, because he never imposed any necessity
of sinning upon us; yet they are necessary in respect of our selves, seeing we
being left to our selves cannot but sin. So many things which are contingent in
respect of our nature, may be in some sort necessary in respect of our persons;
as those things which our complexions, or customs and habits necessitate us to:
But this is an impertinency.

They say moreover, that our opinion contradicts both Scripture and
Philosophy. Obj^ct. 4.


1. For Scripture, it is said, Act. 14. that in him we live, move, and have our
being; by which words we are taught, that all our motions, of what kind soever,
either natural or moral, vital or rational, are not only guided; but also
caused by God Himself.

2. Both in Logic and Metaphysics there are diverse Rules consonant to this
Scripture, as [ Causa causae est etiam causa causati: causa secunda non agit
nisi meta a prim, etc.] Therefore man does no kind of thing but God is the
first cause of it, and consequently whatsoever we do, we do necessarily in
respect of Him.

This is one of the Arguments which proves more than our Adversaries would
have them, and by these Rules have I formerly Answ.
in the second Argument proved, that they make God the Author of sin; for if
causa causae be causa causati (as doubtless it is) while they make God the
cause of all those actions, which either are sins, or the causes of sins,
questionless they make God (according to their own Argumentation) the cause of
sins. But they have a limitation for this Rule, and say, that it holds in
causis essentialiter subordinatis, as they say, that God is the cause of all
those things which are essentially and districtly done by our wills; but sins
proceeding from the depravation of our wills, are effects of a cause, not
directly subordinate to God. The limitation is sound, but not applicable to
their instance; ye^, the limitation it self quite spoileth them: For 1. While
Adam's will was yet sound, they teach, that God decreed that Adam should eat
the forbidden fruit; now at that time they cannot say, but that Adam was a
cause essentially subordinate to God. 2. They teach, that God is a cause not
only of our actions, but also of our volitions, as I may say; then these being
the causes of our sins, are directly subordinate to him.

3. Let us consider not only the subordination between God and our wills, but
also between our actions and their moralities, and we shall perceive, that
according to the abuse of these Rules, they make God the cause of our sins. For
that Rule, Causa causae est causa causati, is infallibly true expounded thus,
The cause of any effect, is the cause of all such events as necessarily follow
that effect.

Now then, if (as they say) God be a necessary cause of all our particular
actions, seeing our actions in reference to such and such objects must needs be
sinful, it is manifest what follows. For example: Though to take money in
general be no sin, yet to take this or that money, being none of our own, is a
sin. Now then, if God be a cause of this action in reference to this object (as
he is if he be the cause of this particular action) it is impossible their
Doctrine should excuse God from sin. Eating, in reference to the forbidden
fruit, was a sin; but according to them, God was a principal cause of eating
the forbidden fruit. Ergo.

Minor prob. They say he was the necessitating cause of this particular action.

Eating was a natural action, the individuation of this eating by an unlawful
object was a moral obliquity.

But God was the cause of this individual. Ergo.

The like may be said of all our sinful actions. When I have drunk sufficiently
both for the necessity and comfort of nature, to drink a cup more is sin. But
our Opposites teach, that I cannot take up this superfluous cup without Gods
special determination: Ergo.

This Doctrine is enough to make ones hair stand an end, making God (whatsoever
they say) the cause not only of our actions, but also of our obliquities: for
what are the obliquities of our actions, but the placing of them upon wrong
objects? If therefore they make God the principal cause of all our particular
actions, most of which are particularized by bad objects) what do these men
make of God? But Recrimination is no answer.

Hitherto I have showed (though perhaps without method, yet, I hope, not
without profit) how our Opposites are wounded with their own weapons. Now I
will take their weapons out of their hands, and teach them the right use of
them, showing how God is the cause of all things, only not the cause of sin: a
cause of all good things, yet so as that many good things are contingent also.

We have showed in the third Argument how God has ordained, that all sorts of
Inferior or second causes should work according to their proper kinds; that
voluntary Agents should work voluntarily, etc. God then is the first cause that
all things do work and that they do work in certain kinds: If so, then God is
the cause that many things are done contingently, one of the chiefest sorts of
second causes by this appointment working voluntarily, and therefore
contingently, which connection we have formerly justified. This being well
understood, will instruct us not only that it may be so, but also that it must
be so. That God being the necessary cause of all good things, yet all such
things are not necessary effects of Him. For example, It is impossible that man
should do any thing without God, therefore God is a cause necessary to the
being of all things effected by him; yet because many things done by the free
choice of man, might as well have been omitted (God no ways constraining him to
them) these are not necessary effects of God. The Reason of this is, because
God has decreed that man should work voluntarily, having liberty to do as well
one thing as another, yet so that God gives him the strength to do whatsoever
he chooses to do, and ability to choose what he will without limitation of his
choice, (for this were else)
to take it away, and to make man an involuntary Agent.) For example, God has
given thee strength of body; he has given thee also ability to choose in what
exercise thou will employ it; thou choosest to Ring or Dance; God then the
Author of thy strength is the chief cause of these exercises, yet so, as they
are contingent in respect of Him, because thou might have omitted them had
thou pleased. By this we may plainly see, how God is the principal cause of all
things of which he is capable to be a cause; and yet many things are contingent
in respect of him. This being cleared, we may with more facility conceive, how
and in what sense God is the cause of all we do, and yet we only the cause of
sin.

God sustains us when we are about our sins; even then, in Him we live, and
move, and have our being, as well as when we are better busied. God gives that
strength by which we commit any sin, yet because he does not necessitate or
incline unto it, but we of our selves abuse it to wickedness, God has still
the part of a Creator, we only are sinful. An example will make this clear,
Suppose a King delivers to his Subject Men, Weapons, Money, and Warlike
provision, that he may fight for his Honor against his enemies; his Subject
proves a Traitor, and uses all his Sovereigns strength against himself. His
Sovereign here is a cause that he has the command, and does the Office of a
Captain, but he is no cause of his Treachery, the offense is only the
Captains, and the wrong is only the Sovereigns. This is just the case between
God and us; God has given us many excellent faculties both of body and soul,
which he intended we should use to his Glory, in obedience to his
commandments, and resist His and our enemy the Devil; we most traitorously
siding with Satan, have abused His gifts to His Dishonor; God did the part of a
Creator, we of Rebels. A man lives intemperately, God gave him not strength to
this purpose, he necessitated not the man to this intemperancy: Man therefore
only sinned, God is dishonored. The King made his Subject able to rebel
against him, by delivering his military furniture unto him, the verier
miscreant he that did rebel against him. So God made Adam indeed able to sin,
but he never intended that he should sin with that ability. God then is the
cause of all those things in which we sin, and yet whatsoever he does is
exceeding good; he is not the cause that we intend any sin, but the cause that
we are able to commit those sins we intend; and yet he intended not our
abilities for sin, but for his Service. Of all our good actions he is the first
cause, we are the second: of all our sins we are the proper cause, he is only
the Conditio sine qui non.

But here some man may say, That choice or election of an unlawful object (upon
which we misplace our actions) is that which makes us sinners; now this being
an act of our will, it must suppose also the concourse of God; how then does
our opinion clear the point? The same Answer abundantly suffices; God made
Adam able to be willing to sin, but he made him not to will sin: God set before
him life and death, that he did choose death it was by the strength of will
given him of God; but God did not bind him to choose death, for that were (a
contradiction) a necessitated choice.

Briefly, whatsoever we choose, we do it by the power by which we are voluntary
Agents, yet if we choose death, God is Object. ult.
not to be blamed, (for he made us voluntary) and therefore it was as possible
for us to have chosen life. If the nature of a voluntary Agent be well
observed, this point will be most evident.

The last objection is this, Gods foreknowledge of all futures is most
infallible and necessary: Ergo, All futures in respect of him fall out
necessarily, otherwise it is possible God may be deceived; yea, if many things
fall out contingently, Gods foreknowledge of them can be but contingent,
depending after a sort on man's free will.

This Argument is plausible at the first view, but if it be touched it falls to
shatters. It is one thing to know that a thing will necessarily be done, and
another to know necessarily that a thing will be done. God does necessarily and
certainly foreknow all that will be done, but he does not know that those
things which shall be done voluntarily will be done necessarily: he knows
that they will be done, but he knows withal, that they might have fallen out
otherwise, for ought he had ordered to the contrary. So God necessarily knew
that Adam would fall, and yet he knew that he would not fall necessarily, for
it was as possible for him not to have fallen. It was the ancient (and is still
the true) opinion, That Gods Praescience is not the cause of Events; he
fore-knoweth all things because they will be done, things are not done because
he fore-knoweth them. The infallibility of his knowledge consists not in the
immutability of his decree, but in the prerogative of his Deity; it is
impossible therefore that any man by his voluntary manner of working should
delude Gods foresight; not because God does necessitate his will to certain
effects, (for this were indeed to take it away) but because his foreknowledge
is infinite.

Let our hearts therefore be never so full of Mazes and Meanders, turning and
winding, yet (...) (to use the Poets language) the alseeing Eye of God cannot
but espy them long before, not because he himself contrived them (for then it
were no wonder if he were (...)) but because to Him (who is every way infinite)
all things cannot be but present and (...) which is the significant word of the
Author to the Hebrews, signifying open, by a metaphor or similitude drawn from
a word that signifies, having the faces laid upwards, because such as lie so
have their face exposed to the sight of all men.

FINIS.
Books Printed or sold by William Leake, as the sign of the Crown in
Fleetstreet, between the two Temple-gates.
Yorks Heraldry, fol. A bible of a very fair large Roman Letter. 4. Orlando
Furioso. fol. call is learned readings on the Statute, 21 H. 8. Cap. 5. of
Sewers. Perkins on the Laws of England. Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs. 8. The
book of Fees. Parsons Law. 8. Mirror of Justice. 8. Topics in the Laws of
England. 8. Skene de significatione verborum. 4. Delamans use of the Horizontal
Quadrant. Mathematical Recreations. Wilbeys second Set of Music, 3, 4, 5, and
6 parts. 4. Co^^^^ius in English. 8. Dr. Fulk's Meteors. ^ Nyes Gunnery and
Fireworks. Cato Major with Annotations. by William Austin Esquire. Mel
Heliconium, by Alex. Ross. 8. Nosce te ipsum, by Sir John Davis. 8.
Animadversions on Lillies Grammar. 8. The History of Vienna and Paris. The
History of Lazarillo de Tormes. Hero and Leander, by George Chapman, and
Christopher Marlow. Mayer's Catechism 8. Exercitatio Scholastica Bishop Andrews
Sermons Adams on Peter Posing of the Accidence Amadis de Gaul Guillims
Heraldry. fol. Herberts Travels. fol. Boccas Tables Man become guilty, by John
Francis Senalt, and Englished by Henery Earl of Monmoth. The Idiot in four
books, first, and second, of Wisdom, third of the mind; fourth, of the
experience of the balance. The Life and Reign of Hen. 8. by the Lord Herbert.
fol. Aula Lucis, or the house of Light. The Fort-Royal of holy Scriptures, or a
new Concordance of the chief heads of Scripture, by J. H. A Tragoedy written by
the most learned Hugo Grotius, called CHRISTUS PATIENS) and translated into
English The Mount of Olives, or (...) volions, by Henry Vaughan Sylurist, with
an excellent Discourse of the blessed estate of Man in Glory: written by the
most Reverend and holy Father Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury. The description
and use of the double Horizontal Dyall, by W. O. whereunto is added the
description of the General Horological Ring. The Rights of the People
concerning Impositions, stated in a learned Argument, by a late eminent Judge
of this Nation. France painted out to the life, the second Edition. The Garden
of Eden, both parts; or an accurate description of Flowers, and Fruits now
growing in England, by Sir Hugh Plat, Knight. Exercitatio Scholastica. Book of
Martyrs. sol. Willet on Genesis and Exodus. PLAYS.
The Wedding. Philaster. The Hollander. The Merchant of Venice. The strange
discovery. Maids Tragedy. King and no King. Othello the Moor of Venice. The
grateful servant.

These Books are lately come forth, and sold by Will. Leak at the Crown in
Fleet Street.
The Solemn League and Covenant, Arraigned and Condemned, by the sentence of
the Divines of London and Cheshire, etc. by Lawrence Womack, now D. D. and
Archdeacon of Suffolk. Amorea, the Lost Lover, or the Idea o Love and
Misfortune, being never before printed, written by Patherick Jenkyn, Gent. An
exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of London, from the Reign of K.
Edward the second, to K. Richard the third, of all the Parliaments holden in
each Kings reign, and the several Acts in every Parliament, by Sir Robert
Cotton, Knight. and Baronet. An Apology for the Discipline of the ancient Church,
intendep especally for that of our Mother the Church of England, in answer to
the Admonitory Letter lately published by William Nicolson, Archdeacon of
Brecon, and now Lord Bishop of Glocestet. Le Prince d'Amour, or the Prince of
Love, Wa collection of several Ingenious Poems and Songs, by the Wits of the
Age. 8. A learned Exposition of the Apostles Creed, delivered in several
Sermons by William Nicholson Archdeacon of Brecon, and now Lord Bishop of
Gloucester.

