A True Discovery TO THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND, How they have been Cheated of
almost all the Gold and Silver Coin of this Nation, WHICH Has been, and is
daily Transported into Foreign parts.

AND How the people of this Nation are, and have been abused by light and
Clipped English money, and the means showed for the prevention thereof.

Humbly presented to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

BY, THOMAS VIOLET A true lover of his Country.

LONDON, Printed by W. B. and are to be sold by W. Sheires at the sign of the
Bible over against the North-door of Paul's 1650.

A true discovery how the COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, Have been cheated of their
Treasure, and means showed for prevention thereof
IT has been daily practiced by some particular Merchants, both Native and
Strangers, to Transport the Treasure of this Nation, to the great prejudice of
the State; who for their own private gain, have not ^pared to damnifie the
Commonwealth (so highly) that their Persons and Estates cannot give a full
satisfa^tion for the great mischief done, and practiced by them to this
Commonwealth, and without a strict Examina^ion, and exemplarie punishment of
^he offenders, or some of the chief of them, these mischiefs will never be
^revented, (and the Common wealth ^e still undermined by those Moles, to the
unspeakable damage thereof) and for that some, through ignorance, do not
understand and conceive the great damage which may come to the Commonwealth,
by the suffering these abovesaid abu^es to continue, and others more crafty
and subtle, both Goldsmiths and Merchants, that are Transporters of Gold and
Silver, and practisers of several high frauds and abuses upon Coin and B^ll^on,
have the confidence (or impudence) to make arguments for defending the
Transgressors. Now for the information of some in their judgments, that have
desired a true account, what Laws are now in force in this Nation for
prevention of these mischiefs; what Orders and Laws in France, H^lland, and
Flanders, for the regulating of their Mints, Money, and B^llion; what
punishments and restriction upon the offenders.

I have procured the Ordinance, and Placcaets of Fran^e, Holl^nd, and Fla^ders
to be translated, have abbreviated them for your information; and quoated some
Laws of this Nation now in force, as hereafter follow.

And if you please to make the Law, now presented to the House, stricter than
it is now drawn, I humbly conceive you will do the Commonwealth the greater
benefit, considering the present condition of the Commonwealth.

Transporting of Treasure has been Felony, 4. Henry 7. cap. 13. and 17.
Edward 4. this Statute to endure for twenty years. I humbly conceive the
Commonwealth has now as much reason to look to keep the Treasures in the
Nation as they had then, considering all things.

That you would be pleased to give one Moyetie at the least to any person or
persons that will, or can discover the Offenders: that so by this reward, all
persons may be invited to discover the Offenders all over the Nation, and the
same rule followed which was in 14. Rich. 2. cap. 12. where Commissions by Act
of Parliament, were granted throughout the Realm, to inquire of such as had
conveyed the Money of England out of the Nation; in doing whereof, great sums
throughout the Nation will come to the State, and the Offenders will remember
the Proverb, sweet meat must have sower sauce, when they shall be enforced to
pay back to the State, that which they have defrauded them of, and will prevent
them and all others hereafter, for to take the boldness to get themselves
fortunes by any of the aforesaid indirect courses, which so highly tend to the
damage of this Commonwealth.

By these deceits, Commerce is spoil^d, Traffic decays, those things that
are needful for man's preservation grow dear, the handie-crafts work cease,
the workmen betake themselves to some other places, and the Commonaltie, to
speak all in a word, is brought to Poverty, (as is Gravely observed by the
Master General, and Council of the Mint in Flanders, 2. October 1647. in their
Declaration, clearly demonstrating, That the careful and punctual keeping of
the Placcaet of the Mint, is very necessary, and withal profitable to all
persons of what state, quality, or condition soever; showing, that if the
Placcaet be not observed, but that money should be paid out above the true
value through these disorders they shall never be able to keep their Treasure
within their Country.

And in their Declaration showing most judicially, the great mischief^ that
befall a Nation by enhauncing and raising their Money, being no rea^ cure for
the Commonwealth, but utterly destructive to all sorts of people, even from
the Prince to the poor Labourer, to any Free State or Commonwealth, to all
Merchandise and Commodities: all which considerations, although very potent,
yet do not oftentimes come into the minds and comprehensions, not only of the
Common people, but also of those to whom the employment of Public Office have
given more judgment and credit in mannaging of affairs themselves, and who
dare to spread it abroad, that there is no harm nor evil in enhauncing the Coin
above its true value and worth, because they can put it away at the same price
as they receive it; not taking notice by the way, that by raising and
augmenting the price of money, does or must by consequence, augment and
increase the price of all Merchandises and provisions proportionable, whereby
of necessity must follow, that if the Moneys be augmented and heightened, the
Landlords and Creditours receive so much less; the Merchandise, Victuals, and
all other Wares grow presently dearer; the Public Treasure either Excise or
Customs are abated, by so much as you enhaunce or lessen your Moneys, for it is
not the Denomination of a high price of Gold or Silver sets the value, but it
must have weight and fineness proportionable to what you call it, or else you
go upon a wrong ground; As for example, in Scotland they call Thirteen pence
halfpenie, a Mark; and Twenty pence, they call Twenty shillings; this
denomination of a great value gives not the intrinsicall value.

I caused these men following to be Fined in the Star Chamber for transporting
Gold and Silver, and Culling and Melting down the current heavy Coin of the
Nation.

The 25th of Jan. 12th Car.
Charles Frank 4000l Robert Ellis 4000l Isaac Romeere 3000l Jacob Delew 1000l
Roger Fletcher 1000l Richard Cockram 1000l John Parrat 2000l The 17th of Febr.
12th Car.
Peter Hern 2000l John Terry 2000l Timothy Eman 2000l Isaac Brames 1000l Henry
Futter 500l Henry Sweeting 500l John Perrin 100l

The total of the said Fines amount to the sum of 24100l.

Sr. John Woollaston Knight, and William Gibs Esquire, both Aldermen of the
City of London, being informed against in this Information, by the late Kings
then Attorney General; procured the late Kings Pardon, and so were discharged.

And Pet^r Fountain who was informed against for transporting of Gold,
procured his Pardon upon payment of 1100l. And all these I did bring to a
Trial all at my own Charge.

That besides the fourteen offenders sentenced in Star Chamber and Pardoned,
as aforesaid, there are many other Merchants, Goldsmiths and others, that have
transported Gold and Silver out of the Nation, that have sold Gold and Silver
at above the price of the Mint, that have furnished much light Gold, English
and Foreign, and great quantities of Gold and Silver to Merchants and others
to transport, that have culled and melted down the weightiest current Silver
Coyns, as shillings, sixpences and halfcrowns, all which offenses are against
the common Laws of the Nation: And the wisdom and policy of State has, upon
free and general Pardons at Parliaments, exempted it out of the free Pardon,
thereby the more to terrify and restrain men from venturing in that kind, to
transport Gold or Silver, or to melt down the current Silver Coyns of the
Nation.

That diverse Goldsmiths of London, are become Exchangers of Bullion of Gold
and Silver, and buy it of Merchants and others, pretending to carry it to the
Mint; but indeed they are the greatest Instruments for transporting that are;
and in a manner, they are only those who furnish transporters with English and
Foreign Gold, Spanish money, Rix-dollers, Pistollets, Cardacues; culling and
melting down the current Silver Coyns of this Realm for Plate and
Silver-thread: and no doubt, when a true representation of the abuses of such
Goldsmiths, Finers, and Wire-drawers, as has been formerly, and is daily
practiced by many of them, shall be made appear; I doubt not but the Parliament
will think fit to take the same into consideration, and provide some means to
restrain them from doing the Commonwealth that damage, as formerly has been
done.

That some of the Goldsmiths make it their use and practice to buy light
English Gold of shopkeepers and others, which by the Laws of this Nation,
wanting beyond remedy, ought to be bought as Bullion, and upon the sale, ought
to be defaced, and new Coined in the Mint: But they take another way; for they
sell all this Gold to transport, though it want 4. 5. or 6. grains above the
allowance, and that a 20s. piece will not make 19s. to be Coined in the Mint;
yet the Goldsmiths will not abate above 2d. or 3d, and sometimes but 1d. in
the piece, let the Gold want what it will; by which means they out-give the
Mint: And the Gold which the Goldsmiths buy of the Subjects, thinking it is to
carry to the Mint to be new Coined to pass in current payment, they put it into
a dead Sea, never to be made use of in our Commonwealth: For weekly, French
and English have bought up this Gold, let it be as light as it will, at higher
prices than the Mint are allowed to give by their Indenture, to the value of
many hundred thousand pounds; for by the Goldsmiths rule, the Mint is always
last served, as being the worst Chapman, and giving least for it; for after all
hands are full, both for transporters, Plate-workers, Finers, and Wire-drawers;
then that, which they cannot vent otherwise, comes into the Mint; which the
Officers of the Mint know very well: and if Gold and Silver never came into the
Goldsmiths hands, (which Merchants sell, to them, believing they carry it all
to be Coined) far more Gold and Silver would come into the Mint, than now does.

And for this last 5. years, sum Goldsmiths have given for English Gold 20s.
6d. 21s. 21s. 6d. and 22s. for a Twenty shillings piece, which for the most
part have been bought of them by Merchants, strangers and others, and
Transported out of the Nation, so that now you may Receive five Thousand pound
in a Payment and never a piece in Gold: If this ought not to be looked after
and the offenders brought to Justice, I shall humbly leave it to the
Parliament to consider.

Also, many Thousand of Dollers and pieces of Spanish money they furnish
Merchants yearly with that Trade for Norway and Denmark and other parts, and
Transport Silver for those parts, to the great weakening of the stock of this
Nation, and hinderance of the sale of our woollen commodities, which (before
that pernicious way was found out) those Countries vented much of. Besides the
hinderance of the sale of our commodities, the State is hindered of their
Custom; for the Merchants drive a trade inward and outward, and so pay the
State no custom; For instance Hambrough-Merchants bring great quantities of
Rix-dollers from Hambrough and other parts of Germany, and pay no Custom,
because the State has ever made Gold and Silver free to be imported without
Custom, which the Merchants usually sell to the Goldsmiths, and the
Goldsmiths for the most part sell to the Merchants that trade in Norway and
Denmark: which Dollers are closely packed in some part of the ship, and so no
Custom paid, either for bringing in the Silver, or sending it out; and no
commodities, in a manner, other than Silver, are transported into those parts
by the said Merchants, considering the quantity of their return; For what they
want in goods exported from hence, they must make up in money: If great returns
of commodities from Norway and Denmark, and few commodities exported from
hence, the Balance must be made up with Silver; for no Nation will give us
commodities; but there must be a balance for goods imported, by goods
exported, or by Treasure.

It is to be feared, that the industry of many ages cannot replenish the Nation
with so much Gold, as has been transported out of it within these few years;
for it is an infallible rule, that where Gold and Silver is over-valued,
thither will it be Transported by Merchants and others, for it continually
resorts where it is most made of, and if you seek to raise it here, the remedy
is worse than the disease; for then you take from the Gentry, and all settled
Revenuers, as much of their means as you raise the current money; for if Gold
should be raised in England, for example, the 20s. to 26s. as was in France,
either higher or lower, you should buy no more at your Market for 26s, than you
could before for your 20s. and contrariwise, if your 20s. were but 14s. you
should buy as much for your 14s. as when it passed at 20s. so that whenever
money is raised, the loss falls most upon the Nobility and Gentry, and
certain Revenuers, who lose so much out of their inheritance, which they have
let out in Lease, as money raised.

All Merchants that trade for Spain, know, that when the West India fleet
comes not into Spain, the Trade for that year is lost; and no money, no
Trade. If this be an infallible rule for Spain, which suffers so much for the
forbearance of bringing in of treasure for one year, and is supplied the next
out of the Indies, and till their Fleet came home, no dealing with Merchants; I
do most humbly present, how much more it does concern this Nation, which has
no West Indies to supply the Treasure transported, to provide, and carefully
keep in the Nations stock, which once transported, cannot be drawn back, but
upon unreasonable terms; which will impoverish all the Gentry to an
inestimable value; and as long as it remains out of the Nation, all Trading
and Commerce decays, the Subjects are unable to pay Taxes, and other Duties,
and it is one of the greatest mischiefs that can befall the Commonwealth.

1. These reasons amongst many other, I humbly presented to the Parliament, 12.
April, 1643. which if they had been then taken into consideration, had kept
many Millions of money in the Nation. But by the subtility of two Aldermen,
whose pardon I had got from the late King, I for my reward was committed to the
Tower for bringing up a Letter from the late King, though I had a Warrant from
the House of Commons, and a Warrant from my Lord General Essex, for to go to
OXFORD, and the Committee at Darby-house knew of my going to OXFORD, for the
late Kings Letter, which I desired Sir David Watkins before ever I went, to
have him acquaint the Committee of both Nations at Darby-house of my business,
and some other of the House of Commons, and that I would not go without their
leave, which I had from them by him; and Master Rily the Scout-master of
London, procured my pass from the House of Commons.

But the truth was, the Presbyterian Party ruled then all, and they were
resolved to make their Brethren of Scotland rich, and had a design to
Circumvent this Nation, both of all their Gold, Money, and Movables, which for
a great part they have done, as I will make it appear; and therefore any that
did speak against transporting Treasure, or knew so much of their Tricks as I
did, must be a Malignant, an enemy to the Covenant, and so I was kept 3 years,
and a 11 Months prisoner in the Tower, almost 3 years of that time close,
because I should tell no Tales; and my Estate given away without hearing, and
Sequestered to my damage, to the value of above 8400l.

Besides the infinite ways the Presbyterians found out for to enrich their
Brethren of Scotland, which all the Nation know. I shall declare one, which
was so usorious and destructive to the Nation, as never the like practice was
before put on this Nation, nor I believe, scarsly upon any other, under the
color of Friendship, League, and Covenant, and this to be done upon their dear
Brethren of London, and that was briefly this. The Scots Commissioners
procured an Ordinance, that no Ships should bring Coals from New Castle, as
appears at large by the Ordinance. When this was done, They must be the only
men must bring us Coals from Scotland; whereas before our dear Brethren
brought us Coals for nine, and ten shillings the Tun, aad sold them delivered
at London at that price, as will appear by all the Woodmongers books; they
having by the subtilitie of their Faction, got all their Trade for Coals for
the City of London, and other parts of the Nation, into their hands, then the
City shall pay for their Brotherly assistance: For since the Ordinance for
restraint of fetching Coals from New Castle, until New Castle was reduced to
the Parliament, Scotch Coals was at thirty, and forty shillings the Tun; so
that they sold them after they had Monopoliz'd the Coals into their own hands,
at four times the value they could, and did constantly before afford to bring
them from Scotland.

Then they had their Factours here, to buy up all the Hangings, Bedding,
Pewter, Stools, Chairs, Houshould-stuff, Pictures, and all manner of Lumber,
which was sold to the value of many hundred of thousand pounds, out of the
City of London and Nation, for half the value, and by them, instead of Ballast
carried to Scotland, and this can be witnessed by thousands of people, who have
to their total undoing suffered in this kind, and are never likely to see their
goods, nor never to be Masters of such again, without they, or their Children
will take the pains to go to Scotland and fight for them: by this way they may
recover their Goods, or their value again.

I shall humbly desire the Parliament to take notice after what Rate the
Brotherly Assistance from Scotland, came in to help their Brethren, even,
after the Rate of sending one hundred pounds worth of Coals to London to their
dear Brethren, to make their return worth eight hundred pounds in a month, or
six weeks time, as is apparent, and can be witnessed by thousands of people,
now they read this. Which after this Rate, a poor Scotchman might with one
hundred pound, within the compass of one year, cheat this Nation of ten
thousand pounds, and Transport it all in money. And this has been done by many
of them, to the value of many hundred of thousand pounds.

And because I Petitioned the Parliament, to look to the Transporting of the
Treasure, by which means, they would have been prevented in sending the
Treasure of this Nation into Scotland, I must be Sequestered, Imprisoned in the
Tower, and held a Malignant.

But I humbly hope the Parliament will give me the hearing for my just defense;
and when they shall by experience find, that this I say to be true, and that I
discover the nest of them that have Robbed this Nation, they will do me right,
and unlose me from Oppression, and restore me to my Estate.

Hereafter follow the Laws in Holland, Flanders, and France, for the regulating
their Bullion and Money.
Placcaet and Ordinance. Concerning the general course and regulati^g of the
Mints and Moneys, as also concerning the Exchange and Exchangers, R^finers,
Goldsmiths, and others in the United Provinces, 1586.
ARTIC. XI.
ANd as for the Gold and Silver-Monies, whose value is valued by this
Ordinance, We forbid every one to present, pay away, or receive the same at a
hither rate, h^^ is here Ordered, upon the forfeiture of such Moneys, or the
worth of it, in case the Fact be not pre^ently discovered, and besides, upon
the forfeiture of ten Golden Angelors the first time; for the second time,
twenty Gol^e^ Angelors; and for the third, four times as much and besides,
A^^^trary punishment according to the h^mon^ness of the Fact. And We understand
the same forfeitures and penalties, to take place, as well upon the Receiver,
as the payer away, unless one of them, presently after the Receiving, or Paying
away, do present himself to an Officer, in which case the denuntiator, either
Receiver, or Payer away, shall be freed or quitted of the abovesaid penalty
and forfeiture; and besides, to enjoy the third part of the same forfeit and
penalty.

ARTIC. XIV.
So that we expressly forbid, and interdict every one, to over-buy, or oversel,
Change, or Chop any Species of Moneys, rated by these presents, either in
taking, or giving upon the same, any profit, gain, or advantage, after what
manner soever, upon the same pain and penalty, as abovesaid, against those who
shall Receive, or Pay away the same, at a higher rate than that of the
Ordinance.

ARTIC. XV.
We forbid also, every one to Cull any Gold, or Silver-Monies, and so by this
means, to sort the weighty and good ones from the light, and bad ones, to Pay
away the light ones, and make their profit of the weighty, upon penalty as
abovesaid.

ARTIC. XVI.
And as for the Stuff, and Materials of Gold and Silver, being in Mass, or
sweepings, We forbid to buy, or sell them at a higher rate, than according to
the Rule of this Ordinance, upon penalty of confiscation of the abovesaid
Materials; and moreover, to forfeit double the worth of them, at the charge as
well of the buyer, as of the seller, for the first time; for the second time,
twice as much; and for the third time, four times as much; and afterward
Arbitrarie punishment.

ARTIC. XVII.
We expressly forbid henceforth to Transport, or cause to be Transported out of
the abovesaid Province, toward any strange Mints, any Gold or Silver-Monies,
and also any Materials, in Mass or Moneys, also any Materials in Mass or Ingots
fit to Coin Moneys of them, upon forfeit of Confiscation of the abovesaid
Moneys and Materials, or the worth of them in case they were already
Transported; and besides this, upon penalty of one hundred Golden Angelors,
upon every Mark of Gold, and twenty Angelots for every mark of Silver, and of
more or less proportionably for the first time for the Second time, upon the
same so feit and penalty; and moreover to undergo bodily punishment, and if
they have not wherewithal to pay the abovesaid forfeits and amerciaments, they
shall be bodily punished according to the manner of the Fact, under which
penalty and amerciaments, We understand are comprehended, all those who had
assisted, and had a hand in the abovesaid Transportation, or conveying them
away, al^hough the Moneys or Materials did not belong unto them.

ARTIC. XX.
Moreover, We forbid every one to File, Cut, or Wash with strong Water, or
Cement, or any otherwi^e, any Gold, o^ Silver Moneys, nor to Sau^der, Gi^d,
Piece, or Nail the same, or any way to make the same ligh^er o^ heavier, upon
the forfeit of life and goods, where Confiscation takes place.

ARTIC. XXII.
We forbid henceforth every one* to Melt any Gold or Silver-Moneys of her
Majesty's of Englands stamp, valued by these presents, upon penalty of life and
goods, where confiscation takes place: And the Moneys of Gold which are found
to be too light by three Grains, or otherwise Clipped, Washed, Nailed, or
Saudered, shall be brought to the Exchange, after the old custom.

Placcaet and Ordinance for Flanders at Antwerp, the fourth of October, 1585.
ARTIC. XIII.
ANd to hinder the Transporting of the good and true Moneys, We ^orbid all and
every one henceforth, to ^uy or sell any Species of Gold and ^ilver-Moneys, to
give any profit or ^ain for it, upon penalty of the Seller, ^o forfeit the
Pieces which are sold, ^r shall be sold, and besides the buy^r, as the
seller, to forfeit threescore ^ounds of the abovesaid good Moneys, for the
first time; and twice as much for the second time; and for the third time, four
times as much; and besides, they are to be Arbitrarily punished.

ARTIC. XIV.
We also forbid all, and every one, to Weigh, Clip, File, or make choice of any
Species of Gold and Silver, for to make any profit with Melting, o^
Transporting of them, upon penalty of Criminal punishment, besides the loss of
the abovesaid Pieces.

ARTIC. XV.
Furthermore, We forbid, and interdict well Expressly; that no one o^ what
quality, degree, or condition soever, shall henceforth endeavor t^ Transport,
or carry into any strang^ Mints, or into any other than our ow^ any Gold, or
Silver-Monies of ou^ Stamp, or others tolerated by thi^ Our Ordinance, nor also
any other Moneys, being clipped, or declared Bu^lion, Melted, or in Mass, or
otherwis^ nor also any other stuff, fit to Coin M^nies of them, upon forfeit of
the ^bovesaid Gold and Silver, and beside of two hundred Golden-Reals, for ^
very Mark of Gold, and twenty Golden Reals, for every Mark of Silver, and of
more or less in proportion for the first time that this shall happen; and for
the second time, besides the abovesaid forfeit, to be bodily punished, and
otherwise as occasion shall serve. And if so be, that any person have
transported any sum of Moneys, without being taken in the fact, We will
nevertheless, that whenever it shall be perceived, and discovered, they shall
proceed against the transgressors by execution of the said penalties, even as
if they were taken in the same Fact, well understanding, that instead of
Confiscation of the Species, they shall be bound to pay the price, and
estimation of the transported Moneys, and besides, the double worth of them,
and also to be criminally punished.

We will and command also, That those who shall have helped to pack, or
secretly convey, and transport the abovesaid Moneys, either in Mass, or
Species, although the abovesaid Moneys did not belong unto them, they shall be
bodily, or Arbitrarily punished, according to the quality of the Fact and
persons.

The Policy and Laws of this Realm, have always aimed at, and intended the
Increase and Augmentation of Money, especially that of Silver, and this diverse
ways.

I. By providing, against Exportation of it. 9. E. 3. c. 1. 38. E. 3. c. 2. 17.
E. 3. 21. 5. R. 2. c. 2. 2. H. 4. c. 5. 2. H. 6. c. 6. 17. E. 4. c. 1. Made
Felony 19. H. 7. c. 5. 3. H. 8. c. 1.

II. By providing, against the melting it down, to make Plate or other
Manufactures of it. 9. E. 3. c. 3. 17. R. 2. c. 1. 17. E. 4. c. 1. 2. H. 6. c.
13.

III. By providing, that if any Moneys through time, or any other practice,
became uncurrant, then the same to be converted into Money again, and not be
diverted from Coin. E. 1. Statute de monet parva Rastall Tit. Money.

IV. By providing, That none should give a price for Bullion, or Coined Money,
above the rate of the Mint, or what the same is current for: for it is not to
be expected that any Bullion, either of Gold, or Silver, shall ever be brought
to the Mint, when the owner may have a greater price, than at the Mint, either
to be Transported, or to be converted to Make Plate, or other things: This
agrees likewise with the policy of Spain, which though it be the Spring, and
Fountain from whence the greatest Streams of Silver have been derived into
other parts, yet Silver there, will always yield the seller six pence, or one
Real more upon the Mark at the Mint, than to be sold to any other for any
purpose whatsoever, concurring likewise with the practice of other States.

That all these Acts are defective, and not effectual to the ends abovesaid,
for the reasons following.

The Acts against Transportation; some extend not to Gold, as 9. E. 3. c. 1.
Others have effect only upon the Money that is Transported, and that comes too
late, and is seldom or never known, as 38. E. 3. c. 2. 5. R. 2. c. 2. 2. H. 6.
c. 6. 17. E. 4. c. 1. being now discontinued.

Those that extend to the Shipping of it, etc. viz. 2. H. 4. c. 5 19. H. 7. c.
5. and 3. H. 8. c. 1. Give the whole forfeiture to the King, and no part to the
Informer, whereby they are not at all made use of, no man being willing to be
at charge to prosecute another, doing no good to himself.

None of those Acts do give sufficient forfeitures to restrain the Offenses, as
has been manifested by experience.

Lastly, they have not given any means for discovery thereof, without which,
the Offenders will not be deterred from finding out close and secret ways to
adventure and practice against them, when opportunity of great gain, and hope
of concealment, shall invite and encourage them thereunto.

And for the now Act drawn and propounded to be passed.

BEsides the frame and body of it, comprehending, and fully extending to all
the ways and means of the abuses, the same for the forfeitures. Is drawn from
the example and president of 18. Eliz. c. 9. against transportation of Leather,
Tallow, and raw Hides, and others in the Queens times, and the late Ordinance
1647. Against transportation of Wool, Fullers-Earth, etc.

The Clauses touching the proceeding by Information, etc. are the same with the
like Clauses of the said Ordinance for Wool, 1647.

And the Clauses to encourage the Instrument and others to discover the
Offenses, wherein themselves are liable to the penalties, are framed in
Imitation, and by the President of the said Act of 18. Eliz. And the other
Ordinances and Edicts of other Kingdoms and Estates, that give like exemptions
and encouragements to such, as though guilty themselves in the second degree,
shall reveal and discover others more principal Offenders, taking likewise
from them the confidence they would have, that the persons they employed should
conceal their Offenses, whereby they will be much deterred from hazarding and
adventuring upon the practice.

And the Clause touching the Commission, and examination of Witnesses for
discovery, etc. And to commit them in case of their refusal to be Examined, is
exampled by the 13. Eliz. c. 7. The Act against Bancrupts, and discovery of
their Estates; There being greater reason and equity, for the discovery of
fraud, concerning the Commonwealth, than concerning any private person.

In an Ordinance and Placcaet for the general Regulating of the Mint,
published at Brussel, the 18 of March, 1633. is inserted.
ARTIC. XXV.
WE declare, That although any of our Subjects or others, who shall have Acted
any thing contrary to this Ordinance, and were not taken in the Fact, yet
notwithstanding, afther they shall be convinced of the said transgression, they
shall be proceeded against, with condemnation of the said penalties and
amerciaments; well understanding, that instead of forfeiting the said moneys
and materials, they shall be condemned to pay the worth of them.

ARTIC. XXVI.
And if it happens that the just quality and quantity of the said Species,
Bullion, or Materials cannot be precisely known or verified, We will, that such
transgressors be punished according to the heinousness of the fact, being left
to the discretion of the Judges.

ARTIC. XXVII.
Which we intend shall take place, in regard of those who shall be convinced,
to have paid away, presented, or received any forbidden Moneys, at a higher
price than by this present Ordinance is declared, although the said quality and
quantity of the same, could not be precisely verified.

ARTIC. XXVIII.
We have Authorized, and Authorize by these, all Officers, for to seize upon,
and break open, the Packs, Letters, and Portmantles of the Messengers, or
others whom they shall know or suspect to bring in any of the forbidden
Species, or Materials, or to Transport, or convey out of our said Lands, any of
our Species, and that in the presence of those, to whom the said Packets are
sent to, or do belong, if so be they are residing in that place; as also in the
presence of one of the Magistrates of the said place, only to know the name of
those who caused the said Gold and Silver to be Transported, and to no other
end.

ARTIC. XXXVII.
We also Order, that all those that shall be found to have Counterfeited,
Coined, Stamped, Pressed, or cast in the sand, any Moneys, of what manner stuff,
or Metal soever, shall be executed a^ false Moniers, in a kettle with boiling
Oil, and water, and with Confiscation of all their Goods.

ARTIC. LV.
If so be any one be convinced, that he had picked, or chosen out, or caused to
be chosen out, any of the said valued Species, for to keep the heavy ones for
his profit, and to pay away the light ones to the damage of the Commonaltie;
We will, that he, besides the said Forfeits and Amerciaments, shall be banished
out of Our said Lands, for the space of ten years.

ARTIC. LVI.
In case that any of the particular Masters of Our Mints, or Exchangers, were
convinced of the said abuse, or that they should have presented, or paid away
any of the said Clipped, or other forbidden Species, after that they had received
the same for Bullion, or not Current, then shall they be banished for ever out
of Our said Lands, and their Goods Confiscated.

ARTIC. LVII.
And because the price of the Species is commonly regulated according to the
price of the Gold and Silver Materials, Therefore we have forbidden, and forbid
every one of what quality and condition soever, to buy or fell any Gold or
Silver Materials, or Species declared for Bullion, or not Current, at a higher
price than the Ordinance of Our said Mint permits, upon penalty of
Confiscation of the said Materials, and the worth of them, at the charge as
well of the Buyer, as Seller, for the first time; for the second time, sour
times as much, besides the Confiscation and Forfeit, and of other Arbitrary
correction.

ARTIC. LXIII.
We Order also, that the Brokers, who did assist and help to conclude or treat
upon such parcels, either in re-regard of money given upon exchange, or upon
use or obligation, either in payment of the sold merchandises, or otherwise,
shall be publicly whipped and banished out of our said Lands, for the space of
ten years.

ARTIC. LVI.
And as We have understood, and are truly informed, that a great part of the
irregularity concerning the said Placcaets, is risen and occasioned, by reason
that many Merchants and Factours, will not buy the works and manufactures of
the workmen, and handicrafts-men, unless they will receive the Gold and Silver
at such a price as they will give it them; or when they have almost bought the
goods, they give the Merchandise back again to the Sellers, if they will be
paid according to the price Ordered in Our Placcaet: Therefore We will, that
such oppressors of the poor Commonalty, shall be rigorously proceeded against,
and punished, by apprehension of their persons, and that they, their Process
being summarily, and criminally formed, and found guilty of what is abovesaid,
shall be banished for ever, and their Goods Confiscated, or instead hereof, to
be condemned in a great sum of money, according to the heinousness of the Fact;
of which Confiscation and Americiament, the half shall be given to the
Plantiff, or discoverer.

ARTIC LXX.
In like manner shall be punished those with the same Forfeits and
Amerciaments, who shall have received, paid away, or presented any clipped Money,
or declared for Bullion, with protestation, or declaration, that it is for to
deliver them into our Mint, or to the Exchangers, unless they had presently cut
them in pieces, or deformed them, or caused the same to be done by others.

ARTIC. XCI.
We declare, that although it be, that any of the Transgressors do obtain
favor and pardon from Us, or from Our Council. We do not intend, nor We will
not, that therefore they should be quitted, and discharged from the parts of
the said forfeits and Amerciaments, granted by Us to the Officers, Callers in
question, and Plantiffs, or Discoverers respectively; but such favor and
pardon only to take place, for as much as belongs unto Us.

ARTIC. CV.
We Order well expressly, all Our Fiscals and Officers, to take their
conclusions, and all Our Counselors, Magistrates, and other Judges, to give
their Sentences in conformity of this Our present Placcaet, without using any
moderation of the penalties and amerciaments therein contained, under what
pretext soever, nor also any compensation of charges, to the prejudice of the
Officer founded in the principal, upon penalty of Our indignation, and for to
answer for it in their own persons, without that they shall plead any
Ignorance, or the general transgression. Which excuses, We do not intend shall
avail, or help them in any manner of way: but Our intention is, that they shall
be punished, because of their negligence and connivence.

This Ordinance and Placcaet of the 18 of March 1633, is again confirmed; and
all Magistrates and Officers are required to do their utmost endeavors to see
it strictly observed in all points. Published at Brussels the 26 of August 1643.

In an Ordinance and Placcaet for the Regulating of the Mint; Published in
Brussels the last day of May, 1644. is inserted.
ARTIC. xi.
WE have also forbidden, and forbid by these presents, every one of what
quality or condition soever; as well our Subjects as others, to Transport any
Gold or Silver from henceforth out of our Lands, directly or indirectly, or
cause the same to be Tarnsported, either Minted or Unminted; as also in Mass,
Ingots, or Bullion; without having obtained of us beforehand express leave and
consent for to do the same, upon penalty of forfeiting the Gold, Silver, and
Bullion, and to pay besides the double of their worth, and upon forfeit of the
Merchandises, if so be the abovesaid Gold, Silver, or Bullion shall be found to
be packt in them; as also of the Horses and Wagons of those, who shall
willingly and wittingly have brought and conveyed the same.

ARTIC. xv.
And if any one be found and taken to have Transported or caused to be
Transported out of our Lands, any Moneys by Us valued, or other declared
Bullion, or any materials of Gold and Silver, and have delivered or caused to
be delivered the same into any strange Mints; We will, that such persons shall
be proceeded against, sharply and rigorously by imprisonment of their persons,
and that they, besides the forfeits of the said Species and materials, and four
times the worth of them for the first time, shall be banished out of our
abovesaid Lands, for the space of five years; and for the second time, for ever.

ARTIC. xvi.
And those who willingly and wittingly have assisted for to pack and Transport
the abovesaid Moneys or Materials, shall be punished according to pleasure, or
banished according to the quality of the person.

Other Countries you may see strictly provide against these offenses; and it
will never be mended here, if you make not as strict Laws as they.

In a Declaration of the King of France, for the Regulating of the new price
set upon the Light and Clipped Species of Money: likewise for the observation of
the prices of Gold and Silver employed for the Goldsmiths work. It is also
expressly forbidden to melt the Money, and to Transport them or other materials
of Gold and Silver out of the said Kingdom, Printed at Paris 30th of October.
1640.
FOLIO 8, 9.
WE expressly forbid, that all materials of Gold and Silver, either Coined or
Uncoyned, shall not be bought or sold at a higher rate than is expressly set
down in this Placcaet, which does contain the true value that must be paid for
the Mark of Gold and Silver.

FOLIO 13.
We expressly forbid every one, of what condition or quality soever, to
Transport out of our Kingdom, any Gold and Silver Coined or Uncoyned nor any
other Goldsmiths work, upon penalty of forfeiting the Materials and
Merchandises, and other things wherein they shall be found to be packt up in;
besides the penalty of fifty pounds and bodily punishment.

Now that general Laws and Statute^ in England from time to time have provided
against Transporting of Gold, or melting down the current Coin, and buying
Silver and Gold at above the price of the Mint, appears by these following,
viz.

Stat. 9. Edw. 3d. Both forbidding the Transporting of the Gold of the Nation,
and the melting down the current Silver Coyns, by Goldsmiths or others into
plate.

Stat. 14th. Rich. 2d. cap. 12th. Commissions made through the Realm, for to
enquire of such as had conveyed the money of England out of the Nation, to the
prejudice and damage of the King and Realm.

Stat. 17th. Rich. 2d. cap. 1. There shall be no melting of the current money
to make any thing by Goldsmiths or others, upon pain of forfeiture.

2d. Hen. 4th. cap. 4th. No person to Transport Gold or Silver, either in Coin
or Bullion, upon pain of forfeiting as much as they might.

4th. Hen. 4th. cap. 10th. No Goldsmiths or other person to melt down the
current Silver Coyns of the Nation, upon pain of forfeiting four times the
value.

9th. Hen. 5th. cap. 1. All Statutes heretofore made touching the good and
lawful government of Gold and Silver, and not repealed, to be in force.

2d. Hen. 6th. cap. 6th. Upon a grievous complaint made in Parliament, that
great sums of Gold and Silver were Transported into Flanders and Bordeaux out
of this Kingdom, it was ordered and enacted, that no Gold or Silver should be
Transported out of the Realm.

And because it is supposed, that the money of Gold is Transported by
Merchants-aliens, It is ordained, that the Merchants-aliens shall find security
with sureties in the Chancery, that they shall not Transport Gold or moneys out
of the Kingdom, upon pain of forfeiting the sum or the value; and if any do
contrary, and that duly proved, and he so doing be gone over Sea, then his
pledges shall pay the State his said forfeiture; whereof he that the same
espied, and thereof gave notice to the Treasurer or the States Council, shall
have the fourth part.

2d. Hen. 6th. cap. 12th. To the intent that more money be brought into the
Mint, it is ordained, that neither the Master of the Mint, not Changer for the
time being, neither sell no^ cause to be sold, nor alien to no other use, but
apply the same wholly to Coin, according to the tenure of the Indenture made
betwixt the State, and Master of the Mint.

4th. Hen. 7th. cap. 13th. Item, Where in a Parliament begun and holden at
Westminster the 16th. of January, the 17th. of Edw. 4th. No person to carry
Gold or Silver either in Bullion or Coin, nor Jewels of Gold, but such persons
as be dispensed with by the Statute of Hen. 4th. upon pain of Felony, to be
heard and determined as other Felony is; the which Statute to endure from the
feast of Easter the 18. of Edw. 4. unto the end of seven years next ensuing:
Since the which 7 years expired, the Gold and Silver Coin of this Realm has
and daily is conveyed into Flanders, Normandy, Britany, Ireland, and other
parts beyond the Seas, as well by Merchants-strangers as by Denisons, to the
great impoverishing of the Realm, and greater is like to be, without remedy
thereof be hastily provided. The King our Sovereign Lord, the premises
considered, by the advice of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Prayers of the Commons in the said Parliament assembled, and by the Authority
of the same, have ordained and enacted and established, that the said Statute
made in the 16 year of Edw. 4. be and stand a Statute good and effectual, with
all the premises in the same observed and kept, and put in due execution, from
the feast of the Purification of our Lady, which shall be in the year of our
Lord 1489. to endure to the end of 20 years next ensuing.

1. Hen. 8. cap. 13. An Act made, that whosoever shall carry any Gold or Silver
or Jewels out of the Realm, shall forfeit double the value, the one half to him
that shall seize it, or therefore sue by action of debt at the Common Law. This
Act to endure to the next Parliament.

5. And 6. Edw. 6. cap. 19. An act touching the exchange of Gold and Silver,
that whosoever gives more for Gold and Silver than it is or shall be declared
by the Kings Proclamation, shall suffer imprisonment by the space of one year,
and make fine at the Kings pleasure, the one moity to his Majesty, the other
moity to be to the party that seizes the same, or will sue for it by Bill,
Plaint, or Information or otherwise.

1. A Proclamation against giving for light Gold more than is current, 21o
July, 17o Jaci.

2. A Proclamation against melting English money, 18o Maii. 9o Jaci.

3. A Proclamation against buying and selling Gold and Silver, at higher prices
than the Mint, 14o Maii. 1o Jaci.

4. A Proclamation against Transporting of Gold, 23o Maii. 10o Jaci.

5. A Proclamation against profit for Gold and Silver, and melting English
money for Plate; Wast in Gold and Silver, 4o Febi. 19o Jaci.

6. A Proclamation against Transporting Gold and Silver, and melting down the
current Coyns of the Natino, 25o Maii. 3o Gari.

From all which Statutes and provisions it may be gathered, that the current
money and Bullion of the Nation, is the Subjects, only to use between man and
man, but not to abuse: for no man by the Law can buy or sell them by way of
Merchandise at higher rates than they are Proclaimed; if he do, he is finable
by the Law: he that washes, clippeth or lesseneth the current Coyns, commits
Treason: He that exports the Treasure of the Nation, either in Bullion or
current Coin, being taken, loses them: he that melts down the current Gold or
Silver of the Nation for Plate or other Manufactures, commits a forfeitute; and
Transporting of Treasure has formerly been made Felony, as by the several
Statutes and Laws to this purpose appears.

By these and diverse other Laws and Statutes, our Predecessors have endeavored
the retention and preservation of the Coin and Treasures within this Nation,
but could hitherto never effect it.

Nor will these mischiefs ever be stopped, till their be Commissions by Act of
Parliament according to former presidents, when the Nation was defrauded of
their Treasure as now it is, strictly to enquire of the offenders, and bring
them to Justice.

For of late, the easy escape of Delinquents for these offenses, has given
the boldness to offenders to go on: and Time, the truest Schoolmaster, has
taught all ages to know, that little penalties could yet never interpose
betwixt the Merchant and his profit.

Whereas this Parliament, by their Ordinance 6. of Sept. 1647. did decrie all
Clipped, Fyled, or diminished Money (by means whereof great quntities were sold
to some Goldsmiths) who have made it a Trade to deal with Receivers of Public
Cashes, Grasiers, and several other Persons (and insted of melting of these
Moneys down) some Goldsmiths have issued these Moneys out again in payment,
whereas at the Tower these Clipped Moneys would make but five shillings the
Ounce-Troy, these men have vented out these Clipped Moneys to diverse
il-affected people at five shillings six pence, and five shillings eight pence,
and six shillings the Ounce, who have dispersed the said Clipped Moneys so
bought from Goldsmiths up and down the Nation again, to the great enriching of
themselves, and defrauding of the good people of this Nation, by buying up this
Clipped Money since the Ordinance 1647. at the least twenty times over, and
venting it for current again (which had been helped, if there had been but six
words put into the Ordinance (which was, to have required all persons
exchanging any Clipped or uncurrant English money with any Goldsmiths or others,
upon forfeiture of double the value, to see it cut in two pieces, or so
defaced, that it should not be passable after.) I humbly present this defect of
that Ordinance, that it may be looked after and amended, and I humbly desire,
that the Act against Transporting Treasure now committed, may be enacted with
such vigor, that the Commonwealth may have the real benefit, and the
offenders brought to exemplarie Justice.

There has been twenty Millions of Money Coined within this twenty five years,
as will appear by the Mint-Books, and almost all of it Transported out of the
Nation, the Gold all gone, the current silver culled out, the weightiest melted
and transported: and that Silver-Moneys which remains, is but little, and all
culled Gold is made as precious in this Commonwealth as Diamonds. What
inconveniences will arise by the indirect dealing of private men in this
particular to the Commonwealth, I shall humbly leave it to you to consider.

In the year 1643. It was humbly offered to this Parliament, to have the
offenders discovered, and to bring them to Justice, and this mischief stopped;
but by the great Interest of the offenders, that had then power in this
Nation, the Proposition was slighted, and these mischiefs ever since daily
practiced, to the unspeakable damage of this Commonwealth: for it is far
easier to keep the Treasure in the Nation by making strict Laws against
Transportation, than when it is gone to bring it back, as too late experience
will make this Commonwealth feel: but you have the power to call these
offenders to a strict account, if you pass the Act fully to enable all people
to make their discoveries, how, and i^ what manner other Nations do punis^
these offenders: you have already presented out of their Placcaets, This evil
is grown to such a height, that both our own Laws put in the strictest
execution, and the Customs and Laws of other Countries added to them for this
particular, with the greatest diligence of expert men, to make the search for
what is past, and to prevent these mischiefs for the time to come, will be
little enough: and to make this discovery is a service of more Importance to
the Commonwealth, than at first sight can be apprehended.

This is a certain rule, no great action in any Commonwealth or State can be
done but by Money, which all ages have held to be the Sinews of War, and
Garland of Peace; and what occasions we have to use it both for commerce and
safety, is humbly left to you to consider; and in all well regulated States it
has ever been accounted a great service to discover the offenders and abuses
practiced upon the Treasure of their Nation: and to prevent the growth of these
mischiefs is the work of every faithful lover of his Country; And he or they
that shall be against the discovery of these offenses and offenders, may
amongst judicious men be justly suspected to be Parties themselves.

And though some Merchants and other Interested Persons (may for their own
Interest, either for their profit (or fear of Punishment for what they have
done) speak themselves, or get others to oppose the Act against Transporting
Treasure to pass the House, or procure it to be so altered, as it shall not be
effectual to give a full cure to the Commonwealth of the great inconveniences
it is now under, by several abuses practiced upon Coin and Bullion.

To give a cure to the Commonwealth of these great inconveniences, and also to
take away the great obstructions of your Mint, which will never be done till
this Act pass; and if it were more stricter, it would be more beneficial to the
Commonwealth, especially in these times, when you have so many occasions of
Money, by bringing in presently very great sums of Money to the State by the
punishment of the offenders.

You have here, with all humility, set down to you, the ways and means whereby
your neighbour-Countreys use to prevent these mischiefs, and to punish the
offenders for what is past, with several old Statutes of this Nation: out of
which if you extract the quintessence, and make a sharp and vigorous Law, and
require all your Officers and others to put it in full execution, you may in a
short time cure this Commonwealth of these dangerous diseases, which if you
let it go on, will prove a Gangrene.

I humbly beseech you to take notice, there has been within seven years Coined
in ten days, more money in the Tower of London, than has been Coined near upon
this three last years: now if you suffer Treasure to go out of the Nation every
day for want of a Law, to give all people power to discover and examine the
offenders, in a short time you will not have any money left in the
Commonwealth; (for experience in all ages show, that little and slight
penalties can never stop some Merchants from their profit) so they get to their
private, they care not what mischiefs the Commonwealth suffers: (for a
Commonwealth without plenty of money, looks like a great House unfurnisht, and
bare Walls is no handsome sight) and you will find there will not be money left
to pay your just Taxes, Customs and Excise, and to maintain Trade and commerce,
if you clear not the obstruction of the Mint, and take some effectual course to
set i^ no work: and this Act is but a preparation and groundwork to cause your
Mint to go: and till ^t pass, you will never see your Mint flourish: for to
allow any man to out-give the Mint for Bullion, is, to shut up the Mint, for
all men will vent their Treasure, where they can have the greatest price, and
not to make a way for the opening of the Mint at this time, especially when you
have such occasions of Money.

I shall humbly leave it to you to consider the inconvenience;

The Goldsmiths when they were before the Honorable Committee, by their
Counselor Mr. Recorder, and Mr. Vinstanly, being demanded by the Commitee,
what they could say why an Act should not pass for discovery of such as had
Transported the Coin and Bullion of the Nation? did by their Council, and by
Sir John Wollaston, Alderman Viner, and the rest, declare their willingness to
have the offenders brought to punishment: The like they did for all such as
Culled, or melted down the Current coin of this Nation for their own private
profit, or such as bought up the light Clipped English Money, decryed by an
Ordinance of Parliament the 6. of Sept. 1647. and did not deface it, but
contrary to this Ordinance, did vent it again into several parts of the Nation,
and pay it away to the deceit of all the people of the Nation. Upon this answer
to the Committee, it puts me in mind of a custom, which is usual in all men's
houses, If Glasses be broke, or any other mischief done, Nobody did it: But
upon a Commission of inquiry, many times it is found to be Somebody. But to
the question that was asked, the Goldsmiths by the Honorable Committee,
concerning buying Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint, they pleaded,
The trade was an ancient Trade, that if they were restrained to a Price, they,
and their Families could not subsist, that they could not buy Silver, but some
time the market was ot 5s. 1d. 5s. 2d. and 5s. 3d. and Sir John Wollaston said,
That he, and diverse others, had given 5s. 4d. nay, 5s. 5d, for Sterling-Silver
for their trade, and for confirmation of the truth of this, he did appeal to
his Brethren, Alderman Viner, and Alderman Nowel, and the rest of the
Goldsmiths at the Committee, and none of them did deny it Now I shall humbly
offer to your consideration; First Sterling-Silver will make but 5s. in the
Mint, and it is delivered out of the Mint, after it is Coined, at 5s. 2d. the
Ounce. If the Goldsmiths give 5s. 5d. for this Sterling-Silver, how can any be
brought into the Mint? nay, how is all the heavy Money Culled and melted down,
and none left to pass but Light and Clipped? And this is the true ground why
many Goldsmiths are Cashers to Merchants, and keep servants to receive men's
Moneys, without any reward, only that they might cull, and weigh out the heavy
silver, and Melt it or Transport it beyond the Seas, for their own private
gain, to the high deceit of the Nation.

There is nothing in this Act does restrain the due and orderly Trade of a
Goldsmiths, when it is well weighed and considered. But that which is their
usual Trade, now discovered to be so highly destructive to the Nation, ought to
be restrained. The Bakers may as well Petition against all pillories, or
against my Lord Major, for weighing their Bread, as the Goldsmiths justly
except against the restraining them, for giving for Gold and Silver, above the
price of the Mint.

They see it, that it is the Law o^ the Land, in the 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 13* It
is the daily practice of France, Holland, Flanders, as appears here by their
Laws. Clothing is the Staple of the Land, and ought most to be cherished; yet
the Law propounds for the Regulating of the weight, the length, and breadth.
Brick-makers, Woodmongers, Meal-men, and diverse other Trades, are restrained
and regulated, and yet all these Trades receive protection and countenance in
their orderly working of their Manufactures, from the Commonwealth.

There are people which believe, That if there had been a real intention to
give a stop to the Transporting of Money, it had been done before; though for
my part, I am not of that opinion: There was (say they) notice of it nine years
ago when the Presbytery had the power: And seven years ago, the grievances of
the Transporting of Gold and Silver, with several other abuses, was by me at
large presented to the Parliament, and the same mischiefs foretold, which is
now come to pass; that without it were looked after, and a strict Law made
against it, to discover the Offenders, there would not be any Gold or Silver
left in the Nation. And this has prooved too true, for many millions of Gold
and Silver have since been Transported, to the unspeakable damage of the
Commonwealth.

And upon seizure of several great quantities of Gold and Silver, by Mr.
Watkins, chief Searcher of the Port of London, which was shipped to be
transported; the Order of the Parliament, the 1. of September. 1647. was made to
the Committee of the Navy, to see to prevent it.

After all these Certificates made by the Officers of the Mint and Customs, and
the Committee of the Navy, for the speedy putting so good a work in execution,
all which, I have hereafter set down.

The Council of State was pleased to make a Committee of themselves; and after
many great and serious consultations, drew up the draft of an Act of
Parliament, with their desire to the Parliament to have it pass with all
expedition, for the Service of the Commonwealth.

There are others, more unhappy, which say, Now the Steed is stolen, shut the
stable door: Now there is no more Gold left to Transport, to what purpose does
the Parliament make an Act against Transporting Gold? this should have been
done before, for how can we maintain Commerce, pay Taxes, when our English Gold
is forty times more plentiful beyond the Seas, than it is in England, and
almost all the Silver Coin of the Nation Transported, and scarce any left, but
Clipped, and light money.

And some people are so Impudent to believe, that there are some Members of
Parliament guilty of transporting money, or else this Act should not have stuck
so long upon their hands.

Others there are, that have Transported money, and committed many abuses upon
the Coyns of the Nation, that hope they shall have their pardons for what is
past, though they have Transported almost all the Gold and Silver of the
Nation, that now if they would, they can offend no more; and they have done the
Commonwealth that damage, that a Million of Money cannot give them
satisfaction. These I humbly conceive, ought to be made restore their unjust
gain, which will deter any others hereafter for doing the like.

And there are that say, Look how almost all men have sped that have certified
against Transporting money, or looked to stop the same. Has not Sir Robert
Harlow, and M. Cogan been put out of their places in the Mint? Has not M.
Walkins, M. Tomes, Sir Thomas Daws, and M. Holloway been put out of their
places in the Custom-house? Were not you Thomas Violet Imprisoned in the Tower
four years, because you should not tell the truth, and let the Commonwealth
know for all that time, most of their Money and Treasure was sending out of the
Nation.

I shall add something more to this. I have observed what the State has gotten
by putting out these men; and I found, First, That upon the putting forth of
the old Officers of the Mint, in M. Swallows place, who was the Clark of the
Irons, and Surveyer of the Melting-house for the Mint; a place of great skill
and trust, there is now a Clark put in, to execute that place, that can neither
write nor read; and other Officers put into the places of the old ones in the
Mint, that were utterly ignorant of the Mysteries of managing that Office: And
one of the greatest Obstructions of the Mint, comes through the ignorance of
the Officers, and their want of correspondence and acquaintance with such as
usualy have brought money from beyond the Seas.

The old Officers of the Mint, were masters in this Mystery, which is not so
soon learned as men think. And for some of those that have been turned out of
their places out of the Custom-house, if the Act were passed for the Committee
of Trade, there would quickly be presented the practices of some of the
Officers of the Customs, and Petitions for a redress of many abusess practiced
by some of them, and a Review Petitioned for, to know upon what grounds many of
the old Officers were turned out of their places, being never charged with any
offense, but only forced out to make way for others to come into their places;
some of the old Officers of the Customs being turned out of their places, only
because of their activity in stopping the Gold and Silver of the Nation for
being Transported; and this is M. Edward Watkins his case, and others put into
his Office, that seizes Gold and Silver before it is forseited, and when the
Merchant recovers it again by Law, the Searcher that made the seizure takes the
Kinsg-Bench, and so the Merchant may go seek his Money, to the great damage of
the Merchant.

But according to former Presidents, all Officers of the Customs, were to put
in security for the just performance of their trust to the State, and no
Officer was to receive the Customs, and Moneys of the Commonwealth in any Port
of this Nation; nor to make any seizure before he had put in security to the
Lord Treasurer, to make a true Account of what moneys and goods comes to their
hands, which I (having more tha^ probable reasons) do believe the Collectours,
and other Officers of the Ports, have not done, to the great damage of the
Commonwealth, and prejudice of the Merchants. If seizures be unjustly made,
and the Merchants recover their goods or moneys by a Verdict at Law, and after
all their charge and hazard; not to have their goods and moneys again. This
discovery I have put in for the service of the Commonwealth, it being a cause
judged in the Checquer this last Term, that for the future such abuses of the
new Officers of the Customs might be prevented.

I have to some men replied this Act; it has been delayed by the Parliament,
only by the multitude of other business, though I must confess there are very
few businesses of the Commonwealth can take place before this, but that all
people should see when the Parliaments business was a little over, how zealous
in deeds (and not in words) they would be, for to punish these great
Offenders, and to make them pay back the unjust gain, which moneys should be
employed for the public, and so save the Nation Taxes: that I was confident
there was not any Member in the Parliament was guilty of Transporting money, or
if there were, they durst not be seen to justify so wicked an Act, but would
be glad to be quiet in a whole skin; and truly If I did know any of them, I
would not meddle with them, without the Act did positively enjoin me to do it.

It has been objected to me, by some Goldsmiths and others; That I my self
have been a tra^sporter of money, and melter down of heavy Coin of the Nation,
and a furnisher of Gold and Silver to transport out of this Nation, and a buyer
of Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint. I deny it not, and my Answer to
them is, An old Deer-stealer is the best keeper of a Park. And though I had the
late Kings pardon, I had it not but it cost me dear; I paid at one time to his
Privy Purse, two thousand twenty shillings pieces in Gold, and I am out at this
day by his command, in making the discovery of such as Transported Gold,
ninteen hundred and threescore pounds, both which sums, I have been out of
Purse fifteen years: I would not have the greatest Offendour (that is a
Goldsmiths) by my consent, pay so great a sum. And this is my Answer to them,
to that objection.

I would have them by my example leave off so destructive a Trade to the
Commonwealth, as furnishing the Transporters with Gold and Silver, Culling and
melting down the current Coin. If I had not been convinced in my conscience,
that it was bad, I would have followed that Trade still, I had as good an
Estate, as most of the Goldsmiths to do it. I had as good Credit, and I left
my Trade as fairly, for I challenge all or any man in London, that can say I
did not pay all men ready money to every penny and farthing I ought, when I
gave over my Trade, and the best Alderman of London can do no more; It is
incident to all men to Err, happy is he that repents, but to persist against
the light of a man's Conscience, is done by the strong Instigation of the Devil.

I do humbly present further, that their has great mischiefs happened to this
Nation and their Army in Ireland since this Parliament, by the Indirect dealing
of some Merchants and Goldsmiths in London, who contracted with some of the
adventurers for Ireland, to sell them Rials of Eight and foreign Coyns, giving
them some small time, but the poor Soldiers that received these moneys in
Ireland, lost above twenty pound in the hundred by the moneys so paid them; for
first the Goldsmiths culled out all the weightiest, and delivered none but
Light and Clipped, and than the coursness of the Silver which was Bead money,
and adulterated in the West Indies in the Mints, sometimes sixpence, sometimes
more upon every piece of Eight, as is well known to some Goldsmiths and
Merchants, so that by the baseness of the Allay and want of Weight, their has
been at the least twenty pound in the hundred loss to the Soldiers: If he
would make any return of it to his wife or children in England, as many of them
found by sad experience.

The Goldsmiths are the general Cashiers for some of the Principal Merchants
in the City, and this rule the Goldsmiths observe when they receive moneys,
to take none that is Bad or Clipped (but let any man send to them to receive
moneys, they shall have great quantities of Clipped money mixed in their moneys
they receive, and some of it constantly will escape the tellers eyes) which
Clipped moneys the Goldsmiths buy of several people for Bullion, but never
Coin it, the rest that they cannot put off here in London, they have their
Agents vent it to Grasiers and other people in the Country all over the
Nation, by which means in many Towns and Cities of this Nation, they are so
pestered with Clipped money, that their is little else stirring in payment, to
the un-unspeakable damage of the receiver, who cannot pay it in London, but
sell it to the Goldsmiths, sometimes at twenty five and thirty in the hundred
abated: which is by the Goldsmiths returned down into the Country next week
after; So that this abuse is like a Horse in a Mill it turns round and is a
cheat put upon all people of the Nation, and without a strict Act of Parliament
against it, will not be prevented.

All these abuses aforesaid, are so high and Transcendent (that the offenders
ought to be used as men usually use Wolves and Foxes) for if private Murder be
so penal) much more is public Murder (now money is the Life, Blood, and Soul
of the Commonwealth, without it no great action can be undertaken) for the
service of the Nation) and those that Transport it or adulterate it in Weight,
may well be esteemed as the greatest enemies to the Commonwealth, therefore
that you would be pleased to give all encouragement to all people, both in the
Seaports of this Nation, and in the City of London, for the discovery of the
Transporting of Gold and Silver, and such as cull out the heavy Silver Coin of
the Nation, and such as have bought Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint
for to Transport: for as the affairs now of this Nation stand, you cannot have
a greater disservice done to the Commonwealth, and you will find the
Commissioners and Officers of the Customs, certify to the Commissioners of the
Navy in Sept. 1647. their desires in their fourth Article, that a greater
allowance should be given to such as discover the Transporters of Gold or
Silver, than by the Statutes in that Case is provided, and the Statute in 1.
Henry 8. cap. 13. gives double the value, the one half to him that shall seize
it, or therefore Sue by action of Debt at the Common Law, and by this draught
of the Act, their is but one Moyetie of what shall be proved to have been
Transported given to the Prosecutour.

What foreign Nations do, you have here the Presidents of France, Holland,
Flanders, and what former ages here in this Nation have done, you have in 14.
Rich. 2. cap. 12. by Act of Parliament Commissions made through the Realm, for
to enquire from the beginning of his Reign, which was for fourteen years, of
such as had conveyed the money of England out of the Nation, to the damage of
the Realm: and without you make the like Commissions, the Commonwealth will be
brought to extreme poverty.

Here are annexed two Certificates of the Officers of the Mint, and
Commissioners and Officers for the Customs, grounded upon an Order of
Parliament, and an Order of the Commissioners of the Navy, viz.

Die Mercurii, 1. Sept. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That it be referred to the
Committee of the Navy to consider of, and take some effectual course to
prevent the Transportation of Bullion out of the Kingdom: and speedily to
report what they have done herein to the House.

H. ELSYNG, Cler. Parl.

Committee of the Navy 2. September, 1647.
THe Commissioners and Officers of the Customs with Master Watkins the head
Searcher, are desired to consider of some course to be taken to prevent the
Transportation of Bullion out of the Nation, according to an Order of the House
of Commons hereunto annexed; and to certify the same to the Committee.

Giles Green.

THe Commissioners and Officers for the Customs, having together with the head
Searcher, in the Port of London, in pursuance of the directions of this
Honorable Committee above mentioned, perused sundry Statutes yet in force,
relating, as well to the restraint of the Exportation of Bullion, as the
Regulation of Merchants-Strangers in their way of Trade, do humbly conceive.

1 That if the Statute of 2. Hen. 6. cap. 6. enjoining Merchants-Strangers, to
give security in Chancery, not to Transport the Money or Plate of the Realm.
And the Statute of 3. Hen. 7. cap. 8. enjoining them to employ the money they
receive, in the Merchandise of this Nation.

2 And that to the Statute of 5. Rich. 2. cap. 2. and 2. Hen. 4. cap. 5. The
Parliament would be pleased, First to declare who shall be reputed Aliens: for
that since the sitting of this Parliament, the Children of Aliens born in this
Kingdom, are reputed Freeborn Subjects, and do enjoy their Privileges
accordingly: which in former times was not allowed till the third descent.
Secondly, To declare by Ordinance that the Estates of him or them that shall
Export money or Plate, shall be immediately Sequestered.

3 To impose a severe Penalty upon the Master of such Ship or Vessel, upon
which any money or Plate shall be found above his ordinary charges, he being
privy thereunto.

4 To allow to such as shall discover or find out, any Bullion or Plate,
endeavored to be Transported, a greater share and proportion, than by the
Statutes in that case is yet provided.

5 And to settle some way of punishment for such as shall resist, or abuse
Officers sufficiently Authorized in their endeavors this way on the States
behalf.

The said Commissioners and Officers, do humbly conceive, That it would be a
good means to deter such, who by all secret means do daily endeavor the
Exportation of the Coin and Bullion of this Kingdom; and much prevent the
Exportation thereof. All which, nevertheless they humbly submit to the Wisdom
of this Honorable Committee.

Tho. Dawes Coll. John Holloway Comptr. R. Carmarden Super. Vis. Edw. Watkins
Searcher. W. Toomes Super. Vis. Genesis Walter Boothby. Rich. Bateman. Sam. Avery.
Christoph. Pack. Charles Lloyd.


The Officers of the Mint in the ^ower of London, whose names are here under
written, in pursuance of the directions of the Honorable Committee of the
Navy, in relation to their Order dated the 3. of December present, do humbly
conceive, and certify as follows.
THat to prevent great abuses practiced upon the Coin and Bullion of the
Nation, which is Transported out of the Nation; as also to prevent the Culling
and Melting down the current money of the Nation: and for the discovering of
such a^ have offended to be brought to justice, to de^er others from a^ting the
live abu^es for the futur^, do humbly c^^ceive.

That according to the President ^^ the 14. Rich. 2. cap. 12. a Commission be
granted to make inquiry through the Realm, of such as had conveyed the moneys
of England out of the Nation, and to make inquiry after all such as Melt, and
Cull out the heavy current money, contrary to the Statute of the 4. Hen. 4.
cap. 10. none to Melt the current Silver Coyns of the Nation, upon pain of
forfeiture four times the value.

That 2. Hen. 6. cap 12. It is ordained, that neither the Master-Worker of the
Mint, nor the Changer for the time being, neither sell or cause to be sold, nor
Alien to no other use; but apply the same wholly to Coin, according to the
tenure of the Indenture of the Mint, made between the Kings Majesty and the
Master of the Mint: to declare by Ordinance, That what Goldsmiths, or Changer
shall buy Gold or Silver, and convert it to any use to Transport, shall forfeit
the value.

To declare by Ordinance, that according to the 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 19. an
Act touching the Exchange of Gold and Silver. That whosoever gives more for
Gold and Silver than it is, or shall be declared, shall suffer Imprisonment by
the space of a year, and make Fine at the pleasure of the State. The Mint
cannot be employed, nor the Transporting of Treasure stopped, if some course be
not speedily taken to discover these great abuses. And already, almost all the
Gold is Transported out of the Nation: and the Silver follows it apace, as is
prudently insisted upon in the late Petition of the Citizens of London, to both
Houses of Parliament.

We humbly conceive, that the making of this discovery throughout the Nation,
of such as have, or shall Transport Gold and Silver into parts beyond the Seas,
and of such as have, or shall Melt down the current Gold and Silver Coyns of
the Nation, o^ have, or shall buy Gold and Silver a^ above the p^ice o^ the
Mint: the practice of which al uses, if not timely prevented, ^^ likely to
bring ^peedie destr^ctio^ to the Trade of this Ki^gdom* which is Pre^idented
Anno 4. (...). 2. (...) 2. when the Nation found the same mischief as we now
suffer under, by Transporting of Treasure. And An^o 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 19.
by giving for Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint. As it will be a
service of great importance to the Public affairs, and bring great advantage
to the Trade of this Nation; so it will draw with it a very great charge. Which
if Master Watkins will undertake, he will deserve well to be encouraged.
Nevertheless, we humbly submit the premises, to the Wisdoms of this Honorable
Committee.

John St John Warden. Robert Harley Master. Henry Cogan Comptr.

December 20. 1647.
THese Gentlemen by reason of their places in the custom-house, and Mint within
the Tower of London, and their long experience in Merchandise and Trade of this
Nation; I humbly conceive their Certificates will leave a great Impression upon
the Parliament, and on the Honorable Committee that are appointed to report
this Act, that what these Gentlemen have certified, has been done upon a great
deal of consideration, and upon great experience, with all their best skill and
judgment for the service of this Nation in this most weighty Business, it
tending so highly to the safety and welfare of the public (and the delay of
passing this Act in its full force and vigor) will one day be found to be
highly destructive to this Nation and that the design has been set a foot, and
prosecuted to hinder the Act for passing, is done by some people that have made
themselves fortunes by these wicked practices, and though they dare not speak
against the Act, yet they labor to stop it and delay it, or to procure the
altering of it that it may be uneffectual, to give a stop^^^ these mischiess
which I hope they shall never be able to effect; I would have these men to know
Justice is slow, but it is sure, and I am assured they will be discovered and
brought to Justice when they least think of it, forbearance will be no payment,
and this Act will bring their dark actions to light when it is passed the
House: Besides these former Certificates, the Act now committed was drawn up by
a Committee of the Council of State, and I was required to attend the Right
Honorable St James Harrington in January last, being on of the Committee for
taking away the obstructions of the Mint, which I did accordingly, and
thereupon by Order of the Honorable Committee, for removing of the
obstructions of the Mint, I was desired to send into Holland for several Coyns
of foreign Gold and Silver, and several Placcaets and Weights, and some of the
said Gold and Silver I have delivered to Doctor Gurden to make Assayes of, for
the service of the State, the remainder I have ready to deliver to any, that
will see me paid upon the delivery, I having demanded money of Doctor Gurden
diverse times, who ^^^ls me, he will procure money, but has not as yet paid me
for what I delivered him: and if I should not be paid for the Gold and Silver I
writ for from Holland, the same price as by my friend I paid for it in the Bank
in Holland, their would be a great loss redound to me to Coin it here (and lose
the Exchange; The Exchange from Holland, when I writ for these Species, running
at about thirty two shillings Flemish.

I do humbly desire the Honorable Committee for obstructions of the Mint, to
call to the old Clarks of the Mint for an acompt of what they have done about
the Assayes made of foreign Coyns, and I humbly desire you to consider, how
much it were for the service of the Nation, both in point of Honor, Profit,
and safety to set your Mint on work.

Which upon the peril of my life, if you pass the Act as it is recommended from
the Council of State, I will find out ways to set your Mint presently agoing,
or lose both my Estate and Life: I would not make this profer but that I am
sure of it, it is well known to all the Officers of the Mint, I know as much of
Mint business as any of them here do, and for the Goldsmiths I am sure they
think I know to much: and the Merchants have found it, that I know what many
did and do here, and what their Factours did and do beyond Seas, and to be
Master of this secret, cost me many a hundred pound, besides many years time
and pains, and by my intelligence in the Seaports of this Nation, I have
caused the Transporters of money to be Fined at four and twenty thousand one
hundred pound, and now as I have laid this business, they shall be discovered
all over this Nation, if I should offer this, and could do the like service in
any other State, I humbly conceive I need not petition twice, but it would be
accepted at the first time, and the delay of passing this Act moves me not at
all for my own particular, but for the Commonwealth. I shall never forget Sir
John Coke his rule to me, and he was Secretary of State to the late KING,
That he never knew a patient, and a vigilant man lose his business, if it were
just, for at one time or another, that man will find an opportunity to do it;
and truly, by observing this rule, I have passed through great business, and
some, of much difficulty; for all which I humbly thank God, and attribute it to
his mercy.

There is another cause of great wast of the Treasure of the Nation, which is
the great quantity of Flanders Laces, and French Laces, both in the Thread, and
in Silk, which are imported into this Nation, to the value of many scores of
thousand pounds a year, which Lace is stole in without paying any Custom, being
subtly packed in Commodities of great Bulk.

But what the State loses by the Custom, is nothing in Comparison, what it
looses in stock: for the Returns of this Lace is for the most part sent over in
Gold and Silver of the current Coyns of this Nation.

Neither is this Mischief all the hurt that comes to the Commo^-wealth, for
this Lace is made by them in France and Flanders, that can afford it far
cheaper than any of our poor can do here; for generally it is made in Religious
houses, in their Nunneries, which Nuns generally bring in to the Religious
houses their Dowries when they are admitted, and as long as they live, they are
well provided for all manner of necessaries to live very handsomely, both for
their diet and apparel, being left to their voluntary choice after their
Religious Exercises is done, to spend their time as they please.

Now many of them being excellent Needle-women, spend their time in making
Cut-works for their Altar-Cloths, Black Laces for Scarffs, and Flanders Laces
(as they are called) though many of them are made in France.

These the Nuns make, and sell great quantities of them into England, which
money, is all Returned into the use of the Monasteries, these Nuns thinking
they merit most, that can get their Monasteries most money by their labor.

And truly when I have been in company of some fine Dames in London, that
profess much; I have told them of their Laces and Gorgets, that if they did
know whom they made rich by such vanities, they would lay by the fashion, and
give that money they spent in Flanders Laces to the poor, and not be
instruments of making Nuns and Monasteries rich beyond Seas; and I have desired
them to think how contrary their work was to their Husbands: their Husbands are
destroying Bishops Houses and Lands, and Deans and Chapters houses, and Lands
here in England, being Relics of Popery, and their Wives by buying up of the
Nuns Laces in England, with the Returns of that Money, which they produce here,
are a building Nunneries, and Religious Houses in France and Flanders.

I humbly desire all the English Gentry, that are wearers of Lace, both men and
Women to consider seriously what I say: it is of concernment. I take God to
witness, I have heard Frenchmen, and Dutchmen say to me, above twelve years
ago, that have dealt in Cut-work Laces, and in Flanders Laces, both black and
white here in London, that they did believe there was above five hundred
thousand pounds in a year Transported in Gold and Silver into France and
Flanders, only in Return of Foreign Cut-works, and Flanders Laces, both Black
and white; and I believe in my conscience they spoke truth; and to this day
there is extreme excesses in these vanities, which as your affairs of the
Commonwealth stand, highly concern you to look to prevent it, for I humbly
desire you to consider, the Nation flings away so much stock in money; for
Flanders Lace is of no use but to keep up pride and vanities; Gold and Silver
Lace makes something upon the Return, one hundred pounds worth may make about
forty pounds when you have done wearing of it: But for thread and Silk Laces,
that which cost one hundred thousand pound, when they are worn out, will not
make the Commonwealth one penny.

I do humbly desire you to consider of a strict Law against importing any
foreign Laces, or selling them in London; the forfeiture of the Laces is
nothing, for that it will not be discovered, once in one thousand times. But I
humbly conceive, it must be made Felony for any to Import Flanders, French, or
foreign Laces or Cut-works, and loss of any Shopkeepers Estate that shall
knowingly sell any foreign Laces, either Flanders, or any other.

By which means you will prevent the Transporting many hundred thousand pounds
of Treasure in a year, and you will stop the Trade of making Nunneries Rich by
our money: And if the Gentry will wear Laces, let them on Gods name put our own
poor on work, and not foreigners; and by this means, you will give relief to
many poor Gentelwomen, which through the calamities of the War are almost
starved, and they are ashamed to beg, and they would be glad to make Lace, if
any would employ them.

There is also a great and excessive waste of the Gold of this Nation, in the
vanity of guilding of Charoches, which is come to that extravagancie, that if a
Bainian of the East Indies, or a Chinoes of China, or any other strange Nation
should come to Hide-Park in an afternoon, he would report in his own Country
such stories, as your Jesuits reports of Perue, and Mexico, upon the first
discovery of the West Indies; That there were towns that all the houses were
covered over with Gold and Silver: So would an Indian report the Gentry's
Wealth of this Nation; That they were drawn through the streets of this City
of London in Charoches covered over with beaten Gold.

But I shall tell you what a French-Merchant said to me this Summer in
Hide-Park, as we were talking of the great quantities of English Gold, which
has been Transported into France and Flanders, and other foreign parts; Says
the French-Merchant to me, I have heard you often complain of all the English
Gold, being transported beyond the Seas, and now we are again speaking of it, I
will demonstrate to you presently, that all is not gone, for you see how many
gilded Charoches here are, then laughing, he told me, you see Sir, how you are
mistaken, all your Gold is not gone, but if you had said, almost all the
English Gold is transported beyond the Seas, that I would have granted you, for
you have the shell of the Gold to guild your Charoches, and to make you fine
things, but we in France have the kernel of your Gold, and thus much I grant
you. But we in France, and Holland, and Flanders have not all, we are more
conscionable, good Monseur Violet. I was forced to bite my lip, for I could not
deny but that he spoke truth.

There is another great wast of Gold and Silver in this Commonwealth, and that
is, the making of Gold and Silver Thread and Lace within this Nation: there are
some things may be said for it, and some things against it; I shall impartially
put down some things what I know in this business, for I had the principal care
of regulating that Manufacture of Gold and Silver Wire and Thread, for five
years together in the late Kings time, and paid him about four thousand pounds
yearly for it, and now it is under the regulation of the Commissioners of
Excise, and I am confident does not make the tenth penny to the State, as I
paid to the late King; besides I was enjoined to look to the just standard of
the Silver, and to the substantial making of the Manufacture, which now is
totally neglected, and the Commonwealth cheated in the courseness of much of
the Silver, and in the slight making of it.

If the Manufacture of the Gold and Silver Thread, was brought in from beyond
the Seas, then would the State have the Custom, there being a great Impost and
Custom laid on it, which would be a considerablederable Revenue to the
Commonwealth. The Commonwealth in the stock of their Treasure would be
augmented, for all Gold and Silver Thread makes a Return to the melting pot,
and so increases the stock of money in the Nation; besides, that is an
advantageous Trade, which for the Returns of our Commodities and Manufactures
of England brings us Returns in Silver.

There is replied to this, the setting so many thousands of poor people on
work, which will starve if the Manufactures of Gold and Silver Thread, were
brought in from beyond the Seas, or if the State should prohibit the wearing of
Gold and Silver Thread and Lace. Indeed this is of great consideration, and
ought to be considered on. But then if they will have leave to make it here, it
should be done with such restraints and limitations, as the Treasure of the
Nation should not be wasted nor impared, the Current money of the Nation should
not be culled out to make Gold and Silver Thread, as many hundreds of thousand
pounds have bin since the making of this manufacture, which was but begun to be
a Trade in London within less than forty years; also there should be a
restriction of the number of the workers, not to increase as they have done,
and the Wyer-drawers should be a distinct Corporation, and Officers appointed
to look after their due and Orderly working, and an account kept for the State,
of what Silver and Gold is spent every year in the Manufacture, and the
Company of Gold Wyre-drawers enjoined to bring in the value in Bullion from
beyond the Seas, as they wast in this Manufacture; for without doing of this,
the Trade is wholly destructive to the Commonwealth, and there can be no just
plea, for to allow their Trade to continue.

I humbly conceive the Commonwealth is not in a condition to suffer fifty
thousand pounds a year in Silver, to be brushed and blown away out of Gold and
Silver Lace: If those that work the Manufacture will not See to Import Silver
from beyond the Seas, and be bound not to work Silver with a Core of Copper,
and sell it for good Silver, for which cheat I have caused some of them to
stand in the pillory, when I had the mannaging of that manufacture; and also
that the Wyre-drawers be bound, not to make any Spangles, Wyre or Thread, under
sterling, which heretofore has been their daily practice, and I believe is
continued still.

M. Jackson the Assay-master of Goldsmiths Hall, by direction of the Lords of
the Council, made many score of Assays of Gold and Silver Spangles, Lace, Wyre,
and Thread found and taken in Silk-mens shops, which were adulterated, and
under the Standard, and this Manufacture will never be justy made, if there be
not a government settled by a Corporation, and then the Trade might be so
managed by their contracting for Bullion from beyond the Seas, that they may
get a great Manufacture here; but I humbly desire the Trade may be driven with
foreign Silver, imported, and not with the Stock, or Coin of the Nation.

I do humbly declare unto you, that being required to attend the Committee of
the Council of State, about the Act now presented to the Parliament, I did see,
and was privy upon what grave consideration every branch of the Act now
depending before the Honorable Committee, was framed and put down by the
Committee of the Council of State, before ever it was recommended to the
Parliament; and I do humbly desire for the Service of the Commonwealth, if any
alterations be made in the Act, those that drew the draught of the Act, may be
required to attend the Committee to give their reasons for the whole Act, or
any part of it; for upon the effectual passing of this Act, much does depend
for the safety of this Nation, and it is of a higher concernment to the Nation
than I can express; and I humbly conceive, there ought to be no respect of
private interest, where the safety of the Nation is so highly concerned.

I humbly desire the Honorable Committee, that the Certificate of the Officers
of the Mint may be taken into your serious considerations, there being very few
men in the Nation, can speak so much upon their own experience of these abuses
concerning the Treasure of the Nation, as these Gentlemen, the Officers of the
Mint have certified, which ever since their Certificate, has been found in
every part to be true.

The Mint standing still and neglected, the Treasure that has been Imported,
was never brought into the Mint, but Exported out again; by which means for the
private gain of a few men, the Nation is ruined and Impoverished, and a Trade
Inwards, and Outward driven without paying of Custom, and the Stock of
Treasure of the Nation almost all Exported in these times, now there is so much
occasion for money, to the admiration and astonishment of many lovers of the
Commonwealth, that truly understand the secrets and Mysteries of Trade.

And what mischiefs these doings will in the end bring upon this Commonwealth,
is deeply apprehended by many wise men, and can have no stop but by a vigorous
Act to bring the Offenders to Examplary Justice, whose Fines and Compositions,
throughout the Nation, will amount to many scores of thousands of pounds to the
State, for the payment of public debts, if Commissions of enquiries according
to former presidents be granted by act of Paliament throughout the Nation, to
enquire for the last ten years of these abuses.

If in declaring what has passed at the Committee, and of other Transactions,
be not usual, I shall, and do humbly desire to have my pardon, for if my
silence might not have endangered the Commonwealth, this that I have said
should never have come to public view, for I know how to keep Secrets as well
as some other men.

I have read of one that was born dumb, and so continued for many years, seeing
one coming to kill his father, cried out, Go^ save my Father, and so gave
timely warning for his Father to prevent the danger.

A happy speaking of the child for the father.

Truly I count the Obligation to my Country, above the Obligation to my Father.

I have seen this danger many years coming upon the Nation. Though I am but
young, and Ignorant in other business, I am sure there are few, if any in the
Nation, that have had those ways and means to find out, and discover these
mischiefs, as I have. I know and apprehend more, than I will or can express.

The great mischiefs Transporting Gold and Silver, brings on this Nation, I
apprehend.

The condition of your Army, which must be burthensom, if they have not money
to pay for their Quartering, I apprehend the danger and damage.

The necessity of Tradesmen, and Handy-Crafts men will be put to for want of
employment, upon the scarcity of money, making all Trade to decay, I apprehend.

The sad condition of poor people, who will be enforced for want, to part with
their clothes, their bedding, their dishes they eat their meat in, I apprehend

The danger the want and poverty of the poor will bring upon this State, if
there be not ways found out to bring in Money into the Nation, I do very sadly
and seriously apprehend the inconveniences.

And therefore I cry, God save the Commonwealth.

God put it into the hearts of the Parliament, to see to keep that little money
we have yet left; and to find out, and punish those that have cheated, and
robbed the Commonwealth of their Treasure, and to study ways how to bring in
money into the Nation, for if this be not done speedily, in all probability,
greater inconveniences than I dare write, will come on the Commonwealth.

Much more I could say, but if these Reasons before recited, nor the
Certificates of the Officers of the Customs, and the Certificate of the
Officers of the Mint, and several Reasons of some Aldermen of the City of
London, for the stopping of the Transporting of Gold and Silver, and the City
of Londons Petition to the Parliament, presenting the great inconveniences
Transporting Treasure has brought upon this City of London and the Nation; I
humbly say, if all these will not prevail, I have do^e: For if I should write a
Volume as big as S^^^ds Chronicle, I cannot give more clearer satisfaction of
the necessity of passing this Act.

If God has decreed this Nation shall be couzned of all its Treasure, and the
Offenders not questioned, nor diligent inquiry made after it, and such means
as our Ancestors and other Nations (having far less occasion for money than we
have) do daily practice; to prevent these mischiefs, and discover the
Offenders, I shall with all humility submit to Gods Providence, and rest
satisfied.

I have clearly discharged my duty to my Country, in declaring this business
to the Commonwealth, that so they may know the true Reasons of the scarcity of
Gold and Silver in the Nation, and the damage they sustain by the want
thereof, and how the Mint comes to be obstructed, that almost no money has
been Coined for these three last years.

What is here said, is with all humility presented to the Parliament for the
service of the Commonwealth, by a faithful lover of his Country, being
desired to state my Reasons by some in Authority for passing the aforesaid
Act, I humbly obeyed it, and humbly conceive (if it were made stricter than it
is) it were far better for the Commonwealth: For Transporting Treasure
heretofore has been made Felony, when the Commonwealth, I humbly conceive,
had not so much occasion to see to keep their Treasure in the Nation, and their
Mint going, as now they have.

London, July 15. 1650. Signed, Thomas Violet.

FINIS.

