Enter into thy Closet, OR A METHOD AND ORDER FOR PRIVATE DEVOTION.

A Treatise endeavoring a plain discovery of the most Spiritual and Edifying
course of Reading, Meditation, and Prayer; and so, of Self Examination,
Humiliation, Mortification, and such most necessary Christian duties, by which
we sue out the pardon of our sins from Heaven, and maintain an holy Converse
with God.

Together with particular perswasives thereunto, and helps therein.

Zech. 3. 2. Is not this a Brand plucked out of the Fire? London, Printed for
John Martyn, and are to be sold at Will. Faithornes without Temple. Bar. 1666.

AN ADMONITION TO THE READER.
WHat it is the fashion to call an Epistle to the Reader, or, if it be somewhat
longer, a Preface, the Author styled an Admonition, or Advertisement to the
Reader, that by a more unusual title he might the more surely draw him to read
it, before he does the Book.

And the first thing, which he admonishes thee of, Good Reader, is, that thou
neither question nor scruple what judgment he is of, before thou have
considered what he here says: nor that when thou shall have read a little way
into the Book, thou make such conjectures of its Authors opinion, as to
conclude the book fit only to be laid aside by thee, because he, who writ it,
may happily descent from thee in some matters. He very little meddles with any
matters here, in which it is likely that any sober Christian discents from him.
A disrellishing expression, or a chapter, should not be warrant enough to thee
for thy sentencing him this or that, and rejecting what else he says for thine
and common good. Perhaps he may make mention of a Commonprayer-book, or Holy
days, only to draw in them, who will hear of no devotion which rejects these,
but execrate it still as Fanatical, to the reading his Book, and thereby to a
more serious and Christian use of those things, than what all are guilty of.
Perhaps, on the other side, he may be in good earnest, and thinking them right
Christian and useful, commend them to thy practice, and direct thee, so to use
them, as that thou shall by such use of them begin less to quarrel with them.
Either design is honest, and it is no matter whether it is, which he has, nor
who, or what he is. He would only have thee to take him for a man of serious
and sober principles, and one who would have all that profess Christianity to
be such also: (and such thou must either take him to be, or else, being that
thou know him not, and so can not know him to be otherwise, thou art
uncharitable:) And as being such, that, which he endeavors here, is to bring
thee seriously upon thy knees before God, there to examine thine heart and
actions according to that Christian rule, which indispensibly enjoynes thee
Charity, Meekness, Moderation, Peaceableness, and such sweet Virtues; which if
thou do but use thy self to, thou will judge thy self no otherwise a Christian
than as these Christian Graces are in thee, and receive, as a newborn babe,
the sincere milk of the doctrine of godliness, come it to thee in what vessels
soever.

Another thing, which he has to advise thee of, is matter of direction in the
use of this Book: in which case his desire to thee is, that thou will first
read over the Table, which is at the beginning of it, and mark the substance of
what he there promises to treat of; that then, if thou resolve to make use of
this method for thy devotion (and, the Author thinks thou will, if thou have
the patience to consider it, and can obtain leisure of thy self to practice
it) that thou will read the Book once or twice over, and endeavor, by attent
consideration, to understand it; and when thou have once got the Book thus into
thine head, the practice will soon grow easy (he is sure, at least, most sweet
and blessedly delightful.) Be but persuaded to try it one month or two, and see
if thou can find in thy heart to be so injurious to thine own felicity, as to
lay it aside again.

Somewhat too there should be said as to what is likely to be objected against
the contents hereof. It may happily be conceived, there are here some practices
directed to in ordinary Devotions, which are too high for every man's reach (as
is meditating upon Scripture, in such sort as is here taught, endeavoring the
mortification of sin in such rational methods, etc.) some circumstances too, as
to the place of retirement, unnecessary, or above most men's condition, etc. As
to the former of which, the Authors answer is, that patterns of this nature
must not be set too low, for that men are apt rather to aim under than over;
that he thinks there is very little of practice here, by which a plain capacity
may not understand somewhat, which he will conclude to be his duty, though it
may be he reach not all in that case; and further both as to this and to the
latter point supposed to be objected, that the higher matters and more curious
circumstances are commended only to men of abilities, estates and leisure
suitable: Let all go as high as they can, and their devotions will be sure to
be more complete, than if they had aimed lower.

Now, which is all that shall be added, possibly some may think such Books as
these needless at present, after so many extant in this kind already. Hereunto
the Authors Apology might be, that the number of such books is much at present
lessened by those merciless flames, out of which the providence of God saved
this Book (when it was in a manner all printed off save this Preface) that this
preservation of it is some excuse for its appearance, and presage that it may
not be altogether fruitless: But this being waved, that which was his answer in
the Preface, which those forementioned flames consumed, when the Book it self
escaped, is, that he is not much read in our English books, and so knows not
what or how many of this nature are extant; but that of those, which it has
been his lot to see, he knows none, which do more aim at the hitting the genius
and humor of every man's devotion (be he of what judgment he will) than he has
done in this; and that, be the Reader a conformable person, or any of the
contrary persuasions, if he be but serious, and resolved not to reject the
main, which he cannot but like, for a page or two, which though he may not much
brook, yet he can scarce be very angry with; the Author believes such person
will not think his pains to no purpose: However, that, in this hope he cannot
but be confident, that the mere writing and publishing hereof will be a
perpetual engagement to himself of a more strict and circumspect life; and that
therefore, if in none other, yet in this respect, it comes not forth in vain.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
The First Part contains only a preparatory discourse and introduction to the
rest.
Chap. 1. OF the necessity of Privacy and those Christian duties which require
it. Chap. 2. Of the situation and furniture of their closet who have choice.
Chap. 3. Of the most common entrance into our closets.
The Second Part treats of solemn retirement to our Closet, and our daily
duties there.
Chap. 1. That if I am a person of leisure I ought daily twice in the day to
retire into my closet for devotion sake. Chap. 2. Considerations to persuade to
daily devotion and prayer in private. Chap. 3. Of the substance of every days
private devotion: to persons of leisure, Reading, Meditation and Prayer. Chap.
4. Of reading the holy Scripture: the most edifying method and manner of
reading it consulted of. Chap 5. Of Meditation, and the most edifying course in
it. Chap. 6. Of Prayer. First of its substance and parts. Chap. 7. Of the right
manner of Prayer. First of its inward manner. Some considerations to quicken to
sincerity and heartiness in prayer. What graces are to be exercised in each
part of prayer. Chap. 8. Of the best outward manner of prayer in sit postures
and fit words. Of praying by gift, and the inconveniences alledgable in this
case against it. Of praying by form, and the inconveniences in this case
alledgable against it. An accommodation and reconcilement of both. Chap. 9. A
form of prayer made according to the former Accommodation, which may be used in
our morning privacy. Chap. 10 A form of prayer made as the other, which may be
used in our evening privacy. Chap. 11. Some further directions touching the use
of these prayers.
The third Part treats of a more solemn retirement into the Closet upon
Holidays and Sundays, and duties then and there.
Chap. 1. That our devotion should be greater upon Holy Days than on ordinary
days. The end of Festivals, and their vindication from abuses and cavils. Chap.
2. What there should be of new in our private devotions upon Holidays. Chap.
3. An Exemplification or Practice of the former rules in Christmas day, with a
fit prayer to be added to my ordinary prayers thereupon. Chap. 4. An
exemplification of the same rules in St. Stephens-day, with a prayer which may
be used on any Saints day. Chap. 5. Of what remains to complete our private
Festival devotions, viz. Alms giving. Chap 6. That the Lords day ought to be
kept holy, and what the keeping it holy means. Chap. 7. Of preparation for the
Lords day. A preparatory prayer thereto. Chap. 8. Of the true manner of
sanctifying the Lords day. 1. Before going to Church. 2. Of secret devotion in
the closet before going to Church 3. Of devotion in the family before going to
Church. A digression touching what our devotion in the family is always to
consist of. 4. Of resorting to the Church. 5. Of due behavior in the Church.
6. Of due behavior between morning and evening service. 7. Of resorting to
evening service. 8. Of the duties after retun from evening service.

The fourth Part treats of most solemn retirement into the Closet for
humiliation of our selves, and duties there.
Chap. 1. An account of what is to be treated of particularly in this part. Ch
2. Of the nature and ends of fasting. Chap. 3. That fasting is a Christian
duty. Chapter 4. How often a Christian is to fast. Chap. 5 Of preparatory acts for
private fasting days. Chap. 6. The order of true humiliation, or penitentiary
devotions. 1. The entrance unto this work how it should be. 2. Of reading so as
to fit my self for self-examination. 3. Of self examination and the view of our
life. 4. Of the endeavor of godly sorrow. How to work our selves to it. 5. Of
Repentance, which is the effect of godly sorrow, its true nature and way of
practice. 6. An exemplification of the former rules in two sins. 7. A further
consideration of Repentance in regard to some particular sins. 8. Of that faith
which is required in order to the pardon of sin. 9. Of prayer upon such fasting
days. A prayer which may be used on such days, made according to the rules of
the former. 10. Of my offerings to God for the use of the poor requisite on my
fasts, and of my carriage after my devotions finished.
Chap. 7. Of great and more solemn, Fasts, and the work thereof. Chap. 8. The
Conclusion of all.
ERRATA.
PAge 9 line 12. read or: p. 26. l, 14. r. one: p. ^ l. 26. r. as to the: p.
49. l. 16. r. an end: P. 57. l. ^^ r. they may be: P. 71. l. 21. r, admiration:
P. 79. l. 7. ^ cannot, except: P. 84. l. 7. add off: P. 111. l. 19. ^^ prayer:
P. 124, l 24. r. light: P. 150. l. 26. r. lamentatine P. 156. l. 9. r.
comprise: P. 158. l. 17, r my: P. 152. l. 16. ^ will, I presume, be: P. 178. l.
3. r. dispense: P. 184. l. 1. 1. left. P. 222. l. 20. dele fully: P. 243. l.
12. dele not: p. 26^ l. 3. r. righteousness. To trust.

Enter into thy Closet. OR, A METHOD For Private Devotion:
Part I.
Chap. I. Of the necessity of Privacy, and those Christian duties which require
it.
THat person can no wise be esteemed a serious and through Christian, uprightly
and cordially discharging his duty toward God, who is a stranger unto privacy,
and uses not to withdraw himself from company, even the company of his nearest
friends, presenting himself alone before God: For that besides the worship of
God, which we perform to him in the public assemblies, and jointly with the
rest of the Family, of which we are members, besides, I say, praying, hearing,
and receiving, etc. in the Church, and praying with the people of our own
house, there are several religious duties to be performed by us, without which
the power of godliness can never be kept alive in our hearts, nor the service,
which before or with others we do unto God almighty, be through hearty and
complete; which duties I say can never be performed as they should be, if we
are in company. To wit,

First it is indispensibly necessary that a Christian often examine himself,
take account of his own state and actions, whether his heart be so sted fast in
holy purposes as it has been or ought to be, or as he has vowed to God it
should be: whether his practices of late have been answer able to such
resolutions and engagements, as he has made: or whether his heart be more
indifferent and careless than it was, his actions more loose and irregular;
This, I say, is absolutely necessary to an holy life: for that without it he
may insensibly go back and grow worse, he may delay his returns unto God, or
not return after several wanderings, and (if suddenly caught) die without the
particular repentance of many sins.

Secondly, it is as necessary that a Christian confess himself to Almighty
God, that is, that having taken such an account of his wanderings, he acknowledge
them, bewail them and beg pardon of them before God.

Thirdly, because repentance cannot be without reformation, it is necessary
that he consult and consider with himself how he may grow better; what
occasions of his sins there were, which may be avoided; what means of the
contrary virtues, which may be used; and resolve seriously with himself, that
these and these occasions he will avoid, these and these means use.

Now forasmuch as such resolutions can never be upright and firm, except made
with deliberation, heed and thoughtfullness; and forasmuch as such deliberation
cannot be taken in company, nor all things duly weighed, where we have a crowd
of occasions and objects to take of our thoughts, it is therefore necessary
that for such work we be alone: and in the other cases, because that
examination of our selves must needs be very slighty and short, which we make
while we sit and talk with others; because also those confessions, which we
make in public or with others, may be, and most frequently are, too general
to reach our particular cases and sins, it is therefore necessary for the doing
of them also, that we retire or go alone.

And to Conclude, because he that would keep himself close to the ways of
holiness, must do all these things often, it is therefore necessary, that he be
often alone, at least as often as with any tolerable convenience he can, and,
to that purpose, if his condition admit or will afford it, that he have a
place convenient to retire to, which we will call a Closet.

Chap. II. Of the Situation and furniture of their Closet who have choice.
NOw (it being supposed that my condition allows me so much choice, as that I
might have it so) my Closet would I have no unpleasant place, as sweetly
situated as any place of my house, that I might delight to be therein; and by
no means a low or darksome room, but as high as I well could: for that so it
will be most remote from the noise, company, and disturbance of the people who
are busied usually below; and besides that, some secret property there is in
such high and eminent places, whence we may behold the heavens and overlook the
earth, which to me much raises the soul and elevates the affections, as if we
derived or partaked more from heaven, by how much nearer we come to it. Our
Savior therefore used to go up into a mountain to Acts 10. 9. Acts 1. 13. and
20. 8.
pray: and St. Peter went up upon the house for the same purpose, that is
probably into an upper room such as the Disciples were assembled in. And if it
might be my passage there. unto should be through two other outer rooms, at
least through one, the door or doors of which I might ever have shut when I
(...) retired, to the end that my (...) which many times I shall have occasion,
for my own quickening, to use, might not to be heard without.

The furniture of my closet I would have a little more, than that of Elisha's
chamber, A Table a Stool and a Candlestick: and instead 2 Kings 4. 10.
of his bed, an hard couch or great chair on which I might some times lean my
weary or aching head: But a couch the rather for that sometimes I happily might
find it necessary to spend the whole night there, and might thereon take some
repose. To these I would add a Bible a Common prayer book, two paper books
(which when filled must be supplied by two others) and a Pen and Ink. Another
book or two (of which hereafter) I may also see occasion to add to these. A
chimney, against winters cold, to make the place endurable, if need be, a whole
night, would be no contemptible convenience. If besides these I there keep any
thing, as Students do books, Gentlemen writings, and Ladies Medicines, etc. all
these I would have placed on one side, or at least, one side I would have free
from them, against which should either stand a table, or a Praying desk (that
when occasion should be I might lay a book or paper before me) and the wall
over such desk or table should be hung (if I were able to do it) with some
stuff, of one color, (Green the best) to the end that when there kneeling at
my prayers, I might have in mine eye nothing to call away or divert my thoughts.

Chap. III. Of my most Common entrance into my Closet.
MY Closet being thus fitted, it is supposed that my recourse thereto is either
more or less solemn. At no time (except upon most earnest and hasty occasions)
should my entrance thereto, want the solemnity of a short (but hearty) Prayer.
For this being a place principally designed for my devout retirement, and the
performance of those private acts of worship which I owe to God, it becomes, by
this its end and designement, after a sort separate or sacred, a certain secret
Chapel for my self; and may not therefore wantonly or slightly be by me entered
into. I say, not by Me: for what ever it is to others to me ought it to be
reverend. As therefore, when our ordinary occasions call us into our through
Churches, we usually out of Reverence to him, to whom those places are devoted,
and in memory of those spiritual feasts, which we or our Christian brethren
have there and in such places tasted, fall down on our knees and worship God,
begging his blessing upon us and his people, as often as there assembled, and
praising him for the benefits, which we or his people have there partaken of;
so when I come, though upon common matters, into my closet, yet considering
with my self, that I am now in that place, where in I have so often worshipped
(or at least resolved often to worship) God, and had sweet converse with him,
in memory thereof, and for reasons hereafter mentioned I would kneel down and
pray, to this or the like effect.

My good God, whom I here frequently and with my heart worship, Bless me I
beseech thee in the affairs I go about. Keep my heart with thee, at least ever
keep it upright before thee: And as often as I here present my self, let thy
good Spirit be present with me, to dispose me unto, and assist me in thy
service, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

And having thus or otherwise, as I am able, or have opportunity, prayed, I
would forthwith apply my self to what I intended.

Now such course observed, as often as I enter my Closet, will be many ways
advantageous to me. First, it will be a means to keep my heart much with God,
and to recall it to him, in case my thoughts have too much wandered from him. It
will make me spiritual in ordinary matters and converse. Secondly, it may be a
means to procure a blessing upon my undertakings. Thirdly, I may the better
expect Gods presence there, when I come purposely to seek him.

It needs not after this discourse, to admonish that we ever take heed what
matters here we do. I would not choose this as a place of my vainer discourse,
or freer hours, as some do; who are ever severest in company, and allow
themselves liberty in private or amongst their confidents, whom if they can but
get into such a place, where neither men's eye, nor ear can reach them (as the
closet for the main is supposed to be) their company shall be vain and srolick
to as high a degree almost as any men's. I take it, and I am greatly deceived if
I mistake it, for a certain argument, that the serious belief of a God and of
the World to come, is much wanting in his heart, who dare be naught, idle, or
sinfully merry, if he can but get out of man's sight and cognizance.

PART II. Treating of Daily Closet-Duties.
Chap. I. That if I am a person of leisure, I ought daily, twice in the day, to
retire into my Closet for devotions sake.
It follows now to be considered of my more solemn retirement or entrance
into my Closet. Now that I account a solemn recourse thither, when my business
there is purely devotion. And such recourse is either ordinary, or more
special.

My ordinary retirement into my Closet should be daily, and that if my
condition will conveniently admit, as most men's may twice a day: oftener I may,
as at noon, seldomer I well cannot.

I am bound thereto upon the same grounds, upon which I am bound to pray twice
a day: and the sum of them is, that the command says, Pray continually; the
meaning of which we cannot but take to be, 1 either pray always when you may
for other duties (that is, so much time as thou can spare from the work of
thy calling and due care of thy body, and other offices of Charity and Piety,
spend in that duty of prayer) or else 2. (parallel to that of the continual
burnt Offering which was called Continual, because ever continued in its course
twice a day.) Keep a continual course of prayer morning and evening. And this
the practices of the Saints in Scripture (which we may look upon as
Exempl^fications of that forenamed command) to wit, the Practice of David
praying Evening, Morning, and at Noon, of Psalm. 55. 7. Dan. 6.
Daniel as many times, and none that we read of less than twice, cannot but
enforce upon us, as the least which can be our duty in this case.

If any think they are excused from private prayer twice a day, by their
praying twice a day with the Family, of which they are a part, They are to
understand, that there is no particular strict command, touching the nature of
our daily devotions, prescribing them to be either public, or private, or
both: but that it is most just and equitable that God should have a liberal
part of our time, as well as of our estates: Dr. Ham: Pract. Catech. Lib. 3.
sect. 2.
that therefore if our condition be such, that besides the time, which we spend
in prayer with the Family (which no one, who would have God to bless his
Family, can think he may neglect) we have convenient leisure from other
necessary matters, it cannot be better bestowed, than in our Closet, and upon
our Souls. And it will questionless be a piece of very sinful vanity, to
trifle it away, and omit what it might so well have been employed upon;
According as in matter of my estate, if after sufficient necessaries and
conveniences provided for my self and Family, there do yet remain in my hand a
portion of what God has given me, I cannot but look upon it as my duty, to
supply therewith the necessities of those who want, and as my sin, for me idly
to squander it away, which might have filled so many hungry bellies, or clothed
so many naked or ragged backs. Further, God having in joined me the duty of
prayer, but left the particular frequency of it, after the nature of other
freewill offerings, to my Christian discretion, I ought not to be therefore the
more heedless: but rather, because I know my sacrifice will be ever accepted
how often soever brought with an honest heart, out of an holy ambition of
pleasing God and sending up an odor of a sweet savor unto heaven, to bring it
as often as I can: And surely twice a day I may present even my private
devotions.

If I be single and in my own power, there is no question but I may: If I be
the Master or Mistress of a Family, there is little question of it: If I be a
servant, or one who works for my living, there is indeed somewhat the more
question; for that not only I may be straightned in time, but want the
convenience of privacy. But, yet even in this case, what hinders, but that
being I cannot do so well as I would, I may do so well as I can? to wit, rising
one piece of an hour ordinarily sooner, or lying down so much latter, fall down
upon my knees by my self at my beds side, and privately pour out my
confessions and prayers before God. And what if my fellow servant be with me?
Why should I be ashamed to do, before him, what he cannot but acknowledge he
also ought to do? shall I not one day much more blush and be confounded at the
omission of my duty before Men and Angels and God himself, than here at the
performance of it? And which shame rather to be chosen? That before God, all
Men, Angels, Devils, than this before one or two? That which is eternal, or
this, which after I have once or twice despised, I shall be troubled with no
more? Begin to do so, and after the first or second time, thou will never be
ashamed of it: I assure thee at least thou will never repent.

This then should be my ordinary retirement twice a day.

Our more special retirement ought to be upon Lords days, Holydaies, and our
own private Fastdaies, each of which will come hereafter to be considered. In
the mean time our daily retirement and devotions must be proceeded with.

Chap. II. Considerations to persuade to daily devotion and prayer in private.
ANd to the end I may be sure to keep such course as beforesaid, let me sit
down and seriously weigh.

First, the concernment, importance and vast moment of those things, which by
prayer I am to seek and may obtain, above the other, upon which most of my time
is spent. What is it of worldly goods, which will not pass away (at least as to
me and my enjoyment of it) with my self? I dying, all dies with me: my estate,
my honors, my friends, and all such, are no more comfortable to me, when death
once appears; but happily a torment, being that they are all now to be left. It
is therefore but to the end of my threescore years and ten (if I should live so
long) or thereabouts, that these can be good at all: And of these my threescore
years and ten (which it is a thousand to one whether ever I reach) how many are
already gone? Perhaps one Moiety, perhaps more. So then all those things, which
my other time seeks, are of a pitiful short and transient concernment. But the
graces of Gods spirit, an holy heart a good conscience, reconciliation with my
heavenly Father, these, and such like, are not only of concernment for my
present happiness but for my eternal. The richest honorablest and most
worldly-happy Man, if devoid of grace, an enemy unto God, conscious to himself
of villainy, cannot in all his abundance here enjoy or like himself, much less
either account himself, or be accounted, an happy person. For what can that Man
acquiesce in, whose own heart calling him a rogue laye^ a fatal necessity upon
him to hate and to be ever and anon ready to execrate himself? Certainly there
is no present possible happiness, which is comparable to that blessed calm and
quiet, which arises from the sense of a Man's one upright heart heart and
discharged duty. Insomuch that were there no such thing as an heaven to come, I
should not fear to pronounce, that that man neglects those things which are of
greatest conducement to his present happiness who neglects to seek unto God,
to commune with his own heart, to set all straight and to reclaim himself to an
holy life, the great means by which such peace, the most real felicity in the
world, can be had. But suppose we such a person ready to die, and it said unto
Luke xii. 20.
him, Thou fool this night shall thy soul be taken from thee; his peace being
unmade with God, himself unacquainted with heaven, his conscience telling him
that all his time has been spent on what he must now leave, and no provision
made (but of a treasure of wrath again the day of wrath) for that etern^ slate,
into which death is his entrance; Romans 11. 12.
is he not now a most unhappy wretch? Is it not to him a pa^equal to the pains
of death to thi^ he must leave all? Has he (...) therefore, by devoting
himself to this world, and scraping togeth^^ such an ample portion thereof, o^
made himself more miserable, a^ that in this present life? For is the any
misery here, like to that ^^guish, which racks such a soul up his now instant
departure? A^^ would I, then, so spend my time that I might, by the spending of
become more miserable than a^ save those who have lived as Would I so spend it,
as that the v^^ thinking or reflecting how I spent it, should then most torm^
me, when I have most need of comfort, to wit in my dying hour? (...) yet thus
do all men spend their d^ who neglect their devotions, ot^^ies of daily
address unto God.

But further suppose we such a person dead; and we have him stripped of all even
his imaginary happiness, naked of every thing save his sins: Of these his
bones are full and they shall lie down with him in the dust. Job. 10. 11.
His works follow him and his ways meet him. Evident therefore it is, that
what he has spent his life upon, is now of no concernment or moment to him at
all, any otherwise, than to render him for ever as miserable as he can be. And
is this a desirable end for a man all his days to be driving at; to be
miserable in life by reason of an evil conscience, or an impossibility of
liking and loving himself; to be miserable in death, by the advancing of that
disquiet, his former torment; and most miserable after death by the perfection
of that and all other mischiefs? Whereas, if some of those days which the
world employed been taken up in seeking unto God, how might that portion have
sanctified all the rest, have led him to a right improvement of what he got,
and that improvement of all been an unspeakable pleasure and content to him
here, and hereafter have wrought him an eternity of blessedness! Not to mention
that unspeakable satisfaction, which the hearty performance of such devotions,
through the blood of Christ, would have filled him with, which we may hereafter
consider. Whosoever therefore truly loves himself will love his Closet and his
Prayers.

Secondly, Let me weigh the Reasonableness hereof, that God should have a
considerable part of my Time, who has given me so much for my self, and the
unreasonablenesse of the contrary. Let me deal ingeniously: may not God well
expect more of my time, than what is by any law set apart or consecrate to this
worship? And it being the genuine Evangelicall sense of the fourth
commandment, Keep all thy life an holy rest from doing thy own works
delighting thy self and acquiescing ever in the Lord, will it not in a good
measure hold thus, Rest as much as thou can to thy devotions, spend Isai. 58.
13; 14.
as many hours as thou can with God? Or suppose that this law would not in
equity bind me hereunto (which yet it seems to do) is it not reasonable, that
there should be free will offerings of our time as well as of our estates? And
will there be any better way found for the employing of what we can spare
thereof, than the thus sanctifiing and devoting it unto God? I am confident
whatever men's practices may be, their consciences cannot gainsay but do highly
approve and commend to them what is pressed. We may complain fondly of the
shortness of time: but evident it is that we spend much upon this world; much
upon our games, much upon our pleasures, much upon our ambitions, much also
upon those necessary acts of life, Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, and much to upon
(God knows) we know not what. Now let those who account themselves to have
least leisure, find but time enough to consider, when they go to bed every
night, how much time they have lost, or trifled away, that day, and setting it
down every night, reckon at the weeks end, and see, to how many hours it will
amount. Do so but one week o^ two, and see if you do not blush at the ordinary
excuse for neglect of prayer, that you have not time. For the issue will be of
these two, the own either my whole time has been really employed, and that
upon my common affairs and necessary care of my body, or else some part of it
(to wit, so much as has not been employed) has been trifled away. Now (utrum
horum) Let me take which I please. If it be supposed all to have been employed,
is it not most unreasonable, that worldly business and my body should have
all, and God and my soul have none, or next to none? Did God make me for
himself, and allot me such a measure of time for his glory and for provision
for my soul, and are they only some few minutes, which I can find either for
him or it? Was, I say, every day given me for these ends, and can I spend all
without considerable seeking either, as I do if I allow nothing to private
devotion? Ought I not therefore to lessen my business, rather than neglect the
great ends of my being? If, on the other side, a considerable part of my time
were lost and trifled away (as I dare say infallibly it will appear upon due
account taken) is not this a most unreasonable part in me, that I can find time
to loose, and yet no time to pray?

And further, Thirdly, it may somewhat quicken me, if I consider, that though
it should be questioned whether it be strictly my duty thus and thus often to
pray, because there may seem to be wanting an express command, yet I cannot
but be sensible that it is my duty to pray, and to pray often, (for, this there
are not wanting commands) and that therefore prayer being a duty and well
pleasing unto God, the more thereof is performed, the more acceptable service
do I do to God: provided, prayer thrust not out my other duties. The frequency,
I say, can never offend, except in the case of neglecting other duties to per.
form it: and herein commonly men are not apt to be guilty. Suppose it
therefore not to offend in this case being that it is a duty, it must please,
and please the more, by how much it self is more. Now this to ingenuity is no
mean incentive unto prayer, that hereby I please my God, and delight heaven.

Fourthly, Let me consider, that as Prayer it self is the most powerful and
effectual means, that a Christian can use for the effecting of all he would,
so there is no prayer more powerful than that which is most frequent and
importunate. In general as to the power of prayer, it is such that it seems to
have done violence to omnipotency it self; as in the case of Moses when God as
though graciously held or restrained bids him lot him alone: and in Exo. 32. 10
Isai. 45. 2.
some causes, if duly performed, God has as it were allowed it to command him.
But what or whose prayers are they, which are thus powerful? Surely not
theirs, who so seldom come to heaven, that if it were for nothing else, but
because they are such strangers, they would not speed: but theirs rathers,
whose daily and frequent application of themselves to the throne of grace, has
rendered them there well acquainted and favorites. We may therefore observe,
that the most absolute and encouraging promises of being heard, are made to the
importunnate suitors. The widow in the Luke 18.
parable, whom injustice it self could not deny, was such, and therefore sped
because such, because she came so often. And that precept, each gradation of
which has a promise proportionably attemporated and fitted thereunto, as it
prescribes, so chiefly encourages importunity, that is, frequency as well as
ferven^y. It is no^ said, only Ask, nor only Math. 7. 7.
Seck, but both, and Knock besides. The last alone, viz. Knocking, implies
frequency, and therefore much more do all the three. And to the Knocking, as
being of all the three the clearest denotation or expression of importunity, it
is promised It shall be opened: as if it had been said, those who only ask
and seek may come to speed; but those who knock, those who are often and and
earnest in their prayers, shall have the treasures of heaven opened and free to
them, out of which to take full satisfaction and supply.

Now because all these things are so, therefore can it not be but that the
benefit of such practice must be unspeakable, which as another (and for the
present the last) incitement unto daily private devotion is worthy my
consideration. First, as to the inward temper of my heart (which rightly to
dispose, and so disposed to keep, is a matter of the greatest concernment to an
holy life) there can be nothing thought of more effectual than such practice,
nor can it indeed well be conceived, how that man's heart can be kept in a
through sense of his duty, and close with God, who maintains not some such
daily course of devotion as is under present consideration.

1. The maintaining hereof will keep alive in me a continual fear and awful
apprehension of God: it will habituate me, in all my ways, often to think upon
and remember him. Now there is nothing, the apprehension of which is of more
wholesome consequence unto a man, than of God and his all-seeing eye. One, who
is sensible and mindful hereof, cannot be long vain, but, if he do forget
himself at any time, will soon return to his old seriousness.

2. Such practice will also much conduce to the keeping of me humble, as being
sensible of (because often minding) my sins: my sins I say from my youth up to
my present years, my present years, my perpetual pronesse and frequent relapses
unto vicious courses. These, being matter of my daily confessions thoughts and
meditations, cannot but in some good measure keep under any towering o^ proud
conceits, which I am apt to have of my self.

3. It will also make and keep m^ tender, affectionate, and truly Zealous in my
service of God. Ther^ will be in me an habitual preparation for all duties;
insomuch that I can no sooner be at them and have engaged my self in them, but
with ^ great deal of vivacity and readiness of Spirit, and with many inward
meltings of heart I shall converse in them: this being not only my daily but
my frequent practice, at least frequent endeavor.

4. It must therefore much increase all manner of Christian graces in my Soul:
inasmuch as grace, according as we now speak thereof, is nothing else but the
due disposition and resolution of the soul, which as is evident will be the
natural consequent and fruit of such practice.

Secondly, it will have a very wholesome influence upon my life, as in all
cases else, so especially in this, that I shall at no time carry on any
design, which I dare not bring unto the test of heaven, and beg thereon the
blessing of the God of Holiness.

Lastly, the mercies which I receive in my own person, in my relations, in all
my affairs as procured and impetrated from God by these my daily and frequent
prayers will be innumerable; and that inward comfort and clearness of heart,
with which I shall entertain and receive these mercies, or any thing else,
which comes from the hand of my gracious God, inexpressible. The same mercies
evidenlty are not the same to all men, no more than are the same chastisements.
But to whomsoever mercies are greater mercies, or afflictions less
afflictions, it cannot be but that to him who thus conscientiously daily
converseth with God, all must be most kindly.

Now the consideration of all, which I have thus meditated, cannot sure but
move me to some measure of diligence in these duties. If therefore at any time
negligence begin to grow over me, it may be of good effect to read over and
duly to weigh these or the like motives, that I may be quickened to resume, and
proceed with, my proposed course: and what that course should be, it follows
in the next place that I consult.

Chap. III. Of the substance of every days private devotion; To persons of
leisure, Reading, Meditation, and Prayer.
THe private devotion of every day will be different to particular persons
according as their conditions differ, from such who are servants or lead a
servile life, I mean all those who get their living by their daily labor,
whose abilities of mind are therefore meaner and and whose privacy more
difficult, from such I say no more than this may seem to be expected, that both
in the morning being risen, and at night being about to lie down, they in the
fear of God fall down before him and pray unto him, touching which directions
will a non follow.

From those, whose way of life being more liberal, their abilities and
opportunities are greater, more may seem justly to be looked for, according to
that rule, To whom Luk 12. 48.
much is given, from them shall much be required. Speaking therefore to to such
who have estates and leisure, and so may have opportune privacy, ^^suppose
their daily private devotion cannot be complete, except consisting of Reading
Meditation and Prayer.

Touching private Prayer it has been before spoken and nothing now can by
such, whom the present consultation concerns, be said for the dispensing with
it, being it is even their duty, who are of meaner qualily and capacity and
therefore much more theirs, who are of greater. Touching Reading and
Meditation; if any suspicion arise, it will easily be removed by those
commands, which enjoin us that we Search diligently the Scriptures, that John.
5. 39, (...) Coloss. 3. 16.
the word of God dwell plentifully inus, and by such Characters of righteous
persons, as that they are such whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, and who
meditate therein day and night. And certainly such commands Psai. 1.
being capable to be intended. or remitted (I mean being to be construed with
some regard) and according to that general rule aforementioned [to whom much is
given from him much shall be required,] cannot but be interpreted to require
greater and more diligent Searching (that is more of Reading and Meditating
upon) Scripture, from those who have greater opportunity and ability to do it,
than they do from others who are meaner in both. Of such an one therefore, who
has not time every day, or if he happily have, yet cannot read, it may be
thought he discharges his duty of searching the Scripture if in a way
proportionable to his ability he endeavor to acquaint himself, with Scripture,
to wit; by a diligent attention to it, and inquiring of it (ash has
convenience) when it is read on preached. But of such an one who can read and
has time to meditate on what he reads, and whom, it may be, it concerns to
instruct others in the knowledge of Scripture (as being over them) of such an
one, I say, being that more is required, than of the other, it cannot in reason
be thought, that he has done his duty by bare attention unto Scripture read,
except he himself read and meditate therein. And he will very hardly (we may
not fear to say, not at all) approve himself to be a Godly man, if he behave
not himself as Godly men did of old, that is if he delight not in the Law of
the Lord, and therein daily meditate. If I should doubt therefore, whether it
be strictly my duty day and night, morning and evening to read the Scriptures
and meditate, I cannot doubt (for I see plain evidence for it) that it is a
Godly man's Character, one part of his practice as he is a Godly man, to road
and meditate, if therefore intend to be a Godly man, it must be my care and
practice too. Wherefore of these three, Reading, Meditation, and Prayer, seeing
that none may be well omitted (at least not ordinarily neglected) it is
requisite more particular consideration be had.

Chap. IIII. Of Reading the Holy Scripture. The most edifying method and manner
of Reading it consulted of.
BY Reading here I understand reading the sole word of God: and this as it
should constantly (for the main at least, if not ever) have a place in my daily
devotions in private; so therein, methinks, will most conveniently take place
in the beginning of them, on this wise. Being entered into my Closet for my
devotions sake, it becomes me first in all humility and out of the fear of God,
not out of custom, to fall down before him, and in short according to former
direction to beg his blessing upon me and presence with me there presenting my
self to worship before his majesty: To which purpose the Form Part. 1. Chap. 3.
already delivered may be proper either for use, or further direction,
according as I shall see sit. This being done, forthwith let me apply my self
to the reading soine portion of the word, according to my prefixed course. And
what course shall that be?

Modesty would presently answer, The same which the wisdom of the Church has
prescribed for public use. And the truth is (the Church consulting herein, as
she ought, the edification of the people.) this order has, in this point, the
advantage of all other, that it will lead us to read over all the most useful
parts of Scripture and those most frequently: to wit, the New Testament
excepting only some Chapters of the Revelation, three times a year; the
Psalms once a month; the Old Testament (excepting only the two books of
Chroni les, which are for the most part extant in the Kings and Samuel, and
some other Chapters of other books, chiefly relating to the Jewish state) once
in a year. But then if we consider its compliance with our present design, it
has these two exceptions lying against it. First, that the portions of
Scripture, by that order to be read daily, are greater than what every man's or
most men's convenience will afford time to read, and meditate upon, as it is
(supposed at present) best for a devout Christian to do. And then Secondly,
that by this means a considerable part of the Old Testament and some part of
the New will be left out; which parts are not questionless without their use,
though, comparitively, not so necessary for the public commonalty as the
other. And to the Churches prescription it may be said, that it was never the
Churches intention to prescribe this order for men's Closets in private, where
she can neither take notice of their observing nor neglecting it, but only for
public edification and uniformity.

This order therefore being taken not to be so proper for our present purpose,
the next which will offer it, self will be the natural order of the books in
which they lie. Now this, though not liable to the exceptions, which we found
against the former (being that nothing then will be omitted, nor the Reader
over burdened with too great a portion, being he is left to himself) yet has
this inconveniency, that it will detain the observer of it a great while in
those parts of Scripture, which may not edify him so much, as would the other:
so that happily Reading shall be a duller and less spiritual an exercise, than
it would be, did he more wisely order it. Yet has it this advantage also, that
the Revelations of God and eternal life being still clearer in each succeeding
part of Scripture (I mean clearer in the Prophets than in the Law and in the
Gospel than in either) one months reading may make me see more into that of the
former month, and all lead me to the magnifiing of God for the present manifest
revelation of his will.

These things being so, it may happily conduce most to our private edification if
we keep strictly to neither of these orders, but observing the conveniences and
inconveniences of each to our private purpose, according to our Christian
discretion frame to our selves one out of both, which may have the commodities
of both, and incommodity of neither. And that may be such as this: To begin
every Reading with a Psalm, or, where the Psalms are very long, with a good
portion of one, taking the Psalms in their course: (This I therefore commend,
by reason of the exceeding usefullnesse of that book of Psalms for prayer, it
furnishing a man with petitions, hymns and ejaculations of all sorts, and
besides discovering very much of the hearty practice of Devotion and
Godliness.) That being finished, in the morning to take in order as the books
and Chapters lie, such a portion of the Old Testament, as my Christian
prudence, considering my own conveniences and occasions, shall judge fit:
which, where the matter affords more work for Meditation, may be shorter, where
less, larger. In like manner at evening, beginning with a like portion of the
Psalms, take a part of the New Testament, as it lies in order, greater of
less, according, as beforesaid, it finds my devotion work. Some such course as
this would I observe, till I had read over the Holy Scripture twice or thrice
with such care, attention and meditation, as shall presently be described; by
which time I should begin to be a little verst in it, and to know what parts of
Scripture I used to read with greatest Christian advantage, which therefore
afterward I would read oftener than the other; setting always a mark at the
name of each book, as they stand in the Table at the beginning of my Bible,
when I had read that book over, that so I might know how often I had read each,
lest I come too long to neglect the reading of any. This as to the Order of my
Reading.

Having now my work thus orderly before me, it remains in the next place that I
look to the best manner of doing it: whither belong the following rules.

First, that I endeavor to read with composedness of mind and attention, not
only to the sense, substance, or subject matter of what I read, but as to the
very expressions of it. For that the very expressions of Scripture are not
only very useful in prayer (God loving to hear his children call upon him in
his own language) but do also many times carry in them such secret emphases and
force, as shall much comfort support, aw, and otherwise affect the heart which
considers them.

Secondly, that I be sure, as I read, to observe the scope and drift of the
portion of Scripture, which I read. For as to particular passages, it may so
happen, that the plain reader may many times scarce understand them, they
puzling ever learned heads: but as to the sco^ of the whole, as to that which
the Holy Ghost chiefly drives at, the may be commonly more easily understood:
and this being understood does not only ensure me o^ so much benefit as I have
understood of it, but will give especial light unto those darker places, whose
meaning I do not so well conceive.

Thirdly, That if ever I inten^ this part of my devotion, to wit my Reading,
should be acceptable to God, or otherwise than a witness against my self, I
resolve upon the impartial practice of what soever (...) by reading find to be
in Scripture commanded, and eschewing of what soever I there find forbidden.
Such godly purpose will increase my very knowledge; For the secret of the Lord
is with them that fear Psalm. 25. 14.
him, and he will teach them his Statutes: whereas other, who bring not a
resolution of such conscientious practice, but bearly inquisitive diligence,
may come to be in a greater measure ignorant of his mind.

Chap. V. Of Meditation, and the most edifiing course in it.
THese rules being thus observed, and a certain portion of Holy Scripture thus
read, it will be proper for me in the next place to proceed to Meditation.

Now Meditation here I take not for the simple thinking of any thing divine,
which shall offer it self, but for an orderly and serious consideration of the
particulars following.

1. Upon that portion of Scripture, which I have read.

2. Upon my own state and ways.

3. Upon the prayers (that is, confessions petitions and thanksgivings) which I
am presently to offer up unto God.

Touching the first there are these three things for me to consider.

Frst, If I have not, as I read, been able to understand the design and drift
of the Holy Ghost in what I have read, let me consider touching that: and, by a
short reveiw of it, comparing the parts or several materials spoken of, and
attending how they hang together, endeavor to comprehend their substance and
scope. He reads to no purpose who reads not thus; for it is not repeating the
words of Scripture, but understanding and digesting their sense and substance,
which is to be accounted reading the Scripture: and one Chapter thus read is
worth ten hastily run over.

Secondly, If there be in what I have read any difficult or harder place, which
seems to contain any matter of practice or article of faith (I mean which is
likely to instruct me in any thing necessary to be believed or done in order to
my salvation) that let me consider, and endeavor thereof to find the meaning.
As to those difficulties, which concern controversies, that is questionable
opinions in divinity, or inquiries into matters of mere knowledge or
speculation, (such things, which when they are known there is no end of them)
these may be very well overlooked by an ordinary person. As for instance;
Reading Acts. 13, (the last Paragraph or partition of the Chapter, which begins
verse. 44.) I find therein (viz. verse. 48.) a certain difficult expression, As
many as were ordained unto life believed. What believing and what life (ie,
heaven and blessedness) mean I know: but what ordained unto life means, I
doubt; and truly need not much trouble my self to inquire. Sufficient it is
that I conclude from thence, that all they who shall obtain everlasting life
are believers, not one unbelieving or ungodly person shall ever enter into
heaven, and therefore particularly that I resolve upon an honest cordial
receiving of the Gospel, as my duty, if ever I intend for happiness. Again,
Reading Exodus. 32. I find that Moses took the Calfe they had made and burned
it is the fire and grownd it to powder: Ho^ the burning gold in the fire, which
only purifies it ordinarily, should come to make it friable or brittle, that
it might be grownd unto powder, I need not stand to inquire. A shorter and
better way it is, to believe the matter feasible, and this relation true, as
being part of Gods word: all I need to conclude thence is, that Idolatry is to
be destroyed, and that in such sort as the people may not return to it again,
but rather loath and abominate it, as we do that which passes through our
bodies: and that it is the wisdom of Magistrates, whom it concerns to destroy
it, as it was Moses's, to find out and contrive such ways or Methods of
destroying it. This is I say as much as can concern any ordinary person, and as
for the curiosity touched it may safely be neglected. We give not rules to make
a Divine but to direct a Christian. Now all such difficulties and curiosities
being left out, I presume the difficulties, which arise in practicable matters
will be but few. And for my help herein, it will be meet I reflect upon that
which (according to the former rule) I found to be the scope or drift of that
Scripture, and consider the difficulty with some relation or regard thereto,
observing the occasion, upon which that expression came in. This will help me
very much many times. But for my further help therein, if I am able, it would
be expedient I had some short gloss, or book explaining such matters: and
truly what book to pitch upon, as best in this case, is not easy to resolve.
For I suppose there are not many books of notes or commentaries upon the whole
Bible in English, which meddle only with necessary and practicable matters,
omitting controversals, which a private Christian, to his better edification,
may well spare, For the New Testament I much admire Dr. Hammons Paraphrase, and
could ten thousand times wish such a piece were extant upon the whole. But yet
it is too difficult for every plain reader. Bishop Hall has a Paraphrase upon
the whole Bible, which comes much necrer to our present design: But I fear
this is scarce. The frequentest, best, and innocentest that I know is Diodates
Annotations: they have indeed a Geneva tang now and then, but pretty soberly.
Some such book according as I can get, I would furnish my self with, which I
might consult touching the meaning of such difficult places as my Christian
direction should tell me to be practical, and for my necessary edification.

Thirdly, Having thus found out the design of that whole portion of Scripture
which I have read, and the meaning of such particular Texts as I shall have
occasion to search into, let me in my meditations cast over again, or recollect
the substance of it, and consider, what am I the better for the reading hereof?

1. Am I instructed or further confirmed in any matter of faith?

2. Am I taught any duty which before I either was ignorant of, or neglected?
Do I here find any precept or command which I never before took notice of, or
had forgot, etc?

3. Is there any thing which may quicken me to any duty, in which I am slack,
or deter me from any sin to which I am prone? Any threatening of Gods wrath? Any
example of his judgments? Any promise of mercy? Any instance of blessings on
his diligent servants?

4. Is there any thing which may strengthen me in any temptation, comfort me in
any affliction, distrust? etc.

5. Is there any particular emphatical or affectionate speech which may at any
time quicken me? Any proper petition, confession, invocation, thanksgiving or
the like, which may be of use to me in prayer, or otherwise?

6. Is there any thing which I can observe of the experiences of holy men of
old? any thing of the deceitfulness of sin? etc.

Through such heads as these may my meditations briefly run: which heads till I
am perfect in, it may not be amiss to open this my book and examine what I have
read according to these directions laid down. And if I am able, I shall find it
an incredible benefit, in the end of these my meditations to use my pen,
whenever by any reading I have gained any more remarkable benefit, and to
register in one of my paper books (reserved ever for this purpose, which I may
account my Memorial) that particular which I have gained: in which I need to
observe no other method, but only to write all the notes which I take out of
any one book, as of Matthew, Mark, etc. together, that so at my second or third
reading that particular book over, I may see, what the second or third reading
of it advantaged me more than the first. And these notes thus taken, because
intended as helps to my memory, I must be sure to find time within a convenient
season to review. This is a profitable course for me to observe in my ordinary
meditations upon the Holy Scriptures.

The next thing which my meditations are to be employed upon, is upon my
particular State and Ways, which I am in some measure to take notice of, as
well that I may be more circumspect in such particulars, wherein I shall find
greater need of circumspection, as that I may be able to address my self to God
in a way suitable to my condition. For my condition varying, my prayers ought
to vary accordingly.

First then, As to my Ways; Let me consider what new temptations have befallen
me, whether as to inward sins, such which are acted in the mind, or as to such
which are matter of outward and bodily commission; how far my heart has closed
with them, and been overcome by them? And this is to be laid open before God.

Secondly, As to my present Inward state, the temper of my mind: Let me examine
that; whether I find any relentings or meltings of heart for those my
wanderings, which I have before viewed, any firmness and resolution for the
future against the like: Accordingly I am to apply my self to God, either for
the giving me a due sense of, and remorse for, and resolution and watchfulness
against my sin, or for the heightning and strengthening those degrees hereof,
which I already have.

Thirdly, As to my Outward state; Let me consider, how Gods holy providence
has either favored or crossed my ordinary affairs and designs: for
accordingly still I am to address my self unto God in prayer; either by
praising him for my successes, or bewailing those sins and omissions which I
may judge have blasted them, or otherwise, as my Christian discretion shall
suggest.

The last head, upon which my meditations are to be employed is my Prayers,
which I am now about to offer up unto God: in which if I use a set form, I am
to consider; where those new particulars of confession, petition, or praises
must come in, after what sort they be conveniently expressed, and sometimes
(when my condition requires and my time will permit me to be more large or
earnest in any part of prayer) with what arguments I may strengthen my faith,
and plead with God touching what I desire to speed for; or again with what
circumstances of my sins, or Gods mercies I may heighten my repentance for my
sins, or thankfulness for those mercies. If I do not use my self to a set form,
then will it be necessary that I more deliberately meditate what I intend to
confess, to ask, to praise God for, how ^ shall so call upon him or conceive of
him, as may suit with those main and principal addresses, which I am to make to
him. Whether every particular expression, or the just words be forethought, it
happily matters not very much: but that some fit significant proper and quickening
expressions, for the several parts and substantials of my prayer, be prepared,
it is expedient; as well for the greater readiness of the soul in prayer, which
when it is much to seek in this case, cannot do its duty with attention, nor
without disturbance and intermission of due affection, as also that nothing
unworthy of the nature of prayer, and the worship of God, may be offered up
unto him. And in this point it may be singularly helpful to consider, what of
those expressions, promises, narratives, experiences, etc. which I have at any
time read in the Word of God may be useful to me in those my intended addresses
to the Throne of grace. God (as already intimated) loves to hear his own
language from us; and so it is, that the very expressions of Scripture have a
mavelous affecting power upon the devout heart, beyond those, which seem not
to have been alike sanctified by the holy Ghost using them.

Chap. VI. Of Prayer, and first of its substance and parts.
WHat I have read being thus digested through Meditation, and by the like
meditation, preparation being made for Prayer, that now remains as the third
and most complete act of my daily devotion: touching which, besides the
precepts already given, others yet remain to be given, when the consideration
of the nature of the duty has a little made way for them.

Now Prayer is the seeking unto God, and before him representing our Estates
and Desires.

The general nature of prayer is a betaking or addressing our selves to God:
and therefore its first act is Invocation or calling upon him. Now our
condition, who are dust and ashes and his Majesty being considered, we cannot
well be esteemed to seek unto him without adoration or worshipping of him in the
beginning of these our addresses; for that in all seeking to Superiors we ever
begin with some acknowledgments of their being above us, able to help us, etc.
upon which accounts we use ordinarily some testimonies of reverence toward
them. If we therefore put both these together, we have the first part of Prayer
to wit, An invocatory adoration of God, that is, an humble calling upon him,
accompanied with Worshipping and adoring his infinite Majesty. And this in most
complete prayers extant is Scripture we may observe: particularly in that for
ever to be reverenced pattern, our Lords prayer, the first sentence contains
what we speak of. [Our Father: this is a calling upon God. which art in
Heaven; these are words befitting one who adores his Majesty.] So in that
prayer of Hezekiah, I saiah xxxvii. 16. O Lord of Hosts, God of Israel, that
dwell between the Cherubims: thou art God, even thou alone, etc. How
evidently does this beginning of his prayer carry in it a calling upon God,
accompanied with the acknowledgement and adoration of his Deity. The first part
of prayer we gathered out of those words (expressing its general nature) it is
a seeking unto God. The second we may gather out of them, which follow, it is a
representing our estate before him. Our estates naturally are sinful and
miserable. SO far forth as we retain any thing of our old nature, so far are
sin and misery inseparable adjuncts or attendants unto us. The representing
therefore our estates before God, is the confessing our sins, and laying open
our grievances and wants before him. A second part of prayer then is Confession

That which all sinners should desire is pardon: that which all miserable
persons do naturally desire is help. The representing then our desires before
God is the begging mercy and grace to help in time of need; that is,

1. Pardon of sin.

2. Deliverance from our misery. Internal, by the sanctification of our hearts.
External, by meet supplies of our outward wants.

A third act of prayer therefore is, Petition of Asking.

Somewhat more yet is considerable in our states here below, which though
naturally miserable, as aforesaid, yet are by the manifold grace of God made in
several respects more comfortable, by reason of variety of blessings. Now he
that receives a benefit ought to have at the least a will and desire of
thankfulness. He therefore who duly represents his state and desires unto God,
lays open also before him those several mercies which at his hands he
receives, humbly blessing and praising him the author of them. The last part of
prayer then is Thanksgiving.

Now because all these may be done either for our selves or others, therefore
is prayer double, or of two sorts.

That which merely respects our selves.

That which we offer up for others, called Intercession.

From all this it is evident, that the first thing, which he, who would learn
to pray, must take care of, is, that he thoroughly know himself, that is, (1.)
Be acquainted with his own state, with his sins, his miseries and wants, inward
and outward: otherwise he can never duly represent them unto God. (2.) That he
well know his own desires and resolutions, lest he play the hypocrite with God,
asking what he desires not, or vowing what he intends not. These are the
substantials of prayer.

Chap VII. Of the right manner of prayer. First, of its inward manner. Some
considerations to quicken to sincerity and heartiness in Prayer. What graces
are to be exercised in each part of Prayer.
THe manner of the performing every duty is much looked upon by God. Now prayer
being such an immediate act of worship, and it being most just, reasonable, and
necessary that we should worship God with the whole man, that is, both with
soul and body, in the manner of prayer there can be only considerable, its
Inward and Outward part.

The inward manner of prayer is unquestionably most respected by God: for that
according hereunto is the prayer, and the man, sincere or otherwise. And the
Consideration hereof should incite us chiefly to care herein. I may pray in as
good and as many words, in as devout postures, and, in a word, after as pious a
sort, as to what there is outward in prayer, as ever man did, and yet he
hypocritical in my prayers. But it is impossible, that I should pray with my
Soul and all that is within me, and not be cordial, honest and sincere in those
prayers which I so make. And therefore as God does, so, I say, every Christian
ought to look chiefly to the inward disposition of his soul in his Devotions.

We may note further for our quickening herein, that God not only requires
the heart in prayer, but has accepted and often does accept the inward
breathings of it, and answer them as fully, as if all other circumstances
belonging to the outward manner of prayer had been observed. As in the case of
Hannah; who in that so successful and effectual prayer of hers spaks in her
heart only.

Now prayer is then right as to its inward manner, when there is an hearty
exercise of Christian graces and affections suitable to the substance of the
prayer, which we offer up to God. (That is to say, to go through the parts of
prayer.) I adore and call upon God as I ought, when in my calling upon him, I
really believe that he is, and that he is such as he has revealed himself to
be and as I now express or conceive him, and therefore with reverence humbly
submit my self before his majesty. It is a piece of holy skill worthy taking
notice of, which is observable in the prayers of holy men in Scripture. They
usually so frame their invocations or callings upon God, as may suit with their
main business at the throne of grace, and strenghthen their faith for those
particular mercies which they ask. Thus in that sorenamed prayer of
Hezechias's against the Assyrian Armies. O Lord of hosts [for he prayed against
a mighty host, and for deliverance from it.] God of Israel [he therefore so
calls God to put him in mind of his covenant with Israel, that he might stretch
forth his hand for the deliverance of his own people] who dwell between the
Cherubims [that is, who have here recorded thy name and promised to meet and
bless and from thy mercy Seat to answer thy people. He therefore makes mention
of Gods promised presence, or dwelling between the Cherubims, that he might
prevail with God to save that City, where his Temple and this his mercy Seat
was placed.] Every expression in this his invocation has somewhat in it proper
to his suit, and of force to strengthen his faith and dependence upon God, that
he might the more surely prevail. In short then the graces to be exercised in
adoration or calling upon God chiefly are, Faith, Fear or Reverence of God, and
Humility.

I then confess my self to God as I ought when with hearty sorrow and
repentance (which if earnest will be accompanied with a kind of indignation
against my self) I lay open impartially my sins before him, not sparing the
sweetest or closest: and with an humble sense of my own vileness, impotency
and emptiness acknowledge my wants or his just judgments upon me for any of my
sins. So that the chief grace to be exercised peculiarly in confession is
repentance or Godly sorrow, an humble and tender sense of what we confess,
accompanied with shame of our selves.

Further, then I ask as I ought, when, as sensible of mine own unworthiness,
out of an humble trust in God, through the merits of his Son, (which trust his
gracious promises and declarations of good will through him, by me ever had
respect to, do encourage me to take up) I heartily desire what I ask at his
hands: or at least am heartily sorry, if I cannot say I heartily desire all I
ask. Now because while I am asking, it so comes to pass, that I often
intermix somewhat of vow, as in asking the pardon of some past sins, many times
I engage to diligent and watchful opposition for the future against them,
therefore is it necessary that, if I would ask aright, I ask with resolution
and purpose of endeavoring a new life. And further for that I cannot expect
forgiveness from God, except I forgive from my heart my brethren, therefore I
must ask in charity. So then the Graces chiefly to be exercised in Petition
are, First, Faith or an humble trust and hope in God through Jesus Christ that
I shall speed (which is, most truly Praying in his name) Secondly Love toward
God and holiness. Thirdly, a steadfast purpose of obedience, which is the most
considerable part of repentance. Fourthly, Charity toward my Brethren.

Lastly, I then praise or give God thanks for his mercies as I ought, when I
have an inward acknowledgement and sense that it is him alone, and through his
mere savor, that I enjoy these mercies, and when, not only I my self do
admire, but desire that heaven and earth may admire him for his goodness: when
also I do all this with a resolution of improving the mercy given, that is of
walking as it becomes one, who has been vouchsafed of such a blessing. So
that the graces to be exercised in thanksgiving chiefly are, 1. Humility, or a
sense of our own unworthiness, and of Gods free mercy and grace, the only
fountain of all received or hoped for benefits. 2. Love, or an administration
of his goodness accompanied with a desire that he may receive all possible
glory for it. 3. Resolution and study of greater and more suitable obedience
and duty to him:

These are those graces, in the exercise of which, the due inward manner of
prayer, or a praying temper, consists: a composition so amiable, as that it
will ever where it is, send up an odor of a sweet savor unto Heaven, and
delight, shall I say, or overcome, the Almighty Majesty.

Chap. VIII. Of the best outward manner of Prayer, in sit postures and sit
words. Of praying by gift, and the inconveniences alledgeable against it. Of
praying by a form, and the inconveniences alledgable against it. An
accommodation and reconcilement of both.
IN the outward manner of prayer the chief points considerable are, the use of
sit postures, and meet words.

Now though the posture of the body seem to be a small matter, yet methinks my
prayers wants their due solemnity, if not performed in a posture of worship.
True it is, many a devout prayer a man may make riding upon his horse back,
walking in the fields, and the like: and right Christian is it thus to
sanctify my necessary journies, or the time which otherwise would be wholly
lost in travel, or stolen away by such recreatory obambulation. But these are
occasional, and not my set and solemn devotions. Here my body being otherwise
necessarily employed, the most which I can give to God is my soul: or if to my
thoughts my words be added, it is as much as well can be. But in my fixed course
of devotion, it is not to be supposed that I worship God (aliud agens) employed
with any thing but his worship: and therefore herein let my body, as well as my
soul, be taken up in meet acts of worship. Now that I account to be the best
posture of worship, which best expresses an inward reverence of that Majesty,
to whom I address my self, who having fearfully made my body, and to this day
wonderfully upheld and preserved it, and (which is infinitely more) redeemed
even my very body to immortality by the body and blood of his Son, has obliged
it, as well as my soul, to all possible homage. And it is to be observed, that
St. Paul seems to speak (chiefly if not only) of private and his daily
devotion, when he says, I bow my knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. What was his therefore, let it be my practice, as often as I thus pray,
to bow my knees: and (if to no other end, but that I may be sure to mind, that
they be without wrath) let me add the lifting up of hands. Other postures may
be sometimes necessary in our solemn humiliations, or more earnest deprecations
of any imminent evil; such as is Prostration, or casting my self on the earth
before God: to which pious discretion will easily in their season direct.

As to matter of words or the forms of prayer, this age has seen more
controversy, and that in England alone, than all ages from the beginning of
the world have known all the world over. Touching which matter I say only,
that the nature of prayer being, as beforesaid, a seeking unto God by way of
adoration, confession, petition, and praise, if we do this with honest hearts
and suitable affections, whether the words in which we utter our selves, be our
own or another; whether they he forethought or sudden, (provided they fitly
and reverently express the inward sense of our hearts) it mattereth not, nor is
it at all essential unto Prayer. For the full essence of prayer is complete,
such an address being made inwardly by my soul, and outwardly thus expressed by
my tongue and body: and be the words whose they will, my praying them (that is,
offering them up to God) with an heart suitable to them, has made them as much
mine, as if I had invented, contrived, dictated or pend them at the first. I
think therefore, if men would be sober and peaceably minded, this need not make
either a stir in the World, or move any scruple to a Christians conscience.

I profess my self no whit guilty of undervaluing the free effusions of the
soul before God (in private especially) in such expressions as the affected and
moved mind suggests, or as the spirit gives utterance. But in my daily private
devotions to use perpetually such a loose and arbritary way, I think has these
inconveniences First, that (by reason sometimes of the coldness, dullness, and
heedlesness of my heart; other times by reason of distractions, encumbrances,
and the like almost unavoidable mischiefs) my devotions will be too often
slightily slubberd over, perfunctorily and disorderly performed: Whereas, had I
a mature and well composed prayer before me, which I use wholly to offer up to
God, all would be much more substantial: and though happily my heart may have
been in these my prayers too too dead (as it was likely perhaps to have been,
had I prayed otherwise, for such or such a season) yet shall I not prove guilty
of such idleness, negligence, and slightiness, as otherwise I should have been.
And such infirmities, which are incident to us by reason of our present frailty
and state, God is likely the more easily to pity and pass by, when he sees
that, though we are more indisposed than ordinary, yet are we no whit less
diligent. Secondly, Another inconvenience thereby may oftentimes be, The
omission of many things necessary to be confessed, asked, or returned thanks
for; not so much through negligence, dullness, etc. (as before) as incogitancy
and unavoidable forgetfulness. Our ordinary wants and spiritual concerns we may
come not to mind, either at all, or as we ought, through much being intent on
some other pressing (outward) evils. Common experience will easily satisfy a
Christian herein, who is but verst in the practice of what we speak of. Have I
not many times kneeled down before God with an intention to ask such things
which by reason of my earnest asking somewhat else, I have forgotten to ask
before I arose? and has not the reason been the mere following extemporary
suggestions? Let it it be considered.

Again, on the other side, to use always a certain and constant form of words,
seems to have these inconveniences. First, that we having almost daily new
sins to confess, new wants to beg a supply of; these by such course shall be
omitted, or only lightly and generally touched, at least not so particularly and
affectionately pressed and insisted upon as they ought. 2. Besides, sometimes
happily I would spend more time in prayer than at another time: Now if my prayers
be always the same, I cannot, expect (as Papists are reported to do their
Credoes and Ave Mary's) I should run over and over the same again. 3. Further,
frequent use may breed dullness, as some may think.

These being the inconveniences of both cases, and each case besides having
advocates (or persons that love and plead for them) even amongst the common
people, it will be best to move for an Accommodation: And that may be on this
wise.

The inconveniences of the former case may be avoided, by the having a certain
good plain and full form of prayer, which we well understand, and by usually
tying our selves hereto: not so as, ^. to think our work is done by the prayer
being said; for that were to neglect the most necessary part in the manner of
prayer, contrary to former rule: nor so, 2. as not to alter, for this or that
time, any expression as God may move our hearts in prayer, or insert any new
thing as we have need: but only so, 1. as to ensure my self that my devotions
and prayers be sound and complete, that I offer not to God the halt and the
lame: so, 2. as to keep my mind fixed and constant to its business, intent upon
all its spiritual concerns.

And again, the inconveniences of the later case will be avoided hereby, that
we have not supposed the form upon occasion altogether unalterable, as above
said, but rathen to have its fit and proper places, wherein we may insert or
put in the confession of new sins, with their proper aggravations, as also fit
places for the adding of any new matter of Petition or Thanksgiving, as there
shall be occasion. And to the last inconvenience of this second case, it may be
said, that Use cannot beget dullness, if the prayer thus supposed to be framed,
be used, according to former precepts, with Reading and Meditation before it,
which exercises will have in a good measure quickened the heart for prayer. And
as for such more solemn seasons, when we would spend more time with God in
prayer, we need not so to tie our selves to these our ordinary devotions;
those, which at such seasons we intend, being already supposed more than
ordinary. We may be larger in the confession of sin, more particular in its
aggravation, more earnest for such and such mercies as we want, etc. according
as we shall see occasion: and either use the groundwork and substance of those
our usual prayers, with such amplifications as we shall judge meetest, or for
that time, in stead of them, use such other prayers as we shall find best to
suit with our temper and occasions; for the preparation of which prayers
directions will hereafter be given.

In the mean time for better understanding and comprehending the precepts
given, as also for the supply of such who may happily be scarce able to frame to
themselves such a form, it may not be amiss to subjoyn one for morning, and
another for evening, framed according to the former rules.

Chap. IX. A Form of Prayer made according to the former accommodation, which
may be used in our morning Privacy.
THe Christian then having read and meditated as before directed, let him
reverently kneel down, lifting up his hands and eyes, but most surely his heart
to Heaven, say,

O Almighty and most Blessed God, Lord of heaven and earth, who make the
outgoings both of morning and evening, and by whose good hand upon me thy
creature, I am awaked out of my last nights sleep, and being risen, here
present my self before thee: I humbly bow to thee my knees, and therewith my
heart and soul, and desire with all that is within me to adore thy blessed
Majesty.

But most unworthy, and of my self most unsufficient, am I to perform unto thee
any worship or service. What is dust and ashes, (and such am I if I were
innocent) to take upon it to speak unto the Lord! But I, O God, am a guilty
wretch, one whom i^ becomes to stand a far, and shame covering my face to
cry Unclean, Unclean. My soul is naturally overrun with lusts as with an
universal Leprofie: there is no free part of me. My childhood and youth have
not only been vanity, but sin: I have done nothing else therein but fulfilled
the desires of my flesh and mind. My corruptions have only grown with me: and
my sins since, become so much the more sinful, by how much the more knowledge I
have had of thy will, and strength and engagements to have performed it.

To this very day, as indeed I ever have done, I daily break thy holy Laws in
thought, word and actions, by choosing what thou have forbidden, and neglecting
what thou have commanded. * * Here confess any particular or fresh sin
committed, or duty neglected, which in thy examination of thy self thou have
found.
In all my ways I most miserably transgress. My very a sleep it self, O Lord,
is not innocent. Nor is it thus only in the common and more ordinary actions
of my life. Those few good deeds, which I do, have many, not only Remember in
the use of these or any such words to reflect in thy thoughts upon any
particulars which thy conscience tells thee, they may fitly represent to God
touching thee.
infirmities, but sins in them: and I have need to repent of my very
righteousness [of my * * *.] I therefore so desire to do: and am here come
before thee, as thou have commanded me, to confess my sin unto thee, with
hopes, according to thy promise, that I shall find mercy. I have, O God,
confessed to thee, as I am able.

Now Mercy, Mercy, let me find with thee, through Christ Jesus my Savior.
Remember that atonement, which he made by the blood of his Cross: In those
streams thoroughly wash away my filth: By those Wounds let me be healed; and by
his Death let me atttain a blessed. immortality, [* Particularly let me obtain
the pardon of *
] And send down thine holy Spirit abundantly into mine heart, which may renew
me throughout according to thine Image, healing all the naughty inclinations of
my soul, and begetting in me an hearty love unto holiness, and a constant fear
of thee my God, that I may have respect unto all thy Commandments, and walk
before thee all my days with a perfect heart. Quicken me also by the same thy
good Spirit, to give all diligence in every duty [and especially in * *] that I
may grow in grace, and in thy favor, and daily come nearer unto salvation and
thee. And forasmuch as I my self am unstable as water, preserve me by thy power
through Faith, that I fall not from my integrity, nor depart wickedly from thee
my God. Especially keep thy servant from his iniquity, [or his iniquites of * *
*] and make me most watchful against all those Here thou may have many
private and proper reslexions: and so generally wheresoever the same mark is
set.
occasions and wiles of sin, by which I have been formerly ensnared. My outward
condition, during all the days of my pilgrimage here on earth, do thou order
to thy glory and my own good: and, if it may be thy holy Will, grant that it
may be so far quiet and prosperous, as that I may serve thee cheerfully and
without distraction.

Be gracious also, O Lord, unto thine Holy Church, and to this Church
especially. Watch over us daily for good: and be pleased to bless and preserve
the Kings Majesty, his Queen, and all the Royal Family. Grant that all
Magistrates may be faithful both to thee, and to their Prince and Country in
their trust: and that all Ministers, of what degree soever, may be sober,
watchful, servent and successful in thy work. Let the whole Nation, and
especially this neighborhood grow in the true knowledge and fear of thee.
Visit with thy grace and blessing all my Relations, my Friends and Benefactors.
Forgive and reconcile both to thy self and me all mine enemies. Comfort,
relieve and in thine own good time deliver all thy servants who are in any
distress inward or outward, and sanctify both to them and me all thy dealings,
causing all things in the end to work together for good, according to thine
infinite Power and Wisdom, whereby thou over-rulest all events.

For which thy gracious administration of the whole course of nature, and the
multitude of blessings appertaining both to this life and that which is to
come, which thy providence incessantly heaps upon all mankind, and
particularly upon me thy most undeserving servant, for ever blessed be thy holy
Name. Especially may Heaven and Earth ever praise thee, for the redemption of
the world by thy Son; and the knowledge of thee, through him, revealed in thy
Word; and the mighty workings of thy Spirit thereby. And be thou pleased to
accept of that praise which thy servant hereby returns thee (as great as he
can) for them all; and particularly, for this last nights refreshings, together
with the comfortable restoring him to the enjoyment of day. Grant me thy
special Grace, that I may spend my time to thy Glory, and may be all the day
long in thy fear. Keep me that I fall into no sin, nor run into any danger. And
accept thou this my morning service, and to gather me who here devote my self
to (...), through my Savior Christ Jesus, in whose Name I further pray, as by
him taught, when I pray, to say,

Our Father, etc.

Chap. X. A form of prayer, made as the other, which may be used in our Evening
Privacy.
IN like manner the Christian having entered his Closet with some such
ejaculatory or short prayer, as before directed to, and having read and
meditated as in the morning, may, I presume, very profitably, use, with such
alteration, as his condition shall require, and his discretion direct, the
ensuing Prayer.

O Most Holy and Gracious Father, the searcher of all hearts, who see my
down-lying as well as up-rising, darkness and light being both alike to thee,
who art near unto all my ways, and espiest my thoughts while they are yet afar
off. I have here set my self before thee to pay my evening homage, and desire
to present both my soul and body (as is most due) a living Sacrifice to thee my
God, who have made and redeemed both.

But most unfit, O Lord, are they to be to thee presented, every part of both
being naturally corrupt and abominable, and nothing in me free from the
loathsome defilement of sin. My soul is desperately wicked, and all its powers
perverse and bent upon evil: My mind alienated from thee through the ignorance
that is within me: My affections unruly and masterless: My will full of enmity
to thy Law, and enslaved to the service of diverse lusts and pleasures. And as
to my body, in iniquity, O Lord, was I shapen, and in sin did my Mother
conceive me: And ever since, have all my members been servants unto iniquity
and instruments of wickedness. With my whole man have I obeyed the law of sin,
and fulfilled the desires of my flesh and corrupt mind. I scarce can think of
that sin, in which I have not had my hands one part of my time or other. In
sin, O God, have I spent not only my vainer age and the days of my ignorance,
but my ripest years, and those of fullest discretion, which I have yet attained
to: Since the light of thy Gospel has shone into my opened eyes, since thou
have touched my heart with a sense of that evil, which there is in sin, so
wicked and perverse a servant have I been, that knowing my Lords will I have
both neglected to do accordingly, and presumptuously done contrary unto it. To
the very present time, O Lord, how frequently, and how sadly do I backslide?
What liberty do I allow my self? How heedlesly do I converse? I walk at a mere
peradventure with thee my God. Notwithstanding all my vows and promises of
watchfulness unto obedience, this very day how little has thy fear been in my
heart! and from hence comes it to pass that I have so miserably departed from
thee [by * * Here confess any of the miscarriages of the day, which thou have
been supposed to have taken notice of in thy meditation.
.] With what stripes therefore do I deserve to be beaten! And, how righteous a
quarrel against me has not only thy Justice, but thy very Grace and Mercy!

Notwithstanding, O Blessed Father, give thy poor creature leave to beseech,
and let him prevail with thee, not to take that advantage against him which
justly thou may: Rather, now thou have borne so long, break my heart by this
thy goodness, and make thy forbearance and long-suffering to lead me to
repentance. Vouchsafe unto me thy sanctifying Spirit: Let it fill me with an
holy shame of my former ways: And let the sense of my own unworthiness toward
thee beget in me an holy indignation against my self, a passionate and constant
zeal by future diligence, as far as is possible, to redeem and repair some of
my lost and most sadly misspent time. Let my heart be never void of a steadfast
purpose of serving thee in the impartial performance of every known duty,
[especially of * * *] and careful avoidance of every sin. [ Here put in any
thing for which thou find occasion.
] And having thus given to will, do thou of the same thy good pleasure give
also to do, following the preventions of thy Grace by the continual assistances
thereof, so that I may proceed from one virtue unto another, perfecting
holiness in thy fear, and keeping a conscience void of offense toward thee and
all men.

And this my cordial purpose, and perseverance in endeavors of pleasing thee,
do thou through the blood of my Savior graciously accept, laying not to my
charge any of my former sins, nor visiting upon me, either the neglects, or
transgressions of my duty. At least however thou shall here deal with thy
servant, in the last day acquit him of all guilt, and, through the merits of
thy Son, let him obtain remission of his sin, and an inheritance in thine
everlasting Kingdom. In the mean while, as to the necessaries of this present
life, give thy servant what thou please, and what thou see best for him,
even food convenient. Thou need not, O God, my service, but accept my
ambition of being serviceable unto thee, and bless me both with strength and
opportunities for it, and, if it may be thy holy will, with success therein.

Father, I pray unto thee also for all men (forasmuch as thou art a God who
would have all to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of thy truth)
especially for all and every member and members of thy Universal Church, and
for the particular Church of this the Land of my nativity: For the Kings
Majesty, the Queen and the whole Royal Family, for all that are in authority,
for the several Stewards of thy Mysteries the Ministers of thy Gospel [for him
in particular to whose oversight thou have committed me] that thou will give
unto them all, according to thy most gracious pleasure, the blessings both of
this life and that which is to come, especially such measures of thy Spirit,
that every shoulder may be fitted for its burden, and all amongst us may
faithfully serve thee, according to their several degrees; so that this whole
Land may be blessed with abundance of prosperity and peace, so long as the Sun
and Moon endures. Forget not peculiarly to show mercy unto the relations,
friends, helpers and well-wishers of thy servant: Reward, I beseech thee, all
their love; and forgive, good Lord, divert, and put an end unto all others
malice or enmity. Let thine eyes be ever open upon, and the bowels of thy
compassion be moved toward, all thy wanting and suffering servants: Support
them under, and graciously deliver them out of all their distresses, and let
the end be peace, and righteousness, and blessedness for ever.

Thy servant will speak yet once more, and praise thee for thine infinite love
and compassion to that miserable nature, of which he is a partaker, in
revealing to us, when we had lost or corrupted it, the knowledge of thy self,
both by the light of Nature, and most clearly by thy holy Word; in sending thy
Son for our redemption, in appointing the Ministry and Ordinances of thy
Gospel, and pouring out thy holy Spirit, to turn us from darkness unto light,
and from the power of Satan unto the Kingdom of thy Son. O God, I particularly
bless thee, for the knowledge which I have of thee in my Savior Christ Jesus;
for my share in him; for any measure of thy Grace on me vouchsafed; for the
comfortable hope which through thy Sons blood I have of pardon and eternal
life; for this days life and protection, for the with holding [or removing]
those several judgments which my sins deserve, [* * Here praise God for any
particular deliverance saying, [especially for * *.]
] for the loading me with a multitude of most undeserved blessings [especially
for * * *.] Increase upon me thy Grace evermore; and make me thankful by
proving a faithful Steward of all thy mercies. Let that Eye of thine which
never slumbreth nor sleeps, which has been open upon me this day, watch over
me this night: Let nothing disturb or make me afraid. Let none of the sins of
the day lie down with me, nor ever appear against me. Vouchsafe my body due
refreshment, and let my soul have her songs in the night. Keep both from all
works of darkness: and let me be ever with thee, O Father, both here and
hereafter, through thy Son my Savior Christ Jesus, in whose name and words I
further pray,

Our Father, etc.

Chap. X I. Some further Directions touching the use of these Prayers.
IN these or the like words may a devout Christian, I presume, not unfitly pour
out his heart before God, morning and evening. But it is to be remembered to
what end these sormes were prepared, and the use of them directed to, to wit,
to be a provision against raw, heedless, imperfect broken, confused, and
disorderly Prayers, of which dullness, distemper, or d^straction may make even
the devoutest Christian to be guilty, if he always trust to his extemporary
faculty and readiness.

Wherefore it is not the intention of the present direction, to tie even every
one that shall use these or the like forms ever to them, but only commonly,
or as his Christian prudence and sobriety shall judge it best suiting with his
devotion and present temper. So then, if at any time a Christian shall find his
mind more ready and present than ordinary, so that he can say in Holy David's
words, My heart is fixed, Psalm. 10^
[or, prepared] O Lord, my heart is fixed, and he feel a certain overflowing of
affection ready to come over his soul, he is to esteem this a time, when God
does as it were bespeak somewhat more than ordinary; to that purpose offering,
and giving him to feel already, morethan ordinary assistance, and by such
special moving of the waters secretly signify, that he has some healing
benefit or refreshment then to communicate unto the soul. Wherefore let him
yield himself to the leading of the Spirit, and by no means let slip that holy
season of a more free and large effusion or pouring out of his soul before God:
Always in the mean while remembering that he duly prepare himself, by somefore
going meditation, according to what has been already in part spoken, and will
hereafter be more fully considered.

And this practice, I presume, as it so far binds a man up, that his devotion
shall not be loose and slighty, so it allows him (1.) such liberty as may duly
exercise and improve any spiritual gifts which he conceives himself to have,
and (2.) such variety as that there is no fear, that custom or treading
always the same tract, (I mean repeating the same words) should make him
guilty of formality and deadness.

If there be any Objection now lying against this proposed course in our
devotion, it is, as far as I can see, only this, that it will take up too much
time. But we have already supposed our practist to be such, who lives somewhat
above a servile life, and therefore may spare some part of his time, which
surely he cannot spend to a better purpose, or upon more beneficial employment.
And it will undoubtedly be sound true by him, who shall set himself upon this
practice, or put his devotions into this mold, that when he is once but got
into the way, and settled in it, the performance of all will cost him less time
by much in a day, than has the reading of these directions. An hour in a day
(or very little more) being divided into equal parts, and half taken in the
morning, half at night, may very well suffice: and they are either very full of
employment, or exceeding bad husbands of their time, who, being at their own
command, cannot afford so much time for so necessary a work. (Not to speak that
some part of this work may be reckoned a kind of studying, and that as
becoming, as useful to all such as we speak to.) Consider man, which is of
greater concernment, thy souls, or thy bodies welfare? Which is longer,
threescore years and ten, or Eternity? Can thou therefore only find time to
provide for the more unworthy?

PART III. Of my more solemn Retirement into my Closet upon Holydaies and
Sundaies.
Chap. 1. That our devotions should be greater on Holydaies, than on ordinary
days. The end of Festivals, and their Vindication from Abuses and Cavils.
THat upon Holydaies or Festivals, they ought to be more taken up in devotion,
than on other days, there is no men I presume will deny, except they be so
factious as to slight the institution, or so sensual as not to understand the
end and design of them.

It is as uncharitable as unreasonable a part, to conclude, that because they
bear the name ordinarily of certain Saints and Martyrs, that therefore the
days were superstitiously consecrated to the mere honor of those Saints. The
design of the Church in this institution seems to me only thus much.

First, that Almighty God might have particular glory for all the particular
parts and degrees of the work of our redemption (the Incarnation, Circumcision,
Passion, Resurrection, etc. of our Savior) as likewise for all those his
servants by whose doctrine and examples, whether in life or death, his holy
Gospel has been planted and confirmed. Then 2. that there might be due
commemoration of such particular persons, and of the graces in which they did
excel; as well to the end, that their examples (at least) might be an immortal
incitement to virtue, and they being dead might yet thus speak; as that virtue
might have its deserved honor, which, for the enforcement of like worthy
practices upon others, comes not at all too late though it be given to the
ashes of the virtuous.

And that these two, to wit, Giving particular honor to God, and the
Propagation of virtue, were the main aims of the Church, seems to be
undeniable, if we do consider either the particular Collects on those days, or
that clause in the Primmer for the Estate of Christ's Church Militant, toward
the end [We bless thy name for all thy servants departed this life in thy faith
and fear, beseeching thee to give us, grace to follow their good examples,
etc.] which prayer, we know, is one part of the Service of the Church upon
every Festival, and both this and the formentioned Collects expressly prosess as
much as we affirm.

Now these, as they cannot be rejected by any sober men (and so the end being
right, and the power just, and the thing it self as just (which two last,
because I see no reason for the questioning them, I let pass without any other
proof, than the evidence which they carry with them) it cannot be seen how the
institution should be amiss, wherefore the factious have an answer:) so they
are directly frustrated by those, who look upon Festivals as merely a time of
liberty, and so many days devoted to pleasure or idleness. I will not say, but
that both the Church and State, in settling their institutions by Law, might
have some aim at allowing servants, and those who live a servile life, some
rest and time for lawful recreations, which sometimes the covetousness of some
Masters, sometimes some persons own covetousness would not allow them: (And
this is justifiable even by the practice of God himself in the fourth
Commandment, that thy servant may rest, etc.) but that it was never either the
Churches or States intention, that they should wholly be spent to this purpose I
do affirm; and for proof hereof, at home, allege our Laws, which enjoin all on
such days to resort to places of public worship for the service of God, and
abroad, that ^mperial Constitution, We will not that Holydaies, which are
consecrate to the supreme Majesty, be employed or spent upon pleasures. And it
would be a right pious work, and as much for the vindication of Festivals as
any other, if Magistrates would according as I am sure they may, punish those,
who use to spend whole Holydaies in their pleasures (dancing, hunting,
runnings, footballs, etc.) by the legal mulct for absence from Divine Service.

But may no recreation then be taken upon Holydaies? I do not say, nor intend
that: nor does, I presume, the Law, neither new, or old. But the rest and (if
by the rest we will understand any thing but a dull idleness) the refreshment
of laboring persons, being one thing which, by the way, was designed in their
institution, plain it is that lawful recreations as they are exercises of
refreshment, may on them be used. But as to such recreations, which shall
supplant or thrust out the service of God, which is the main end to which the
Festivals were ordained, I see not how they can without sin be frequented,
practiced, or tolerated: I am sure our Ecclesiastical Laws tolerate them not.

Further, I presume the genuine sense of the fourth Commandment enforces as
much as I press: For that enjoining a Jew to sanctify the seventh day, that is
the time which by their Law was set apart to the worship of God, will also (at
least) in equity and reason enjoin a Christian to sanctify such times, as
their Laws have consecrated to the Divine worship: which Laws touching the
particular setting apart of times to the worship of God, though they are not
all extant in Scripture, nor immediately delivered by the mouth of God; yet,
being made by them, whom he, to whom all power both in Heaven and Earth was
given, has commissionated and made his delegates (to wit, his Apostles, and
their successors, the governors of the Church) cannot be looked upon as
altogether humane, but have a certain stamp of Divinity; according as
ordinarily we interpret the commands of the Kings officers, in such things
wherein they are commissionated, to be the Kings commands. Now, that Holydaies
were ordained by the lawful governors of the Church, is too evident to be
denied. And I should not fear to say, that some of our present Feasts were at
the least observed by some of the Apostles, our Saviors immediate Substitutes.
How therefore can we neglect to sanctify such times, which are thus
confecrated to God, that is, not employ them to those separate uses, to which
they were appointed (which is the meaning of sanctifying, in this regard, in
Scripture) without the unhallowing holy or devoted things, or withour the
evident breach of this Commandment.

I will add no more to this purpose, bnt that every one being bound to
proportion his time for his devotion, according to the opportunities and
leisure which he has, and it being unlawful by the very municipal law or law
of the Land (for such is the Ecclesiastical law in this case) totally to follow
the work of my calliug on Festivals or Holydaies, I cannot but have more
leisure on them for the service of God; and therefore consequently a greater
portion of it is to be spent in my devotions. Which being concluded, as most
lawfully and rightfully it may, in general, what has been said holds as well
concerning private as public devotions. I ought therefore to think my self
bound on every Holyday to somewhat more of devotion in private, than what every
day calls for.

Chap. II. What there should be of Nero in our Private devotions upon Holy
days.
THe question now will be, what that is of new, which Festivals may seem
properly to require of a Christian in his Closet devotions.

To which it must be said, that as to the general substance of my devotions, it
can scarce be other at any time, than what has been already delivered, to wit,
Reading, Meditation and Prayer. But yet each of these may be employed a while
upon some new specialty, or particular matter which that days occasion and
solemnity directs unto^ to wit, upon the life or virtues of that particular
Saint or Martyr, whose memory the day celebrates: or if the day be such, which
was intended only to praise God for some particular transaction relating to
our redemption (as the Nativity of our Lord, his Circumcision, etc.) to bend my
devotions hitherward. To this purpose it may be proper, besides what I read in
Holy Scripture that day by my constant course, (which should not at any time,
except upon evident necessity, or very considerable business be broken) to read
those particular portions of Scripture, which are by the Church appointed for
that day; I mean the Epistle and Gospel for the day. And these being read over
with such care, as is before prescribed, to spend some time according to former
rules in Meditation upon them: and then, either to my own prayers to take in
the Collect of the day, or to add some other petitions and praises, as my
Christian discretion shall judge seasonable. To this employment if I allot an
hour (or if need so require, half an hour) besides what I ordinarily, on other
days, spend on my devotions, the work may in some good measure be done. And it
cannot be thought but so much time may well be spared by reason of that leisure
and rest which the Law on that day enjoins me.

Chap. III. An Exemplification or Practice of the former rules in Christmas
day, with a fit Prayer to be added to my ordinary prayers upon that day.
NOw because all the directions given will be better understood and rendered
more easily practicable to the plainest, if a little exemplified, a pattern or
two shall be set down of what there should be of new in our devotions on
Festivals: and those so framed, as that they may serve not only for instances
in this last case, but for examples of practice to those formerly given Part.
II. Chap. 4. and 5.
rules, touching Reading and Meditating.

And first for such Feasts which celebrate the memory of some particular in, or
step to, our redemption.

Amongst these the copy shall be in Christmas day. [The Epistle Hebr. 1. v. 1.
to v. 13.] Which having carefully read over, I cannot but observe (according to
my first rule in Meditation) that the Holy Part. II. Chap. 5.
Ghosts design is to express the glory of our Savior, and especially his
emihency above any, and all the Angels (which yet are the most glorious part of
the Creation.) And this glory of his is expressed to be so eminent, not only
in respect of his Divine nature, as he is the express Image of his Fathers
person, but also as he is God man, as having been born in our nature, and
purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. So that
the very humane nature of our Savior, how ever contemptible it might seem once
to be, is now advanced infinitely above the Angels, all the Angels being to
worship the incarnate Son of God, and his Throne being established for ever.

Now there being in all this no considerable matter of difficulty which offers
its self, I have no need here to apply my second rules (touching searching into
difficulties) and therefore I proceed to the third, to consider what I am the
better for having read this. The substance of it I have already gathered in the
practice of my first rule: that reviewing, to gain light to the particular
parts, I find by the second verse my self instructed and confirmed in that
point of my faith, the Eternity of the second person, or the Sons being from
everlasting: For it is said that God by his Son made the Worlds, that is (as I
may probably conclude) all things that are. His Son then was before the Worlds,
that is from Eternity.

Again that admirable expression [the brightness of the fathers glory, and
express image of his person and the upholder of all things by his power] what a
glorious representation is it of the Sons Deity, and being distinct, but not
separate, from his eternal father; according as the brightness of glory may be
conceived as distinct from that glory of which it is the brightness, but never
can be apart from that glory.

Again that following expression [after he had by himself purged our sins, Sat
down at the right hand of the Majesty on high] with what an heavenly emphasis
does it set out.

1. The fullness of the atonement made by Christ as to every faithful person:
by himself he purged our sins: and how can they not be pure before the father
whose sins his only Son by himself has purged?

2. The transcendency of our Saviors glorifycation [He sat down at the right
hand of the Majesty on high] What a blessed ((...) or) height is here to
express it! and how does the very expression affect the considering mind! he
sat down at the right, etc. me thinks I could say it an hundred times over with
new admiration and dissolution of soul. It secretly insinuates also, what shall
be our future glory, when we shall be like unto him, and sit down with him at
the right hand of the same Majesty. More of the same nature might be noted, but
this is sufficient to exemplify the Rules.

I proceed now to consider the Gospel which also I am supposed to have read.
[Gospel, John 1. v. 1, to 15.] The scope and substance of this Gospel seems to
be this, that our Lord Jesus being God ever with the Father, in time took upon
him our nature to redeem us, and that John the Baptist was a witness hereof.

But here are several expressions, which seem to contain some matter of faith
touching our Savior, and yet I do not perfectly understand them. Wherefore if
I have any help (as before directed to, by the second Rule touching Meditation
upon Scripture) I consult that touching this whole portion of Scripture. Which
having consulted I may be supposed in some tolerable measure to understand what
is held forth therein necessary to be believed. If I have no such book or help,
then I must make as good shift as I can: and considering the scope and drift of
the place before mentioned, and every particular expression at which I stick, I
interpret that which I doubt of, with a regard to, and by the height I can take
from, what I understand. Thus having the general scope of this Scripture in my
mind, I review it, or consider it again in the order as it lies. Nothing do I
meet with which I do not in a good measure understand till I come to v. 4, and
5. (For having observed at the first reading, that (v. 14.) the Apostle says
the Word was made flesh, by the Word in the 1. verse I can understand nothing
but the eternal Son of God) In him was life, and the life was the light of men.
What life? or how is the life the light of men? I consider that the holy Ghost
is here speaking of the Delty of the Son, and in the third verse ascribes the
making of all things to him. Then it follows In him was life. It is very likely
that the meaning hereof is thus much. He is the fountain of life, he made as
well the things which live, as those which do not. He communicated life to all
living And the life was the light of men. It is very likely that life here is
to be understood of that natural life, which all men whatsoever live: for he
speaks of Christ as the Creator of all living. Now, whereas it is said, that
this life is the light of men, or that that life, which men do partake of from
God, is light, happily the meaning hereof may be, that the life, which the
Creator gave to man, was a more light some, that is a more intelligent, life
than what the rest of living creatures here below partake of; to wit, a
Rational life. Now it follows, The light shined in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not It is very likely that by light I must understand in this
verse what I did thereby in the former, to wit, Reason: and so considering all
more attently, at length I guess, that some such thing as this is the import of
that verse.

The natural light of man's reason shone in his corrupt and sensual nature, but
that Nature followed not the dictates of it: Men rejected what their reason
would have guided them to choose. And this, being that I was led thereto by
considering the drift of the words, and find now that the words will, to my
best judgment, very well bear, I conceive may probably be the meaning of this
place. But here it may be very necessary to admonish (especially ordinary
people) that they proceed not too far upon their own judgments in interpreting
darker places of Scripture, of which this happily may seem one. We have only in
what we have said shown the best way, which can be taken for the finding out
the sense of Scripture. But if so be, that using this method I particularly
could not have found out so much touching the sense of this Scripture, as has
been above declared, yet had not either my reading or my meditation been
fruitless. I could very well and very profitably have rested in this, that I
observed these verses to testify to me, that Christ is God, and by him all
things were made: and that from him came life, and all the light, which in life
men have. And thus much, by observation, a plain person might have found from
hence. But usually plain persons will do best, not to trust the strength of
their own reason, which commonly is none of the best judge of consequences and
dependances, but rather get to themselves such helps as above directed to, and
follow their wholesome guidance

Well: having found, out as I conceive thus much of the meaning of this
Scripture, if there be any thing else I doubt of in that part of it which
remains I proceed to consider it, carrying still in my mind the scope of the
whole, and thus much as I have learnt of the sense of the former part. The
substance of the remaining part seems to me thus much, That when it pleased the
Word to be made flesh (that is, the Son of God to take upon him our nature, and
in that nature to dwell) John the Baptist was sent for a witness to testify,
that this was the true true light, to the end that men might believe: And to as
many of mankind as did believe upon, and receive this light, this light
(himself being the eternal and natural Son of God, gave the privilege, right
or power to become through him the Sons of God being now born unto a new (viz a
godly) life by their receiving him Now here it may be (as I look through the
particular verses) are one or two things more of moment which! doubt of, and
touching which I will consult the best helps I have, or, otherwise consider
with as much attention and modesty as I can.

First, in what sense should Christ be termed the true light?

This considering of, I remember that before, there was mention of a, certain
light which all men did partake from the Word as created by him (to wit, their
Reason) and this light, though it shone in them, yet (as the first man did not
follow its shine so) the rest did reject his guidance, and the darkness
received, or comprehended it not. But now it is said, that the Word; that is,
Christ made flesh, is the true light: both which considering together, the
import of all seems to be this, That whereas the natural light of reason, being
not comprehended (but rather overcome) by the darkness of man's corrupt nature,
was insufficient, of it self, to lead man unto his salvation or true happiness,
and, being sophisticated by the same corruption, had led him to seek happiness
in many false and by paths. Jesus Christ came into the world to bring to light
the true way to happiness, and so was the true light.

From whence also I begin to see somewhat into the second passage which I
doubted of, to wit, what should be the meaning of that [as many as received
him]. For, considering how the Evangelist in the verses immediately foregoing
speaks of Christ, to wit, as the true light, I easily see, that to receive him
is to embrace him as the light, and so to apply my self to those holy ways,
which he has discovered, alone to lead unto happiness. Which also the
following words further intimate [them that believe in his name] that is them,
who by their embracing the discovery, which he has made, and doing
accordingly, do manifest that they are persuaded he is the true light: which
thing they do not as they are born by the will of man, of flesh and blood (for
the darkness comprehends not the light) but as begotten, or created over
again by God hereto.

So then, now I conceive I understand the Gospel for this day, and all the most
concerning particulars in it. The substance of it therefore I recollect after
this my search, to the end it may sink the deeper into me, and I be the better
verst hereafter in this Scripture. And that is this. That Christ, being
eternally God, was also with God (with whom he ever was) the Creator of all
things: and particularly of man: that man in his creation received a certain
light (viz his reason) which he opposed and overcome, rather than followed:
that therefore it pleased Christ to be made man, and coming into the world, to
discover the true way to happiness unto degenerate man, and as many of mankind,
who embraced this discovery, and manifested their belief of Christ's being the
true light, by their receiving him as such, he restored into the blessed state
of being the Sons of God (as Adam was before his fall). And Luke 3. 38.
of all this John the Baptist was sent before to be a witness, that by his
testimony men might be prepared to believe in this true light.

Thus much then I am improved in point of knowledge. But is there nothing which
may be further useful to me as to practicals? No promise of mercy? No threat of
punishment to any? Nothing to quicken me to my duty? There is surely.

First, that is a remarkable expression, As many as received him, to them he
gave power to become the sons of God. I cannot expect ever to be by my
incarnate Lord, made a Son of God, and Heir with him in the Kingdom of his
Father, except I receive him as the true light, except I look for happiness by
the method by him delivered, a holy Christian practice, according to his
Gospel. I see therefore hence the necessity of heing conformable to all the
Commands of the Gospel. He is salvation to none to whom he is not light: If
therefore I am not faithful, meek, charitable, holy, etc. as the Gospel
directs, salvation it self will not save me

Further, both the Epistle and Gospel put me in mind of, what the day
celebrates, the incarnation of our Savior (at least his visible Incarnation,
for to the eye he was not incarnate till born.) The Word was made flesh, and so
himself spoke unto us, and by himself be purged our sins. The Word, who was
that? The Son of God, the brightness of his Fathers glory, the express Image of
his Person, he who was ever with God, and ever God, heir of all things, by whom
aell things were made, he was made slesh. O ths depth of the love of God and
Christ! Whose soul can well hold to contemplate it!

Besides this admiration, and dissolution of soul, the thoughts hereof cannot
but be thus further useful to me.

First, seeing, from what an infinite glory, to what a mean nature and
condition, the Son of God (himself the infinite God) stooped for the help and
saving of men, I cannot but see my self in duty bound to the like humility,
meekness and condescension; not to stand upon mine own petty interests, and
consult nothing but self, when I have opportunity to do good to any infcriour,
that wants my succor. Had Christ done so, he had never been made flesh for me.
Now let the same mind be in me which was also in Christ Jesus.

And again, seeing to what an height of excellency the nature of mankind is now
advanced, it should prevail with me to put a due price upon it, and never
willingly to dishonor, by any unworthy action, what God himself has so
honored. Did God stoop to vindicate my nature from the contempt and tyranny of
the devil, and shall I, notwithstanding all the condescensions of his grace,
still wilfully enslave and destroy my self.

Further, God having united the nature, of which I am a partner, to him, I
should be ambitious of all means of uniting my self to him, that is, of doing
all that may be on my part to further this union.

And especially, the thoughts hereof should quicken me this day to a zealous
participating his body and blood. Can I consider God made flesh for me, God
debasing himself to be one with me, and is it possible that I can neglect, what
is so much for my honor and interest, as the means of sealing my particular
union with him? How can I esteem my self doly to have celebrated the memory of
his being made flesh, if having means of partaking of that flesh, which he
took, I neglect it? And how much ingratitude must such neglect have in it?

Lastly, seeing that one great end of our Saviors being incarnate was. to be
the true light to man in the pur suit of his happiness, let me account it a
noble degree of assimilation or being like my Savior, if I can in any measure
be a light to any herein. And if God have by office made me such, let me prize
and honor my employment: and manifest my value of it by my diligence in it.
The more light I give, the nearer do I in my office come unto my Savior.

Thus much then of incitement have I hence. to my duty. My other rules are not
here so applicable: Wherefore in the conclusion of my Maditations I consider
what of new all that I have meditated, does suggest See Part. 11 chapter 5.
unto this days prayers: And that I shall find to be matter of As to the first,

Praise. Petition.
1. The infinite goodness of God, that he would at all think of restoring that
nature, which was now an enemy to him, having wilfully fallen from him, cannot
if duly considered, but melt my heart into thankful praise of him.

2. That (yet) greater commendation of his goodness, his infinite
condescension, his redeeming our nature in a way so glorious to it, as was the
assumption of it unto his own nature, methinks should overcome my soul, and
wrap it into an ecstasy of praise and admiration. In all likelihood, infinite
Wisdom might have thought of a course, which would have been less honorable
to man, and would nor so much (if I may so speak) have humbled the Deity. But
he would not bring us to glory ingloriously. The mere consideration therefore
of the honor; which our Lords Incarnation puts upon our ill deserving nature,
will not suffer me to be silent this day in his praises.

And as to matter of petition, surely it cannot but be right seasonable to
beseech, 1. That all this may not be in vain unto me: And 2. That to that end,
I may transcribe these Copies of goodness, humility, and purity, which shone in
our Saviors incarnation, and walk in the light, as well of his example, as
doctrine. And all this I may do in some such words as these.

A Prayer to be added to my other daily Prayers on Christmas Day.
O God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; who, out of thy mere goodness and
pity, having promised thy Son to redeem fallen mankind, did in the fullness of
time faithfully perform with thine hand what thou had spoken with thy mouth,
and send him into the world made, and about this time born, of a woman: I one
of that redeemed, though vile, nature, humbly adore this thy Grace and
faithfulness. Eternity, Lord, is too little to bless thee for it: But Eternal
praise is the greatest that I can wish thee: and may thou to eternity receive
due glory for this thine infinite Goodness and Mercy!

O Thou the only begotten Son, by whom thine eternal Father made the Worlds,
who wast ever with God, and ever God, the brightness of his Glory, and express
Image of his Person, yet wast pleased in time to be made flesh, and pitch thy
Tabernacle in our nature: I part of the purchase of thy blood, poor dust and
ashes, but such as thine infinite Glory was pleased for my sake once to wear,
and now to glorify, and set above Angels, most humbly bless thee, as well for
this thy condeseension as for the honor done to man. Thou tookest not upon
thee the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham thou did take. Even so, O
Savior, for so it has seemed good to thee. Thou thoughtest not the Angelical
nature low enough for thine Infinity to stoop to. Most dear Jesus! thou have
overcome me. I would praise thee, but I cannot further. -- Accept my silent
ravishment, admiration, and faith. I believe. Lord, help my unbelief.

O holy Spirit, the power of the most High; who, after an unconceiveable sort,
overshadowing the Virgin Mother, did frame in her sacred Womb that Holy
Thing which That is, was the Son of God. For in Scripture many times being
called and being, word and thing are one and the same.
was called the Son of God; For this thy most wonderful and fearful (but to man
most happy) operation, I unworthy man bless thee: beseeching thee to inspire my
heart, that I may from this blessed Copy transcribe these Virtues of Goodness,
Humility, Love, Purity, and what soever mine holy Savior, either by his Life
or Doctrine has caught me: that so, I walking in his light, he may be to me
life ever lasting, to the praise of thee, O Father, Son, and holy Spirit, one
undivided God, Eternally. Amen

Chap. IV. An Exemplification of the former Rules in St. Stephen' s day's With
a Prayer which may (be used on any Saints day.
FOr the Epistle, Acts 7. 2. 55. to the end. Which, having read, I find to be a
narrative or relation of St. Ste^ben's martyrdom, And the chief substantials,
that my thoughts fix upon, are, That Encouraging vision vouchsafed to him, in
his entrance upon his suffering, and the manner of his taking his suffering.

St. Stephen, the first of those who were to pass to Heaven in the fiery
Chariot of a violent death, for the witness of Jesus, was now as good as
sentenced: for the defense, which he had made, had only further incensed his
persecutors. But he, who should take first so bold a step, had need of some
more than ordinary encouragement: It pleased therefore him, whose Witness he
was, to command away the Clouds, and through the opened Heavens to show himself
standing at the right hand of God, ready to receive him thither. And seeing the
passage now so clear, and the end so glorious, it was not likely that good
Stephen should stumble at a stone or two. This method does the gracious
providence of God observe, that where he gives a bitterer cup, there he
secretly provides greater encouragements, and thereby raises the strength of
his suffering servants.

Answerable to his encouragement do I find St. Stephens carriage. For being
cast out of the City, and stoned, all is so far from daunting him, that it
scarce seems to have disturbed him; for he readily prays to his Savior both
in his own and his murderers behalf. Particularly, these Virtues I cannot but
observe livelily shining in him suffering.

1. Constancy, Resolution and Christian Magnanimity in those sufferings, which
a truly Christian cause engaged him in. 2. Notwithstanding all his
extraordinary assurances of glory (Christ witnessing it to him from Heaven in
that blessed Vision) perseverance in earnest prayer to the last, When the
stones now struck him, he called upon God and said, etc. 3. Quietness, patience
and serenity: The injustice of his sufferings exasperates not his Spirit, nor
puts him into any passion or indisposition for his duty 4. Meekness, Charity,
Forgiveness, even toward them, who in that they were enemies to him, were
enemies also to Christ. He kneeled down [An expression of the solemnity of his
Prayers] and cried with a loud voice [an expression of the earnestness and
fervor of them.] A pattern most worthy imitation in suffering.

A double benefit then the substance of this portion of Scripture (recollected
according to direction) Part. 11. Chap. 5.
yields to me. The first, an Antidote or Remedy against dejection under, and
slavish fear of suffering. If God at any time call me to the bearing a greater
weight of afflictions than ordinary, let not me basely or sinfully decline
them, but rather remember what St. Stephen (and indeed all the Children of God
have) found by experience, that strength shall be given in proportionably, and
that suitable to my misery shall comfort and refreshment come in to sustain my
spirit, if I nobly engage. Secondly, St. Stephen's example is to me a copy how
I ought to suffer. Hence should I transcribe, Constancy, Dutifulness, Patience,
Charity, and what ever other Virtues I can observe him to have exercised in his
sufferings.

Now as to particular expressions here, that which concludes the relation
cannot well pass without notice. And when he had said this, he fell asleep: In
sweetness and love he breathed out his soul; and he doing so, pity it was, but
that to so sweet a soul, death it self should be sweetened, and so it was: He
fell a sleep. It teaches me how I am to look on death. To all men death is but
a sleep: good or bad, they must awake from it. But a good man's death should be
looked upon only as a falling asleep, or as another Scripture says, Resting
from his labors: Death is much the easiest to good men

Of these notes or remarks which I have thus in my Meditations on this Reading
made, those which I have mind chiefly to fasten upon my self (though I would
not forget any) are these, which follow, of which therefore I register in my
Memorial some hints, perhaps so as follows.

St. Stephen's day, 1 6 6 4. Acts 7.

Verse. 54, 55. God ever proproportions his Servants comforts to their
sufferings.

Verse 60. He sell asleep. How sweetly do good men dye! Also, a fit Petition to
use when I pray for enemies; Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

I noted all along in St. Stephen these Christian Graces. 1. Constancy and
Courage. 2. Perseverance in Prayer, notwithstanding the immediate revelation of
his instant Glory. 3. Patience. 4. Charity and Forgiveness.

This Pattern will serve for direction in what we ordinarily intend; and it is
brief, because it is supposed a pattern to be followed in what we in daily
course observe or set down. But if on Holy days any have a mind to be larger
in their setting down their Meditations, this hinders not.

The Gospel, Matt. 23. v. 34. to the end.

Observing the scope of this Scripture, I find it to be a Prophecy of the
dismal calamity which should befall the J^ws, by reason of their wilful
rejecting the Gospel; and cutting off them who were sent to preach it;
according as their stubborn forefathers had cut off the Prophets. A judgment
should befall them, which should be in some measure a proportionable revenge of
all the righteous blood which had been shed, from Abel to Zachary: Ver. 35.
and this by reason that they did persist in shedding such righteous blood, as
they indeed did in the case of our Savior, and his persecuted followers. Their
City therefore should become a desolation, and the very worship of God being
laid wast, they should expect the Messiah Ver. 38.
so long, that they should even bless him that could tell them any thing of him.

This is the general substance of this Scripture. Difficulty in it I find none
to stop me: I proceed therefore to inquire what of advantage I can make by the
reading of it, according to my proposed course. And, 1. I find my self, by the
observing the two first verses of it, much satisfied touching one case, in
which I have many times thought God to deal very hardly, to wit, touching his
visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children. Verse 3 5. It is said, that
upon that generation should fall all the righteous blood spilt from Abel to
Zachary, which, at the first look, seems very severe. But the reason is
rendered, ver. 34. because, of the Prophets, wise men and scribes, which Christ
sent amongst them, some they would kill and erucifie, some scourge in their
Synagogues, others persecute from City to City, according as their forefathers
ever had served the Prophets: Which gives me ground to conclude, That children
seldom or never inherit their fathers punishments, or the wrath due to their
fathers sins, but where they first prove inheritors of those sins: And in this
case, because they have seen their fathers sins, and the punishments, which
have befallen them for them, and yet not mended by their examples, it is but
justice, that their fathers sins should be visited upon them, that they should
have the same or like punishments as their fathers had, and greater.

Then, 2. I cannot but note how slowly and unwillingly God comes to judgment.
Thus much those words, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, suggest to me. Our Savior, I
see, cannot foretell this desertion and rejection of the Jews without a
lamentable taken up, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem. So unwilling is he to punish that
he even weeps at the very thoughts of it. [This is a very affecting
consideration, and of special force to quicken me to repentance, and is
therefore to be noted to that purpose.]

Lastly, Examining further according to the rules proposed, whether there be no
instance of Gods judgments against sinners, no threat to deter me from any
sin, or the like, I find there is, and cannot but stay my thoughts a while upon
this heavy denunciation of woe against those, who were outwardly Gods own
people, for their rejecting the offers of grace, and upon foolish prejudices
not acknowledging, or not being willing to see the light, which yet they could
not but see. And if God spared not the natural branches, how much less will he
spare me, who am only grafted in out of the wild olive, if I be guilty of the
same sin? It concerns me therefore in this case to look into my self: the very
reading of this Scripture ought to be to me a warning And let me see: Am I not
guilty of the like resisting light and rejecting grace? What do I else when I
sin presumptuously, and only not wilfully? Do not I then shut mine eyes
against the light, and offer violence to the convictions, which come from those
Scriptures, whose Authors, the Jews, were rejected, for offering violence unto?
They rejected their living testimony, I not only that (for that I have in the
Scripture) but the very voice of their blood, by which they sealed the truth of
their testimony. Oh sinful and ungracious wretch!

Now if any such as this be my case, let my meditations here rest a while. Let
me consider whether in this Scripture, which has thus convinced me of sin,
there be not somewhat which may reclaim me. And truly there is 1. (That which
has already been mentioned) Gods unwillingness to punish, his patience and
forbearance. And has not this been great toward me? How often have the warm
offers of love and pardon invited me, as they did them! May not I say, God
would have many a time gathered me under his wings? And do not these very
warnings, that if I am not reclaimed, I must be forsaken, speak Gods present
unwillingness (if any thing will work) to forsake me? Is not this as much as an
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem? Again, 2. I here see, that though God bore long with
his people, he would not bear always, being that they did persist in
resistance of his Grace. And truly I know not how soon God may call home from
me his opposed Spirit, and, suffering his Grace no longer to be abused, leave
me as he did the Jews, in my own stubbornness and wilfulness to perish

After this sort may I employ a while my thoughts: and if time will suffer,
thus ough^ I so long to meditate, till my moved heart have taken up full
resolutions of following the guidance of Gods Spirit, and yielding to his
Grace. And these warnings or convictions from the Word, together with my
resolutions upon them, should I (if able, register in that other of my Books,
which I call my Accomptal, or if not) take such solemn notice of, that I forget
not. But if any necessary matter force me to depart my privacy, before my
meditations arive at such a ripeness, yet let me not fail to take notice of the
warning which I received and set it down in my Accomptal, that so upon my *
fasting day, when I review the actions of that week, I may be sure not to
forget it, but to humble my self for my former miscarriages, and consider for
the future, how I may turn my feet into new ways.

But to return to the devotions of this present day: So much only remains now
to complete my present meditations as to conside^, what of new from all will be
seasonable to be added to my accustomed Prayers. And here will be,

First, Matter of confession touching my resisting Grace and not walking
according to the light which I have had

Secondly, Matter of praise.

1. For these warnings, which are so many calls to repentance, and invitations
to happiness.

2. For the testimony which the Gospel received, and does to this day receive,
by the doctrine and death of St. Stephen, and for the constancy, faithfulness,
patience, charity and meekness which shone forth in him.

Thirdly, Matter of Pe^ition.

1. For grace, that I may from henceforth yield unto all motions of Gods holy
Spirit. 2. That when ever God shall call me to suffer (as he does frequently by
the crosses, oppositions, frustrations, etc. which I meet with in the course of
my life) I may manifest the like meekness, patience, charity, holy resolution
and mindfulness of God by prayer and all other seasonable duties. All which,
having considered how I may in some sober and orderly way express or represent
before God, let me either insert in my wonted prayers, or in some short prayer
to be added to them compris^ as well as I can. A pattern whereof very
particular it will not be so expedient to set down here, but rather so to frame
a Prayer with some respect to the foregoing heads, as that it may in general be
accommodated to, or used upon the Feasts of any Saints or Martyrs.

A short Prayer which may be added to our ordinary prayers upon the feast of
any Saint or Martyr by our Church appointed to be kept.
O Lord, the God of truth and holiness, who at sundry times, and in sundry
ways have revealed thy self unto the world, by thy holy Prophets of old, and
in these last days by thy Son, of whom thou have since in all ages raised up
thy Saints and Servants to be witnesses. I humbly bless thee, as for all the
revelations of thy will and confirmations of thy truth, so especially for the
testimony given thereunto by the life [( The word doctrine is chiefly to be
used upon the feasts of the blessed Apostles.
) doctrine] [and ( If the feast be not the memorial of a Martyr, the word death
is to be left out.
) death] of thy servant St. S. whom thou made unto the world not only a
witness of thy truth, but a pattern of holiness: and I beseech thee to pardon
both all my opposing, and all my holding in unrighteousness those truths, which
either he or any other of thy servants have preached, or left on record. I
acknowledge and bewail may guiltiness herein: Keep me, blessed Father for the
future (at least) from all such presumptuous sins; and grant that the same
Spirit resting upon me, which dwelt upon them, may beget in me the like
humility, charity, [* Here insert the mention of any Christian virtue, in which
thou have observed the Saint whose memory thou celebratest to excel.
] diligence, resolution, and perseverance in all holiness. Let me as they both
in life and death glorify thee, according to my measure; so that amongst those
heavenly Hosts and blessed Society of thy Servants, I may have some (though it
should be the lowest) place, eternally to praise and enjoy thee O Fathers, Son,
and Holy Ghost, one most glorious God, Amen.

Chap. V. Of what remains to complete my private Festival-devotions, to wit,
Almes-giving,
SOme time, besides what my ordinary course requires, being thus spent in
Reading, Meditation, and Prayer, suitable to the particular regard of the day,
it only remains to complete my devotions, that according as God has blessed
me I set apart somewhat for the poor: for it is not certainly my self or my
rich neighbors only, which I am to feast upon Holydaies: and however it may
be I cannot give in my closet, yet I may in my closet, and at the end of my
devotions most conveniently, cheerfully, and religiously (and it may be most
liberally) consecrate, what I can spare, to such pious use, by separating it
from the rest, which I reserve for ordinary uses. And somewhat every Holyday
would I cast to have thus to consecrate to God, though it were the less: By the
observing this course I shall commonly, if not always, have wherewithal to
relieve the wants of such, whom I meet with and find to be truly indigent;
which, if I do not use my self to some such method, I may happily many times want
a stock for. Whether to distribute it in money, or in that which is bought with
my money, may be more suitable to the wants of those whom I relieve, a little
Christian discretion will easily direct. And the more to enforce this practice,
let me consider how naked, miserable and stingy solemn thanksgiving is, without
somewhat of Alms giving. Then surely I rejoice in a way most becoming the
mercies I and mankind have received, when as many as I have wherewithal
coveniently to help, have cause to rejoice for my rejoyeing: and on the
contrary, if being able (by doing but what is my duty, at least what I well
may) to revive poor and disconsolate persons, I suffer them through my
close-handedness) to groan under their distresses upon days of public joy,
what a blemish is it to those days joy, and what want of Christian goodness
and charity does it bespeak in me? I should rather be greedy and ambitious to
make all the world rejoice with me.

Now, for the making at least thus much of Almesgiving an act of my private
devotion, no one willj presume, to be dissatisfied, who either considers the
premises and the nature of the thing, or what our Savior says touching this
matter. Let not thy right hand know what in this Mat. 6 3.
case thy left hand does. Let therefore, I say, my charity crown my devotions:
and as I put out that (whatsoever it is) which I have to devote unto God, for
the relief of his wanting servants, it will not be amiss to use some short
ejaculation directed unto his allseeing Majesty, by which I may express my
cheerful offering it unto him, that is my setting it apart for the poor, whom
he has commanded me to succor, and promised me a blessing if I consider. Psa.
41. 1
Now that may be done in some such words as these.

O Lord, whose is the earth and the fullness thereof, I offer unto thee (what,
by thy gift and blessing, I have) this small testimony of my thankfulness and
duty, to be bestowed upon those wanting ones whom thy providence shall give me
opportunity to relieve. Be thou pleased through the blood of my Savior to
accept it, and pardon all my vain expenses.

The using some such course as this proposed will make me more liberal in these
my acts of charity: for how can I offer niggardly to this my bountiful God,
when I am conscious to my self, I have somewhat considerable, if I will well
husband all; which I may devote to him, and yet not abridge my self or mine
either of necessaries or conveniences: and hereto I shall be the more quickened
if I remember I offer to God, who both gave me, and sees all I have. Now
whether I may upon such a day meet with opportunity to my mind; or such a
person to bestow it on, as the discretion of my charity could wish, or whether
I cannot; yet let me account it really given to God, and therefore separate it
from the rest of the store, so that ever after I may look upon it as devote,
and not to be touched, except to distribute it to the poor. But if any fatal
necessity should constrain the meddling with any part of ought thus separated,
let me religiously observe to return it again to the poor man's purse or stock,
with an expiatory usury; that is with somewhat more, which may make recompense
for my first diminishing it. And thus we will leave the private devotions of
Festivals, and consider, in the next place, what will be meet to be performed
on the Lords day.

Chap. V I. That the Lords day ought to be kept holy, and what that means.
TOuching the observation of the Lords day, though I judge them indiscreet
friends unto it, who refer the institution of it mainly to the fourth
Commandment, yet I put the keeping of it holy so far out of all question, that
I cannot but account him very unchristian, who either is slightly herein
himself, or goes about to possess others that they may be so without sin.

The 1. natural justice of the The true gro 3nds of sanctifying the Lords nay
sum. med up. 1 Cor. 16 1, 2.
thing, that there should be some time set apart amongst the Christian
community for the public and solemn worship of God, 2. The antiquity and
authority of that Apostolic canon (recorded partly in express terms in
Scripture, and if it were not sufficiently manifest by their practice) which
has set apart this time, 3. Our Saviors honoring this day with his
resurrection thereupon (which gave occasion to its being set apart) 4. The
custom of all Christian Churches through all ages, and from the very Apostles
days. 5. Nay the practice of our Lord himself on this day meeting his
assembled Disciples, are all of them arguments beyond contradiction, and
warrant (sufficiently) divine, that it is to be esteemed consecrate or set
apart to the worship of God. And then the force which the fourth Commandment
in equity bears, that what time is set apart or consecrated to God should be
sanctified, that is spent to those separate purposes and intents, for which it
was set apart (which I say is the meaning of sanctifying or keeping holy any
time) sufficiently and beyond all evasion enjoins its being kept holy, it being
supposed once to be set apart, as it is before proved to have been. And
certainly (if as is undeniable, it be the duty of every Christian, as much as
may be, to keep all his life as a perpetual Sabbatism Hebr. 4. 10.
or holy rest unto God) it must needs be an argument of a very profane,
worldly, and unchristian spirit, not to afford God this day free from sensual
pleasures, and worldly cares or labors. Wherefore, I say, the keeping holy of
the Lords day, I put out of all question, and would have no man flatter
himself, that he is a devout Christian, who uses either by idleness or
pleasures, or unnecessary worldly business to profane what ( the Church, and
being that the Church has done it, by good warrant and power transmitted to
her by Christ) God himself has allowed. Profanation I call it: for if the
spending it to holy purposes be to sanctify it, then the spending it
contrarily upon ordinary or unworthy practices, is to profane it. And if we may
not give that which is holy unto dogs, it is then surely most intolerable to
take that time, which by divine Law ought to be holy unto God, and give it to
his enemies, the devil, this world, and our own lusts, which we do when we
spend the Lords day either in idleness, pleasures, or needless worldly matters.

Works of charity or mercy are acts of holiness: and works of necessity, so far
forth as they are works of necessity, are acts of mercy, and consequently the
doing of either of these (that is, works of Charity or Necessity) when due
occasion calls me thereto, is rather sanctifying than unhallowing the Lords
day) (especially if I do them out of duty toward God, and in his fear) and for
this I have his warrant, who tells Mat. 9. 13.
me that he better accepts Mercy than Sacrifice.

Chap. VII. Of Preparation for the Lords day. A preparatory Prayer thereto.
SEeing then that the Lords day is to be kept holy, that is, to be spent in the
worship and service of God, for which it is set apart, it concerns me to
consider how I may spend it in a way most complying with this its design or
intendment. And I shall easily, upon the very consideration of the nature of
Gods worship, be convinced, that it is in a manner impossible for me duly to
sanctify it, if I come unto it hot and wreaking from my worldly business. For
being I am to worship God in spirit and in truth, with all my mind, soul and
strength, and in a word with my whole man, evident it is that I am unable so to
do, while my heart yet remains unemptied of the world: and being unfit to
worship God, I am not, while so, in a due state to sanctify this day.
Wherefore the right sanctification of the Lords day is to begin with
Preparation.

And it is a right wholesome institution, that upon the Evening before it, there
should be Prayers in every Parish Church, which is grown now too much into
disuse by reason only (that I can imagine) of the degeneracy of the age. If
there be such custom kept up in my Parish, I would not, but upon necessity, be
absent from those preparatory prayers: At which, though I should be supposed to
have been present, yet would I not content my self therewith: but, whether I
have been employed publicly in preparations or not, in my course of devotion,
on Saturday night, take so much more time than I do ordinarily, as might serve
for some preparatory Meditations and Prayers.

The least which I can do to this purpose in my Meditations, is, First, To
examine whether there be not some sin or sad miscarriage of the week past,
which lies unrepented of, and so may blast my next days performances. And if
any there be, secondly, to consider of it more particularly, its aggravations,
its nature, whether it be not such an one, part of the Repentance, for which
must be Reconciliation, Restitution, or somewhat like: and accordingly to apply
my self to what I in my conscience, and in the fear of God do judge due
repentance. Thirdly, to endeavor the emptying my head of worldly (at least
distracting) cares; to bid them be gone now, till a day for them return: And
lastly, so to contrive (as near as I can) all my affairs for the next day, that
both I and my family may have as little avocations, or matters to call away our
minds from holy duties as may be. This by way of Meditation.

My Prayers must be suitable to my condition. If any such sin, as before
mentioned, be found, that must be confessed, bewailed, and pardon craved,
together with grace for the future against it: which may be done by putting in
the mention of that sin in the proper space left for such purpose. But besides
this, it will be necessary to add, some particular petitions for due
preparation or disposition of heart for the duties of the next day. First, for
a quiet, settled, and composed mind so that I may attend, with all my soul, my
holy concerns or business. Secondly, for enlivened affections, that I may not
be dull and heartless, but of a tender and melting spirit. Thirdly, for a
pliable ductile yielding and easy mind, that I may mix the word with faith,
and render the obedience of faith. Lastly, because both my own and the
Congregations benefit and edification much depends upon the Ministers due and
affectionate discharge of his office, it is therefore fit I forget not him, but
commend him to the assistance of the Spirit. To which purpose the following
prayer may be either inserted in some fit place toward the end of my prayers
or added to them.

O Lord from whom the preparations of the heart are: The day now approaches
which, being holy unto thee, I am to spend in thy more solemn worship. Many
sins there are by me not duly repented of, which may justly bring upon me a
curse instead of a blessing. [Especially my [ Here insert the mention of such
particular sins which thou have found thy self guilty of, etc.
] may make my very prayers an abomination to thee]. But accept thou I beseech
thee of this my confession of them, and (at least desired) sorrow for them.
Turn my heart from them for the future: and through the blood of my Savior so
remove the guilt of them, that they may not hinder good things from me. Let the
effusions of thy grace both upon me and all the Congregations of thy people be
plentiful. Let my heart be fixed, and none either vain or worldly thoughts
lodge within me this night. Quicken me by thy Holy Spirit, that I may draw near
unto thee with a true heart, and be fervent in Spirit in thy service; and with
a good and honest heart receiving thy word, may understand and keep it, and
bring forth fruit with patience and unto perfection. Remember thou thy servants
who are to dispense thy Mysteries unto thy people: and especially him upon
whose teaching I am to wait. Pardon their sins and frailties; Open their
mouths, guide their minds and tongues, that they may deliver thy truths in the
demonstration of thy Spirit: and let thy work so prosper in their hands, that
both themselves and others may be built up in our most holy faith, to the
perfecting thy Church, and the eternal glory of thy name thereby, through our
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. Amen.

Chap. VIII. Of the true manner of sanctifying the Lords day.
Sect. 1. Generally before I go to Church.
NOw as to my Closet duties upon this day, least the sole consideration of them
should breed any neglect, forgetfulness, or disturbance of the duties to be
performed in the family, and in the public assembly, it will be most expedient
to consider the whole duties of that day, both public, private and secret, and
set down each in their natural order.

First then, as upon no day we suppose our Christian to be slothful, so least
of all upon the Lords day, but to be up in a convenient season, both himself,
and, if any are under his charge, to see that they are so to. A convenient
season I call that, which, every man's health and occasions being considered,
will agree therewith, and leave time sufficient for the discharge of the duties
of the day. And supposing the public service to begin generally about nine of
the clock, between six and seven will be a good hour: and all things being well
ordered may consist very well with most men's health and occasions, And of this
time, which passes between my rising and going to Church, if an hour and the
odd parts be divided between the devotions of the family and the closet, so
that half an hour be spent in the one, and the other half with the odd time in
my closet, it may do very well; and the common occasions of most houses being
considered, so much time may be allowed: If so much cannot be afforded to this
work, yet let some; and what day soever I spend with double prayers (I mean
prayer in my closet, and prayer in my family) yet this day let me omit neither.
It is a bad omen to begin the sanctification of the Lords day by the breach of
my ordinary course of devotion, and an argument it is likely to be but
negligently sanctified by me. Besides, many in my family may perhaps make no
other preparation for the worship of God, than what they make by joining in the
familydevotions: it will be therefore the more necessary to make sure of thus
much.

Sect. 2. Of secret devotion in the Closet before going to Church.
NOw my private devotions will be for the main the same this day as others.
Only in my Meditations it is to be remembered that I examine my self touching my
preparations for the solemn worship of God that day: and if any thing in my
preparatory devotion be wanting (any sin unconfessed, unrepented of, etc.) in
these my morning devotions, let that be done. And how complete soever I may
conceive my preparations to have been, yet let me not in my prayers in private
that morning forget to send up some petitions for preparing and assisting
grace, to the end I may more spiritually go through the duties of the day: for
the doing of which, I cannot Chap. 7.
now want directions, after a preparatory prayer already considered upon. And
these my closet, devotions it will be necessary be first performed, for that
they will very well fit me to perform my devotions in my family with more
fervency.

Sect. 3. Of Private devotion in the family before going to Church. A
digression touching what our devotion in the family is always to consist of.
THese therefore being done, and it being now somewhat above half an hour till
the time we usually go to Church, I am to call all my family (except in
extraordinary cases of sickness, etc.) together to prayer, at which time all of
them, who that day can go to Church, which should be, as many as may be, should
appear dressed as they are to go, that so, after the family devotions
performed within a very short space we might all together resort to the public
place of Gods worship.

Now if question be made what the devotions of the family are to consist of,
the answer is, they cannot well consist of more or less than these two parts,
Reading and Prayer.

By Reading here I understand chiefly the reading of the Word of God: and that
it is the duty of the head of the family, either himself to read, or cause by
some other to be read, the holy Scriptures in the hearing of the family; none
can question, who considers those frequent Commands to the ancient people of
God, to teach their children the Law of God, and his judgments, and dealings
Deuteronomy. 4. 9. etc.
with them.

Now how they can be taught those things by their parents, from whom they never
hear of them, cannot be understood: nor will any reasonable person think thief
commands fulfilled by the mere teaching their children the Belief, Lords
prayer, and ten. Commandments (though this must be most sure to be done) for
we find of old they were to acquaint their children of Gods wonderful works in
delivering them out of the Land of Egypt: And in like manner we Christians to
teach our children Gods Miracles of grace, in freeing us by his Son out of the
bondage of sin; which, how it can be better done, than as God has thought fit
to teach it to the world, to wit, by the Holy Scriptures, none will easily find
out.

Now for the method to be observed in reading the Scriptures in our family,
that which was above commended for use in the Closet may happily be most proper.
And if I so order it, that I read the same portion of Scripture in my family,
and in my closet, it may be much for my edification: the double reading it will
set it deeper, both in my memory and in my understanding. But then, least I
read faster and more in my family than in my closet, and for other reasons, it
will be necessary that either my Closet devotions go before my Family
devotions, or that at least I so contrive my readings, that what I last read in
my Closet, I the next time read in my Family.

Instead of Meditation, which was one part of my Closet devotion, if in my
family I use to examine my people, what they have learnt or observed out of
what has been read; and where none takes notice of what is mainly observable,
there suggest it to them, it may not be amiss, provided it be done soberly
(without a long deal of prate and meddling with curious matters) and without
vainglory.

The Prayers which I use in my family, except upon some very eminent occasions,
may best be the Prayers of the Church. These are easy and best understandable:
and the use of them in our families, will sit the plainest people in our family
to use them with more devotion and understanding in the public.
Notwithstanding I confess my judgment in this case to be, that the Injunction
of them does not in strictness reach to private families, but there is a
liberty le^st; yet if we use that liberty only thus, so as freely and of our
own accord to prefer the Prayers of the Church, I really judge, (generally) it
will be the best. Some particular cases there may be, as when any great
judgment lies upon a family, or the like, which may be admitted as exceptions
to the general rule, and in which cases it may be expedient to use either other
or more Prayers than those extant in our Church Liturgy.

The general course then of my family devotions will be this. First, he who
prays begins with the last clause of that Exhortation thus: [I pray and
beseech you, as many as, etc.] Then follows the Confession: [Almighty and most
Merciful.] The Absolution is to be left out, except he be a Minister who read.
Then comes the Lords Prayer and Versicles. Which being done, all rising, give
attention to one reading a Psalm and a Chapter, or so much of them as the chief
of the family shall appoint. This being ended, if the Master of the family, or
any by him deputed, will at that time examine, or briefly (as beforesaid)
instruct any touching what has been read, here such examination will most
seasonably come in: After which, he who reads the prayers saying [Let us pray]
all kneel down, and he begins with the Versicles, O Lord show thy mercy, etc.
and so proceeds with the Prayers in their order, as they stand, morning and
evening.

Upon the Lords day in the morning, after the prayer for the Bishops, Clergy
and people, that is just before the Blessing, it may be convenient to add, for
preparing grace unto all, the prayer in the beginning of the Communion service
[Almighty God, to whom, etc.] (or if there be any sitter in the Liturgy found)
and that at the end of the Communion service [Prevent us, O Lord, in all our
doings with, etc.]

And in the evening upon the Lords day, after the same prayer for the Bishops,
etc. to add that prayer for fruitfulness by the means of grace, which is in the
end of the Communion service [Grant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that, etc.
Thus much then as to the order of devotion in the family, both ordinarily and
upon the Lords day.

Sect. 4. Of resorting to the Church.
THese devotions both in my Family and Closet being thus performed, it will
soon be time to appear before God in the Church. And I am to account no
celebrating of the Lords day like to that in public, with a full Congregation
of Christian people. Hither therefore I early, with as many of my family as
possibly (at least conveniently) I can, resort, both my self taking with me, if
I can read, my Bible, and Common Prayer book, and seeing that the rest of my
family, who can read, do the same. And (especially, if the way be long) I watch
very narrowly over my self and those of mine with me, that our discourse be not
vain and idle, much less purely worldly, so as to unfit our hearts: and as to
my private self the same care am I to have of my thoughts. Seasonable it will
be to think of the happiness which I enjoy, in that I come into the Courts of
God, and feed upon the fat things of his House, and to praise God in my heart
that I have such freedom of access unto him: In which case many happy and
proper Ejaculations may I furnish my self with out of Holy David's Psalms.

Sect. 5. Of due behavior in the Church.
BEing come to the place, which is holy to Gods worship, I enter it with all
reverence, bare, if my sex so require, remembering, that though God be present
every where, yet is he more specially in the places where his people are
worshipping him: and any postures of reverence, that I use there, are acts of
worship unto his unseen but present Majesty, and therefore cannot but be
mistaken very much, if judged by any superstitious. Having therefore orderly
taken my place, I should (not out of custom but devotion) how to God my knees,
and beg his gracious presence and blessing toward me, and the congregation of
his people that shall there meet that day, which I may do in this or the like
form.

O Lord, who though thou dwell not in Temples made with hands, yet have
promised to meet and bless thy people wherever thou have recorded thy Name; be
pleased to be graciously present to thy servant here worshipping before thee,
and to the Congregation of thy people, which shall here assemble themselves
this day for thy worship. Pardon every one, who has not prepared himself
according to the preparation of the Sanctuary. Quicken us all for thy Names
sake; teach us to do thy Will, and build us up in our most holy faith, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

I know there are some who object against this practice, but I could never yet
see any reason in their pretensions.

This therefore being done, if the Congregation be not yet fully met, it is not
for me to employ my self in vain discourse with any of my neighbors: but
either to meditate on somewhat which may be seasonable, or, if I can, to read.

And it may not be improper, till I am well verst in it, and know my duty
therein well, to read the Church Liturgy, Rubric (that is the directions which
are mingled with the prayers, for their use) and all: taking one day some part
of it, and another day another, till I have gone through it wholly. By this
means, discreetly used, I shall be able mere readily to join with the public
in the use thereof. But if the Congregation be fully met, and service beginning
or begun, I am to yield all possible attention, remembering God requires my
whole man, all mine heart, soul and mind, yea, and my very body too: Where.
fore so am I to place and order even that (I mean my very body) as the worship
of God, and the Churches instructions for the worship of that God, require;
kneeling, standing and answering still wheresoever I ought. Nor am I to censure
any thing if I do not yet understand its use: for by so much as I do
understand. I cannot but in a good measure see the Wisdom and pious intentions
of the Church: By those answers, which I with the rest of the people are to
make, I find my self much quickened, and my wandering heart many times called
home; the use therefore of these, as I should not omit, so should the benefit,
which I have found by them, be an argument to me, to conform my self to every
other practice injoined; not doubting, but that all of them will in the end
have as good an effect as this upon me.

During the celebration of Gods worship, if my mind at any time be run away
from my work, I am, as soon as ever I perceive it, secretly to check my self,
to call it home, and in my heart say, Lord pardon and help thy servant, or some
such thing, and, in a word, to employ it as fully as I can about my business,
remembering not only how displeasing it is to God, but how unprofitable to my
self to draw near unto him with my body only, and honor him with my lips,
when my soul is afar off.

Whatsoever I hear of the Word, read or preached, I must remember all along to
apply unto my self: not carping at, or censuring the Preacher, but taking all
in the best sense, (Possibly, it may be long of my sins he did no better, or so
ill) nor looking so much how it concerns others, as my own particular state and
manners. And if there be any thing which more nearly touches and concerns
me, that let me be sure by some means or other to keep or set home upon my
memory: perhaps there may be some place of Scripture cited to confirm, explain,
or illustrate it; let me note that place, and the being able to find it, may,
in case I am forgetful, bring the matter to my remembrance.

The exercises of divine worship being all ended, I am with the same reverence
to depart the Church with which I entered it (not rudely, hastily and
disorderly, as the common manner of the multitude is) courteously saluting any
of my neighbors, which I have occasion to salute, and that with inward love
and good will: remembering that the ancient Christians had such an usage at
their Assemblies, as the Kiss of Charity; it is but Christian therefore for me
to use a charitable and cheerful Salutation of any of my Christian neighbors.

Sect. 6. Of due behavior between the Moruing and Evening Service.
My return with my family home should be with the same gravity and care, with
which was my passage to the Church: my talk rather of what I heard or learnt,
than of any worldly matter, except necessary occasions enforce the contrary.
And being come home, one of my first businesses should be to step aside into my
Closet, if possibly I can, and there, according as I have found my my self
affected, to apply my self unto God. If I have been awakened to any duty,
raised to any hopes of Gods favor, strengthened in any of my holy resolutions,
informed of any thing touching which I was ignorant, or the like, there briefly
to bless God for it: if I have been dull and improfitable, there to bewail it;
both which may be done after this or some such sort.

I Bless thee, O Lord my God, for the comforts of thy House; for thy awakenings
of me to my duty; for any softenings of my heart, and sense of thy love, or
hopes of enjoying thee hereafter. Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, who am a
vain, hard-hearted, sinful wretch of my self, but to thy holy Name be the
praise. Now increase, I beseech thee, this thy goodness to me; and confirm me
in thy Grace evermore: Let me grow in the knowledge, fear and love of thee; and
any impressions thereof, which I have this day received, suffer me not to
loose; but enable me to bring forth fruit unto perfection, to the glory of thy
Name, through Jesus Christ, my blessed Lord and Mediator. Amen.

If this prayer may not suit with my condition, it may be presumed, that as I
have knowledge enough to see it does not, so I have abilities enough, in some
tolerable way, to represent and bewail before God my barrenness, heedlesness,
worldliness, carnality, and whatever other great distempers I find in my soul:
which accordingly I ought briefly to do. And this being done, let me recollect
my self, and view over in my mind those severals, which I have that day learned
or been affected with: for this will further imprint them upon my memory. Less
than a quarter of an hour may suffice hereto: and though happily sometimes I may
see occasion to allow more, yet so much sure I may afford at all times.

Having thus fastened upon my spirit my spiritual gains, I now depart to my
company for the necessary refreshment of my body, which this day was not
appointed to abridge me of. Let me therefore be cheerful, and eating my meat in
singleness of heart rejoice before my God: but let not my joy by any means be
wanton, idle, vain, or intemperate.

Of the rest of the time which passes between the public duties of the day,
the employment ought to be sacred, at least wholesome, and such which may not
indispose me for the remaining part of the days work: and hereof much care is
to be had,

First, As to my discourse: touching which, if it be the Apostles Precept, at
all times to be observed, that our speech be always with grace, seasoned Col. 4.
6.
with salt, certainly more specially ought it to be such on this day. And
though it cannot be accounted absolutely sinful to converse about secular
matters of concernment, if occasion so require, yet. 1. To be wholly taken up
with these cannot but argue a greater care of this world than sense of
Christianity, if so be there be any truth in that speech of him who is
infallible: Out of the abundance of the heart the Mat. 74. 34.
mouth speaks And, 2. To be needlessly meddling with such affairs, or idly
busying our selves about other men's actions and concerns (which are the
ordinary subject of men's discourses after dinner on the Lords day) is at the
best but a mixture of worldliness and vanity: and it is made the character of
naughty men, that their tongues walk through Psalm 73.
the earth.

Secondly, As to my actions care too is to be taken: It is not questionless
unlawful upon due occasion, that is, on account of mine own or others
necessity, or considerable convenience, to put mine hands to an ordinary
action, as is evident Luke 13. 9 5.
from our Saviors both doctrine and practice: But (as abovesaid of discourse,
so now of business) to be needlessly employed in worldly matters and ordinary
work, cannot but be some kind of profanation of the day, as being contrary to
its sanctification, that is, the spending it to other uses and ends, than those
for which it was set apart. And albeit in this case no certain perpetual rule
is to be set (the conditions of men being various) but each man's Christian
discretion and piety ought to mete out to himself what he in his own
conscience, and in the fear of God, considering his occasions, judges fit (in
which we are not one to judge another) notwithstanding I cannot think that man
takes such care of himself as he ought, or is duly cautious of indisposing his
heart for his duty, who can constantly suffer all this time, between Morning
and Evening service, to pass over with him without any thing of devotion,
either in his privacy or family, or just as the same time passes over every
day. This I say, cannot be to sanctify the day, because not to separate it
from common, and to use it to distinct ends.

Soon therefore after dinner ended amongst all the family, it is meet that I
call the younger sort and set them to the learning their Carechisme: and as to
the Elder, if I suspect any of them to be apt to trifle away their time, let
them be kept in my presence; and if all of them be able, let them read, by
course, somewhat out of the Scripture, or some plain and honest book; if all be
not, then such as can.

Sect. 7. Of resorting to Evening service.
WHen it is now almost time to resort to Evening service, let all be called
together, to the end that all may orderly repair with me to the public
Assembly. And it may not be amiss (but right edifying) if some one person read
a Psalm suitable to the present undertaking of going to worship God (such as is
the lxxxiv. or the cxix. one or two parts of it being taken at a time, as
occasion or time shall serve) to which reading all ought reverently to attend.
And this being done, let the same rules and directions, which were given
touching going to Church in the Morning, be observed in the Evening, and all as
before ^esort to the public worship Which if they do, I and my family are now
a second time attentively and reverently placed before God in his House of
Prayer; where my carriage ought to be the same, as is before directed to. And
surely unless I and my house appear thus the second time before God, I cannot
account my self duly to sanctify the Lords day, I have done it only by
halfes. The Church was never in a settled condition, but it had the Evening as
well as Morning sacrifice Vespers as well as Martins.

If therefore any thing should so sall out, that I or mine are hindered from the
second part of the public duties of the day, it ought to be my grief and
sorrow, Psalm. 42. 4.

Sect. 8. Of the duties after return from Evening service.
MY departure from the Church and my retirement as soon as I come home for
about a quarter of an hour, or as I see occasion, should be after the same
sort, as in the former part of the day. Which being done, it will be expedient
to come amongst my people and see that all things are wisely ordered; that so,
sometime before night, the Devotions of the family may be performed. In the
mean time, both I my self, and as many of the family as can be spared from
necessary services, are free to our private devotions. Only if there are any
triflers, let them and the younger sort be dealt with as after dinner, that is,
kept, where the people most commonly sit, reading and attending to the Word of
God; at least for some certain space. Let them not spend their time as they do
ordinarily: for the Lords day should look with another face than common days
all the day long.

This care being taken of my self and family, I see not but my Christian
liberty permits me any honest refreshment, such as may be walking forth in my
garden, in the fields or open air. Only let me observe these cautions 1. That
my walk be some such as Isaac's Evening walk was, that my Meditations be Genesis
24. 63.
good. Unquestionably I shall not find the fields an unfit place for good
thoughts: There are many in the world, whom the very breathing the free air,
the beholding the glorious light of Heaven, the passing clouds, the verdant
earth and smiling face of all things, transports into a rapture of devotion,
affects very much with the admiration of the Creator of all things, makes too
long for the time, when either they shall ascend above them all, or see them
pass away, and dwell ever with their God, beholding his face without any such
interpositions. And with much advantage may a man spend an hour thus, mixing
often prayers or ejaculations with these his thoughts. 2. Another caution I
should observe is, That I return so early, as that neither my Devotions in my
Closet, nor in my family, may be omitted. And truly most convenient will it be,
that my own private devotions (which, being that I look on my self bound to on
other days, I cannot this day omit) be performed before that supper, which I
take: for then shall I be freshest; then will what I have learnt that day be
better in my memory, than after the diversions which my supper and company may
cause. Besides that, the performance of them will have fixed and prepared my
spirit against any such diversions, and for the performance of devotion in the
family.

Now as to what I am this evening to perform in my Closet, it is the same, for
the most part, as at other times. My course of reading must be the same: only
if so be that I see fit the portion which I read larger. My Meditations,
besides what is every days task, upon what I read, may take in a view of my
carriage that day; an enquiry what I have learnt; a considering it so as to
affect my self with it; and a setting down a resolution to endeavor in all my
ways a practice of it. My prayers may take in some new Confessions, [of my
unprofitableness, hardheartedness, unsetledness] petitions [for pardon, memory
to retain, and grace to perform what I have learned.] Thanksgivings [for any
quicknings of heart, resolution of holiness, any instruction or improvement of
my Christian knowledge, etc] all suitable to what in my Meditations I have
found mine oslate to be: for the inserting or putting in of which, I shall
easily find in my usual prayers fit places.

My Closet devotions being thus performed, time it will now be for me and my
family to take what Evening meal we use: which being done in some convenient
time before we go to bed (which ought not for many reasons to be too late) if I
am a pious Christian I cannot but look upon my self bound to shut up the day in
my family with some such devotions as I begun it with. Touching which some
directions have been already given, as to Reading and Prayer: and it is only
to be added that I am to make some enquiry severally into those, who are under
my charge, touching their improvements that day; to help out and instruct the
ignorant; to rebuke, and that sharply, the negligent and heedless; to encourage
the careful as my Christian discretion shall see meet: the properest place for
which, will be either before the prayers begin, or just after the reading of
the Scriptures, so that the family may be dismissed and the day ended with
prayers.

PART IV. Of my most solemn Retirement into my Closet for the Humiliation of my
self.
Chap. I. An Account of what is to be treated particularly in this part.
MY most solemn retirement into my Closet, and that for which the place is most
principally designed, is upon such days or times, which I set apart to humble
my self for my sin: before God by Fasting and Prayer and Mourning, and all acts
of Contrition.

And truly if the ordinary Fasting days of the Church were duly by all
observed, all, that our present design would seem to call for, were, to deliver
the manner of their private observation, that is, the particular duties to be
on them performed. But forasmuch as most men keep them ordinarily no otherwise,
than by a little change of diet, taking perhaps fish, etc. for flesh, and
feeding, neither more sparingly, nor much less deliciously, than they do on
other days, and so make them indeed no fasting days, we must consider both of
the Setting apart of days for private fasting, and of their Observation when
set apart. But first of all it will be necessary to spend a few thoughts upon
the nature and ends of Fasting.

Chap. II. Of the Nature and Ends of Fasting.
BY Fasting here is meant the Religious abstaining from our lawful food.
Lawful food at present we will account that, which, according to the common
practice of sober and discreet persons of our rank and quality, is neither too
much nor too dainty for us. For we may account a man intemperate in his
feeding, as well by being too delicate and fine, and eating constantly on
things which are fit chiefly for persons above his degree, as by eating
overmuch. Now not all abstaining from this my lawful food is that Fasting,
which is here intended: for I may abstain for my healths sake, or through
business, or (by some accidents) upon necessity, and all (it may very well be,
without sin, and yet not fast as fasting signifies a duty, or an act acceptable
to God: but it must be a Religious abstaining, which I can duly call Fasting,
as at present that name is used: Now it will be best discerned to be Religious,
by the ends which I design to my self therein, and by my employment of my self
upon such my Fasting days.

First, as to the ends and designs See Dr. Hammon, Pract. Catech. Lib. 3. Sect.
4.
of him who abstaines or fasts religiously. The chief of them are

1: Devotion, or the performance of religious exercises: when I fast, that I
may have more leisure and be fresher for Reading, Meditation, and Prayer.

2. Mortification: when I fast to tame my flesh, to keep under and beat down my
body, that it may be in due obedience to the commands of God and reason.

3. Liberality: when I fast to deal my bread unto the hungry, and either
deprive my self or feed more slenderly, that I may have the more wherewith to
relieve others.

4. Sympathising with the sufferings of others: when I fast out of a fellow
feeling of the afflictions of Gods people, commiserating their condition, and,
through an abundance of charity, desiring as it were to partake with them in
their sufferings.

5. Exercising my self to the obedience of Christ's commands: when I fast out of
self denial, and when I both would and could eat, by fasting, as by one
particular act of obedience to that general command of denying my self,
exercise my self unto godliness.

6. Diverting or removing Gods wrath, and expressing my sorrow and humiliation
for sin: when Gods wrath either resting upon my country or friends, or self, or
hanging over any of our heads, I fast and deprecate it, and beg pardon of all
those evils, which have brought us into such misery and danger.

7. An holy revenge or punishment of my self: when having repented of some sin,
for which I am 2 Cor. 7. 11.
holily angry with my self, I choose thus to punish and chastise my self for my
former (it may be) luxury, wantonness, or the like.

When I say out of any of these intentions or with these designs I abstain from
my lawful meat, I then fast in the sense that fasting ^is now taken: for this
is (thus far) Religiously to abstain; and no doubt, but such abstaining is
acceptable unto God, if all be as right as my intentions, that is, if suitable
performances or devotions be added, touching which, rules will anon be
considered, when the nature of fasting is a little further looked into, and it
is evident that it is a duty, and no such needless matter as men usually seem
to take it for, if we may judge of what they think by what they do.

Chap. III. That Fasting is a Christian Duty.
NOw that none either suspicion touching its necessity, or excuse for its
neglect may be left, it will be expedient to consider what Evidence may be
brought that Fasting is a Christian duty. And

1. Indeed there needs little more to be urged for the proving it a duty,
besides the recollection and summing up those excellent ends to which it serves
and conduces. No doubt but to humble my self for my sins, to pray earnestly
for pardon, and for the turning away of Gods wrath are duties; No doubt but to
keep under my body and make it subject, to relieve the poor, to sympathize with
the afflictions of Joseph, are duties: now to all these is fasting a means,
and of some of them (besides) an expression. No doubt but to deny my self, and
to take upon my self an holy revenge for my former extravagancies, are duties:
Now of these is Fasting a part. It may therefore hence sufficiently be
concluded a duty.

2. A further evidence of the same I take it to be, that Fasting is Mat. 62, 6,
15. compared.
by our Savior, in that Sermon of his upon the Mount, which delivers to us the
sum of the Christian law, or rule of Evangelical duties, ranked with Prayer and
Alms giving; (which are undoubted duties) and rescued from the Pharisaical
abuses of it, the true manner of it being insinuated: Insomuch that it may be
justly demanded, how comes it to stand in the Christian law? to what end needed
its practice to be vindicated from corruption, and asserted, as it is by
Christ, to its purity, if it were not a Christian duty? Besides

3. We find God in its season calling for it, of old by his prophet Joel,
Sanctify a Fast, call an Assembly; which place though it intend a public
Fast, yet it is evident our Savior Joel 2. 15
in St. Matthew spoke of those private Fasts, which every one is by him
supposed to consecrate unto God. Who knows not that the Afflicting of the soul
(touching which we meet with so many commands, and such frequent mention in the
old Testament) does mainly intend fasting? And as to the new Testament, further
yet: though our Savior once tell us, the season for his Disciples fasting was
not then come, while the Bridegroom was with them, Mat. 9. 15
yet at the same time he tells us, its season would not be long too, and then
they should fast.

4. Again, the constant sense of the world, and of all the Saints of God in all
ages (amongst whom by how much soever any have been more zealous, by so much
the more has he been in the exercise of fasting) is an argument (no whit
contemptible of its being a duty. Not only the Saints under the Law fasted,
and the pharisee too twice a week, but the devout Christians have ever been to
us ensamples hereof. And,

5. (Which sets it off with more advantage) we find not only the commendation
of them for this practice, but the recompense of it with many signal blessings
recorded in Scripture: which recompense God does not use to give to
willworship. Thus we find Anna commended for her continuing in the Temple day
and night, serving God with Fastings and Prayers. And it Luke 2. 36.
is observable, that fasting is there reckoned as one part of her serving God.
That blessed vision, which led Cornelius to the knowledge of Act. 10.
Christ was vouchsafed to him upon a day when he had fasted till about the
ninth hour (which is with us three a clock) and then too we find him not at
meat, but prayer.

All which cannot but enforce that though it be not always and indispensibly a
duty, as is Faith, Repentance, Charity, and such others; yet is it as far a
duty as any thing can be that is not required absolutely and for it self: and
that therefore whenever there is occasion for it (and no Christian can be
long without due occasions requiring it) it is to be performed; and being so,
if it should be performed in manner of a free will offering, or oftener than in
strictness the Christian might seem to have need of it, yet if it be done as it
should be, it is likely to be acceptable to God.

But this makes it seasonable to enquire how often a Christian is to fast.

Chap. IV. How often a Christian is to fast.
IN answer whereunto it must be said, that no certain or constant rule, as to
all persons, can or may be given herein: nor will the times of fasting be the
same to all, some men having more need, others less (if not need yet)
opportunity. We are assured by the ends to which it serves, that many men's
particular conditions (which happily leave them none other means to mortify the
flesh but this) make it a duty very necessary for them to be much in. On the
other side, those who ever feed sparingly and temperately, and have an evener
constitution, less inclined to carnality and inordinate affections, than have
other men, seem to have least need of this taming discipline. And those whose
labors are daily and hard, and whose life is servile, many times neither have
so much need, nor so much opportunity of fasting, as have those whose life is
easier. Yet forasmuch as it is (according to what has been above insinuated) a
piece of Afflicting a man's soul, and so a necessary piece of contrition and
repentance (which has commonly somewhat of indignation against a man's self in
it) there is none who can think himself wholly dispensed with for it, or to have
no need at all of it. But I say every man's conscience and Christian discretion
must in the fear of God set to himself the rule, how often he is to fast: for
that every one best knows his own needs, and it would be very sinful in some
not to use more strict and oftener fastings than others; and some on the
contrary must be very injurious to themselves, should they use so much fasting,
as others (if they duly consider their leisure and condition) cannot but think
themselves in duty bound to. This is the sum of what in general may be
positively determined as to all. Yet it is worthy our consideration, and may be
a guide to particular persons to remember.

First, that it is a practice of very great antiquity to fast twice a week, and
was in use as is evident before our Saviors days, and by him not censured in
the Pharisee upon any other account, than because he was proud and conceited of
it, using to reflect upon it in oftentation of his own holiness, and scorn of
others. And it is a very worthy note of St. Chrysostomes, that we should only
avoid the Pharisees pride, but not neglect his performances, as on the other
side, forsake the Publicans sins, but retain his humility. I here is also a
constitution, which although perhaps it pretend to more authority and antiquity
than it ought, yet must be acknowledged to be ancient and not unreasonable,
that we should fast Wednesdaies and Fridaies, because on the one the Lord was
betrayed, and on the other crucified: and it is beyond controversy Constitute
a Clem. Roman. collect. Lib 5. Cap. 14.
that the primitive Christians used to have their solemn assemblies upon those
days, not much less constant than upon the Lords days.

Secondly; that if this course be not always to be used (which yet I know not
what should hinder, except a man want leisure) yet at certain seasons, as in
Lent and Ember weeks, the commands and custom of the Church will engage me to
as much as this amounts to, if not to more. And he to whom the commands of our
present, and continued practice of the Catholic Church in devotionals signify
nothing, is surely a man of a strange humourous sanctity.

Lastly, It is out of question that there is no Christian can walk strictly and
keep a good conscience toward God and man, who has not Dr. H^mmons Pract.
Catech. Lio 2. Sect 3.
his solemn set days for the performing that great and weighty duty of
humiliation, in calling himself to an account for all his ways, and confessing
his sins more particularly before God: and those days should not be too slow
in their returns [that is, too seldom] least his soul should be too deep in
arrears [that is, least there should be such a long score of his sins
unrepented of, that he think it an infinite and endless work to repent of them]
and so be loath to come to account at all. It is very reasonable therefore for
every man and woman of any tolerable leisure to set apart one day in a week for
this purpose, or if the whole day, or any other part of it may not be spared
from the business of his calling, yet the dinner time that day may be borrowed
from eating and thus more usefully employed without disturbance to the affairs
or injury to the health of any ordinary person. I do not say that this day
ought always to be one and the same: it may be one week one day, and the next
another, according as my occasions will best bear: nay even after I have
appointed it, upon unexpected events, it may undoubtedly be altered without
sin, but wholly neglected it cannot be without a sinful omission, except upon
some urgent, or more than ordinary business.

Chap. V. Of the Preparatory acts for Private Fasting days.
THe worship of God is ever best celebrated, when some kind of preparation is
made for it: It will be meet therefore that somewhat I do by way of preparation
for my private fasts.

And one piece of Preparation as well for these days as for the Lords day it
self (though indeed somewhat remote, or afar off) it will be, to be diligent
other days in my calling, and well to husband both my time and estate. For if
he, who has not by his six days labor made such provision for himself and
his, as that he may be without care of providing upon the seventh day, will
scarce rest that seventh day unto God without distraction (as seems to be
suggested to us by those words [Six days shall thou labour] being put into the
fourth Commandment, much less will he be able to allow himself constantly more
time in a week than a seventh day comes to, to wit some part of every day, and
a considerable part besides of one of the six days (which is to be his fast)
to the service of God. I would therefore have every man not to incumber himself
in this world more than he needs must. We should learn to know when we have
enough, and allow our selves some part of our time to enjoy as well as all to
get. But this is preparation very far off.

The first act of more immediate preparation for these my fasting days will
be, prudently to contrive, upon foresight and consideration of my weeks
business, what day or days they are, in which I can best spare time for this
work: and those days or that day will be the fittest to be pitched upon, in
which I may the most freely converse with God without the disturbance, which
much business necessarily brings. Besides the time spent in my ordinacy course
of devotions, which are not upon my fasts to be omitted, under pretense of
making amends for them, or running them up into my penitentiary performances, I
cannot upon those days when I allow least, allow less than two hours and
upwards to the peculiar work of my fasts. So much time therefore, at the least,
I say, I must resolve such a day to devote.

Which being resolved upon; it will be sit (as a second act of my more
immediate preparation) in the devotions of the evening before, to spend a
petition or two in my prayers to God, that he would by his gracious Spirit
prepare me for the work which I intend the next day, softning my heart and
giving me to understand my errors, that I may duly ^^ment them and truly
amend them; which petitions I may easily see a fit place to insert in my
prayers. And the day being come, unto my morning devotions it will be expedient
to add some such short prayer, as this which follows.

O Lord who sees the purposes of all hearts, and have been privy to the
intentions of thy servant touching calling himself this day to an account of
his ways, and humbling himself before thee for all his transgressions; Be thou
in mercy present to me by the preventings and assistance of thy grace, that I
may with a true heart and contrite spirit perform what I intend. Grant that no
worldly cares or business may so take off my mind from thee, but that I may be
able forthwith to return, and without distraction to employ my whole soul in my
designed devotions; to the glory of thy Name, my own amendment and comfort
here, and everlasting blessedness hereafter in and through thy Son Jesus Christ
my Lord, Amen.

And lastly, my morning devotions being thus finished until the time come that
I have resolved to retire I must endeavor to converse and behave my self in my
ordinary affairs so warily as that nothing may discompose, disorder, or disturb
me; no worldly design too much possess my thoughts, according as above I have
prayed.

Chap. VI. The order of Humiliation or Renitentiary Devotions.
Sect. 1. The entrance unto the work.
THat time being now come, which I appointed to spend with God in my Closet, I
must religiously observe mine appointment: For albeit the resolve was only
private, and never proceeded without my own breast or closet, yet has God
taken notice of it, and it stands on record in his omniscience; and by breaking
these my private and (as happily I may judge) less material resolutions, I
shall soon learn to break my word and vows too, in other matters; both with God
and man.

Coming therefore at my time appointed into my Closet, I reverently kneel down
before God, and having the sense of his presence, and all-seeing eye upon mine
heart, humbly begin in some such short prayer, as is this which follows.

I Am come, O Lord, into thy presence, upon work, which no one has more need
to do than my self, to consider my ways, and repent of my sins, and turn to
thee. But I have an hard heart, not apt to relent; and dry eyes, such, at
least, which seldom shed tears for my sins. O that thou would bow the
Heavens, and come down, and melt my soul, that it might kindly flow forth
before thee in godly sorrow, which might work repentance not to be repented of.
Open mine eyes and help me to see into mine heart: B^ing my sins to my
remembrance, and set them in order before me, that an holy shame and confusion
may cover my face for them, and thou beholding my contrition may accept it,
and both pardon me, and assist me hereafter by thy grace, that I may live more
godlily righteously and soberly in this present world, and attain unto
blessedness with thy self in the world to come, through the merits of Christ
Jesus my Lord and Savior. Amen.

Sect. 2. Of Reading, so as to fit my self for self-examination.
SOme such supplication being with a^l my heart made unto God, I may happily find
it not to be always the best course forthwi^h to fall upon the examina^ion of
my self: For, for this I shall be the fitter when awakened and made more
attentive to my self by some other exercise. It may be proper therefore to
spend and hour in the reading some honest practical Book, which treats
severally of those duties which we owe both to God, others and our selves: to
wit, upon that particular Book, which knowing to be very good, I have chosen
and singled out to my self to read and practice, such as are the never enough
commended Doctor Hammond's Practical Catechism, or (if that seem to any too
difficult) that excellent Book, The whole Duty ^f Man. And in reading hereof I
must endeavor to read,

First, with understanding: so that it is not so much the repeating to my self
the words, as considering and digesting the substance of them, which I must
account reading of them. I must therefore read and study the Book as Scholars
do their Books: and if there be any material thing, which I do not understand,
mark it, so that I may inform my self, by advising with some more able person
than my self.

Secondly, I must read all with application to my self, remembering that all
this concerns me, and endeavoring to see how it concerns me; whether I perform
the duty I read of as I should, or how I neglect it, etc.

By this means, taking upon every of my fasting days a part, my Book will in
convenient season be read over: which when it is it must not be thrown aside,
but read through again and again, with the same diligence, till I am perfect in
it. Nor ought the third or fourth reading of a good, profitable and practical
Treatise, to be tedious or unpleasant to me: for that Christian duties are not
new, but have been, and always will be the same; and multitude of books do but
confound plain heads. All wise men know, that to make a man's self master of one
good book is better than to have slightly read an hundred, which were not
either thoroughly understood or digested. To keep therefore thus to one good
Book, which may instruct me of the sum of my Christian duty, till I have fully
made it mine own, is my most edisying course.

Sect. 3: Of Self-examination, and the view of our life.
THis my Exercise of reading being over, it will be seasonable now to fall to
the examination of my self touching my sins. And here I shall find a very good
help of the former work of reading, especially after some considerable use of
it, when I am once come to know my several duties: for certain it is, No man
can see what he has done amiss, what he has left undone (which two heads, of
Omission and Commission, contain under them all actual sins) till he sees what
he should have done. Now this duty of Self-examination, a man may be supposed
either to be a stranger in, and little to have practiced, or else to have been
much in it, and to be thoroughly verst in his heart and life.

He who is a stranger to it, has unquestionably more work to do than the
other. That he may therefore do his business thoroughly, he must begin with
those very first years which he can remember, and trace sin from his insancy,
through his youth, to his riper and present years. He must see what Devil first
entered him, I mean, what sins first seized him, how they have grown up and
continued with him: but this will be too long a work for an hour or two Such a
person therefore had need to set apart whole days for this purpose, till he
has a little recovered himself, and set his accounts straiter with God. Yet
must he not, while he is enquiring after unknown or forgotten sins, neglect to
repent of his fresher and known transgressions. If therefore so it is, that for
the present he cannot recollect himself, and make a diligent search into the
whole course of his life, yet must he confess and bewail what he knows of
himself, and together acknowledge how much he is in arrears, which he has
forgotten, or at present does not see, and for all humbly beg mercy. But this
not so, as wholly to put off surther enquiry: but having this Fast examined
himself touching so many years or months (according as his life finds his
thoughts work) upon his next Fast proceed farther, and so on the next still
farther, till he come home to his present age. Now in this sifting of my life,
if I can, it will be very useful to me, and much further a distinct Repentance,
to use my Pen, and through each year set down my sins: By this means I shall be
able much better to consider them, and so, both know more of my self, and of
the deceitful ways, which sin has to gain upon me.

And because as I owe to God Confession and repentance of my sins, so I owe
also acknowledgment and thanks for his Mercies, therefore in this enquiry, it
will be necessary to observe Gods remarkable Mercies and deliverances to me,
recording these also year by year, as my sins.

Thus will the sight of his Mercies aggravate my sins, and increase my
repentance; and the sight of my sins, parallel with his mercies, commend his
goodness and inhance my thankfulness; both which are singular benefits.

And because even afflictions have their use. and are to be accounted for; if
therefore I find any considerable adversity or cross, with which God has
exercised me, this also is to be registered as the former. If it did me good, I
owe to God thanks for it: if not, I owe repentance for being incorrigible.

Being thus come to my present time, it will become me not to run in arrears
again, but every ^ast day still to make my accounts even; and to that purpose
to take care, as aforesaid, that these my Fasts be not too seldom.

Supposing therefore, that I am a person who have so far practiced self
examination, as that I have formerly taken account of all my life. That, which
I shall have chiefly to enquire into, upon each return of these my fasting
days, will be,

First, What new sins or commissions I have been guilty of since my last day of
accounting.

Secondly, What neglects, especially, if I have formerly made any vows or new
engagements to God, how I have observed or slighted them.

Thirdly, In what posture or temper my heart has continued, and at present is;
whether soft, tender, penitent and in awe of God; or whether dull, careless,
insensible, or otherwise out of order and prone to its old lusts.

Lastly, How the providence of God have carried toward me sithence; what
mercies received, what afflictions sent upon me, and what has been my carriage
answerably. And whatever I find more remarkable, let it be registered in mine
Accomptal (so I call that paper book in which I use to keep account of my life
and spiritual state) whereof, as is abovesaid, I shall find singular advantage
in my succeeding time.

Sect. 4. Of the endeavor of godly sorrow. How to work our selves to it.
SIn is not such a thing, the knowledge of which is desirable for it self, but
only in order to somewhat else, which it is apt to beget, to wit, Godly sorrow
and Repentance. My sins therefore being thus known, I am to set my self about
the sorrowing for them and repenting of them.

And to godly sorrow, the readiest course will be, more fully to fix my
thoughts upon the sins, of which in my examination of my self I have found my
self guilty, to look upon them, so as that mine eye may affect my heart, my
attent consideration of them may move and grieve me, as it ought. To this
purpose I am to consider particularly.

First, the foulness of my particular sins in themselves and in their own
nature how vile they make me, how unable I should be to look men in the face,
if they knew all these unworthy acts by me, which I do of my self, and God far
better than my self: how vile therefore must they needs render me in his holy
Eye.

Secondly, The several Aggravations which they admit; the chief of which, and
those which are aptest to affect me, I may take to be those which follow.

1. Against how great light and how clear knowledge of Gods will I have sinned.
I knew such and such actions to be sinful, when yet I ventured upon them.

2. Against how many checks of conscience I committed them. Did not my own
heart at that very instant smite me, telling me of the wrath of God and eternal
flames belonging to those who do such things.

3. Against how many engagements and obligations to the contrary have I sinned.
1. My own vows and covenant both in baptism and since. 2. Gods mercies and
forbearance, which should have invited and lead me to repentance. 3. Gods
judgments and heavy hand many times upon me, which should have taught me
righteousness. 4. Had I no hindrances in the way, which I broke through? It
may be Gods holy providence cast somewhat in, which did a while retard my
commission of the sin, and, if I had not been lesperately bent upon it, might
have diverted me and dashed the temptation.

4. Was not I the tempter and Devil to my self in them? Did not I set my self
on work, without Sa^ans, incitation of me thereto?

5. Whether or no have not many of them been publicly dishonorable to God,
and scandalous to my Christian profession? Has not mine example, if not mine
enticements, drawn in others to the same sin, or driven others out of conceit
with Religion? Wretched man that I am! that I should so hold [perhaps teach]
the faith as to make infidels.

Lastly, Something of grievousness the circumstances of time and Place, etc.
may add thereto, which ought not to be overlooked.

Through such heads as these should I trace my sins, especially those of them,
which are most gross: and in my Meditations dwell so upon these considerations,
as may, if possible, move my sorrow, at least breed an utter ^aversion of the
sin, and a loathing of my self for it: And if it be so, that I cannot shed
tears and really mourn over my sins, yet if I can find in my self, a through
displeasure with my self for sin, and an hatred of it, together with an earnest
desire to be freed from the habit and power of the sin, as well as from the
guilt of it, this I may conclude to be a sorrow of mind, and ought therefore to
cherish in my soul

Sect. 5. Of Repentance, which is the effect of godly sorrow, its true nature
and way of practice.
THe Apostle says, Godly sorrow workith repentance, which need not to be
repented of. Now that repentance may seem to consist of two things, Of a full
purpose of heart to forsake sin, and of hearty endeavors against it.

First, I say, I may not think I have repented of my sin, till I have taken up
a full purpose and resolution of mind against it for the future. As long as
there is in me any intention of returning to it again, I am an impenitent
wretch. Now such purpose and resolution the foregoing consideration of my sin
is apt to beget: and therefore by laying such thoughts truly home unto mine
heart, by employing my mind much on them, I ought to endeavor to work my self
up to such resolution, and never to sit down contented, or think my self
penitent till I am so wrought upon. I shall not much need to be minded, that
during such endeavors I ought to intermix with my meditations, frequent
petitions to Almighty God, whose Grace only it is, which is sufficient for me
for the turning my heart from sin.

Now purposes and resolutions are rotten, except endeavors to fulfill them
follow. This therefore is the second part of repentance, that, as I have
resolved, so I endeavor against sin.

And this endeavor against sin seems to have two parts, the one of which may
best be acted in my Closet, the other must be acted any where and every where.

The first part of the endeavor against sin is, to do what we can to mortify
the habit, that is, the inclination, readiness and customary proneness, which
we have to the sin, which is to be forsaken. And that must be done.

1. By considering with my self what means (or remedies) I can find out against
that sin. Certain it is, the more I can restrain or keep back my self from the
actual commission or doing of any sin, the more will the power of that sin
decay in me, the less inclined shall I be thereto. Wherefore if I cannot at the
first root out the habit, or overcome that miserable inclinedness, which I find
thereto, yet let me endeavor to find out such means, which may keep me from
the acting the sin, and, I say, that customary proneness unto the sin will by
the grace of God decay.

Now in general it will be a true and proper remedy against any sin to consider
the occasions or inducements, which chieflly lead me thereunto, and to provide
as well as I can against them.

Whether or no is it a sin which is deeply rooted in my nature and
constitution? or whether or no is it such an one, which by my way of living,
converse and custom, I have settled in my self? If it be of the latter sort,
the breaking my self of that custom, the altering, as far as is possible, such
converse as has brought me into it, is a very good remedy against it. But if
it be a sin innate, and after a sort planted in my very make and complexion, it
is more difficult to subdue: But the way will be, 1. To take such course with
my self, as that for the future I may keep my self from the acting of it as
much as may be: And 2. To make it a constant petition in my daily prayers to
God, that he by that Spirit, by which he is able to subdue all things unto
himself, would mortify in me the affection and lust, which I have after that
sin. And by persevering in such course, no doubt but at length, through the
divine Grace, I shall overcome it. These means therefore having consulted of,
attending to my particular sin, the next step which I am to take in the
mortifying of it, is:

2. To resolve there before God, diligently to use those means, which I have
particularly consulted of, and so forthwith to order and contrive all my
affairs (as far as in me lies) that I may without any partiality use them all,
according to the best of my skill, and in the most effectual manner that I know.

The second part of the endeavor against sin (which will not be so much the
work of my Closet, as of my life) is diligence in the using of these means
(which I have thus considered of, found out and resolved upon) wherever I am,
and when soever I have opportunity.

Now that I may so do, it will very much help, if I write down these
resolutions before God in my privacy, which I am to do in mine Accomptal; where
also I am to record every days fasting, and the issue thereof, what I found
new in mine estate, what I resolved on, what means I considered of against such
and such sins! We find, they not only made a Covenant, but put it in writing,
and sealed it before the Lord, in their solemn Fast, Nehem. 9. 38. This will be
one way to secure me against being slighty in my Penitentials: and it may
besides much both confirm and quicken me in my execution of these my resolves,
to read them over written by my mine own hand before God.

And being thus registered, it will be good for me to be often (when I come into
my Closet about my devotions and examine my self) looking on and reading them
over, least forgetfulness should betray me into the breach of them.

Sect. 6. An exemplification of the former Rules in two sins.
NOw to the end that this most necessary practice may be as plain as possible,
it may happily conduce to set down some particular examples, in which those
general rules may appear practiced. And for as much as it was before said, that
all sins, of which we shall find our selves frequently guilty, are either such
which are rooted in our particular complexion (and so may especially be called,
our iniquities) or such which by some outward occasion (as converse or manner
of living) we fall into, one instance shall be of such a sin, which is commonly
too too much rooted in men's natures or particular Crases, to wit, Uncleanness,
the other in such an one, which though happily a man may be naturally inclined
to, yet commonly may be more truly referred to the head of contracted than of
in-born evils, and that is, Trifling away our time, or idleness.

First then, suppose that upon examination of my self, one sin, where of I find
my self guilty, is uncleanness; and this I find diversely to have run through a
great part of my life. Touching this, certain it is, that I repent not of it as
I should, if I set not my self to root it out. Wherefore, according unto the
rules laid down, I thus proceed.

Being come now so far in my devotions upon my fast day as to Meditation, and
having in my Meditations chiefly employed my thoughts upon my self, whereby I
have found my self guilty of this sin, I set upon the repenting of it. To that
purpose I endeavor to sorrow for it. I therefore consider, first, how grievous
a sin that is in it self. And in this case it may be, that good practical book
which I have chosen to my self to read and study, may much help me, and
discover to me the grievousness of it in its own nature. This being done, I
consider how grievous my commission of it is: what particular aggravations all
my actions of this kind admit. Here I open this my book, and examine it by
those aggravating particulars mentioned: All which cordially employing my
thoughts upon, I endeavor to affect my soul therewith, and to work in my self
a loathing of such courses: This sorrow will work repentance, to wit, First a
resolution against what I loath, and then an endeavor against it, as well by
consulting remedies and means against it, as by putting my self into a way of
using such means. And the result of my Humiliation thus far I, as briefly as I
can, register in mine Accomptal, in some such sort as this.

A. D. -- Januar. -- Fasted. I found my self guilty of Uncleanness. This I
considered to be in it self a very grievous sin.

1. It defiles my very body; makes me loathsome.

2. It debaseth and dulls my soul.

3. It is that which nature it self is ashamed of.

4. God most perfectly hates it, and therefore when he expresses the vilest
sins, calls them Whoredom.

5. It is one of those sins which God seldom suffers to escape unpunished here.

6. I shall never be able to like my self, or have any inward content in my
self while I practice it.

7. Perseverance in it will undoubtedly destroy my body and health as well as
soul.

[Each of these and more than these, as God shall be pleased to assist me in my
Meditations I am supposed to have attently considered.]

My particular commissions in this case have the following aggravations. They
have been done [so long]

1. Knowingly. 2. [as I find it with my self] 3. Against my vow of baptism
expressly. etc.

Whereupon, most humbly begging pardon of God, I resolved with all my might to
endeavor against it. To that purpose I considered of these means against it.

1. Spare diet: frequent fasting: avoiding high meats.

2. Spare sleeping: not lying down till sleep compel me, rising early or at
least as soon as sleep leaves me.

3. Hard usage of my body: lying hard, using prostrations, or tiring postures
in my prayers, etc.

4. Praying often, and much conversing with God in holy duties, which will make
me ashamed of such carnal delights and sordid enjoyments.

5. Avoiding light company, light discourse, gestures, looks, etc.

6. Considering death, and that in its pomp and terribleness: looking much on
Sceletons, dead men's sculs, bones, or contemplating consumptive and ghastly
visages.

7. Not venturing my self on any opportunities or temptations to it.

These I then resolved to practice, and will therefore frequently r^^^ over.
Amen.

But it may be this is not my sin (however, it will teach me how to deal in
humbling my self for that which is). Suppose then I find my self guilty of
trifling away my time. There is no repenting hereof without amendment: But what
course may I take to be truly penitent for it?

The answer is: I must proceed as before. Meditating, Resolving, Consulting,
and by all means confirming my self against it. And the result of what I am to
register in my accomptal, may be thus.

[Such a day Fasted] I found my self guilty of trifling away my time. I
considored the grievousness hereof.

1. This is truly idleness, what name soever else I give it. For idleness is
not the doing nothing, but the not doing what I should when I should. Now
idleness is undoubtedly a grievous sin, ^^ having not only its own guilt in it,
but the guilt of many more sins, which it occasioneth.

2. This is the frustrating the end of my being, as far as in me lies, a living
to no purpose: and that how unworthy it is of a reasonable creature.

3. I must needs be unprepared for Heaven, and my great accounts, while guilty
hereof. Every hour stands on record in Gods omniscience: and I cannot it may be
give account of three hours in a day.

4. How evidently do I ruin my self, not only as to the future, but as to
this present world hereby. What might I do, and be, were I careful of my time!

Further for me to do this, how grievous is it?

1. I know it to be sinful. 2. When I have remembered my duties to be undone, I
have yet neglected them, against the present warnings of my conscience. 3. How
many ways have I been engaged against this. So much, so worthy work to do, and
so much of my time already spent, etc. [Easie it is hereby to see how I may
proceed according to my particular state.]

These Meditations being finished, and, as briefly as I can, entered, it remains
that I enter my resolution of endeavor against this sin as before: and then
study meet remedies thereto. Now this sin not being always natural to them in
whom it is found, but adventitious, it concerns me to consider, as before
admonished, how I came to be guilty hereof, and to suit my remedies to those
occasions.

1. It may be I am busied about many things, and so either neglect all, (or
what chiefly concerns me) my proper duties. Perhaps I cannot endure that which
should be my business, but am fickle, desultory, and rambling in mine
employment, and though I am not much guilty of doing nothing, yet do I not do
what I should: and this is undoubtedly a piece of idleness, (as abovesaid) for
a man to neglect the business of the season and of his calling, and to be most
taken up in things which least concern him. Now here the remedy will be, to
consider what it is that is my proper business: to put my work into a certain
mold and order: and then to set my self a task daily, and engage my self (as
well as I can) to so much of it, before I divert to any Eccentrical occupation,
I mean to the busying my self in things, which do not properly concern me.

2. It may be I use to sit and talk away my time with friends and company: much
goes in idle visits: I have a nature, which is too sociable, and when I meet
with company to my mind, I know not how to deny my self of their society and
discourse: and if I do not meet with such, I am apt to leave my busines^ and go
seek such. Here the remedy will be (partly the same with the former) prudently
to proportion my time to my business: So much of my business have I resolved to
do: that resolution must not be broken: so much time will that work take me up:
so much, my devotions: wherefore I have but so much left for society: more
therefore I must not take. If therefore I am lite into any acceptable company,
it will become me often to consider, how goes the time? so much of my imposed
task yet lies undone, etc.

3. It may be much of my time is spent in dullness, sitting still, etc. It may
be my constitution is such that if I eat heartily, I am a great while unfit for
my work, and so feeding freely lays upon me a kind of necessity of being idle.
Here the remedy will be to resolve upon a sparer diet, to bridle mine appetite
and eat less when I do eat; or if I cannot that, to eat ^eldomer, and to be at
least but once a day unfit for my work: which time of unfitness, if I will well
husband my time, I may best allow for society; it will be fit enough for that.

4 It may be vexations, anger, or giving way to passion many times indisposeth
me for business. Here the remedy will be to watch against such disturbances, to
endeavor meekness, patience, and the mortification of unruly affections.

5. It may be solicitude about this world, thoughtfulness, cares take up many
of mine hours: and then, mine head being full, I cannot call home my mind and
fall to work: and when by my care I cannot find any expedient for what I
sought, this breeds discontent, envy of other men's ease, happiness, freedom,
etc. And seriously it is a great deal of time, which narrow fortunes thus steal
away from some men. Here the remedy will be, study of content, frugality, wise
husbanding mine estate, proportioning mine expenses to my revenues. And so what
ever I find to be the occasion of my loss or expense of time, let me study a
suitable remedy thereto, and register as well the occasion as its corresponding
remedy. Let me then proceed to resolve upon the use of such remedies, and to
order my particular affairs in such sort that I may use them with the best
advantage: and such resolutions let me always enter upon my Accomptal, for the
fastening them both upon mine heart and memory.

Sect. 7. A further consideration of Repentance with reference to some
particular sins.
REpentance may seem to have been considered hitherto with a Relation to
habitual sins, that is, such sins which either by nature or custom are rooted
in the heart, and have begot in the soul a readiness, and inclinedness unto
them. But surely, if I thoroughly understand the Practice of it, as it has been
hitherto described, I cannot be at a loss in what sort it ought to be
exercised, when I find my self guilty of one particular fall or sin, the habit,
or customary readiness to which, I have not yet contracted: for the substance
of my work is still the same, viz.

Having in mine examination of my self found my self guilty, I am by attent
consideration of that sin, whereof I am guilty, both in it self, and as it is
mine, to endeavor to affect my heart therewith, so that I may truly sorrow for
it: and though it may be I may truly conclude, that it has not yet got fully a
rooting within me, yet for as much as the first or second commission thereof
has in probability made me more inclined and easy thereto, than I was, when
my mind, having been never much bent this way, was thitherwards more
inflexible, therefore ought I to study and consult how for the future to secure
and confirm my soul against any relapses or second backslidings: and after such
consultation to resolve and engage my self with all possible strength against
it.

One thing more, in case of sins committed, or wrong done unto my neighbor, is
yet requisite to the making my repentance sincere and through; and that is,
that I forthwith upon sight of the sin, if possible, make restitution:
otherwise that I make it as soon as I am able; and in case I am not likely to
be able to make it, that I endeavor by acknowledgement of mine offense to seek
for reconciliation unto him, whom I have so wronged. The necessity hereof may
be concluded from what has been above said, that repentance cannot be true,
except there be an amendment. Now most evident it is, that while I suffer the
wrong done yet to remain or continue, I am still injurious; and so consequently
there is no amendment, and therefore no repentance. And the words of our
Savior most expressly enforce it. If thou bring Mat. 5. 23, 24.
thy gift to the Altur, and there remember that thy brother has ought against
thee, Leave there thy gift and first go and be reconciled to thy brother, then
come and offer thy gist. God will accept of no sacrifice or duty whatsoever, at
my hands in such a case, till I have reconciled my self, if possible. If any
think this not to amount to restitution, let him read Levit. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and Numb. 5. 6, 7, 8, where he shall find, besides the sin offering to be
brought to God in case of wrong do^ie to others, it was enjoined that the
principal should be restored, with an addition of one fifth part thereto. Now if
so it be, that I cannot find those to whom I have been injurious, that I may
make restitution, let me give and devote so much to the poor as would do it:
this is to restore unto God, when I cannot to my brother: let me never lay up
any thing wrongfully gotten, or that wherewith recompense should be made for
wrong done, it will eat as does a Canker. Besides I cannot, if by wrong I
increase my store, ever have a quiet conscience, or reasonably expect the
pardon of that my sin.

Now the consideration how this restitution or reconcilement may be made, and
the Resolution to make it, may be best done in my Closet: and such consultation
and resolution deserves a place to be registered amongst my other penitential
devotions, upon the same reasons as they do.

These rules in my repentance if I have observed, though I cannot look upon any
action of mine as complete, yet I may have hope I have not herein been slighty,
but that God through Christ Jesus will accept it.

Sect. 8. Of that faith which is requisite in order to pardon of sin.
BEsides Repentance, it is commonly said that God requires Faith of us in
order to pardon of our sins: and it is most certain, if we understand faith as
we ought. But it is as certain, that people are ordinarily very much mistaken
in the nature of Faith; as it is not unusual for us to be in such things, the
names whereof are takne in such different Dr. Ham. Pract. Catech. Lib. 1. Sect.
3.
senses as the name of Faith is in Scripture.

Now faith we all of us know signifies Belief: and therein does the nature of
it lie. Him that we believe in is God: that which we believe is his Word. So
then, Faith is a full belief or credence of the whole Word of God; and
especially of the Gospel; a receiving it and every part of it in a way suitable
to the matter of it; agreeing to whatever is therein affirmed, as being true;
believing all the promises, that God will never fail on his part, unless we do
on ours; setting our selves to fulfill all the commands, as believing all that
is commanded to be our duty and of indispensible necessity to salvation;
trembling at all the threatenings, as being persuaded God will be as good as his
word, and punish all impenitent sinners. Faith, I say, is the hearty and
sincere embracing and being persuaded of the whole word and these its parts
after this sort: and we must not single out the promises and believe them
alone; for all commands and threats are no less the word of God than are the
promises, and therefore must be as much believed, nor shall any one ever be
justified who does not thus believe.

If it be asked, whether it be not faith in the free promises of the Gospel, or
a trusting to God through Christ, that he will pardon my sin, which does
chiefly justify me, I say, No: and that the embracing the doctrine of the
Gospel, the receiving every command and threat so deeply into my heart, as that
the belief of the one turns forthwith into obedience, and of the other into
obedience, and of the other into an holy fear, (which are the other parts of
faith) cannot be conceived to be either in their own nature inferior unto that
trust, or less either valued or required by God. I do not say that God accepts
of any of them, or all of them, for their worth: (He accepts of them, and of
the person, in whom they are purely through Christ; through his merits does he
impute this faith to such person for righteousness, that is reckon and accept
of this his cordial and impartial receiving his whole Gospel after this sort,
as well as if he had performed perfect and unsinning obedience, as he was first
bound:) but this I say (and that upon the evidence already hinted) that
justification, or the pardoning of sin, is no more appropriated to that one act
of faith, which we call trust, than to those other; and that I cannot (if
comparison in this case be made) but account those other acts (that impartial
submitting and devoting the sold to obedience answerably to every command,
that true resting in the fear of God) as the more principal, worthy, and I am
sure, less to be suspected acts of faith: At the least I cannot conceive, what
we call a justifying faith to proceed any otherwise than as follows.

First, I do believe the promise of pardon of sin to be true, and God to be
faithful, and that without all doubt God will not fail on his part, except I
fail on mine. God will not fail to give the promised blessing, if I fail not to
perform the condition, upon which he has promised it.

Secondly, I therefore forthwith set my self about the condition, or duty
required, as I expect the blessing or promised mercy from God: I sorrow for my
sins; I endeavor amendment of life. I cleave unto God with full purpose of
impartial obedience.

Thirdly, having done so, I do not believe that all this is worth any thing in
it self, but that it is through the mere grace of God in Christ Jesus, that I
must be accepted, pardoned, and saved. Wherefore I trust to God according to
his promise (the condition of which I have ^ndeavoured to fulfill) that he will
through Christ pardon all my sins, and reckon this my faith to me for
righteousness, to trust for the pardoning of my sins upon any other terms is
unbelief and presumption: for it is a believing God will pardon my sins upon
their terms, than he has said he would ever pardon sin, and that is a
believing God will be false.

But now let the case be put, that some grievous sinner, much humbled under the
sense of his notorious wickedness, does, as beforesaid, believe the promise to
be true as it is, set himself about the fulfilling its condition (sorrowing
repenting, etc.) believe all that he does to be in its self worth nothing, but
yet Christ's merits to be of infinite worth, through which notwithstanding he
dare not trust for the pardon of his sins, as remembering them to be so great,
and doubting lest he has not yet performed the condition, which the promise of
the pardon of sin through Christ's merits requires, and in this temper dies;
Put, I say, this case, shall we think this man has not a true and justifying
faith? He has surely; and it may be a truer faith, than has many an one who
yet has more of the trust. But yet it is evident he has not this trust: for
he durst not, through sense of his own unworthiness animate himself thereto.
Seeing therefore, that it is very possible a man may in such case be justified
without that act of faith, I conclude that justification is not appropriate
unto it, that is, that a trusting in God that he through Christ will pardon my
sin, is not that act of faith which chiefly justifies me, and that they are
very much mistaken, who take this (by it self) to be the true nature of
justifying faith, that they believe God will pardon their sin for Christ's sake.
so then, I now see the course which I am to take, in my humiliation, to sue out
the pardon of my sin. I am to believe, that God will not fail on his part, if I
do fail on mine: I am therefore to repent of my sins, as before I have been
taught, and persist in amendment of life, all the while trusting in the grace
of God through Christ, according to the promise of the Gospel, that I doing
thus, my sins shall not be laid to my charge, as being taken away by the cross
of Christ, in whose merits I have, through this my faith and the mercy of God
to me, a share.

Sect. 9. Of Prayer upon such Fasting days.
THat which will much heighten my affection in this my repentance, and further
complete all its parts yet remains, to wit, prayer; which, as it must on this
occasion and day be more large and particular than ordinary, so I cannot now
want matter for it, after such consideration of my condition, and of the way
how I am to seek for pardon of sin as is supposed (if the former rules have
been observed) to have foregone. particularly* I am to frame my prayers, or at
least to alter them, as near as I can, to my condition,

1. Confessing my several sins, and that not without those aggravating
circumstances, in which I formerly considered them.

2. Representing before God my sorrow, my resolution of heart against them.

3. Begging his grace, to assist me in the fulfilling my godly purposes, and
pardon for all my sins, whether known and confessed, or as yet unknown to me.

To these heads my Christian discretion may add more according to my particular
condition. To wit, if any judgment rest on me or mine, or is feared by reason
of these my sins, I may implore deliverance from it: If any mercy is expected,
or by me aimed at, which I fear my sins may most justly hinder or blast, I may
importune God for the granting it; or otherwise apply my self as occasion
serves.

Now as to the form or outward manner of my prayer; if I am able to pray
otherwise, I shall not happily on these occasions see it always fit or
convenient to use set, or composed forms: for that there may be many particular
affecting circumstances of my sins, which no form will express so plainly, as I
have need to express them for the moving my sorrow. If therefore I find my
heart ready and so composed, that I dare venture upon what we call a conceived
prayer, which being of mine own invention, by the assistance of the Spirit, may
more perfectly suit with my condition in all, than one framed by another to my
hand, having either noted in a paper before me the substance or matter of my
Confessions, Petitions, and Thanksgiving, (which paper for memories sake, I lay
before me when I kneel down to prayer) o^ else so considered of, as that it
will be ready, I may spend a few thoughts touching the particular expressions,
by which I intend to represent this my mind to God. To this purpose these two
practices may be helpful.

1. To read any part of the wo^d of God, which (being I daily read some of it)
I may know to be suitable to my present case. If I find mine heart hard let me
read some affecting working place. (Such I may be presumed to have noted as I
have read in my course.) If I find it tender, let me read such place or places,
as may nourish this tenderness, or raise me to to an holy joy, and delight in
God and these duties which I perform to him. And in like manner, in other cases.

2. To recall and consider such fit expressions of the particular materials,
which I am to set forth before God, as I may be presumed to have observed and
treasured up in my memory or book, in my ordinary course of reading.

After such premeditation, with an holy fear, I am to endeavor to pour out my
inward conceptions before God, as fitly and as fervently as I can. But I must
not think that fervency lies in loud speaking, but in the inward affection of
the soul: notwithstanding if my closet be so situate. that I may judge I cannot
be heard without, I may many times find, that it will conduce, if not to the
affecting me more, yet to the keeping my mind more close to my business, for me
to speak in a voice exceeding a private whisper.

But let me be never so able a person and my heart never so fixed, to use a form
so far, as where occasion shall serve to leave it a while, to wit where I would
confess or ask more particularly, may keep my prayers from being loose,
imperfect, broken and disorderly, and consequently make my devotions riper. Now
such an one is this which follows.

O Thou Great, Holy, and Fearful God, unto whom all things are naked and open;
and before whom, as being of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, nothing that
is unrighteous shall stand. I even blush and dread to appear before thee: For
in me there is nothing but iniquity that thou can behold. Iniquity indeed is
too soft a word: I am nothing but filth. I have sinned against Heaven and
before thee; and am so far unworthy of being called thy son, that I am not fit
to be called thy servant: but deserve rather as a rebel, as a faithless and
treacherous wretch against thy Majesty, to be destroyed of the Destroyer, to
have all thy wrath and plagues to meet in me, and to be made unto the world an
example of thy severity and revenging justice, that by me men might learn no
more to presume and backslide.

But there is mercy with thee, O Lord, that thou may be feared and sought
unto: Nor have thou, as thou have protested, any pleasure in the death of
sinners; but art so desirous, that they might return and be healed, that thou
have not spared thy very only begotten Son, but have given him to seek, and,
by death it self, to save the lost sons of men; promising, that of all those,
who through him come home unto thee, thou will by no means cast off any. I
come, O Lord, at least I have here set my self in the way to come, and bewail
my departures. And let not my Lord be angry, and I will consess.

I have, O God, a most corrupt nature and heart, full of impurities and
abominable things, as a cage of unclean birds. She was innocent in comparison
of me, out of whom came but seven devils: I may most truly style my self
Legion: such swarms of lusts do possess me! The Wheresoever in this prayer the
mark is found, the Reader must not forgot to consider particularly touching
those expressions whether they fit his condition.
lusts of the flesh ( Intemperance, Idleness, Uncleanness) the lusts of the
eyes ( Covetousness, Envy) the Pride of life ( conceitedness of my self,
Ambition and proud Wrath) are things familiar to me, rooted and grounded in my
heart: And that truly, Lord, not so much by nature, as by continued custom and
wicked practice. I have my self made my soul more depraved, than I ever
received it from corrupt nature. That I am dull and heartless in the
performance of all holy duties; that I am vigorous and active in the serving my
lusts and pleasures, and the fulfilling the desires of my flesh and mind; that
I am vain, heedless, and commonly void of thy fear in all my ways, I owe very
much unto my own vicious conversation; unto my giving my self up to walk in my
own ways; unto my choosing vanity, and addicting my self thereto; unto my
either total neglect or slighty discharge of thy worship. Impossible in a
manner it is, that any one who lives as I have done, should have a better
heart, than I have.

And at this rate, O Lord, have I ever lived. My childhood, the innocentest
part of my life, was a state of necessary ignorance of thee: yet even herein
how soon did the accursed fruits of inborn lusts begin to show themselves! My
youth, what was it, but a vain and brutish, a mad and sensual age! As to that
small notice, which therein I had of thy will and nature, how little credit did
I give unto it, and how ineffectual was it upon me, either to the quickening me
to my duty, or restraining me from any wickedness! But as to my riper years, O
Lord, I know not what to say: I should in truth sit down astonished before
thee, but that I want a due sense of my sinfulness. Mine iniquities are gone
over my head: That they are greater than I can bear, is little; they are
greater than I can comprehend or number. Nay if I should let pass my sins of
ignorance, of infirmity, of heedlesness and inadvertency, (by which
notwithstanding I seriously acknowledge my self times without number, to have
dishonored and provoked thee:) If I should insist only upon my knowing,
presumptious and wilful sins, even these, O Lord, it were impossible for me to
reckon up. For besides that vast number of them, which I cannot call to mind
(all which notwithstanding are upon record before thee) what a black and
tedious Catalogue of them have I here open [or, which I can spread] before
thee! How many wilful neglects, yea even contempts, of my duty! How many
resolute perpetrations of horrid crimes; such which I now am ashamed even to
think of, yet did not then blush to commit; sins, the heinousness whereof being
considered, if I could do nothing else but mourn over them all my days, though
I should weep as my Savior sweat, in blood, under unknown agonies, I could not
but account my self impenitent. Nay, had I only that one sin of [**] so often
by me repeated to bewail, what sorrow could suffice for its due lamentation!
Here are to be mentioned thy chiefest and most frequent sin or sins.


But if I add hereunto my [**] my [**] etc. what reason have I, were my fasts,
confessions, prayers and tears a thousand fold to what they are or can be, to
sit down and lament my notorious impenitence!

And besides this weight of guilt, which the heinous nature of my sins
themselves load me with, what a sad additional pressure do their dismal
aggravations bring? What circumstance almost can there be that makes sin
grievous which I may not find in most of mine? It is but an ordinary
aggravation of my sins, that they have been committed against knowledge, that I
have held thy truth in unrighteousness, and being convinced of my duty, have
both neglected it, and done contrary unto it.

The very instant dictates of conscience, protesting against the sins which I
have been about to commit; the smitings of mine own heart, not only after and
before, but amidst the very commission of them, have not restrained my
headstrong will.

Nay, O Lord, has not the voice of thy Spirit joined with the voice of my
Conscience, and the united persuasions of both striven with me, but all in
vain? Have I not known that if I would resist, through thy grace I should
overcome? And might I not through the same grace, have resisted if I would?
Have not I at the very same time thought of thy wrath and eternal flames
belonging to those who do such things? and yet this in vain too. And besides
the vow of my Baptism, which I have owned and acknowledged my self to stand
bound by. Ah! Lord, have I not made many a particular vow against those very
sins, which after, as a Dog to his vomit, I have returned to; And those vows
brought to thy Table, and sealed in the Blood of thy Son? Have not I tasted thy
mercies encouraging mine obedience, and on the contrary, sometimes wrung out
almost the dr^gs of thy wrath in punishment of my backslidings.

Further, have not thou many a time hindered me in my prosecution of these sins,
and, by some interposing providence, dulled the temptation, which I lay under
toward them; When yet I have proved so far a Devil to my self, as to retrieve
the temptation, and over-bearing the voice of my conscience, the resistance of
thy Spirit, breaking through all engagements to obedience, which either thou or
my self have laid upon me, yea and the very hindrances and lets, which have
been put in my way against those sins, I have returned to the attempts and
practices of them! Ah Lord! what can such a sinner be fit for, but destruction?
And yet after this sort, how long have I lived, sinning! And how have I
hardened my heart against all those means, which thou have used for my
betterment! Besides, How many of these my sins have been committed openly and
in the sight of the Sun, to the dishonor of thee, and to the scandal of
others, who beholding my practices have blasphemed, at least been provoked to
blaspheme and speak evil of Christianity!

All this, O Lord, is but my old wickedness: I have later [and therefore if
possible, some of them more grievous] sins to confess unto thee. It is but
[such or such a time or day] that I [**] Here mention later falls.
Ah! how can I lift up my face, or look toward thee my so often offended God!
And yet, notwithstanding all this, I have not yet done, O Lord. For besides
these sins of mine own, what a multitude of the sins of other men do I stand
accessory unto and guilty of! How many, for ought I know have I undone by my
example! What a multitude is there, for whose profaneness and unbelief (being
occasioned by the scandal against Religion, which my looseness has possessed
them with) I am to answer for! Some there are, whom I have more directly and
nearly corrupted. And how many more may they have corrupted, who happily had not
been in that case corrupt themselves, had not I propagated such sins to them!
Ah! wretched man that I am, who have not been so far innocent as to be wicked
alone, and destroy no more than my self.

And now, O Lord, after I have confessed thus much, notwithstanding all which I
have confessed, and much more which I am not able to express, nor so much as my
self to know, what an hard unbroken and stupid heart have I! The truth is, the
multitude and grievousness of my sins is such, as is enough to make me
impenitent and desperate upon the mere sight of them. I may well doubt whether
it be possible, that such a backsliding wretch as my self should ever be
renewed again unto repentance, or thereby restored. But forasmuch as I
understand, that to turn thus desperate, and to neglect repentance and
amendment of life, would be worse than all the wickedness, which I have
hitherto wrought, I am here prostrate before thee to bewail my self, and with
sorrow and grief of heart for my former ways do I here cast my self upon thee.
If thou will have mercy, thou can still save me: If thou will not, Lord, I
perish. But do thou use to suffer those to perish who thus, with such
repentance as they can, submit and humble themselves at thy footstool, crying
unto thee for help? Far be it from thee, thou Father of Mercies!
Notwithstanding, inasmuch as I, being much worse than ordinary sinners, do more
justly deserve to find no place for repentance, and have therefore more reason
to fear how thou may deal with me, deal with me as thou will, through thy
grace I will sin no more; no more knowingly and presumptuously as I have done.
And to that end I have here in thy presence this day considered my ways: I
have endeavored to find out those wiles and methods, by which the Devil and
mine own lusts have ensnared me in such grievous sins. I have resolved upon
impartial diligence as well in my endeavors against these particular evils as
against all other, and in performing unto thee hearty and entire obedience.
These Resolutions I here humbly present before thee, sacredly engaging my self
to do my utmost to keep them, and beseeching thee by thy grace to engage my
heart more firmly to them. And, Lord, let not any dullness or want of that
affection, with which I ought to have confessed my sins, to have bewailed my
guilt, and to have passed these resolutions, hinder, that this my serious
humiliation of my self should not be accepted before thee. Such contrition, as
thou have enabled me to, I have endeavored, sorrowing that I am not more
deeply humbled: Such, which is wanting, do thou bestow; For it is no less thy
property to bestow than to accept the contrite heart: The broken spirit is, O
Lord, from thee. When thou of old commandedst water out of the flinty Rock, it
forthwith yielded obedient streams: nor can my heart (dry and hard as it is)
but dissolve into holy tears, if thou will bid it melt: Give forth then the
word, O God; Speak, thy servant is here ready to hear. Turn thou me and I shall
be turned. Send out thy good Spirit: let it inlighten the eyes of my mind, in
the knowledge both of my self and thee: let it savingly persuade me of the
truth of all that thou have spoken, and especially, of the defiling, cursed,
and damning nature of sin, of the sufficiency and efficacy of the merits of
Christ Jesus unto all those, who by a right faith apply themselves to thee
through him. (I do O Lord, believe, help my unbelief.) And grant that this
sight and persuasion both of my sin and Savior may affect mine heart, so that
I may sorrow after a godly sort: and that sorrow may bring forth in me those
wholesome fruits (which after all my endeavors of repentance I cannot but
lament to be much wanting in me, to wit) carefulness against sin, vehement
desire and zeal of holiness, indignation and an holy revenge against my self;
by all which I may for the future clear my self, and ever approve mine heart
honest, upright and sincere before thee. Suffer not this my righteousness to be
only, as a morning cloud or early dew, soon passing away, but let thy grace
always dwelling in me keep open in my soul an ever flowing fountain of such
penitence, that I may go on thus mourning to mourn over my sins, and perfecting
holiness in thy fear; accounting all little enough, if so be I may but in the
end obtain mercy. And this my penitent return (at least hearty endeavor of
such return) accompanied with persevering study of impartial obedience to thee,
do thou, however most unworthy in it self, through the perfect merits of thy
Son accept, washing away all my sins (both the iniquities of my youth and
transgressions of my riper years, as well known as unknown) especially Here
mention thy chiefest sin or sins.
my [**] in his blood; and reckoning, according to thy gracious Covenant, this
my faith (which by such works as these shall discover it self to be alive and
true) unto me for righteousness. And, if thine infinite Wisdom shall see it to
be good for me, do thou grant me this further happiness, that I, thus living in
thy fear, may be ever filled with peace and joy, through a comfortable
assurance of thy favor, and hopes of eternal glory.

As to all my outward affairs, by thy good providence be thou pleased so to
overrule all events, that whatsoever befalls me may work together to me for
good. My sins indeed, O Lord, deserve quite contrary; even the severest
inflictions of thy wrath and fiery displeasure. And I do most seriously
acknowledge, that in all the judgments, which thou have at any time laid upon
me, thou have used much mercy. All the pains, which my body has felt; all the
losses, which have impaired my estate; all the slanders, which have blasted my
name [particularly **] I embrace as infinitely less than my deserts. That I am
in any straits, [**] that I Here mention any particular afflictions.
suffer otherwise [in my body, relations, etc. **] were all a thousand sold to
what it is, I should confess it to be most just. Were I to enjoy no more good
than I do deserve, I should have just nothing. Righteous therefore art thou, O
Lord, when I plead with thee. Yet if thou will be entreated by thy repenting
servant, to withdraw [ These and such like expressions are to be used according
to persons particular conditions.
or withhold] thy hand, to remove the punishment I feel [or not to inflict the
punishments which I fear] but through the blood of Christ to deliver me from
thy present wrath, as well as from the wrath to come, thy servant shall ever
bless and praise thee, and be able to serve thee with more cheerful diligence.
However, Lord, thy Will be done: Bring me surely to thy self, let it be by what
means thou will: Please thy self, thy servant will endeavor to be content:
Deny me what things thou will, only deny me not Grace, Pardon, and thy Self.

And not only upon me, O Lord, but upon all men do thou have mercy, according
to the gracious pleasure of thine own most holy Will. Especially upon the
universal Church; Enlarge thou its bounds; provide for its safety and purity,
delivering any part of it which is in danger, and reforming whatsoever of it is
corrupted. Do thou with all suitable mercies bless this particular Church:
Forgive the public sins. [**] Heal the public Here mention such sins or
calamities.
Calamities [**]. Preserve and every way be gracious unto the Kings Majesty,
his Queen, and all the Royal Family. Let all thy Priests be clothed with
Righteousness, and let thy work prosper in their hands: and especially within
this Parish, of which I am a part, let the knowledge and fear of thee increase.
Visit all my Kindred, Relations, and Acquaintances [**] with such blessings as
they need. Reward a thousand fold all who have shown any kindness to thy
servant; [especially **]. Forgive In all these vacancies thus marked [**] make
such particular mention as thy condition shall require, or prudence suggest.
and have mercy upon all mine enemies, and let not one of them ever fare the
worse for any wrong done to me. Deliver in thine own good time thy righteous
ones out of all their afflictions, and in the mean time support them,
sanctifying all unto them. [**] Show thy self every way allsufficient unto all
thine.

Finally, O Lord, I bless and praise thy glorious grace, for all those
blessings which I enjoy, and those particular deliverances, whether ancient or
later, which thou have vouchsafed me. [**] Above all, for thy redeeming, not
only me but the whole humane nature, by the precious blood of thy well-beloved
Son; for that knowledge which I have of thee in him my Savior Christ Jesus;
for any sight and sense of my sin, which through thy grace I have; for any
hopes of finding mercy in that great day. [**] I, O Lord, Here bless God for
any inward joy, enlargements, etc.
am far less than the least of these mercies. It is thy goodness, thy goodness
alone, which is the fountain whence they came: and may thou from me, and
from Heaven and Earth, ever receive the glory of that thy goodness. May I ever
serve thee in newness of life and answerable walking.

And do thou forgive not only my former ingratitude, but my present want of
thankfulness, together with all the sins of these my holy things, washing me,
and my very tears, prayers, and penitence in the blood of my Savior Christ
Jesus, in whose words thy servant will speak yet once more,

Our Father, etc.

It is not to be supposed that this Prayer without any alteration will suit
with the condition of every Reader: God forbid all should have sinned at that
rate, to come up to which this prayer was framed. The prudent Christian
therefore is to add, leave out, alter, what he sees good; or, if able himself
to do better, to lay aside all. Nothing is here obtruded on any, only
directions and help intended to some who need them.

Sect. 10. Of offerings to God for the use of the poor; departure out of the
Closet, and behavior afterward.
MY prayers being thus finished, I should not hastily run out, but pause a
while, and remember that there is one work remaining, which is not to be
neglected, if I have wherewithal to do it, being it is required by God in an
acceptable Fast: and that is, to add something every fast, though it be the
less, to what I have formerly laid aside for the poor; or if there be no such
stock already made by me, much more than to design and devote somewhat to that
purpose. This is the fast I have chosen, to deal thy bread unto the hungry,
etc. It being thus given, I may deal it when Isa. 58. 7.
I shall see occasion. Now as to the particular manner of this practice,
directions have been above given, which especially upon these days it will be
expedient to observe.

And this being done, let me with cheerfulness depart my Closet; let not my
behavior be without innocent alacrity: and let it be my special care so to
order all my carriage on these my fasts, that they may not, if possible, be
taken notice of by any but my self and God; as being mindful of that command of
my Saviors, Anoint thine head, and wash thy face, that thou appear not unto
men to fast, that is, behave thy self with such outward cheerfulness (of which
anointing the head and washing the face are Arguments) that no man ordinarily,
beholding thee, would take the day he sees thee so, to be one of thy fast or
mourning days.

Chap. VII. Of great and more extraordinary Fasts, and the work of them.
BEsides these my Fasts which come in course, at least once a week, several
occasions may befall me, which may require an extraordinary fast. Such is any
great evil hanging over mine head, or my friends, or the Nations; any
considerable change of my way of living, or the like: but especially, when I am
to receive the Holy Communion.

My work upon such occasions will be the same as is formerly directed to: only
my Christian discretion will order it with a particular respect to that my
great occasion which calls me to fast: which occasion I am especially to
meditate upon (and that not without a regard had to my sins, if there be any
evil which I deprecate, to consider how my sins have been the causes of it, if
any good which I beseech for, how again my sins may blast that) and accordingly
to commend it to God in my prayers: in which case also the form of prayer
delivered in the foregoing Chapter will not be useless.

Particularly as to that which will most frequently come in practice my
humiliations preparatory for the Lords Supper. In these, besides that
examination of my self, which in ordinary course I make, I am to look over mine
Accomptal, to see every week since my last communicating, what my carriage has
been, how I have amended, especially in those particulars, in which I had
formerly taken notice of my miscarriages, and vowed reformation. All my revolts
and backslidings are to be attentively viewed, in themselves and in their
aggravations, and repentance, as before taught, to be with all diligence and
servour, that I can, exercised.

Yea, and besides these times of special exigence, ought I to be often
surveying and looking over mine Accomptal. In mine ordinary daily devotions, or
in my devotions upon my fast-dayes I shall find both need and opportunity for
it. And if Scholars find it necessary to peruse their own Collections or
Commonplace books, if Shopkeepers review often their books, to the end they
may, by seeing what they have formerly done, know how to order their future
proceedings in their business, so as not to go backward, or be diligent to no
purpose, how much more care ought I to take in the concernments of my soul, and
for that Jewel which if I loose, although I should gain the whole world, I am
irreparably undone.

Chap. VIII. The Conclusion.
THe Author of this small piece, Christian Reader, is very sure, that be thou
who thou will, thou can not but approve for the main that practice which is
here commended to thee: although there should be some particulars (as to the
observation of Holidays or the like) which may not suit with the humor of
every man's devotion. Confident he is, he says, that the daily practice of
Reading, Meditation, Self-Examination, Prayer, the orderly and due practice of
Humiliation, Mortification, and the rest of those Substantials, which are here
directed to, cannot be gainsaid. It might have been better taught, but he has
done it as well and as plainly as he could. Being therefore that thou can not
but say, he is a good man who thus lives, and wish that thou ever had lived
so, he charge it again upon thy conscience thus to live: else art thou
self-condemned, and guilty of known negligence and omission. Thou do not
endeavor what notwithstanding thy conscience cannot but approve. He is
confident further, that if thou did but feel that peace, quiet, joy and
happiness, which such practice leaves behind it, if thou have any sense what it
is to have a clear Conscience, and therefore free and cheerful access to God,
and an humble fearlessness of the face of men, which without some such practice
as this thou can never have, thou need no other argument to quicken thee
to this practice. Find a greater happiness on earth, than for a man to be at
peace with and like himself, and get that peace by any other course, than such
exercise of godliness, such circumspection over all thy ways, as has been
here taught, and thou shall have leave to neglect all: but if thou can not,
then think thy self bound to these practices. For directions in the making use
of the Book, thou have them in the Admonition to the Reader, in the beginning
of the Book, whither return and read the whole over again: It will be no whit
worse the second time read: And so God bless it and thee.

FINIS.

