THREE KINGDOMS MADE ONE, By entering COVENANT with one GOD; wherein we have
these Remarkables, worthy all observation. I. What it is to Covenant with God.
II. How hardly his People are drawn into it. III. How The Lord has suffered His
Adversaries from time to time To Buffit His People thereinto. IV. The height of
this Covenant above former Covenants, and Reasons why?
Clear Demonstrations also to show. I. The necessity of this League and
Covenant; whereunto there are grave Objections made, and Answered. II. The
Legality and Equity of this Covenant for the Casting out of Archbishops and
Bishops, with their Curates Service, and all together; And Answer made to all
that can be reasonably objected against their Casting forth. III. The
Exemplarynesse of this Covenanting way; It is according to the foot steps of
all the Godly, as all the truly Noble in the World have gone in before us. IV.
The Seasonablenesse of it, and therein the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of
God, All wonderfully admirable. V. The Sweetness of the Promise touching this
matter, The purging out of the Rebels; and how saluted a far off: If Rebels
continue longer in the Land; if more Rebels come plundering into the Land, Then
there is excellent Reason, why it must be so, and abundance of Comfort for the
Church of God, and no cause of fear. VI. The force, efficacy, and virtue of
Covenanting with God; It never failed the Church; It never shall fail the
Church unto the Worlds end. VII. One Objection there is, but it is cleared; and
Gods Interest in the business is so cleared too, That He must help His People,
That He must. VIII. We have Reasons and Arguments enough, why He must help; His
glory is engaged, even He Himself; and so we have concluded.
By Ez: W.

Deuteronomy. 27. 17, 18, 19. Thou have avouched The Lord this Day to be thy God; And
The Lord has avouched thee this Day to be His peculiar People; And to make
thee high above all Nations, which He has made in Praise, and in Name, and in
Honor; And that thou may be an holy People unto The Lord thy God as He has
spoken.

London, Printed for Christopher Meredith, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Crane, in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

READER.
I Have of late fastened my thoughts upon a great business; The Militia of
Kingdoms, how To fortify them* To set them in a safe Posture for War. By
Gods good hand with me my Thoughts have issued the Means, how to compass, and
bring about this greatest Work, none like it. These are the means; First, Purge
out the accursed, Persons and Things; That must needs be first. But this is not
done by humane strength; Men have done it, yet working as Instruments in Gods
hand; and He has been brought down to them and their Work. How? By Fasting,
Praying, Preaching, etc. Mighty means all these to bring God down to a People
(but all these cannot keep God close to a People.) And because we are lost in
generals, I have singled forth one Person, To exemplify all this; To show
what exploites he has done; How he has maintained his Militia by all these
Means; and more to be shown in due time; but more specially by This, the
chiefest of all Means, which now follows, Covenanting with God; That is, An
Engaging Work; It Ingageth us to God, and God to us; This is Covenanting, and
most prevailing it is every way: Indeed, Nothing does the Work thoroughly, but
This Covenanting with The Lord. An high and mighty Work, of large, yea infinite
capacity; Therefore it must take up more room then we would have it,
Considering how loath men are to fill their hands with Papers now a days; or to
be at Cost, unless for news, some of it, not worth a Sparrows price; though a
Penny more, might gain us very much, and undeceive the whole World, even of
unbeleevers; as one The Vndeceiver, I shall name the Author anon for honor
sake, in a Low Case; If I would make a request in so low a matter, I would
entreat you read it.
has done very happily that way; but there is a generation of Men that will not
give twopence for knowledge; They care not what the Learned say, but they can
read and believe lies. In reference to the present time, and this nov^ll
Reader, all for News; This comes out a part, and alone, like a piece or a
cantle, broken off in the midst, and therefore begins so abruptly.

Three Kingdoms, etc.
I Am come now to a full point, the conclusion of the business, The entering
into Covenant with God; That is the period, the main point indeed. I will tell
thee in the intrance what it is; I. I.
The great and highest work; That which will maintain the Militia of a Kingdom
fully; It will set it in a Posture for War, or against it, the strength of
Battle, even so safe as it shall laugh to scorn all the fury of the oppressor,
and ask, Where is it? it will make a Kingdom like a wall of brass; and render
the blast of the terrible ones, of no more force or account against it, then is
a puff of wind against the perpetual hills, and everlasting mountains; For
this work is an engaging the heart of a Kingdom altogether, as one Man unto
one God; The I refresting, Intitling Him to the Kingdom, the giving up the
government of it into Gods hands, the willing resigning this government up, and
leaving of it where it is, and must be when all is done, upon the Lords
shoulders, so as it shall be now called, The Lords Kingdom, and the people
there, the Lords People, the gates and bar; there, (I mean all the fenced
places, all the Ammunition, all the Battlements there) the Lords gates, the
Lords Battlements; Not the Kings Forts now, [though there shall be no
diminution to Hi-Rights and Royalties, His Kingly Power and Authority, which
God had given into his hands, No diminution at all, not one jot or tittle is
taken thence, Caesar must have his due given him, enough by Gods allowance, but
then no more for God is God of gods and Lord of Lords, the High and Supreme
Lord still, and his Law the supreme power still; and this is the glory of a
King on earth, to be subordinate to the King of Heaven, and a a willing Subject
to His Law] I was saying, not the Kings Kingdom now, nor the people, properly,
the Kings people now, nor their own; nor the Forts and Battlements there, all
these Fortifications there, not the Kings now, but the Lords Kingdom now; the
Lords people now; the Lords Battlements now. It is just so; for if the King
will do as we shall see anon, the Kingdom has done, give himself unto the Lord
(which is the prayer of all His good and faithful people) then the King will
not be his own neither, but the Lords, a willing Subject to Him, who is King of
Kings; he sits King in the Lords Throne, stands charged by the oath of God, to
rule His people (Gods people) with equity; and His poor (Gods poor) with
judgment, 2 Chronicles. 8 9. Psalm. 72 8
doing all still in subordination to the Supreme Law, and in reference to the
Law Book.

I was saying (but I was interrupted, willing to tell the Reader, as shortly as
I could, what this Covenanting is) that now we are come to the great work and
business of the time, with much ado and great trouble, through the heat of the
day, we are come up to this business now at the last, The entering Covenant
with God, an endeavor, at least, to bring three Kingdoms up unto it to engage
them to be the Lords Kingdom; the sum and upshot of the business, the fruit
and result of all our Fasting, Praying, Preaching; the end and issue of all
this is, but to make a People, a People of willingnesses, a willing People to
this Work of Covenanting with the Lord, that they will be Psalm 110.
the Lords People.

II. II,
A wonderful thing, that since this is all, to enter Covenant with the Lord,
that we will be no more our own, but His People, we should be so hardly drawn
to the Work, so backward to it! I say again, a wonderful thing! O ye heavens!
be astonished at this, the Lord has brought up Rebellious children indeed. Take
the sons of Belial this once for an example; these sons all the world over, how
willing are they to make a League, and Covenant, with their Adversary the
Devil; Sin, Death, and Hell. And Israel, His people draw back, will not hear
the joyful sound, will not enter Covenant with the Lord. O ye heavens! are ye
not astonished at this? See again, how these children of disobedience, and sons
of Perdition, how these Associate, and knit themselves together, fully resolved
to their power, to break the bands of the Lord, and cast away his cords, and
then to root out His people, that their name may be no more upon the earth Thus
these Children do; Earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord, shall not
his people do as much for their God and His Cause, as the wicked do for the
Devil their Master, and to maintain his worship, and their Idols? yet how
hardly are the sons and daughters of God drawn to do, contrary to these sons of
Belial, To lay their souls under Sacred bands, To bind themselves with the
cords of God, His Law, His Statutes, His Judgments.

III. III.
It is very remarkable, and sure we will set a mark upon it by the way, how
the Lord has forced His People, has used a kind of violence to bring up His
people to this Covenanting Work. The Lord suffered the Adversary to buffit His
People into Covenant with Him. The Lord suffered the foot of Pride to prevail
very much, even to a setting-under, and trampling upon the heads of the
Righteous, as Mire in the Street: Thus The Lord suffered it to be, That His
People might stir-up themselves; Protest to serve God better, and avouch Him
for their God. And so His People did. But here was much of self in this Work;
self ends, and self respects. They groaned under grievous Taskmasters: The
Proud man had set his right foot upon the Church, and his left foot upon the
Common wealth, and swore he would take away their Birthright from both, Their
Laws, Rights, Liberties; 1 Pet. 1. 19.
(...) the Inheritance of their Fathers: But these outward Liberties, the
setting the foot upon these. This pinched indeed, this crushed to the heart;
and this was the main Inforcement with the greatest part, To enter into a
Protestation, I say, that swayed most with the most. Well, God heard their
groans notwithstanding, pitied His People, and took off that head, which
consulted against His hidden ones; and withered that hand, and foot, which set
so hard upon the Necks of the Righteous. But as is said of the King, he never
dies; So of the Churches Adversary, he is still lively and strong, and a Legion
he is; for many there are, who hate the Church here; And then he was more mad
with rage; then the Nations were indeed angry; So the Adversary and Enemy
plotted, and plotted: Here he laid a snare, and there a snare; The Lord brake
the snares still; For He had a respect to their Protestation, That His People
seemed willing to avouch Him for their God; And from that very day See Thank
^ss^. p. 85.
The Lord blessed His People, made them strong to do exploits, from that day;
But from that day the Adversary was more lively, and active, as was said, to do
mischief: So they traversed this way, and that way, Till at last they brought
about a most bloody Design. What was that? To cut and slay not a few; To
destroy a Mother City in Israel, even her, Who maintains a great Family; is the
great Housekeeper under God, The great Hostess in our Land, that forgets not
to entertain strangers, To welcome the outcasts and abjects, those that are
thrown-out of Cities, and Towns all over the Land, as Persons, or things of no
worth there 2 Cor. 4. (...). Heb 13 1.
: But the world is not worthy of them. These this Hostess does entertain, she
is not forgetful: This Mother City was in design to have been destroyed, even
this City* and with her, all the faithful there, and every where, that had an
hand with David: Indeed, and indeed, had the Adversary had his will, they had
destroyed this City, and all with David, all throughout the Land, from corner
to corner. What then? Then we entered into Covenant. It was high time; And
doubtless the hearts of the upright, were upright, touching that matter? But
we, we common People, did not Covenant To search every man his own heart, for
the finding and casting out the accursed thing therein; And those, who, as
always they have done, made void the Laws of God and man. We came not up fully
unto that Work; Nay, let me take the boldness for to say, since I speak in the
presence of God, and by His grace will weigh and consider what I say, and I
will propose it by way of doubt or Proposition, only thus; Was not that
Covenanting too Selvish? I mean, did not the Subjects Rights and Privileges,
take up too much Roomth there? I will not say it did, for, was there not a
Cause? That the Worthies, should do as they did? Yet this I may say.

III. IIII.
There was not that Spiritually in the business, as God requires; The
Worthies, all of them, did not (till now) rise to that height of Soul, touching
The Lords matters in His worship: The main and chief business did not seem to
be, the Cause of God, Religion, The Faith, The great Trust of the Kingdom* The
maintaining the Rights and Liberties of the Gospel, and then of the Church,
against those Usurpers, That had taken these Liberties quite away, (pleading
their Right from Heaven, the while they set the Church under foot) Against such
Opposers, mighty Adversaries, who have let hitherto, and will let till they be
removed, and taken quite away: The Covenant did not descend to this Bottom, to
this Root (even that descent To the Root, argues an height of zeal too) the
eradicating, or rooting-out of that cursed train, the Pope, and his Bishops.
Nor did that Covenant express a Love, or a Care so diffusive, so spreading
toward their Sister Churches of Scotland and Ireland, (as it should have done)
when yet they knew (but the present distractions and care to save themselves
clouded them a little) sailed in the same Ship with them, were involved in the
same dangers from those floods of great Waters, quite covering the Ship of the
Church in the same Tempest, even Scotland too. Much more might be said, I will
say but this, The Lords thoughts are good and gracious toward His People; He
will bring His People up to Him, fully and indeed. And what way takes The Lord?
He suffers the Adversary to blunder on his own way* gives him, as the Adversary
calls it* Success in his way, and, as he will have it called, a Victory; The
Lord delivers up His Cities, some of them, into the Enemies hand; then suffers
the Adversary; gives their Tongue power to move, and to blaspheme His Holy
Name: The Adversary in his pride, and height of blasphemy, asked a poor People;
Where is now your God? What is become of your Praying, and Fasting, and
Preaching. What of all that? O wretches! Devils, I had almost said, What is
become of all this! Look you here, and if you can consider, consider, for it is
Higgaion Selah, a matter seriously to be thought upon; That the Pe^le of God
have prayed and praised (Prayer and praise still go together) and fasted Psalm 9
16.
and preached, Three Kingdoms into one: as sanctisied means, these have brought
them into Covenant with their God, as it is at this day: At that very time when
the Adversary so blasphemed, at that point of time, Scotland had great thoughts
of heart for England, and England for Scotland; both for Ireland. So they
entered into a League, knit themselves together, all as one, To etc. For there
is enough said, touching the matter and manner The subject of a short Treatise
of that solemnity, though I had said nothing. I shall enquire now into these
things, and demonstratively show, first.

I. I.
The necessity of taking this way of Covenanting with God; It is the Sacra
Anchora the only remedy, to save the Ship of the Church. How is that done?
(For save the Ship and save all) By maintaining the Rights and Privileges of
the Gospel; or to speak in the vulgar and common speech, To maintain the
Protestant Religion: No way to do this, but To Covenant with The Lord so to do;
there is a necessity then.

A. No, no Necessity at all, nor cause why this should be the Kingdoms care,
for it is the Kings care.

B A poor speech, I will not say simple. Is any one man sufficient for that
care? Or dare any man say, he is compitent for such a care? The care of all the
Churches lay upon Paul; God fitted him for it, and Paul was not alone, he had,
and would have, many helpers. The care of three Kingdoms is more and more
weighty.

A. True, nor is the King alone; as he tells us, The maintenance of the true
Religion, is his care, and he vows to discharge that care.

B. Very well! But I wish from my heart, That His Majesty, had not vowed so
much for the Church: And more from my soul, if more can be, That he had not
done so much against her.

A. His zeal is pardonable, and his care pious and conscientious; he is
careful to discharge his care, as was said; and he knows how to do it well
enough: His Majesty has Noble Instruments about Him, helpers to him in the full
discharge of that great Trust and care.

B. By your leave Sir, I Will take it; yet, by the help of God, and His Law, I
will keep my self within the Bounds of Christian Prudence, and say, The vile
Counselors have set the King in a worse way, then ever Jeroboam (who made
Israel sin) prosecuted: For Jeroboam took a good way to a cursed end: and that
is strange, yet not so strange as true: I say, good, by allowance of the
Spirit, who calls Achitophels Counsel good 2 Samuel 17. 14.
, though tending to a cursed end. A good way Jeroboam went, plain and direct,
neither he, nor the People could be deceived in it: The full purpose of his
heart was to set up a Calvish worship, which yet he might call true (for I
think no man embraces falsehood under that ^otion) though clean cross and
contrary to that worship instituted, and commanded by God Himself at Jerusalem:
I say, he set up a Calvish Religion, and he says so too; That was well, say
so, and do so; And the good way he took, plain, and direct; For all that he
did, had a direct tendency thereunto, to his main scope in the sight of all the
People.

Therefore what did he? He appointed Calvish (brutish) Priests; such a service,
such Priests; These agreed as the Ma^e^lips and Lettice: A good way this still,
no turnings of the old Serpent in it, but direct and straight. But had Jeroboam
then professed in words, To maintain the worship of God commanded at Jerusalem,
while yet he did, as he did, set his eye against the Priests of the Lord; spied
them out and spurned them out throughout all his Towns and Cities; which he did
with that violence and eagerness, That those Priests, if you mark the story,
came by companies to Jerusalem, persecuted by Jeroboam out of their places,
where he had Command, or spoiled there, had I say, Jeroboam professed with his
mouth all this time, while he persecuted with his hand; To maintain the true
worship of God, then every child would have laughed at him: and the soberman,
who knows what it is to mock God (but God is not mocked) would have wept
heartily. Ah Lord would the true Israelite have said, what? profess the true
worship as at Jerusalem, and set up Calves at Dan and Bethel! Ah Lord? Indeed
the true Israelite would have so wept, so mourned! and let him do so still, as
he sees cause; for whatever we judge of the King (the Lord He is Judge between
him and us) we do know his helpers, what maintainers they are of Religion; what
Lawless men will do for our laws: children of Belial with our sacred Coards,
and Bands; and what Papists will do touching the Rights and Privileges of the
Church and Gospel. For at this time we will not mention the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, though of good account with us, yet of no account to
the Pearl in the Gospel, that is the Gospel, and at the stake now, have at it,
and all at once, and then lose that and lose all.

A. The King cares for the Gospel as well as you; and because of this blood
shed, his heart is grieved; he would stop that flood-gate, and hastens as fast
as he can; he will have Peace with all men, and pursues it, witness that
Royal Act he has done in Ireland, therefore what needs there preparations, or
Covenanting betwixt three Kingdoms?

B. A Royal Act! and what need of Covenanting! I protest I can scarce hold;
but I will keep within my bounds with Gods help still, and say and prove. The
necessity holds still and holds the stronger, and has all laws of heaven and
earth for so holding, but I will say this first, A wicked Counselor has put
his Majesty upon an hard work, and he has been upon it all this while, how he
may undeceive the people, now the work is done, and not till now, not so
perfectly done as now; why now? Because he has made a peace with Ireland, and
now England is undeceived I hope.

A. Good Reason and Charity to boot so to do: for Ireland is quite wasted with
the hurtful sword: and to give peace there argues a soulbleeding over the
desolations the sword has made there, does it not?

B. No sure, for he has made peace with those -- Monsters, I want a word to
express their villainies, who have laid that land waste; have murdered 100000.
thousand souls with a rage reaching to heaven; exercising such Cruelties upon
the bodies of men, women, children and sucklings, such cruelties as were never
heard of or done, by the Ethenick or Heathenish. Rome, not the like to those
executions we now read of in the Tragedy of Ireland: His Majesty has made a
peace with them, a league with them. Shall it stand? God has sworn by his
Holiness, it shall not stand. He will have war with them, who have dealt so
and so with His people: There is a Curse pronounced against these murderers
too, which shall cleave unto them, and to their children after them, faster
then does the Ivy to the wall, because they compassed about the righteous with
words of hatred: and fought against him without a cause; Because they remembered
not to show mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy man; Psalm. 107. 3. 16, 17.
This, Curse of the Lord upon the enemies of the Lord, it shall certainly
pursue and overtake them. They loved Cursing, it shall come to them: They
delighted not in blessing, it shall be far from them: And peace shall be as
far from them too, as far out of their reach, as it is from their hearts, or as
is the highest star from their lowest finger. We judge not the intentions of
the King here, we leave him to the Searcher of hearts, who judges
Righteously. We are sure, very sure we know the intentions of these murderers,
their purpose is to band themselves against the Church; The Church expected so
much, and is provided for their coming; how well fortified she is we shall
here anon. Truly she is not careful touching that matter. But she sees the
necessity of doing what she has done, Of asscciating her sons and daughters;
kniting themselves together all as one man to stand the firmer against the
Common Adversary.

A. You may thank your selves, if the Irish do come against you? You call in
the Scots, why should not the King call in the Irish?

B. I would as good reason could be given for every thing that is done, as will
be given for this, and then we should do and walk as men. Should not the people
of God seek to their God; and for help from the people of God to come-in to
help Gods Cause? And should help be sought from the Devil and his Instruments,
the enemies of God, to help the King against God and against his good people?
more to this anon. It is well now, whatever strength comes against us, let it
come: and if this Covenanting with God, has occasioned more stirs (as
doubtless it has after the old manner) blessed be His Name. Whatever falls out
in the world, it is not Chance, the Lord does it, suffers it to be so, and He
is The Lord; He does all things well, It is the Lord, let Him do what is good
in His sight.

Here His people are; They must go Gods way, The way of His people; our defense
and protection is from the Lord; it is not our care, it is His, with reverence
be it spoken, let God look to that. His people are gathered together to do Him
service; The time was when at such a time, when His people were so gathered
together for that great purpose, then did not the Lord suffer a Dog to move his
tongue against His people: none must do them hurt at that time, though all lay
open to invasion. He did reprove Exo. 34. 24
Kings for His Churches sake. (Oh! the security of a people engaged upon Gods
work!) Reader let us do our work; leave God to His; I will assure you we shall
put it hard upon him anon. What is that? We shall, having done our duty,
require of Him to maintain and protect His servants.

But yet before I take of my hand hence, I will say this and no more. That the
King is liable to Gods reproof; Thou have loved them that hate the Lord: and
hated them that love the Lord: And now it is in my mind, I will shut up this
with a Story out of Tacitus, how a brave Emperesse takes up her Lord Tiberius
the Emperor, and lays the grossest, most palpable, pellucide, transparent
hypocrisy to his charge, thus it was; Agrippiua comes to Tiberius to intercede
with him in behalf of some of Augustus his kindred, against who he had put out a
very rough hand: and she finds him, to speak in English, doing before Avgustus
his Tomb, as we have seen our Bishops do before the Altars, bending and
cringing there, and performing some other devotions, I know not what, to the
sacred memory and external honor of Augustus, that diminitive god. The woman
could not forbear; out she breaks, like a woman full of indignation, Shame
upon thee, Tiberius, shame upon thee; what a notorious hypocrite art thou?
what! seem to honor Augustus Non est ejusdem macti^ victimus Augusti and
posterius ^s inje^.
as a god, and abominate his friends and children as if they were Devils? O
abominable! how mistaken art thou? Think thou to vail the eyes of the people
so? then thou must put out their eyes, for bending with thy knee before thy
god, will not bear out, not countenance the injustice of thy hand against
Augustus children, No in good faith, Tiberius, it will not; And let me
undeceive thee there, for thou can not by all this deceive the people Thou
art but one person, Tiberius; Thou can not truly and really act two so
different parts: It is not possible, notwithstanding thy seeming devotions,
truly to honor Augustus; and yet to persecute his kindred. The vile
Counselors will not apply here, I will; yet I will make but two Suppositions,
and two Positions, and then the use of all; The first Supposition [for qui
supponit non ponit, Though I do think what I think, and know what I know, yet I
say only] suppose That the King does persecute the Children of God. This
supposition granted, this will be the Position, That all his devotions to God:
all his protestations to man are null, and of none effect, as his Proclamations
and Commissions have been, for he cannot worship before God and persecute His
Children.

2. Suppose That the King has made a peace the Irish, the most kankerd
Adversaries, That the Church has, or ever had, in the world; do but suppose it
so, grant that Supposition; Then this is the Position; I tremble to put it
down, but it is Truth; Then the King, what ever shows are to the contrary,
hates God, and good men; That he does, God, Angels, and Men are witness
hereunto; That being supposed, this must be granted in despite of the Devils
in Hell, and his servants on Earth; That the King doing so, and so heartily for
the Irish, he hates all true English and Scottish, all the faithful in the
world; He hates them all; as heartily as he loves the Irish; I must add, he
hates God too. Take both the Suppositions together now, and then the necessity
follows, which has all Law with it; and that I will call the use, or
inference from the premises; If the King persecute the ^nred of God, then he
cannot honor God: If his heart be toward the Irish, those murderers for good
(as they call it:) then his eye is upon David and his helpers, all the
faithful in the world, for Evil, to do them all the mischief they can. Then
I hope all the faithful in the world will make this use of it, and a virtue of
necessity, To Associate themselves; To enter Covenant, To knit themselves
together all as one man, against the haters of the Lord, for they see the
necessity of so doing, and they have the use; but all must be done orderly,
according to Law and equity: for our necessity is not like the necessity of the
Irish and English Monsters which has neither Law nor Reason; ours has both, and
equity too, this fellows, from clear demonstration.

II. II.
A reasonable and most equitable thing it is, That we should swear to maintain
Religion; for the Adversary swears to destroy Religion, and if he destroys
that, he destroys all; All that the excellent of the world, account excellent.
We swear to maintain Religion, then we swear to maintain all, for Religion is
the Gospel, Christ and all; It is the very Pillar of this great Fabric; It is
like a Ship in a storm indeed, but save that and save all.

A. No man will gainsay you in this; Maintain Religion in Gods Name; And defend
the Church with all your Power in the same Name; It is but just and equitable
so to do; But I pray you where is your Law? This Law bids you maintain,
Archbishops, and Bishops; their Curats too, and their Service Book also, our
Churchmen all, and our Church Officers all, and our Church Services all,
Organs and the like. What! Cast-out these? O! I tremble when I think of our
holy Service, and holy Servants, and of your oath which runs thus, we swear to
root all these Archbishops and Bishops and all, etc. for there is, as was in
their oath an etc. and so your Oath runs through all.

B, Yes indeed does it, and we will run after as fast as we can, we will do as
we have sworn. But first, know you what you said? It is a wonder indeed that
you are so mistaken: Churchmen, said you! They are no Church men nor
Commonwealths men neither; not the later, for they so sought their own private
wealth, that they left the poor subject nothing he could call his own, but his
misery: And such Churchmen they are too, such Archbishops and Bishops as
Titularis non Tutilaris Rex; defuit non praefuit Reipublicae.
Chilperick was a king (of France:) They were as a golden Head set over the
Church, but they did not the Office of an Head, of a Foot rather, for they did,
to their Power, stamp the Church and Common wealth both to Powder: We have
sworn, as they did, To Root themselves in, so we, To eradicate, and Root them
out; and mark now whose Oath shall stand: I Will say nothing here touching their
Messes of Service, first Mess, and after Mess, the Mass indeed: I have much
to say of it, and if it come forth, I Will curtle it that the Reader may have it
for his price three farthings, yet that he may rise one farthing higher if need
be, I will assure him this, If I do not prove by Argument, That the Liturgy
or Form of Worship, (the peoples Idol now, and the Bishops god) is as useless
(to say no more) as is unsavory salt; then I will give the Reader my Tongue,
and leave to throw it-out after the Liturgy and Salt to the Dunghill. This in
passage.

A. Ay but you ought to swear in judgment, and to do justice, then you must
not swear to Cast-out Archbishops and Bishops, nor their Curates; for the Law
of man has settled the one in their Throne, in the house of Lords too, and over
their Diocese: and their Curates in their several places, settled men too; you
cannot swear them out neither, by Law.

B. No? why then we will let them alone a little; as their fellows have done,
they will throw themselves out anon. But I thought verily the man would have
said, That Gods Law set and established Bishops there; truly I thought the man
would have pleaded for their standing Iure Divino, by a Right from Heaven, as
the Bishop did, penning his own Charter; but the man is vviser now, and the
Bishops too: The only refuge now is, To the Laws of man; well, To the Law of
man let them go, but that will deceive them too; I will leave the Reader to
Mr. Channel, I name him for honor sake, because indeed he may Glory in his
work, and Boast in the Lord, for he has undeceived all the Christian world
touching that Point; the world thought, and such a fool was I, (amongst the
rest) I almost thought so too, hearing such braggs and boastings, as if the
Bishops had all from Heaven, Their White Sleeves too, the garment of the
Saints; so the world thought, That Bishops were by Divine Right; yes, and
their Curates and their S^vice-Book, commonly called the Liturgy; all this was
established by Law too, and to question that Right, was as dangerous in those
times, as to take a Lion by the Beard. But now we are clear in this point,
thank our learned men, Lawyers and Divines, They say, These have no Law for
their standing nor Reason neither, not a word, not a syllable of either, have
Bishops for their standing, say our learned men, and Mr. Channel last of all:
And truly I believe them as verily as I do the Gospel, so clear I am at that
point, which Mr Channel has cleared to all the world, that This and That,
Persons and things, were brought in by the mere pleasure of man against the
Law, [vvhereon I could delate very largely too, for he is deceived indeed, and
willingly so, That will not be undeceived now] ergo say I, These may be
cast-out by Law. But I will not trust my Law, I will grant, though my
indulgency that way will do the Bishops no good, That the Law has appointed
Bishops Lords over Dioces, has settled them in the Church, placed them amidst
the House of Peers, made them Spiritual too; (I cannot tell what the Law of
the Lord may do, but sure I am, The Law of the Land never did that) But grant
all this, give them their challenge, (all the Rope they do deserve) all the Law
they do desire, grant them their sayings, That the Law of the Land has made
them Arch Bishops and Bishops, Lords and Spiritual, all this (truly I can
scarce suffer such a thing to drop from my Pen, the Rope was more in my
thought, and that is Law too) But be it so for this time; yet notwithstanding
this large grant; If Archbishops and Bishops are all for mounting-up of
Altars, Edification of Images, for maintaining Superstitions, Heresies,
Blaspemies, horrible Prophanations, even of the Lords Day; Then may we find
out a Law, or make a Law, and swear unto it when we have done, To thrust-out
such abominable Parsons, or give them the Rope within, so Trussing them up by
the Necks.

A. Stay a little, dare you avouch all this?

B. Yes, and swear it too; and more, I will make a challenge, If I do not give
better Reason and Law both, why the Archbishops, and Bishops I mean a Bishop
rick in the Bishops latitude.
should have a Rope from Earth, than they can give why they should have a
Bishopric from Heaven; I mean, If I cannot make better proof, That they should
have a Rope, Lege Humana, than they can make Proof of Tenure or holding their
Bishoprics Iurc Divino, Then I will hang for them at Tyburn, or burn for
them in Smithfield.

A. Durst you (or vviser and better than you) say as much as this five years
ago?

B. No indeed, (...) quidem, deep silence then, for it was the Power of
Darkness and the Bishops were in their Zenith, the verticle point, and height
of their Reign. I will speak a little for my betters, It was an Evil time,
the Prudent man held his peace, and so he showed his (own) wisdom by his
silence and doing nothing; for, Beholding The Lords Day Profaned, The Lord of
the Day Blasphemed, The Honors and Service of the Day defiled, all this while
he (vvisely) held his Peace; He observed more, even grievous Wolves hasting to
Christ's fold, thence removing the Shepherds, and there scattering the sheep:
All this while, if they would let him alone, he would let them alone; such was
his wisdom: But it was his own, he never learnt it of his God. He bids this
man, who ever he is, (But this man was not alone, a thousand with him, were as
silent as he was, but if alone, yet God bids him) In my Cause, and against my
Enemies be as bold as a Lion; Then certainly, He that so commands, would as He
did, command the Lions mouth, he shall not devour this man, who is as bold as a
Lion for Gods sake: Truly we must not flatter our Wisers and our betters, It
was their fault, and they are excedingly humbled for it, they were too
fearful, too loath to speak, too forward to flatter: So the Shepherds and
their flocks were scattered as we heard; indeed the servants of the Lord,
considering the terrors of the Lord, the place appointed for the fearful, are
very much humbled for their silence, and Compliance, and if they be carried
down with the stream of mighty waters they can accept of their punishment,
whereof Augustine discourses very well and usefully in his first Book of the
City of God, Cap. 9. Now we return to our Law Book, which tells us, That our
Bishops were not made Archbishops nor Lords neither by our Law-Book. Though an
Archbishop said once in the face of a great Assembly, That the Holy Ghost made
him Bishop. Well said for a Bishop, but when he had said, he had done, and no
man was so foolhardy as to reply, for it was in the High Commission Court, and
he was next to the highest there, and by the Laws and Constitutions there, he
was made, constituted, and established a Bishop, and maintained his standing
there by the same Statute Law, we know no other. But grant them all the Law in
the world for their being Bishops (Archbishops we will not mention) yet they
are not more Bishops, nor by a better Law, Than Maacha was Queen, yet when she
had hoysed-up a filthy thing, I know not what to call it, but an Idol it was,
and lifted her eyes and heart unto it, then was she, by the Covenant and Oath
the King and Peoyle had taken, Put down from being Queen. So it follows here,
and by as good Law, and so I leave it, and will hear now what the Man has to
say, why their Curats may not be extirpated or Rooted out also. Truly me thinks
they stand together very I mean all the Idol Shepherds in the Land.
handsomely in their Service Book (Bishops and Curats) and let them be
thrown-out in Gods Name with their Service Book too, So it will be: why should
they not be together still, Bishops and Curats, for such Bishops and such
Curats, and such a Service Book: And out they shall be cast for certainly so
contrary, the Church has Prayed this long time, and now the Church shall reap
the fruits of her Prayers and long expectations; by help of God and His Law
Book the Church will cast out Archbishops, Bishops and Curats.

A. Not Curates sure, they are good men, standing up for the King, and for
Religion.

B. So say the Bishops too; explain the terms, and you have your Answer.

For the King; What Is that? Against God, the High God, Lord of Lords; against
His Christ, Prince of the Kings of the Earth; against Truth, and Peace; against
every thing, That has a tendency that way, to the good and happiness of the
King and Kingdom. For Religion now, what is the meaning of that? The Curate
shall tell you; For Religion (i. e.) for forms of Religion, a Liturgy, a
Service Book; for all their Religion is there. We have lifted up our hands to
the High God, That we will throw out all these; who are so contrary, even as is
light and darkness, to That, which we have joined hands and heart to maintain
with our Estates and Lives, that is Religion: and cursed be all those, who
obstinately stand Neuters in this great Cause, so nearly concerning God, His
King, and Kingdoms.

A. Why are those that stand Neuters cursed men? They are innocent; They will
anger no Party; They are for the King, for the Church, for Churchmen, and
Church Service, as we will call it, and not against the Parliament.

B. Yes, against it, for they are not with it: In this very case also, our
Lords words are true, and reach these Neuters.

A. But what Law have you for Neuters?

B. None at all; Law is for an Hare, they say, and a Polt for a Polt. Cat. The
very truth is, we have no Law for them at all, But all the Law in Heaven and
Earth, is against such: And if we do not throw them out, The Lord will spew
them out; As sure as Herod was a Fox; so sure this Neuter is such another man,
a cunning knave, and a very fool too; he stands holding fast a brasse-penny in
his hand, beholding the while, the Pearl trampled-under by Swine: He holds fast
his own Rights, and will keep his own Privileges: But for the Gospel and
Gospels Rights, whether kept or lost, he is William Indifferent I knew a man in
Oxford called so, who when his house (very old and rotten) was on fire, and he
was told of it, said he was indifferent.


I know not where to find this Neuter (as our English Seneca to his little
friend, in his younger days To Mr. W L. deead 3. epist. 5.
he is every where, and no where, etc. But I will rather have it observed, how
the Poet describes him, Natat modo, like one that swimes; he is now on this
side, now on that; openly for virtue, secretly for vice; as unequal as
Priscus, as like himself, as Vertumnus; as various as Protcus Hor 2. ser. Sal.
7.
A man, that has his body here, and his heart with the Kings Army: That gives a
pound of silver to The Lord Christ (thereby to keep his thousand:) and one
hundred to maintain the War of Antichrist.

A man that stands at an indifferency, so equally poysed, That a Moment turns
him, he is as is the time; runs as does the stream; stands as does a Weather
Cock; I could tell him now two or three stories, which would make him tremble
at the judgments of God, upon Neuters, but I forbear. He will not appear for
Christ, his end will be destruction; he must appear, but Christ will not appear
for him, not acknowledge him then, at that day. As miserable a man as is in the
world, and as Malignant, and hurtful; They that are so, and appear not, do the
most mischief. It is but Law and Reason both, That these should be cast out.

And now to close up the Bishops Case, and the Legality of the proceeding
against them, we will note this as follows, That the proceedings against the
Bishops have been all along these 3 years, according to the clearest prints of
Law and Justice, that ever were observed in the world: For first, The Worthies
un-Bishoped them, thrust them down from their Thrones; (an honor their
flatterers gave unto them without Reason; the Worthies took it from them by all
Reason, and Law to help.) They took from them their Dignities, Lordships,
temporal and spiritual, rendered them as contemptible, as they made
themselves, and endeavored to make the Lords day: And, which was most
observable, The Church cast them out of their Prayers: Indeed their praying for
them still (as Bishops over the Church) had been an intimation of their right
to reign (tyrannize rather) over them still: and the Churches subjection to
that Antichristian power. But they thrust them out of their chairs and now they
vow to root them out from the Land of the living. If we behold this well it
will appear to be a very beautiful work, and the order taken therein, makes it
so beautiful; It puts me in mind how the Romans dealt once with their Ruler,
that ruled them, as the Bishops ruled, with a Rod of Iron; so proudly, so
contrary to Law, and all good Reason, That he was called Turquin the proud: he
dealt with his People almost as proudly, as the proudest have dealt in Ireland.
The People honored him while he was their King, but when he rendered himself a
Tyrant, by his insolences and cruelties, then they would not endure; they
un-kinged him, that was first, and then lifted up their hands, and vowed to
root him out, him and all of his name; I note it to show the Legality of the
proceeding with the Bishops; It reaches higher to the Archbishops; But I have
done. You see the Legality and equity of this Covenant, touching the casting
forth these Archbishops, Bishops, Curates, and all this, as clear as is the
Sun, next and there I shall be short:

We must observe the exemplarynesse of this Covenanting way: There are a Cloud
of Witnesses, who will give their Seal and Warrant hereunto. III.
Asa is a man of renown, touching that matter; who ever observes his steps,
will go on after him; Never any man was more successful then he; so
victorious as he; he made his Kingdom a Mountain of brass: The Ethiopian came
against Judah with a thousand thousand, and more, thought verily to storm
Judah. No; Judah had taken a sure way, To confound his Adversary, They had
entered Covenant with God. But I prevent my self here; more of this anon. I
might be large here, but I forbear in so cleared a case: The three Kingdoms
entering into Covenant now, have done according to the best examples, as all
the true Israel have done in all Ages; It is a clear case, as clear as the Sun,
I come to the next.

The Seasonablenesse of this Covenanting. IV.
Oh the Wisdom of God, The Power of God. Oh the goodness, the mercy of God,
whose Name is wonderful! God, indeed, hissed for His people in the North;
called upon them to enter Covenant with His people in the South. They readily
obeyed: Was that any wonder? No truly; For, besides their own endearments and
concernments, (paries cum proximus ardet) their own vows were upon them, and
have lain upon their shoulders, almost these fourscore years. But let us see
the power of God here, we will observe His Wisdom afterward; His Power
first, Who makes the Wolf to lie down with the Lamb, The Calfe and the young
Lion, and the fatling together, and Isai. 11. 6.
a little child shall lead them. Wat you what? Reader, I pray you let us hear.
That as we understand how matters stood betwixt England and Scotland three
years ago, when the Bishops in both Kingdoms, would have thrust each others
sword into each others Bowels: So also, we may understand how matters stood
betwixt England and Scotland three hundred years agone: Ah Lord! But we may
remember it rather with praise now, and rejoicing: For we are Brethren now,
and live as Brethren, and accursed be he with all the curses in Gods Book,
that goes about heartily, and indeed, to break the Brotherhood, between Judah
and Israel; To sow seeds of discord betwixt these two: God has joined us
together, and we are Brethren now. We, (and here God is wonderful) who,
sometimes Centuries ago, were Wolves each to other, such devourers, that it
was a wonder, (say our Chronicles almost all) that the Nations were so Hos. 9.
12. Cruente Caedibus Tren.
fruitful to bring forth so much flesh, as the sword did devour; for England
brought forth her children, as Ephraim did, to murderers in Scotland: and
Scotland her children to murderers in England, so they flew one the other, and
fell in one day, I know not how many, but as the Poet expresses it very well,
as the Wheat-Stubble before the Reapers. North and South, (indeed it commands
our observation) The people there, as opposite Homer.
once, as are the two Poles now, are made one now, brought up together now to
enter into Covenant; whereunto, (and this we must take notice of in passage)
Scotland had engaged themselves 70 years agon. I pray you let me tell you how
that came about, for our purpose is to exalt the Name of God, Scotland was over
powered by their Queen there, and her power from France; Then did That Queen,
whom every mouth does bless: but that which speaks blasphemies still: whom
every Church has in their eye, what they can see, and keep of her, indeed she
loved the Church and the Nation, Then did Queen Elizabeth send succors into
Scotland, which kindness Scotland accepted, and remembered with all
thankfulness, and then engaged themselves to do the like for England, as their
matters should require. We have seen the Arm of the Lord, now I hope we can
discern the wisdom of the Lord, and so take altogether according to our
scantling. Let us observe the power of God again, They that were twain, as
scourges, nay, as Scorpions each to other; are now made one, as one stick in
Gods Hand, wherewith He will beat the Hazaels of the world, till he has
consumed them. O the power of God! And His wisdom too! at such a time, such a
seasonable time as this is, when all the Dogs in the world, all the Irish,
English, French (all in the Kings Army, having their hearts, and hands there)
when all these have their mouths wide open, to devour the Church for such a
Time as this, God made these twain one, That they might be as one Stick in His
Hand, To beat these Dogs: for such a time as this! As it was with the Scots,
when they were oppressed Ezekiel 37. 19.
by their Governesse the Queen Regent, and she helped from France, then did
help come from England, seasonably, as a sweet shower falls upon the mowen
grass: so, in such a season as above said, did the Lord remember the Scots of
their Engagements, which they will answer now with all readiness. O the
wisdom of God! I pray you let us leave Him to His own Time; let us never make
haste, nor distrust Him for after time, he will come-in seasonably to His
Churches help; He will do all for His Church, as He did for His servant
Mordecai, (In truth the parallel is wonderful) and exalts Gods Power and
Wisdom, and Glory to the worlds end.

The Lord remembering Mordecai in the fittest time, may learn us the
understanding of our own hearts, and of the times, and patiently to wait Gods
time. I shall not count it then a digression from the main purpose, to stay a
little upon it, I will lay open my thoughts here, That good men may (for the
wicked will not) judge of their own hearts thereby, and find a means to make
them better. I thought the time long; how long Lord, Holy and True, how long
shall the treacherous man, deal treacherously? Shall the Sword destroy for
ever? (In our distractions, we call a week a month, and a month an year, and
an year, ever, an everlasting Time, so we forget prosperity, and in adversity
we cannot consider) Thou have said, Lord, Thou will purge out the Rebels. Shall
it not yet be? So also I asked after an Association and a Covenant, to assure
it when shall that be, if that were done, all were done; When will thou bring
up the hearts of thy people, To this work? When shall it be, that we be no
longer vexed with all adversity? I do not blame these desires I persuade my
self these are good. Yet I must examine my desires, which way they tend. The
purging out of Rebels and Rebellion is the Thing desired, a warranted desire,
according to Gods will. I hate them more then I do a Toad or a Viper, for a
more venomous and hateful generation there is not in the world, and, which is
all, such, whom God hates: I may hate their Rebellion, and, as they are enemies
to God, them too. Then the desire to be rid of them, is a good desire. But now,
if that Rebel, self, and the Rebellion in my own heart, has not vexed me
more, or as much, as all that I see in the land: and, if I am notas eager to
have it cast out, then that is my blame, and this the good man's lesson. Look to
it how that Rebellion has troubled and vexed Thee; whether more than has that,
which thou see in the world? That Rebellion in thy self grieveth thy Father,
and the good Spirit of thy God most of all: Observe thy self well now, whether
this Rebellion grieveth thee most also? whether thy desires are most intent,
and hearty, To have this Rebellion, subdued or cast out. So for the other
desire, O! an Association, that we were at a sweet agreement, with our selves
knit together, and with our God in Covenant. Indeed I did desire it as before,
heartily, and it was a good desire, But if I do not desire as much, To agree
with my Adversary in the way: and to be at peace with my God; if not, there was
self in it, self ease, and other self respects, and I must blame my self
for it; which may teach the best man in the world, as before, and so, in the
second place, for that is most pertinent here.

My desires are good, but I heartily blame my hastiness therein. I was too
hasty, for I limited God, as if I were wiser then God. Truly I never thought
so, but I did, as those do that are half of that mind, who have such high
thoughts of themselves. I was too hasty touching the time, and season of it;
Was I as hasty to be rid of that Rebel my own will, and self, and of the
Rebellion, which selfwill caused, was I as hasty at that point for a Riddance
there? Certainly I was not, Then must I correct my self there first.

Secondly, Let us all consider this for it is pertinent indeed; The Day is
Gods, so is the Night, He created the Light, He formed darkness; Time and the
season in His, Then let Him alone with His own; let Him dispose of it, and of
matters to be done in it, when and how it pleases Him. Whatever He does we
must not meddle with that, for it is His prerogative Royal To be Lord, and,
master there; We must not limit Him, Who is infinite, to our time: Time and
season is ours to make use of, but the propriety is in Gods Acts 1.
Hands, we may quickly be too hasty there; While we have time let us be doing
good; we cannot be to hasty at that point, for that is our duty; but to set God
a doing at our time, there is hastiness. We may, nay, we must lift up a prayer
for that Remnant, David and all his helpers, thorowout all the Christian world,
with, and in the Parliament; with, and in the Assembly, for the Heads of the
Tribes there, for all the precious, the Cream, and Crown of the Kingdom; We
must strive in prayer for them, and endeavor with our Estates and lives, etc.
we know what follows, and must do it, else we do not as we stand bound to
do, our work and duty, to lift-up the Hand against Amalek^, both on the Mount,
and in the Valley. But having done so, we have done our duty, we may rejoice in
the Lord, and express it, as Luther did, singing the 46 Psalm. Surely this
being granted, That we have done our Duty, we can stand still calm and quiet
in Spirit, embracing the promise a far off, and magnifying Gods Salvation to
be made manifest in His Time, and no hastiness now, being assured, that all
Gods works as they have been, so shall they be gloriously beautiful: Why?
because, as they have been done, so they shall be done, in season; His time,
not ours, therefore in season: We cannot but know how seasonably He works for
His people* how beautiful His Footsteps and Comings in for their help have
been ever, are, and shall be evermore: The Lord will comein, as he always has
done, so seasonably, That His people shall say, O the Power of God, how
admirable! O the Understanding of God, how unsearchable! O the Goodness,
Mercy, Love, and Kindness of God to His people, how rich! how abundant all
these! I cannot express it. The Point is this whereat we Anchor our spirits,
God does all things well, because in His own time, the fittest season. We have
a parallel for it, whereby to exemplify this; Thence I digressed, thither I
return now to take a fuller view of this seasonablenesse, M^d c^s kindness
was rem^mbred in the fittest time; so the kindness of Englands Queen. (...) 9
4.
In the Night of our destractions, The Day of Jacobs troubles, none like it,
when all were designed to destruction, when the foot of pride set so hard on
the neck of the Righteous; Then the kindness of England must be remembered:
When Englands King deals (I will say but) hardly with his good people, then
the kindness of Englands Queen must be remembered, even then. Surely The Lord
does all things in the fittest time, the best season: and, O the sweet simpathy
of the Scottish Nation! Brethren indeed, they are made for adversity; Truly
they have the mind of Christ; Persecute My people, thou persecutest Me, that
was the mind of Christ; Persecute England, The Gospellers there, you persecute
us, there is the mind of the Scots. Truly they are more sensible of our pain
than we, who smart from the Scorpion; and they will assemble themselves, knit
themselves together with us into one Body, to destroy this Legion of -- that
they may no longer sting in Gods Holy Mountain: We have Vowed to stand-up
against this Generation of Vipers, till they are so subdued, that they shall no
longer Sting, or be as grieving Thorns, or vexing Briars to the Church, and
people of God. Amen.

V. V.
A. But now you have associated your selves, and are knit together (as you say,
the wicked are solden together, as thorns, so ye) as one man, now you are so
knit together, are you able for this work?

B. Yes, that we are, able through Him, there is no doubt of it, in Whom we can
do all things; we have done our duty, that we have done touching this matter;
The rest we leave to God, and will tell him of his Promise anon.

A. Why, but they (you call Rebels) are as many every day, nay, more than
before, and as lively they are, as strong, as formerly they were, and more
firmly united.

B. Well, what then? Therefore the Rebels shall not be purged forth; that does
not follow, though it is not the work of a day, nor an year neither; That
work is doing, but we must not make haste; we have a promise for it, and we
can live upon that, and give God thanks. God can do greater things; The Church
never Questions His Power, He can take away the iniquity of the Land in one
day; with the same speed He can take away the Rebels, as He did the Northern
Army, send forth His vvinde, Zech. 3. 9.
blow them away in one night: He can do so, but it is not his manner so to do;
He will hold his people in expectation, and it is good for them they should be
so held: If there were not sore trials, and long vvaitings, where were
Faiths mastery? there must be a distance between the Promise and performance,
that the Saints may learn to salute, to kiss the Promise afar off, and be glad
too, with exceeding joy, as at the sweetest embracement. Heb 11 13 (...).


A. Salute and embrace afar off! how can that be?

B. Very well, and it must be so; The Antipasses Gods faithful Witnesses, the
Martyrs, could embrace and kiss a Faggot so near at hand, that presently it set
them all on a flame, so near it was. O vvonderfull! Yes, for it is granted,
They did embrace and kiss the Faggot: But so they had not done, if they had not
seen the Promise afar off, and embraced it; I will be with thee in the fire, it
shall not burn thee: and in the water, it shall Esaias. 43 2.
not drown thee, for thy Head is above. I pray you observe it; Gods people see
and embrace the promise afar off, and can vvait with patience till it come.
They are a waiting people, God has vvaited upon them, they must vvait upon
Him; so exercising their patience, yea every Grace. O blessed be His Name! If
He does not deliver His people now, He will sustain them now: If He suffers
Rebels amongst them, this is also sanctified unto His servants, for the
overcoming the Rebellions, and casting out that Rebel Self in their own
hearts: All administrations of Mercies, all distributions of sorrows all for
the Churches good, all shall tend to the advantage of the Soul, That shall
prosper by all; and if the Soul (that excellent thing) far above the
excellency of the Sun when he shines in his full strength, if the Soul
prospers, all prospers, for the Soul is all: And all The Lord does or suffers
to be done, has a direct tendency to this great end, That His Church or People
may prosper as their Souls prosper. Gods way is always straight, and Man's
crooked motions shall tend directly to His end, the purging and whitening of
His Church, and making them meet for Dan. 11. 35
Glory: When that end is attained, Then you shall hear that the Rebels are
purged, and sent to their own place. So all is in reference to His People, for
the Churches good; all this trouble shall greatly advance the Churches peace
and quiet; This Sour shall yield Sweet to them: Hereby the iniquity of Jacob
is purged, etc. for this will fall in again in the seventh Section. Here I Isa
27. 9.
shall tell what the Lord has done toward this Promise; I will purge out from
you the Rebels. Truly He has done so much, That, if we see no more done, Ezekiel.
20. 38.
yet for ever blessed be His Name, for that the Lord has done; Our eyes may be
closed shortly and covered with dust; What if it be so? yet we can salute, we
can Kiss this Promise afar off, and say, Praised be His Name for what our
eyes have seen fulfilled in all the peoples sight, touching this Promise, I
will purge out the Rebels. We have seen Archbishops and Bishops laid flat on
their backs, as men in their graves. Al but they will rise again, they say;
Yes, at the last day, we say; howsoever we have seen them laid flat, The height
of our desires was three years ago, The taking away of three Innocent
Ceremonies (for such a Pope there was) Good Lord! He would give us a full
mercy; we have seen three and four, that is, seven abominations taken away; The
Lord be praised for what we have seen. That which we have seen is enough to
defray all our expense of Spirits, Time, and Purse.
Luther thought if he could be isntrumental for throwing out of Indulgences
and Pardons, those cursed things, O how well appaid would he be! how would he
boast in his God! Would ^e so? His God would use him for greater things than
those, The Lord broke down before his servant, this Wall, and that wall, showed
him these and those abominations, and what Luther did, all the world knows: The
Lord loves to bestow mercies with a full hand; and blessed be His Name, as it
is Holy, Esaias 6. 3.
Blessed, Blessed, Blessed, for what He has done toward this promise, and for
what our eyes have seen; even so, Amen

There are stops and pawses, nay, Lions and Shee-Bears, Walls, What hinders and
retards the business.
and Mountains in the way, we shall get over them all at the last. Indeed we
of the Common sort move very slowly, not like men who would leap over walls and
skip over Mountains; and the Richer sort are nothing nimble neither, very
sluggish in their motions, specially if they move toward their Purse, the
drawing or emptying of that. I can easily believe the Covenant was penned in
Scotland, who well understood, and mean to perform what they wrote, to their
eternal praise, which is in the Gospel. There is one expression in the
Covenant (nay two) which we poor men cannot perform to our wills, and Rich men
will not understand to their Power; and that retards, holds-back, and sluggs
the motion very much; We Covenant to endeavor with our Estates, and Lives, (i.
e.) we will let Estates go, and Lives go, and all go, That the Gospel may not
go; we will lay-out all, all we have, and all we are, That we may maintain the
Rights and Liberties of the Gospel; for, maintain the liberties of Christ's
Kingdom, and God will maintain the Liberties of our Kingdom; and for the
maintenance hereof, Thus we Vow to do, to expend our Estates and our Lives. The
Scottish Nation, a poor people, for we must remember how they were oppressed
plundered, persecuted four years ago; yet so they have done: And verily,
wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, surely there
shall also this, that they have done for the maintenance of the Gospel, be
told also for a memorial of them; such great matters they have done for the
Gospel, as men, that know a Pearl, and can estimate it. Truly we poor men
cannot perform here as we would, but a poor man's Myte has been accepted, where
there is no more. And happily some of us have done what we can, and then it was
a resolved case a thousand years ago, That a poor man may be liberal, when a
rich man giving an hundred times more, yet not unto a proportion to what God
has given him, shall be called a Niggard, a Covetous man; and now you have said
the worst of him. I will say but this more, certainly the rich men do not
understand what they have sworn, and this is my reason; There was an hundred
thousand pounds to be collected this last month, a great sum you will say;
Yes, but I assure the Reader, upon the knowledge I have had of this City these
twenty years, and of the vast expenses now drawn from the rich men there this
last year, (which the Lord returns seven fold into there Bosoms) That yet there
are ten men who could and would make up this large sum, and send it away; I
say, would, if they valued the Pearl in the Gosspell, (It is Religion, it is
the Gospel, call it what you will, it is the Pearl) as they do the Pearl in
the world, that is, their money. Reader! do these men understand what they
swear? We will with our Estates, I will not add, and with our Lives: If they
will not part with their money now, at such a needful time: not give out that,
I mean in a proportionable sum to what God has given them, and with a
reference also to the Pearl now in danger to be trod under foot by Swine; If
they give not now like themselves in a proportion to that, which God and his
Cause, and all good men, call from their hands; if not help now (with their
Estates, asmall proportion thereof to what God has given them) to save a
Kingdom, then not with their lives sure, though the Pearl is worthy the
purchase at the highest rate; for we remember, That a Merchant sold all that he
had, and bought the Pearl, Mat 13.

A hard matter to persuade with Merchants in these days so to do, from whom
(some of them) we may more easily draw blood, then their money. The Scottish
people have done their duty, To vindicat and keep the Pearl trod-under by
Swinish men, they have sold all; The English swear to do as much, Some in
Scotland, Some in England will be faithful, they have counted their cost,
understood what they did, and so have Covenanted; and by help of God, they will
stand to it. There is no more required to make a Kingdom as a Mountain of
Brass: In the next placethen we will well consider, what is the virtue, force,
and efficacy of this Covenanting with God.

VI. VI.
It is very prevayling every way. It is a sure way, it never failed the Church;
They associated themselves, entered into Covenant, and then all was sure. King
Asah, King Ezekias with other, are great examples here: It is a safe way, and
it is an only way. Ask from one end of Heaven to the other, what is the
readiest way to complete the Militia of a Kingdom? It is Answered, this is the
way, Come up to Gods terms, enter into Covenant with Him. So Asa did, and
until he had done that, he had done nothing. It is true, he took away the
Sodomites; he threw down the Altars; thrust aside their Service; And what of
all that? Sodomites had thrust in again, Altars had been hoysed up again, If
he had not Covenanted against all these. It is so still, We must every man, for
his own part, Covenant against the accursed thing in his own heart. So also,
against the accursed Persons and things in the Kingdom, to throw them out,
else Fasting does no good, nor Praying, nor Preaching neither; Covenanting must
go together with all these, else nor the Kingdom, nor the Christian Soldier
there; can be in any safe Posture. What is done to day, in this Posturing work,
will be undone to morrow, If we do not Covenant against Idol-men, and Idol
things and with the Lord, So engaging our heart, to cast them all out. But do
as aforesaid, and the Kingdom is sure; so is the Person too. There is no hope
but in this way; mark it. We have trespassed against our God, says Sheshaniah.
What had they done? They had taken the daughter of a strange God, I know not
how many strange Wives; and then they had taken the readiest way in the world,
To stock up their Kingdom by the roots, yet, says he, There is hope in Israel
concerning this thing; Though such a grievous Trespass be committed, and the
Chief in the Kingdom are Chief in that trespass; Yet there is hope. What
hope? Even now therefore let us Ezra 10 2.
make a Covenant with our God; There is the hope; If any thing under the Cope
of Heaven will do it, That will do it. What? Away with the daughters of a
strange God, Set them packing, who would thrust us from God, and God from us;
Let us thrust them away and Covenant so to do, and then we shall keep our God,
and close to His worship; And if we keep God and close to Him at that point,
All is kept, for God is all; and he will keep us all, if we keep to Him and
stand to the Covenant; There is the hope of Israel concerning this matter,
says good Shechaniah, It is a sure way, it is an only way to save a Perishing,
a down sinking Kingdom, brought to the Pit of destruction, upon which are all
the Symptom's of death, and for which the grave is made, because it is so vile,
Come, let us make a Covenant; It is the only hopeful way to save such a
Kingdom. An hopeful way say I! I will say a great word, and I will boast of
the way, but in the Lord, There is more then hope, There is a certainty of
Success in this Covenanting; It never failed the Righteous, it never shall
fail unto the worlds end; I know what the good man will say now, hear him.

VII. VII.
A, This way has failed the most Righteous King, that ever had his Kingdom in
this world, Josiah by name, it failed him, even him.

B. No, it did not, he Covenanted with his God, and so kept close to his God,
and God to him all his days, and at death they were not divided; he that
breathed after GOD all his life long, breathed his soul into Gods hand at his
death, and so departed, and is now for ever with the Lord: This Covenanting
with God did not deceive Josiah.

A. It failed his people all, his whole Kingdom (and that is my meaning) They
were carried away at last, though first their King made a Covenant with his
God, yea, and made His People stand to it.

B. He did indeed, and it shall ever be spoken to his Praise, when that
Scripture is Read, Josiah made a Covenant with God; and caused to stand to it.
But if we observe it well, we shall tremble, for here is a But, will spoil
all; But Judah did not stand to it.

Stand to it; alas no, The Covenant did not fail, they failed the Covenant:
The people dealt wickedly there; The King laid an inforcement 2 Chr. 34, 35.
upon them, hi very example was of force, to pull and drag the People to enter
Covenant, to lay them under those sacred bands, to make them stand to it; but
there was not an heart in them; much they did in seeing such a glorious example
before them, but they did nothing in truth. They were not a whit humbled for
all the Blood, that Manasseth had shed, not for the Idols he had set-up, they
were as Idolatrous as their King: Not a whit humbled were they, for all their
abominations, theirs and their Princes; not a Ier. 15 4. Page 121.
whit; therefore wrath came upon them. Indeed I should be large in this point,
but I find it somewhat enlarged in the Kings Chronicle, whereto I will refer
the Reader. I will say but this here, never was there such a Backsliding
people, no not in our days, never was there such a Departing from God, as at
that time in Judah: I tell you what makes me think verily it was so; read the
last of the Chronicles, what a declining, what a fallingback was there from
their God, from His worship, of all degrees, of all estates, high and low, Rich
and Poor! To what an height of Provocations did they rise! But for ought I can
observe in that Chapter the Prince and People did not more wickedly in those
days, then we have done in our days: our abominations have risen to the same
height. But yet I observe what I Read in Jeremy, and that is thus: I find more
goodness Ier. 38.
in one Ethiopian, then was in all the Princes of Judah. I would Entreat the
Reader to mark that Chapter; As our Lord says of the Centurion a stranger to
the Common wealth of Israel; I have not found so great faith; no not in Israel:
So, not so much goodness in all the Princes of Judah, as Mat. 8. 10.
in that one Ethiopian. Not so much goodness! said I, there was no goodness
in the Princes at all, all naught, all Rebellious and fallen off from God. They
did not pray to God, they prayed to the King, That Jeremy might be put to
death. Certainly, Reader, Certainly, though we (I say we, for Scotland and
England are one,) though we are a very wicked, a very wretched People, fallen
very low, parted very far from our God, yet not fallen so low, as Judah was at
that time; not so far departed, but a Covenant with our God, will fetch us
back again; for there are many Nobles in Scotland, many Princes there (I find
Priests called Princes there) 2 Chronicles. 17. 7. a Psalm. 110 3. (...) A people of
Devotions. 2 Cor. 8, 23.
to say nothing of the Common people, a very willing people, a people of
willingnesses, (a) willingly, offering Devoting their estates, and lives now To
help in the battle of the Lord; and day of Jacobs trouble; who have sworn, and
will stand to it To maintain the Cause of the Lord, as it shall require, and as
we read before. And there are a people in England too Nobles and Princes there
(I mean by Princes the Messengers of the Churches, and the Glory of Christ) who
have given up themselves to the Lord, and to maintain His Cause; some Nobles I
say, not many, but some there are, who, their eternal praise, have entered
Covenant and will stand to it; when others, to their eternal dishonor, enter
into a Covenant to day, and break out from it on the morrow, stand not to it,
no not an hour: As if they might take the Covenant of God, as a Papist takes
the Oath of God, swear to day, and forswear next day; Adjure to day, calling
God to witness: and perjure anon, so blaspheming that Holy, Holy, Holy, Name,
making the Oath of God, like a Gypsies knot, fast now in show, loose presently
in fight. We have some Nobles, that do abominate this Blasphemy, they enter
Covenant with God to day, and are more and more resolved and engaged for God
and His Cause every day, from hence forth, and for ever. I could say as much of
a people too, very many in Cities and Towns both, a very willing people, If
they cannot give to the Cause, they can die for it, as a Martyr said; if their
estates be none or gone, (they cannot be prodigal there, as the Cause commands)
then their lives shall go, they will be prodigal of their blood, and thank God
He has honored them so, Who gave His blood for them. And so we are where we
were, in a way which never failed. And shall it fail the Righteous now? God
forbid, nay God forgive us such a thought. But let us look to our standing now,
I mean to the standing to our Covenant, for that bears up the weight of the
business; This standing to it, let us look to that: we are now come up to God,
to His Terms, to His Command, not more knit together amongst our selves, as
knit to God. What now? Now the Nations are angry. Angry! They are stark mad;
look ye on this side, and but a little beyond Lincoln, and behold how they rage
there! See also in the South, and in Ireland, What are the the thoughts of
those Monsters there? They think to join with our Monsters here [Monsters! Yes.
They are Nobles many of them. True, but the more monstrous, if Nobles by birth.
Certainly, if those Nobles (not to mention the black Regiment, those Bulls of
Bashan, nor the Calves of the people, Some call them Cavel: Gentlemen; I have
called them Rogues twenty times with an Accent, for I will call a Spade, a
Spade, Thieves, Robbers, Murderers, all these by their names, so let them go,
the way of Cain, who slew his Brother. I am a speaking of the Nobles, who
beat their own Mother, even her, that bare them, that suckled them, that
dandled them upon her knees, vvarmed them in her bosom; These Nobles, who
have set their Mothers House on fire over her head; (and are not these
Monsters, for they have done yet more villainy) if these Nobles should see their
own visage represented unto them now, as it will be shortly, in the very next
History, they would be gastred at the sight of such Monsters, as the King was
at the vvriting on the wall. Truly me thinks I see them now, and they troubled
my Spirit, and Interrupted me, I was saying, Dan. 5. 6.
The Monsters in Ireland will join now with these in England; will be folden
together like thorns, will come out now against those all, who are joined in
Covenant with their God, and will do; What will they do? All the mischief
they can; They will storm the City of God, as they can, to their Power. That is
true, They will do what they can do, all the Mischief they can. But what can
they do? for we do not question their will. These have shed blood to their
Power, with a Rage that reacheth-up to Heaven; They have cursed David and his
Helpers by their gods; They have blasphemed The God of Heaven; They have thrust
the Ministers of the Lord out of their Houses, or slaughtered His Servants
there, even All the faithful in the Land, unto whom their hand could reach;
They have gods, as Jeroboam had, which he called honestly, truly, and very
well (as we call Priests now and their gods) Calves, for such are their
Priests, Idol-Brutish-Priests; Their Services such, Idol-Bruitish-Services. I
will ask again, what can these cursed People do against a Kingdom united in
its self, and in Covenant with their God? What can they do? I Will tell you what,
for the Spirit tells it me, They will Associate and gird themselves, and gird
themselves all for the Battle, and to Storm the Church of God, that they Esaias
8. 9.
will do. Well, yes, very well; now hear what the Lord will do, and what He
will do, He can do, That is a Comfort; What will He do? He will ungird His
Adversaries as often; He will break them, and break them, and break them (it is
no idle repetition) so often till He has broken them all to Fritters, like a
Potters Vessel, so He will break them; in breaking He will break them,
Breach upon Breach. Briars and Thorns! will they Array themselves for Battle
against the Lord? He is a Consuming fire (unto them) they shall be devoured
every one, in the Furnace, which their rage and fiery indignation against His
people, has made seven times hotter then ordinary. Rebels! that have lifted up
the horn, have spoke proudly, have dared to thrust at the Righteous, nay, The
Lord of Glory out of His Throne; The Lord will thrust-sore at them, He will
make them like an Oven and their Faces like Flames, He will purge them out.
But when? Even now, at this time* we have His word for it, for we are in
Covenant with our God: I will speak an high word and comfortable to the
fearful in heart, but humbly before our God, and if proud men will hearken,
let them hearken; This is the word and our Confidence, Now that we have entered
into Covenant with our God, To stand close to Him, To His Cause, To His
worship; Now that we have engaged our hearts to all this; what now? Now we have
engaged God to us, God must help us; We will by His Grace stand to our
Covenant, and appear for Him; It is an high word now to amaze proud men, God
must appear for us, and stand by us, and He cannot be idle. Must is not for the
King, you will say; yes, for the KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords; This King
must help us. The unjust judge did right the the Widow, must not the Judge of
all the world do right* He must, He must; There are Mighty Reasons why, and
Arguments as strong to assure the hearts of the Faithful; That God will and
must help His people now at this time, you shall hear them anon.

I suppose now even a good People, somewhat slow of Belief touching this
matter, being fearful now, hearing of the breaking-in of more grievous Wolves
into the Lords Vineyard; I mean, hearing that the Irish -- [I should call them
Brethren now, but I cannot call these Children of the Devil, These Enemies of
Christ, I cannot call these by so friendly a name; I must call them and their
Legion by their right Names, as their Father is called, Abaddon, Apollyon,
Destroyers, Murderers all, hearing that these] are coming-in to join with the
English -- [I cannot call them Brethren neither, Rev. 9 11
but] Monsters here; supposing I say, that a good people are slow of Belief,
and too much shaken with fear now; I will speak to their hearts first from
the Mouth of The Lord, as follows;

If all the good men in the House of Parliament were sick Men all, and all the
Bad there (some there may be) as bad as those that have run from them: if all
our Men of War, good Men there, were wounded men all; and all the bad, as bad
as are the Irish and English Monsters; and so bad they are, if any there, who,
in show stand up for God, but in word and heart are against him: If some in
our Counsels for war, in our Committees for all concernments of the Church,
and State, were as false and treacherous (God knows what they are) as bad
and rotten as some have been suspected to be: If so be the Scottish Army never
join with ours, [our hearts join, and our prayers join, that is as good, nay,
better, though we think it best of all, that our Armies may join, that we
might be all as one Stick in Gods Hand, to beat the dogs away, which so
infest, pester and trouble his people, Amen, but] If not so, yet, as it will
follow anon, well, for God is good to Israel still: If the Irish -- The
English -- Legion of Devils, I had almost said; if these were Devils indeed,
not Flesh, but all Spirit, as their father is; and if This Legion were
multiplied by such a number as they have hairs on their head; what then? Then
we shall all be destroyed, every Mothers Child. No, as sure as God lives and
loves His people, as sure as His Son is King and rules in the the world
amidst His enemies there; so sure This Cause, and all the Helpers in it, shall
prosper: and all that the Adversary does, shall help but to advance the
prosperity thereof, so sure God will issue-forth great good out of this great
evil and sore affliction; These bloody men shall be so far from hurting the
Church, that they shall do the Church infinite good. The Adversaries thoughts,
are, as his were, and as always they have been, Esaias. 10 7.
bloody, devouring, and destructive; But Gods thoughts are all mercy and Truth
all toward His people, to edify and build them up by these desolations, To
stablish them by these shakings; To heal them by these woundings. What men do
wickedly, God orders holily; They think evil against the Church, but God means
it unto Good: He is contriving a way now to make His Name, and His Church
Glorious.

Can this be so, do the fearful say, they doubt it very much, whether this
Pacification in Ireland, those bloody execrable -- there; Those Outrages,
Insolences, those -- here, shall turn to the Churches good; Can this be! Can
God bring good out of this evil? Can He bring Comfort out of this sorrow?
Glory out of this Cross? Life out of this Death Can He do it? Yes indeed, He
can: But truly we should never question His Power, no nor His Good Will
neither, toward His people: Can, said I! He will, He will, nay, He must, He
must, else he does not like a God, after His manner from the beginning of the
world; for evermore it was thus; when the Envy, the Malice, the Rage, the --
wrathful executions of the Churches Adversaries rose like a mighty Flood to
the Highest-top, against the Church, Then presently the Lord God so ordered it,
That His People have had Rivers, Floods, Brooks of Honey and Butter, streaming
down toward them: from whence? From the love of God, issuing good toward them
still out of every evil, even from these Floods of ungodliness before
mentioned: From the Rage, Envy, Hatred, Malice of the Churches Adversaries,
have streamed down to the Church Floods of Honey and Butter; The highest
Comforts, the strongest Consolations from out of the lowest bottom, the place
of Dragons, whereinto the wicked have smiten the Righteous, even from thence.
He give the Reader but one Instance here, amongst many, whereby to exemplify
this. I conceive verily, That the most envious hateful Act that ever was
offered to the Lord Christ, until this day, was acted upon His Body, when he
hanged upon the Cross; He had shed His precious Blood four times a little
before; 1. In the Garden. 2. When He was Crowned with Thorns. 3. When He was
whipped at the Post. 4. And when His Arms and Legs were nailed to the Cross,
(which Commands our Estates and Lives for Him now, He say no more)
Notwithstanding all this (for the Lord Christ's Adversaries then, as now, may be
glutted with Blood, they cannot be satisfied) A Soldier then would have more
Blood yet, and and so with his Spear opens the Lord Christ's Side and Heart
together, both at one thrust. Ah Lord! never was there such an horrid Act heard
of from the beginning of time to that day, until now, as it is at this day!
But what followed then? And forthwith came there out Blood and water: Look you
there, what the Soldiers Rage and Envy has done! He has opened Joh 19 34
the Heart of Christ to all the world of Believers, and let-out from thence
streaming toward them, floods of Honey, and Butter, from that very time to the
worlds end.

What shall I say! O the thoughts of God toward His people! O the love of
Christ, How inexpressable! there is blood to justify, water to sanctify,
there is all! There are the two Sacraments, Seals of the Righteousness of
Faith, Rivers, Floods, Brooks of Honey and Butter. So the Soldiers Rage
wrought then, so wonderful for the Churches Comfort then, when he pierced the
side of Christ, hanging on the Cross: Shall we doubt what will be the effect
of his rage now, now the Soldiers are piercing the living Body of Christ, as
dear to Him as the Apple of His Eye, now in Glory? Doubtless, and he has an
hard heart that does not firmly believe it, That these Soldiers now, thrusting
their Spears now into the sides of Christ still, with the same hatred and envy,
as once that Soldier did, do make but a passage wider open whereout to flow
unto the Church floods of Honey and Butter. All their Malignity shall serve but
to whiten the Church first, and then let in streaming into them the strongest
Consolations. As sure as the Lord lives, this must be so. These Soldiers are
now with one hand filling up their measures of Iniquity: and with the other
completing the Church, and the Consolations of God toward His People, That
their joy may be brimme full. The higher the enemies rage against the Church,
Rises, the higher shall the Consolations of God rise toward The Church. It is
so, and it must be so; But who is sufficient to express those things! Gods
administrations toward His people, how wonderful! His mercy is over all His
works, He saves man and beast; But specially His people, The hairs of their
head are said to be numbered, To tell us how safe and secure these people are;
nothing shall do them hurt, every thing shall do them good, even the rage and
bitter wrath of their Adversary; That great evil the adversary and enemy
intends against the Church, shall tend (see how the enemy is mistaken!) to
the greatest advantage of the Church: So as the Church shall say; We could not
have wanted these roaring Lions, Leaders in this war against us; we could not
have wanted those grievous Wolves, bloody Soldiers; Its good for us, that
these have done so much hurt (in their intentions) unto us; These have been a
sanctified means to open our mouths the wider to our God in praying to Him,
and praising of Him; These have, by purging out, and scouring of our
filthiness, made us more meet for Glory; we could no more have wanted them,
than a great house can want its Sinks and Conveyances whereby to carry-out the
filth; or Scullions, who serve there to cleanse and whiten Dan. 11. 35
the vessels appointed for honor, even for the Masters use. And now do those
servants of the Lord, intend their spirits, calling upon all within them, and
without them, To praise their God, Who works so and so for them; does them good
by all that falls out; makes the wounds from their Adversaries, healing to His
people; and of their poison and venom toward His people, a most sovereign
Balm; Blessed, Blessed, Blessed be God for this unspeakable mercy, Amen. His
people will endeavor heartily To live to His praise, Amen. To lay-out
themselves all they have, and are, to advance the Name of their God, Amen. We
have seen now by one example how God has wrought for His people; He is the same
still, He changes not; He must do the like, now, for He stands still in the
same relations to His people; The same engagements are upon Him still; His
people have the same Reasons and Arguments also, whereby to prevail with their
God, as all the faithful had before them, who Commanded God Esaias 25 11
by His own command, mastered, overpowered the Almighty in HIs own strength,
overcame Him with HIs own weapons, Reasons and Arguments, I mean, taken out of
His own Armory, The Word of God, more firm, mighty, and stable to assure His
peoples standing now against their Adversaries, than the Earth and Heavens have
for their continuance.

VIII. VIII.
The Reasons are thesefour, and the last contains the chiefest of the Arguments.

1. His peoples importunity; They give God no rest, God must help them: for
though He bear long, He will not be disquieted always. God hears the Ravens
when they cry; He must hear His people when they pray. He will have His people
Command Him; They do Command Him, He must do what He will have His people
Command Him to do.

2. His people Roll themselves upon Him, they Trust Him. A man must not
deceive his Trust, God must not; A poor people are persecuted, Esaias 62 7.
hurried, ferrited from place to place, They betake themselves to the Rock, The
Munitions of Rocks: must not our Rock (not like their Rock, the enemies
themselves being Judges) be to them, a feeble folk, as the Rocks are to the (
d) Esaias 55 16. ( e) Deuteronomy. 32. 31. ( f) Prove. 30 16.
Cunnies?

3. His people are in a low estate, God must remember them now, a poor people,
as contemptible, Psalm. 102. 17. (...) Nude nude nuditissi is Esai 51 18 k.
Psalm. 20. 7.
as naked as the barest shrubs; their Arms taken from them, a destitute, a
fatherless people, who found no man upon earth, that would take them by the
hand, (they that should have taken His people by the hand, took them by the
throat) His people observing that, laid fast-hold on the Almighties hand. What!
but one hand to rest upon, none besides on earth, none besides in heaven, and
will the Lord pluck away that hand, the only prop? His people Trust in Him,
rely upon Him, not in men, not in horses not in Chariots; not in Armies, not
in Navies, not in Treasures, They remember the Name of the Lord their God; and
shall not those rise now and stand upright? God remembered Noah, and every
living thing, and all the Cattle. What a good word is that? every living
thing, and all the Cattle. God must remember David and all His helpers; Them
and all their Genesis 8. 1.
troubles. He will help His people, nay, He must; have we misgiving thoughts
touching this matter? now God forbid, nay, God forgive, let us pray that these
misgiving thoughts may be forgiven us.

4. And the last of the Reasons, which I would have well observed, because I
shall draw the chief Arguments from it, wherewith to command, I say command God,
(for He says, Command ye me) To come-in for His peoples help. His people do
say, now of themselves, then of their Kingdom, of all the Esai. 45. 11
Rights, and Privileges, of all you can think of more, they say of all, as
Jehoshaphat says concerning the battle; The Battle is not yours (says He) 2 Chronicles. 21 16.
but Gods; We must note the words; As if He should have said thus to His
people. You have done your duty, ye have praid to God, you have praised Him,
you have done all faithfully; be no more sad, nor careful touching the enemies
approaching, They are not more your enemies, then Gods enemies; let Him alone
with them, and with the Battle, It is not yours now but Gods: The Swords and
the spear these in the enemies hands are His: He made the Smith that blows the
Coals, And our Walls and Towers, Gates and Bars, not ours now, but Gods; You
have given up this Kingdom to the Lord, you have entitled Him to, and
entrusted Him with the Kingdoms and all its Concernments: If He now will give
away His Esai 54. 41.
own, so; if He will lift up the Right hand of His Adversaries, so; It is the
Lord, let Him do as seems Him good: He is the Lord still, But hold ye still
to this, You are 1 Samuel 3. 18. 2 Samuel 16. 26.
not your own now, the Kingdom is not yours now, the Fortifications there, not
yours, nothing yours now, all is The Lords; hold to that, and be no longer sad,
nor careful touching the War: The Battle is not yours but the Lords. Truly
we have said as much; if we can understand what we have said; Lord, the
Kingdom, the Battle, the Cause, we are engaged upon, is not ours, It is Thine
Lord, Thine, and we Thine, and all Thine: Thy Cause, we stand up for, Thy
Christ, our Lord, Thy Cause, Thy Kingdom, and Thy Glory: All is Thine, nothing
ours, nothing we, Thou art all in this business, All the Concernments in this
great business. Thy Concernments every one: The Battle is not ours, but the
Lords: so His people say, who have done their work, and having so done, they do
assure themselves, that now God must do His work: I had almost said, His duty,
for it is according to His Word, wherein he has caused His Servants to put
their trust. I come to the Arguments now. The Lord has strong Arguments why he
cannot show mercy: but His people have stronger Arguments, wherefore he must
show mercy: The Lord will help His servant now, and suggest to him what
Argments He will use, and what Arguments I must use, for His good pleasure is
so, He has instructed me in all this. The Lord says why he should not show
mercy.

Does your expectation rise so high now, touching the making bare My Arm
toward your Kingdom? Think you to command Me now? Remember every Mothers
Child of you, and be confounded because of your shame Ezekiel. 16.
A seed of evil doers, as your forefathers! therefore must I call your name
also, as I commanded them to be called, Lo-ammi Hosca 19.
for you are not My people. No, in nothing like My people: If my friend Abraham
were now amongst you, or Israel my old servant to take notice of your manners
and fashions, they could know you no more to be My people, then they could
acknowledge Esaias 164. 16 So Trem. expounds the place.
those, that were of their own posterity, their own sons and daughters; so
degenerate ye are, as they anciently were, so fallen off: Ye have despised all
My Corrections, set at naught all My Reproofs, ye lightly esteemed My Words. I
have written to you, as to my people before you, the great things of My Law,
but they were counted as a strange Hos. 8. 12.
thing; Ye have polluted My Ezekiel. 20. 21. Vbi conqueritur Deus se contempto
Judaeos ad extremam impietatem porlapsos esse tantum dicit violata fuisse
Sabbata, ac si in eorum observatione praecipue consisteret Religio. Calv.
Sabbaths, ye have profaned My Day by a Law; and they, that served in My House
suffered it to be so, they opposed it not, though they could read, what Respect
I had to that Chief 1 Chr 6 10. There were fourscore more with Azariah, but he
being the Chief in opposing the King, God gives Him all the honor. 2. Chr. 26.
17.
Priest, who stood-up against the Profanation of My House, and My Sacrifice
there. You have profaned My Day; Then I was presently 2 Hosca 5 12
Moath to your Land, then ye consumed and pined away, and became as
Rottenness, and yet you considered-it not: Now I am as a Lion unto you (for
the Moath was but the Lions Harbenger) so in tearing I tear you to pieces, and
yet you do not acknowledge your offense, to seek My Face; no, not yet, after
all this evil is befallen you. Ye are a Peevish, a sullen, a froward, a
murmuring, a stubborn, a rebellious people. Say on, Lord, for we confess all,
a wicked, unkind, unthankful people, (we have polluted Thy Sabbaths, all thy
Holy Things) we are all this, and more, a people whose sins are hightened,
are aggravated by receipts of Mercies, by the Means of Grace vouchsafed to us,
by Time and Place (when and where we lived) and other Circumstances, hightned
above all the sinners in the world; An unsavory people we, as the Salt, or as
the unprofitable wood of the Vine, which has lost its fruitfulness; such we
are.

But, Lord, wilt not Thou respect a people, till they be a reformed People,
till they be Gentle, and Meek, and Good, and Gracious, and Holy, and like Thy
Self? Ah Lord! Then Thou will never respect us, we shall never be as aforesaid;
What Thou will have us to be, Thou must make us to be, Holy as Thou art Holy;
and what Thou command us to do, Thou must give us Grace to do, and then it
is done. Thy love is Free, Thy promise is without Condition, not any if there,
not, if ye will be my people, but, Ye shall be my Jer. 32. 38, 39.
people: and I will be your God; And I will give you one heart, and one way,
etc.

We remember, Lord, very well, how Thou have commended Thy love toward us;
While we were yet sinners Christ died for (...), Romans 58, 10.
us: when we were Enemies then were we reconciled; The thoughts of this freest
Mercy, freest love, wounds and pierces our hearts, it melts us into godly
sorrow, and forces us to love Thee again. While we were yet sinners; when we
were Enemies; Then Thou did set Thy Heart upon Thy People. What so free as
Grace! What so Reasonlesse as Thy Love! Thou love Thy people because Thou
love Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8.
them; The reason is in Thy Self; If it be in us, it is Thy pitis toward us,
when we lay as that, Cast-out, in our Blood, when we walked after our manner,
frowardly in our way, for then Thou said, It is a time of Ezekiel. 16. 8.
love; then Thou said, I will heal Esaias 57. 17.
you. This was love in Thee, Thy servants cannot say what (...), Ephesians 3 19.
love; and misery in us they cannot express how great! such exceedings in all
this, that all passes knowledge. But that is the argument, we are miserable
indeed, and Thou art merciful indeed; And Thou did say, when Thy people lay
in their Blood, It is a time of love; and when they went on frowardly, Thou
said; I Will heal you. And, Lord, did Thou set Thine heart upon Rebels once,
how much more now will Thy heart be toward them, now they have laid down their
weapons; now their uncircumcised hearts are humbled for all their
heart-andland-abomitions! They have loathed themselves now for their
Commissions, and Omissions, Ignorances and Negligences; Thy Ministers chiefly,
greatly humble themselves now, because they have turned their back against
Thee at any time, and did not set their Faces as Flints against those Bishops
and Curates, who set their foreheads, as Brass, against Thee; would They
cannot wonder that the land is stung with a generation of Vipers, whom it
warmed and hatched in its Bosom. Ezra 9.
not suffer Thee to Rule in Thine own House, not by Thine own Law, and Rule
there. Thy servants lie prostrate before thee for this, accepting their
punishment, what ever it be; Thou must not spurn them, now prostrate at Thy
feet; surely Thy servants are exceeding humbled now, That they suffered Thy
Sabbaths, Lord, Thy Day to be blaspemed by a Law; when they remember That, they
are ashamed, and sit down as Thy servant did, astonished; Thy loving kindness
has melted their hearts, and Thy Goodness makes Them fear before thee; and now
their pursuit is more earnest after Grace then after Glory; They would be
sanctified thorowout in Bodies, souls and spirits; Surely, Lord, Thy servants
have the affections of Children toward Thee, Thou must be so to them: Thou
did love Thy people being Enemies, how much more being made Friends, one with
Thee now in Covenant? Truly, Lord, Thou must love them now; Thy people can
argue the Case with Thee, they have an if now; If Thou shewedst such love, such
abundant favor to a people when Sinners, when Enemies; how much rather will Thou be the same to them, now, that they are made Friends? so Thou have taught
Thy people to argue with Deuteronomy. 32. 19
Thee, because it is Thy Good pleasure to be Overcome. Thou say we are
sinners, no such sinners in all the world as are we; we say so too, and
acknowledge it heartily; But all this does but Commend thy love unto us: It is
but to advance Thy free Mercy toward us in and through the Lord Jesus Christ;
our sins are hightened indeed, no sins so highly provoking as our sins,
the sins of Sons and Daughters, etc. But though we could highten them to the
utmost, yet not above our High and Mighty Redeemer, who saves to the utmost,
those that come unto Him: We have multiplied Transgressions: Thou has said, I
will abundantly (multiply to) Esa 557. (...) We can appeal to and glory in free
grace for full pardon.
pardon. Thy people will not let their hold go from off this Argument, but they
will move Thee with another.

Our little ones, Lord, our Children and Sucklings, a Seed of evil doers Thou
say, and we say so too; But yet Thy heart was toward those in Nineveh, Thou
did pity them; We Fathers do so, and Mothers do so; As a Father pitieth his
Children! O, it is an exceeding pity! There is more pity in God, infinitely
more: And we have more to say, why Thou should pity our little ones; They
never trampled-under the Pearl; They never hid their eyes from the Sabbath:
They never complied with Thine Enemies; They never dealt treacherously with Thy
Friends: Truly, Lord, Thou must pity them.

And the whole land; It is Thy Land now, and much people there, who are
Children in knowledge, never had any means to make them Babes in Christ; let
them know, they had a Prophet amongst them. Give us Bishops indeed, Curates
indeed, who can naturally care for thy people, as a Father for his Children.
Truly, Lord, we do confess a wicked heart has deceived us. But this is Truth
also, our Guides have misguided us; they were appointed as fathers, spiritual
fathers unto us, We poor ones thought verily, we might follow our Guides; we
might trust our fathers; Ah Lord! bloody Fathers have they been to us; bloody
fathers! These were appointed Leaders to go before us, They went before us, and
we followed, and down we were tumbled all into the Ditch, and there, like
swine, we lay in the mire. Good Lord! pity a poor, dark, ignorant people; Give
us good Lord, Bishops indeed, Curate, spiritual fathers indeed; Trust Thy
people with such a mercy. Thou know the hearts of the Children of men; we
think, had we such Leaders, we should walk orderly; had we such a mercy let
down unto us, we should be drawn up unto Thee. Alas, Lord, what desire Can we
have after that, which we know not! we never saw our Bishops do any thing but
what we see plainly now, deceived us; we saw him Cringing, and ducking before a
Table, which he called an Altar; and then we, observing all that, thought we
might call it a god; he bad us indeed carry our selves circumspectly, and
reverently in the Church, especially toward the Chancell, for there was a
providentiall eye over us, Dr. Valentine seducer of the people in Detford.
which he had * with our cost, painted-up in our window, This was all we have
seen our Bishops and Curates do before us in the place, they call the Church.
And for that we have heard we profess in thy presence, That we never heard a
word of thy sacred Scripture opened unto us by them; not a word touching the
Things of the Lord Christ, made they known to us; not a word. Dead preaching
without the Book, or clean cross to thy Book. Good Lord thrust out these, and
give us Pastors after thine own heart.

We know, Lord, what thou will say now: Ye have had Bishops and Curates after
your own hearts; like People, like Priests; Sottish people, brutish Priests,
They desiled My house, and polluted my Sabbaths, and you loved to have it so.

Truth, Lord, and herein we are at a stand, for we cannot plead ignorance; we
cannot say, the times of this ignorance Acts 17 30.
. We have rebelled against the light, and groped at midday as at midnight. To
confess all at once; We have polluted Thy Sabbaths, and then all was
polluted, even Thy whole land Throughout; and most just it were, That Thou
should require this of us, and dung our land throughout with our Carcasses,
and water it with out blood from corner to corner: Just it were that thy
plagues should abide, should rest on us, for we have polluted thy Rest; just it
were that our land should keep it Sabbaths now, lie Fallow without an
Inhabitant there, to plow it up; This were Justice. But remember, Lord, That
this horrible profanation, was not so much our sin, as the sin of our
Bishops and Curates; Their sin, Lord, who told us we might Fiddle and Dance,
and Riot on Thy Day: and that such (man like) exercises, would make us fit for
War. Nay, they did not only tell us so, but they did force Thy servants to
do, all the world knows what, To prescribe grievousnesse, To counter-mand Thy
Command, and this in thine own house. Truly, Lord, we could plead with Thee
here; We poor simple ones thought verily, we might trust our Bishops and
Curats, do as they did, and commanded us to do; their words came as Oracles to
us. We suspected Bishops, as Lords ever, but never as fathers; we did not
suspect, That fathers, they would give us for bread a stone, for a fish a
serpent. Spiritual Fathers, so they were called too; we could not imagine
that Spiritual Fathers would command their children to walk as men, and live
as beasts. Good Lord, though we were content to have it so, yet spare Thy
people, but spare not those Bishops and Curats, who have made, yea forced Thy
Israel to sin: and pity the land and its Inhabitans, who sit in darkness,
and see no light, who seek for bread now in desolate places, where they are
more like to meet with grievous Wolves then with bread. Good Lord pity the
land, a barren land. Barrenness! Barrenness! as the places whereon never fell
dew nor rain: Truly Lord Thou must pity Thy land. Thou art making these Barren
places, Edens now; Those dark places, Goshens now; Thou art about it Lord, Thou
must not leave the work half done. We poor men can sit down, and count our
cost; Thou have counted it already. Thou saw all the mountains in thy way,
all the oposition, man would make against this work; Thou saw what the
Potsheards of the earth would do, all our perverse, our froward dealings; Thou
have accounted all this cost, and hitherto Thou have proceeded to build us-up;
In Thy strengh hitherto Thy servants have marched valiantly, and done exploits.
What Thou have begun, Thou must finish. We have more to say yet; If we cannot
move Thee for our selves; if Thou vvilt not be moved for our little ones, those
dear pledges of our hopes; Nor for our Land, because defiled with blood, and
Idols; and we have polluted Thy Sabbaths there, yet we have something more to
say, which must move Thee. I. I.
The Woman Lord, so forced once, so persecuted still, against whom the mouth of
the devourer is so wide open (c), casting-forth so great a flood; This woman,
so gloriously clothed, nothing of earth upon her, is Thy Sons Spouse. Truly,
Lord, Thou must own her Thou must give forth Thy hand unto her now in this low
estate; Thou must remember her, Revel. 12.
and save her, Thou must render her, for her shame double, for she must rejoice
in her portion, therefore must she possess the double, everlasting joy shall
be unto them (a): so Thou have promised, and so Thou must perform with thy
people: so also, Isai 61. 7.
everlasting confusion must be recompensed to Thine and her Adversaries, a
double destruction to them; so Thy people have Jer. 17. 18.
prayed, and so Thou have commanded, fill to her Rev. 18 6
double.

Truly, Lord, all the Christian world stand now at a gaze, what thou will do
now touching this poor woman and her Concernments. What will the Righteous Lord
do? Truly we should not make it a question; Thou must work graciously for Thy
servants; Thou must gloriously issue-forth all Thy Churches Concernments. The
Church has Thy Isa 54 11, 12, 13, 14, etc.
word for it, and Thou have commanded her to Trust unto it; she does trust, and
she does expect glorious matters. Truly, Lord, Thou must not deceive Thy
peoples Trust, not the expectation of all the Faithful in the world.

Why, Lord, Thine Enemies make a Tumult now, never so madd with rage as now;
They that hate Thee lift-up their Head, and speak with a proud Lip. and yet
pretend to be friends with thee, and to this woman, and do nothing against her,
but for her altogether; To maintain the Laws, Rights, and Privileges of Thy
Kingdom. The Prince of Robbers says so; They that are as the mountains of Prey
to Thy People, these Prince Ruperts Warrant annexed to the end Psalm 83 1.
say so, they Rob, and Spoil, and Murder the poor, and helpless men, and do
yet worse to women: They Vow and Swear to do yet more violences and wrong, to
the Power in their hands; and yet To maintain the Laws and Liberties of Thy
people still: Keep not Thou, silence, O Lord; hold not Thy peace, and be not
still, O God: The poor and needy commit themselves unto Thee, a Refuge from the
Storm; Thou must deliver the needy when they cry unto Thee, the poor and them
that have no helper. Psalm. 72. 12
Thou must not sit still now; Thou must rise and take To Thy Self Power; Thou
must right the Cause of the Fatherless; Thou must stop the Mouth That speaks
Blasphemies; Thou must dispossess the Land of these unclean Spirits, The Eyes
of all thy people in the world are fastened upon thee now, and are steadfast
toward Thee; Thou must not deceive the expectation of all the Faithful in the
world touching this woman and her concernments.

Truly, Lord, Thy servants make no question here* as their Conversation is
without Covetousness, so without fear also, (which causes too much
carfulness) They can boldly say; The Lord is our Helper, He has helped
hitherto; He does help, he does save, he does deliver even now, every day; Thou
do purge out the Rebellious every day; if not every day Cutting-them-off
from the Land of the Living, then by purging them out of thy servants hearts,
and that is the greatest deliverance. Thy servants know, Lord, what thy Great
end is; if the Rehellious in Thy peoples hearts were subdued there, then there
were no work for the Rebels to do now in Thy Land; They must be purged-out
presently, even this very hour, if the Rebellious in Thy servants hearts were
purged-out. There is the stop, the mountain in the way, there is That which
lets the Churches Victories; Thy Isreal's Tents are not thoroughly searched (then)
not purged: Therefore the Rebels are so strong, therefore they must prevail
yet longer. Were thy Isreal's hearts truly humbled for the pollution of Thy
Sabbaths, O that every servant of the Lord fighting the Battles of the Lord,
did well consider this. See Alarm second Section, Cha. 5, 6. and sect. 3. ch 8
and 9. Psa. 81, 14, 15 The servants of the Lord do not more desire the remove
of the sword, than they do the remove of the sins, which caused the sword. Isa
10 12. Jer 51. 31. 35. 36 37. Rev. 18. 18.
the profaning of Thy Day; for their little or no Zeal, when time was,
against the Profanation of Thy Day, Thy House, Thy worship and service there;
were their Hearts truly humbled for all this, To an accepting of this sore
punishment, though it should abide, yea, Rest yet lone ger upon their Backs,
because they have suffered the Day of Thy Rest to b^, profaned by a Law: Were
it so, That Thy People were so humbled Then they know what Thou would do,
even as Thou have spoken long since, I should soon have subdued their Enemies,
and turned mine Hand against their Adversaries: The haters of the Lord should
have submitted themselves. Thy Servants know full well, That these Adversaries
and Enemies, all the Rebels in the Land, are but as Instruments in Thy Hand, as
a Batte-Axe to Cut down the Rebellious there, that will not consider their
ways, and be ashamed; as a Rod in Thy Hand To correct and chastise Thy
Children; as a Besome in Thy Hand, To sweep clean the Floor of Thy Church; as
Scullions To cleanse, whiten and purify the Vessels appointed to honor: And
when this work is done, this whole Work is performed, upon Mount Sion and
Jerusalem, Then, Then these Battle-Axes, shall be thrown away; Then these Rods
and these Besomes shall be thrown-out, and cast into the fire; Then these
Scnllions all, even their Princes and all, shall be sent to their own place:
And then shall the violences done to Sion, and to her Flesh, be upon Babilou;
for then The Lord will stretch forth His Hand upon Babylon, and her helpers
all, and Roll her down from the Rocks, and make her as a burnt Mountain: Thus
it must be, Lord, for Thou have said it, and strong is The Lord God, who
judges Her. In the mean time; Thy People, Lord, are not afraid, not a whit
afraid; They encourage themselves in Thee, and they boast in Thy Name all the
Day long. I will speak a word more in the Ears of the fearful; Thy people,
Lord, are no more afraid of these Rebels in the Land (Instruments in Thy Hand)
then Children are afraid, seeing some Instruments of Death, Carbine, Pistol,
or Cannon in their Fathers Hand; fully assured they are, Their Father intends
not to shoot at them, not at his Children; No, the Father is making ready, and
bending these Instruments against the Faces of His and His Childrens Enemies;
against them He intends all this: And let the fearful attend to this and a
little more. Why, Lord, thy Church does not lie at the mercy of Instruments,
whose mercies are cruel (rather) none at Prove 12. 10. Plane nulla Jur.
all. Thy Church lies at the mercy of a God, who is all mercy, and has the
Instruments all, English, Irish, French, all these Malignants in His Hands, the
Hands of a Father.

Truly, Lord, Thy people are assured, That these Instruments in their Fathers
Hands, shall not kill his Children: Kill! They shall not hurt His Children. Not
hurt! These Instruments, in a Fathers hand, must do His Children good; and the
more Malignant, the more good. It must be so, Lord; Instruments in a Fathers
Hand must work for the good of His Children; they know it, and are as confident
and fully assured of it, as that their Father ever lives and ever loves His
people. Amen; for so says the Faithful and true witness, Amen.

2. The Heathen rage now, they take counsel together all against Thy Son,
Thine Anointed, our Lord and Christ. We know thou have taken to Thy Self Power
now, Thou will see to Thine own House, Thou Son of David. Psalm. 2.
Thou do laugh now; but woe to the world, the men of the earth there Revel.
when Thou do Laugh, for now they shall howl bitterly, When Thou shall
speak unto them in Thy wrath, and vex them in Thy sore Displeasure.

3. Thy Name, Lord, Thy Glory is engaged upon it; for Thy Namesake, for Thy
Glory-sake Thou must do it, maintain Thine own Cause: The Cause Thy servants
stand-up for, is not theirs, but the Lords, Thy Cause; and though Thy servants
have offended Thee, yet, the comfort is, The Cause never offended Thee; Thou
art as well pleased with it, as with Thy Son; yea, in Him, Thou love Thy
People as Thou love Thy Son: But Thy Cause, Lord, Thy Sons Cause, His
Churches Cause, Thou must help it, Thou must deliver it, Thou must bring it
forth to victory. Thy Cause, Lord, Thy Glory, That is engaged. Were the Cause
ours, and no more but our selves interested in it, let it sink, or let it swim,
Thy people could not be careful about it; they would be as careless of it, as
those have been, who have turned Tail upon Thy servants in the House of
Parliament, and dealt treacherously with Thee. But, but, The Kingdom is Thine,
The Battle Thine, The people Thine, The Cause Thine, The Glory Thine, (ours by
free gift, and so returned back with all thankfulness) All is Thine; Thou must
look to Thine own, Thou must do it; We are not our own, Thy Purchase Lord,
engaged to Thee, Thou must help us; We have done our duty, blessed be Thy Name
for That Grace, we have Fasted; we have prayed, we have Covenanted, taken Thee
for our God; we said, in uprightness of heart, Thou art our Rock, our high
Tower. Truly, Lord, Thou must be our Refuge (heaven is our place of Esa 45. 11.
Josh. 1 5. Heb. 13. 5. (...). Five Ne gatives to ascertain the affirmative, and
to give the Church strong Consolations for ever. (...)
Randevouz still) in life and in death, whereto we must continually resort.
Thou must do it, it is Thy Cause, and Thy Glory; Thy people will not let Thee
alone, they will give Thee no rest; Thouhast bid them, saying, Command ye me;
They take Thee at Thy Word, they command Thee to prosper This Cause in all the
peoples sight: It must be so, Lord, for so Thou have Commanded, and, not we,
but Thou have said it, I will never, never, never, never, never, leave Thee not
forsake Thee.

Thou did not give so full an assurance to thy servant Joshua, but Thou have
said it so often, and given so full an assurance to thy servants now a days:
Thou did assure indeed Thy servant Joshua, That Thou would hold him fast,
Thou would not let go Thy hold of him (a), Thou would bear him up in
Thine hand; A full assurance this: Yet Thou have given a fuller assurance to
Thy servants now a days, so as they can say boldly, and believe perfectly,
that Thou will never forsake Thy Kingdom; never forsake Thy Church; never
forsake Thy Battle; never forsake Thy Cause, never forsake that matter,
wherein Thy Name, Thy Glory is engaged. In confident assurance hereof, All Thy
faithful servants, all the world over do stand still (calm and quiet in their
minds, not sad nor careful, having done their duty) expecting the Salvations
of the Lord, and ascribing salvation to their God, Praise, Glory, Honor, and
Thansgiving To Him, That sits upon the Throne for evermore: So be it:

Amen.
Postscript.
THat these things, I have said, may not seem Parables, I have singled out a
single man, a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, by him to exemplify all this. As
the Nobles have done before him in ancient days touching the well posturing
Kingdoms: so he has done in the maintaining his own Militia and posturing
himself; for he has done as aforesaid, and at last entered into Covenant with
his God; and, by help of God, stands to it, and so made himself as a Wall or
Mountain of Brass, able to stand it out against all Storms and Batteries: he
mocketh at Famine now, and laugheth at the Sword; If his Adversaries threaten
to Storm him, he will laugh at them; And if it be told him, that the Rebels in
Ireland will join with them in England for that purpose; He will reply, That he
fears God, and is not afraid of the beasts of the earth. He now that will take
a full sight and view of this Soldier Job 5. 22.
throughout all his Ranks and Postures, must happily be at three pence cost,
which thinking he may stick at, I will only make honorable mention of this
Soldier here, and of one of his exploits, which makes him more renowned than
were they, whose conquest made them famous all over the world. He has overcome
himself. That is a conquest indeed; he has ever-powred Self-will, nearest of
Kin to the great troubler of the world, Master of Mis-rule, and Prince of
Rebels, which, next to the Devil, has and does cause all the stirs, tumults,
and mischief there; He has overcome this Adversary, and thrown-out other
accursed things, I know not how many. Some foyls he received, and sometimes
falls, but he rose again and stood up the more stoutly. It was sometimes dark,
and night in his spirit, but it was always day with him, and light in the
Lord: and his false made him rise the higher in faith, humility, patience.

Indeed this is the man, who is a great part of the Kingdoms Militia, the
Chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof: he has chased a thousand, and put
a legion to flight. This he did, you will say, when he was lively and strong.
That is true, but this man did the greatest exploit then, when his enemy
thought him under the Power of his hand; Then was this Soldier strongest, when
that Adversary, the King of terrors, thought him to be weakest, Sick, and sick
unto death; Then he did not say, I am sick, but strong in the Lord, and so his
Militia is completed now; his warfare accomplished now; he has marched
valiantly, triumphed Esaias 32. 24. Judges 5. Revel. 4. 10. 11.
gloriously, trod down strength, in His strength, Who made him have dominion
over the Mighty. And now He is taking the Palm into his hand, but his Crown he
has, with the Elders, east down before Him, That sits on the Throne, saying,
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou have
created all things, and for Thy pleasure they are, and were created.

An end.
The full purpose; total intendment; true use of Prince ROBER his Warrant to
the Constables of Northamptonshire; for the speedy Posturing their Country;
Signed with the Great Seal, and dated the first of November, 1643. This relates
to the 34. Page of this Book.
OUT of Our Princely Care, and [so often protested] zeal, for The Defense of
the True Protestant Religion, The two Houses of Parliament; [he has abused a
known figure here, the Subject for the Adjunct, For the Defense of the two
Houses; but for The Total destruction of the Nobility and Gentry therein,
and] Their Rights and Privileges; The Liberties and Properties of the Subject;
we have issued forth Our Princely Warrant to command you, and every one of you,
That instantly upon sight hereof, you cause all the Inhabitants (sit for War)
in your several Towns and Villages, to make their appearance before Us; With
Us, To carry on Our Royal Design, For The Defense, as aforesaid [by
impoverishing Cities, laying wast Towns, Plundering, Pillaging, Firing Houses,
Murdering the men there; Ravishing Mothers there; Deflouring Daughters there,
For the Defense, as aforesaid:] And in case, ye shall refuse to do according
to Our Royal Charge [In so Legal a way, according to the known Laws of the
Kingdoms;] Expect ye to suffer, ye, your Wives, and your Maidens [as
aforesaid;] Besides the total Plundering, and Burning your Houses; with what
other mischiefs, licenced and hungry Soldiers [with their Prince, that rules
mightily with the Children of disobedience] can inflict upon you.

Rupert Rober in Dutchland. England.

THis Warrant was issued forth in the Forenoon, and before High-Noon of the
same day, This valiant Prince ran His own way, the way of Cain, against the
blood of his Brother: And of Balaam, against the Angels sword: But no man was
so mad to blunder after Him, but they that were as blind as Himself: except
the Avengers of blood, who feeling the weight of their Office, True sense of
Duty, and of Love to their Country, (having power in their hand,) pursued after
this Murderer, as sometimes the English did after grievous Woolves, which no
more spared their flocks once, then these Woolves spare their Sheepheards now.

The True Use is at last, To goar the sides of our Issachaars, all the strong
Asses in our Genesis 49. 14.
Land, who bend their necks to the yoke, and crouch under the Burdens laid
upon them by a strange lord; To undeceive all the Christian World; To summon-up
every person there, To stand-up in their place; or, as their calling may be, to
come-in speedily, and enroll themselves for this Holy War, against the Beast.

This is the Use of this Warrant, and it shall be the End.

FINIS.

