THE VERDICT UPON THE Dissenters Plea, Occasioned by Their MELIVS INQVIRENDVM.

To which is added, A LETTER from Geneva, to the Assembly of Divines.

Printed by His late Majesty's Special Command; with some Notes upon the
Margent, under His own Royal and Sacred Hand.

ALSO A POSTSCRIPT touching the Union of Protestants.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul 's Churchyard,
1681.

THE INTRODUCTION TO A Person of HONOR.
As Soon as a tedious Distemper would give leave, I have returned you the
Inquisition, taken at your Command, upon the Melius Inquirendum, which you sent
me. To deliver my Opinion freely, (as you have Conjured me) The Author seems to
have very little of that Tender Conscience, which he pleads sor. If we may take
our Measures from him, who is a Judge beyond exception, such as will strain at
a Gnat and swallow a Camel; scruple at a Ceremony, and play the Wanton with
deadly sin ( Schism and Rebellion;) who with the Scribes and Pharisees of old
will make no difficulty to sacrifice the Fifth Commandment, to their own
superstitious Phansies; These are Men of no Conscience. Matt. 23. 24. with
Chapter 15. 5, 6, 7.

This Author makes himself an Advocate for the Dissenting Party; and he manages
their Cause with as much artifice and advantage as his Confidence, Wit, or
Malice can afford. He takes upon him all shapes and insinuates himself by
Fables, Metaphors and Similitudes. He is often Scurrilous, and sometimes worse.
He drolls, quibbles, and makes sport for Men of no Religion (the Tribe into
which he seems to be adopted,) and this is the farce of his Discourse, as if he
were not serious, or the Subject he treats of not worth a sober Thought. This
begets a vehement Suspicion; His design is not to satisfy the Judicious, but
to impose upon the Weakness of the Common Reader, and by tickling his
Imagination to delude his Understanding.

To follow him, step by step, is no part of my concern; let the Compassionate
Enquirer (who trod out the way for him) look to that, if he thinks fit.

But to make short work, He has reduced All, the Dissenters insist upon, to
Eleven Sections. And (if this their Advocate understands their Principles)
their whole Cause and Plea, being so concisely sum'd up, and comprised within
the compass of less than four Pages in Octavo From p. 163, to 166.
, I shall attentively consider it, to give you and my self the better
satissaction.

And herein I shall neither Cant, nor Rail, nor Rhetoricate; but with such Arms
and Weapons as the Holy Scriptures, the light of Reason, and the Writings of
Learned Men, especially those of the Protestant Churches have provided. I shall
presently approach the Trenches of these professed and implacable Adversaries of
this most Primitive and excellent Church of England.

MELIVS INQVIRENDVM, Page 163, 164, 165, 166.
What Dissenters usually insist upon for their Justification, I shall reduce to
these Heads.
Section 1.
THey plead, That some things are imposed upon their Faith, tendered to
subscription, as Articles of Faith, which are either false, or at best, they
have not yet been so happy as to discover the truth of them. In Art. 20. They
are required to subscribe this Doctrine, The Church has power to decree Rites
and Ceremonies; which clause of the Article, as we fear, it has been by some
indirect means shuffled into the Article, it not being found in the Authentic
Articles of Edward 6. so it proves also, that the Terms of Communion have been
enlarged since the First times of the Reformation. p. 1 They Object also
against the Doctrine in the Rubric; That it is certain from the Word of God,
that Children baptized, and dying before the commission of Actual Sins, are
undoubtedly saved. The Scripture, the Protestant Churches, nor any sound
Reason, have yet given them any tolerable satisfaction of the truth of the
Doctrine about the Opus operatum of Sacraments. That Doctrine laid down in the
Catechism, That Children do perform Faith and Repentance by their Sureties, is
also as great a stumbling to our Faith, and we cannot get over it. How the
Adult should Believe and Repent for Minors; or Infants Believe and Repent by
Proxy. I omit many others.
Sect. 2.
They plead, That they are not satisfied in the use of any Mystical Ceremonies
in God's Worship; and particularly they judge the use of the Cross in Baptism
to be sinful. A Sacrament of Divine Institution, according to the definition of
the Church in her Catechism, is an outward and visible sign of an inward and
invisible Grace, given to us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we
receive the same, and a Pledge to assure us thereof. Where we have, 1. The
Matter of a Sacrament, An outward and visible sign of an inward and Spiritual
Grace. 2. The Author of a Divine Sacrament, Christ himself. 3. The End of it,
to be a means to convey the thing signified, and a Pledge to assure us of it.
Hence it is evident, that it is simply impossible that any Church should
institute a Divine Sacrament; because they cannot give it a Causality to those
Graces it is instituted to signify. Nevertheless it is possible for Men to
institute Humane Sacraments; which shall have the Matter of a Sacrament, that
is, An outward visible sign of an inward Spiritual Grace; and they may pretend
to ascribe an Effect to it also, To stir up, to excite or increase Grace and
Devotion: And yet because it wants the Right Efficient Cause, it is no lawful
Sacrament, though it be an humane Sacrament. Such an Institution ( say they) is
the Sign of the Cross. An outward visible sign of an inward Spiritual Grace,
ordained by Men as a means to effect whatever Man can work by his Ordinance.
Here is the matter without Divine Signature, which is the thing they condemn it
for. p. 49.
Sect. 3.
They plead, That since Communion with the Church is suspended and denied, but
upon such terms as take away Christian Liberty in part, and by consequence
leave all the rest at Mercy; they dare not accept of Communion upon those
Terms. There are some things, which in the General, God has left free and
indifferent, to do or not do; yet at some times, and in some Cases it may be my
great sin if I should do some of them; as when it would wound the Conscience,
and destroy the Soul of a weak Christian. If now I shall engage my self to the
Church, That I will never omit such an Indifferent thing; and the Soul of that
weak Christian should call to me to omit it, I have tied my hands by
Engagements, I cannot help him, though it would save his or a Thousand Souls
out of Hell, because I have given away my freedom to the Church. p. 60.
Sect. 4.
They plead, That they ought not to hazard their Souls in one Congregation, if
they may more hopefully secure them in another; for that their Souls are their
greatest concernment in this World, and the next. Now, say they, there is no
question but Men preach such as they print with Public Allowance; and
therefore they ought to provide better for their Souls elsewhere. Especially
they say, That the Doctrine of Justification, is Articulus stantis, vel
cadentis Ecclesiae, an Article with which the Church falls or stands. This
Article, say they, in the Parish where we live, is quite demolished by the
Doctrine of Justification by Works: We are bound therefore to provide for our
safety and depart; and when We are once out, We will advise upon another
Church, not which is tolerable, but which is most eligible, and in all things
nearest the Word. p. 161
Sect. 5.
They plead, That there is no Obligation upon them to own the Churches Power to
impose new Terms of Communion, unless the Church can prove her Power from
Christ. It Is not for them to disprove it; it lies upon her to prove it, and to
prove it substantially too, or else it will be hard to prove it their duty to
own it. p. 181
Sect. 6.
They say, The World is pestered with Disputes about Worship, about Religion;
and therefore since All cannot be in the right, they are willing to go the
safest Way, and worship God according to his Word: If the things disputed be
lawful to be done, let them be so; they are sure it is lawful to let them
alone. And they think there is no great hazard in keeping to Scripture Rule; nor
can believe that Christ will send any to Hell, because they did not worship God
in an external Mode, more neat and spruce them God commanded. p. 190
Sect. 7.
They pretend, That the things imposed are parts of Worship, which none can
create but God, nor will God accept of any but such as are of his own creating;
and whether they be Integral or Essential parts They do not know; but in the
Worship of God they find them standing upon even ground with those that are
certainly Divine, or at least as high as Man can lift them. p. 196
Sect. 8.
They do not find, that God ever commanded the things imposed, either in
General, in Special, or their Singulars: If God has commanded a duty to be
done, the Church must find a place to do it in. But though the Church must find
a place for the Duty, a time for the Duty, she may not find new Duty for the
Time and Place. p. 216
Sect. 9.
They are the more cautious of all Ceremonies, because the Old Church of
England, in her Homilies, Sermon. 3. of Good Works, tells us, That such has been
the corrupt Inclination of Man, superstitiously given to make new Honoring of
God of his own head, and then to have more Affection and Devotion to keep that,
than to search out God's holy Commandments, and do them. p. 247
Sect. 10.
They say, They have read over all the Books that have been written in
Justification of those things; and they find their Arguments so weak, their
Reasons so frivolous, that setting aside Rhetoric and Railing there is nothing
in them, but what had been either Answered by others, or is contradicted by
themselves, which hardens them in their Error, who are gone astray into the
right Way. p. 254
Sect. 11.
They say, It Is their Duty to endeavor a Reformation according to the Word,
which if others will not they cannot help it, and hope they will not be angry
with the Willing. p. 262
A Fresh Inquiry Into the PLEA of the NON-CONFORMISTS, etc.
SECT. I.
THey plead that some things are imposed upon their Faith, tendered to
subscription as Articles of Faith, which are either false, or at least, they
have not yet been so happy as to discover the truth of them. In Article 20.
they are required to subscribe this Doctrine, [The Church has Power to decree
Rites and Ceremonies.] Which Clause of the Article, as we fear it has been by
some indirect means shuffled into the Article, (it not being found in the
Authentic Articles of Edw. 6.) so it proves also that the Terms of Communion
have been enlarged since the first Times of the Reformation.

The Answer.
The Articles of the Church of England are not imposed under Oath, nor required
to be received with a like affection and piety as the holy Scriptures are; nor
to be believed as Articles of Faith, further then they can approve themselves
to be contained in the Holy Scriptures: For the Sixth of those Articles
declares thus; [Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation, so
that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or
be thought requisite and necessary to salvation.The moderation of the Church of
England herein is evinced in another Treatise, viz. The Proselyte of Rome
called back, etc. p. 7. to the 10.

There is no Protestant Church of any creditable denomination, more moderate
and ingenious in this point then ours is. To keep them from Sects and
Corruptions, and tie them up close to the Doctrine of the Augustan Confession,
Abra. Calo. System. p. 885. etc.
we find it decreed among the Lutherans, Nemo quicunque sit, That no man
whatsoever shall be admitted to any Office or Ministry, in their Churches,
Schools, or otherwise; nor shall any such be tolerated therein, unless they
shall approve and receive such a body of Doctrine (as there mentioned) and
shall persevere therein, and neither by word nor deed oppose the same. And it
is further decreed and established, That if any shall be but suspected as
contradicting those Doctrines, and the unanimous consent therein, if they
refuse to be better instructed, and give no place to the Fatherly admonitions
of others (their Superiors) they shall be removed from their Offices or
Employments, or else their names shall be signified, that due execution (of
punishment) may proceed against them as persons refractory and contumacious.
And it is their practice too, upon occasion, to make their Ministers and
Professors to renounce such opinions as are declared to be erroneous, sub
jurisjurandi sacramento, even under the Sacrament of a solemn Oath.

And the Calvinists are no less strict in this point. Anno 1617.
The Proxies or Deputies to be sent from the Provinces to the National Synod,
(as is expressed in the Form of the Letters written a Synodo Victoriacensi in
Britain) are tied to this Solemn Engagement, Promittimus coram Deo, etc. that
is, We do promise before God, that we will submit our selves to all things
which shall be agreed and decreed by your holy Assembly, and will execute the
same with all our power; because we are persuaded that God presides over it,
and that he will direct you by his Holy Spirit according to the rule of his
Word, into all truth and equity.

Here we have a promise of submission made before God, (by a kind of implicit
Faith and blind Obedience) to the Decrees of a Synod of Calvinists before the
Convention of it: And this is grounded upon a Divine persuasion (else with what
confidence can they promise before God:) That God would preside amongst them,
and direct them into all truth and equity. The Church of England requires no
such subjection,

As to the twentieth Article; They object first, against the Substance, and
secondly against the Superfoetation of it since the time of Edward VI.

1. That the Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies. This, they say,
is false; or at least a truth which hitherto they have not been able to
discover. This is a bold Charge against the Church of England; That she
obtrudes a falsehood to be subscribed. But does it not argue an affected
blindness in these Dissenters, that they will not see the Churches Power; or
else a malicious obstinacy that they will not acknowledge it? But

To clear the Article, it will not be amiss to declare what we mean by Church,
and what is intended by Rites and Ceremonies, which we assert the Church has
power to Decree and establish.

As to Rites and Ceremonies Disput. 10. ex Ep. ad Romans These. 21.
David Rungius for the Lutherans) tells us, That the necessity of Order and
Decency, which the Apostle injoins; does require that there should be some
Ceremonies in the Church; and among the Calvinists it is the peremptory
assertion of Zanchy De cultu Dei externo. These. 2. in p. 385.
, That the Church of God on Earth, never did, or ever can want Ceremonies, cum
sine Ceremoniis, etc. because the Faithful can neither grow up into one body,
nor perform any public Worship to Almighty God, without them.

Hereupon De dog. Rit. and Guber. Eccl. Christ. in princ.
Grotius has very well observed, That the Christian Church, as established by
Christ, and propagated by his Apostles and their Successors, is a Body joined
together, not only in Opinions as the Sects of the Philosophers: nor in Rites
and Ceremonies only, as the Pagans of old: nor in Government only, as the
People of Poland: sed in tribus his vinculis colligatum, but (a Body) bound up
together in all these three Bonds of Union.

To this effect Jac. Armin. Disp. private. These. 56.
others have observed, that there are two sorts of Laws prescribed to the
Church of God; some concern the very essence, life and substance of
Christianity, and the necessary Acts (and Duties) of Faith, Hope, and Charity.
And these are the primary, the principal and fundamental Laws of Christ's
Kingdoms; these are of Christ's own Institution and appointment; and for any
Church to pretend to a power herein is Usurpation.

In reference to these Laws and Ordinances, the Church has but the Office of
an Ark, to preserve and keep them; and of a Pillar, to support and declare them
to the World.

Other Laws are secondary and suppletory, having respect to the circumstances
of those principal Acts and Duties, and tending to the more facile and
commodious observation of them. These Laws may be called positive and
inservient for that reason; and the whole Legislative power of the Church
consists in making Laws of this inferior nature.

To this purpose Zanchy observes a twofold Power given to the Church, In quart.
praecept. in p. 671.
one definite and determined, quatenus scilicet determinata and praescripta
habet mandata, ultra quae non licet progredi. Inasmuch as it has Commands
determined and prescribed, which it ought not to transgress. And such is the
Power which the Church has in preaching the Word administering the Sacraments,
etc.

The other Power of the Church is indefinite, and more ample; whereby according
to the circumstances of time and place, and as shall seem most expedient: She
may appoint many things of their own nature indifferent, that may make for good
Order, Decency, and Edification. [Sub Ceremoniarum nomine complecti quicquid
externe geritur ad cultum divinum celebrandum, religionisve causa peragitur,
says Comp. Concert. tit. 27. ar. 1.
Joan Bunderius. Under the name of Ceremonies, is comprehended all that is
outwardly acted in the celebration of Gods Worship, or performed for Religion
sake. But this definition takes in all Gods external Worship; even the Holy
Sacraments are Ceremonies in this sense and notion: Whereas the Rites and
Ceremonies we treat of, have their Scene in a lower Sphere among things
indifferent. Such are,

The Time of Public Worship, not only as to the ordinary proportion, but
likewise as to extraordinary occasions, for Fasts and Festivals. The Persons,
in their several stations and parts of the Ministration: The Place, with all
the Furniture of Books, Utensils, and Ornaments thereto belonging: The Forms of
all particular Offices and Administrations: The Ministerial Habit; and the
Gestures both of Priest and People respectively in the performance of Divine
Service: with all Observances, Actions, and Circumstances of Deportment ( pro
hic and nunc) in Religious Assemblies, which may be judged more commodious to
procure Reverence and Devotion, or to add Solemnity to Gods Public Worship and
Service. These in the general, are called Rites and Ceremonies; and as to the
Specification and particulars of them, they are in the Churches power, and are
left to the prudence and care of Governors to determine and set in order.

But we meet with Complaints in many Holy men and learned Authors, That the
Church of God has been made a Theater of Ceremonies, P. Martyr. ad 1 Cor. 4.
m. p. 56. Luther ad Gal. 5. in p. 227.
many of which are unintelligible, and some of them opposite to the Word of
God; and yet, in these, men place their righteousness and holiness; and in
these, consist the whole Practice of their Piety. These Ceremonies are made
matters of Merit and of Merchandice too; Remission of Sins and other Spiritual
Effects are attributed to them: they are made so essentially necessary, as if
Christ could not save us, nor be served at all, without them.

The Grievances which have afflicted godly minds upon this account do arise. 1.
From the number and multiplicity of these Ceremonies. 2. From their Futility
and Lightness. 3. From the necessity and value that has been put upon them.
And lastly, From the use and end that has been assigned them. And indeed they
are not only vain (as our Savior calls them) but pernicious, when through the
high esteem men have for them, 1. They do depretiate Gods Word and Ordinances.
2. When they incumber and justle ^ut Gods substantial Worship and Service. 3.
When men rely upon them in an expectancy of grace and life from them, as if the
use of these could supply the want of Reformation and amendment.

That we may not split upon this Rock, we have certain marks given us by the
great Apostle to steer our Course and Practice by; and those marks are four.
The Ceremonies ordained, must be, 1. Expedient. 2. Decent. 3. Significant. 4.
Prescribed by Authority.


1. They must be expedient: and that requires two things: 1. That they be few
and easy. 2. That they be safe and inoffensive.


1. They must be few and easy, because we are not under the Law but under
Grace; and Christ's Yoke is easy, his Burden light. Whereupon he has knit
together the Society of Christian People [novi populi] by Sacraments, in number
few, in their observation easy, Ep. 118. in princip.
and in their significancy most excellent, says S. Augustine: who therefore
toward the end of his 119. Epist. complains, Epist. 119.
that the Religion, which the Mercy of God had made free, was so oppressed with
servile burdens, through the presumption of men, that the condition of the Jews
was much more tolerable than that of Christians: Ad Gal. 5. in princip.
Multitudo Ceremoniarum suffocat potius opera Spiritus; a multitude of
Ceremonies does rather choke the fruits of the Spirit than refresh them, says
Catharinus: for they are like the leaves upon a Tree, Ibid.
quae si nimis densa sunt, succum fructibus suffu^antur, ut nequeant maturare;
if they be too thick, they steal away the Juice from the Fruit that it cannot
ripen. Many times by their multiplicity, and the burden of them, they do both
obscure and hinder Gods substantial Worship, Ritibus operosis distenti
praecepta Dei minus curare solent, Ad Marc. 7. verse. 8.
says Grotius, such as are busied in troublesome Rites and Ceremonies, care so
much the less for Gods commands. But this objection lies not against the Church
of England, whose Rites and Ceremonies in a strict sense are but two or three;
and very easy. We must remember therefore, that Religion is not therefore to
be stripped naked, because hypocritical Professors will dote upon her outward
Ornaments, to the neglect of her substantial Worship. To such we must say as
our Savior did to the Scribes and Pharisees in a like case; These things ought
ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. As these Rites and
Ceremonies must be few and easy, so

2. They must be safe and inoffensive; and the Apostles rule of expediency was
given more especially upon this account. The Jews and Gentiles respectively had
their federal Rites, characteristical and distinctive notes of their several
Religions. These were now (upon the promulgation of the Gospel) become matters
of indifferency in their own nature; yet very inexpedient to be continued. For
the use and practice of them had been apt to harden the Jews and Gentiles, and
make them more obstinate in their several Professions; and to tempt Christian
Converts either to Judaize, or to think it innocent enough to conform to the
Custom and Religion of the Gentiles.

It was a Rite among the Gentiles to eat of things offered to their Idols in
their Idols Temple, and thereby to testify their communion with such Idols.
Now though the Apostle did account an Idol nothing, and to eat of things
offered to Idols a matter of indifferency, yet he told them it was highly
inexpedient for Christians to use those Rites; for the Practice would tempt
others to think they did it in honor to the Idol, that they were friends to
that way of Worship, V. Grot. ad 1 Cor. 8. 10. etc. 10. 32. Et Bullinger. ad 1
Cor. 8. 10 etc. 10. 28.
that there was no harm in it, and that they had more Gods than one; and that
the God, they professed especially to believe in, did not disallow, what they
saw, these his pretended servants did not abhor: and so this practice might be
apt to inthral some, and ensnare others into Idolatry. Hereupon St. Austin Apud
Bedam ad 1 Cor. 8. in fol. 130. Col. 2. a^.
resolves touching the Conversion of Pagans. Si quaeritis, etc. If you inquire
how Pagans may be won, how enlightened and brought to salvation; forsake their
Solemnities, forsake their trifling and superstitious Ceremonies: that if they
will not consent to our truth, they may be ashamed of their own falsehood.

Zanchy has very well observed, De cultu externo. in p. 382.
that though we are obliged by the Law of Nature to worship God with external
worship, yet it is not lawful to worship him as the Jews were commanded to
worship him, because their sacred Ceremonies were appointed for their
Discipline only till Christ's coming; So that he who should reduce Hoc enim
derogasset veritati, rei, and evangelio Christi. Calixtus ad Gal. 5.
them again to practice, should deny Christ's coming, and renounce his
Christianity. So that in matter of Rites and Ceremonies in the Practice of
Religion, that injunction of the Apostle binds inviolably, Give no offense to
the Jew, by hardening him in his persuasion; 1 Cor. 10. 32.
nor to the Gentile, by tempting him to play the Jew; nor to the Church of God,
by seeming to communicate in their Worship, either with Jew or Gentile.

2. These Rites and Ceremonies must be decent. And for the Rule of decency, the
Apostle directs us to have recourse to Nature or common Paulus utitur symbolis,
prout ea significare apud eos rep^rit, cum quibus agebat. P. Mart. ad 1 Cor.
11. p. 150. 1. m.
Custom. 1 Cor. 11* 13, 14.

This direction was of some necessity to confront the Custom of the Gentiles,
who had Rites in their Religious Worship, which were dishonest. They worshipped
1 Cor. 10. 20.
Devils, to whom they offered themselves for Slaves, and their Children for
Sacrifices. They had a God of Turpitude Inter res indifferentes ponitur
scortatio -- quod passim agentibus indifferens haberetur, nec flagitium
judicaretur adolescentem scortari, quin apud ipsas pars aliqua religionis and
cultus numinum in prostitutione corporum poneretur. Calixt. in Act. 15. 28.
[Baal Peor] and many of their Rites were such as are not to be named among
Christians, [v. Bonfrer. ad Exodus 32. 6. especially ad Numb. 25. 3.] The men
put on women's apparel, and the women such as used to be worn by men: and this
was in honor of the Deities they took upon them to worship Grot. ad Deuteronomy. 22.
5.
. This induced the Apostle to call so earnestly for all things that are honest
and decent, among Believers, especially, at their Religious Assemblies, and in
the performance of Gods Public Worship Romans 12. 17. Phil. 4. 8. 1 Cor. 7. 35
. And that is the sum of his Discourse, 1 Cor. 11. Wherein says Bullinger Ad 1
Cor. 11. in p. 131. b.
, there is nothing else delivered, quam Publica quaedam honestas, ut decorem
and modum in vestitu, Liquet satis Apostolum agere de velatione solum cum
versaretur in sacris; and respici aliquid quod attinet ad foeminam respectu Dei
potius quam respectu mariti. Lightfoot.
totoque corporis habitu servemus, maxim in coetu ecclesiastico, in quem
colligimur ut humiliemur, ut peccata nostra deploremus, ut verbum vitae and
veritatis audiamus, utque puris precibus fide ac veritate ipsum numen
demereamur: quibus rebus quam non conveniat luxus and superbia nemo est qui non
videt. Summa huc spectat, ut decorum in Ritibus conservetur. P. Martyr ad 1
Cor. 11. in p. 1.
The Apostles discourse, says he, is of public Honesty, that we should
observe a Decorum in our Vests, and the whole disposition of the Body, and
especially in Church Assemblies where we meet together, that we may be humbled,
that we may bewail our sins, that we may hear the Word of Life, and by pure
devotion in Faith and Verity, win the favor of God. And there is no man but
sees that Pride, Luxury, and all Undecencies are very opposite to that effect.
But

2. Decency implies more then common Honest illud fit, quod cum pace and
Disciplina fit. Ambros. in Ep. ad Cor. 1. c. 14.
Honesty. The Rites we use in Gods Worship must be grave and solemn, suitable
as well to the Majesty we adore, as to the Offices we perform in his Service.

1. David and Solomon his Son, have given us an instance as to the Place of
Gods Worship. When his People were in the Briars God was well content to dwell
in the Deuteronomy. 33. 16.
Bush: But when they were settled in Peace and a flourishing prosperity, then a
stately Temple was to be prepared for his Solemn and Public Worship; 1 Chronicles.
22. 5.
The house which I build must be great, 2 Chronicles. 2. 5, 9.
wonderful, and exceeding magnifical. And why? For great is our God above all
Gods. Hereupon it follows with great reason, Habet enim hoc humanus affectus,
ut quae communia sunt minus revereatur, quam quae habent aliquam excellentiae
discretionem ab aliis. Petr. a S. Joseph. Idea Theol. Moral. cap. 1. Resol. 3.
in p. 37.
God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints: and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him, Psalm. 89. 7. Wherefore he urges,
Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: worship the Lord in the beauty
of holiness, Psalm. 29. 2. And this occasions the Church to make that invitation
in our entrance upon our Public Service, See Rev. 4. 9, 10, 11.
O come let us worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker, Psalm.
95. 6.

2. There should be some congruitie in the external Rites of our Worship, to
testify the inward reverence and affection we have for the God whom we serve;
and also a congruity and suitableness to the duties which we are to perform;
Sancta sancte.
a worthiness in all other solemn addresses, 1 Cor. 11. 29.
as well as in receiving the holy Sacrament of our Lords blessed Body and
Blood. His condescension to be Incarnate has not depretiated his Majesty, nor
lessened his Greatness; but heightened our obligation to a greater duty and
observance. Upon these clearer Revelations which we have received, Mal. 1. 11.
our Worship indeed should be more spiritual, but not at all the less solemn or
celebrious. The Rites and Ceremonies with her external Worship, S. Augustine
terms the vesture of the Church. And she should be clothed as becomes the Kings
daughter, and the Spouse of Christ. Psalm. 45.
She may be all glorious within, and yet have her clothing of wrought Gold.
Upon the coming of the Empire into the Church, there is promised such a
glorious state and face of things, as is resembled to a new Heaven, and a new
Earth; and when the Kings of the Earth should bring their glory and honor into
it, Rev. 21. 2. with the 24.
it was also promised that the Church should be prepared as a Bride adorned for
her husband. Grot. ad loc.
Hic ea cum novo cultu procedit, late conspi^na, and fulgore suo hostibus aciem
oculorum praestringens, says Grotius, so conspicuous in her Worship and the
beauty of holiness, that her splendour should dazzle the eyes of her Adversaries.
In short, when we approach Gods presence we must remember we are not in an
earthly Court, but in a holy Temple. All our actions therefore, and our
deportment should not be light, ludicrous, or histrionical, but grave, serious,
and reverent; not such as befits a Stage, but such as becomes the Altar. And
care must be taken that the splendour of external Forms may not detain the mind,
not eclipse and lessen that inward and spiritual Worship, which they are
designed to promote and heighten.

3. These Rites must be significant; if they be dumb, Instit. l. 4. c. 10.
Sect. in p. 765.
idle, and insignificant, they are not only useless, but nugatory and
ridiculous. Certum est ceremonias omnes corruptas esse and noxias, nisi per eas
homines ad Christum dirigantur, says Calvin, It is certain that all Ceremonies
are corrupt and hurtful, unless they direct men unto Christ. If they be not
significant they cannot reach the end of their institution, which is Gods
Glory, and the Churches edification. That they may make for Gods glory, they
must not be against his Word; for his Word is his Will, and what is done
against his will is done to his dishonor. V. Rivet. in Decal. in p. 187. 1.
These Rites therefore must in their use be inservient to the moral law, and be
as helps in the nature of Objects to promote our spiritual duty.

It is therefore a great mistake, that because they are reckoned among things
indifferent, therefore they are but like chips in Porridge. When we call them
indifferent, we do not mean, that they are neither good nor bad in any sense:
but that they are betwixt Commands, and Prohibitions: it is no Sin to omit, nor
bounden duty to perform or use them; yet such things they are, as by a Prudent
use, may be very profitable and of good advantage. These Rites and Ceremonies
were invented, says P. Martyr, In 1 Cor. 4. m. p. 56. 1. a. f.
partly that we might transact Divine Matters with the greater Decency, partly
that they might be signs, whereby we might manifest and profess the inward
Piety of our Minds, Et aliquam eruditionem divinarum rerum per sensus
acciperemus, and by our very Senses receive some kind of instruction in Divine
Matters; And that Learned Author says further, That Ceremonies are the more
laudable, In 1. Cor. 11. p. 150* 1. m.
Si sint instar Concionum; if they be like Sermons to put us in mind of our
Duty. That Learned Protestant was far from condemning significant and Teaching
Ceremonies; for this was it that all Rites and Ceremonies in the Church should
aim at. Why of old, did they rent their clothes, but to show their indignation?
Why did they put on sackcloath and ashes, but to express their humiliation,
Bullinger ad Gal. 2. m. p. 32. 2.
and their sorrow? Why did James, Cephas, and John give Paul and Barnabas the
right hand of fellowship, but to be a sign and evidence of their Concord? Did
not the Holy kiss, and the Feasts of Love among the Primitive Christians, put
them in mind of that accord and charity, that ought to be betwixt them? By a
threefold dipping or sprinkling of the Baptized, they professed their Faith in
the Blessed Trinity; and by standing at their Prayers betwixt Easter and
Whitsontide, they did assert the Article of the Resurrection. And why did St.
Paul give order, that Men should be uncovered, and the Women covered in the
place and at the time of God's Public Worship; but that the very Rite and
Ceremony might proclaim the Modesty of the one, and the Reverence of the other?
So that if we look upon these Rites and Ceremonies, as the Wisdom of God and
his Holy Church would have us, this is the end of their appointment and
observation, To awaken the Senses, to whet the Memory, to fix the
Understanding, to inflame the Affections, to encourage and exalt Devotion, and
make it (according to the occasion) either more retired and severe, or more
exultant and festival; as St. Austin says of the Lord's Nativity, That upon the
annual Revolution of it, Epist. 119. in Princ.
it ought Festa devotione significari; to be celebrated with a Festival
Devotion.

4. These Rites and Ceremonies must be prescribed; some Rites and Ceremonies
are suggested by Natural Religion, and that makes them so spontaneous and
familiar, that we are apt, upon all occasions, to practice them, without any
other Authority or Monitor, besides the light of Nature; such are the lifting
up of the hands and eyes to Heaven, when we stand in need of help or blessing.
There is a sursum Corda implied in all these Natural and Arbitrary Gestures.
But in other Matters, if every man should be left to do what is right in his
own eyes, we should have no Public worship Toll Ordinem, mis^^bis caelum
terra. Musc. ad 1 Cor. 14* ult. Vid*
, no Solemn Assembly for it; some would be for the Ninth, some for the Tenth,
some for the Twelfth hour: Some for the Field, some for the Barn, some for the
Tabernacle; one would sit, another stand, another loll; one would be Mute, and
another vent himself in an unknown Tongue, or in a canting and unintelligible
Language; and in this tumult and distraction of Parties, we should become
Barbarians to one another, and seem to worship a God of Confusion, and not of
Peace and Order. To prevent which, all the parts of God's Worship are to be
performed in a due and commodious Order and Method; and to this effect there
must be a standing Rule, a just Authority, and a due Appointment; V. Lightfoot
ad 1 Cor. 14. 26.
The Order must first be duly made, and then carefully observed.

1. For this cause left I thee in Crete (says St. Paul to Titus) that thou
should set in order the things that are wanting. Tit. 1. 5. Calixtus ad locum.
The foundations were laid, and the men instructed in all the Articles, which
concerned the sum of Salvation; what concerned, the Government, the Order and
Decorum of the Church, These things were yet wanting: and great care was to be
taken lest these Cretians should forget the Truth they had been taught, or
suffer themselves to be drawn from it by perverse and wicked Teachers;
Therefore to supply what was requisite to the Conservation, external
Discipline, and Ornament of the Church of Crete, Titus was left there and
empowered by the Great Apostle.

Such Orders we find made among the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7. 11. 14. 16. and
among the Colossians, Col. 2. 5. And when such Orders were made, the Apostle
was very strict to have them observed, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 11, 14. Let all things be
done decently, and according to order. 1 Cor. 14. ult. (...). According to
appointment. Hammond.
He had scattered some Notions about Rites and Ceremonies in the former part of
his Epistle; but here he collects all into one short sum: He does establish an
Order (...) ad totam ecclesiae tum Liturgiam tum disciplinam refero. Grynaeus
ad Colos.
to avoid Confusion and preserve a Decorum in God's public Worship and
Service; and this, Mr. Calvin Ad locu^.
makes the Rule, Ad quam omnia quae ad externam politiam spectant, exigere
Convenit; which is to measure all things that belong to the outward Polity and
administration of the Church.

The Power to Decree and make such Orders is lodged in the hands of such as are
in Authority. Act. 20. 28.
The Bishops, 1 Cor. 4. 1.
who are called Stewards and Rulers, Hebr. 13. 7, 17.
who have the Keys of Christ's Kingdom entrusted to them, A power of
Jurisdiction both Directive and Coercive. Mat. 16. 19. c. 18. 17, 18.
This power we find exercised by single persons, Act. 15. 23.
and persons Convened in Councils whose Authority is of greater extent and
veneration. 1 Cor. 7. 17.
The rest will I set in order when I come, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. ult. from
whence Grotius does very well infer, Grot. ad 1 Cor. 11. last.
that the Apostles had Right and Authority to appoint such things as served for
Good Order, the Liturgy of the Church, and the Ministry about Holy things.
Haec est Origo Canonum, qui dicuntur Apostolici; Here, says he, is the
Original of those Canons, which are called the Apostles, which though not (all)
written, yet were brought into use by them. And we see St. Paul invested Titus
with the like Power; Tit. 1. 5.
For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting. This charge the Apostle gives, that no man might think
Titus undertook any thing of his own head, or the desire of vain glory Crocius
ad locum. Tit. 1. 5.
; but according to the mind, and at the command of the Apostle, says Crocius.

But it may be objected, That the Apostles and Apostolic men were inspired of
the Holy Ghost, and did act by Revelation Consider what Mr. Calvin writes on
Act. 21. 23. He calls it, Stultam indulgentiam, vitio non carebat zelus ille:
vix longo tempore Apostolis revulsa fuerit haec superstitio, These Expressions
do not speak immediate inspiration in those Apostles and Governors.
. To this I answer, If they had done all by immediate Inspiration, there had
been no need of Ocular Inspection: But St. Paul did not only receive
Information touching the state of particular Churches; but he comes to see
their temper, and observe their wants, and what will be most convenient for
their present Condition, before he offers to establish Orders to regulate their
practice (1 Cor. 11. the last) The rest will I set in order when I come V.
Dicson ad 1 Cor. 11. 34.
. But if he had made Orders by Revelation, he might have done it at a distance.
That the Apostles and Revelations is out of question. And that they took pains
to search the Scriptures, and had been instructed in them by Christ himself,
Regner. a Mansvelt. Adversus Anonymum Theologo. Politicum. Cap. 14. in pr.
cannot be denied. It Is certain also, That after such instruction and search of
Scriptures, as wise men, they knew how to use their Reason better than others
of their quality. Hereupon when they Taught, (being endued with more than a
vulgar stock of Grace and Divine assistance) they propounded, not only those
Revelations which they had received; but also whatever they had attained to
under the Discipline of Christ, and by a continual search of Scripture, and the
Prudent use of Reason. And so in a different respect, they may be called
Prophets and Divine Doctors. V. Calvin ad 1 Cor. 14. 6.
That Title was due to them as they had their Prophetical Revelations: This as
they confirmed their Doctrine after an infallible manner, both by a Divine
assistance above the vulgar rate, and by holy Scripture, and their own Reason
And thus did St. James, Act. 15. 13, to 20.
.

But that St. Paul did not order all things by immediate Inspiration, is
evident from his own Text, 1 Cor. 7. 25 Ego dico, non dominus, i.e. ex
authoritate mea; non quod Dominus non consentiat; sed quod authoritatem ejus de
hac re in Scriptura non invenio. Bruno.
. And herein Mr. Calvin Calv. ad 1 Cor. 7. 25. Ubi non habuit expressum Dei
praeceptum, sibi tribuit decisionem. Aret. ad. 1 Cor. 7. 10.
makes him an example of a faithful Teacher, Fidelis hic veracem Significat,
qui non tantum pio zelo agit quod agit, sed etiam Scientia praeditus est, and
pure and fideliter doceat; such a one as is a Man of Truth, who acts, not only
out of a pious Zeal, but out of a pure and steadfast Knowledge. Neque enim in
doctore sufficit bonus animus, nisi adfit prudentia and very cognitio; For a
good meaning is not sufficient in a Teacher, unless he be endued with Wisdom
and the knowledge of the Truth. It will be a very hard matter to prove that
Titus (who had Authority to make Orders in the Church) did act by inspiration:
Tit. 1. 5.
The whole Epistle which St. Paul wrote to him (being a kind of Ritual, or
System of Canons for his direction in the management of his Episcopal Office)
speaks otherwise. And yet if we speak of a more general assistance of the Holy
Ghost, I doubt not, but the Bishops and Prelates of the Church, when they weigh
and establish their Decrees and Canons, according to the Rule of God's Word,
Prideaux Lect. 22. m. p. 356, 357.
have a fair Title to it, from the Promise of our Savior, Mat. 28. 20, Lo I
am with you always to the end of the world.

This Power is essential to the Church, and inherent in the Governors thereof,
who did exercise the same when there was never a Christian Magistrate in the
world. It Is true God was pleased to supply the want of such Civil
Administrations by a miraculous assistance We have Examples in Ananias and
Elymas. Act. Chap. 5. 5. and 13. 11.
; for such as were delivered up unto Satan by the Censures of the Church: He
had Power grievously to afflict them, and many times did torment them bodily V.
Hammond on 1 Cor. 5. 5. Notes e, f.
. How long this miraculous assistance lasted; or whether it be in any measure
in the Greek Church (now under Persecution) as some affirm Rycaut.
, I shall not take upon me to determine.

But this I am sure of, Christ did not intend to leave his Church always
exposed, and like an Orphan; for he has promised her, Thou shall suck the
breast of Kings (Isa. 60. 16.) that is, ( v. 10.) Kings shall minister unto
thee. And to the same purpose, (Isa. 49. 23.) Kings shall be thy nursing
Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing Mothers; which signifies (says Mr.
Calvin) their Ministry and obsequiousness to protect and succor the Church of
God: Ad Isa. 60. 16.
Vnde observandum est, Ad Isa. 49. 23.
etc. Whence we may observe, says he, That besides the common Profession of
the Faith, there is required of Princes something more: because God gives them
Power and Authority to Protect the Church, and to advance God's Glory. Ibid.
This indeed concerns all Men: but for Kings, the greater their Power is, the
more they are obliged to lay out themselves [for the Interest of the Church]
and the more carefully to regard it. Vnde Videmus, says He, Idem ad cap. 60.
10.
quam alieni sunt a regno Christi, etc. Hence we may see, how repugnant they
are to the Kingdom of Christ, who would take away the Authority and Power of
Kings [in Church affairs] that they may transfer it upon themselves.

But here we are to observe, that the Power of Kings in Ecclesiastical matters,
is not Privative but Cumulative, not designed, or intended by Almighty God, to
infringe or weaken the Authority of the Church; but to fortify and assist it.
To this purpose the Professors of Leyden tell us, Synopsis pur. Theol. Disput.
50. These. 40.
it is the Duty of the Prince or Magistrate, to settle the Worship of God
according to his Ordinance by the Ecclesiastical Ministry; and when it is
settled, to preserve it entire and pure, per judicia Ecclesiastica, and when
corrupt or depraved, to reform it, by the advice and judgment of Ecclesiastical
Officers, and as much as in him lies, to prevent and suppress all Seducers and
false Teachers, that would hinder the practice and progress of true Religion.
August. contra Crescon. l. 3. cap. 51.
In hoc enim reges sicut eis divinitus praecipitur, Deo serviunt, in quantum
reges sunt, si in suo regno bona jubeant, mala prohibeant: non solum quae
pertinent ad humanam Societatem, verumetiam quae ad divinam Religionem: Herein
Kings serve God according to his Command, when they enjoin what is good, and
forbid what is evil; not only in things relating to Humane Society, but in
Matters of Religion. And this is all the account needful to be given to that
inquiry, what we mean by the Church, in this Article.

That the Church has a Power to decree and settle Rites and Ceremonies to
support her own Government and Administrations; and to promote the public and
solemn Worship of God, may be proved irrefragably out of the premises.

1. What things are needful or expedient to be decreed, appointed and settled
in the Church to support her Government and Administrations, and to promote
God's public and solemn Worship, those things the Church has a Power to
appoint, decree, and settle; otherwise Christ has not been faithful in his
House, is deficient in things expedient and necessary, and has not provided for
the well-ordering of his Church and Kingdom.

But some Rites and Ceremonies are expedient and needful to be decreed and
settled in the Church, to support her Government and Administrations, and to
promote God's public and solemn Worship. This has been proved already, by
Reason and Authority in the former part of this Disquisition. I shall add but
one or two Authorities more; the first shall be Mr. Calvin's, who delivers
himself fully in the point; Hoc primum habeamus, says He, Calv. Instit. l. 4.
c. 10. Sect. 27.
Let us lay down this for a Rule, That if in every Society of Men we see some
government necessary to preserve the common Peace and Concord: if in the
performance of all Matters, some rite or other is in force, which it concerns
the public honesty, and humanity it self not to reject: that is more
especially to be observed in the Churches of God, which being best supported by
the well-composed Constitution of all things [therein administred] when they
are without Concord, they fall to nothing: wherefore if we regard the safety of
the Church, we must take care of St. Paul's Injunction, that all things be done
decently and according to order and appointment. But seeing there is such
diversity in men's manners, so great variety in their Minds, such opposition in
their Wits and Judgments: No Government can be firm and steadfast, unless it be
established by certain Laws: Nec sine stata quadam forma servari ritus quispiam
potest; Nor can any Rite be preserved, without some set Form. Huc ergo quae
conducunt leges, tantum abest ut damnemus, ut his ablatis, dissolvi suis nervis
Ecclesias, totasque deformari, ac dissipari contendamus; Such Laws therefore
and Decrees as tend to this effect, we are so far (says he) from condemning,
that if these be taken away, we may avouch that the Nerves and Sinews of the
Churches are dissolved, and that they are all deformed and shattered to pieces:
Thus Mr. Calvin; and we find it by sad experience; whereupon Whitaker does
acknowledge, Controvers. 3. de Council. quaest. 1.
Habuit Ecclesia semper authoritatem leges ecclesiasticas condendi, and
sanciendi, easque aliis imperandi, ac eos puniendi, qui non observarent: The
Church had always a Power and Authority to make Ecclesiastical Laws, and to
establish them, to enjoin them to others, and to punish such as would not
observe them.

2. That Power which has peculiar Officers assigned, and special Rules
prescribed to direct the exercise of it in the Church, That Power is invested
in the Church; otherwise that assignation of Persons, and Prescription of Rules
would be nugatory, trifling, and to no purpose.

But to direct the exercise of appointing and settling Rites and Ceremonies in
the Church peculiar Officers are assigned, and special rules prescribed. Of the
Officers assigned to exercise this Power in the Church, we have said enough
already; and of the Rules prescribed, I shall add no more than what is said by
one or two Protestant Writers, upon that Text, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
Let all things be done decently and according to order; Hinc colligere
promptum est, Calvin ad locum.
says Mr. Calvin, from hence we may gather, That those Ecclesiastical Laws
which concern Discipline and Order are Pious, and not to be accounted humane
Traditions; because they are grounded upon this General Command, and have a
clear approbation as out of the mouth of Christ himself. D. Dickson ad locum.
My next Authority shall be out of David Dickson, a Scotchman and a
Presbyterian; He reckons it the seventh Precept touching Good Order; Vt decorum
observetur in personis ad publicum Conventum Ecclesiae accedentibus, and in
rebus ad publicum cultum necessariis: ut omnia cum gravitate, and modestia,
sine Superstitione, and sordibus peragantur; and parts Cultus Divini inter se
ita Ordinentur, and temporibus suis disponantur, ut Dei gloriae, and
aedificationi Ecclesiae inserviant Maxim; That a Decorum be observed of all
Persons that come to the Assemblies of the Church, and in all things allied to
the Public Worship: that all things be performed with Modesty and Gravity,
without Superstition, and a Clownish sordidness; and that all the parts of
Divine Worship be so ordered among themselves, and so disposed to their proper
times, that they may be inservient, as much as is possible to the Glory of God,
and the Edification of the Church: This is an Apostolical Precept.

3. That Power which the Church exerted from the beginning, and has exercised
in all after-Ages, That Power the Church is invested with; (if not, let them
show us some defeasance, or forfeiture of it.) But a power to appoint and
settle Rites and Ceremonies the Church did exert from the beginning, and has
exercised in all after-Ages. St. Paul exercised this Power in appointing; Their
Method and course of Prophesying, their weekly Collections for the Poor, that
they speak not in an unknown tongue, unless they do interpret; that the Women
keep silence in the Church, that the Men be covered, and the Women uncovered in
the time and place of Public Worship. De legum Human. Oblig.
And it is the affirmation of the most Learned and Judicious Sanderson, Posse de
novo leges Condi, de Ritibus, Prael. 7. p. 288.
de Rebus, and Personis Ecclesiasticis, omnibusque V. Zanchy in 4. Praecept. p.
695. 2. f. edit. Neostad. Palate. 1597.
Sacri cultus externi Circumstantiis, ad Ordinem, honestatem, and
aedificationem spectantibus, extra eas, quae sunt a Christo and ejus Apostolis
traditae in Sacris literis; adeo Manifesta res est and rationi Consentanea, ut
perversi judicii, obstinatique animi suspitione aegre se liberaverit, qui
siccus and sobrius id negaverit; That new Laws may be made concerning Rites,
Things, and Persons Ecclesiastical, and all the Circumstances of our external
holy Worship concerning Order, Honesty, and Edification; besides those
delivered in holy Scripture by Christ and his Apostles, is a thing so manifest,
and agreeable to reason, that he will very hardly free himself from the
suspicion of an obstinate mind and a perverse judgment, who shall soberly deny
it.

And this Power is of necessity to be perpetually in the Church; because such
Rites and Ceremonies are not perpetual; For they are of things in their own
nature indifferent and alterable; and there may be a just Cause (if the Church
thinks good) to alter them; and consequently there must be a constant Power in
the Church to appoint, or alter them accordingly as occasion serves. And this
is the judgment of the Learned Whitaker, De Script. Sacr. Controvers. 1a q. 6ta
in statu quaestionis: m. page 384.
Fatemur Apostolos in singulis Ecclesiis Ritus aliquos atque Consuetudines,
ordinis and decori Causa, Sanxisse, non autem scripsisse: quia hi Ritus non
erant perpetui futuri, sed liberi, qui pro Commodo and temporum ratione Mutari
possent: we acknowledge, says he, that the Apostles did in all Churches
establish some Rites and Customs, for order and decency sake; and yet did not
commit them to Writing: Because these Rites were not to be perpetual, but free,
and such as might be changed, in regard of the time and benefit of the Church.
See Ad. 1 Cor. 14. ult.
Hemmingius.

4. That Society whose Custom and Practice in matter of Rites and Ceremonies
(not repugnant to God's Word) is a Supersedeas to all objection, and ought not
to be disputed, that Society has a Power to appoint Rites and Ceremonies; I
say not repugnant to God's Word; for Custom is not pleadable in God's Church
without Right, or against God's Word; for Consuetudo sine veritate est
vestustas erroris; Custom without Truth is but the dotage of Error.

But the custom and practice of the Church in matter of Rites and Ceremonies
(not repugnant to God's Word) is a Supersedeas to all objection, and ought not
to be disputed. This is St. Paul's own Argument ( 1 Cor. 11. 16.) in a Matter
of Ceremonies, the Woman's vail in the time and place of Public Worship; If any
man seems to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of
God. Quae sententia, tam ad contentionem, quam ad velandi ritum referri potest,
which Sentence may as well be referred to the contention, as to the Rite of
Covering the head, Ad locum.
says Bullinger. Duabus securibus disputationes amputat, says Grotius, He
cuts off Disputes with two Hatchets, Ad locum.
Apostolical Institution, and the Custom of the Churches. Quod per omnes
Ecclesias receptum est, to call that in question which is received among all
Churches, est (...), is the part of such as are contentious. And as Bullinger
very well observes, Hoc ultimo hujus negotii loco, Ibid.
This being added in the last place, by the Apostle, to conclude the whole
matter, Vehementer potuit eorum pungere Mentes, qui non omnino praefracti atque
deploratae erant pertinatiae: It might have nettled them exceedingly, who were
not altogether stubborn, and desperately obstinate.

To conclude this Matter, Christ has settled in his Church a Power to make
Laws, and appoint Rites and Ceremonies, for the decent and orderly performance
of all her Administrations; and such as do otherwise than these Laws Command*
with a contemptuous and disloyal mind, His Treatise of Conscience, and in his
Commentary upon the Galatians, Chap. 2. 3, etc.
Mr. Perkins has declared them guilty before God, in sundry places of his
Works. For that general Rule of the Apostle, Let all things be done decently
and according to order, must be looked upon with the same Reverence as if it
dropped from the Lips of Christ himself, says Mr. Calvin. This is the foundation
upon which the whole Ecclesiastical Discipline is built, Ad 1 Cor. 14. ult.
says Hemmingius. And from hence it is confirmed, that the Pious Constitutions
of the Church are so far sorth Divine, as they serve to Edification, by their
decency and good order. Whereupon they bind us to Obedience, says he, in that
respect, Etiam jure Divino, even of Divine Right. When St. Austin therefore had
received this advice from St. Ambrose, Aug. Epist. 118. in Princip.
[whatsoever Church thou come into, observe the Customs of it. that thou
may not be a Scandal to others, nor others to thy self,] This saying of that
holy Father St. Austin often thought on, and always embraced it as an Oracle
from Heaven. Ibid.
And concludes from thence there is no better Rule or Instruction for a
discreet and sober Christian to follow, than to do as the Church does where
e're he comes: Quod enim neque contra fidem, neque contra bonos Mores
injungitur, indifferenter est habendum, and pro eorum inter quos vivitur
Societate servandum est: For that which is enjoined, if it be neither against
the Faith, nor against good Manners, it is to be esteemed as a thing
indifferent, and ought to be observed in regard of their Society, with whom we
do converse. And so much for the Power of the Church to decree and enjoin Rites
and Ceremonies.

As to the Superfaetation of this Article, That it is not found in the
Authentic Articles of K. Edward the Sixth; and so the Terms of Communion have
been enlarged since the first times of the Reformation. To this I answer,

1. That the Corinthians and the Cretians might have made the like objection,
as well against St. Paul as against Titus; because all things were not
presently settled at the first plantation of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 11. last. Tit.
15. Much may be abolisht in an instant, but such as pretend to Reformation, and
yet do nothing but pull down, they will never edify the Church, but most
certainly deform it. Rome we say, was not built in one day. The Apostle left
something unsettled till a further consideration, 1 Cor. 11. last. And when he
departed from Crete, he left Titus his Vicar, V. Hierome and Joan. Crocium in
Tit. 1. 5.
says Crocius, to supply what the shortness of his stay would not allow him to
accomplish; and as St. Hierome observes, to super-correct what he could not
then bring to perfection. Zanchy In 4m praeceptum. m. p. 696. 2. f. Edit.
Necstad. Palate. 1597.
observes very well, That it is the Duty of the Bishops to take care of the
whole Church, and whatsoever may conduce to the welfare of it, whether it be in
point of life and manners, in the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, or in
the Discipline of Penance, or in the wants of the Poor, or in matters of
Ceremonies; and to give diligence, that whatsoever has been constituted in such
matters, either by the Lord himself, or by his Apostles, or by the
after-Church, may be observed. But if there be any thing that is not appointed.
and yet may concern the edification of the Church: Let Laws be appointed
concerning those things, that they may be confirmed in the Name of the whole
Church, and by the Authority of Pious Princes, and be observed of all,
[respectively subject to their Jurisdiction.]

2. I Answer, That according to the Common Prayer Book in King Edward the
Sixth's time, the Church enjoined the Priest at the Consecration of the
Eucharist, to sign the Elements with the sign of the Cross; and so if she did
not declare her Power in her Articles, yet she declared it sufficiently in her
Practice; In ordering the Priest to make the sign of the Cross upon the Symbol,
in the Patin and Chalice, she did exercise her Power in decreeing and
practicing that Rite; which has since been taken away, (though it has proved of
very little consequence) to avoid Scandal; and consequently, the Terms of
Communion have been somewhat contracted since those times, and not enlarged, as
is pretended. However that Rule of St. Austin will certainly hold, Epist. 118.
His enim causis, id est, aut propter fidem, aut propter Mores, vel emendari
oportet quod perperam fiebat, vel institui quod non fiebat: For these Causes,
that is, either for the Faith, or for Manners sake, that ought to be amended
which was done amiss, or appointed to be done, which was not done at all.

But this is not all; in this Section, They object also against the Doctrine in
the Rubric, That it is certain from the Word of God, That Children baptized
and dying before the commission of actual Sin, are undoubtedly saved. The
Scripture, the Protestant Churches, nor any sound Reason, have yet given them
any tolerable satisfaction of the Truth of the Doctrine about the Opus Operatum
of Sacraments. That Doctrine laid down in the Catechism, That Children do
perform Faith and Repentance by their Sureties, is also (says he) as great a
stumbling to our Faith, and we cannot get over it. How the Adult should believe
and repent for Minors, or Infants believe and repent by Proxy. Thus the
Dissenters.

The Answer.
1. The silence of other Protestant Churches (if they be all silent) herein, is
but a Negative Argument from Authority, and that is of no validity. But we are
sure the most Learned amongst Protestant Writers do favor this Article; The
Form of a Sacrament, they say, is the Sacramental Conjunction of the signs and
the things signified, which Conjunction consists not only in the signification,
and obsignation, but also in the exhibition of the things signified by the
signs. So Wendelin; Theol. Christ. l. 1. c. 20.
And he makes the effect and end of the Sacraments to be not only, The
Confirmation of our Faith in Christ; These. 9. and 11.
but also the Obsignation of his gracious Promise touching our Communion with
him, and our participation of the benefits purchased by his death. And
particularly among the effects of Baptism, Zanchy reckons these,

1. Our admission into Covenant with God. Lib. 1. de Baptis. m. p. 404, 405.


2. Our ingraffing into his Church and the Communion of Saints, which are the
Faithful.

3. The Remission of Sins, and the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.

And Calvin upon those words [1 Cor. 7. 14. else were your children unclean;
but now are they holy] Comments after this manner, This is a high point of
Divinity: For it teaches that the Children of the Faithful are segregated from
others by a special Prerogative, and are accounted Saints in the Church. And to
reconcile this with those other words of the same Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 3. We are
all by nature children of wrath; He says thus, Aequalis est igitur in omnibus
naturae conditio, The condition of nature is alike in all; They are all
obnoxious both to sin and death eternal. But this privilege which the Apostle
attributes to the Children of Believers, that flows from the benefit of the
Covenant, upon the intervention whereof, the malediction of Nature is blotted
out: and they are consecrated to God by Grace, who are Profane by Nature. From
which Testimonies we shall draw an Argument presently, that Children baptized
and dying before actual Sin, are undoubtedly saved. But first let us consult
the holy Oracle.

The Scripture tells us, That Christ tasted death for every man, (Hebr. 2. 9.)
for Children. (verse. 14.) And to what end did he do this? to reconcile them,
(verse. 17.) to sanctify them, (v. 11.) to free them from the bondage of the
Devil, (v. 14, 15.) and to bring them unto glory. (v. 10.) Can Christ fail of
his end without any Obstacle in the Subject? Has he done enough to save a
drunken Noah, an incestuous Lot, an idolatrous Manasses, and a perjured Peter;
and yet left a poor innocent Babe without a Remedy?

It Is our Savior's comfortable assertion, with a gracious invitation thereupon
( Mat. 19. 14.) Suffer little Children, and forbid them not, to come unto me:
for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. If these Dissenters be of a Cross
opinion, That of such is the Kingdom of Satan; They should in modesty keep
their faith to themselves, till they can find a better proof than the
Post-poning of Esau, whose person notwithstanding Learned Men do think was
saved. In the Discourses of our Savior, little children are Candidates for
Heaven, and set forth as a pattern to such as shall undoubtedly inherit it, (
Mat. 18. 3.) and he tells his Disciples, ( v. 14.) It is not the will of your
Father which is in Heaven, that one of these little ones should perish; which
in all Reason must be understood of little Children literally, according to the
first intention of the words.

But (2.) Baptism is the Laver of Regeneration. (Ephesians. 5. Tit. 3.) Hereupon St.
Peter makes his Exhortation to the People, Repent and be baptized every one of
you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you and to your
children. ( Act. 2. 38, 39.) Whence I argue thus, such as are admitted to the
benefits of the Covenant, (remission of sins, and the imputation of Christ's
righteousness) and do neither break the Conditions, nor put a bar to the virtue
of it, They are undoubtedly saved: But Children baptized, and dying before
actual Sin, are such. Pueri enim fidelium ideo servantur, quia in foedere Dei
sunt and sancti, says the Learned Zanchy. De Rel. Christ. Fides cap. 15. Sect.
15. and cap. 14. Sect. 2.
The Children of the Faithful are therefore saved, because they are in the
Covenant of God and holy. For (as he has it in another place) what is acted (
at our Baptism) outwardly, Symbolum ejus, is the sign of symbol of that which
the Holy Ghost works in our Souls.

3. Children so dying, have no guilt upon them but Original; if Christ has not
saved them from that, He has not broke the Serpents head in them; He has not
blotted out the handwriting that was against them, not taken it out of their
way, V. Col. 2. 13, 14.
nor nailed it to his Cross for them; then the Antidote is not so extensive and
powerful as the Poison; the Old Proverb stands still in force against them, (
Ezekiel. 18. 3, 14, 20. The Fathers have eaten sower grapes, etc.) Christ is an
insufficient Mediator, and defective in his Institutions. For there is no other
means appointed for their Salvation besides Baptism; and if that be not
effectual to them to that end; then either Christ is defective in his Priestly
Office, and has not made an expiation for their Sins; or in his Prophetic
Office, and has not revealed his Father's Will concerning the means of their
Salvation; or else he is defective in his Kingly Office, not a Complete
Lawgiver, having not prescribed what is sufficient for their Salvation: All
which assertions are absurd, erroneous, and impious.

We are told, that touching the Opus operatum of the Sacraments, they have, as
yet, received no tolerable Satisfaction; and we need not wonder at this, if we
consider how hard a matter it is to please them in any thing. Yet instances we
have of this Opus operatum, as it is wrought in the Body, and why may not these
help us to apprehend what may be done in the Soul? How was Naaman cleansed of
his Leprosy? He was commanded to wash seven times in Jordan: He did so, and
his flesh came again as the flesh of a little child, and he was clean, 2 Kings
5. 14. This was ex opere operato; and the means was appointed by the Prophet.
Thus was the blind man restored to his sight ( Joh. 9. 6, 7.) Thus were the ten
Lepers cleansed. ( Luke 17. 14.) Thus was the Woman healed of her bloody Issue,
Mark 5. 29. Here was Opus operantis too. V. 34. Thy Faith has made thee whole.
and thus the Plagues of a whole multitude were healed: ( Luke 6. 19.) These by
a means of their own choosing, the other by means of Christ's prescribing.

This opus operans and opus operatum, is a School distinction; and though not
found in his sums, it is as old as the Prince of Schoolmen. And the great
excellency of that sort of Writers appears in their Distinctions, whereby many
times they clear great difficulties in few words. This brevity makes them many
times obscure; and that obscurity oftentimes makes them liable to
misconstruction; and so it has happened in the Case before us. Sacramentum
dicitur confer gratiam ex opere operato, quia proeter exhibitionem signi
forinsecus adhibiti, non requiritur bonus motus interior in suscipiente. The
Sacrament is said to confer Grace, ex opore operato, because besides the use of
the outward sign there is required no inward good motion in the Receiver; says
Biel, Lib. 4. Sent. did. 1 q. 3.
and Paludanus 8 L. 4. did. 1. quaest. 1.
to the like purpose, Non requiritur in Sacramentis novi Testamenti ut homo se
disponat, sed dispositio efficitur ab ipso Sacramento; and hoc est confer
Gratiam ex opere operato: In the Sacraments of the New Testament, it is not
required that a man should dispose himself for them; but the good disposition
is wrought by the Sacrament; and this is to confer Grace ex opere operato. This
Doctrine is most absurd and Scandalous; because it makes all Pious
Dispositions, all worthy Preparation for the Sacraments, needless. In
opposition therefore to this Doctrine, the Reverend and Learned Davenant Deter.
23. in fine.
has thus determined, Sacramenta non esse nuda signa, sed gratiae exhibitiva;
The Sacraments are not naked signs, but they do exhibit Grace; yet so, that
this Grace is not wrought in the Minds of men ex opere operato Sacramentorum,
but through the Ordinance and Operation of God alone, who in the right use of
Sacraments, does always perform, that which he has promised.

There is another sort of Schoolmen more Orthodox in their sense of this
Distinction, and the Opus operatum of the Sacrament; They say the Sacraments
are a means to confer Grace upon such Receivers as are worthily prepared to
receive them. Wherefore when they say, the Sacrament confers Grace ex opere
operato, their meaning is not that it confers Grace as it is a kind of natural
action, but as it has a Divine Institution, and an infallible promise to that
effect, so says Estius In 4. Sent. d. 1. Sect. 5. Col. 2. litera F.
And because That Promise is conditional requiring a due preparation in the
Adult, it follows, nor from this Phrase rightly understood, that according to
the opinion of Catholics, the Sacraments are effectual without any good Motion
in the Receiver.

A Sacrament is Causa conditionalis, 18 did. 2. ar. 1. p. 67. Col. 3. p.
princ. ad resp. ad 5m In fine Artic.
says, Argentina, a conditional cause; and all the Power and causality of the
Sacraments in respect of Divine Grace, is from Divine Institution, and from the
Covenant, which God has made with his Church. And De natura Causae
conditionalis est, quod non observata Condition; it is the nature of a
conditional cause, that if the condition be not performed, the effect does not
follow: but if the condition be performed, the effect follows infallibly.

In short then, They say Grace may be produced in the Soul two manner of ways,
either ex opere operantis; which is by the elicite and acceptable Devotion of
the Church, and the work of the Ministry, or the meet and worthy disposition
of him that receives the Sacrament. Labat Theol. Schol. Tom. 8. page 70. and
Petr. a S. Joseph Idea Theol. Sacram. p. 41.
Or else it is produced ex opere operato, by virtue of the Sacrament it self,
as of Christ's institution, and by the application of the external work, by the
Power whereof (according to God's Ordinance and Promise) Grace is given. Now I
suppose we may safely say, That Grace is conferred by the Sacrament of Baptism
both these ways.

1. As it is a part of God's Worship, in genere Orationis, under the Genus of
Prayer, so it procures Grace, ex opere Operantis, Per modum impetrationis, by
way of impetration.

2. As it is a Sacrament of Christ's Institution. So it confers Grace, ex opere
operato, by way of Exhibition, conveying, through the divine Benediction and
Compact, that Grace which it does consign, and which Christ has promised to
his Church.

But here two Rules are very useful and necessary to be observed:

1. That in the operation of the Sacraments (as in all other of God's
Ordinances) The excellency of the Power is of God and not of us. (2 Cor. 4. 7.)
and who can deny the effect when we have God's fiat for it? when he said, Let
there be light, there was light; So it was at the Creation of the external
light; and so it is at the Creation of internal light, when God is pleased to
put forth his Power to that effect. ( 2 Cor. 4. 6.) And methinks, Those men
should easily be satisfied about the opus operatum of the Sacrament, who are of
opinion, that we are merely passive in the work of our Regeneration; that it is
wrought in nobis sine nobis, wrought in us, (but) without us, and that
irresistibly.

The Second Rule is, There is Suffragtum Ecclesiae, cujus personam Minister
sustinet: and stipulatio bonae conscientiae.
That we must not Substitute the Opus operatum to supply the neglect, or want
of Moral duty, and a worthy disposition in the Adult; for in such, to make the
Sacrament effectual, there must be no bar of a deadly Sin, (as the Schoolmen
call it) but a fit and worthy disposition for the Sacrament. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
For though the Sacrament has a power of it self, through Christ's institution
and promise, to produce Grace, yet that it may actually produce it, it is
necessary that the Receiver puts no Obstacles Petr. a S. Joseph ubi supra.
, but if he be adult, i.e. (of age) that he dispose himself by some meet and
fitting acts to receive it. By means of the Sacraments, says Holden De
Resolut. Fidei. l. 2. c. 4. Sect. 1. p. 302.
, God confers his Grace upon such as being worthily prepared, are made
partakers of them. And Franciscus a Victoria Sum. Sacram. p. 5.
, semper and infallibiliter, omnibus and singulis digre ea suscipientibus
conferunt gratiam: The Sacraments do always and infallibly confer Grace upon
all and every man, who worthily receives them.

The next Objection is against the Doctrine of the Catechism; That Children do
perform Faith and Repentance by their Sureties. This they say is so great a
stumbling to their Faith, They cannot get over it. But we know full well that
some of these Dissenters will scruple at little things, stumble at a straw, and
yet so full of agility at other times, they can nimbly leap over a block, that
very Block upon which they made their Sovereign a Sacrifice to their tender
Consciences.

How the Adult should believe and repent for Minors; or Infants believe and
repent by Proxy, They cannot understand. And 'twere well if this were the only
thing wherein they could plead a want of understanding. But Peter Martyr In 1
Cor. 7.
will tell them, Fidles in liberis, qui suscipiuntur dum parvuli sunt, non
requiritur, vel ad id, ut Christiani sint, vel ad remissionem peccatorum; Faith
is not required in Children who are Baptized, while they are little ones,
neither to obtain Remission of Sins, nor to make them Christians; This is true
of an actual Faith, and a personal disposition; yet they have a Title to such a
Faith as is of good advantage to them. To this purpose we have the Judgment of
Mr. Perkins, and in him the opinion of the Ancient Church. It Is objected that
Infants have no Faith, and consequently, That Baptism is unprofitable to them.
To this objection he answers thus, some think they have Faith, On the Galat. c.
3. p. 263.
as they have Regeneration, that is the inclination or seed of Faith. Others
say, That the Faith of the Parents is also the Faith of their Children: Because
the Parents by their Faith, receive the Promise of God, both for themselves and
their Children: and thus to be born in the Church, of believing Parents, is
instead of the Profession of Faith. To this second Opinion, (says that Pious
and Learned man) I rather incline, because it is the ancient and received
Doctrine of the Church; I wish our present Dissenters would be so Sober and
well advised, as to follow his Example.

For receiving the Sacrament of Baptism, Faith and Repentance are said to be
the qualifications in the Adult: To Infants they are supplied by the Faith and
Piety of the Church in general (as well as by their particular Sureties
respectively); and where there is an absolute necessity for it (because God is
not wanting in necessaries) it is piously credible, that the supply is made by
the High Priest of our Profession Hebr. 2. 14. with Romans 5. 12, 15. Sicut
Adamus fuit porta and fons peccati and mortis, ita Christus justitiae and
vitae. -- Gratia Christi potentior est ad salvandum, quam Offensa Adami ad
perdendum, etc. David Dickson. ad Romans 5. 12. and 15. Vide Calixtum, etc.
; and sure these Dissenters will allow him to be a good Proxy for them.

Have they forgotten that Levi paid Tithes in the loins of Abraham? was not
that as great a matter as this they stumble at? Let them tell us how the Adult
do transgress and Sin for Minors; and how Infants do transgress and Sin by
Proxy; and we shall be able presently to remove their scruple. If the Adult
themselves may receive advantage by the faith of others, V. Exodus 32. 11, 14.
and Numb. 16. 48.
as undoubtedly they may ( Mat. 9. 2.) how much more Infants, who are neither
capable of Sin, nor of Grace, but upon the account of their Relations under
guilt, or under Covenant. (1 Cor. 7. 14.) But we must look upon that person as
a cruel Step-Father, who gives his Child nothing but a Stone, when he wants
Bread, and instead of Fish a deadly Serpent.

Dissenters Second Section.
THey Plead, that they are not satisfied in the use of any Mystical Ceremonies
in God's Worship; and particularly they judge the use of the Cross in Baptism
to be sinful. A Sacrament of Divine Institution, according to the definition of
the Church, in her Catechism, is an outward and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual Grace given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby
we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof. Where we have,

1. The Matter of a Sacrament, An outward and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual Grace.

2. The Author of a Divine Sacrament, Christ himself. 3. The End of it: to be a
means to convey the thing signified, and a pledge to assure us of it. Hence (
they say) it is evident, that it is simply impossible that any Church should
institute a Divine Sacrament; because they cannot give it a Causality to those
Graces it is instituted to signify: Nevertheless it is possible for Men to
institute Humane Sacraments; which shall have the Matter of a Sacrament, that
is an outward and visible sign of an inward spiritual Grace; and they may
pretend to ascribe an effect to it also, to excite, to stir up or increase
Grace and Devotion: And yet because it wants the right efficient Cause, it is no
lawful They should have said, no Divine Sacrament.
Sacrament, though it be an Humane Sacrament.

Such an institution (say they) is the sign of the Cross; An outward visible
sign of an inward spiritual Grace, Ordained by Men, as a means to effect
whatever Man can work by his Ordinance. Here is the matter without Divine
Signature, which is the thing they condemn it for.

Answer.
Here we see they profess themselves unsatisfied; and indeed it is a very hard
task to satisfy such as study more to contend and make themselves scrupulous,
then to be quiet and to do their own Business. They are unsatisfied, that the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church are not Divine Sacraments; which she never
did pretend a Power to institute. They are unsatisfied at the use of Mystical
Ceremonies in God's Worship: But so was not St. Paul. The Wife is subject to
the Husband, says He, Ergo gerat insigne subjectionis, let her therefore wear
her veil, the badge of her subjection, Ad 1 Cor. 11. 10.
says Mr. Calvin. And he speaks of an external Rite in sacred Assemblies; and
we are taught that this is to be observed in such Rites, that they be suitable
to admonish us of our Duty, ut Ceremoniae sint instar Concionum; that
Ceremomonies may be like Sermons, which is then done when we have an account of
their Mystical meaning, In 1 Cor. 11. p. 150. 1. m.
says Pet. Martyr.

But the great scandal they pretend to take, is at the sign of the Cross in
Baptism. But God forbid, says the great Apostle, that I should glory save in
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; And I cannot persuade my self, that he who
worthily glories in the Meritorious Cause of his Redemption, will abhor the
sign of it as sinful, or be offended at it.

If we inquire after the Antiquity of this Badge, we shall find it in the
Banner of our Militia from the time of the first Christian Emperor. Church
Story tells us, That when Constantine had gathered an Army in France and
Britain to repress the Tyrant Maxentius, He was afraid of his Charms, wherewith
he was supposed to have vanquished Severus (whom Gal. Maximinus had sent
against him formerly.) And as he stood in doubt what to do, He cast his Eyes
often up to Heaven; and saw a brightness therein, about Sunset, in the
likeness of a Cross, with certain Stars of equal bigness, which afforded this
Symbol (like an Inscription in Latin Letters) In Hoc Vince, that is, In this
shall thou overcome. After this Vision, His Banner was made in the similitude
of a Cross, and carried before him in his Wars; the Tyrant Maxentius was
Conquered and Drowned. And to ascend higher, some think this was the Cognizance
of Christians from the first Plantation of the Gospel, being mentioned by the
most ancient Writers of the Church. Zanchy De Redempt. p. 447. 1. fin. Naostad.
Palate. 1597.
concludes from the Practice in Justin's time, that the mingling Water with
Wine in the Eucharist, came from Christ and his Apostles. The sign of the Cross
is a Ceremony of as long a standing; wherefore the use of it, upon all
occasions, in all times, over all parts of the Church, is to be ascribed to the
Apostles; as a very Reverend and Learned Man observes Epilog. l. 3. p. 342.
. And St. Austin has given us a Rule that does assure it, Lib. 4. de Bap. c. 24.
Quod Vniversa tenet ecclesia, nec a Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum
est, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. That which
is held, (or practiced) by the Universal Church, and was never appointed by any
Council, but always held and maintained, is most justly believed to have been
delivered (at first) by Apostolical Authority. For such an Universal Effect
must have a Cause equally Universal. The Apostle tells the Ephesians of their
being sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. Whether the Church took
occasion from those words, to appoint that Ceremony to be used in Baptizing, I
am not able to determine: But the Prophet Ezekiel tells us of a man with an
Ink-horn by his side, who was commanded to set a Mark upon the foreheads of
such as did sigh and cry for the Abominations, that were done in Jerusalem.
(Ezekiel. 9. 4.) Now says Deodati (that Learned Minister of Geneva) because the
word Mark in Hebrew is Thau, and that the same word is the Name of the letter
T. which letter in ancient Hebrew Characters, is made in the figure of a Cross;
hence some Ancients (says he) have believed, That this Mark was a sign of the
Cross, which figured Christ's Blood, the only Mark of Salvation to Believers.
If any Credit be to be given to this suggestion, the sign of the Cross upon the
forehead has been of longer use than is imagined. It Is true, that Learned
Professor says, there is no certainty in it: but he does not say 'twas
superstitious to be done, or sinful to believe it. Some Mark there was, and
'twas of some importance; and so is this Ceremony now in question.

We read ( Jos. 22.) That the Children of Reuben, Gad and Manasseh, built a
great Alter upon the Borders of Jordan (for which they had no Divine Warrant,
nor did they pretend to it.) Hereupon the Congregation of Israel took offense,
and leavyed War against them. But before they entered into any act of Hostility,
they thought it reasonable to expostulate, and debate the matter fairly with
them; which they managed in these words: [ What trespass is this, which ye have
committed against the God of Israel, to turn away from following the Lord, in
that you have builded you an Altar, that ye might rebel this day against the
Lord? To this heavy charge those Tribes returned this Calm and sober Answer.
The Lord God of Gods, He knows, and Israel, He shall know, if it be in
Rebellion, or in Transgression against the Lord, that we have built us an Altar
to turn from following the Lord, if to offer Sacrifice thereon, save us not
this day; (and) let the Lord Himself require it: And if we have not done it
rather, for fear your Children should say unto our Children, in time to come,
Jordan is the border that divides between us and you; ye have no part in the
Lord; no right or title to the benefits of his holy Altar; Therefore we built
this Altar, not for burnt offering, nor for Sacrifice, but to be a Witness
between us and you, and our generations after us, that we have an interest in
the Lord as well as you, a right to approach his Altar, to perform our Service
at it, and receive the benefits thereof. And they called the Altar ( Ed,) a
Witness; for it shall be a witness between us, that the Lord is our God as well
as yours. By this Story, we see, that Altar was erected as a Monument, not for
a Remedy of what was, but for a Caution against what might be hereafter. And to
apply this Matter of Fact to our present purpose, was not the Cross the Altar
upon which our Blessed Lord offered Sanguinem Crucis cum vocat, eo quod in
illius ara effusus est. Grynaeus ad Colo. p. 81.
up Himself to God, as a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, to expiate our
Sins, and make an atonement for the World. Now we know very well, there are a
Generation of Men that say of us (and will say it of our Children after us) that
we are Outcasts to the Commonwealth of Israel, Schismatics and Separate from
the Body of Christ, and the Communion of the Catholic Church; that we are
Enemies to the Cross of Christ, and have no interest in his Ordinances, or
right to the benefits of his Death and Passion. In answer to which objection or
Cavil, we can allege, that we have the Copy, the Representation of that Altar
(upon which our B. Savior suffered that shameful, that painful, that accursed
Death for us) the sign of the Cross was made upon our Foreheads (when we were
dedicated to him at our Baptism): not that we are drawn from our duty and
allegiance to God by it, or expect any supernatural Grace or Virtue from it, or
intend to pay any manner of devotion to it: but to assert our own privilege,
and relation to our Crucified Jesus, to be a Symbolical Protestation of our
faith and affiance in him, a Memorial of the solemn Profession we have made to
own and serve him. This is our Ed, our Witness to this purpose; And, as far as
I am able to discern, no less commendable in our practice, than that was in
those Tribes.

But these Dissenters tell us, it is impossible that any Church should institute
a Divine Sacrament; and they have good Authority to back them, no less than the
Suffrage of Trent Sess. 7. Can. 1. De Sacram.
to bear them out in this assertion; which has denounced Anathema to all that
shall say otherwise: Si quis dixerit, Sacramenta novae legis non fuisse omnia a
Jesu Christo, Domino nostro instituta, Anathema sit: If any one shall say, That
All the Sacraments of the Gospel (which they call the new Law) were not
instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord; let him be accursed.

But (they say) it is possible Men may institute Humane Sacraments, An outward
and visible sign of an inward and spiritual Grace; and they may ascribe an
effect to it also, to excite and increase Devotion; and yet because Christ is
not the Author of it, (they say) it is no lawful, (which is but a begging of
the question, for they should only say, it is no Divine) Sacrament: though it be
a Humane Sacrament. Such an Institution (they say) is the sign of the Cross;
The Matter of a Sacrament, without Divine Signature; which is the thing they
condemn it for.

Now the question is, whether this Condemnation be just, or no? The other day,
as I remember, I saw a Pack of Cards, which according to this account may very
well be called a Pack of Sacraments; for each Card had the matter of a
Sacrament, that is an outward and visible sign, of some inward and spiritual
Grace, in the Martyr Sir Edm. Godfrey.
(whose barbarous Murder they were designed to represent); and sure the
Ingenious Contrivers of those Cards, intended some effect from them, to excite,
to stir up, to increase Grace and Devotion by the sight of them, viz. an utter
abhorrence of Treason, and all Popish Principles which lead to it; And must
this poor Pack of Cards be condemned to the Flames for the ingenuity of the
Author? I am so far from being the Executioner of such a Sentence, that I wish
such another Pack to represent the horrid Mischiefs of Schism and Sedition, to
teach our Children for the time to come, to have the Practice, and Doctrines,
which lead to it, in utter detestation.

That such mystical Ceremonies, or symbolical Representations are not sinful, I
am fully convinced; because they are good for the use of edifying. For
whatsoever is apt to inform me, and put me in mind of my Duty, and to excite me
to perform it, That is certainly for my Edification; because to inform, to
admonish and excite, is to edify 1 Cor. 8. 10.
And that some Mystical Ceremonies are of this Nature, is too notorious to be
denied. Est homini Connaturale, ut per sensibilia ad Cognitionem
intelligibilium deveniat, Bon Joan. Comp. 3a Part. c. 6. p. 349. 2.
says a Person well verst in the Prince of Schoolmen. It Is Connatural to Man by
the help of sensible things, to arrive at the knowledge of such things as are
intelligible.

This I learn from all the Prophets, Amos has his Basket of Summer fruit, (
Amos 8. 2.) Jeremy, his Seething-Pot, and the Rod of an Almond Tree, ( Jer. 1.
11, 13.) Ezekiel has his Roll, his Seige, his Chain, his Fire, his Wheel, and
his Razor; All these Representations in Vision, for the Service of God's
People, and the interest of Religion. And the great Prophecy concerning the
state of the Christian Church is displayed in Mystical and Symbolical
Representations. Shall I quarrel with the Book of the Apocalypse, and the seven
Golden Candlesticks, because they are full of Mystical Ceremonies, and some men
may erroneously fancy, they put them in mind of seven Sacraments? I will not.

But to see how far the force of prejudice and a superstitious conceit will
carry these men! By their invention Daniel's Chamber-window is made a
Sacrament. The opening of it toward Jerusalem was the outward and visible
sign; The inward and spiritual Grace was his faith and affiance in God, with
his Zeal for God's Holy Temple and Worship. Yea, so unreasonable and
extravagant is this their Act of Condemnation, it will reach all the most Pious
accomplishments of Holy Men; the Practice of Piety, the Whole Duty of Man, the
Saints everlasting Rest, the Institutions of Mr. Calvin; I confess, I cannot
say so of those many Books which these Dissenters have written and sent abroad,
to shake the People, and unhinge the Government, to foment Faction, and disturb
the Peace of Church and State. I cannot say it of such (that they are outward
and visible signs of an inward and spiritual Grace): but of every Pious and
Learned Book, I say, it will fall under this their rash and unadvised
Condemnation: It is a Humane Sacrament; that is, it has the matter of a
Sacrament, which is an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual
Grace; and the Author (whoever he be) will hope for some good effect from it,
(else he is ill advised to make it Public), to excite, to stir up, to increase
Grace and Devotion by it, and whatever Man can work by his Discourse, and
Ordinance; and yet (according to these Dissenters Notion and Logic) because it
wants the efficient Cause to make it a Divine Sacrament, it must be unlawful,
it must be sinful; for it is upon this account, they do (here) judge the sign of
the Cross in Baptism, to be so, and so condemn it. What he means by a Divine
Signature, is a matter of some question: if some institution or promise to
annex Grace to it, we understand it not; But if he understands by Signature,
some impression, that discovers something of God's Attributes, we say with the
great Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 18. with 24.
That the Preaching of the Cross sets forth the Power of God, and the Wisdom of
God. There is this Divine Signature upon all Creatures: For the invisible
things of God from the Creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, (Romans 1. 20.) The Heavens declare the glory of
God; (Psalm. 19.) And every Rational Creature should Echo to that Declaration,
and say, When I consider thy Heavens -- Lord what is Man.

For a Sacrament properly so called, that is a Divine Sacrament (in the sense
of the Church), That is a thing of another Constitution. For,

1. It must have Christ for its Author; all Ordinances of Divine Worship
designed to exhibit, to seal and convey supernatural Grace are of his
Institution; because Eorum tantum est signum instituere, qui jus habent
promittendi signatum, and potentiam applicandi; He only has power to appoint
the sign who has right to promise, and power to apply the thing signified. In
this we are agreed.

2. As we are agreed in the Author, so in the Matter of a Sacrament;
Sacramentum est sacrae rei signum, says St. Austin. A Sacrament is the sign of
a thing Sacred; yet not every such sign (for then we should multiply Sacraments
beyond reason) but such a Sacred thing as sanctifies the Receiver; Sacramentum
proprie est signum rei sacrae in quantum est sanctificans; Properly a Sacrament
is the sign of a thing Sacred, inasmuch as it is ordained to Sanctify.

3. We are agreed in the effect and end; that God by the Mediation of his
Sacraments, gives his Grace to such as are worthily prepared for them, and made
partakers of them.

4. We are, I hope, agreed too, as to the Constituents of a Sacrament. To the
making of a Sacrament, the word is required, the word of Consecration, the
operative word, ( Sermo operatorius, as St. Ambrose calls it,) Accedit verbum
ad elementum and fit Sacramentum; the word applied to the Element does make a
Sacrament, says St. Austin. We acknowledge, says Zanchy, that a Sacrament is
a visible sign: But of what? of an invisible Grace. But whence has it this (
habitude) to be a sign of such a thing? De Relig. Christ Fides. p. 253. f.
from the word of Christ's institution, says Zanchy.

From hence it is evident, that the sign of the Cross is far from the Nature of
a Sacrament in the proper Notion of the Church. For, 1. It has no office of
Consecration to hallow it, no word of Prayer or Benediction bestowed upon it.
2. It has not Christ for its Author; we do not find, we do not say He gave it
institution to that effect. 3. It has no internal sanctifying Grace for its
Matter. And from hence it will undeniably follow, 4. That it does not confer,
convey, or exhibit Grace, as the end of its appointment.


It is the Resolution of Fran. Hallier Defens. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 2. Sect. 3.
Page 85.
(a sober and learned Sorbonist) Nullum signum practicum gratiae habitualis, ex
opere operato eam Conferens, instituere potuit Ecclesia: The Church cannot
institute any practical sign of habitual Grace, that can confer, that Grace, ex
opere operato; because it is in the Power of God alone to confer habitual Grace
upon us: Nor can the Church of God appoint any sign to confer supernatural
helps and motions of Grace, ex opere operato; because Actual Grace is no less
supernatural than habitual, and God is equally the Author and Dispensor of them
both. And secondly, says He, we cannot understand how any spiritual or
supernatural effect should follow upon the putting of any sign, unless we have
some Covenant or Divine Promise to warrant us, that such effect is annexed to
such a sign: but (says he) we have no Testimony either of Scriptures, or
Councils, or Fathers, to assure us of any such Promise.

And for the sign of the Cross in Baptism (wherein we are now particularly
concerned) it has no peculiar reference to God, or the sacred Rite of Baptism:
but to the Congregation into which we receive the baptized, and to the duty as
to the end, unto which he is consigned; that he should not be ashamed to
confess, etc. This therefore is appointed to assert our Privilege, and the duty
incumbent upon that account, So that in the use of this Ceremony, there is no
Divine Authority presumed, no Consecration performed, no Promise pretended, no
Grace expected among us. We cannot therefore be supposed to use it as a
Suppletory Sacrament; Nor (though of very great Antiquity) was it ever designed
to add any the least Melioration, Virtue, or Efficacy, to our Holy Baptism: but
used as a Collateral Appendage and Contesseration of our solemn Engagement: to
notify our Relation to a Crucified Redeemer: to assert our interest in the
Merits of his Death and Passion: to put us in mind of our Christian Profession,
and to excite us unto our Duty. After this account, if the Offense of the Cross
be not yet ceased, I shall add these further Considerations for the Reader's
satisfaction.

1. These Dissenters make use of these words, Humane Sacraments, Symbolical
Rites, Mystical Ceremonies, out of design to make a noise, to amuse and
affright the scrupulous and common Reader. The word Sacrament is of a very
large signification; An Oath is called a Sacrament; so is the Creed by St.
Austin So is the Paschal Feast. Epist 119.
, and the whole Christian Doctrine by Tertullian; In the vulgar Latin,
Marriage, is a Sacrament, Ephesians. 5. 32. so is the Incarnation of Christ ( 1 Timothy
3. 16.) Nebuchadnezzar's Dream. ( Dan. 2. 18, 30, 47.) The seven Stars and
Candlesticks (Revel. 1. 20.) The use of that word therefore (whatever these
Dissenters make of it) is no matter of offense or objection in this case.

2. We may make a sanctified use of all Creatures, of all Works of Art, and of
all emergent Accidents: This cannot in Reason be denied; for by this holy usage
of them, we turn them into a Ladder; and by them our minds ascend up to God.
And such outward and visible signs have an aptitude to that effect. Signum est
quod praeter speciem, quam ingerit sensibus, facit aliquid aliud in Cognitionem
(alias Cogitationem) venire, says St. Austin. A sign is that which brings
something else into our thoughts and knowledge, V. Labat de Sacram. p. 5. and 6.
besides that which it offers to our senses. And such signs, whether they be
Natural or Arbitrary, if the things suggested by them or collected from them,
be spiritual and heavenly, it makes no matter of consequence, whether they be
called Mystical Ceremonies, Symbolical Rites, or Humane Sacraments; For they
are really nothing else but outward and visible things applied to a spiritual
and heavenly use.

That such signs, or Humane Sacraments or Mystical Ceremonies (call them what
you will) are, not only lawful, but laudable and of good use, is easy to
evince. What if the sight of a Dial, puts me in mind, that my life is as a
shadow that departs? and if I make the like reflection upon the striking of
the Clock; and thereupon break out into this Ejaculation: [So teach us to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom] What sober Christian
could blame me for it? He was not an ill Man, who took occasion from the Feast
at which he was entertained, to cry out, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in
the Kingdom of God; And our Savior took occasion from thence to discourse of
his great Gospel Supper. There may be much Divinity, and much Moral Duty,
taught by Hieroglyphics; and Natural Religion taught the Ninevites to put on
Sackcloth, to publish their sorrow and humiliation, Jonah 3. 5. to the 10th.

We have need enough of such helps; and God himself directs us to the use of
them. Go to the Ant, V. Lyserus Fornax Babilonica, p. 170, etc.
to learn Industry: and consider the Lillies of the Field, to avoid anxiety.
And he teaches us to make this spiritual improvement, not only of the works of
Nature; but of Art also, and of emergent Accidents. He commanded that the
Censers of Corah and his Accomplices, (though abused to Superstition and
Sacrilege; yet should still be continued in use about the Worship of God) that
they should be made a Covering for the Altar, to be a Memorial, to prevent all
Sacrilegious Usurpations of the Priests Office ( Numb. 16. 40.) Hereupon Mr.
Calvin observes (as he had done before of God's Mercies and wonderful works, so
now of his Judgments) Statim excidere ac deleri ex cordibus hominum, nisi
adminiculis quibusdam exerceantur in eorum Meditatione; that they do soon slip
out of the memory, and are soon blotted out of the hearts of Men, unless they
have some helps for their exercise, in the Meditation of them. And (he says)
This happens not only through their ignorance, but through their neglect; we
should therefore be more attentive to such helps of Memory as may keep us to
our Duty. Another instance we have to the same purpose ( Numb. 57. 10.) And the
Lord said unto Moses, bring Aarons Rod again before the Testimony, to be kept,
for a token against the Rebels; and thou shall quite take away their murmerings
from me, that they die not; Upon which words, the same Mr. Calvin takes notice,
That men are forgetful and sluggish in considering the great Works of God, and
many times they do wickedly Drown and Bury the Memory of them; and therefore
not without an Exprobation, God Commands that Rod to be safely kept as a sign
of their Contumacy and Rebellion.

And it will not be amiss to take notice, that these Instances as well as that
of the Altar erected by those Tribes, are in reference to Religion and God's
Worship. All Rites and Ceremonies appointed in the Church, and about God's
Worship, must be designed for Order, Decency and Edification; Vt Retinacula
sint and incitamenta Pietatis, that they may be stays, helps, and incentives
unto Piety, says a Learned Lutheran Meisner.
. Such as are idle, insignificant, and unprofitable would be nugatory and
ridiculous. But we must always remember, that whatever the Church appoints, she
does not pretend to add to Divine Institutions; but to assist our Infirmities
in the use of them. It is not in her power to meliorate an Ordinance of God's
appointment; but to adorn the Solemnity to imprint our duty and heighten our
affections to it. God's Sacraments cannot be made better in their own Nature:
But the Faith, the Devotion and Piety of the Receivers and Worshippers may be
more or less intense and vigorous, according to the impressions made upon their
Faculties: And he that is not sensible of the force of words and visible signs
to this effect, is too stupid and brutish to write himself a Man.

There is scarce any Object but may be helpful to our devotion, and serve us to
some spiritual and heavenly end and purpose; and when there is none offered, we
should study and make occasions to be heavenly minded. It Is a good Observation
of Mr. Arrowsmith, in a Sermon before the House of Commons, (on Revel. 12. 1,
2.) Jan. 27. 1646.
That besides the Natural, there is a spiritual use to be made of all the
Creatures, (and I will add, of all the works of Art, and of all occasional
emergencies,) Man's Soul (says he) is an Alembeck, in which, when the Creatures
are laid like so many herbs, if there be any fire of Devotion within, many
sweet Meditations may be distilled. Natural hearts are apt to make a sensual
use of Divine things: but Spiritual hearts have an Art of making Divine uses
even of Natural things, which (says he) we should all do well to learn. And may
we not set up our Furnace in God's House? May we not extract such Spirits and
Essences in Matters of Religion, and Divine Worship? Should we endeavor to be
devout and heavenly-minded at all times, and shall we be profane in God's
House? when we are about his Worship and Service shall we be profane then, for
fear we should be accounted Superstitious? God forbid. Let us always bear in
mind the Apostles Rule, and let our Practice make it ours; Do all to the Glory
of God.

To help the truly weak and conscientious over that, which these Dissenters
have made so great a stumbling block, I mean the sign of the Cross; I shall
conclude this Section with a Meditation of that Polite and Learned Prelate
(Bishop Hall.) His Subject is a Red Cross upon a Door, and his Devotions run
out thus, [Oh sign, fearfully significant; this Sickness is a Cross indeed, and
that a bloody one; both the form and the color import Death; The Israelites
doors, whose Lintels were besprinkled with blood, were passed over by the
destroying Angel; here the destroying Angel has smitten, and left this mark of
his deadly blow; we are wont to fight cheerfully under this Ensign abroad, and
be victorious; why should we tremble at it at home? Oh God, there thou fightest
for us, Here against us; under that we have fought for thee, but under this
(because our sins have fought against thee) we are fought against by thy
Judgments. Yet Lord, it is thy Cross, though an heavy one; It is ours by Merit,
thine by Imposition; O Lord, sanctify thine affliction, and remove thy
vengeance.

Certainly there is more Devotion and Piety in such Godly Meditations upon the
Cross, then in quarrelling at the Innocent use of it; And I am sure it is no
Superstition to use any thing for a help to heavenly Meditation; but only then
when I treat it with affections and a regard, above the true value of it; and
court it with Adoration. To conclude this Subject. If I be low of Stature, (as
Zacheus was) and shall meet with any Tree, that lifts me up to a Salutary
apprehension of my Savior, I will neither make it my Idol by a Religious
veneration, nor will I superstitiously reject it, upon a vain or pretended fear
of becoming an Idolater at the sight of it. See more of this Subject, Sect. 8.
at the end.

Dissenters Third Section.
THey Plead, That since Communion with the Church is suspended and denied, but
upon such Terms as take away Christian Liberty in part, and by Consequence
leaves all the rest at Mercy; They dare not accept of Communion upon those
Terms. There are some things, which God has, in the general, lest free and
indifferent, to do or not do; yet at some times, and in some Cases, it may be
my great sin, if I should do some of them; as when it would wound the
Conscience, and destroy the Soul of a weak Christian: If now I shall engage my
self to the Church, that I will never omit such an Indifferent thing; and the
Soul of that weak Christian should call to me to omit it, I have tied my hands
by engagement, I cannot help him, though it would save His or a Thousand Souls
out of Hell; because I have given away my freedom to the Church.

The Answer.
Though the Church does restrain our Liberty in part, yet the whole is not in
danger; because she does declare, That where there is no Sin in the imposition,
of things Indifferent (as to the nature of the things) yet Authority may be
excessive, as to the multiplicity and number of them. If the Governors of the
Church, as the Pharisees of old, should lay heavy burdens upon other men's
shoulders, and not so much as touch them with one of their own Fingers, there
might be some color for this Objection: But we know, They are the first, the
most eminent and punctual, in the practice of what is enjoined; and to think
they will ever incumber and overload themselves with Ceremonies, is irrational.
And God be thanked, we have a Prelacy so Moderate, so Discreet and Learned,
there is no ground to fear it. This Author was convinced of this; and therefore
he sets up his Consequence for a Bugbear; and so perhaps when the sky falls we
may have a quarry for his jealousy.

The mean while we acknowledge that Christ has purchased a Liberty for His
Church: If the Son shall make you free, then shall ye be free indeed, Joh. 8.
36.

This is Liberty from a yoke of bondage: A yoke that had a heavy burden annexed
to it; From the bondage of the Devil, the Superstition, Idolatry, and
Uncleanness, with all the Pomps and Vanities, wherewith He had inthrall'd the
wicked world; from the Captivity and Law of Sin in our Members; from the Curse
of the Moral Law, and from the wrath of God, the fear of Death, and the bondage
of Corruption upon that account; From the Obligation of Moses Law, of the
Levitical Rites and Ceremonies, with such Humane Traditions as had taken their
rise from thence; And although by Analogy some Divines are wont to reduce unto
this Head such Ceremonies as become matter of Superstition in their use, or
burdensome for their variety and number; yet this does not impeach the Authority
of the Church, in commanding such as shall be deemed meet to adorn the
Solemnity, and procure Reverence and Devotion, in God's House and Worship.
'Twas the design of our Redeemer to make us free from the bondage before
mentioned; but not to set us at liberty from a decent Habit, from a Reverent
gesture, or from any innocent observance, which the Authority of Prudent and
Pious Governors shall appoint.

For the liberty which Christ has purchased for us is consistent with Civil
Servitude; (1 Cor. 7. 21, 22.) Art thou called being a Servant? care not for
it. For he that is called in the Lord being a Servant, is Christ's freeman.
Therefore, when he says (in the next Verse) Be not ye the Servants of Men; His
meaning is, as Bruno has very well expressed it, it a quod in vobis pereat
servitus Christi; be not the Servants of Men, so as to abandon, lessen or
depretiate the Service of Christ. Though ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Christ
and Belial; yet ye may Fear God, and the King; ye may serve them both, and ye
serve the Lord in your duty to your Relations. ( Col. 3. 24.)

Christ came not to dissolve the Law betwixt any Relations, but to tie their
Mutual Obligations faster, though with the silken strings of Love and Charity. If
we should instance in all Relations, the matter of Fact is evident.

1. Betwixt Masters and Servants, (Ephesians. 6. 5. Col. 3. 22. and 4. 1.)

2. Betwixt Parents and Children, (Ephesians. 6. 1. Col. 3. 20, 21.)

3. Betwixt Husband and Wife, (Ephesians. 5. 22, etc. Col. 3. 18, 19.)

4. Betwixt Prince and People, (Romans 13. 1, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 13, etc.

It Is not probable, that He, whose Laws do enforce the duty of all other
Relations with stronger ties of obligation and endearment, should leave his own
House and Kingdom to be the only Stage for an unbridled licentiousness.

Things were never left so indifferent since the first Creation, as to leave
any man without restraint. And did Christ purchase himself a Church with his
own Blood, did he Espouse her to himself in a Covenant of Peace and loving
kindness, and then abandon her to the Conduct of blind chance, to the
extravagant Caprichoes and wild whimseys of Fanatics, or to the Lust, Humor,
or Ambition of Pretenders to Religion? No; He has established a Regiment and
Subordination; And although the Government he has appointed be not Despotical but
Ministerial, not Lordly, but Paternal and Fatherly; yet has he invested his
Pastors and Bishops with a Power to Order and Command 1 Timothy 5. 17.
, and has put his Flock and his Disciples under an Obligation to obey Heb. 13.
7, 17.
; for Authority without Obedience, would be trifling and to no effect. Dic
Ecclesiae Mat. 18. 17.
has sometimes been the last resort in every difference. And the Sentence of
the Church like the Oath of God (for Confirmation of the Truth) has put an end
to all strife. For it is God's solemn Promise to His Church ( Isa. 60. 12.) The
Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish.

And here we must observe a great difference between the Church of Christ, and
some Civil Societies. For these may have their being first, and then frame
their Government; They are first free, and have all Jurisdiction Originally in
themselves, and then they communicate the same to Kings or Magistrates. But the
Church did not make it self, nor its own Government: but Christ, who is Prince
and Head, did first appoint Rules and Orders, constitute Laws and Officers, by
which his Church should be governed, and then did call and assemble it; and
wherein he has determined any thing, we are obliged to look upon it as
necessary to the support and well-ordering of that Society.

Whether such Orders were made by himself, or determined by his Apostles, (who
were immediately sent by him to that purpose) makes no difference. For he spent
Forty days with them after his Resurrection, instructing them about the
Constitution and Government of his Kingdom, ( Act. 1. 2, 3.) and after his
Ascension, he sent down the Holy Ghost, to establish and empower them; that is,
not only to make them Prudent, but Infallible. Hereupon they did not only
profess that they had the mind of Christ, ( 1 Cor. 2. 16. Gal. 1. 12.) but that
they acted all in his Name 1 Cor. 2. 16. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 2 Cor. 2. 10.
, that is, by his Power, Commission and Authority. From hence it will
undeniably follow, that such as come under this Apostolical Government, (which
is the Government of Christ's Kingdom) have no Christian Liberty, but what is
restrained and limited by the Laws of that Government; because that very
Charter by which they claim their Liberty had established that Government
before They were called to be Christians, and admitted into that Society. I
say, This Authority and Ecclesiastical Government, being antecedent to the
Incorporation of all particular Churches, the Liberty of the Members (being
Subjects) of Those Churches, must needs ( de jure) be restrained by the Laws
and Orders, which are inacted and appointed by That Authority.

What Those Laws and Orders are, have been declared already; we shall add these
further Observations of them.

1. They were occasional; yet the occasions for their introduction were such,
as will perpetuate the force and obligation of them. The Moral Law, which
prescribes the Substantial Worship of God, teaches a double Duty,

1. To Glorife our God. And,

2. To Edify our Neighbor.

This gives the occasion and ground to the Rule of Significancy Suspicor eos
judaizasse in confusa vocum suarum Commixtione: Lightf. in 1 Ep. ad Corin. 14.
2. p. 8^. Lightfoot.
; that in the Public performance of Divine Worship and Service, we do all
things with understanding; 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will pray with the spirit, and I
will pray with understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing
with the understanding also. Orabo spiritu, i. e. in demonstratione donorum
spiritualium; and Orabo intelligentia, i. e. ut intelligar ab aliis; That is, I
will make such a demonstration of my spiritual Gifts as shall be intelligible:
Consider St. Paul's Discourse takes in Musical Instruments. 1 Cor. 14. 7, and 8
Verses.
Here is a single instance in point of Language; For prescinding from the
consideration of God's Glory in the Churches edification, it is indifferent what
Language we use in our Prayers and Sermons: And by a parity of reason, not all
Offices and Forms of Administration only, but all Rites and Ceremonies should
be significant.

2. Under color of Christian Liberty, many let loose the rains to their lusts
and sensual appetites, were luxurious and libidinous even to a Proverb,
accounting Fornication amongst things indifferent, as is generally observed by
Learned Men. Apoc. 2. 20.
And this was a noted Vice among the Corinthians; insomuch as Corinthiari
Prisci vulgato joco dicebant eos, qui voluptatibus and Scortationibus
indulgerent and Lenocinium exercerunt, says Bullinger (ad 1 Cor. 6 Vid. Grot.
ad locum.
. 68.) they were wont to say of such as did indulge their Lusts and lived in
carnal Pleasures, that they played the Corinthians. Others again, though they did
not addict themselves to such lewd and dishonest courses, yet would take
liberty to walk contrary to the Decorum of civil Modesty and common Custom,
whereof the Apostle has given several instances, ( 1 Cor. 11. 4, 16, 21, 22,
34, 35.) and they would needs make Religion their pretense, and the House of
God their Sanctuary for this Profaneness. These unseemly and dishonest
courses, gave occasion for that Rule of Decency.

3. Under pretense of extraordinary Gifts and sudden impulses of the spirit,
some would start up (and possibly at the suggestion of the Tempter, or the
motion of Fancy) to the interruption of more grave, modest, and solid Teachers,
and to the disturbance of the whole Congregation: [Vid. Grot. ad 1 Cor. 14. 27,
34.] Quando unus adversus alterum tumens, illo adhuc loquente, loqui tentabat,
dissentionem faciebat, says Haymo, and hoc Deo execrabile erat: When one man
swelled against another, and would attempt to speak before the words were out
of the other man's mouth, this made Dissension, and was execrable to Almighty
God. This occasioned that Rule (...): Let all things be done according to order.

4. When the Gentiles had cast off the yoke of their Heathen Superstition and
Idolatry, and embraced the Faith of Christ, there were false Apostles, who made
it their business to reconcile them to the Law of Moses; And did tempt them to
adopt the Foederal Rites of the Jews, yea, and of the Gentiles too, into their
practice, with the Profession of Christianity: This was plausible upon the
account of Christian Liberty, and the pretense that these things were now
become indifferent; but the Apostle observes the Practice, not only to be
hypocritical (and unwarrantable for that reason): but to be full of peril and
hazard otherwise: And this gave rise to his Rule of Expediency.

2. These Laws and Rules as they were Occasional, so they are General; and
there was some reason for it: The same particular and special Rules would not
suit with all Places, Times and Tempers. Several Nations have their several
Manners, Humors, Customs; and we see what is Veneration and Decency in one
part of the World, is not accounted so in another. Hence we find variety of
Rites, Forms and Customs in several Churches; and those Churches are not to be
blamed for it, keeping to the General and Apostolic Rule. Absit ambitio, absit
pervicacia, absit fastus and contemptus aliarum: adsit e converso studium
aedificationis, adsit moderatio and prudentia: and tunc in rituum varietate
nihil exit repraehensione dignum, says Mr. Calvin (ad 1 Cor. 14. 36.) Away
with Ambition, away with Obstinacy, away with Pride and Contempt of others: and
on the other side take in Prudence, take in Moderation, take in a care of
Edification; and then in the variety of Rites and Customs there is nothing to
be reprehended. The Apostles Rule is general; and the Prudence of Governors
must deduce particulars (as for decency, so for significancy and
intelligibleness) as occasion serves, suitable to the Circumstances of Times,
Places, and Persons.

3. We may observe also, That these Laws, and Rules and Orders, being
Apostolical, are, as to the Original, the root and ground of them, Divine, as
if they came from the very Spirit and Mouth of Christ himself: So the Apostle,
They are the Commandments of the Lord, (1 Cor. 14. 37.) The Reader may reflect
upon what was mentioned above, from Calvin, Hemmingius, Dickson, and Grotius,
in Confirmation hereof. Calixtus glosses thus upon the words, [Divinoe
voluntati Consentaneum esse.] Let him know that it is consonant to the Divine
Will, that all things be performed, which the Apostle has prescribed, for Order
and Edification. For that good order be kept is a Divine Command. But what
order ought to be kept, this or that, is to be collected from the diverse
Consideration of Persons, Times, and other Circumstances. Thus Calixtus. And
Bullinger to the like purpose; Ad 1 Cor. 14. 37.
when the Apostle says, If any one seems to be a Prophet, let him know, that
what I write unto you are the Commandments of God; He does clearly confirm,
that all, which he had written of Prophecy, and the use of Tongues, and of
Ecclesiastical Assemblies in general, non ex humana sed divina traditione
scripsit; He wrote it not upon any Humane, but a Divine Tradition. From hence
it will follow in the last place.

4. That Laws made according to such general Rules, are necessary to be obeyed;
we must look upon them as having their approbation from the mouth of Christ,
says Mr. Calvin; uti Supra, V. Perkins on Gal. 2^ m. p. 190. 2. a.
and ( Jure divino) says Hemmingius, they do call for our obedience. And we
have the suffrage of a great Council with the assistance of the Holy Ghost for
it, Act. 15. 28. The things there enjoined, are called necessary things and
accordingly Hierome glosses upon those words of St. Paul even now mentioned, 1
Cor. 14. 28 Nihil suum tradere se dicit, sed Domini. Ambros. ad loc.
. These things are the Commandments of the Lord; that is, God has by me
Commanded, quae factu sunt necessaria, those things which are necessary to be
done. But as Calixtus and Malcolm have observed (to give you the sense of them
both in the words of the last) Necessitas illa non fuit absoluta, Ad Act. 15.
28.
That Necessity was not absolute, but ought to be referred to the condition of
the time, that there might be the nearer approach and better agreement in their
course of life between the Jews and Gentiles; Those things were necessary to be
decreed respectively to the general Rules of Order and Expedience, to take off
the aversion of the Jews, and to prevent the obduration of the Gentiles, and to
promote their Coalition into one Body, their Association into one Communion in
the Church of Christ. Brockman Tom. 2. c. 2. 9. 3. p. 516.
says roundly, Quod in se est liberum, Propter publicum Ecclesiae Decretum
servari debet ut necessarium, non necessitate simplici and absoluta, sed
necessitate Ordinis and decori, test Dei spiritu, Act 15. 28. That which is
free in it self, upon the account of the Church's Decree, ought to be observed
as a thing necessary, not by a simple and absolute necessity, but by a
necessity of Order and Decorum; and he alleges that very Text for it, Act.
15. 28.

Nothing therefore can be more evident than that our Liberty is restrained both
by positive Laws, and a standing Authority.

I shall add yet further, That the Apostle did never set up any Liberty against
Authority, never intended to subject Authority to the designs of false
Apostles, or the pretenses of the Spirit, or a tender Conscience. He gave this
charge, ( Romans 13. 4.) Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, and
having the mind of Christ (as he Professes) he could not forget that decretory
Sentence, He that will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen
and a Publican. He was sometimes very indulgent out of his great Zeal to gain
all that were or might be tractable: but when he observed a Faction came in as
Spies to find out their Christian Liberty, in order to entangle them in a new
yoke of Bondage, he opposed it with an inflexible stoutness by his Apostolical
Authority. Again, when he saw others put a restraint upon the use of things
indifferent, for fear of Sin, or of offending God, or on pretense of Religion,
He severely checked them as Superstitious, Col. 2. 20. Touch not, taste not,
handle not. Whatever Faction was in vogue, he ever interposed his Authority to
quench it. When Christian Liberty was invaded upon the account of necessity, in
order to Justification and Salvation; He commands them to stand fast in their
Christian Liberty; but then lest they should grow high and insolent, slight
the Examples of their worthy Presidents, and withstand the Laws of a just
Authority, He refers them to their spiritual Guides, and injoyns them to follow
their Faith and Practice, ( Hebr. 13. 7, 17.) Phil. 4. 9.

Nor is this all, He asserts his Authority at a higher rate than this: He tells
them he has [Power enough] in a readiness to avenge all disobedience; and to
encounter such as were puffed up against his Clemency; which makes him put it
to their Deliberation what Method of Discipline He should use among them: What
will you? shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, or in the spirit of
meekness? (1 Cor. 4. last.) And if they will urge him to it, if he must use the
Rod, He tells them he will not spare, He will use sharpness according to the
Power the Lord had given him, to Edification, and not unto Destruction, (2 Cor.
13. 10.) By excusing himself from this severity, He makes his threatening the
more formidable, (says Oecumenius) The Power of inflicting Censures, he
ascribes to Christ; and though this Power may by accident be destructive to the
Flesh, yet it is certainly designed for the benefit of the Church; Nam punire
peccantes aedificatio Ecclesiae est, the Punishment of Offenders, is the
Edification of the Church, while by the Punishment of such, others are rendered
more steadfast and more approved, says the same Author, V. 2 These. 3. 65. 14.
when he made any Ordinances, he did expect a due observation of them: Now, I
praise you, brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
Traditions (or the Ordinances) as I delivered them unto you. (1 Cor. 11. 2. V.
Grotius, 1 ad Cor. 11. 2.
.) And it is observed, These Traditions were not Dogmatical, but Ritual, and
about things indifferent; nor yet were they Perpetual, but Temporary, (as
Sclater Sclater.
notes) And when his Ordinances of this nature were neglected or despised, He
could express himself like a Son of Thunder. Witness, what he writes upon this
Argument (1 Cor. 14. 37, 38.) and he appeals to such as pretended to the
Spirit, and to the gift of Prophecy, If any man think himself to be a Prophet,
or Spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the things which I write unto you, are
the Commandment of the Lord. But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant.
The Apostle does here anticipate the prejudice of proud men, (says Sclater)
who had it in their hearts to object thus; Seeing we are spiritual, we are able
enough surely to judge of these things; so that you shall not need to interpose
your opinion. There were a sort of high-minded men, who thought themselves
above the Apostles teaching; and the only Wise men of all the Church, and
therefore they preferred themseves above all others; and here the Apostle does
repress their Supercilious arrogance (says Aretius.) Dickson calls them
Sciolists (for all their pretended Gifts,) and tells us the Apostle does here
contemn their affected ignorance, and a Precept being now given to the
Governors of the Church, that they should acknowledge these Commands to be
Divine, He remits these ignorant Contemners of them, to the Moderators of
Discipline (that is the Phrase it seems among the Scottish Presbyterians) to be
dealt withal according to the Rule and Judgment of the Apostle. In settling
these Rules and Orders, the Apostle seems to say, I have done my duty; if any
man will yet continue obstinate, and will not understand his own, Let him
affect his ignorance at his own peril; Nam spreta Authoritas Apostolica, Deum
habet vindicem, says Grotius; for when the Apostolical Authority is despised,
God is the avenger of it. Atque ita contentiosis qui acquiescere nesciunt, and
nullum finem disputandi faciunt, froenum injicit (says Calixtus:) And thus he
casts a Bridle upon the Contentious, who know not how to acquiesce, or make an
end of their disputing. By all this it is evident, That the Apostle never set
up any Christian Liberty against a just Authority; never intended to subject
Authority to the designs of false Apostles or Pretenders to the Spirit; what he
has delivered in favor of weak Christians we shall consider anon.

In the mean while (and in order to that) it may be worth our inquiry, why the
great Apostle should vary so much in his way of handling the same Argument. Of
Circumcision and other Ceremonies, Synops. In Proleg. ad Roman.
it is observable, he treats more mildly and gently in His Epistle to the
Romans, but more severely and sharply a great deal in his Epistles to the
Galatians and Colossians. Was it out of Condescension to their weakness at his
first Writing, which was not to be continued, when success of time might have
afforded them sufficient means of better Information? So the Author of the
Synopsis Proleg. ad Roman.
thinks; but then the Epistle to the Romans should be more early written, then
the Learned do allow it was. Soto In Ep. ad Romans c. 14. 15. p. 379. 1.
is of Opinion, That the Mystery of St. Peter's Vision (which directed him to
converse with Cornelius and other Gentiles, Act. 10. 10, etc.) was not yet
published to the Romans, or at least that they did not understand the meaning
of it; and thence he Collects also, that the Council mentioned, Act. 15. was
not then assembled. In the Epistle to the Romans the Controversy chiefly lay
between Grace and Nature; but in that to the Galatians, it was betwixt the Law
and Faith, says Ambianus, Argum. Ep. ad Romans
The Apostle was angry with the Galatians; because, though they were very well
instructed, yet they were easily seduced. But he ought not to be angry with the
Romans, but to commend their Faith, quia nulla virtutum videntes insignia
susciperunt fidem Christi (says the Comment of St. Ambrose Presat* ad Romans
) because they had embraced the Faith, though they had seen no Miracles; and though
they mistook the sense, it was, because they had not yet been sufficiently
instructed in the Mystery of Christ's Cross. The Epistle to the Galatians was
written only to Gentiles; that to the Romans, was written both to Jews and
Gentiles, as S. Hierom Ad Gal. 5.
has observed. The Jewish Converts though they embraced the Faith, yet they
thought themselves still obliged to Moses Law, to abstain from certain Meats,
and to observe certain days according to the Jewish Customs: On the other side,
the Gentiles, (and such as were better instructed in the Truth of the Gospel)
they embraced the faith of Christ, but would not be concerned in those Mosaical
Observances, to which they had never been addicted; Hereupon heats and
animosities did arise, which kindled into a despising and condemning of one
another. Now in this Epistle to the Romans, it was the great Temper and
Prudence of the Apostle to carry an even hand betwixt the two contending
Parties, and amicably to compromise Et hoc egisse Paulum ut neuter populus
offenderetur, quo Sc. utraque plebs privilegium possideret. Hieron. Ad Galat.
51.
the difference between them. We must remember St. Paul had not yet been at
Rome: And although upon Information and Complaint from some other Churches, He
gave Orders (at a distance) for the redress of some particular Miscarriages;
yet some other things he thought fit to reserve till his own personal presence
should give him an opportunity to inspect the Temper and Conditions of the
People, that he might be the better able to settle such Rules and Orders as
should appear to be most convenient. Thus he did in the Church of Corinth: Many
undecent Carriages he corrected by his Epistle, Coetera autem quae ad
aedificationem Ecclesiae pertinent, praesentia sua Ordinare se promisit, (says
St. Ambros. ad 1 Cor. 11. ult.) Other things which concerned the Edification of
the Church, He promised to set in order by his presence. And thus de did
touching the Church of Rome. Some Points of Doctrine he carefully stated; as
Justification by Grace, through the Faith, which is in Christ Jesus, etc. He
Taught the Jew and Gentile-Converts likewise, how they should carry themselves
respectively to one another; That the strong should not despise the weak, nor
the weak judge and condemn the strong. But these were Directions for Common use
among private Christians: but for Decrees and Orders of public use and
practice, he gave out none to this Church; because as yet, here was no
Jurisdiction settled, no Laws made, no Governors appointed to put them in
Execution. This Grotius Collects from Romans 16. 4, 5, and 17. This makes me
believe, that there were then no Common Assemblies (of Christians) says he, or
no Presbytery at Rome. Otherwise in stead of commanding to mark such as caused
those Scandals, or Schisms, He would have had them Excommunicated. For when the
Church is without such Government, single Persons can do no more than avoid
familiar Conversation with such as live not according to the Rule of Christ.
Thus Grotius Catharinus seems to Collect no less from the Apostles
expostulation, Romans 14. 4. Who art thou that judge another man's Servant? Cum
non sis Pastor aut Dominus ejus, seeing thou art neither his Pastor nor his
Lord: and therefore thou have no right to pass Sentence on him. And as much is
to be concluded from the 22 Verse, Have thou faith? have it to thy self before
God. Had there been a Bishop settled there, it had been their Duty in any
Matter of Hesitation, to consult him, to resolve their Doubts, and settle their
Persuasions; But as yet there was no such Establishment; hereupon he does
advise them to be sincere in their Profession, and to carry themselves
uprightly between God and their own Conscience. Catharinus to this purpose
says thus; Thou have Faith; that is, thou have a clear knowledge of thy
Liberty in matters indifferent: But have this Faith to thy self before God;
that thou may not hurt thy weak Brother. And this is always to be the
Practice in such things as the Church does tolerate: They are to be dissembled
or concealed, and we must yield to Infirmity, for a time, till the matter comes
to be made more clear. But then we ought to dissemble or conceal (our
persuasion) no longer, but freely to declare, and boldly to follow what the
Church has established: Thus Catharinus; for then Obedientia praecepti est,
our Obedience is under Precept, as Tolet has observed Ad Romans 14. p. 622. Vid.
Soto ad Romans 14. p. 382. Col. 2. Fir. 6.
. The Apostle does Predict and Promise them a happy Conquest over all adversary
Power, whether exercised by subtlety and imposture or otherwise, Romans 16. 20
Vid. Grotium, and De la Cerda ad locum and Oecumen.
. The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. He means the
false Apostles, Deceivers, and Disturbers of the Churches Peace, the signal
Instruments of Satan; and their overthrow should be by his speedy coming to
them, to ordain what was wanting to their settlement.

The design of this Digression is to show, that the Apostle did never give
color to set up Christian Liberty against the Laws and Authority of the
Church. And it is further evident, that the Church did from time to time
prescribe and limit the use of things indifferent, as they judged it most
expedient, to avoid Scandal, and promote Edification. And to this purpose they
did observe times, and determine things, and distinguish persons.

1. They did observe times; For the People of the Jews had been so long Wedded
unto Moses, had so great a veneration for all his Laws, Rites, and Ceremonies,
and these were so constantly inculcated into them every Sabbath Day (as St.
James observes, Act. 15* 21.) That they could not suddenly be weaned from the
Practice of them. And they were a People so perverse, stubborn, and inflexible,
that St. Peter himself was pendulous and knew not well how to handle them: yea,
though he had a Vision from Heaven to instruct him in his Duty that way ( Act.
10. 10.) yet still he was sometimes afraid to own the Conversation of the
Gentiles; and as his fear had once betrayed him to disown Christ himself, so in
this Case it betrayed him to disown his own Christian Liberty. Gal. 2. 11. St.
Paul was pendulous too, and acted the same part for some time upon the same
account; for one while, to comply with their Zeal for the Law of Moses, He
circumcised Timothy, (Act. 16. 5.) and purified himself with other Votaries,
after the Rites and Custom of the Law, ( Act. 21. 23.) But afterward he grew
more resolved (as he perceived the Jews grew more obstinate and malicious) and
would neither yield to have Titus circumcised, nor endure Peter's counterfeit
compliance with the humor of the Jews, to the prejudice of the Gospel, Gal. 2,
3. 11.

But when certain of the Sect of the Pharisees would needs intail Salvation
upon Circumcision and the Law of Moses (Act. 15. 1, 5.) 'twas high time to
consult the Apostles and Elders about this matter; lest the Gentiles in general
should be discouraged from embracing the Gospel, and such as had embraced it
already should be tempted to Apostatize from the Profession of it. The Council
Convened at Jerusalem to decide this Controversy, determines in this Decree,
That the Gentiles should abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from blood,
and from things strangled, and from fornication, (Verse. 29.)

Here is a restraint put upon the Gentiles in favor of the Jews; and they
restrained them in one practice which was amongst them, as a Foederal Rite of
their Religion, eating in their Idols Temples, and of such meats as had been
offered unto Idols; These things of themselves were indifferent, (as St. Paul
proves at large, 1 Cor. 8. 4. and Chap. 10, 25, 27. And among these they reckon
Fornication; because (though forbidden by the Moral Law) it was looked upon, as a
thing indifferent among the Gentiles.

In order to a Coalition of Jews and Gentiles into one Communion, they would
have the Gentiles so far to conform to the Jews in their daily and familiar
Conversation, as to abstain from (such things as the Jews did most abhor) the
eating of things offered to Idols, from blood, and from things strangled; These
were not necessary simply and in strict speaking, but indifferent; yet being so
highly expedient to the Edification and Unity of the Church, they were passed
into the Decree as necessary things, Act. 15. 28.

Here was nothing determined as to the Point of Circumcision; yet in this very
Decree it was tacitly implied, That after the Death of Christ, neither
Circumcision, nor the Sacrifices or Ceremonies of the Law, were necessary
either to the Jews or Gentiles, toward the obtaining of Faith or Salvation. And
yet to such Jews as became Christians, and lived in Palestine, they concluded
the observation thereof so far forth necessary, till the Destruction of the
Temple, that they might not seem to have lost their reverence for God's
Commands, and by that means so alienate the minds of their Countrymen both
from themselves, and from Christianity.

To decide the Case concerning the Ceremonial Law, St. Austin does distinguish
three Periods of Times. The first, before Christ's Passion, wherein those
Precepts were alive, in vigor and of great obligation. The second time was
from the passion of Christ to the sufficient Promulgation of the Gospel,
wherein those Precepts were dead, and did neither bind nor profit any body, yet
they were not deadly: but tolerated and exposed to view as a Hearse laid in
state, till they might receive an honorable Burial, in the rubbish of the
Temple. But when men began to pay an awful Reverence to this deceased Body of
Moses, and to put their trust in it for Grace and Salvation; then the Rites and
Ceremonies of this Law became deadly, and began to stink, as false signs of a
thing to come, which really was already past; and then this Law was utterly
exploded as an Imposture and an object of Superstition. To this observation of
times by the Apostles, I shall add but one thing more: There was a time when
the Apostle thought fit to tell the Philippians, that in some Cases, they might
(then) expect a clearer Revelation, Phil. 3. 15. But we being so well assured,
that the perfect Canon of Scripture is Consigned to the Church, He will be in
great danger of Enthusiasm, who now expects a further Revelation.

2. As the Apostles did observe times, so they did determine things. What
things were determined by that Council, (Act. 15.) (for a temporary observation
among the Gentiles) you have seen already: But the Capital question, that about
Circumcision, was left undecided. At this the false Apostles and Sect of
Pharisees took advantage. That Gentiles might be admitted into their Communion
they did not deny, but would have Them made Proselytes of the Covenant, whereof
Circumcision was the foederal Rite: This Sacrament therefore they must receive
for their initiation, else they could not be saved* (as Act. 15. 15.) This
makes the Apostle write so sharply against Circumcision (which in effect did
imply an obligation to observe the whole Law, Gal. 5.

In short, Those Converts, whether brought into the Christian Church, from the
Communion of the Jews or Gentiles, Their Case was this: The Jewish part of them
had been Educated under the Discipline of Moses; The false Apostles told them
they were yet under the bond of that Dispensation, and some were so simple and
weak as to believe them. Hereupon they had still an eye to those Jewish Rites
and Sacraments, even in the use of Christ's own Institutions. They did Judaize
in the Matter of Circumcision, and Paschatize in the Use of the Lord's Supper,
wherein they had a greater veneration and respect for their old Passover than
for Christ's Sacrifice; and for this reason Dr. Lightfoot. Ad 1 Cor. 11. 29.
the Apostle taxes them, That in the Celebration thereof, They did not discern
the Lord's Body. By this means the Apostle tells them they did renounce their
part in Christ, and were fallen from Grace, (Gal. 5. 2, 4.) And he says, as ill
things of the Gentiles. For by the Rites and Ceremonies of their Religion, and
particularly by their Feasts in the Idols Temple, they held a Communion with
Devils. Now to see such as had taken upon them the Profession of Christianity,
play the Jews and Gentiles, in addicting themselves to the Institutions, Rites,
and Ceremonies of that Religion and Worship, which those Jews and Gentiles
respectively did profess and practice, This was such a Scandal to the
Conscientious and weak Disciples, the Apostle could not dissemble the
resentment of it; but tells them plainly, They did renounce Christ in it, they
were fallen from Grace, and were in Communion with Devils Gal. 3. 4. 1 Cor. 10.
20, 21.
, and Christ should profit them nothing; and the Scandal they gave hereby might
harden unbelievers, and betray weak Christians to fall into the same state of
Condemnation 1 Cor. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12.
. Hereupon they came to a determination, and did actually restrain the use of
Christian Liberty in these things.

3. They did distinguish of Persons: among Christians, they found some that
were weak, and some that were strong: The strong were those that were sound in
the Faith; they perfectly understood the extent of Christian Liberty, the
nature and use of things indifferent: they could forbear or use them as
occasion served, without hesitation or doubtfulness: They were offended at
nothing; The weak were such as had the Faith newly planted in them: They were
Novices in Christianity, and their Faith being yet tender, was apt to be shaken
by ill Documents and Examples. It Is an Observation of St. Hierom (on Mat. 18.
6.) Quod qui scandalizatur, parvulus est: Majores enim scandala non recipient:
He that is offended is ( weak, or) a little one: for the greater (strong in the
Faith) receive no offense, or Scandal: But all men had not this Faith, Ad Romans
14.
(Romans 14. 2.) There were some weak (says Catharinus) Qui metuebant, ubi omnis
timoris cessaverat ratio, and volebant semper manner in legis lacte and
elementis: Such as did fear where there was no reason at all for it; and they
would (by their good will) be always feeding upon the milk of the Law.

From This distinction of Persons, some things are observable.

1. That this weakness proceeds from ignorance, 1 Cor. 8. 7. Howbeit there is
not in every man that knowledge. Then when the Church was an Infant, certain of
the converted from Judaism did believe, and contend, that the Law was not
antiquated by the Gospel; but was rather to be observed together with it. Ad
Romans 14. in Princ.
And these (says Soto) the Apostle calls weak in the faith, quasi nondum satis
progressos confirmatosque in cognitione fidei: as if they were not as yet
sufficiently instructed and confirmed in the knowledge of the Gospel. And this
brings great mischief to the Church; saepenumero enim turbae in Ecclesiis
oriuntur, ex eo, quod imperiti and ignari, nolint imperiti and ignari videri,
sed peritiorum and doctorum locum occupent, says Hemmingius In 1. ad Cor. c.
14. 38.
, Debates and Factions in the Churches do, for the most part, arise from hence,
that such as are ignorant and unskilful will not seem to be such, but will
needs possess the place of the more Skilful and Learned. Vnde enim turbae magna
ex part, (says Sclater) nisi quod imperiti nolunt imperiti esse, sed
peritorum locum occupant? 2 Ad Corinth. 14. 38. in Scholiis.

2. The second observable is this, That these weak ones are more prone to
Superstition. Some renders the word Horat. Sum Paulo infirmior. i. e.
Scrupulosior,
[weak] by one that is more [scrupulous,] Si quis fuerit inter eos, fortassis
Judaeorum genere, qui ob diutinam superioris instituti vitaeque consuetudinem,
sit adhuc Superstitiosior; nec adhuc sic in eo sides adoleverit, ut omnem
pristinae legis observationem excludat, etc. De la Cerda, ad Romans 14. n. 1. and
n. 3. Alius enim, qui sc. est perfectus and firmus in fide, vacansque omni
superstitione; he is persuaded he may lawfully eat all things: that is, he that
is most free to use his Christian Liberty, is most free from superstition. For
from hence there arose such contentions and disputes between the Convert Jews
and Gentiles, illis reliquos damnantibus tanquam profanos and contemptores
legis divinae, his vicissim habentibus illos pro imperitis and superstitiosis:
says Calixtus Ad Rom* 14. in Princip.
; They (the Jews) condemning the rest as Profane; and Contemners of the Divine
Law, These on the other side (the Gentiles) accounting them for ignorant and
superstitious. For what signifies Superstition, but an immoderate fear? (says
Mr. Calvin In Act. Apost. 17. 22.
) Quo se anxie torquent superstitiosi homines, dum sibi fabricant inanos
scrupulos? whereby Superstitious Men do torment themselves with much anguish,
while they frame vain Scruples to themselves.

3. A man may lose the title of a weak brother, and the benefits indulged by
the Apostle to such Persons. On the Ep. to the Galat. Chapter 2. p. 190. 2. D.
It Is Mr. Perkin 's distinction of Persons; Some are weak, and some are
obstinate. Weak ones are such, as having turned unto God, and carrying in their
hearts a purpose in all things to please God, nevertheless do sundry things
amiss, upon simple Ignorance, or bad Custom, till they be better informed. And
a little after, This being always remembered, that weak ones truly turn to God,
and carry in their hearts an honest purpose not to sin against his Laws at any
time wittingly and willingly. Obstinate persons are such as profess the faith,
and yet hold and practice bad things of wilful Ignorance, and of Malice. These
Persons, ( says he) are not to be born with, nor to be respected.

1. After sufficient time and means of information, if a man will be offended,
it is supposed to be out of stubborness and Malice: Si ille qui scandalum
accipit, vel quodvis aliud detrimentum ex ignorantia, fuerit eo usque
admonitus, ut non possit jure and merito ignorantiam obtendere, jam ex malitia
censetur Scandalizari; Ad Romans 14. p. 378. 2. f.
says Soto: If he that takes offense through ignorance, shall be so far
admonished, that he cannot justly pretend ignorance, He is supposed to be
offended out of Malice.

2. When from a modest Inquirer, out of a timorous scrupulosity, a Mancomes to
be Positive and Dogmatical, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
and will not endure sound Doctrine, but after his own Lusts shall heap up to
himself Teachers, having itching Ears; He can no longer pass the Muster for a
weak Brother. As long as there is any appearance or probability, that a
Heretic, a Schismatic, or Seditious person, and other persons of Pestilent
Principles to the Public good, are sick of ignorance, it is safe, and an
Office of Charity to bear with them, and to admonish them of the truth with
gentleness; quoniam ignorantia medicabile est vitium, (says de la Cerda Ad
Romans 16. n. 35.
.) Because ignorance is a Medicable Vice: a fault that may be healed Quid ergo,
licet esse in fide infirmum, licet in errore positu^ permanere? Minime: sed
naevus non praecipiti, sed Prudenti Manu abstergendus, nec zelo praeter
scientiam* sed remedio curandus ad conscientia^ apposito. G. Ambian. Ad Romans
14. p. 453. 2. D.
, but (says he) as soon as it appears, that such Persons adhere to their Sects,
out of Pride and frowardness, out of affection and animosity, they are
presently to be avoided, according to that of the Apostle, Hoereticum, etc. A
man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject: knowing
that he that is such is subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself.
(Tit. 3. 10, 11.) and (2 These. 3. 6.) We command you, that you withdraw your
selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, V. Grot. Ad locum.

3. When a man is pufft up with an Opinion of his own Knowledge, when he
becomes a fierce Disputant, and a malicious Insidiator; when he grows stubborn
and despises Dominion; when he does Dogmatize and Censure, and take the
Scorner's Chair; He does then Commence Schismatic; and is by no means to be
treated as a weak Brother, but as a Seditious Mutineer: For now, it is evident,
he dissents not out of weakness, but out of Pride, Animosity, and Stubbornness.
Ferus could say, very truly and pertinently (on Romans 14.) Non loquitur de his,
quae ex impudentia, pertinatia, aut destinata malitia committimus: The Apostle
speaks not of such things, as we commit, out of impudence, obstinacy, or
prepensed Malice and Design. For, if he who takes offense, does it out of
Malice: Nempe quod vel nulla offuscatur ignorantia, vel illa penitus, cujus
potest facile convinci, sed aut per vafritiem, aut per obstinationem
Scandalizatur, neutiquam tenemur morem gerere nequitioe ejus, says Soto: In
Romans 14. p. 378. ^. f*
if he be not clouded with ignorance, or with such ignorance only as he may
easily be convinced of, and yet is scandalized, either out of craftiness, or
through obstinacy, we are by no means bound to satisfy his wickedness: For
otherwise (as he says) we should be bound to connive at Heretics, and (for
instance) to abstain from flesh, for fear the Jovinians should take offense at
us.

And because the Dissenters take Sanctuary, upon all occasions in the
Fourteenth Chapter to the Romans, we shall the more particularly consider it.
That the Doctrine therein delivered was peculiar to the Jews, is the
affirmation of the Learned Estius Ad Romans 14. p. 200. 1.
, and he has it twice for failing; and our Synopsis p. 291. 1 20. ad Romans
says the same after him. De Ceremoniis Judaicis, non Christianis Apostolus
Loquitur: The Apostle speaks of Jewish, not of Christian Ceremonies, says
Matthisius Ad Romans p. 659.
: and Mr. Perkins Cas. of Conscience, B. 2. Chap. 12. Of Confession. V. Hieron.
in 4. ad Galat.
is of the same judgment; For he says, That Commandment (Romans 14. 22.) was
given by Paul for those times, when men were not fully persuaded of the use of
God's Creatures, as Meats, Drinks, etc. but to these times it is not. Nor
indeed can it directly be applied to us for this Reason.

The Apostle there gives Directions to accommodate the differences betwixt
private persons: But among us the contest is, between Authority and Faction,
the Church and Private Dissenters from her Communion. Now when from an
indifferent action, or the omission of it, one of two Evils will necessarily
follow, right Reason dictates, that I must so act or omit acting, that I may
avoid the greater evil. But certainly, being under her Jurisdiction, it is a
greater evil to offend the Church Mat. 18. 17.
than any private person or persons, who are but Members of it. And, as when
the competition is betwixt them, I must obey God, rather than Man: So when the
Competition is between the Church, and private persons, Common Reason will soon
determine, which is to be preferred. The right stands presumptively for the
Governing Party, who are in Possession of their Authority; and I am certainly
obliged in Law and Conscience to adhere and submit to them; because the Law
concludes, Melior est conditio possidentis Quia ille opinione Dominus est; ad
opinionem autem evertendam firmissimae requiruntur demonstrationes, ex re ipsa
petitae. Joan. a Felden. Annot. in Hu. Grot. de Jure B. and Pacis lib. 2. c.
23. Sect. 11. m. p. 117.
; They that are in Possession have the fairest Right: Especially where the
Possession began upon so good a Title, and has been of so long continuance
without interruption. Give none offense, says the Apostle, neither to the
Jews, nor to the Greeks, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 32. which we must
interpret by that other Rule of the Apostle, Gal. 6. 10. Let us do good unto
all men, especially to them, who are of the household of Faith. If I cannot
please all, I must be sure not to offend the Church, to which I stand more
strictly obliged than to any Conventicle or private Person whatsoever.

I would fain know also of these Dissenters, under what Form they will place
themselves. If they be strong in the Faith, then they are so well instructed in
the Nature of Christian Liberty, and things indifferent, they cannot be
offended at the use or forbearance of such things: If they be weak, that
weakness proceeds from ignorance', and a proneness to Superstition (as was
observed above): and it is their duty to seek for better information, and
acquiesce in the Sense and Resolution of Authority, when they have it. But they
should do well to remember, there is another sort of Men, a Faction, that is a
sort of obstinate Men; and how little value is to be set on such, we have heard
from Mr. Perkins.

2. But it will be alleged, that the Apostle will have us to receive him that
is weak in the Faith; but not to doubtful Disputations, (Romans 14. 1.) We must
use them gently as we do by sick persons, Matthis. ad Romans 14. p. ^48.
the weakness of whose Constitution, will not endure stronger Medicaments; we
must apply remedies that are more mild, take care of their Diet, and attend
them with great Care and Diligence. But we must not forget, that this was only
a Temporary provision to keep the Peace among private Christians: Ad Romans 14.
p. 125. 2. m.
Itaque suscipiendi erant ad tempus and non spernandi (says Catharinus) quoad
usque securis ad radicem poneretur; They were not to be despised but to be
received for a time, until the Axe was laid to the Root; That is (says he)
until the Apostles had made a perfect Determination, and by that means had cut
off those Leaves of the Law, which were without Fruit, and the wholesome Sap of
Truth. We know it is the office of the Bishop, not only to instruct in
meekness, but to reprove, 2 Timothy 2. 25. c. 4. 2.
rebnke, Tit. 1. 9.
and by sound Doctrine both to exhort and convince Gainsayers. And when
Authority has settled matters of difference, The Subjects Rule is express and
Positive, ( Phil. 2. 14.) Do all things without murmuring and disputing, V.
Act. 16. 4.

3. But it is objected, as the charge of the Apostle, That no man put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way, Romans 14. 13. But
this is to be understood of an Active Scandal, designed, as a Mousetrap set and
ready baited on purpose to entice and catch the unwary Mouse, as Tirinus Ad
Romans 14. fin.
notes from the word. It is to be understood, says Cajetan, of putting a
stumbling block formally, Secundum propriam rationem Scandali, according to the
proper account of Scandal to the Mortal ruin of another person. This Scandal
is in a matter, that is in my own Choice and Power, Romans 15. 1. And it is to be
understood in Cases wherein Authority has not interposed her Determination; for
that does Supersede my Choice. It Is very well observed therefore by G. Ambianas
Ad Romans 14. p. 453.
, That Liberty is Promiscuous both to the strong and to the weak, but with this
Limitation, Vbi nec Pietas violatur Conscientiae, nec Ecclesiae temeratur
Auctoritas; where the Piety of Conscience is not violated, nor the Authority of
the Church infringed.

But here we must observe some Rules to direct our Practice.

1. I must not omit a Duty to avoid Scandal; for that were to do evil that good
may come, which the Apostle says is damnable, ( Romans 3. 8.)

Nor 2. Can I properly be said to give Scandal by performing that which is my
duty antecedently to that Scandal; for then my duty should be my sin: and I
should be under a necessity of sinning, whether I do my duty, or do it not;
which is absurd.

3. Spiritual things which are necessary to Salvation Soto Ad Romans 14. p. 580.
are not to be omitted to avoid Scandal; for then I should be bound to go to
Hell to avoid Scandal: But Obedience to my Superiors is a thing Spiritual, and
it is necessary to Salvation, Romans 13. 5. Hebr. 13. 7. 17. I give no Offense in
doing my bounden duty: But He that takes offense at it, He does it at his own
Peril. If my Dissenting Brother doubts of the Authority that Commands the duty;
yet if I be well persuaded of it, I must govern my self not by His, but by the
persuasion of my own Conscience, Romans 14. 5.

4. It may be objected further, That the Apostle would have us do (as he says
he did himself) Please all men: But we should remember there is a restraint put
upon the duty: we must only please them for their good, that is, their
Spiritual profit, that they may be saved, Romans 15. 2. with 1 Cor. 10. 33. Quod
ergo Saluti eorum Contrarium est, illis concedere non oportet, Ad Loc.
says Mr. Calvin. I must not grant them that which is contrary, or prejudicial
to their Salvation. I must therefore do nothing, That may,

1. Encourage them to oppose Authority; because this very Apostle tells me,
that such as resist shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13. 2.
Therefore if I act Conform to the Rule of Charity, ( Romans 14. 15.) I must take
care (as the Apostle says) to please my Neighbor to his Good; not to feed his
humor and make him the more obstinate, as Vorstius has well observed; for
that were to lay a new Scandal in his way, contrary to this very Apostle, Romans
14. 13. 1 Cor. 8. 9.

3. It must be for his edification (Romans 15. 2.) Ad Romans p. 686.
Non tam ut grati simus assentando and palpando, quam ipsorum utilitati ac
saluti inserviendo, says Matthisius: Not so much to make our selves acceptable
by soothing and flattering them, as by making our selves serviceable to their
Salvation. This applying our selves to his edification, supposes him indeed to
be weak, but it supposes him also to be tractable; but if he be proud, an
admirer, of his own abilities, one that leans to his own understanding and will
not endure sound Doctrine, He has no title to my tenderness or forbearance; His
Conversation is rather to be rejected by the Rule of this Apostle, 2 Timothy 4. 3.

4. I am so far to please him as is consistent with the Truth and Privileges
of the Gospel. Where these were wittingly infringed, the Apostle had not the
least Patience to dissemble the resentment of it, no not for an hour, Gal. 2.
4, 5. with 14. And the Truth and Privileges of the Gospel are no less
infringed by the Interdict and Superstitious forlearance of a thing
indifferent, than by the Injunction and Superstitious usage of it, Colos. 2. 21.

5. To this, I may add another Allegation; The Apostle requires Christians to
follow after the things which make for Peace, Romans 14. 19.

But 1. It Is some comfort that in this case, he ties us not to impossibilities.
And to humor some men in their Superstitious scrupulosities is little less,
it is a task too great for any ordinary virtue, a burden more intolerable than
the Jewish yoke of bondage, such a Circumcision of all our freedom as would
never suffer us to be at ease in any of our enjoyments. The worst of Tyranny is
more eligible than such Anarchy and confusion, wherein every false Apostle or
factious Teacher sets up a Tribunal and Supremacy for himself and such
Disciples as he can draw after him, Paramount to the Judgment and Authority of
his Superiors.

But 2. St. Paul is, in that place, prescribing an expedient for the Peace of
Private Christians; to which nothing can conduce more than a mutual tenderness
and forbearance; when the strong and more-knowing do not despise the weak, for
their ignorance and folly; nor the weak and ignorant judge and condemn the more
knowing for their freedom in the use of things indifferent. Nor ought one man
to condemn or despise another, Ferus ad Romans 14.
dum coelesti praecepto non obviet, says a Moderate and Learned Romanist,
while he walks not contrary to any Divine Precept Nam legem regni Dei nemo
Debet pro bonofratris violare. Soto ad Romans 14. p. 379. 2.
. But persons in Authority are to take care of the Public Peace; whereof there
can be no better Preservation than Order Col. 2. 5. unde Romans 15. 4.
and Uniformity, in Submission to the Decrees of Governors. This made the
Apostle so careful to deliver the Decrees to be kept, which were ordained by
the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, Act. 16. 4. Optimum tunc fovendae inter
Ecclesias Concordiae vinculum erat, servare quod per Apostolos fuerat
transactum. In eo cum diligens est Paulus, bona fide Cavet, ne quid oriatur
turbae sua culpa, says Ad locu^.
Calvin. -- Facit quoque ad disciplinae conservationem and pacis vinculum
tuendum piorum, rituum Constitutio and dispositio, vrbo Dei Consentanea. David
Rungius Disput. 16. ex Epist. P. ad Romanos. These. 21. p. 320.
The best tie of Concord among the Churches in those days was, to observe and
keep what had been transacted and determined by the Apostles, and Governors.
In which St. Paul being very diligent, did faithfully provide that no disorder
should arise through any fault in him.

That Synod gave an Example to after Ages, and taught them by Experience what
course is best to follow; and it is that which all Protestant Churches do
observe to this day. This is evident among the Calvinists; for in the Fifth
Chapter of their Discipline, under the Title, De Consistoriis, Art. 31. Where
they prescribe a way for the ending of Controversies, which may arise
concerning any head, whether of Doctrine, or of Discipline, when the matter is
brought to a National Synod, They resolve thus, Hic integra fiet and ultima per
verbum Dei totius quoestionis decisio, cui si renuant omnino acquiescere,
erroresque diserte abjicere, ab Ecclesia abscindentur: Here shall be made the
entire and ultimate Decision of the whole matter in Controversy, by the Word
of God; and such as refuse to acquiesce in it, and to forsake their Errors,
let them be cut off from the Communion of the Church.

The Apostle therefore does not enjoin the Prince to lay aside his Sword to
make Peace; nor will he lay by his own Rod, when occasion serves to use it, ( 1
Cor. 4. last.) for that is designed for Edification as well as the spirit of
meekness, ( 2 Cor. 13. 10.) And they that were of a factious and untractable
disposition, He did not advise the Christians at Rome to flatter or humor them
for their Edification; but to mark and avoid them, to shame them into
Conformity, Romans 16. 17. For in truth, when a Law is made and Orders given,
(and all care taken to give satisfaction touching the Equity of them) then to
walk disorderly 1 These. 5. 14. 2 These. 3. 6, 7, 11. (...).
, is the part of absurd and unreasonable Men, such as will keep no place, no
rank, no Decorum; and such are to be looked upon as proud, stubborn, and of ill
humor; and St. Paul will have them treated accordingly, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.

But the Apostle himself seems to be much more tender in the point, as appears,
not only by his general advice, but also by his personal resolution. It is
good, says he, neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby
thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak, Romans 14. 21. and 1 Cor.
8. 13. If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world
stands, lest I make my brother to offend.

To this I answer, That many Expositors do restrain the words of the Apostle,
to such Wine and Flesh as had been offered up in Sacrifice to Heathen- Idols;
and so the sense is clear and easy; and I know no good Christian but would
observe the Rule, if there were occasion for it. For, as S. Ambrose notes upon
( 1 Cor. 8. 13.) a measure is to be observed in those things which the Law
allows us. Vxorem certe licet habere: sed si fornicata fuerit, abjicienda est:
ita and Carnem licet edere, sed si idolis Oblata fuerit, respuenda est: It is
lawful to have a Wife; but if she commits Fornication, she is to be put away:
so we may eat flesh; but if it be offered up to Idols, it is to be refused:
Thus St. Ambrose. But this concerns not us at all; For we have no such flesh
sold in our Shambles; no such wine in our Taverns, no such Heathen Feasts, no
such Idols (God be thanked) among us. But, I answer,

2. The Apostle writes (especially to the Corinthians) as an Orator, by way of
Hyperbole and exaggeration Non autem hoc dicit, quod hoc aliquo casu opus sit
Grotius, and ex eo Synopsis.
. We have the like kind of Expression Mat 5. 29. as Grotius has observed. There
is apparently an Excess in it; and it is impossible that Rule should be observed
to a general Satisfaction. This we may learn from St. Austin; For (as he has
it Epist. 86. m.
) Sicut quod ait Apostolus verum est, Malum esse homini, qui per offensionem
Manducat; ita malum est homini, qui per offensionem jejunat: As that of the
Apostle is true, It Is evil to him that eats with offense: so it is no less
true, It Is evil to him that fasteth with offense. Hereupon De la Cerde Ad Romans
14. n. 36* p. 320. Ex Origin.
, does very well observe, that sometimes it may be necessary to eat flesh and
drink wine, to avoid Scandal; lest by abstaining from such things as were
Prohibited by their respective Laws, a man should fall under a Suspicion, that
he plays the Jew, or observes the Law of the Saracens. Wherefore in strict
speaking, this branch of the Apostles discourse, is neither to be drawn into
Practice or Argument. For one man (as he himself has told us, Romans 14. 5.)
will observe a day, another will not, one man will eat (Swines) flesh, another
does abhor it. Ponatur quod ille Scandalizetur de quolibet? quid fiet?
Respondeo, tunc debet comedere, etc. V. Hugo Card. ad Romans 14. and Soto ib. pa.
378. 2. a. f.
I cannot satisfy them both; for both are scrupulous, and both respectively
offended at one another practice. To eat and not to eat; to esteem a day, and
not to esteem it; These are perfect Contradictions; and it is impossible for any
Charity, for the Charity of an Apostle, to reconcile his Practice to both their
Scruples. St. Paul himself (at last) found this insuperable difficulty by
Experience, upon the congress of the Jew, and Gentile Converts. Therefore
instead of a charitable and prudential expedient (which in this Case was
impossible to find out) He withstood St. Peter to the face, and with great
integrity and stoutness, asserted the truth of the Gospel; and the extent of
Christian Liberty. ( Gal. 2.) And herein He left us (His own Practice) an
example, to maintain our privilege; and not to govern our selves by the
timorous squeamishness, or pretended scruples of superstitious men (which may
be contradictory and endless) but by the solid Rules of Truth, and the Prudent
Resolutions of Pious Governors.

7. It may be further alleged, that the Apostle would not have us make use of
our Christian Liberty against Charity, (Romans 14. 15.) It Is very true Charity
should direct and moderate our Christian Liberty, that our mutual content may
not be disturbed by the abuse of that Liberty: but rather, that we may Worship
and glorify our God with unanimity. Charity is a great Mistress within her own
Jurisdiction; and when positive Laws may be superseded, the Law of Charity will
oblige us. But must the Church spend all her stock of Charity upon these
Dissenters, while they have no love, no respect at all for the Church? In
reference to a private Neighbor, there is Debitum Charitatis, a debt of
Charity: but in reference to my Governors there is Ferus, ad Romans 13. 8.
Debitum necessitatis, (in respect of their Authority over me) a debt of
Necessity. If my Brother be offended at what God has made my duty, there is no
Remedy, but that he lay aside his unjust Offense, and not that I lay aside my
necessary duty. Mel. Inquir. pa. 348.
. The Apostle tells us, That love is the fulfilling of the Law; and certainly,
if it be an Ordinate love, when it looks upon the Second Table, it will begin
with the Practice of the Fifth Commandment. And it ought to be considered, that
St. Peter speaks with reference to Authority, when he gives that injunction ( 1
Pet. 2. 16.) As free, and not using your Liberty as a cloak of maliciousness,
but as the Servants of God. My Liberty is like my cloak in this, that I may lay
it down, or put it on, as occasion shall require. And it shows very little
respect to my Superiors, if I will not lay aside my cloak to take an innocent
walk with them into the House of God. And if, notwithstanding our Christian
Liberty, ( Gal. 5. 13, 14.) the Law of love does oblige us to serve all Men,
sure it can never allow us to despise our Governors, or their Commands.
Besides there are other ways to express our Charity: Potest is qui infirmus est
sufficienter instrui and doceri; Fratrem been agere; quodque ejus facto offendi
non debeat: The weak may be sufficiently instructed and taught, that his
Brother does well, and that he has no reason to be offended at him; Ad 1 Cor. 8.
so says Estius, and this will be the best instance of our Charity. Whereas if
I encourage him in his disobedience, either by my Discourse or Example, I do
certainly give him Scandal; and that we are sure is against Charity. But what
if my weak Brother will not lay aside his error? Correctio opus est
Eleemosynae spiritualis, and propterea, quae locum habent in Eleemosyna, and ab
ea excusant, habent etiam in correctione, ut excusent ab ea. Paul. a Palate. In
Mat. 18. Mat. 15.
That Learned Man has answered this question too; Post quam sufficientem ac
plenam instructionem, si adhuc in Scandalo perseveret, non erit illud scandalum
datum sed acceptum; After sufficient and full instruction, if he still
perseveres in his Scandal, it will not then be a Scandal given, but taken; for
then it will proceed not out of ignorance, but out of malice: Quale erat
Scandalum Pharisaeorum, quod Dominus in Evangelio docuit, non esse Curandum,
Mat. 15. and such was the Scandal of the Pharisees, which the Lord has taught
us in the Gospel, is not to be regarded; Thus the Learned Estius, (ibid.)

And now I suppose, we shall not need to fear any objection from Christ's
example in this Case; though propound by the Apostle, Romans 15. 3. 5. For never
could any Man be more tender of giving offense, (whether by word or deed) than
he was; and that he would have us to be so too, (when the Party is to be
treated with tenderness) we may conclude from the severity of his Sentence upon
such as do the contrary. ( Mat. 18. 6.) But for all that great Compassion,
which he had for his little ones, His weak and infirm Disciples, His Divine
Wisdom was pleased to make a difference; and he had his vae vobis, His Let them
alone, His sharp reproofs, and his dereliction for the Scribes and Pharisees (
Mat. 25. 12, 13, 14.) And truly, we do not desire, much less dare we pretend
to be wiser, or more charitable than our Lord and Master. Danda quidem opera
est, quoad licebit, ne qua ex nostra dicendi ratione offensio nascatur: sed
extremae insaniae foret, velle nobis prudentius Moderari, quam edocti sumus a
Coelesti Magistro; says Mr. Calvin In Mat. 15. 12.
: Care must be taken (as much as in us lies) that no osfence arise from the
manner of our words (or actions); but it were a part of extreme madness, to
think we can carry our selves more Prudently, than we are taught by our
Heavenly Lord and Master. Christ knew very well that the Pharisees were
offended at his Doctrine (says the Learned Luc. Brugensis:) Sed non judicabat
operae pretium ut placandis illis intenderet, In Mat. 15. 14.
aut clarius interpretaretur doctrinam contumaciter rejecturis: But he did not
think it worth the while to endeavor to pacify them, or to give a clearer
Interpretation of his Doctrine to them, who would reject it with Contumacy and
stubborness. And a little after, Significat hic porro Christus -- Christ does
signify thus much to us, that such men are not so much to be regarded, as that
their offense should greatly trouble us, who take occasion of osfence from our
Good, when the cause of it is solely in themselves. Yet there is some need of
Judgment and Prudence, that we may distinguish betwixt the weak, who being
offended out of ignorance, Mox se reddunt sandbiles, do quickly become Curable,
and the Malignant and Contumacious, who study, invite and pick up Scandals,
almost out of every word and action. Thus Luc. Brugensis.

The Dissenters go on thus.
There are some things which God has in the general left free, and
indifferent, to do or not to do; yet at some times, and in some Cases it may be
my great sin if I should do some of them; as when it would wound the
Conscience, and destroy the Soul of a weak Christian.

To this I Answer:

1. That the Pleas of Christian liberty and weakness, were never more abused
than by such as have pretended to defend them. The abuse hereof against
Sobriety and Temperance, have been taken notice of by the two great Apostles,
V. Jud. Ep. Verse. 8.
and Caveals entered by them both against it, Gal. 5. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 10, 18, 9.
See Soto ad Romans 14. 16, 17. p. 379. The abuse hereof against Authority, St.
Paul takes notice of Romans 13. Vnde non dubia conjectura Colligimus, fuisse tum
quosdam inquietos, qui libertatem Christianam stare non putarent, nisi
deturbata Civili Potestate. From whence we undoubtedly Collect, that there were
unquiet Spirits in those times, who thought Christian Liberty could not stand
without the disturbance of the Civil Power, says Mr. Calvin Argum. in Ep. ad
Roman.
. Hence St. Peter, As free, and not using your Liberty as a Cloak of
Maliciousness, (1 Pet. 2. 16.) freed by Christ from many yoaks, but not from
that of subjection to God or to Superiors, and therefore not pretending to any
such Liberty, nor covering Sedition, etc. under color of Christianity, as the
Gnostics did Ham.
, who said they were free from all Public Laws, and despised Dominion, as St.
Jude has it; but as the Servants of God; ac proinde etiam eorum, servi, quibus
Deus nos servire jubet, Gro^.
and therefore the Servants also of those, whom God commands us to serve. In
short, when Christian Liberty is set up against Order, Decorum and common
honesty, it is set up against Authority, (1 Cor. 14. last.) when it is set up
against the common Methods of Edification and Peace, it is set up against
Charity; (Romans 14. 19.) when it is set up against Temperance and Sobriety; it is
made an occasion to the flesh, (Gal. 5. 13.) when it is made use of to palliate
the designs of factious and ambitious men, it is used as a cloak of
malitiousness. In all these Cases there is Apostolical Authority to restrain
our Liberty. And in Matters of Religion, what Liberty can we justly claim, more
than what Christ has obtained, and his Grace conferred upon us? A Liberty to
serve God acceptably (in all instances of the First and Second Table) with
reverence and Godly fear? Hebr. 12. 28. To this purpose Mr. Calvin In 1 Pet. 2.
16.
observes, That St. Peter pronounces them free who are the Servants of God,
Vnde colligere promptum est, hanc esse finem libertatis nostrae, ut promptiores
and magis expediti simus ad obsequium Dei. Neque enim aliud est quam manumissio
a peccato. Atqui peccato dominium tollitur, ut se in subjectionem justitiae
homines addicant. From whence, says He, it is easy to Collect, that the end of
our Liberty is, that we may be the more prompt and ready for God's Service; and
obey him with the greater expedition. Nor is this Liberty any thing else, but a
Manumission from Sin. And the Dominion is taken from Sin, that men may render
themselves up to the Subjection of Righteousness. Thus Calvin.

2. I must tell my weak Brother, that Christ has established a Church, and
placed me under Governors, and given them Authority to restrain and determine
the use of my Liberty, according to their Christian Prudence, by such Rules,
and to such ends and purposes as he himself has prescribed. And though he has
left some things free, and indifferent in the general, yet it will certainly be
my great Sin to do them unseasonably, as when I despise Authority, break good
Order, and destroy the Unity and Peace of the Church; for this will be an
affront to Christ himself, who established such a Constitution (in his Church)
long before I came into the Communion of it; and has said, He that hears you
hears me; and he that despises you despises me: And every Soul, which will
not hear that Prophet, Act. 3. 23.
shall be destroyed from among the People. Hereupon I take it for granted, that
I am justified in my Obedience to the Voice of the Church by the Concession of
this Author, (which has been mentioned already somewhere in the Margent of
these Papers) For (says He) if my Brother will be offended at what God has
made my duty, there is no Remedy, but that he lay aside his unjust offense, and
not that I lay aside my necessary duty. Mel. Inquir. page 348. which Rule, (if
well applied) will (very near) determine the whole Case betwixt us.

I may add for the further information of such a Brother. That God expects, a
solemn Public Worship should be settled in his Church, and religiously
performed to his Honor and Glory. That there can be no such, unless the use of
our Liberty be retrench't; for otherwise how shall we come to an agreement, for
Time, Place, Form, Gesture, Language, and all such other circumstances as are
to be determined? God has therefore appointed Laws and Orders, and established
Authority and Governors to this effect: That This Government and Authority is
Divine and Sacred, and not to be controlled but by a Warrant and Commission
from some Authority that is Higher. That we must come to an agreement about
time and place to celebrate and solemnize God's Public Worship, our Author is
very positive V. p. 273. and 275, 276. of Melius Inquirendum.
. For this Command (says He) is so straightly bound upon the Consciences of all
Churches, that though none should determine for them, nay though All should
determine against them, yet are they under its Authority, and must come to an
issue about it, (but by what means is unintelligible, if there be none to
determine for them, nay, if All determine against them, yet to an Issue, and
Agreement, about it, come they must) unless (says He) they will draw the guilt
of the neglect of worshipping God upon their Souls, with that wrath, which is
due to so great contempt of the Divine Law. Thus our Melius Inquirendum.

Besides, I will tell this Brother, I cannot go to Church and be at home at the
same time; no more than I can make both parts of a Contradiction true:
Wherefore that I may not continue pendulous, and be ever in suspense, and so
make no use at all of my Liberty, I must determine my self one way or other.
But if the Church, which I take to be wiser than my self, shall in some
instances (as she sees occasion) determine for me, I will dutifully submit my
self to her Authority. And he walks very uncharitably, who takes upon him to
censure my Practice, or judge my Conscience for so doing. Ferus ad Romans 14.
For I know it is not this carnal liberty of the flesh (to do or not to do)
that makes me a Christian; But Righteousness and Peace, Humility, and other
Virtues of Religion. And upon a full examination of Particulars, I am very well
satisfied that the Rites and Ceremonies in use among us, are not introductive
to any false Religion or Worship; but rather a Bar against it, (even against
that of Rome, which by the ignorant (and by no man else) it is most suspected
to favor.) They gratify neither the Opinion of the Jew, nor of the Gentile;
They lead neither to Idolatry, nor Superstition; They are not ridiculous for
any levity that is in them; nor burdensome for their number; and in short, they
are not sinful; because against no Law; for Sin is the Transgression of a Law;
and where no Law is, there is no Transgression.

3. It Is the supposition of our Author, that this Liberty must hold in utramque
partem, that we may Act or not Act, Determine, this or that way, or it can be
no Liberty, (pa. 339.) From hence I infer, that our Christian Liberty is more
infringed by the Dogmatical Prohibitions of the Dissenting Teachers, than by
the Prudent and Regular Impositions of Ecclesiastical Governors. For besides
their want of Authority, over me (which makes their pretended Power an
Usurpation) I am no more free under him that will not let me kneel (for
example) then I am under him, that will make me do it. Nay, he that ties my
hands behind me that I may not Act at all, does restrain me more, than he that
does but take me by the hand to guide me in my Acting. To this purpose we have
the suffrage of David Rungius (a Learned Lutheran) who (after a short Catalogue
of some things indifferent in use amongst them) tells us thus, Disput. 16. ex
Epist. ad Romans th. 45. p. 324.
Haec and similia qui simpliciter necessario retinenda, vel necessario abolenda
docent, utrinquevim Libertati Christianae faciunt, and tanquam Pseudo-doctores,
jugo traditionum humanarum nos captivare volentes, fugiendi sunt: These things
and the like, such as teach, they are simply and necessarily to be retained, or
necessarily to be abolished, they do, on both sides, offer violence to our
Christian Liberty, and they ought to be avoided as false Teachers, who would
hold us Captive in the yoke of Humane Traditions. He that forbids me the use of
things indifferent, does no less inthrall me then he, who requires the practice
of them. And the Apostle, as he inveighs against the superstitious use of
things, ( Gal. 4. 10.) Ye observe days, and months, and times and years:) so he
does likewise against the superstitious forbearance of them ( Col. 2. 21. Touch
not, taste not, handle not) They that are so fierce for these Negatives, (and
have little besides their own Fancy to show for it) would draw us into the very
same superstitions, which St. Paul condemns in the Colossians; Col. 2. 21.
And if they condemn the use of them as sinful, they are never the less
superstitious, but much more intolerable.

4. The restraint put upon our natural liberty, by the Laws of the Church, is
no Impeachment of our Christian Liberty. For Christian Liberty is a spiritual
privilege peculiar to the Church; and it is seated in the Soul. Vbi clanculo
tibi licuerit, fruere hoc jure, says Soto Ad Romans 14. p. 382. 2.
and Peter Martyr In 1 Cor. 10. p. 145. 1. pp.
, De rebus adiaphoris in animo libertas est servanda. The notice of our Liberty
being matter of Faith, has properly respect to God, says Mr. Calvin, Ad Romans
14. 22.
Ergo qui ejusmodi certitudine praeditus est, eum conscientiae tranquilitate
Coram Deo contentum esse oportet, neque opus est venire in possessionem coram
hominibus: He therefore, who enjoys a certainty hereof, ought to be contented
with his Peace of Conscience before God, and needs not take possession of it
before Men; for as Soto Ibid. pa. 383. 1. Pr.
, to the same purpose, Qui credit licitum esse Matrimonium, non Protenus
tenetur vxorem ducere. He that thinks the state of Matrimony very lawful, is
not obliged presently to take a Wife.

2. Consistit libertas Conscientiae cum abstinentia non minus quam cum esu rei,
and vice versa, says D. Dickson Ad Romans 14. 22.
; Liberty of Conscience consists no less in the use of things, than in the
forbearance; nor a whit less in the forbearance, than in the use of them. But
till I be determined I am in suspense; and while I am in suspense, I am in
pain. I must therefore come to a Determination for my own ease. When I am
determined, I am not then at Liberty; yet herein I do but exercise my Liberty,
not lose it. What Man (well in his wits) did ever feel the loss of his
Christian Liberty, by putting a Gown upon his Cassock? or a Surplice over both?

5. I would desire such a Dissenting Brother to lay his hand upon his heart,
and examine himself betwixt God and his own Conscience, whether the aversion he
has to the present Constitution and Orders of this Church, does not proceed
from some one or more of these grounds, viz. either from want of Humility and
Modesty in Himself; or from want of Love and Reverence to the Governors; or
from want of a due examination of the nature, ends, and usefulness of the
things established; or from want of Candor and Ingenuity in putting a fair
construction on them?

For the very same Rites and Ceremonies, which we have in the Church of England
are in use in all the Lutheran Churches with many others. And although the
Churches under Calvin's denomination have not all that are practiced amongst
us, yet none are more strict than they in the Observation of such as they have
established.

For Obedience to Authority is certainly the duty of God's Servants: St. Peter
calls it well-doing (1 Pet. 2. 13, 15, 16.) and makes it as well a branch of
God's Will, as an exercise of our Christian Liberty. For, as Mr. Perkin's (on
Gal. 4. 28.) has very well observed, This is perfect Liberty, when man's will
is conformable to the Will of God.

Nor does any Church think her Liberty impeach't by such Impositions. For the
use and excellency of my Christian Liberty lies in this, that it teaches me to
be just and dutiful without constraint; and so it is no burden to me. I can
comply with the Commands of my Superiors, and carry my Liberty along with me.
And all the while I hold to the generous Resolution of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.
12. All things are lawful for me: but I will not be brought under the Power of
any.

Knowing the Dominion I have over such indifferent things, I will gratify my
weak Brother as far as I am able, treat and instruct him with all ingenuity and
freedom in the use of them. And if my Superiors shall think fit to retrench
the Practice of my freedom in some particular Instances, (that the world may
see I am not under the sullen Spirit of fear and bondage, but acted by a free
Gospel Spirit, the Spirit of Power, of Love, and of a sound mind,) I will
conform my self to their Commands with so much ease, cheerfulness, and
satisfaction, that it shall not look like a force or restraint upon me, but as
an exercise of my Liberty, being very well assured for whose sake, and upon
what account and Principles I do it. And,

6. When I consider, that things indifferent may be well or ill used (as Mr.
Perkins has observed, and every Man's Experience can tell him) I cannot but
think my self happy in the Churches appointment; for when she has determined my
choice by her Injunctions, (to stand or kneel for example) if I perform it with
alacrity and reverence, (as I should do) I find a satisfaction in my Humility
and Obedience; and I am the more obliged to my Superiors for the good use of
my Liberty, which I might have used amiss; and for making that which was but
indifferent of its own Nature, to become of good advantage to me by her
Authority. And yet such is my Christian freedom even in the use of these
things, that while I practice them, I am not at a loss either for my liberty or
my duty. I am not in bondage either to fear a Curse, or to hope for Merit, or
to seek for ease of Conscience, or Salvation in them.

The Dissenter goes on thus.
If I shall engage my self to the Church, that I will never omit such an
indifferent thing; and the Soul of (a) weak Christian should call to me to omit
it, I have tied my hands by engagement, I cannot help him, though it would save
his or a thousand Souls out of Hell, because I have given away my freedom to
the Church.

Answer.
That all Clergymen are engaged to the Churches, in which they are appointed to
Administer is no new thing, no matter at all of wonder. For how else can the
Church be secure of their fidelity? How can she trust them with the Sacred
Office? This therefore is the practice of every Church of any creditable
Denomination.

But when Men get into a vain of Scrupling, they can seldom or never find the
way out of it. One scruple begets another like circles in a troubled water.
Lib. 2. c. 10. Sect. 7, 8.
Mr. Calvin has pursued this Observation rarely well in his Institutions, to
which I refer the Reader; He concludes, when some superstitious opinion has
cast a scruple into our heads; things that are pure in their own Nature, become
contaminated and unclean to us; and we can make use of nothing that God allows
us, without perturbation and disquiet of mind. When a man begins to scruple at
the Cross, soon after the Wedding Ring will pinch the Finger; the Surplice will
become an eyesore, or a burden; and bowing the Knee to our Heavenly Father (at
the Sacrament) will be thought so hard a task, we shall not be willing to
buckle to it. Nay, if we suffer our selves to be haunted with these fears, a
Religious Oath, a Honorary Title, a Civil Salutation will be a Bugbear to our
jealous minds. It Is the duty of a Ghostly Father, or Spiritual Guide, not to
foment, but to dissipate and expel such Scruples. And though they have
voluntarily tied up their hands for the Satisfaction of the Church, yet their
tongues are let loose enough. Do they therefore lay open the Nature of things
indifferent? Do they declare that they may be used or let alone without Sin,
till Authority does interpose about them? Do they acquaint the People with the
Power wherewith the Church is invested by the King of Saints? and instruct them
in their duty to that their Spiritual Mother, as the Spouse of Christ? Do they
represent the excellency and reward of obedience to Superiors, according to the
Fifth Commandment? and back their Discourses with their example to lead them
unto Conformity? These things they ought to have done, whatever they have left
undone.

Those Good Women of the Church of Corinth, might have scrupled at St. Paul's
injunction of the Vail, and silence in the Church: They might have objected
that it went against the grain of a tender Conscience, and their Christian
Liberty, to submit to such impositions; which were nothing else but some of the
old Traditions amongst the Jewish Rabbis V. Lightfoot in 1 Cor. 11. 5. etc.
14. 35.
; They might have alleged that Christ had made them free: that they had
Innocence, as well as Confidence, enough to lift up their faces before Angels,
and that for Sion's sake they could not hold their peace.

Whatever the Women did, we know there was among them a sort of bold Men, who
thought they had good warrant to control the Apostles Orders; 1 Co. 14. And
how does the Apostle encounter them, but by an allegation of God's gentle
Nature, and the temperament of the Church according to it; God is not the God
of Confusion, Bulling. m. 1 ad Cor. 14. Ves. v. 33.
but of Peace, as in all Churches; and the impulse of his Spirit does not push
men on to Contention, but to love and unity; and are you, O ye Corinthians, V.
36.
aggrieved at those Rites which are observed of all Churches? Did the Preaching
of the Gospel proceed first from you, that we must dance after your Pipe? and
are you the only wise men of the world, and are all the Churches else in
dotage? V. 37.
For those vain janglers you so much admire, I will not odiously contend with
them. But if any of them be a true Prophet, and really endowed with those Gifts
of the Spirits, which ye pretend to, He will easily perceive and acknowledge,
that I do not vent my own passions in this matter, but the Commandments of the
Lord, who without all doubt is contemned by such as will not obey our
Prescriptions. But if any man be so profane, V. 38.
or blind with prejudice, that he will not, or cannot see it, let him be
ignorant at his own peril. It Is not my part to contend, but to teach and
admonish; If he despises the Precepts of the Lord, which I have delivered, he
betrays his own impiety; and if he will not obey, but continue in his
filthiness, let him be filthy still. Thus Bullinger Comments upon the Apostles
expostulation. And it is very material, that the Apostle writes this in
justification of his own Orders prescribed for edification and decency; and he
writes thus not to the rude and ignorant populacy, but to such as being
desirous to seem Prophets and Spiritual, studied more to introduce their own
Mastership into the Church, than to acquiesce in the Doctrine Apostolical, In 1
Ep. ad Cor. 14. p. 598.
as Musculus well observes.

He that has St. Paul's Principles, and governs himself by those general Rules,
which he has laid down as the Oracles of God, He may use the same expostulation
to Dissenters. Such faithful Ministers, though they can compel none, yet they may
call them to a voluntary amendment; if they find them refractory they may say
with a good Conscience, Qui obedire detrectet, Musculus ubi supra.
detrectat; He that denis to obey, let him deny it; He that rejects the truth,
let him reject it; He that had rather perish (in his perverseness) than be saved
(by being tractable (as a little Child) let him perish: I have done my part, if
he refuse the Lord's Commands, let him see to it. Thus Musculus.

But do our Dissenting Brethren speak thus home to the Consciences of their
followers? Do they not love to draw Disciples after them? and do they not many
times speak Act. 20. 30.
perverse things to that effect? we are well assured there have been flattering
Teachers, who have blessed the People in their Seduction Isa. 9. 16. See the Orig.
, that they might get the Vogue, and keep up their Power and Interest, to lead
them against the injunctions of the Law, and the Edicts of Divine Authority.
And by such courses it is no wonder, if, with the Pharisees, they Proselyte
their Disciples into Hell. Mat. 23. 15.


Do not some of our Dissenters give the like Scandal to their Disciples? Do
they not Dogmatize them into ill Principles, and encourage the Practice thereof
by their Example? Do they not fill their heads with doubts and jealousies,
possess them with vain and superstitious fears, till they bring them to an
avowed disobedience and separation from the Communion of the Church? Do they
not perplex their Consciences with endless scrupulosities about those minutes
made Sin by their Doctrine, Mel. Inquir. p. 311.
which else (to use our Author's own words) had been as innocent as a piece of
powdered Bief and Turnips; and such are the Rites and Ceremonies, which are in
use among us, if they were as inoffensive in their Discourses as the Church is
in the practice of them. Job 40. 8.
Do they not condemn the Church that themselves may seem Righteous; and to
justify their own Schism, do they not quarrel at the Terms of her Communion?
They say God has left something free, but they would leave nothing free (in
matters of Religion) but their own Fancy. They make that Sin which God never
made so: and that I do not slander them, you have their own instance in the
sign of the Cross. Of which they do not speak of modestly as to say, they
think, they doubt, or scruple: but positively and definitively they tell us,
They judge it sinful: but by what express Law, or clear Deduction, they can
never make us understand. They menage the Consciences of their Proselytes
betwixt so much awe and boldness, that they can make them either take the
hedge, or start at a shadow. They tickle them with a conceit of Liberty, while
they inthrall them to their own Dictates, and put upon their Necks a yoke of
their own making; much heavier, than that of their Governors, which they
attempt so strenuously to shake off. And when they are charged with such
unwarrantable Practices to the Scandal of Religion, and the disturbance of the
Public Peace, where do they take Sanctuary but in the Temple of a Tender
Conscience?

Conscience, I confess, is a Centurion of great Command; but yet it is under
another Jurisdiction, and must be accountable for her Conduct. Nor is her
Liberty or Privilege so great as is imagined. For the whole Nature and force of
Conscience is expressed in a Practical Syllogism, which consists of three
Propositions according to the three Offices of Conscience. For instance; He
that will not obey the Church, is to be treated as a Publican and a Heathen:
This is the Major Proposition, and our Savior's express Revelation. But thou
do not obey the Church: This is the Minor Proposition, produced and attested
by the Conscience. Therefore Thou art to be treated as a Publican and a
Heathen. This is the Third Proposition or Conclusion inferred from the other
Two.

By this instance we see Conscience has a threefold Office. 1. To Dictate and
declare the Rule of the Law. This is called Synteresis. The Second is to Record
and declare Matters of Fact; and this is called Syneidesis. The Third is to
give Sentence according to the merits or demerits of the Cause, and so to
determine the Condition of the Person; and this is called Crisis.

Here is all the Power that Conscience has; And it is clear that Conscience
has no Liberty in any of these Offices. Not in the First: not a Liberty to
call evil Good, or Good evil: not a Liberty to dictate or declare what every
man please to be the sense or letter of the Law; for then it should have a
Liberty to err and to deceive, by imposing that for a Rule of Law, which is
not so. For Conscience (in this Notion, that is, the Synteresis) is obliged to
take direction from the Light of Reason, and the Revelations of God's Will, and
from Humane Laws consonant thereto (for such Laws made by persons set over us
in God's stead, must be obeyed for the Lord's sake:) if the Conscience directs
otherwise, it is erroneous, and leads to Sin, and binds over to Damnation, till
it be corrected, and become conformable to its Rule.

Nor has the Conscience any Liberty in the Second Office, in reporting Matters
of Fact; for then it should have Liberty to misinform or tell a lie, in
representing Matters of Fact otherwise than they are. Nor has Conscience any
Liberty in the Third Office, in determining the Case; for then it should have
Liberty to be an unjust judge, to absolve or Condemn; that is, to pass Sentence
contrary to the Evidence and Verdict.

It Is true an evil Conscience may, now, make use of many shifts, tergiverses,
and evasions; but at the Grand Assize, (or time of Judgment) God will beat it
off from all its Subterfuges, and starting holes, He will rectify and refine
it, and make it a faithful Suffragan to him in that exercise of his
Jurisdiction. For then the Synteresis, (called sometimes the inward man) shall
fully consent to the Law of God, that it is Holy, and Just, and Good. Romans 7.
And for the breach of that Law (which is Matter of Fact) it will be a thousand
witnesses. And in the issue of the Trial, it will subscribe to the Sentence of
the Judge, in a due acknowledgment of his Justice, saying with the Angel out of
the Altar, Even so Lord, Apoc. 16. 7.
God, Almighty, true and just are thy judgments. Thus it will be at that great
Day. And now, all the Liberty that a good Conscience has, or can pretend to, is
a freedom from the Power of Satan, and the Law of Sin, from the rigor and yoke
of Moses his Dispensation, to do our duty to God and Man, (to work or forbear
working) without hesitation or scruple, according to the Injunctions or
Permissions of the Gospel; The measures whereof we have already given some
account of, (if I be not much mistaken) to a reasonable Satisfaction.

Here, if it be a digression, it is very pardonable, to take notice of a sort
of busy men, who seem to carry on a subtle Project (and there are more than
one of foot) under this disguise (of Liberty of Conscience.)

They make love to natural Religion, choose her for their Mistress, and cry up
her Discipline to so great a height, as if Christ and his Apostles came out of
her School, and the Moral of the Gospel were to be taken from the Philosophy of
the Heathens.

I know very well, we may borrow Jewels of the Egyptians, provided we do not
turn them into Idols, or value them above the Gospel-Pearl, which is truly
Orient. For the Apostle tells us of the Heathens, that when they knew God, they
did not glorify him as God. That professing themselves to be wise, they became
fools; for their foolish heart was darkened, and they changed the Glory of the
uncorruptible God, Romans 1.
not only into an Image made like to corruptible man, but also to birds and
four-footed beasts, and creeping things; and worshipped and served the Creature
more than the Creator: In their Theology, which was that wisdom which had God
for the object See Dr. Lights. 1 Cor. 1.
, They knew not God; and generally their Morals were as Corrupt as their
Divinity Romans 1. 26 to 32. And Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.
. Hence the Apostle says, After that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom
knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21.

Yet this Natural Religion is laid down with much Art, and embellished with
great Commendations as an immovable foundation for Liberty of Conscience. And
this Liberty of Conscience is, by several Engineers, set up to supplant the
present Church of England. And this done, the Great Mysteries of our Faith, and
the Institutions of the Gospel will with little difficulty, be depretiated at
the first, and at last utterly evacuated and exploded. Then the Socinian
System, or Model of Divinity will pass for Current; and That by subtle Wits,
will easily (by degrees) be reconciled to the Alcoran. And what will the issue
be but this? Men, at the long run, will be at a loss for their Religion. They
will see the Holy Sacraments laid aside, if not trampled under foot, as
obsolete or Temporary Institutions: the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity
accounted a vain Speculation of doting Schoolmen: the Incarnation of the
Eternal Son of God, an incomprehensible and unaccountable thing, and an
Omnipotent Redeemer, with his satisfaction and precious merits, but an useless
imagination. And in fine what will all this amount to? Pious and Sober persons
will in time, not only be awakened, but offended at it; and will think
themselves highly concerned also to search, (though it be among the much Rubbish
of the Church of Rome) to find out the Primitive Christianity. This I confess
will be the furthest way about; but it will advance the Jesuits design as
certainly, as if it were accomplished by a shorter Method. Which would very
well become the wisdom of our Governors to take into their most serious
consideration.

But to return, Our great Patrons of Liberty, are wont to rely much upon that
charge of the Apostle, Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ
has made us free, and be not entangled again with the (or in a) yoke of
bondage. But what is that Liberty he writes of? He is writing unto Gentiles.
And the Gentile world, ( the creature) which the Apostle mentions, Romans 8. 21.
was to be delivered from the bondage of Corruption, a jugo and servitute
corruptionis Peccaminosae, from the yoke and bondage of a peccaminous or sinful
corruption, Lightfoot.
that is, from the Bondage of their lusts and depraved affections, (under which
they lay so long inthral'd) into the noble Liberty of the Sons of God. This is
a Liberty not of the brain, but of the heart: Freedom from the Power of Sin, to
serve God, which is to reign; and that is the glorious Liberty of God's
Children: I shall run the way of thy Commandments, when thou have set my heart
at Liberty, Psalm. 119.

The Liberty the Apostle speaks of, is opposed to a yoke: but it is not to be
understood of every yoke; V. Joh. 1. 12.
for there is a yoke of Privilege as well as a yoke of bondage; such is
Christ's yoke; and this yoke we are obliged to take upon us. (Mat. 11. 29, 30.)
This yoke is his Law, (Mat. 28. 20.) which consists of Two Tables; and this
yoke is made up of both. The Commands and Ordinances of the Civil Magistrate
are a part of this yoke; and we must submit our necks to that, 1 Pet. 2. 13,
14. Romans 13. 1. The Orders and Injunctions of the Church are another part of
this yoke, and we must put our Necks under that too, or else we are to be
looked upon as Publicans and Heathens. (Mat. 18. 17.) And that we may not be at
a loss for the Church, our Savior has committed the Keys thereof to certain
Select Persons, that we may know who have the right and power to govern in his
stead; And to their Discipline we are to submit, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. And Chap. 14.
40. This is a yoke which we must not shake off. Hebr. 13. 17, Obey them that
have the Rule over you, and submit your selves: Mr. Calvin does not doubt at
all but the Apostle speaks of the Governors of the Church; Ad Hebr. 13. 17.
and he says, He tells those Hebrews, that their ingratitude would bring those
Governors grief and trouble, ut significet, to signify, that we cannot be
troublesome or disobedient to our Pastors, Sine propriae salutis jactura,
without the loss of our own Salvation. Ad locum vide.
And Gerhard is very full to the like purpose: The word signifies, to submit
themselves by a most exact and obsequious Subjection. And he adds for all the
Protestants of their Party, That there is none of them denis but Bishops are to
be obeyed in their Office; and not only when they Preach the Divine Law, but
when they press such Ecclesiastical Constitutions as are introduced for order
and decency. And although these do not immediately and of themselves, bind the
Conscience, yet in the general they do bind, by reason of that general Precept,
to obey such as have Rule over us. And that this is not a whit against the
Liberty of Conscience, we have Mr. Calvin's Suffrage, who thus sums up our
Christian Liberty In 1 Ep. Petri. c. 2. v. 16.
. In summa, est libera servitus, and serva libertas: Our Christianity is a free
service, and a servile freedom. Nam sicuti servos Dei esse nos Oportet, ut hoc
bono fruamur; for as we ought to be God's Servants, that we may enjoy this
benefit, so Moderation is required in the use of it. After this manner (says
he) liberae quidem sunt conscientiae, our Consciences indeed are free, sed hoc
non obstat quin Deo serviamus, qui etiam nos hominibus subjicit, but
notwithstanding this, we must serve God, who has also made us subject unto
Men: Thus Calvin. Thus much of Christ's yoke; which is not our bondage, but our
privilege; and ought to be our choice as it is our duty. The yoke of Bondage is
twofold, 1. That of Moses's Law. 2. That of Satan's Tyranny.

1. Satan's yoke, is a yoke of Tyranny: for He is the Prince of the Power of
the air, the spirit that works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.
This yoke is made up of the Pomps and Vanities of the wicked world, the
Superstition and Idolatry (with all the unclean and filthy practices which did
attend them) wherewith the Devil had inthrall'd the Heathen world. These
Galathians, for a long time, had had their Necks under this yoke: but were now
set at liberty by the light of the Gospel; yet were there a sort of false
Apostles, who for their own ease and advantage, made it their business to
entangle them in another yoke, which they had not been accustomed to, the yoke
of Circumcision, and the Law of Moses; and therefore he says, be not entangled
again in a yoke of bondage, quia si vos fideles jam circumcidimini, idem est
quod ad Idola Converti, quibus antea serviebatis, says Bruno; for if you, who
are Believers should now be circumcised, it is the same thing as if you should
be turned unto the Idols you served before. To iterum non eandem servitutis
speciem sed simpliciter and generaliter iteratam servitutem significat, quasi
dicat: Nolite iterum servire, ut pridem Idolis, ita nunc umbris and merosis
Ceremoniis, says G. Calixtus: This word [Again] does not signify the same
kind of bondage, but simply and generally an iterated, or repeated bondage; as
if he had said, be not now again in bondage, to shadows and burdensome
Ceremonies, as you had been formerly to dumb Idols. You are actually freed from
one heavy yoke, be not entangled in another; be not ensnared and inthrall'd, so
as to seek your ease, your pardon, your salvation, in another, which is of no
more validity to that effect, than the former, which Christ has therefore
equally freed you from: But what is all this to the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England?

He that will undertake, from the Doctrine of St. Paul, to impeach the Practice
of the Church of England, in commanding the observance of Rites and Ceremonies,
and thereby restraining the use of our Christian Liberty in things indifferent,
must make good these two Propositions.

1. That St. Paul has set up Christian Liberty above the Authority of the
Church; For in all things wherein the Church has not interposed her Authority
to determine our Practice, we have the use of our Christian Liberty as much and
as fully as we can desire. But that St. Paul has set up Christian Liberty
above the Authority of the Church can never be made good as long as the
Epistles to the Corinthians, to Timothy and Titus are extant and held Canonical.

2. He must prove, That, in the use of those Rites and Ceremonies, which the
Dissenters impugn, we do renounce our Christianity, and are fallen from Grace,
That (therein) we have fellowship with Devils, and that Christ shall profit us
nothing, but we must eternally perish in our practice: For those things which
the Apostle inveighs against, He forbids upon this account, as is most evident
from all those Texts of Scripture; wherein he does professedly and peremptorily
handle this Matter Col. 2. 8, 18. Gal. 4. 11. c. 5. 2, 4. 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21.
Romans 14. 15, 20.
. But I do challenge the Prudence and Justice as well as the Charity of him who
dares say, if you wear a Surplice, if you sign with the Cross, if ye kneel at
the Sacrament, ye renounce your Christianity, and are fallen from Grace; ye have
fellowship with Devils, and Christ shall profit you nothing, but ye must
eternally perish in that Practice.

To conclude this Section, I must put the Dissenting Brethren in mind, That the
charge or injunction they insist upon (Gal. 5. 1.) was not written against the
Church, but against a Superstitious Faction, which opposed Apostolical
Authority. And if they look upon the Superstition and Tyranny of the Church of
Rome as a yoke of bondage, then, by a Parity of Reason, They are highly
concerned in the charge upon that account. For they do oppose that very
Authority by which Christ has (once) made them free from that yoke. Which
Authority does still, with the like Zeal and Courage, call upon them also, to
stand fast in that Liberty: But if they will continue to give the Emissaries of
that Church advantage, by their unreasonable Separations, to creep into their
Conventicles, and make Proselytes with them, (which I can see no way to be
avoided, but by their Cordial return to the Communion of the Church of England)
the Scandal and burden must lie at their doors, if we be again entangled.

The Dissenters Fourth Section.
They plead, that they ought not to hazard their Souls in one Congregation, if
they may more hopefully secure them in another; for that their Souls are their
greatest concernment in this World and the next: Now say they, there is no
question but men preach such as they print with public allowance; and
therefore they ought to provide better for their Souls elsewhere. Especially
they say, That the Doctrine of Justification is Articulus stantis vel cadentis
Ecclesiae, an Article with which the Church falls or stands: This Article say
they, in the Parish where we live is quite demolisht by the Doctrine of
Justification by Works; we are bound therefore to provide for our safety and
depart; and when we are once out, we will advise upon another Church, not which
is tolerable, but which is most eligible, and in all things nearest the word.

The Answer.
That the Soul is a very precious thing, whether we look into its Creation and
Original, or into the Purchase and Redemption of it, we do readily acknowledge.
We should not hazard it; for 'twas God's great care, and should be ours. But we
must take heed, (and we have a Proverb to admonish us,) that we do not leap out
of the Drying Pan into the Fire. For in this Case of Separation, we may fitly
ask the Question. What Authority have you for it, and and who gave you that
Authority? Whatever your Cornerstone be, we question whether your new erected
Church will be built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Yet upon
second thoughts, we find you have something to say out of Scripture for your
practice. For we find you 1 John 19. They went out from us, but they were not
of us: for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us:
but they went out that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of
us. We find you again, Acts 20. 30. Also of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them. And we find Predecessors
of yours, 2 Cor. 11, 13. and part of your Character, at least, is to be seen in
St Jude's Epistle, Psalm. 19. These be they who separate themselves; and whether
Diotrephes was not the President of the New College, you should do well to
consider; for he had an aspiring spirit, and was imperious, and (as our Author
observes of him) his fingers itch't to be tampering; p. 160.
for he loved to have the preeminence and set himself to oppose Order and
Apostolical Authority.

But there is little satisfaction in following such examples. That Schism is a
work of the Flesh, and excludes such as are guilty of it, from the Kingdom of
Heaven, is the express Doctrine of the Apostle ( Gal. 5. 20. Voce Synonyma,
(...), Episcop. 1 P. Disp. 16. These. 2
) It Is one of his Rules 2 Cor. 7. 24. Wherein a Man is called to the profession
of Christianity (whether in a state of Servitude, or freedom) therein to abide
(so as he may abide the Servant of God.) If my Christian Liberty dos not
warrant, or allow me, to desert the service of Man (to whom I am antecedently
engaged) much less the service of the Church, into whose Communion I was
baptized, and under whose Jurisdiction I was bred and born. Quo pax and
concordia Vndique Constat inter Christianos homines, quaedam dissimulanda sunt,
quaedam ferenda, quaedam benignius interpretanda, Ad Romans 14. n 2. p. 105.
Says the Learned De la Cerda: That Peace and Concord may be kept on every
side among Christians, some things are to be dissembled, some things to be
tolerated, and some things to be favorably interpreted. Where there is
nothing enjoined to the peril of our Souls, or the impeachment of our
Salvation, we are obliged to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
not to break the Communion of the Church, but to observe the Orders and Decorum
practiced in it. It Is the Faith, which the Learned Zanchy professed and
published, when he was 70 years of Age, in the name of himself and Family; Cap.
24. These. 10. p. 152.
Tho Defects and Errors are never to be dissembled, yet Peace and Communion is
to be held with all Societies, as the true Churches of Christ, in which the
Foundation and Sum of Apostolical Doctrine is retained, and no manifest
Idolatry admitted. Episcopius 1 Part. Disp. 16. These. 10. etc.
(who was no great admirer of Rites and Ceremonies) says there can be no just
cause of separation from the Church, but what seperates from Christ, from God's
Paternal favor and the Kingdom of Heaven. And seeing there can no such thing
be charged upon this Church, it is undoubtedly Schism to separate from her
Communion. Hence the very worthy Dr. Falkner Vindic. of Liturgies Page 21.
makes this solemn asseveration: I account my self to have as plain evidence
from the Laws of God and the constitution of the Christian Church, that Schism
and unnecessary separation is a sin, in the breach of Christian unity, as that
Adultery is a sin in breaking the bond of Wedlock. And I account my self to be
as certain, that if ever there was any unwarrantable separation, from any known
Church since the Apostles time, the separation from the Church of England is
really such: Since our Church is truly as free from any just exception^ in its
Constitution, Doctrine and Worship, as any other since that time, either was,
or is. Thus that worthy Author.

But these Dissenters do allege, That the Doctrine of Justification, is
Articulus Stantis vel Cadentis Ecclesiae: an Article with which the Church
falls or stands. And that in the Parish where they (or some of them) live, this
Article is quite demolisht by the Doctrine of Justification by Works. But I
must tell them that one Error broacht in one Parish ought not to make them
desert the whole Established Church. That Error, tho grievous, cannot be deadly
to them, that have all necessary truth laid before them, if they do cordially
embrace and profess the same. The Error is only his, who, through the weakness
of his Judgment, cannot discern that the necessary truth is not overthrown by
it.

But because they allege a Print and public allowance, this reflects upon
Authority and our Governors; and therefore the Charge requires a more strict
and punctual examination. And here we must premise.

That Justification without Christ's Merits and Mediation, or without Faith in
his Blood, dissolves the Church of Christ, because there is salvation in no
other. (Act. 4. 12.) The Christian Church is built upon the Foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. (Ephesians.
2. 20.) and other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. (1 Cor. 3. 11.) Fides est Caput and initium Christianismi, says St.
Austin. (...)
Into this Olive Tree, we are ingrafted and stand by Faith: The Jews were
broken off (...)
through unbelief.

But in Justification, we find several persons concerned: There is something
attributed to God: Something to Christ, and something to Man himself.

1. God is looked upon as the Author and Efficient, for who can forgive sins but
God only? I have blotted out, as a thick Cloud, thy transgressions, Isai. 44.
22. and Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is
God that jnstifieth.

2. There is something attributed to Christ. We are to look upon him, as the
Meritorious Cause and Procurer of it. He is said therefore to have loved us and
to have washed us from our sins in his own Blood. (Apoc. 1. 5.) for by him we
have received the Atonement, (Romans 5. 11.) and for his sake God has forgiven
us. (Ephesians 4. ult.)

3. There is something attributed unto Man: He is the subject of this great
benefit, and some qualification is required in him toward his own
justification. Christ is set forth to be a Propitiation, (but it is) through
faith in his Blood: tho we are said also to be justified freely by God's grace.
See Romans 3. 24, 25. And with the heart man believes unto righteousness (Romans
10. 10.) and to the saving of his Soul. (Heb. 10. ult.) It Is out of
controversy, on all sides, that Believers are justified freely through God's
mercy, and that Believers are justified for the Merits of Jesus Christ. All the
matter of Question amongst sober men is this, Whether in our justification,
Faith be our own Act, whether considered as our Act, and as a lively Act, and
fruitful of good works.

As we own no other Author of our justification but God, no other Merits but
Christ, so likewise do we acknowledge no other Condition but Faith. But that is
not a dead Faith, for St. James tells us flatly, that is unprofitable. (Jam. 2.)
This Faith must be an Evangelical Faith, which though the Holy Ghost, maks a
Change; not only in our Relations, but in our Habitude, in our Hearts and
Practice. ( Act. 15. 9.) He that pretends to remission of sin before
repentance, may with as much reason pretend to a Pardon (as some do) before he
is guilty. We must not confound the Condition with the Cause either Efficient
or Meritorious. The presence of some disposition may be requisite as a
qualification in the person to be justified, and yet have no efficiency into
his justification. I think it is agreed among all Men learned and sober minded,
That it is a lively Faith, which is the Condition of our Justification. And if
we be agreed in this, to wrangle about Notions, Quae and Qua, is not of so
great importance as to study to be quiet, and to follow the things which make
for peace, and the things whereby we may edify one another.

It Is true St. Paul (in the matter of justification) does exclude the works of
the Law. (Romans 3. 28.) But there are works of Faith. (1 These. 1. 3.) Are they
excluded too? By what Law? The Apostle prays, That the work of Faith may be
fulfilled. 2 These. 1. 11. To say we, are justified by the efficiency of these
works of Faith, That Is against God's Prerogative: To say we are justified by
the merit of them, that is against Christ's Mediation: But will you deny the
Presence and Concomitancy of them, to attend, to evidence and to attest our
justification? If it be Faith only, yet it is not Faith alone; of all
qualifications (which the Gospel requires) Faith must have the respect of
Sovereign; but it stands not with her Enemies to be solitary.

Faith therefore may be considered in a double Capacity. (1.) Receptive, as she
has the Office of a Receiver. (2.) Redditive, V. Perkins Case of Consc. B. 2.
Chapter 12. Ans. to 1. Q. P. 87. 1. B. In the first capacity she justifies the
person, in the second she justifies her self, as some distinguish. But in this
last sense, Mr. Perkins makes it the way and means to life. Eternal.
as she has the Office of a Dispenser.

1. As a Receiver, (so taken Joh. 1. 12.) she receives Christ in all his
Capacities and Offices, as a King, as a Priest, as a Prophet, in his state of
Humiliation, in his state of Exaltation. In this Habitude or Capacity, to
believe in Christ is the most Natural act of Faith, her Elicite Act, and as
much a work, as is the Elicite Act of Hope, or Love, or of any other Virtue.
The People ask ( John. 6. 28.) What shall we do, that we might work the work of
God? Our blessed Savior Answers: This is the work of God, (the work commanded
by God ( 1 John 3. 23.) but to be performed by you) That ye believe on him whom
he has sent. It Is Man's Duty at God's Command, and by his Assistance.

2. Take Faith Redditive in the Capacity of a Dispenser so it is much more a
work Call. 5. 6.
, and the Mistress of it: for so she disburses all her Talents; and she sets
all other virtues a work, and so pays homage to Christ in all Capacities. As he
is a Prophet, so she hears his Voice, and own's his Doctrine; as he is a
Priest, so she trusts to his Atonement and relies upon his Merits and
Mediation; as he is a King, so she obey's his Laws, and observes his
Institutions; she renders up the whole Man to the dispose of his Redeemer, and
makes him resolve with full purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord, and to
submit to all his Commands and Impositions. Take Faith therefore in the whole
habitude and capacity of it, and (for a qualification to justification and
life) I may say, it is all in all: It comprehends (the sense of the word is so
large) the whole Principle of Grace, and all the Effluxes and Egressions of it.
Of Communion with God page 196.
This Dr. Owen does acknowledge; for speaking of Habitual Grace, which dwells in
us and makes it abode with us, He says thus, [This, according to the dictinct
faculties of our Souls wherein it is, or the distinct Objects about which it is
exercised, receives various Appellations; being indeed all but one New
Principle of life. In the Understanding, it is Light, in the Will, Obedience in
the Affections, Love; in all Faith.] He that desires to be fully satisfied in
this point let him consult, the Learned and Judicious Divine, Mr. Thomas
Hotchki's, He has also another part ready which deserves to be made public.
in his Second Part of a Discourse of Imputed Righteousness. Chap. 28. and
especially the 29th. where he treats hereof solidly and perspicuously.

St. James gives us a double instance or example of Justification by works,
Abraham and Rahab; and concludes with a kind of demonstration, thereupon, ye
see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by Faith only. (Jam. 2.
21. to the end.) We must not therefore deny the Proposition in every sense; For
it is more modest to throw that Epistle quite out of the Canon as Luther did,
then to question the truth of this Doctrine in it. But does not St. Paul
contradict St. James? No, in no wise. For in Christ Jesus (he tells us) neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, (and these two divided the
whole World) but Faith which works by love, St. Paul does there discourse
expressly of Justification. see Gal. 5. 4, 5. 6. Ad Romans 10. 10. p. 453.
( Gal. 5. 6.) if nothing but Faith, which works by love, then no dead, nor
idle, no other kind of Faith: and if not avail to any thing, then not to our
Justification. And it is the Observation of P. Martyr, Talem semper Apo^^olus
describit fidem, cum de justificatione agit, quae necessario Confessionem, and
opera bona habeat Conjuncta: Where the Apostle treats of Justification, he
always describes such a Faith, as has Confession and Good-works necessarily
joined with it. Ad Romans 10. 10.
And Calvin upon the same Text tells us, That the Apostle notes there, which is
the true Faith, from which this fruit (of Justification) flows, lest any man
should pretend to an empty title of Faith instead of it; For (the true Faith)
ought so to affect the heart with the glory of God, that the flame may break
out and appear openly. And a little after, Caeterum viderint quid respondeant
Paulo; qui nobis hodie imaginariam quandam fidem fastuose jactant, quae secreto
cordis Contenta Confessione or is veluti re supervacanea and inani supersedeat.
Nimis enim Nugatorium est, asserere ignem esse ubi Nihil sit Flammae neque
Caloris: Mr. Calvin.
Let them consider what they can Answer to St. Paul, who at this time do
proudly boast of a certain imaginary, Faith, which being contained secretly in
the heart, Supersedes Confession (and all good works) as vain and needless
things. For it is too grossly Nugatory and trifling to affirm there is a fire
there, where there is neither heat nor flame. In the Doctrine of Justification
let these Dissenters take Faith in the general Gospel-sense, or in the sense
now mentioned from Dr. Owen, and there will be no Dispute, much less Offense
about this Article.

But there are very Learned men, who return this Objection upon (at least some
of) these Dissenters; who overthrowing the remission of sins, do utterly
demolish (as our Author words it) the Article of Justification, as well by
Faith as by Works, and the necessity of New obedience. For if the satisfaction
and death of Christ, were suffered and made in our stead, and formally made
ours, they do certainly expiate all our sins* and free us from all guilt as
well of Omission as of Commission. And upon this account being made, not only
innocent (as free from all Commissions) but also actually just, (as omitting no
part of our bounden duty) we have no need of Pardon or Remission; because here
remains no sin to be remitted. And then we have Christ's Obedience and Merits
for a surplusage, and consequently have no need of Repentance or New obedience;
but a fair title to eternal life, upon Christ's account without them. So that
this Authors Argument turns clearly upon themselves. For they who take away the
necessity of remission of sins, do demolish the Article of Justification: But
these Dissenters (or a Sect of them) do take away the necessity of remission,
therefore they do demolish the Article of Justification; which consists in
remission. Romans 3. 7, 8. Ephesians. 4 ult. Colos. 1. 14.

We appeal therefore to all Protestant Churches to judge how well they provide
for their safety by departing from our Communion. Yet depart they will; and (as
this their Advocate says) when they are once out, they will advise upon
another Church, not which is tolerable, but which is most elegible, and in all
things nearest the word.

But suppose you mistake the word? It Is possible men may think themselves
nearest, when indeed they are furthest off from it; for you dare not pretend to
be infallible. It Is Calvin 's Ad Hebraeos. c. 10. 24.
Observation, Tanta est fere in omnibus Morositas --. There is among men such
Morosity, Envy, contempt of others, and such an immoderate esteem of
themselves, that were it lawful, every man would erect a Church to himself;
because he finds ( in his own disposition) some difficulty to accommodate
himself to the Manners of others.

Some thought themselves as near the Mark certainly, as these Dissenters; See
the confidence of Corah and his consederates Number. 16. 3. and such as follow
their pernicious ways Ep. Jude v. 11.
so near that they took upon them to control the Orders ( about matters of
Indifferency and Decorum) of the great Apostle; and it is worth our Observation
to take notice how severely he checks them for it; 1 Cor. 14. 36. What? Came
the word of God out from you? Or came it unto you only? Objurgatio asperior,
Calvin Ad locum.
calls it, a sharp objurgation or chiding: but no more than what was needful,
to abate and blunt the pride of those Corinthians, who studying nothing but
themselves, would defer, ( or allow) nothing to the primary Churches from whom
they had received the Gospel: But carried themselves (says D. Dicson Ad. loc.
) as if they had been the only Christians ( in the World) to whom the Apostles
had been sent, and to whom alone it did belong to judge of matters of Order and
Decency in the Church. The Apostle therefore does justly expostulate with them;
Are you the prime and only Christians? No, you are not; there are other
Churches besides yours, and of more Antiquity. It is not meet therefore, that
you should despise them, their Customs, and practice, to do all things
according to your own Way, Mode and Arbitrament. Thus the Learnud Calixtus.
Calixtus ad locum.


To separate from any Church of an Apostolical Constitution, (which cannot be
justly charged with Heresy, Idolatry, or the practice of any deadly sin, with
allowance or without control,) as from a body full of Wens and Ulcers to the
great scandal, of many of that Communion, is undoubtedly Schism. For the Church
(and such a Church) is undoubtedly the Spouse of Christ; Who gave himself for
it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word:
That he might present it to himself a glorious Church not having spot or
wrinkle, Ep. 5. 25, 26.
or any such thing, but that it might be holy and without blemish: This is the
end of Christ's dispensation, tho not accomplished to perfection till she comes
to Heaven. The mean while* if she be chaste and loyal, he does embrace and
cherish her, not give her a bill of divorce for little faults and curable
infirmities; no more must we: Mr. Baxter himself could once tell the World,
Preface to Mr. Hotchki's his exercitation of the forgiveness of sins.
[I confess, I have no great zeal to confine the Church to the party that I
best like, nor to shut Christ out of all other Societies, and coop him up to
the Congregations of those few, that say to all the rest of the Church, Stand
by, we are more holy than you.

He therefore that separates from, such an Orthodox Church, out of a real
intent to be take himself to another, which he thinks more pure, he ought, to
be very sure that it is so, (and not to stand in need to advise about it,
whether it be or no) and he ought also to observe these two rules.

(1.) That he do not profess a total separation from it, much less to do it
with reproach, as if it were not a Member of Christ's Body; for that will
defame the Spouse of Christ, of whose honor and safety Christ is very tender
and jealous.

(2.) That he does it so, as may give no scandal to those truly pious, tho but
weak ones, of that Communion which he deserts. Solius enim puritatis Majoris
amor tanti fieri non debet, quanti unius fratris infirmi Scandalum atque
Offensio: For the love only of greater Purity (When he may be personally as
pure as he please) ought not*
ought not to be so much regarded, as the scandal and offense of one such weak
Brother, when by such a breach of concord he gives scandal also to his
Superiors, and by that means may hinder that Reformation, which in due time (if
need were) his sober carriage and example might promote in that Communion.
Hereupon the Apostle exhorts, Vid Gerhard. ad Heb. 10. v. 24.
( Heb. 10. 24, 25.) Let us consider one another, to (whet and) provoke unto
love and to good works. Not forsaking the assembling our selves together -- but
exhorting one another. He that forsakes the Church, whether it be out of a
damnable neglect, or the fear of persecution, or a persuasion of greater
perfection, falls soon into Schism and Apostasy; and cannot perform that duty
of Charity, which he is obliged to by his Christianity. Vult Deus adorari, and
nos in vera congregari charitate, says Oecolampadius, In Dan. 6. 11.
God will be worshipped, and will have us to be assembled in true charity: Qui
ab Ecclesia Dei se scindit, non orat versus Jerusalem, quando quidem illam non
cupit reparatam, a qua ipse seperatur: He that cuts himself off from the
Church, does not pray with his face toward Jerusalem (as the Prophet Daniel
did;) because he does not desire that (the Church) should be repaired from
which he is separated. Thus Oecolampadius.

These Dissenters may reform and purify the Church (they are to advise about)
till they leave it naked, not only of Rites and Ceremonies, but also of useful
Truth, faederal Conditions and holy Duties, as others have done, and do still
to this day. Here Mr. Baxter shall vouch for me, and I will instance in the
great Article of Justification. He charges (not a small party) with
misunderstanding of the nature and use of Christ's Death and Obedience,
Confutation of Dr. Lewis Moulins Dissertation in the Epistle Dedicatory.
( as he says) thinking that Christ obeyed or satisfied by suffering, or both,
as in our persons, so that the Law takes it to all ends and uses, as done by us
our selves as when a man pays his debt by his Delegate: This opinion ( says
he) if I understand it, blots out Law and Gospel at one dash. And he adds a
little after, That from that Doctrine this opinion follows. That, we are
justified before we believe, nay before we sin, nay before we are born, nay
that it is an immanent Act in God, (and therefore eternal) and that Infidels
are justified as Infidels. And a little after he says, The beginning of these
men's misery is usually pride of their supposed graces, This leads them first to
a separation from their Brethren, and contempt of their Guides next to
Anabaptistry, and at last they turn Antinomians and Libertines, and are given
up to a Spirit of Madness. As Luther In Deuteronomy. 18.
observed in his time, eo feruntur Spiritu Satanae, ut rideant doceri a nobis
fidem and charitatem: They are carried with such a Spirit of Satan, that they
deride we should teach them Faith and Charity. But to return to Mr. Baxter,
This was printed 1654.
who goes on thus, [When men will so horribly abuse thSe on of God, as to make
him a friend to sin, who has done and suffered so much to destroy it, and to
make his blood the chiefest defensative of transgression, and the price of a
Lawless and Licentious life, which was shed to demonstrate God's hatred of sin,
and to purge the Souls of men from its power and pollution, etc. It Is no wonder
then ( as he concludes) if God bears no longer, but do appear against them,
from Heaven, Excommunicate them, and deliver them up to Satan the Spirit of
Delusion. It appears by the Confutation of that Physician, that Mr. Baxter
thought, Dr. Lewis Moulin, had taken too strong a Dose of that pernicious
Doctrine. Ibid.
And he tells us further, that my Lord Brooks made this the Basis of all their
Vanity, Pride and Insolence. They have the Spirit, and so know more than all
the Learned, Pious, Godly men in the World. They have the Spirit they cannot
sin, they cannot err. -- Adultery is but an Act of the Flesh, but they are all
Spirit and no Flesh. -- In this case, if they be Traitors heady, highminded,
etc. Who will wonder? What may they not be carried up to by the imagination of
the Spirit? That Lord (as Mr. Baxter cites him) goes on with their Character
and concludes: How can these ( things) be spoken of Arminians, Socinians, or
our Prelates?

These Dissenters should resolve the World whether these be the more eligible,
or only the tolerable party, they communicate with, in their separation from
the Church of England. But because they Appeal to the word, to the word let
them go: That word tells us of Prelates, and refers us to their Authority, and
sets forth their Faith and Practice for our Pattern. Heb. 13. 7. 17. It tells
us also of false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15.

But it charges us not to follow their pernicious ways. And so I leave them.

The Dissenters Fifth Section.
THey plead, that there is no Obligation upon them to own the Churches Power to
impose New Terms of Communion, unless the Church can prove her Power from
Christ; It Is not for them to disprove it, it lies upon her to prove it, and to
prove it substantially too, or else it will be hard to prove it their duty to
own it.

The Answer*
1. That Power, which the Church had from the Apostles she had from Christ; for
the Apostles (as was proved above) had the mind of Christ; if they did not
deliver what they had received, they were unfaithful; And if they were
unfaithful in this, they might be unfaithful in all the rest; and so our whole
Christianity will be called in question.

2. The Church has not only made her Claim to a Power, but has bin in actual
Possession of it for more than 1600. years without interruption. That Plea is
enough, for her to keep possession; and many Rules of Law will Justify her in
it, (1.) Melior est conditio possidentis, He that is in possession has the best
Title, and (2.) Cum Partium Jura sunt obscura, favendum est Reo: When the
Rights of the Parties Litigant or Contesting are obscure and doubtful, we are
to favor the Defendant; that is; the Party, whom the Actor or Accuser desires
and labors to thrust out of Possession, or lay a Guilt upon. And the Law says
further in dubio favendum est Superiori imperanti; in doubtful Cases we are to
favor the Commands of our Superiors.

That the Church is not Bonae Fidei Possessor, and comes not honestly by her
Title and Possession of this Power, cannot by the Rules of Law or Equity be
determined by the Melius Inquirendum of an Adversary. The Actor, Aggressor or
Plaintiff must bring his Writ of Ejectment to try the Title; and (if these
Dissenters have not yet been sufficiently bafled in this attempt) let them at
last offer us substantial Proofs to this effect, and I dare promise them (we
shall not follow the example of this Author) we will not be scurrilous, not
droll or quibble upon him, about a substantial proof of circumstantial matters.

3. This Power is not pretended to be such a plenitude of Power as they claim
in the Church of Rome, not a Power to all intents and purposes: No, not a Power
to make any new Articles of Faith; or institute any new Sacraments, or parts of
Divine Worship: But only to make Orders touching Circumstances, Rites and
Ceremonies in the public performance of God's service, and the Administration
of Discipline amongst the Members of the Church.

To me it is incredible that Almighty God should appoint an Order of men to be
the Guides Heb. 13. 17.
of Souls and the Stewards of his Divine Mysteries, and the means to bring them
to Eternal bliss; and yet not entrust them with sufficient Power for the due
and worthy Administration of that Office. It Is the great charge laid upon
Bishops to feed the flock of Christ, (Act. 20. 28.) And, in Scripture-sense,
this is to be done not only, by Preaching the Gospel, but also by wholesome Laws
and Discipline. Some means they must have to accomplish this end, which can be
no other then a Legislative Power. And this is evident from Matt. 16. 19. What
ever ye bind on Earth, etc. Which is understood not only of Absolution, but of
Excommunication, and inflicting Censures. Vide Mat. 18. 17.
And in those words of the Synod, Act. 15. 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost
and to us to lay upon you no other burden than these necessary things. Hence it
is manifest that the Apostles imposed a Law upon Believers, which they were
obliged to observe; else, they would never have called those things necessary
and a burden. And why did our blessed Lord establish Superiority and
Subordination in his Church, some Persons to Govern, and others to Obey; but to
keep good Order and prevent Confusion; and this is no less needful in ours,
then it was in the Apostles times; This Power therefore is to be continued in
the Church to the Worlds end. Matthew 28.

For a full and clear Demonstration hereof, These several particulars have been
proved in some other Papers.

1. That Christ and his Apostles intended Unity, and to obtain and preserve
that Unity, They enjoined Order and Uniformity in Churches.

2. That the Apostles at their first preaching of the Gospel did not presently
establish that Order, The late Proposal of Union reviewed and rectified. p. 3,
4.
which the state of the Church did afterward require.

3. That the Apostles expected such a settlement should be made, by such as
were entrusted with the Government of the Church.

4. That they gave certain general Rules or Canons to direct the Governors of
the Church in making such establishmenrs.

5. That they left it to the Judgment and prudence of Church Governors to
determine the particulars to be established in such cases.

Now let us lay these Principles together.

1. That the solemn Worship and Service of God cannot be performed without some
Rites and Ceremonies, Without some Ceremonies it is not possible to keep any
Order, or quiet Discipline in the Church. Of Ceremonies before the Common
Prayer, etc. vid.
as was observed above from Zanchy, Rungius, and others*

2. That these Rites and Ceremonies are to be observed according to the Rules
of Decency and Order.

And 3. That these Rules are to be adjudged and determined by such as are
invested with Authority to that effect; From hence it will follow unavoidably,
that all Subjects and Members of the Church are obliged to obey such Laws and
Establishments. For it is most certain, where some are empowered to Command,
others are enjoined to obey; else the Power given to Superiors were Nugatory,
and given to no effect.

Whereas they mention [New Terms of Communion:] I confess the word New, to my
self is somewhat scandalous: I am no lover of Innovations in Religion; tho the
Addition of Collects and Forms of Prayer, upon emergent occasions is both
frequent and very useful; and alterations are allowable too, when the change
is of importance, and does not argue Levity, or give scandal. As to [Terms of
Communion,] the expression may be equivocal. For my part I would have nothing
established in the Church of God, but what has, at least, general Rules and
Directions in Holy Scripture, and a just Authority, to warrant it. And this has
been very carefully observed in all the Rites and Ceremonies established in this
Church of England.

For any man to imagine, that these things make a new worship, is a very great
mistake. Any thing added to Divine Institutions as essential, or substantial,
and simply necessary, does change the worship, says Zanchy and makes it
another. De Redempt. Lib. 1. c. 16. p. 447. 1. edit. Neostad Palatin. In una
side nihil Ossicit Ecclesiae Sanctae consuetudo diversa. Gregor.
But what are added, yet only as things indifferent, Propter Ordinem, Propter
Decorum, and ad edificationem; ea substantiam Sacramentorum, eoque cultum non
Mutarunt: Such things added for Order, for Decency and to edification, they
change not the substance of the Sacraments (for example) nor the nature of the
worship.

Now (if I understand what he means by his Terms of Communion,) I argue thus.

She that has a Power to appoint Rites and Ceremonies for edification, Decency
and Order, she has a Power to impose Terms of Communion: But the Church has a
Power to appoint Rites and Ceremonies for edification, Decency and Order.
Therefore the Church has Power to impose Terms of Communion.

Besides the Proofs already produced, is not this evident in the Practice of
all Churches? Are the Terms of Communion numerically the same in the Greek and
Latin Churches? If we look into the constitution of the several Protestant
Churches shall we not find variety of Customs, Rites and Ceremonies among them?
This Discord we cannot but observe in the Harmony of Confessions; whether we
examine Cambridge Edition of 1586. or Geneva Edition, 1654* and the Church of
England declares her self in these words: Of Ceremonies before the Common
Prayer.
We think it conveient, that every Country should use such Ceremonies as they
shall think best, to the setting forth of God's honor and glory, and to the
reducing of the People to a most perfect and godly living without Error or
Superstition. Are the Terms of Communion the same among the Lutherans and
Calvinists? David Rungius ex Epist. Ad Roman Disput. 16. p. 324.
The Lutherans reckon these things in the Catalogue of things indifferent.

1. To place Historical Images, ( or pictures) in the Church for Ornament, and
Commonefaction.

2. To use Stone-tables (which they commonly call Altars) in the Administration
of the Lords Supper.

3. To adapt a peculiar kind of Garment to the Minister in his public
administration of the holy Office.

4. In the Administration of the Eucharist; either to break and divide little
Cakes or Wafers, or else to make use of single small ones, fit for distribution.

5. In Baptism to use the Lessons of exorcismes, and the sign of the Cross.

6. To sing the Sacred Hymns, either in the German or Latin tongue, with the
voice, or Musical Instruments.

Haec and Similia, etc. These and such like things, they who teach, that they
are simply necessary to be retained, or necessarily to be abolished, they do
offer violence to Christian liberty on both sides, and are to be avoided as
False-teachers, desirous to inthrall us in the Yoke of humane Traditions.

Notwithstanding this their Declaration, we cannot be admitted to their
Communion unless we submit to the Terms of their establishment. And is not the
case the same among the Presbyterians? Why were the Directory, the Ordinance
for Ordination of Ministers, And what was the worcestershire Agreement? Were
there no Terms of Communion in it?
the form of Church Government for England and Ireland, Their Confession of
Faith, and their advise for Catechisms; were not all these designs to be
imposed as Terms of Commmunion? And I am sure they were new ones; never heard
of in the World, till the years 1645. 47, and 48. and (as, I remember) before
the year 1650. They were quite out of request, and laid in the dust. And have
not the Independents their peculiar Terms of Communion too? And are not these
new likewise? The Synod of Charenton 1644. takes notice of their Error, that
they teach, Vnamquamque Ecclesiam suis propriis Legibus ita gubernari debere,
etc. That every Church ought so to be governed by its own Laws, that, in
matters Eccclesiastical, it be subject to no other, nor depend upon any other,
nor is it bound to acknowledge the Authority of any Conference or Synods, in
reference to its own Government and Administration. Of which Error that Synod
of Charenton gives this Sentence, Esse hanc Sectam tam Reipublicae, quam
Ecclesiae perniciosam; absurdis quibuscunque insanisque Commentis viam aperire;
omnes iis medendi rations tollere; ac si illi sententiae locus esset, Posse
tot Religiones fingi, quot Paraeciae privative Conventus forent: That is, this
Sect is pernicious both to Church and Commonwealth; it opens a gap to all
absurd and mad inventions whatsoever; it takes away all the ways and means of
healing them; and if way should be given to that opinion, there would be as
many Religions, as there are Parishes or private Meetings. By this we see that
the Protestants of France do not agree with the Independents of England about
the Terms of Communion. But in truth if the business be sifted to the very
bottom, the Question is not so much about the Power it self; (For these
Dissenters suppose it in all their own expedients, which they propose:) but,
really, the question is, What hands shall menage this Power. The Laws of Christ
and his Apostles, of Church and State, have placed the Power in few hands, to
make the Government the more Regular in it self, the more safe to the King, and
the more easy to the Subject: But these Dissenters would put it into every
Parish Priest, and so set up ten thousand Independent Jurisdictions in the
Kingdom. And such a Church as this is most Eligible in their Conceit.

The Dissenters Sixth Section.
THey say, the World is pestered with Disputes about Worship, about Religion;
and therefore since all cannot be in the right, they are willing to go the
safest way, and Worship God according to his word: If the things disputed be
lawful to be done, let 'em be so; they are sure it is lawful to let 'em alone;
and they think there is no great hazard in keeping to Scripture Rule, nor can
believe that Christ will send any to Hell, because they did not worship God in
an external Mode, more neat and spruce than God Commanded.

Answer.
The World is pestered with Disputes about Religion: Hereupon some men resolve
they will trouble themselves with none at all. Woe be to them by whom this scandal
is given! I pray, from whence come these Wars and Fightings amongst us? The
Reformation silenced them, and settled Uniformity to establish Peace. Some men
are of restless Spirits and can never study to be quiet, making it their
business to disturb the repose of Christendom. And all the Disputes for these
40. years, (and we may say, ever since the Reformation,) whether menaged by Pen
or otherwise, have been commenced and carried on (against this Church of
England) by the Jesuits and Dissenters. And upon what account this is done (as
to our Dissenting Brethren) Mr. Baxter has told us long ago in these words, In
his Apologetical Preface to his confutation of Dr. L. Moulin.
[Every one must needs reduce all others to his opinion as if his Judgment were
the infallible Standard of Verity; and so we have proved too proud and
uncharitable, while we would be Orthodox overmuch.] And a little after he gives
good Advice, (if he had been steadfast enough to follow it,) I advise my
Brethren, to prepare their weapons, against the Papists, and Socinians, and
Antinomians. above all other Sects: and to associate speedily, and carry on all
their work in Unity, if ever they will succeed.

2. It Is sure all cannot be in the right; it is fit therefore, we should take
some pains to learn the safest way. But self-conceit and the private Spirit are
the worst Guides in the World. He that is wise in his own eyes is very apt to
put darkness for light, and light for darkness (Isai. 5. 20.) The Holy Ghost
has observed this to our hands, and advises us therefore not to lean to our
own understanding: For (as that devout man said) He that is his own Scholar has
a Fool to his Master. The nearer the Fountain the clearer the Stream. God calls
upon us to tread the Jer. 6. 16.
good Old way; sends us to the Law and the Testimony. Isa. 8. 20.
But as he gave the word, so he gave the Preachers too. The Priests lips should
preserve knowledge; and they should seek the Law at his mouth. Mal. 2. 7.
In difficult matters God did refer earnest and cordial Inquirers to the
sentence of such as were in Authority, Deuteronomy. 1. 7 Our Savior did not slight
that Order, wherein that Dispensation was on foot, but liked it so well (as he
did many other of those Institutions) that he transcribed it into his Gospel,
Matt. 23. 2.
and adopted it into the practice of his Church. They sit in Moses Chair, etc.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves. Heb. 13. 7, 17.
Matt. 18. 17.
And if a Dic Ecclesiae be of so great Authority (in our Saviors account) to
decide our civil differences, much more those of a Spiritual and Religious
nature (as Schism and Heresy) which belong more properly to her Cognizance Dr.
Prideux Sect. 22. de Author. Ecclesiae in Rebus Fidei. cap. 3. p. 354.


3. Whereas they say there is no great hazard, I say there is none at all, in
worshipping God according to his word, and keeping to Scripture-rule; provided
we rightly understand it. For Luther Annot. in Deuteronomy. cap. 248.
observes, there are two sorts of Prophets (hinted at by Moses) that should
rise up against sound Doctrine. One should come in the name of the Lord, and
bring the word of God and holy Scripture with them. Such should be the Jews in
Christ's time, who alleged the Scripture against the Gospel, for the
Righteousness of the Law; and such should be Heretics after them, etc. Men
will wrest the Scriptures to serve their own Hypothesis.

Is any thing more clear than the Scripture-rule for Governors, that they set
all things in order (where it is not done to their hands) and then to see, that
(in the worship and service of God) all things be done decently according to
that Order? And that these are the Commandments of God. 1 Cor. 14. 37.
And the Scripture-rule for such as are under Authority is as plain as words
can make it, ( Heb. 13. 7, 17.) and yet if there were no such Scripture-rule,
common Reason would infer the Duty. Where some are empowered to give Orders,
others are under an obligation to observe them: Else Authority is Nugatory and
ridiculous, as has been observed formerly.

4. If the things disputed be lawful to be done, we are not of these Dissenters
opinion, that it is lawful to let 'em alone: but we believe the contrary. For if
they do not dogmatize themselves and their followers into superstition (which
is highly probable,) yet by their pretermission, and neglect of what is
enjoined them, they break the Law, despise Authority, and give scandal to the
Church; and whether Hell may not ly at the bottom of such disobedience, I leave
it between God and themselves to judge. Gal. 5. 20.
Does not God require and delight in Verity? And can there be Unity without
Obedience? Does he not require us to avoid Offenses, and follow Peace,
especially with his Church? Is not Schism a work of the Flesh as well as
Murder, or Adultery? Is not a wilful and groundless separation from the
Mystical Body of Christ, a separation from Communion with him? And is there no
peril in breaking our selves off from this Vine? Do they think they can climb
up to Heaven by a Ladder of their own, when they place the foot of it upon
ground of their own devising? No, No. Graviter peccant, says the Learned
Zanchy, Lib. de Redempt.
They sin grievously, who for these indifferent Ceremonies disturb the
Churches, and damn all other Magistrates and Rulers, because they use their
liberty in these things: Is this the Piety which is boasted of? Is this the
Charity which we ow to the Churches of God? If they want Piety and Charit who
contend with other Churches about Ceremonies, how little of those
Christian-virtues have they to pretend to, who quarrel with their own; because
she will not prostrate her self to gratify their humors?

5. If Christ will send none to Hell for performing his worship and service
rudely and slovenly, with a stiff and peremptory sawciness (which I am sure is
no where allowed) certainly he will not send to Hell such as worship him in the
beauty of holiness, with a due Reverence and Solemnity, which he has commanded.

The Dissenters Seventh Section.
THey pretend, that the things imposed are Parts of Worship, which none can
Create but God: nor will God accept of any but such as are of his own Creating;
and whether they be integral or essential Parts, they do not know; but in the
Worship of God they find them stand upon even ground with those that are
certainly Divine, or at least as high as man can lift them.

The Answer.
When the Apostle says, let all things be done (...), according to Rule and
Order, he does imply that somethings are to be decreed and ordered; 1 Cor. 14.
40. etc.
and that must be done after such a manner as is decent and to such an end as
edification. Orders to this effect are not the essentials of Religion, but the
Appendages, Circumstances and Modifications of it; which in a general sense, we
call Rites and Ceremonies. And of the Dissenting Brethren, this their Advocate
tells us.

They pretend, that the things imposed are Parts of Worship. This, he says,
they pretend; and it is one of the modestest expressions I have observed fall
from his Pen. But why do they pretend? Why, because they are resolved to object
and Cavil. But why do they but pretend? Because they cannot prove; and perhaps
because some of them do not believe themselves in what they suggest against the
Church, viz. That the rites and ceremonies imposed immediately by her Authority
are Parts of Worship.

The Worship of God is twofold. 1. Internal, Internam sinio, quam Men's and
affectus habent: externam, quae ab illis for as octenditur actu aliquo externo.
Jos. Mede de Sanct. Relat. in Levit. 19. 30. Op p. 401.
which consists of the internal actions of a pious Soul, for example, the act
of Faith, is to believe, the act of hope, is to hope, the act of Charity, to
love God and our Neighbor, with other internal exercises of Piety. 2. There is
an external worship of God, and that consists in the external exercises of
Piety; and these are of two sorts. Some are of themselves good, and acceptable
to God, and necessary to Salvation: Such are Confession of our Lord and
Savior, (the external works of Faith,) Beneficence, or doing good to our
Neighbor, (the external work of Charity) These are such effects of Piety that
Piety it self cannot be without them; Whereupon they are more properly called
works of Piety, and no less pleasing to God than the internal works themselves.

There are other external exercises of Piety, which are conversant in, external
Rites and Ceremonies of God's institution, and opposed to the inventions,
Exercises and Offices of man's devising: Such are Sacraments and Sacrifices;
which are Ordained not for their own sakes, but to be inservient to internal
Piety, to bring that to light and protest it, to exercise and promote it, to
God's glory, the good of our Neighbor and the salvation of our own Souls.
Piety is the Soul of all our worship; without which the Observation of these
external Rites and Ceremonies are but as a dead Carcass Isai. 1. 11. to the 16.
which God will reject as a thing of an ill savor. In this worship of God it is
doubtless the Duty of the Church to give direction, and call upon us to perform
it: But this worship is of Gods appointment and imposition, not the Churches.
If the Rites and Ceremonies imposed by this Church be part of worship: How came
they to be so? It must be either by Divine Institution, (which we are so far
from pretending to, that we do steadfastly deny it,) or else, by humane
estimation: If we did value them at so high a rate, this must appear. 1. Either
by the necessity we lav upon them. Or, 2. By the Merit and Efficacy we ascribe
to them. Or, 3. By the preference we give them.

1. The Scribes and Pharisees indeed set such a value upon their Traditions,
(which had no competent Authority to establish them, but were wicked and
repugnant to Divine Authority) that they preferred them so far before God's Law,
as to have force enough to rescinde it, and make it of none effect. ( Matt. 15.
6.) But for Rites and Ceremonies established among us, the Church has declared,
that (upon, just causes) they may be altered and changed, and therefore are not
to be esteemed equal with God's Law. *

2. That we should place any Merit in the use of them cannot well be imagined,
Preface of Ceremonies before the Book of Com. Prayer.
when we allow no such to the very best works we can perform at God's
appointment. And when Authority has enjoined or restrained the use of them, so
that (upon such a supposition) they become necessary, according to such
restraint or injunction: Yet they remain indifferent still in their own nature:
and do not immediately bind men's Consciences, as if they were immediate parts
of God's worship, or of absolute necessity to salvation, for which the Church
has tied our Faith strictly to the holy writ; and to nothing else. Artic. 20.
But to proceed.

They say, none can Create parts of worship but God, nor will God accept of
any, but of such as are of his own Creating: Here we have two things, which
call for our consideration. 1. The Creation of worship. And 2. The
acceptableness, of such performances as have not that stamp of God's Creation
on them.

1. By Creation of worship (or the parts of it) we suppose he means the
erection and dictating of it; which may be done either by natural suggestion,
or by general and positive institution. And then we must distinguish betwixt
erection (as I may call it) and direction; betwixt natural suggestion (by which
we understand the dictate or impression of the Law of nature) and occasional
Application: betwixt general institution) and particular determination. The
erection, (whether by natural suggestion or general institution,) may be from
the wisdom and will of God; and yet the direction as to occasional Application
and particular determination, may be referred to the Power and Wisdom of the
Church. this will appear in some Acts or Rites of external Worship. Nonnullas
(Ceremonias) diotat ipsa natura; Nature her self does dictate some sort of
Ceremonies, for example, to kneel down when we pray, to smite the breast, to
lift up the eyes and hands to Heaven; which are therefore common to the Heathen
with all Sects, says Herinex. Summa Theol. Schol. and Moral. part. 4. p. ^ 52
^. 76.
And Zanchy De Culru externo (...).
proves that some external Rites used in God's worship, are from the Law of
Nature: because they were common to Jew and Gentil: He does instance in howing
and kneeling, when they worship God, and in lifting their eyes up to Heaven
when they said their prayers. etc. And he adds, we can use no Ceremony, wherein
the Law of Nature has not some place. Vsque adeo Natura nos ad Deum adorandum,
ac rite honesteque ac pie colendum instigat: So far does Nature incite us to
adore and orderly and honestly and piously to worship God. Michah. 6. Ephesians. 3.
14. 1 Cor. 14. 25.
To give some instances, bowing the head, bowing the knee, and bowing the body,
are external Rites, or if you will Acts of external worship; and so is
prostration: They are suggested to us even by the Law of Nature: and enjoined
by the Decalogue Second Command meant, etc. Psalm. 95. 6.
in general: But in regard it cannot be performed all at once, therefore the
particular determination Pro hic and nunc, or the occasional Application of
them to God's service is left to the Wisdom and Order of the Church. In like
manner the Confession of Christ, is a Rite, or an Act of God's external
worship; (for there was never any Nation that did believe a God, but would also
declare that he was to be owned and acknowledged.) But whether this confession
and acknowledgment should be made viva voce, by word of mouth, or by
subscription, or by some Symbolical sign or gesture. This is left to the
prudence of such as are concerned to determine it. Thus much touching the
Creating of worship (as our Author calls it) with such Rites as do attend and
protest the truth and piety of it.

2. The Acceptableness thereof follows: Some things are acceptable to God* as
they are suggested by the Law of Nature, which is from God; and therefore
cannot but be very pleasing to him: Some things are acceptable as they are
inservient to the exercise of internal Piety; and so Alms and Beneficence are
well pleasing to him. ( Heb. 13. 16.) And some things he is pleased with,
because they are inservient to the solemnity of public worship and Ornamental
to it: Such was the holy Temple with the musical Instruments, and all the
magnificence of it; The Lord loves the Gates of Sion, Psalm. 87. 2.

For Adiaphorae actionis possunt Deo placere (says Vrsin) licet aliter quam
cultus Dei proprie dictus: Cat. 9. 96. in. 2. praec.
Indifferent actions, may please God, tho not upon the same account, but in a
different manner, from the worship of God properly so called. God may therefore
accept what he does not particularly, or directly enjoin. In the free will
Offerings under the Law, tho God determined the Quid and the Quale, yet he let
the Quotum undetermined, v. 2 Cor. 8. 8. de certa summa in Eleemosinis nihil
certi aut praescripti imponere Deum, etc. Sclater and Calvin. ad locum.
which nevertheless was acceptable to him. And what shall we say of David's
purpose to build the Temple (which resolution he took up, not (as our Author
says of some others) Jure Prophetico; V. Grot. ad 2. Sam. 7. 2. etc.
(for it was not the manner of Prophets to be mistaken in their intendments, as
David was in that case) yet God accepted the Piety of his design, tho he would
not allow him, the execution of it. Another instance we have in the great
Apostle. Potuit B. Paulus ex Evangelio sibi victum quaerere: quod maluit
operari amplius erogabat, says St. Austin: Blessed Paul 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14:
might have lived of the Gospel: That he chose rather to earn his own living,
he laid out himself so much the more: And was not this acceptable to God?
Gratis Evangelium praedicare, voluntaria quaedam est libertas, eoque and
gloriam promeretur: To preach the Gospel freely is a kind of ingenuous liberty
and deserves glory, says the Theophylact: In epist. 1 ac Cor. cap. 9.
And a little After, Haud quaquam tantundem futurum est, ut is mereatur, etc.
He that preaches the Gospel for reward, can never deserve so much, as Cum
Christiana liberate optime convenit summa servitus, sed quae sit ex charitate
ultronea and voluntaria Peter Mar. in 1. ad Cor. 9. p. m. 118. 1. m. Is not
this acceptable to God?
shall be given to him, who preaches the Gospel freely. Cum Christiana
liberate optime convenit summa servitus, sed quae sit ex charitate ultronea
and voluntaria Peter Mar. in 1. ad Cor. 9. p. m. 118. 1. m. Is not this
acceptable to God?
I will instance but once more and that shall be in Mary Magdalen; who
commanded her, either to wash Christ's feet with her tears, or to wipe them
with the hair of her head, or to pour so costly a box of Ointment upon his
head, which according to Law might have been sold at a great rate and given to
the poor? Was she not accepted herein? She had the Son of God to be her
Advocate, against the cavils of his own Disciples, Luke 7. v. 37. etc.
she received the comfort of a declarative Absolution, and the honor to have
her devotion celebrated wherever the Church should preach the Gospel.

These Dissenters say further, whether the things imposed, be Integral or
Essential parts (of worship) they do not know, but in the worship of God they
find them standing upon even ground with those that are certainly Divine, or at
least as high as man can lift them.

That the Church does impose or command any parts of worship, not of God's
Creating, is but their pretense and our Denial. Affirmanti incumbit Probatio:
The proof lies on their side; and if they cannot make it good they are
uncharitable and false Accusers.

What Rank they hold in the esteem of the Church and Learned Protestants we
may best learn from her and themselves. This Church of England says, That
without some Ceremonies it is not possible Of Ceremonies. Preface before the
Common Prayer, and Calv. instit vid. l 4. c. 10. 27.
to keep any Order, or quiet Discipline in the Church; they were reserved
therefore (and established) as well for a decent Order in the Church, as because
they pertain to edification. What Rivet In Decalog. p. 187. 1. m.
says from Robert Loeus, of the time consecrated to God's service may be
applied to all Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, Moralis potius legis usui
subservire, quam vim and naturam ejus continere; nec tam proprie quidem
virtutem aut Pietatem, quam nervum virtutis vinculumque Pietatis dici: He says
that it is rather subservient to the use of the Moral Law, then that contein
the force and nature of it; neither can it so properly be called Virtue or
Piety, as the sinew of Virtue and the bond of Piety. The titles given to these
Rites and Ceremonies by Learned men are these, Meisner.
Retinacula, Adminicula, Incitamenta, Ornamenta: They call them the hold-fast,
the helps, the Incitements and Ornaments of Religion and Piety. These were the
Traditions mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 2. Precepts left by Christ to
the wisdom of the Governors and Presidents of his Church, pertaining to good
Order and Decency. There were many of this kind says Grotius, of no great
moment to Piety, but therein 'twas fit and profitable that something should be
settled in common, lest a different use and custom should blemish the Church,
beget disputes, and, as it often happens, of disputes and Schisms. So that
these Rites are like the Leads in a Glass-window, not designed to let in
Light, but to hold the Quarries of Glass together, to keep the Window tite and
strong, and make it the more serviceable to keep out storms and cold.

That these things, in the esteem of the Church stand upon even ground with
such things as are certainly Divine is so great an untruth that a modest man
would blush at it. They have not the same Author, not the same end, nor the
same necessity, nor the same obligation.

1. They have not the same Author, Divine things have God for their only
Author: but for these Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, they ow their
Original, either to the customs of several places, as standing in sign of
Reverence. Judge. 3. 20. Eglon stood up, when Ehud told him he had a message to
him from God. When the word of God was mentioned Eglon gave honor to it by
rising up, says Pet. Martyr. And he says, it is to be believed, that it was
the custom of those Countries at that time.

Or else 2. They derived their Original from the Authority of Superiors, as 1
Cor. 11. 2. 34. and Tit. 1. 5. and the Practice of their institutions in
process of time become customs too. 1 Cor. 11. 16. Upon these words The rest
will I set in order when I come: St. Austin Epist. 118.
says, that Christ commanded nonothing in these matters, but left them to the
ordering of the Apostles, with whom he entrusted the disposal of the Churches,
etc. Read the Epistle at large.

Or 3. The Rites and Ceremonies may take their rise from the Devotion of Pious
Persons; as the Practice of the Publican and Mary Magdalen, Luke 7. 38. c. 18.
13.

2. As they have not the same Author, so they have not the same End: The end of
Divine institutions is internal Grace and Sanctification: This is said to be
the end of Christ's Dispensation to his Church. That he might Sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of Water, by the word. Ephesians. 5. 26. But the end of
these Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies is not to confer Grace, but to
preserve good Order and Decorum, to procure reverence, and (as objects fit for
that purpose) to help Devotion.

3. They have not the same necessity; For as touching Divine things, an
absolute necessity is laid upon us to observe them; and it may be a double
necessity, Praecepti and Medii, not only because they are under command, but
also because they may be means without which salvation is not to be had: But
for Ecclesiastical Rites, the necessity is not absolute; they may be changed,
they may be abolished, and we may be saved without them; and that they do not
stand upon equal ground, the Church professes in her Articles; and this is
clear upon an other account.

For, Lastly, There is a great difference in their Obligation. Divine Commands
and Institutions do bind the Conscience, immediately and of themselves, under
peril of Eternal Death: Ecclesiastical Rites do not so: And where there is no
breach of Charity, and that is, where there is no contempt of Authority, or
Scandal to our Neighbor, the Omission does not wound the Conscience, nor incur
the guilt of deadly sin, as the Reverend and Learned Davenant Nostra Ecclesia
agnoscit hasce leges suas de rebus adiaphoris and Ceremonialibus, autore,
materia, fine, long distare a Divinis; and in tanta omnium rerum imparitate
non posseexurgere aequalem Conscientiae obligationem. Davenant. determ. 20. p.
100, v. caet.
has determined.

But perhaps there lies a Fallacy, in the expression; for to stand upon even
ground does not always argue an equality. It Is said Exodus 14. 31. The People
believed God and his Servant Moses: Likewise it is commanded, Prove. 24. 21. My
Son, fear thou the Lord and the King: There, God and Moses may seem to stand
upon even ground in the term [Believed;] and here, the Lord and the King, stand
upon even ground, in the term [Fear:] yet he were little less than a mad man,
that should conclude from hence, that God and Moses, or the Lord and the King;
are of equal consideration, when notwithstanding the difference between them is
no less then infinite.

We read in the book of Josuah of an unlucky jealousy, which did arise in the
heads of some of the Tribes of Israel against Josu. 22.
their Brethren; and this begat a Dissent; and that Dissent had ended in a
Fatal and deadly Breach, if it had not been made up by interposing the Innocent
Parties Protestation. The Two Tribes and half, Ver. 10.
when they left the Camp of Israel, in their return to their own Inheritance,
they built an Altar for Memorial and a Testimony: Hereupon their Brethren looked
upon them as Apostates and Idolaters, Ver. 12.
and took up Arms, (as they imagined) to avenge God's quarrel.

When the Children of Ruben and God and those of Manasseh, Ver. 21.
had heard (by their Legates) of their preparation for War, and their bitter
expostulation, they calmly made their Defense, The Lord God of God's knows,
and Israel shall know our Innocence. If we have built this Altar in Rebellion
or for Sacrifice to turn from the Lord, let the Lord himself require it; but we
have done this only to entitle our selves and our Posterity to a share in God's
Public and Solemn Worship, and to an Interest in his Tabernacle and Altar.
When the Priest and Princes of the Congregation had heard their Apology, Ver.
30.
they were well pleased, and declared their hearty satisfaction: This day we
perceive that the Lord is among us: Ver. 31. 33
and they blessed God; and all was concluded in a happy Peace.

Calvin Ad ver. 30.
reflecting upon Phinehas and the Ten Princes which were with him, he commends
the temper of their zeal, that they did not insist upon the prejudice which
they had conceived against their Brethren: but admitted their excuse with
kindness and alacrity. For there are many (says he) if they take offense, no
Apology can be calm them: but they will always be finding out something
unjustly to carp at, rather then yield to reason. Homil. 61. in Librum Josuae.
It Is Lavaters complaint (in treating of this story) Hodie reperies Magnos
Theologos qui tam sunt importuni and praecipites, ut nondum auditis aut lectis
aliorum argumentis, statim responsiones fabricent and in lucem emittant: We see
great Divines at this day, who are so importune and precipitant, that before
ever they have considered or read the Arguments of other men, they are busy at
framing Answers, and sending them abroad in public. But both Parties ought to
be heard with meekness and good attention. Quam hoc utile and necessarium sit
in Causa Religionis, hic locus aperte ostendit: How profitable and necessary
this is in the Cause of Religion, Ibid. Hom. 62.
(says he,) this place does plainly manifest. And that moderate Divine adds a
little after, Si viri boni jure jurando, vel aliis idoneis rationibus se
legitime excusent, recipienda est eorum excusatio: If good men can purge
themselves by Oath, or by other meet ways, their excuse is to be received.
There are some, that will stubbornly maintain what they have once propounded:
Such men, (says he,) are Authors of great mischief in Church and State.

Let not the Reader wonder that I insist so much upon these Authorities: For
has not the Church of England purged her self sufficiently by Argument against
these Dissenters and entered her Protestation too, to satisfy their jealousies?
Let us hear the Learned, Ad Clerum on Romans 14. 3. p. 24.
Pious, and Judicious Bishop, Dr. Sanderson; Our Church ( God bethanked, says
he) is far from any such impious presumption (viz. as that of the Pharisees and
the Church of Rome:) and has sufficiently declared her self by solemn
Protestation, enough to satisfy any ingenuous impartial Judgment, that by
requiring obedience to these Ceremonial Constitutions, she has no other
purpose, then to reduce her Children to an orderly Uniformity in the outward
worship of God, so far is she from seeking to draw any opinion, either of
Divine necessity upon the Constitution, or of effectual holiness upon the
Ceremony: Thus Dr. Sanderson.

Our Dissenting Brethren should have been so Charitable as to have followed the
steps of those Ten Tribes: They should have declared their satisfaction upon
the Churches Protestation; and have blessed God that she is so perfectly clear
of their suspicion: They should have been highly pleased that matters are so
well; this they should have done rather then to revile and cavil (as they have
done,) rather then to condemn and forsake her Communion, upon their own
jealousy, to set up a new Altar, and Altar against Altar, condemned by all the
Orthodox among the Ancients. They have indeed the jealousy and rashness of
those Tribes but not their ingenuity and condour. And to show their
uncharitableness, they bear the World in hand that, we set up these Rites and
Ceremonies as Parts of God's worship, matters of necessity and designed to
ensnare the Conscience.

But to mollify the Objection and Censure, they say (at last,) if these Rites
and Ceremonies do not stand upon even ground with those things which are
certainly Divine, yet, at least, they stand as high as man can lift them. But
by their good leave, they are mistaken in this suggestion too: for they stand
not so high, as they are set up in the Church of Rome. Aquam sale conspersam
populis benedicimus, ut ea cuncti aspersi Sanctificentur, ac purificentur: As
Alexander the First has it in an Epistle: Apud F. Her^^^.
We bless Water and Salt for the People, that all who are sprinkled therewith
may be Sanctified and Purified. They attribute Spiritual effects to their
Ceremonies: not only a power to cure Diseases to expel and drive away the
Devil: but to procure Grace, to remit venial sins, to Sanctify their Persons.
And they use Spiritual Acts of Consecration and solemn Benedictions to Hallow
them to these effects. Do the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England
stand thus high? For shame, in cool blood, they will not say it. I suppose
therefore, the meaning is only this, That they stand as high as of due right
and lawfully we can lift them. If this be their meaning, (tho there may be a
malicious insinuation, that we do something more then we ought, yet) really, to
do what, of due right and lawfully, we may do, is no sin in us: but it is sin in
them to break Communion and separate from us upon that account. Here we may
observe the method and progress of Discord; First, they fancy and pretend a
fault: then they take the confidence Calumniari fortiter, to make the Calumny
as black as may be, and to stick it upon us with as great an Odium as they can;
and when they have shown their spite, they mince the matter; they were mistaken
in their exaggeration; we have done nothing but our Duty, or at least what is
warrantable, in exalting God's solemn worship and service, by lifting up the
Appendages thereof to their due and decent station.

For other Protestant Churches do lift up their established Rites and Discipline
as high as we; and this is evident from the severity they design and inflict
upon such as are refractory to the use and practice of them. When such Rites
and Laws about them, See above out of the Calvinists Book of Discipline* c. 5.
de. Consistoriis Act. 31.
are established, the Church does not account the Observation of them so mean
and vile, as to be violated through contempt and with the scandal of others:
but such transgressors she looks upon as undecent and disorderly walkers, and
exercises her Authority, to note, to admonish, to reprove and rebuke them, and
endeavors by all wholesome means to reduce them to a sound mind: This is the
Duty of the Church (when it may be performed seasonably,) says a Protestant
Divine of great Learning and an acute Judgment. And does not Mr. Calvin say the
same? I am sure it was his Practice: And upon those words. 1 Cor. 11. 16. If
any man seems to be contentious, he writes thus, Tales sunt omnes qui bonos
ritus and utiles Convellunt nulla necessitate, etc. Such are all they, who
without any necessity root out good and profitable Rites and Ceremonies; such
as make controversies about matters of no difficulty, such as no reason can
satisfy, such as will not endure to be reduced to Order, such also are they who
are unsociable, and are carried away with a foolish affectation of novelties.
Such as these St. Paul will not vouchsafe to answer: Because contention is a
pernicious thing, and ought to be banished out of the Church. Hereby (as Calvin
goes on) he teaches, that refractory and contentious Persons are to be bridled
by Authority, rather then refuted by disputations, Nunquam enim contentionum
erit finis, si certando velis hominem pugnacem vincere: quia centies victus,
nuaquam satigabitur Haec Calvinus ibid.
etc. And Grynaeus Ad Col. let. 18.
upon these words, Colos. 2. 5. [Joyning and beholding your Order,] refers
Order, to the whole Liturgy and Discipline of the Church; and of such as walk
disorderly, (as those mentioned 2 These. 3. 6.) he says, Quoad ejus fieri
potest, in ordinem, Disciplinae Ecclesiasticae severitate adhibita, redigendi
sunt, They must be reduced to Order, by the severe use of Church Discipline.
Haec ille.

The Dissenters Eighth Section.
THey do not find that God ever Commanded the things imposed, either in
general, in special, or the singulars of them; If God has commanded a Duty to
be done, the Church must find a place to do it in; but tho the Church must find
a place for the Duty, a time for the Duty, she may not find New Duty, for the
time and place.

The Answer.
1. To this I Answer, That the Church can never fix upon a time or place for
public worship without Order and Authority. For, when matters are left at
random, Quot homines tot sententiae: So many men so many minds; and the
confusion of Tongues is not so destructive as that of Judgments. One will be
for the hour Nine, another will not have his Devotion up and dressed till at
least Eleven. One again will be for the Barn, another for the Tabernacle. And
although this Gentleman tells us of a Church that will and must certainly agree
about such things, though all determine to the contrary (as was observed above)
yet I have not been so happy as to converse in that Vtopia.

2. Natural Circumstances are not Rites in the practice of Religion and God's
worship upon that account: but as they are capable of improvement in a Moral or
Religious respect. That all things be done decently, according to Order, and to
Edification; These Rules look a little higher then those Natural circumstances,
which adhere inseperably to all Actions; for which there was no such need of a
solemn charge or Apostolical direction, Time being a Fluid thing and always in
motion, we can fix no respect upon it, but as we separate several portions of
it, to be the measure of our worship and service for point of duration, and
take care for the strict observance of them. Nisi quit forte usitatum illud
Festis Diebu^ ornandi and vestiendi studium eo referat. Jos. Mede. ubi infra.
p. 404.
But the place is capable of more advantage to help devotion. God therefore
seems to distinguish them as to the respects we are to give them: for he says,
Levit. 19. 30. V. Jos. Medes Concio ad Cler. in Levit. 19. 30.
Ye shall keep my Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord. And here
I must repeat, That Order requires the same time, the same place, the same
gesture; and Decency requires, that the Rites and Vsages (in God's worship) be
honest, grave, solemn, suitable to the Majesty we adore, and the Offices of
Divine worship; which we pay to him.

3. We say New Rites do not make a New Duty, not alter God's Law, or change his
Worship, as was noted out of Zanchy. It Is the same Duty still, whether
performed at 9. or the 12th. hour in a Church or Chapel, Cathedral or a Parish
Church, in a Cloak or Cassok, Gown or Surplice, standing or Kneeling. And
because* our Author is so good at illustrations, I will make bold, for once, to
borrow a familiar instance from him; P. 280.
Suppose a Law promulgated by the Legislator: That every Subject shall sweep
his door once a week with a Beesom: Now to sweep my Door with a Beesom of Birch
or Broom, cannot possibly be any Addition to that Law (or, say I, the setting
up of a New Duty) because it is necessarily required to the putting of the Law
in practice, that I do it with the one or the other, and therefore they are
both comprehended virtually in the Law by way of disjunction, that is either
with this or that or some other. Again to sweep my Door on the Third day of the
week, and at the ninth hour of the day, can be no addition to the Law, because
I am commanded to do it, upon some day in the week, and at some hour of the
day, and the Law not having defined the precise day and hour, supposes it
indifferent to the Lawgiver which I choose, but one or other I must choose,
unless I will obstinately disobey the Law. We shall make use of this
illustration thus: God makes a Law that we shall give him external worship: Now
to worship him by Bowing, Kneeling, or Prostration, cannot possibly be any
addition to that Law, because it is necessarily required to the putting of the
Law in practice, that I do it with the one or the other, and therefore they are
(all three) comprehended virtually in the Law by way of disjunction, that is,
either after this or that, or the other manner. Again God commands me to
confess the Faith of Christ Crucified, and profess my self a Christian: Now to
make this Confession or Profession by word of mouth, or by the subscription of
my hand, or by some Symbolical sign or significant gesture, cannot possibly be
any addition to that Law, because it is necessarily required to the putting of
the Law in practice, that I do it, either the one way or the other; and
therefore they are all comprehended virtually in the Law by way of disjunction;
that is, I must do it either this way, or that or the other. And the Law not
having defined the precise way, supposes it indifferent to the Lawgiver, which
I choose; but one or other I must choose (unless the Church has chosen for me) or
else I am an obstinate Transgressor.

4. It is no derogation to the perfection of Scripture as a Rule, that the
Singulars, or Particular instances of Worship are not specified in it. p. 264.
For (as our Author well observes) it is always supposed, that every one in his
private or more public capacity be able to use and apply the Rule. As the
Square, or Rule of the Architect, however exact in it self, yet presupposes him
to have eyes to see, and Brains to apply it to his work; so the Scripture as a
Law teaches Duty, and whatever of well-pleasing Obedience we can perform to
God, yet supposes us at least to be Rational Creatures, that can apply that Law
to our own particular Actions, whence these two things must necessarily follow.

1. That it was not only needless but impossible, that the Scripture should
enumerate or determine upon the Particular Natural Circumstances, of general
Time, Place, Person, When, Where, Who should worship God, every day, hour,
minute to the End of the World: for so the whole World would not have afforded
sufficient stowage for Rubricks, nor have been able to contain the Volumns that
must have been written: for as the End and use of a Rule is not to teach the
Artificer, when he shall begin to work, but how he may do it like a workman,
whenever he begins; so neither was the Scripture designed for a Clock to tell
us at what hour of the day we should commence the public Service of God, but
that whenever we begin or end, we manage it according to this Rule.

2. That when the Scripture has prescribed us all the Parts of worship,
instituted the Administrators of worship, given Rules how to separate them to
that Office, and laid down general Rules for the regulating those natural
Circumstances, which could not particularly be determined, as that they be done
to edification decently, and in Order; And has withal commanded us to attend to
this Rule, and no other, ( which is true Sano sensu) it has then discharged the
Office of of a Rule, and, as a Rule, is complete and perfect. Thus our Author
has Architectonically erected his Hypothesis: but the singulars are not yet
determined: And what must be done for them?

Jus Naturae docet esse Deum, ip sique reddendum esse quod suum est, nempe
Cultum, tum internum, tum externum, says our Synopsis: Ad Dan. 6. 10.
The Law of Nature teaches there is a God, and that we ought to render him his
due, that is, both External and Internal worship. And the Learned Zanchy De
Religione Observe. in Cap. 15. Aphoris. 4. m. p. 237.
resolves, Substantia legis Ceremonialis est perpetua: Unde alii a Carendo
deducunt, q. Ceremonia; non potest enim Religio exerceri illis destituta and
Carens. Camer.
That the substance of the Ceremonial Law is perpetual, Natural Religion does
Dictate something, and where there is equity and a parity of Reason, and a due
Analogy for it, we may take some directions from the Levitical Law, as the very
Learned and Judicious Sanderson observes. Our blessed Savior retained many
Ceremonies and Usances of that Carnal Commandment, as Imposition of hands and
both the Sacraments. And from whence did the Apostle take the hint, to enjoin
the Women to wear a Vail, and keep silence in the Church, but from the Custom
among the Jews? See Dr. Lightfoot on 1 Cor. 11. 25. and cap. 14. 35.
And how does he establish Maintenance for the Evangelical Ministry but upon
this bottom. 1 Timothy 5. 18. 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Sanciens Leges Vet. Test.
Conformes, establishing Law conformable to those of the Old Testament, says
Theophylact. In 1 Ad Cor. 9. 13, 14.
And perhaps this Analogy may be a fair ground for the strict observation of
the Lord's day, of Fasts and Festivals; provided they do not typically respect
things to come (as those of the Law did,) but reflect upon what is past, and
fix us upon present Duty. The Apostle did not always pretend to inspiration in
such matters, but used Christian Prudence (yet not without a divine assistance)
and made Inferences out of Generals; yet strictly observing such general Rules,
he concludes, that the Particulars were the Commandments of God. 1 Cor. 14. 37,
40.

The Learned Mede In Levit. 19. 30. conc. ad Clerum vide.
observes, That it is a Synechdoche proper to the Decalogue, Vt ex una specie
intelligeremus, omnes ejusdem generis Species, una rerum Sacrarum specie, omnes
Omnino res sacras: that from one Species we are to understand all of the same
kind. Quaedam and sunt and dicuntur in Scripturis, ( says Dr. Sclater out of
Nazianzen) quaedam vero sunt in Scripturis tametsi non dicuntur. And 3. Rules
are laid down by that learned Dr. First,

1. Where Generals are delivered, there are all Particulars comprised in those
Generals intentionally delivered; because Generals comprehend their Particulars.

2. Where Principles and Causes are delivered, their effects are also intended:
as being virtually contained in their Principles.

3. Where one equal is taught, all of like reason is taught, quia Parium Par
ratio: and where is Par ratio, there is Par lex: Where is like Reason there is
like Law. So take Contents of Scripture (says he) no instance of any Point of
necessary, or but convenient Faith and Practice, can be given, but what is
delivered in the written word. Thus Dr. Sclater, on 2 These. 2. 15. p. 199.

The Psalmist tells us, The Commandment is exceeding broad. And very Learned
Protestants Conf. Remon. c. 23.. 8.
think all matters of Decency impli'd in that of Romans 12. 17. and the Apostles
expression Phil. 4. 8. is of a very great latitude, Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, -- if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise: These with the other particulars there enumerated will extend a great
way: And the Learned A. Rivet Animadver. in Consult. de oper. superer. m. p.
242.
makes good use of that Text against works of Supererrogation; nor is it less
valid or useful against Will Worship. Omnia quaecunque homines possunt ex
gratia Dei, Deo debentur: All that ever men can do by the Grace of God, is due
to God, according to that exhortation; and consequently they are (in the
General) enjoined by God. At least, (as Luther has observed, from the Apostle
ad Gal. 5. 13.) They are under the Law of Charity: Quaecunque Ceremonialiter
and humaniter statuuntur -- Pro Charitate servanda sunt propter eos, cum quibus
vivendum est nobis, donec ipsi easdem servari a nobis exigunt, Luther ad Galat.
5. m. p. 226, 227
ne pax Solvatur in Schismata and Seditiones: What things soever are appointed
by way of Ceremony This I refer to Religion.
and Civility; This to humane Societiy.
are to be observed out of Charity, for their sakes, with whom we live, so long
as they require us to observe them, lest Peace should break loose into Schisms
and Seditions. And a little after he conclude, that there is no Law, but is
comprehended in Charity. Nam sine omni dubio, si tu quicquam statuisses, etc.
For without all doubt, (says he) if thou should enjoin any thing, thou
would be obeyed: therefore thou art obliged by the Law of Nature and Charity
to perform the same to another, especially to God and his Vicegerents:
provided you do not place Salvation in the Precepts of men: but only consider
that you are bound to serve others in Charity. Hereupon Calvin (Argument. in
Ep. ad Romanos in fine) observing a sort of men, who thought their Christian
Liberty could not stand without a disturbance of the Civil Powers, he resolves
the case thus, Verum ne quid videretur imponere Ecclesiae Paulus praeter
Officia Charitatis: hanc quoque obedientiam sub charitate contineri indicat:
Lest St. Paul should seem to impose any thing upon the Church besides the
Offices of Charity: He declares ( viz. Romans 13. 8.) that this obedience (to the
higher Powers) is comprehended in Charity. Those Impositions therefore which
these Dissenters quarrel at, are commanded in General, and (not being against
any command of God,) if there were no more in the Case, yet they are under a
General Rule, because done According to Order.

5. It is to be noted, That external Worship is a Duty of Religion; and of
great necessity.

It is the Observation of the Author of our Synopsis, upon Josuah 22. 25. Ita
est Mortalium ingenium, ut Adminiculis opus habeant, quibus mentes erigant in
Coelum: Such is the disposition of Mortal Men; that they stand in need of helps
to raise their Minds to Heaven. Whereupon it often comes to pass, Vt ubi Cultus
externus negligitur, that where God's outward Worship is neglected, Ibi
animorum quoque Religio sensim Tabescit and Minuitur; there the (internal)
Religion also of the Soul flaggs, and by degrees dwindles away to nothing.
Recte igitur (as that Author goes on) wherefore they made a very good
inference, that if the Ritual Worship were obstructed or hindered, the Spiritual
Worship, that I may so call the inward Piety of the Mind will decay and depart
with it. And the Learned Grotius Ad Mat. 24. 11.
has very well observed, that to make external Worship but a matter
indifferent, is the way to make the Courage and Constancy of Christians to
languish; and nothing is more destructive to Christianity then to bring in
Conciliating expedients, to mingle the Christian Religion with others, whether
approved, or only tolerated.

6. We must consider, That when there are many ways of external Worship to
express our inward Piety, (which cannot all be performed at once) God has left
it to the Wisdom of his Church (In Public Administrations) to determine which
we should observe. And for the proof of this, I Will go no further than one of
our own Divines, Learned and Zealous and very Famous in his Generation: B. 2.
C. 6. q. 3. p. 67.
It Is Mr. Perkins in his Cases of Conscience, concerning the Gesture to be used
in Prayer; wherein he lays down these Three Rules (he speaks of Public Prayer.)

1. When Public Prayer is made in the Congregation, our Gesture must always be
comely, modest and decent.

2. All Gesture used publicly, must serve as much as may be, to express the
inward humility of the heart, without Hypocrisy. Now these kinds are manifold
(says he) some concern the whole Body, as the bowing thereof, the casting of
it down upon the Ground. Some again concern the Parts of the Body, as lifting
up of the Head, the Eyes, the Hands, bowing the Knees, etc. Touching these the
Scripture has not bound us to any particulars.

3. (Therefore) we must (says he) in public Prayer, content our selves to
follow the laudable fashion, and Custom of that particular Church, where we
are. For to decline from Customs of particular Churches, in such Cases, often
causes Schism and Dissentions. And what he says, upon the Epistle to the
Galatians to the same purpose is worthy to be noted, and seasonable for our
Christian Practice.

The use of the Law among the Jews (says he) was to shut them up into the
Unity of one Faith and Religion. For this Cause they had but one Temple, one
Mercy-seat, one Highpriest, etc. Hence it follows (says that Holy man) that in
a Godly and Christian Commonwealth, when true Religion is established, there
may be no Tolleration of any other Religion. For that, which is the End of
God's Laws, must also be the end of all good Laws, in all Commonwealths and
Kingdoms, namely to shut up the People into the Unity of one Faith.

The Church of the Jews (says he) is called a Fountain Sealed, a Garden
enclosed, Cant. 4. 13.) a Vineyard hedged in (Isai. 5. 5. Psalm. 80. 13.) And
here ( viz. Gal. 3. ver. 23, 24, 25.) we see what is the Hedge or Wall of this
Garden, or Vineyard: namely the Regiment or Policy of Moses by a Threefold kind
of Law. This admonishes us (says he) to respect, and with care to observe
good Laws: because they are as it were Hedges and Fences of all good Societies:
and the breaking of them is the pulling down of our Fence: Thus Mr. Perkins,
from which principles of his, good God! How much are these times degenerated?
and let all the World judge, who honors the Reformation most, they who
professedly violate, or they who zealously maintain the Laws and legal
establishment of it.

7. We may add, That the Church has this Power, not only in Sacred Rites, and
Acts of external Worship, but also, in such as are civilly decent; and such is
the Woman's Vail, which I look upon not as a thing properly Religious or Sacred,
but only as a decent Habit, according to custom, common estimation and the Law
of Nature, especially in Ecclesiastical Assemblies; See 1. Pet. 3. 3.
whereupon Bullinger Ad Corin. Ep. c. 11. v. 16. p. 131.
concludes his Commentary upon that head thus, Haec vero de Habitu Ecclesiae
ingredientium dicta sufficiant: This shall suffice to have spoken touching the
Habit of such as approach the Church of God.

And, now, one of the Apostles Instances, (when he is giving Orders to
establish Decency in public Assemblies) being in the matter of Habit; methinks
this should be warrant enough (as a General Rule) for the use of the Surpliss
by Ecclesiastical Ministers in the Public Offices and Administrations of the
Church. For to Officiate naked is against Natural Decency, and so dishonest: to
Officiate in a Fools Coat (or some singular Habit taken for it) is ridiculous
and scandalous. And such as are peculiarly separated to the Service of the most
High God, why should not they be distinguished by special Habits, (in the
public and solemn Administration of their Sacred Offices) as well as Civil
Judges, Mayors, and other Public Officers? Does this make any alteration in
the substance of Religious Worship? Quod veteres Episcopi coenam
administraturi, aliam induerint Vestem, ad Mutationem Coenae nihil pertinet,
says Zanchy; De cultu externo: m p. 447.
That such as Administer the Holy Office, do put on another Vesture, this does
not change the Worship: but adds solemnity to it. To prevent indecency, we have
the Order of a just Authority to determine the Point. And our Governors, for
their direction, (besides the light of Nature, and common custom, where any
Religion was in Vogue) had the Rule of Analogy from the Vests of the Priests
and Levites, in their Solemn Assemblies, under the Law, and an Invitation by a
fair Allusion to that Practice, in the Vision of St. John. (Apoc, 7. 13, 15.)
And what Habit more Decent then White to represent, that Holiness becomes both
the Priest, and the Christian Profession as well as the House of God? However,
this being about the use of a Habit in Ecclesiastical Assemblies (as was the
Woman's Vail, which the Apostle gave special Order for) it must certainly be
comprised under the General Rule of Decency, and consequently as such, under
the command of God, according to the Observation of Hemmingius (In 1. ad Cor.
14. 37.) Sunt Mandata Domini, quae hic a Paulo praecipiuntur, quantum quidem ad
Genus attinet, quatenus praecipiunt Decorum, and Ordinem in Ecclesia Publicae
aedificationis and Pacis gratia: They are the Commandments of God, which are
there enjoined by St. Paul, as to the Genus or Generality of them, inasmuch as
they require Decency and Order in the Church of God, for Edification and
Peace-sake.

As to Kneeling at the Sacrament, (a Ceremony much scrupled at heretofore) much
need not be mentioned to Judicious Persons. For Kneeling it self is undoubtedly
an Act, or Part of God's External Worship (and not a Mere Rite, or Naked
Ceremony;) it is suggested by the Law of Nature, dictated by Common Sense and
the Reason of all Nations, and declared to be our Duty by the Second
Commandment of the Decalogue. A Gesture so familiar and frequent at our
Prayers, that it is many times put for the whole Duty, aswell-under the Old as
under the New Testament, Micah 6. 6. Ephesians. 3. 12. Zanchy De cultu ext^rno^m.
p. 380.
makes it a Part of Adoration or External Worship. Where the bowing of the Knee
to Baal is disapproved, and they are commended who did not bow the Knee to him:
Wherever we find a Command that every Knee should bow to God and Christ: In
all those places, the Speech is not of Internal but of External Adoration.
Whence it is easy to Collect, that God requires External Adoration also; and
External Worship, as the Testimony and Fruit of that which is Internal. Zanchy
and Mr. Perkins Cases of Conscience B. 2. Chap. 11. page 84. He that does not
fall upon his Knees where co^veniently he may, illud indicium est non tantum
Magnae Socordiae and pigritiae, verum etiam profanae mentis Lyserus in Aula
Persic. p. 55.
is clear and express for it. Adoration in general (says he) is outward
Worship, signifying and testifying the inward Worship of the heart. More
especially by it we must conceive the bowing of the Head and Knee; the bending
and prostrating of the Body; the lifting up of the Hands, Eyes, and such like.
And a little after, Adoration that is due to God the Creator, must not be
social (for we are not God's Mates and Companions) but only Religious. And that
this External Religious Worship is due to God, and to God only, he proves thus.
The Devil when he tempted our Savior, desired no more of him but the
prostrating of his Body. But Christ denies it and Answers, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Matt. 4. 10. This is a Part of
God's Worship, but of whose Creating? Not of the Churches, but of God's; the
Church does not immediately and Originally enjoin it, but rather exhorts to it,
( Psalm. 95. 6.) O come let us worship and fall down, and Kneel before the Lord
our Maker; She directs also and determines when it is most suitable and decent
to be used. All the Question then will be whether the Appointment of the use of
it at the Sacrament be convenient.

Kneeling doubtless is a Gesture, which very well becomes Supplicants; and it is
very suitable and Decent, in such as Pay their Homage, or beg a Boon, or
commemorate a sad Tragedy, wherein they have been and are still concerned; And
all these Cases meet together in such as come worthily to the Sacrament.

That this Sacrament was always received with Adoration, Nemo autem carnem
illam manducat nisi prius Adoraverit. Austin. in Psalm. 98. Et non Solum non
Peccemus adorando, sed peccemus non adorando. ibid.
we have Authority and Evidence beyond expectation. That in the Primitive
Church they received it standing was, (thereby) to assert the great Article,
(that supports our Christianity, that is) Christ's Resurrection. But when the
Church was well settled in the belief hereof, (without any more hesitation,) and
the World generally persuaded of it, then (to show her own Power and Liberty,
in the Alteration) she changed that Practice for another no less consonant to
God's Law, and more suitable to the Nature of the Duty. For tho standing be
more proper to assert tho Resurrection, being a Gesture of Reverence with
erection and alacrity of Spirit: yet Kneeling being a Gesture of Reverence,
with dejection and humility, is more suitable at the Lords Supper, being the
Annunciation of the Lord's Passion and death, wherein we had a Guilt, and now
expect a Benefit; which cannot but bring an apprehensive Soul (that is Devout)
upon her Knees, as well to bewail the one, as to receive the other.

The Rite and Ceremony, at which the greatest offense is taken, is the sign of
the Cross; which is fallen under the same Fate with the Preaching of it; 1 Cor.
1. 18, 23.
and I heartily wish, this were, (only as that was) among Jews and Gentiles.
But if we can find a General Command, and some Parity of Reason in Scriptural
instances to warrant it, I am in good hope among wise and modest Christians,
this scandal of the Cross will vanish.

1. That Confession of Christ Crucified, is an External Act of Worship, cannot
reasonably be denied; and the necessity hereof is grounded upon the words of
our Blessed Savior, and his Apostles: Be ready to give an Answer always to
every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. 1 Pet. 3. 15.
Here is a flat Commandment for Confession, says Mr. Perkins. And our Savior
says, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me in this Adulterous Generation, of him
shall the Son of Man be ashamed also, when he comes in the glory of his
Father, with his holy Angels, Mark 8. 38.

2. This Confession or Profession has a threefold way to show it self.

1. By the Mouth, Opus habet and cor oris Ministerio. Theoph. ad Romans 10. 10.
and that is most Ordinary; and of this express mention is made Romans 10. 10.
For with the heart man believes unto Righteousness: and with the Mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation. Non Solum fidem and interiorem affectum
requirit Deus; sed and externam Confessionem and liberam ejus professionem,
says our Synopsis: In Dan. 6. v. 10.
God requires not only Faith and an inward affection; but outward Confession
also, and a free Profession of it. But then

2. This profession may be expressed by the hand, by Subscription, Isai. 44. 5.
One shall say, I am the Lord, another shall call himself by the name of Jacob:
and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the the Lord, and surname
himself by the Name of Israel: Upon which place Mr. Calvin observes that true
faith will break out into Confession. And there are four words used to intimate
so much (Invocari nomine Israel, etc.) to be called by the name of Israel, to
Subscribe, to Surname himself, and to say, I am the Lords. Nec enim obmutescere
oportet qui vere Deum Colunt: sed quod intus in animo gerunt, factis etiam and
dictis testari: Such as truly Worship God ought not to be mute: but by Words
and Deeds to testify their inward Piety. Whence it follows.

3. This Profession may be made by Symbolical signs or real tokens. Caeremoniae
ad Dei Cultum, institutae Pars quoque sunt nostrae Confessionis, says Calvin
(on Romans 14. 22.) This I doubt not will easily be granted of such Rites as are
under particular Command and of Divine Institution, as Baptism and the Lord's
Supper. But we can produce other Instances for which there is no such Command
or Institution to be alleged. What was the true meaning of that Altar,
forementioned? The building of it gave offense to the Ten Tribes, as if it had
been a Monument of Superstition or Idolatry: Ad Josu. 22. 26.
but, as Calvin observes, Congeriem Lapidum erigere trophaei Loco, vel in
testimonium Miraculi, vel in memoriam insignis Dei gratiae, nusquam lex
prohibuit: To erect a heap of Stones as a Trophy, in Testimony of a miracle, or
in memory of some special favor of God, this was never forbidden by the Law:
otherwise both Joshuah, and many holy Judges and Kings after him, had defiled
themselves with Profane novelties: But those words [ver. 26, 27.] Let us build
an Altar, that it may be a Witness, that we may do the service of the Lord
before him with our Burnt Offerings: Which words make it plain, that they
intended that Pattern of the Altar, ( Jos. 22. 28.) to be a Recognition of the
God of Israel, a Real Protestation of their Relation to him, and of their
sincere Devotion to his solemn Worship. And that the use of the Cross in the
Christian Church was introduced upon the like account is affirmed by our
Synopsis upon that very Text: The words are these, Sic Ecclesia nobis ante
oculos ponit Crucis Christi figuram: thus the Church sets the sign or figure of
Christ's Cross before our eyes, not to invite us to Worship it, but to put us
in mind of that true and salutary Cross, the Passion and Death of Christ, which
wrought our Atonement and Redemption.

But we have a more pregnant instance than this to our purpose. We read ( Dan.
6. 10.) when Prayer to Almighty God was interdicted, Daniel went into his
House, and opening his Windows toward Jerusalem, He Kneeled down and Prayed.
The opening of his Windows was an open Protestation of his Faith and Worship.
For why did he open them? Not to let in Heaven, or to let out his Devotion: but
to give light to his Profession and Practice. Hic erat Confessionis casus,
says our Synopsis, Here was a Case of Confession: and so says Lyserus, in his
Aula Persica, p. 57, etc. Fidem suam egregia Confessione testatur, says
Oecolampadius Ad Dan. 6. 11.
; He testifies his Faith by an egregious Confession. He enters into his house,
but he does not shut himself up for fear; for if he had done so, he would have
shut his Windows: but he set them open on purpose, that such as watched to
betray him, might have the clearer prospect of his Faith and Piety. Notandum
est, says Mr. Calvin Ad Dan. 6. 10.
; It is to be noted, that 'twas not the inward Worship of God that was here in
agitation, but the outward Profession of it. When he saw his Faith was put upon
the trial, and an experiment to be made of his Constancy, he would not so much
as dissemble or counterfeit a forgetfulness of his Religion and Piety.

And no doubt the holy Prophet opened his Windows, that by this help (says he)
he might consult his own Infirmity, and stir up himself to a greater Liveliness
of Faith and ardour of devotion. And from hence we should learn, says Mr.
Calvin, when we are sensible or jealous of our own infirmity or coldness, to
collect all the helps and advantages we can to awaken our care, and correct
that torpour and sluggishness, whereof we find our selves conscious. This was
the Prophets design when he opened his Windows toward Jerusalem. Hoc etiam
symbolo; He had also a mind to let his Family see, by this Symbol, (or Mystical
Ceremony) the Constancy of his Faith, and his steadfast hope of the promised
Redemption. This is the sense and Judgment of Mr. Calvin.

Where we cannot but observe, that the Holy Prophet, out of the fervent zeal of
an inward Piety, made use of a Symbolical sign, before the Princes of the
Empire, to protest the truth and sincerity of his Faith and Worship. And also
here was no special Command, or divine Institution for the Practice; yet it
gained an approbation from Heaven, and such as was attested and sealed by a
Miraculous deliverance.

Now, that the Sign of the Cross among the Ancients, was a Real protestation of
their Faith, and like Daniel's opening of his Windows, to let others see what
Religion he professed, we have the attestation of no less man that Mr. Perkins
Demonst. Problem. Tit. Signum Crucis.. 3. Ibid.. 1.
; who says, Annis a Christo 300; That the first Three hundred years after
Christ, the Sign of the Cross was taken for an outward Profession of the Faith,
used in their common course of life, or their ordinary actions. And a little
before he reports thus; Veteres se Cruce contra Daemones munierunt: The Fathers
used to arm themselves against the Devil with the Sign of the Cross; not that
they ascribed any such Power to the Outward figure, but because they would make
show, and professed to others, Suam fiduciam in Crucem, their Trust in the Cross,
that is, says he, in the Passion and Death of Christ, by this solemn Ceremony;
and use it (also as he goes on) Quodam quasi Monitorio fidem excitare; as an
Item; or Watchword, to awaken and stir up their Faith, which Conquers (the
World and) all Evils (in it).

Here, from this Holy man, we may observe, That this transient Sign of the
Cross was in use from the beginning and in the purest, which were also the
persecuting times of Christianity; and 'twas used upon a double account: (1) As
a symbolical Profession of their Faith: (2) As a ready Monitor to excite and
quicken the exercise of it. This twofold use of the Cross Mr. Perkins does not
disallow, though with all good Protestants he utterly condemns the worship of
it. Ibid.. 2.
Crux non fuit a veteribus adorata; The Cross was never worshipped by the
Ancients, much less with Divine Worship. They had only a veneration for it,
that is, says he, they used it with reverence, and for an attestation of their
Faith; and extolled it also as a sign of their undaunted Belief in Christ
crucified before the Gentiles; and this they did even then, when the Gentiles
threatened them with Torments. Thus Mr. Perkins.

Non sine causa, says Venerable Bede Ad Romans 10. 10. v. August. De verb. Dom.
Ser. 8.
out of St. Austin, etc. 'Twas not without cause that Christ would have his own
sign fixed upon our Forehead as the seat of Modesty, that the Christian may not
be ashamed at the reproach of Christ. And Soto, Hac ratione, etc. For this
reason the sign of the Cross is made upon the Forehead of the baptized, that
(as the Church of England also has it) They may not be ashamed publicly to
confess the Faith of Christ, and him crucified. De la Cerda, and Hugo
Cardinalis say the same thing upon the same Text, Romans 10. 10. And the Learned
Gerhard De Baptis.. 261.
tells us also, That Christians, to show they were not ashamed of the Cross of
Christ, painted it upon the midst of their Foreheads; and Cyril of Jerusalem
Catech* 13. in princip. (...). Ibid. ante sinem. (...). Aug. in Joan. Tra. 118.
Signum Crucis nisi adhibeatur sive frontibus credentium, sive ipsi aquae qua
regeneramur, etc. nihil rite perficiatur, i. e. Not according to the custom of
the Church, the Rule of Decency. Crucis signo in front hodie tanquam in post
signandus es, omnesque Christiani signantur. De Catechiz. Rud. c. 20.
, long before him, exhorts the Christians after this manner; Let us not be
ashamed of Christ crucified; but with our fingers let us imprint the Sign of
the Cross upon our Foreheads.

By these, and a multitude of other Testimonies, which might be produced, it is
evident that the Sign of the Cross has always been looked upon as a Real
Confession of the Faith of Christ crucified, and a symbolical Protestation of
it; so that we may sum up our Discourse in short after this manner:

Confession is an Act of external Worship, under a General command of Christ,
which does bind Semper, though not Ad semper; and consequently the Duty is
always lawful, though not always (in prudence) practicable. (2) That a
General Command comprehends all particular Instances. (3) That the Sign of the
Cross is one Instance of Confession, and so determined by the Authority and
Practice of the Church. From which premises it will unavoidably follow, that
we are under an obligation to observe it.

And indeed there is sometimes a necessity for it; for a confession by word of
mouth, or by subscription, is neither practicable nor possible, at all Times,
by all Persons, in all Places. Some have their Tongues cut out, some are mute
and speechless, some are among Barbarians, who understand not their Language.
Some other way therefore is to be pitched upon; and what should that be, rather
then what may reasonably be concluded from such intimations of Holy Writ as
these: Looking at Jesus, who endured the Cross, despising the shame: ( And) I
have determined to know nothing, but Christ and him crucified; ( and) God
forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: ( and)
If any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, take up his Cross and
follow me.

From which expressions, granting a Real Confession of the Faith, or a
Symbolical Protestation of it, to be requisite, what could be more convenient,
than that which has been in use (as far as we are able to collect) from the
first establishment of Christianity. Epilogue lib. 3. cap. 29. p. 342.
And, as that very Learned and Judicious Divine, has determined; There are,
certainly, many occasions for a Christian to have recourse to God for his
Grace, upon Protestation of his Christianity, (which is the condition upon
which all Grace of God becomes due) when there is neither time nor opportunity
to recollect his mind unto a formal address by praying unto God: All which this
Ceremony ( the Sign of the Cross) fitly signifies.

I shall conclude this with a matter of Fact; The Practice and Behavior of a
Member of the Greek Church at the time of his Martyrdom (a few years since)
sent to me by a very Worthy, Learned, and Ingenuous Person, (who was upon the
place at Constantinople.

One thing (says he) I cannot but take notice of, that all the way this
deplorable Creature was hurried backwards and forwards to the Cady and the
Kaima Came, and afterward to execution; when either he could not speak through
weakness of body, or else could not be heard among the thronging Multitude: He,
in a manner continually made the Sign of the Cross upon his Breast, to testify
to the World by this dumb Rhetoric, his undaunted resolution of being and
dying a true Christian. I confess it made me with great pleasure reflect upon
that ancient Rite used by our Church in Baptism, I mean the sign of the Cross.
It may be, that to men who never lived abroad amongst Unbelievers, nor
considered the state of the Primitive Church, in which this Practice first
prevailed, it may seem a very useless and empty Ceremony to make this Sign upon
an Infants Forehead at his reception into Christ's Flock; much more for a man
in Public to do it upon his own Breast: but for my own part I shall rather for
ever esteem it as an Universal Character of a Christian, forasmuch as it is
sufficient to signify throughout the whole World (when no other Language is
mutually understood) that the Person so signed is owned, or owns himself to be
a Member of Christ's Mystical Body. See Tertul de Cornu Militis, cap. 3.
And therefore many of the Primitive Christians were branded with a Cross, and
the Walls of their Cities, and Castles, and Houses (as we see some yet
remaining in many places to this very day) bore this Mark upon them, only as a
note of distinction at first, though the Superstition indeed of succeeding Ages
much altered the Original intent of it. The Christian Slaves and other
miserable and indigent Believers, who up and down the Streets beg our Charity,
when all Language is insignificant, or perhaps their Tongues are cut out, will
declare their profession to us by this only sign. And we have several times
traveled abroad in Turkish habits, and happening into a Christian Village, we
have found the People at first very fearful and averse from giving us any
entertainment; but assuring them by this sign, that we were of their own
Belief, we have been immediately admitted and kindly treated. And without any
further Instances, I have found this outward token alone in these Countries to
be a sufficient Shibboleth to distinguish a Christian from an Infidel. Now
though perhaps in your Parts of Christendom a Christian of riper years, may
never have a real occasion of making profession of his Faith by this Outward
Character; yet I think our Church does extremely well in retaining so much as
she does of this Ancient Custom, I mean in Crossing, at least the Persons that
are Newly baptized; since the words which she uses in that Office sufficiently
expound the meaning of the first Institutors of this Ceremony; to wit, it
signifies, that as they should manfully maintain the inward and Spiritual fight
against Sin and the Devil and all Pomps and Vanities, under the inward Banner
of a steadfast and lively Faith in Christ, so they should not be ashamed
publicly, even by this Outward Sign Vexillum Crucis in front portans. Hieron.
Apol. advers. Ruffi^. l. 2. r. 8.
to confess the same Faith to the World, and all the Powers thereof, when, and
wheresoever they should have occasion for it.

Thus far I am gratified by my Worthy Friend's Letter. We see then, that the
use of this Symbol in All the Christian Church, has always been accounted a
Real Protestation of the Christian Faith; and consequently, they have
understood and practiced it, as comprehended under the General Command of
Confession; which contradicts the Hypothesis of these Dissenters.

The Dissenters Ninth Section.
THey are the more cautious of all Ceremonies, because the Old Church of
England, in her Homilies, Sermon. 3. of Good Works, tells us, That such has been
the corrupt inclination of Man, superstitiously given to make new honoring of
God of his own Head, and then to have more affection and devotion to keep that,
than to search out God's Holy Commandments and do them.

The Answer.
1. That which was the Old Church of England, we desire may be the Old Church
of England still. But Martin Luther In Formula Missae, in pr.
observed a sort of men in his time, who were all for Novelties. He was very
fearful, he says, of changing Old things for New ones, in respect of the weak:
but especially Propter leves illos and fastidiosos Spiritus, in regard of those
light and fastidious Spirits, qui ceu sues immundae, sine fide, sine mente
irruunt, and sola Novitate gaudent, atque statim ut Novitas esse desiit
nauseant: Who like unclean Swine without Faith, without Sense, rush upon
Novelty, and delight in nothing else; and as soon as ever it cease to be a
Novelty, it becomes nauseous to them. If these Dissenters had any veneration
for the Old Church of England, they would not be so importune and fierce, as
their Party are, for Innovations. For what is it but a New Church which they
attempt to set up? New Laws, New Liturgy, New Form of Ordination, New Ministry,
New Governors, New Government, New Discipline. All New.

2. That these Dissenters are more like to be given to Superstition than the
Church of England; for the more Scrupulous are ever the more Superstitious, as
Matthisius observes of those weak ones ( Romans 14.) Tanquam Evangelicae
libertatis nescios, and superstitiosos; They were ignorant of the liberty of
the Gospel, and Superstitious. And though Mr. Perkins (as was noted above)
says, that discourse of St. Paul was intended peculiarly for those times, not
for ours (who should and might understand as well our liberty as our duty, a
little better than those raw Converts,) yet these men fill their heads with the
like Scruples, and imitate their Superstition. For what does Superstition
signify, but an immoderate fear, Quo se anxie torquent superstitiosi homines,
dum sibi fabricant inanes scrupulos, as Mr. Calvin has it (in Act. 17. 22.) An
immoderate Fear, wherewith Superstitious men do sadly torment themselves, while
they frame vain scruples to themselves. And a Superstitious man is defined to
be a Person affected with a vain and superfluous fear of God; Calv. Lexic.
Jurid. verbo Superstitiosus. See the Proposal rectified, p. 5, 6.
Qui metuit ibi Deum offendere, ubi non offenditur; One that fears to offend
God in that wherein he is not offended. Hence proceeds that tremulous aversion
to such things as God has no where forbidden, as if the use of them were
sinful. This the Apostle reproves in the Colossians, Touch not, taste not,
handle not, Coloss. 2. 20. Whence this Observation does naturally arise, That
such as are afraid they should offend God, and wound their Conscience, by the
use and practice of such things as God has not forbidden, are Superstitious.
And into what absurdities and extravagant Whimsies this humor will carry men,
we may read (as has been said) in Mr. Calvin, if our own Experience were not
pregnant with Examples to that purpose. How many men have formerly, and do
still trouble themselves and the Church of God upon this account! Sensi enim
saepe dolens and gemens multas infirmorum perturbationes fieri, per quorundam
fratrum Contentiosam Obstinationem, and Superstitiosam timiditatem, etc. They
are the Complaint of the Great St. Austin Ep. 118. Januario.
; I have seen with grief and sorrow, that the weaker sort are much disturbed by
the Contentious, Obstinacy, and Superstitious timorousness of certain Brethren,
who in matters of this ( indifferent) nature, which can be brought to no issue,
either by the Authority of the Holy Scripture, or the Tradition of the
Universal Church, or upon the account of their being beneficial toward the
amendment of life; but only, because they fancy they have some reason for them,
or some foreign practice, (which they esteem so much the more learned, because
it is the more remote) Tam litigiosas excitant quaestiones, ut nisi quod ipsi
faciunt, nihil rectum existiment Bullinger citing these words of St. Austin 1
Ep. ad Corinth. 11. p. 146. [Haec mire quadrant nostro saeculo] in his Margent.
; They raise such litigious Questions and Disputes hereupon, that they will
allow nothing to be right, but what they do themselves. Which is as true a
Character of our Dissenters, as if St. Austin had been alive, and acquainted
with their disposition and practice before he wrought it.

Fear is a Passion very apt to enthral us; and a fear upon the account of
Religion most of all. This Fear many times sets up strange Opinions in men's
minds; and when these are once framed, Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 10.. 11.
Humanum ingenium quod suum est illic recognoscit, and recognitum libentius
amplectitur, quam optimum aliquid, quod suae vanitati minus conveniret; It Is
the Nature of man to recognize his own Conceptions, and not only to acknowledge
them, but to be fond of them, and prefer them before the best things, which
contradict their Vanity.

3. Being wedded to these New Fangles, Matt. 15. 6.
(the issue of their own imaginations;) out of devotion to them they Sacrifice
(they offer up) the very Commandments of God; and perhaps by this means they
run into Idolatry, as well as Superstition, (though such as are most concerned
therein, are not presently sensible of the guilt of it.) I am sure St. Austin
and St. Hierome are both of this Judgment. Perverse Opinions (says Hierome) are
the Graven and Molten Images, which are adored by such as frame them in their
Imaginations, ( Comment. l. 1. in Habak. 2,) and (in Dan. 3.) Qui falsum Dogma
componunt He speaks of all Heretics, Qui fulgore eloquentiae Secularis falsum
Dogma componunt.
--;They which set on foot a false Opinion, set up an Image, and as much as
lies in their power, by their Persuasion, they compel others to fall down and
worship the Idol of their Falsehood. And again (in his Commentary upon Jerem.
32.) Sed usque hodie in Templo Dei quae interpretatur Ecclesia, etc. Even at
this day ( says he) in the Temple of God, which is interpreted to be the
Church; or in the hearts and minds of Believers an Idol is set up, when a New
Doctrine is broached: and as is said in Deuteronomy (the 4th) is worshipped in
secret. Nor does that Doctor rest here, but he says further (in that second of
Habakuk) Si quando videris aliquem nolle cedere veritati, etc. When thou see
a man that will not yield to Truth, but persist still in his Error and studied
opposition, when the falsehood of his Doctrines is made manifest; thou may
very fitly say, Sperat in figmento suo, and facit simulachra mu^a vel surda; He
puts his trust in his own figment, and frames to himself dumb or deaf Idols.
Nor does St. Austin differ in his Judgment; for he says plainly De vera
Religione, cap. 38.
, They are involved in a baser kind of Superstition, Idolatry and Servitude,
who worship their own Fancies, than they who worship the Host of Heaven. His
words are these, Est alius deterior and inferior cultus simulachrorum, etc.
There is another inferior and baser kind of Idolatry, when men worship their
own Fancies; and whatever the Imagination sets up in the mind through pride or
fear Timore (alias) tumore*
, Religionis nomine observant, They observe it strictly as their Religion. Now
whether these Dissenters, out of zeal to their Negative Superstition [Touch not
a Surplice, sign not with the Cross, kneel not at the Sacrament, etc.] do not
peremptorily reject the express Command of God, for Obedience to their
Governors, let all sober men and the World judge.

4. I would ask this Question; Do these Dissenters value those Homilies, or do
they not? If they trust our Reformers for that Observation, they have reason
also to believe them, that there is no such peril of Superstition in those
Ceremonies, which the Church then enjoined and they themselves practiced; for,
I hope their insinuation should not be more prevalent to keep them from
Superstition, than their constant practice to keep them in Obedience,
especially when, it is evident, that their Disobedience runs them into one sort
of Superstition, which in the general they pretend to be so very shy of, that
they can overlook an express and necessary duty to avoid it.

The Dissenters Tenth Section.
THey say, they have read over all the Books that have been written in
justification of those things, and they find their Arguments so weak, their
Reasons, so futilous, that setting aside Rhetoric and Railing, there is nothing
in them, but what had been either answered by others, or is contradicted by
themselves, which hardens them in their Error, who are gone astray into the
right way.

The Answer.
1. He says, they are gone astray into the right way: This is no time for
Bullbaiting; therefore if they have a mind to gad let them take their jest
along to make merry with. But Corah had as fair a way and as safe a Convoy too,
in his own conceit: Yet St. Jude was of another Judgment; and we know he fell
into the Pit at last. And it is somewhat an unlucky expression, [To go astray
into the right way, Jud. v. 13. Cajetan. ib.
] For we read of wandering stars; whose Motion (if we may believe any old
Philosophy,) is very Regular, in respect of the first mover, (and so they are
in the right way:) But they have Erratick Motions of their own; and to these
were those false-teachers resembled by St. Jude, who are said to wander;
because really they do so; by their fluctuation in their Doctrines, Deviation
from the common Practice of the Church, and by seducing their simple followers.
But they that are such, St. Jude tells us, there is a sad reserve of vengeance
allotted for them. Jud. Ep. v. 13.

2. They say, they have read over all the Books, etc. But do they bring minds
prepared to receive the truth, and Patient of convictions? Lavater (as was
observed above) tells us of Zelots in his time, that would write and publish
Answers, before they had well considered or so much as read the Discourses,
they did oppose. And one would think that some of these Dissenters dealt so by
their Adversaries; for they call their Arguments weak, many times, when they
cannot answer them: and their Reasons Futilous when they find them too
convinceing to be eluded. What their performances have been, when they menaged
this Province before that Learned Prince King James, at the Conference at
Hampton Court, his Majesty has told us in his Proclamation, Printed before the
Old Common Prayer: but left out in the New one.
of March 5. in the first year of his Reign, in these words [we found mighty
and vehement Informations supported with so weak and slender Proofs, as it
appeared to us and our Counsel, that there was no Cause why any Change should
have been at all in that which was most impugned, the Book of Common Prayer
containing the form of the public service of God here established neither in
the Doctrine; which appeared to be sincere, nor in the Forms and Rites, which
were justified out of the Practice of the Primitive Church. Thus says that
Learned and Judicious Prince. And whatever Partial men may think, the Judicious
and well discerning will conclude, that our present Dissenters (after all their
great pains and study) have made very little accession of advantage to their
Cause by Argument and sound Reason, whatever may accrue to it, by Noise,
Tumult, and importunity.

3. For Railing it is so much our Authors own Talent, I know no man will claim
it from him, especially finding that the Spirit; which acts in him, prompts him
not only to Scoff and Rail, but now and then to be Smutty and Obscene.

4. This Author seems to be very kind in allowing his Adversaries to have
Rhetoric. And it is a quality so ornamental and useful, I shall not wish them
to part with it, but to make use of it still (to better purposes then he does
his Wit and Reading) to advance Obedience Peace and Piety. But for
contradicting themselves (by which we are not to understand any ingenuous
Retraction upon second thoughts and better information) it is a new Observation
of this Authors, never before collected out of their Writings. It Is true, we
have read of Richard against Baxter (in 80 Pages,) but never of Richard against
Hooker, or any the like, in all my time. If he has found him out let him name
the party.

5. But the main Quaere will be, How these Dissenters come to be hardened in
their Error; for (tho he calls it a Going astray into the right way) there is
no less truth in this his Drollery, than in their Conviction, who are mentioned
Wisd. 5. 6. They have erred from the way of Truth; and how so? Malunt perversis
Vocibus veritati reluctari, quam confessis erroribus Paci restitui, De Baptismo
contra Donatist. lib. 3 c. 12
as St. Austin says of the Donatists; They had rather perversely resist the
Truth, than Confess their Errors to be restored to the Peace of the Church.
Let Scripture, and Antiquity; let the best Authority and the highest Reason
urge what they can, they will not be convinced or persuaded; the Reason is
given by the Learned Davenant; They are Inscitia occaecati, or Malitia abrepti,
or Philautia fascinati: Either blinded by Mistakes and Ignorance, or hurried
away by Envy and Malice, or bewitched by Self-love and Vainglory. They are
pre-engaged, and having embarked themselves upon other Principles (and drawn
so many well-meaning Souls into Association with them) they are resolved to
keep possession for their own Reputation and Interest. V. Isai. 44. 20.
Quisquis sibi in errore suo placet, nec inquirit an rectum sit institutum suum,
is nunquam animam suam liberabit. Calv. in Isai. 44. 20
For this Reason, they study, not to be informed, but to contradict. They read
what is Writ against them, not with a preparation of mind to receive the Truth
in the love of it; but to contrive the better to justify their Separation
(with the odd pranks which have been played upon that account.) This makes them
to Gavil at little things, and to rest in nothing; nor will they ever be
satisfied, but in the use of Forms and Canons of their own devising. For (to
such as have read them thoroughly) in the opinion of their own personal
Infallibility they come not much short of the Pope himself; and (had they Power
in their hands) we have some reason to believe, they would no less imperiously
impose the effects of it. I need go no further for Evidence, than the Front of
a Book written by Mr. B. which bears this Arrogant Title [The true and only way
of Concord of all Christian Churches:] which puts me in mind of what Bullinger
observed of the like sort of Men (which pesterd the Church of God) in his time:
In Ep. ad Gal. c. 2. p. 32.
Invenias hodie (says he) Morosos quosdam, qui tametsi non negare possint,
alios Paria docere, and unum cum ipsis Christum praedicare, cupiunt tamen se
Religionis Dominos appellari, imo a se profectum esse Evangelium Christi. You
may find ( says he) at this day certain froward men, who, though they cannot
deny, but other men Preach the same Christ, and the same Truth with themselves;
yet they ambitiously affect to be called the Masters of Religion; yes, and to
have men believe they stand engaged to them for the light and purity of the
Gospel. To such Arrogant Pretenders, we are taught what Reply to make by the
expostulation of the Great Apostle, See Grotius, Georg. Calixtus, Dav. Dicson,
Jo. Calvin.
to those deceitful Workers (as he calls them) among the Corinthians (1 Cor.
14. 36.) What? Came the Word of God from you, or came it unto you only? But of
this place we have given some account already.

I shall conclude this Section with the Words of the Reverend and Learned
Professor (who was not then Bishop) Prideux; De Authorit. Eccles. Lect. 22. in
Benedict. m. p. 352.
Haud scio an filios alat Magis degeneres quaevis Ecclesia, quam Anti-Synodicos
nonnullos Novatores, qui seorsim saperent a Majoribus, aut Fratribus; and satis
ducunt ad Contemptum, si quis non statim se incurvet ad eorum vestigia. Hisce
plerunque familiare est, Transmarina, and long Petita admirare; Domestica
extenuare; Ignotos deperire; praepositis vero suis, quibus debito tenentur
obsequio, quavis arrepta occasion, recalcitrare; sua tantum deosculari, quae
non pallam This Lecture was read when Authority prevailed.
astruunt, sed occulto disseminant. Tantum abest ut tales Ecclesiam audiant, ut
indignantur plurimum, si ipsos non audiat Ecclesia, and saltet ad ipsorum
fistulam, etiamsi incertissimum edat Modulamen, Hujusmodi Superstitiosi,
factiosi, furiosi, insidiosi, destinandi vel debellandi sint a vobis, (Dilecti
Filii) si Benedictionis Coelestis Messem uberem, pacatam and optatam
expectetis. I know not ( says he) whether any Church can nourish more
degenerous Children, than some Anti-Synodical Innovators, who would be wiser
than there Betters, or their Brethren; and take it for a great Contempt, if any
one should not bow himself at their feet. It Is very familiar with these Men, to
admire what is foreign and farfetcht; and to depretiate and lessen what they
have at home; to be fondly in love with Strangers; but upon all occasions, to
kick against their Governors, to whom they owe a due Obedience: To embrace
only their own (Sentiments,) which (in those days) they did not openly assert,
but privily disseminate. Such Men are so far from hearing the Church, that they
take it in great disdain if the Church will not hear them, and dance after
their Pipe, though it gives never such an uncertain sound. Such Superstitious,
factious, furious, insidious Persons, you ( my Beloved Sons) are to mark out,
or vanquish, if you expect the plentiful, quiet, and desirable Harvest of the
Heavenly Benediction, etc.

Thus that Learned Doctor in his Lecture, In Vesperiis Comitiorum, July 10.
1637.
July 10. 1637.

The Dissenters Eleventh and Last Section.
THey say, It Is their duty to endeavor a Reformation according to the Word,
which if others will not, they cannot help it, and hope they will not be angry
with the Willing.

The Answer.
1. Is it their duty to endeavor a Reformation? How? Endeavors have several
ways and methods to exert and declare themselves: Is it by force of Arms, and
with Garments rolled in Blood? This is the practice of the Jesuits; and it was
in use in the Times of all our Princes since the Reformation of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, King Charles the First: and from the like practice in
the Reign of our present Dread Sovereign (we may make it a part of our Litany)
Good Lord deliver us. For we are sure this is not Christ's way, not according
to the Word. It may very well be their Temptation, but it cannot be their Duty.
But in order to a clear and full Answer, we shall consider,

1. The Scandal and Danger of Innovations; Scandal, I say, for if there be not
very good ground for it, the very Change it self is scandalous. Hereupon the
(then) Lord Commissioner Fiennes, in his Speech Treasons Mr. ^i^^^, page 23.
to Protector Crumwell, tells him, [So far as Old things can be retained
without danger or inconvenience, it is the wisdom and duty of all Governors to
retein them.] Things by good advice once settled, are not presently to be
altered, because some men presume they can make them better. Epist. 118.
Ipsa etenim mutatio Consuetudinis, quae etiam adjurat utilitate, Novitate
perturbat, as St. Austin has it; The change of an Old custom gives more
trouble and disturbance by the Novelty, than it can give advantage otherwise.
And, as is judiciously declared (in the Preface Before the Com. Prayer.
Of Ceremonies) If they grant any Ceremonies to be necessary, or so much as
convenient; surely where the Old may be well used, they cannot reasonably
reprove the Old only for their Age, without bewraying of their own folly. For
in such a Case, they ought rather to have reverence unto them for their
Antiquity, if they will declare themselves to be more studious of Unity and
Concord, than of Innovations and New-fangleness, which (as much as may be with
true setting forth of Christ's Religion) is always to be eschewed. Hereupon
King James concludes His Proclamation Printed before the Old Common Prayer
Book, and fit to be reprinted.
(of March 5. in the First of his Reign) in these words, We do admonish all
men, that hereafter they shall not expect nor attempt any further alteration in
the Common and public From of God's Service from this which is now
established; for that neither will we give way for any to presume, that our own
Judgment having determined in a matter of this weight, shall be swayed to
alteration by the frivolous Suggestions of any light Spirit. Neither are we
ignorant of the Inconveniences that do arise in Government, by admitting
Innovation in things once settled by mature deliberation: and how necessary it
is to use Constancy in the upholding the Public Determinations of States; for
that such is the unquietness and unstedfastness of some Dispositions, affecting
every year New Forms of things, as if they should be followed in their
Inconstancy, would make all actions of State ridiculou^ and contemptible:
Whereas the steadfast maintaining of things by good Advice established, is the
Weal of all Commonwealths.

It was a Law among the Locrians, That he who offered to repeal or change
Ancient Laws, and put up new, should come with a Halter about his Neck to their
Senate; that if there were better reason against his New Laws (then for them)
he should be hanged up for his bold Attempt. Demosth. contr. Democr.

2. We should consider whose duty it is to Reform. Private Persons have their
proper duty assigned them: But they want Learning, Skill and Judgment for the
work of Reformation; and consequently, should they attempt it, the Remedy were
like to be worse than the Disease* And, Secondly, they want Authority too; and
so their attempt would be but an Usurpation, and commence Rebellion, and so
proceed to Arms and Blood; and perhaps end in a submission to Popery, to bring
us again to some Rule and Order, after we are weary of Confusion.

Common People have business enough of their own, which the Apostle confines
them to, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. they must study to be quiet, and to do their own
business. They must live soberly, justly, and godly: To keep themselves from
Idols; to suffer Persecution, rather than defile their Conscience with
Superstition or profane Worship; for as Lactantius has observed, Inst. 5. 20.
Defendenda est Religio a privatis omnibus, non occidendo, sed moriendo; non
saevitia, sed patientia; non scelere, sed fide: Religion is to be defended of
all private Persons; not by taking away the lives of others, but by laying down
their own; not by Cruelty, but by Patience; not by Wickedness, but by Fidelity.
For St. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 4. 15.
They suffer justly as Malefactors, who suffer as Busybodies in other men's
matters. No Reformation can be made but some Laws and Customs must be laid
aside, and some established. But none have any legal Power to dissolve such
Constitutions, but they who make them. And they must have some Commission to
show for this purpose; for it would be too arrogant in men, to take upon them
to make Laws for the Government of Christ's Household without his Authority.
Hereupon the Learned and Judicious Sanderson has determined, De legum Human.
obligat.
Jus Condendi Leges Ecclesiasticas esse penes Episcopos, Presbyteros, Praelect.
7. p. 289.
aliasque personas a totius Regni Clero rite electos, and in Legitima Synodo
rite Congregatas; That the right of making Ecclesiastical Laws, is in the
Bishops, Presbyters, and other Persons duly chosen out of the Clergy of the
whole Kingdom, and rightly convened in a lawful Synod. Ita tamen ut ejus juris
sive potestati exercitium in omni Rep. Christiana, ex authoritate Supremi
Magistratus Politici pendere debeat: And yet so, that the exercise of that
Right and Power in every Christian Commonwealth ought to depend upon the
Authority of the Supreme Civil Magistrate.

Wherefore that Learned and Ingenious S. P. in The Case of the Church of
England (p. 264, 265.) has very well observed, That the Bottom we build upon
is this, That the Church owned by the Law of England, is the very same that was
established by the Law of Christ. For unless we suppose, that the Church was
Originally settled by our Savior with Divine Authority, we deny his Supremacy
over his own Church; and unless we suppose that the Supreme Government of the
Kingdom has power to abet and ratify our Saviors establishment by Civil Laws,
we deny his Majesty's Supremacy over his Christian Subjects; and therefore both
together must be taken into the right State and Constitution of the Church of
England.

There are some Rites and Ceremonies whose Original cannot be traced out,
having bin in use in the Church of God, at all times and places: These are
supposed with great Reason to have been derived from the Apostles themselves;
for such an Universal practice could not be introduced but by a Common and
Universal Authority, as an Universal effect must have a Cause of no less
efficacy to produce it. Now for any Particular Church to attempt a Change of
such Rites and Ceremonies, is as if a Quarter Sessions in a private
Corporation, should take upon them to dissolve or overrule what has been
regularly done and settled in a Full Parliament.

3. We should consider, whether there be any need of such Reformation as they
endeavor? There are some Rites and Ceremonies, which no Person, no Particular
Church should presume to alter; because the Unity and Uniformity of the
Catholic Church is preserved hereby; and if we will possess our selves to
continue in her Communion, we must observe them upon the account of our
Conformity to her practice. But other particular Rites and Ceremonies are left
to the prudence of Particular Churches, to exercise their Power and Liberty,
with respect to the Manners and Temper of the People. But,

That there is no Necessity of Reformation of the Public Doctrine of the
Church of England, has been made good against Doctor Burges by the Right
Reverend, Learned and Judicious Doctor Pearson, now Lord Bishop of Chester. And
that there is no Need of such a Reformation of the Public 1. Doctrine, 2.
Worship, 3. Rites and Ceremonies, 4. Church Government, 5. Discipline, as is
pretended, has been proved by H. S. D. D. 1660.

But we shall not take it for granted, (tho we know no Answer returned to
these, and several other Learned Men, who have wrote in Justification of the
Church of England to that effect,) but give our proof for it; That Church which
is already Reformed and established, according to the Word, as far as a state of
Frailty and Humane Prudence will admit; That Church has no need of further
Reformation: But such is the Church of England.

I would not be mistaken; For I know there ought to be a proficiency in Grace 2
Pet. 3. 18.
and Holiness, and the practice of all Christian Virtues, till we arrive at
such a Degree of Perfection as this Mortal condition is capable of. But for a
further Reformation of Doctrine or Government, of Liturgy, Rites and
Ceremonies, or of Laws and Canons, (if what are already enacted were duly
enforced and executed) we have no need of it.

It is duly observed by that Worthy Person even now mentioned, The Case of the
Church of England, p. 268.
That if every defect from Christ's Institution should forfeit the Rights of a
Christian Church, there never was, as we may find by the Apostles account of
the Churches in their times, nor ever will be such a thing as a Church in the
World. For in this life it is not to be expected that any thing should be
absolutely perfect, the very nature of Christianity supposes Imperfection, and
accepts of Integrity; and as long as with sincere Affections men adhere to the
Principles of the Church, they are within the Promise of the Grace of God.

That the Church of England is not Reformed up to those Principles, who can
make good the Charge against her? Where was the failure? Did not our Reformers
use sufficient Means?

(1) Did they not search the Scriptures, according to the Rule of our Blessed
Savior? Did they not understand the sense and latitude of the Scriptures? Had
they not an eye to the Rules of Decency and Order, to God's Glory and the
Edification of the Church?

(2) Did they not consult Antiquity, according to Divine Direction? Job 8. 8,
10. Jer. 6.. 16.

(3) Did they not use a Moral Diligence to search into the nature of things,
for their full satisfaction?

(4) Did they not make this Inquiry after the Truth with a Christian Simplicity
and Godly Sincerity? We appeal to the Searcher of Hearts to witness this, and
to their own Learned and Judicious Writings to assert the other.

(5) Had they not as full Authority, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, as was
needful to establish that Reformation? And,

(6) and Lastly, Have we not had God's Blessing (while we Conformed obediently
to it) to assure us he was well-pleased with that Establishment?

King James tells us in his Proclamation even now mentioned, [We had no reason
to presume that things were so far amiss as was pretended, because we had seen
the Kingdom under that Form of Religion, which by Law was established in the
days of the late Queen of Famous Memory, blessed with a Peace and Prosperity,
both extraordinary and of many years continuance; a strong Evidence that God
was therewith well-pleased.] But it is an ill sign of a growing Reformation,
when the times afford us (as they have done a long while) so many Evil men and
Seducers, who wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, (2 Timothy 3.
13.) A Reformation of Manners and Practice we acknowledge highly needful; but
for Ecclesiastical Orders and Constitutions about the Worship and Service of
God, there wants nothing but a hearty Observation to improve them.

4. It is to be considered with great attention. Whether such as are in
Authority, and are satisfied that there is no need of Reformation, should alter
Legal Constitutions to gratify, whether the Humor or Importunity of Dissenters?

In the management hereof I shall consult no Passion or Interest, nor be swayed
by any prejudice, resolving only to give the sense of other Protestants, and I
shall begin with the Lutherans.

It Is the Resolution of David Rungius Ex Ep. ad Romans Disput. 16. These. 43.
, After a faithful account given of the free use of things indifferent, such as
will not submit to a just Authority, nothing is to be done in their favor; but
as Persons persisting in their purpose, out of Hypocrisy or Stubborness, out
of a love of Contention, or some other Mental distemper, they are sharply to be
reproved.

Brochmand System. Tom. 2. Artic. 40. cap. 1.. 3. p. 514.
, another eminent Man of that Party, says, Some respect is to be had of the
Weak in order to their Information: but to such as are obstinately
Superstitious, maliciously Treacherous, or false Brethren, there ought not to
be the least yielding. His Reasons are these, Lest hereby we should confirm the
Superstitious in their Superstition, or Minister Scandal, and an occasion of
Error to such as are conformable, or afford such false Brethren matter to
glory in.

The Learned Meisner Colleg. Adiaphor. Disput. 1. These. 60, etc.
has mustered up no less than Seven Arguments to the same purpose, which I
shall collect as briefly as is possible.

1. The first is drawn from the Nature of things Indifferent; which is such as
that they may be freely used, or freely disused or abrogated; but when the
disuse, abrogation or practice is obtruded as of Necessity and Coaction, the
nature of such Indifferent things is violated.

2. From the Nature of Christian Liberty. This is a valuable Treasure, and of
Christ's own purchasing: but it is endangered by a double Invasion. 1. When
things not commanded by God's Word, are imposed as absolutely necessary to be
observed. 2. When things not forbidden by God's Word, are restrained as sinful
to be practiced. There is Error and Superstition on either side, and Christian
Liberty is equally betrayed in them both; which Authority therefore should
neither abet, nor tolerate.

3. From the Duty of true Christians. An ingenuous Profession of the Gospel; to
assert the whole Truth thereof, with the Privileges which accrue to us
thereby, especially when assaulted and opposed: and such is our Christian
Liberty, with the free use, or disuse of things Indifferent (not determined by
Authority, whose Power the Gospel has established.) This is a Christians Duty;
A flat denial whereof is against that Profession which Christ requires ( Matt.
10. 33.) and to dissemble it is unwarrantable, and we ought to avoid the
appearance of it, (as one of the unfruitful works of darkness) that we betray
not our Profession.

4. From the general Command touching the lawful use of Ceremonies and things
Indifferent: Wherein three things are to be observed, Order, Decency, and
Edification. Good Order is not kept in tumultuous Alterations: All Change is
dangerous in Church and State. No man can foresee what disturbance will ensue
upon an inconsiderate variation of indifferent and inoffensive Ceremonies,
especially in a time when such Christian Privileges and Public Authority
ought to be owned and preserved inviolable. What Doubts may arise upon such a
Change, and what Confusion may follow it, who will take upon him to determine?

Is not the Confusion great, when things Indifferent are exposed for Necessary,
and things Absolutely necessary accounted but Indifferent?

Can it be inservient either to Order or Decency, when there is no degree of
Superiority and Subordination among the Ministers of the Church? No distinction
of Habits between the Laity and the Ministers of the Gospel, observed?

Who can think the Church is Edified, where all Genuflexion, all Reverence, all
evidences of a Devout mind are out of practice? When all the Proper Lessons,
that should inculcate the Great Mysteries, which are to be represented for our
Memory, our Devotion and Gratitude, on the Festivals of the Nativity, the
Resurrection and Pentecost, etc. are abrogated; and perhaps the History of
Lot's Incest, and the like, things most incongruous for such Sacred
Solemnities, shall be surrogated and read in their stead?

5. A Fifth Argument is drawn Ab incommodo, from the great Incommodiousness of
it. As the general Command requires in matters of Indifferency, that all things
be done to edification: so the Law of Charity forbids us to do any thing that
may either offend the Weak in the practice of their Conformity, or confirm the
Adversaries in their Error; the Example of the Great Apostle affording us
signal Instances to these purposes. The Mischiefs of such a Scandal* are
sufficiently collected from the Woe our Savior has denounced against the
Authors of them, Matt. 18. 6,. 7. And the Mischiefs of such a Confirmation of
obstinate Dissenters, are too evident (says he) by Experience: The Peace of
the Church is not hereby obtained, but the safety thereof much endangered; for
the Adversaries do not acquiesce in such Concessions; but take occasion from
thence to proceed in defending their Errors, and disturbing the Church; an
Example whereof has given us a late Experiment in the Dukedom of Anhalt. If
they can obtain to have things abrogated, because they are pleased to load them
with the reproach of Superstition and Sinfulness, they cannot with a fairer
occasion to traduce other Matters, and by this specious Argument of yielding in
such Cases, among the weaker and worse sort of Men, to render Them suspected in
their Principles, whom they had formerily treated with all respect and
reverence as the Ministers of God: Hereupon such as are not well Confirmed,
will be apt to fall away, and others will be offended at their defection; and
so the Church (says he) will not be edified, but destroyed; the Course of the
Gospel not promoted, but hindered; and at last Truth it self not asserted, but
weakened and subverted.

6. A Sixth Argument he draws from The Practice of the Primitive Church.
Circumcision being then but a thing indifferent (as he observes) St. Paul,
according to the Rule of Charity and Christian Liberty, did sometime practice
it; but when false Brethren did fraudulently intrude, to spy out and betray the
Liberty of the Church, and attempted to impose it as a matter of Necessity; St.
Paul did absolutely reject it and condemn it.

Simile ergo, etc. In like manner the Rites and Ceremonies used in the Lutheran
Churches are Adiaphora, things indifferent, neither commanded nor forbidden,
either by any Divine Law, or Prohibition; God leaving them as a middle sort of
things, which the Church may either freely use or not use at her pleasure. Now
( says he) seeing the Calvinists would put a necessary abstention and
restraint upon us as to the use of these things, it is out of all question, they
would ( in effect) betray our Liberty. Wherefore such as are faithful Asserters
of the Christian Liberty, ought not to yield to them in the least; that
(according to their duty) the Truth and Privileges of the Gospel, may be
preserved inviolable from all bondage and dissimulation. Such as do otherwise,
by a tame and cowardly Cession, do betray our Liberty, give scandal to the
weak, and offer a manifest violence to Apostolical Practice.

7. His last Argument is drawn from the insufficiency and weakness of the
Adversaries Reasons to make good their pretensions; which he does clearly
evince, as will appear to any man that shall take the pains to examine the
Discourse it self, to which I remit the Reader.

I have studied to be concise in the Abridgment of his Arguments, which he
concludes thus:

That the Calvinists may obtain what they desire, it is necessary that they urge
their abrogation upon an honest Title; and prove by evident Reasons, that the
Rites received in our Churches are not purged from the Superstitions and abuses
of the Romanists, but serve to nourish them. Which, since they never did
attempt, because Experience is a clear Evidence to the contrary; therefore
according to the Liberty purchased for us, says he, we do retain these
Ceremonies, which are indifferent in themselves, and no where forbidden by the
Word of God. And that the Nature of things indifferent may remain entire,
Christian Liberty safe, and the Truth unshaken; we are resolved not to yield,
no not so much as for one moment, to the intemperance of our Adversaries, who
under a pretense of Zeal do nothing in matters of Religion, but with tumult and
an immoderate Asperity. Thus the Learned Meisner, on behalf of the Lutherans.

Yet I cannot omit another pregnant Evidence of their strictness in adhering to
their establishment, which we find in an Extract out of the National Synod,
held by the Churches of France at Charenton, in September 1631.

In the Chapter which contains their General Acts, their Answer made to an
Address of some of the Lutheran Persuasion, (Translated into English either by
Mr. Samuel Hartlip, or Mr. John Dury, Printed 1641.) runs in these very words,
viz.

Touching the request made by the Province of Burgoigne, that such of the
Faithful as embrace the Augustane Confession, might be permitted to Contract
Marriages, and bring their Children to be baptized in our Churches, without
abjuring the former Opinions which they hold, contrary to the Belief of these
Churches. The Synod does declare, that seeing the Churches of the Confession of
Ausburg do agree with the other Reformed Churches, in the Principles and
Fundamental Points of true Religion, and that in their Discipline and Form of
Divine Worship, there is neither Idolatry nor Superstition. Such of the
Faithful of that Confession, as shall with the Spirit of Charity, and in a
truly Peaceable way join themselves unto the Public Assemblies of the Churches
in this Kingdom, and desire to Communicate with them, may, without the
Abjuration This was a special favor.
aforesaid, be admitted to the Holy Table, Contract Marriages with the Faithful
of our Confession, and present themselves in the quality of Godfathers to the
Children which shall be baptized: Upon their Promise given to the Consistory
This is their strictness.
, that they will never solicit them to Contradict or do any thing, directly or
indirectly, against the Doctrine believed and professed in our Churches; but
shall content themselves with giving them Instruction only in things wherein we
all agree. --

The Note in the Geneva Bible (at 1 Cor. 14. 38.) is worth our observation,
[The Church ought not to care for such as be stubbornly ignorant, and will not
abide to be taught; but to go forward notwithstanding in those things which are
right. Nay, in their Books of Discipline, as was observed above, they Decree,
That such as will not acquiesce in the Decision of their National Synod, and
expressly cast of their Errors, shall be cut off from the Communion of the
Church. And this we find practiced in Genevah with great severity; for
Goulartius, and the rest of the Consistory, deprived Rotarius, one of their
Ministers, and thrust him out of their City; and (which is more) they hunted
him by their Letters out of a Town not far from thence, which had entertained
him for their Pastor. And all this was done, because he gave the Cup, in his
own Church, with his own hand, not permitting a Layman to deliver it. This
Fact of his was not the breach of any Ancient Canon of the Church, but
consonant to our Savior's own Practice, at the Institution of the Sacrament;
yet being against the Custom of that place, they did thus sharply punish it.
And Mr. Calvin does seem to justify such rigor, upon a Rule of the Apostle (1
Cor. 11. 16.) which affords him this Observation, Authoritate magis
compescendos esse pervicaces, and rixandi cupidos, quam refellendos longis
disputationibus; that is, Such as are stubborn, and addicted to dispute and
wrangle, ( and refuse to sit down quietly by the Public Determinations and
Practice of the Church) are not to be treated with Disputations, but to be
bridled by Authority. And there is

AN END.
AN ANSWER Sent to the Ecclesiastical Assembly at LONDON, By the Reverend,
Noble, and Learned Man JOHN DEODATE, THE Famous professor of Divinity, And most
vigilant Pastor of GENEVAH; With some Marginal Notes by the late King. Printed
at Newcastle by Stephen Bulkley, 1647.
The Translators Preface To the Simple Seduced Reader.
Reader,
MAy the Father of Lights open thine Eyes to see over this Strangers shoulders,
and by this Impartial perspective, what thou, whilst kept down thus low by the
new Masters and through thy Seducers false Mediums, have not hitherto been
suffered to perceive, it being till now purposely hid from thine Eyes: Behold a
mere Stranger that notwithstanding his manifold Obligations and personal
engagements to a contrary Discipline in the Church, and different form of
Government in the State, yet overruled by the manifest Truth and Honesty of the
Kings Cause, breaks through all those Restraints of his Liberty (as far as he
may) to tell the thus much plain English Truth; Behold here Geneva's veneration
and full vindication too of thine own Mother the Church of England, as it stood
under Episcopacy, traduced here at home by her own spurious Brood for
Superstitious, Popish, Antichristian, what not? And this Apology directed to
the Assemblymen in answer to their Letter what ever it was. Behold here again a
clear Justification of the King, vilified by his own for that for which
strangers do admire him; his Clemency, his Inclinations to Peace, his Acts of
Grace, etc. Behold here the Root of Gall, that which has brought forth all
these National Mischiefs, the Popular Tumults and Conspiracies pointed at
there, as the only Evident Cause of the Kings Divorce from the Parliament. See
here by whom poor Ireland was deserted* one thing also thou may here take
notice of from these standers by, That the Clergy, in their own proper Sphere,
may be as fit and as honest, and perhaps in some respect more able, for the
good speed of a Treaty, than those that do slight them with utter preterition.
Last of all behold here the Loyal and Religious Subjects only Militia or his
own proper Magazine, to wit, the known Laws of the Land, that and Prayer and
Submission are the only defensive weapons allowed here by this Master of Fence.
I say no more to thee, See Dr. Deodates Notes on Romans 1. 2. and elsewhere.
save only, that I do heartily pity thee, and therefore I do still pray for
thee, and for all thy fellow-bondmen, That God will bring into the way of Truth
all such as have erred and deceived, Amen.

Reverend, Godly, and worthy Sirs, our Dear Brethren and Companions in the work
of the Lord.
IF proportionably to the grief, we have conceived at your Letters, (wherein
you have expressed the most sad face of your Affairs,) we had but as much
Ability either by our Consolations to assuage your sorrows, or by our Counsels
to ease. your Burdens, or by any our Cooperation to help your Extremity, we
should think our selves very happy in so well corresponding with your
Honorable, and most loving Compellation of us; and right glad we should be
thus to requite you with our best and effectual good Offices. But alas, as the
scantness of our Capacity in this kind, so the ignorance of the more inward
causes of so many miseries, and chiefly the perplex and dangerous Nature of the
matters now in Agitation among you: All these put together, strike us quite
dumb: we are as men wholly at a stand, able only (in a kind of silent
Astonishment or holy horror) to admire, and to adore that finger of God, which
is now listed up over you all.

But since, being by you so lovingly invited to it, we must needs at last break
off our silence, we are reduced to an extraordinary suspense both of mind, and
of pens, what to say first or last, or indeed what to say at all.

And now in the end, after long deliberation, lest, as Job's Friends, we should
transgress by precipitate or unseasonable discourse: Behold our Hearts and
Mouths top-full of the Senses and Expressions of our hearty Commisseration, our
Eyes running down with Tears of Compassion, our Breasts even swol'n up with
Sighs and Groans at your Calamities. These are they, God is our Witness, that
fill up the greatest part of our private Prayers, of our public Devotions,
Fastings and Humiliations: In all which we are resolved to give the Father of
mercies no rest, until your Tranquillity being once more Ordained in Heaven,
God do extend peace upon Earth unto you all like a River, and the fullness of
his blessing, like an overflowing stream.

Our Affairs, yea, the general interest of all the Reformed Churches are so
closely involved in yours, and so mutually depending thereon, That your safety
once procured assures us all of our own good Estates. Therefore especially
during this grevious Tempest, which may seem to bring about again the heavy
time of the saints great primitive tribulation, we are, in a manner compelled
with trembling Hearts and Lips, to pour out our Lamentations into the Ears of
our most gracious and heavenly Father, no longer now only preparing to contend
by Fire, as he once revealed it in a Vision to his Prophet Amos. 7. 4, 5. but
already for a long time really contending by Fire indeed: And how then can we
forbear from crying out, O Lord forgive, cease we beseech thee, by whom shall
Jacob arise for he is small, and round about all in Flame, by the Fire of thy
burning Indignation. From this our own Watchtower, untoucht as yet by Divine
Miracle, We have beheld this furious Conflagration spreading it self all over;
We have seen the Grisoen-Italian Churches utterly defaced, the Gospel in
Bohemia its ancient seat, wholly extirpated; The Palatinate devoured; The
French Church as deprived of all humane supports, and refuges, like so many
poor little Callow Birds alive indeed, but only during pleasure: The German
Churches almost all over shaken, yea, more then half destroyed; your own
Ireland swallowed up with an unexpected deluge of Assassines and Robbers; one
only thing was wanting to that huge heap of public Calamity, Namely, that
Flourishing England, the very Eye and Excellency of all the Churches, Christ's
own choice, purchase, and peculiar; the Sanctuary of the afflicted, the Arcenal
of the faint-hearted, the Magazine of the needy, the Royal Standard of good
hope, This is a very large Testimony o^ the flourishing Estate of the Church of
England as it stood under it is Episcopal Government.
should be so unlookt for an accident, without any external Enemy, or foreign
Impression, become in a manner, it is own Felo de se, and make an end of it self
with it is own cruel hands. What a sad Spectacle is this to see that Church thus
trodden under foot? To see that glorious Fold of our Lord thus ransackt, yea
worried, not by the wild Beasts of the Forest, not torn in pieces by the
merciless paws of the Lion, or of the Wolf, but utterly dismembered by it is own
unnatural Sheep enraged and exasperated one against another* An horrid example
this, and till now never heard of among the Reformed Churches! It seems
heretofore like Christ's own true Sheep, they were kept tame by the fear of
God, united by the same bond of Faith, knit together by the apprehension of the
common Enemy, and so long they did both express and exercise holily and
faithfully their mutual Charity, Quiet, and Unity amongst themselves; in all
which they preserved themselves from the rage of the Wolf, by the Christian
simplicity of their own good conditions, by the Innocence of their pious lives,
by the sanctity of their Religion, by the constant undauntedness of their holy
Faith. But now we are wholly struck with horror at the change of that glorious
face of your Church, Still that was under Episcopacy.
whilst we hear at this distance the loud report of those deadly Wars that are
now flaming up betwixt the King and his People; to see at Daggers drawing
indeed, Brethren against Brethren, Parents against their own Children, Christ's
Sheep pushing against and goaring their own fellows, nay their own Sheepherds:
At all this we are utterly amazed, and would scarce have believed, That in the
self-same pitched Field, one and the same God and Father, in the name of one
and the same Mediator, at one and the same time, could be invocated for help on
both sides, to shed the Blood of those, that for the Major-part had hitherto by
so many clear Demonstrations, in the whole equal course of their lives, equal
in their piety toward God, equal in their love and loyalty toward their
Country, approved themselves such faithful and true Brethren one to another;
strange, That these should now against their own Bowels turn all their
warlike-power, far better if employed in the just punishments of their own
treacherous Neighbors, or toward the relief of their dearest Brethren, so
long bowing the back under the weight of their bondage, and even at the last
gasp for help.

What marvel then, if these your cruel distractions have awakened, yea,
divided even to a variety the Judgments and Affections too of Christendom?
Neither do we our selves deny but that for a while we did somewhat stagger at,
and as it were fluctuate about it; yet that demur of ours did neither proceed
from prejudice against; nor from partiality toward either side, as not being
called upon by either, neither publicly nor privately, till now of late in
your reference unto us, which we do reckon as no small piece of honor, since
in your esteem our Judgment may seem of so much weight, as able to advance or
balance down either party, both being of such extraordinary quality.

We have contained our selves within the bounds of a conscionable Judgment, and
impartial Charity, toward both parties, for indeed ye are both Brethren; We
have neither way exceeded the compass of our own measure, but still kept a
mean, as rejoicing on the one hand at those good things which we did hear were
entertained with the general applause of all good men; So on the other hand, we
could not but behold with grief those other sinister passages that in
themselves did carry a more fatal appearance: we were overjoyed at the Without
Battle or Bloodshed.
Issue of the Scottish troubles, that seemed at first to presage a Combustion
not unlike this of yours, and yet far sooner quenched; for as by God's own
admirable handi-work (so by the never-enough-magnified Piety and Wisdom of your
most gracious King, and by the Concord of that wary Nation) that fire was in
time put out, ere ever it did burst into a more open flame. At the first Report
of these your own Commotions, our minds were possessed with a good hope that
all past Offenses might with the same promptitude and facility be forthwith
repaired, and all matters composed: So that what Actions or Counsels should
appear amiss, might by the Benignity of the best of Princes be easily
redressed, and consequently both Church and Commonwealth without noise or
bloodshed be kept in due order: In pursuance of all which, we could not but
admire the happy and glorious beginnings of the Parliament, and the more than
Fatherly affections of his his most gracious Majesty, evidenced by his enacting
those Laws, from which for the time to come, there was a clear hope of a
Government full of Equity, and freed from all Corruption: An example not so
rare, as indeed singular in this our wild Generation, so fertile of violent
Powers and Princes. But all these our goodly hopes were soon blasted by that
raging storm and tempest of popular Tumults among you, that did force away both
your most gracious Prince from his Parliament, as also a great part of the
Parliament from it self, since which we have heard indeed of many attempts and
enterprises, many propositions and projects, but all of them come to nothing,
nothing is yet brought to perfection, nothing is yet rightly settled or
established.

The Business of the Church might seem the chief object of your care and
solicitude: If it had been handled and debated at times, and with minds calm
and quiet, had the opposite Judgments been compared and impartially weighed one
with another such an orderly course might happily have purchased a lasting
peace to your Kingdom, and also rendered unto your Church that most desired
Primitive face of the Apostolical times, Such was Episcopacy in it is first
Apostolical vigor of Discipline; and Government, the which as at the Synod of
Dort, this very man did both acknowledge unto Bishop Carleton, to be the best
form of Church Government, and also did heartily wish for it in his own Church;
so does he sufficiently commend the happy effects of it above page 5. in that
full passage on his containing the superlative praises of the former
flourishing Estate of the Church of England, as before these troubles it stood
under Episc^pacy; The Restoration of which former good Estate, is again by
this Auth^r at the latter end of this Epistle, p. 12. earnestly wished and
prayed for.
but behold how quite contrary the Event has fallen out! For the minds of both
sides being averse from, yea, violently bent one against another, this very
matter has proved the Rock of Offense by exasperating the wound and tearing it
wider and wider by distracting more and more asunder the hearts of each party
distempered enough already through former partiality and discord of affections.
Nay, if the report be true, these Church-distractions have opened a wide gap to
so many boisterous and private spirits, which we hear have assumed to
themselves the most mischievous Title of Independants, than which Destructive
Sect nothing could more undermine, yea, quite overturn the very Foundation of
the Church.

Besides all that, we have been extremely grieved at this, That The Spirit of
Division has so plentifully sown among you his pernicious Tares of Fears and
Jealousies, that they have not only fructified, but even overgrown all manner
of mutual Trust, in despite of so many Royal Protestations sealed and bound up
with most grievous Imprecations. But the very top and height of all our sorrows
on your behalfs, has been this, That all that cursed fuel thus heaped on, is
now at last kindled into a bloody War, lengthned on both sides, by a
Multiplication of deadly feudes; so that during such an Universal Combustion,
what ever men's bare words, and never so frequent protestations otherwise may
pretend, yet the Royal Honor, Power and Dignity cannot but fall into utter
contempt: And on the contrary the licentiousness of the most Audacious and
Lawless cannot but gather strength and out-grow the other: and then,
consequently Piety must needs decay, mutual Love and Charity must utterly
vanish away, and instead thereof a kind of Savage disposition, yea Brutish rage
must needs at last invade the minds and manners of the men of this Generation,
who in process of time will no longer look upon the Old Original Causes that
began the War, but rather upon the new mutual injuries freshly done, or
received in the very progress or prosecution of the War between two parties
divided far more by an odious difference of reproachful names, as it were,
infamous brands fixed upon each other, then really by the cause it self, it had
been far more easy unto us, and all good men else, to deliver our Judgments
upon your cause; had the Major part of either side differed from the other
either in the more Essential points of Religion, or else dissented about the
Fundamental Laws of the Commonwealth; or had either party been oppressed Woe be
to them that first began that war, whose non-necessity, yea, Injustice,
strangers themselves can so far off so plainly perceive and condemn too.
by the other in a direct way of open persecution, or had there been an
introduction of public Tyranny against the Laws through the baseness and
pusillanimity of the other party: But as for you, you have abundant cause of
comfort of security against all these evils To Wit, in a fair, quiet, Legal
Parliamentary way, not in a Martial way: therefore he mentions not at all the
power of Arms, but only the power of the Laws.
since by virtue of your own most Just and Powerful Laws, those Laws that
already have been indifferently agreed upon by the general consent of all
parties concerned, you may with ease prevent, or put by all those forementioned
evils, which in other Kingdoms may seem almost unavoidable: All these
Considerations put together, have moved us for a long while seriously to
deliberate and advise what might be at last, the best expedient lest to procure
an honest and sure peace among you. Indeed we have been much scandalized, that
all the Mediations of several Kingdoms and Provinces in League with you, have
been tried and used all in vain: Howbeit it came into our mind to propound this
one Medium more, whether now at last there be yet any hope to obtain from the
King's most gracious Majesty, and from the Parliament, that of both sides
Ecclesiastical Persons may be chosen of unquestioned Trust, and fameproof
beyond all suspicion, to whom this great business may be committed; Namely,
That comparing the chief points now in controversy, they may chalck out some
good way toward an holy peace. But first these men must by God's good Spirit,
themselves be dispossessed of all factious inclinations, that so they may
become sit Vmpires and Trustees of the Public peace, and Impartial
Ambassadors of Reconciliation between both parties, and also able and studious
too, by all their speeches, exhortations, and sacred obtestations, to charm the
hearts that on both sides are so obdurate in War and Bloodshed. This were the
ready way, by this interposing the Sacred Censer in the very midst of these
public flames to quench all the heart-burnings: for who knows whether at the
devout Prayers and holy Groans of Persons Sacred, thus prostrate at the
footstool of the Heavenly grace, the Divine Power and Glory may not break out
once more, and show forth it self by moving the hearts of both parties to lay
down all hatred, and public enmities. The only way to procure such sound
Counsel of both sides, and to purchase again the precious blessing of a general
Peace, is especially when all humane helps fail, to call in the Divine
assistance, which no man did ever try in vain. By these good means that may be
brought to pass (what cannot be hoped for from Civil-War, however the success
prove) that by a voluntary inclination of minds, the wound shall be so fully
closed up, as that Love and Charity may in time perfectly be recovered.

The good opinion which you have conceived of us may suffer us to offer these
Considerations unto you, It might be immodesty in us to prescribe, or to advise
you any further: But no Law of modesty can ever forbid us to wish, and to vow,
and to beseech God for you, yea to appeal unto God, and to adjure you All in
his name.

O then above all, take a speedy and special care for a sure and sound Peace;
what ever it be What would this Peacemaker have said if he had seen or heard
of so many Royal Reiterated offers of Peace wherewith the Sovereign has and
still does woo his stif-necked Subjects? Certainly, the more peaceable side
has always amongst good men had the reputation of the better side.
it is to be preferred before any Civil Broyls. Beware lest the fortune of War
smiling upon you, draw you on, and tempt you to commit your great affairs to
the Ambiguous Chance of Victory, then which nothing can happen more deadly,
yea, pernicious unto the Commonwealth. Roll away that huge scandal that lies
so heavy upon the whole Christian World, yea, wash and wipe of that foul stain
of black oppression, charged especially upon the purest profession of the
Gospel, as if still it did in a kind of Antipathy, or secret hatred, oppose and
oppugn all kingly power, and Supreme Authority. Mitigate and assuage the
exulcerated and too too much provoked mind of your King, and do not Compel him
This was very good Counsel from a stranger, had the Subjects had the Grace to
follow it in time, then had there been an end of the Old-War, and a happy
prevention of a New War, which except stopped by timely submission, can portend
nothing but the utter National ruin of Church and state, which God in mercy
Avert.
to Pinacles and Precipices.

Rather bear with some Blemishes and Corruptions, from which, no Empire could
yet wholly be free, no not in its most flourishing Estate. Account not those
Remedies the best, that are abruptly applied and accumulated, but those rather
that being taken in by Degrees, may in time, by little and little, go down more
easily, end digest the better, and so at last obtain a Confirmation. And last
of all by the Bowels and Mercy of Christ, suffer your selves to be entreated,
that we may no longer see that wealth, power and strength, which God has
graciously bestowed upon you, employed, yea, utterly wasted in the fatal ruin
of your own selves, but rather let it be stretched out to the Relief, and
support of so many of your own most afflicted Of Ireland.
Brethren, even panting after your own Peace.

May the God of Peace himself bear, accep^, and grant these our sincere
Devotions; may God defeat all the Plots, disappoint all the Machinations of the
Devil, and of Antichrist. May the same God restore your Kingdom and restore
your Churches, to that high state and pitch of Holiness and Glory, in which, on
the Theater of the universal Church, they have hitherto excelled and out-shined
all the This full Testimony of the Excellent State of the Church of England
(st^ll as it heretofor^ stood under Episcopacy) out-speaks all the former; and
to this good Ejaculation from Genevah, no right Protestant-Malignant but will
heartily say, Amen.
Churches upon Earth.

As for us, take in good part this our plain sense delivered freely unto you in
a Brotherly Confidence; pardon also and impute our delay of answer unto these
weighty reasons: The Roport was here very strong, that you were now very fair
for a Treaty of Peace: Therefore we thought fit to expect what a day might
bring forth, so that all our words and all our affections too, might overflow
with mere gratulations and full expressions of our Joys. But sorry we are, that
we have yet again been deceived with vain hopes: And now that we may speedily
recover and enjoy that happiness, we both wish and pray (with as much Devotion
as becomes your dearest Brethren, who Glory not a little in your good esteem of
us.) That God will pour down upon you his richest Benedictions, together with a
large measure of his Wisdom, and Spiritual strength. Farewell, and Prosper in
the Lord

FINIS.
Postscript.
SIR,
YOU have put me upon a fresh task, and I must obey you. The Projected Union
among Protestants, (to tell you my Opinion,) is a thing most desirable, and of
the highest Consequence, if possible to be accomplished. But if we design an
Union of all Protestants in General, we must consider the Circumstances under
which they ly.

1. Some of them are under such Subjection and awe, to Popish Princes, it is not
safe for them to come into any Debate about the Means and Methods of it. Where
it may be done with freedom and safety, it may be Prudent and Advisable to
Consult the most Eminent Divines as well of the Lutheran as the Calvinian
Churches. And the Concurrent Judgment of such (if to be obtained) might
Contribute more to the satisfaction of the truly Conscientious, in Uniting the
Protestant Interest, than the gratifying of every Sect, hand over head, within
our selves. But I confess it is almost out of doubt, that the Sects (which swarm
among us) of Anabaptists, Socinians, Antinomians, Ranters, Quakers,
Fift-Monarchists, and (which comprehends them all) Independents, would never
pass the Muster with such Divines, for any public establishment or protection.
And can any wise man think fit we should loose or hazard our Character and
Esteem abroad, the honor of the most prudent and Regular Reformation, to
gratify such Sectaries as would certainly be exploded among all Protestants of
any Creditable Denomination?

2. Besides, being a Maxim and Rule generally received among them, That every
particular Church has power within it self, to frame Canons and Constitutions;
and to settle Rites and Ceremonies, for the exercise of Religion and Discipline
among their own Members, they may very well think it impertinent for them to
interpose, or to be called upon for their Advise and Judgment in this matter.

3. Besides, it is to be considered, that we stand all ready upon the same
bottom with other Protestant Churches, only we are better built, (as they know
very well) both for Strength and Beauty; in so much, as that Noble and Learned
Pastor of Genevah, calls the Church of England the Arsenal of the Protestant
Profession, the Crown and Glory of all the Church of that Denomination.

Can there be any reason or good Policy to cut of the locks of this Spouse of
Christ, and Eclipse her Glory? To pull down the Pallisadoes and demolish the
Fortifications of such a Fabric? To rob her of her Venerable Antiquity and
Primitive Luster? And all this upon no other account, than to gratify a
restless and uneasy sort of People, by falling under the same reproach with
themselves, of being addicted to nothing else but Lightness, Change, and
Novelties.

4. But we are to consider further, That the Laws are the Bond of Union, the
Sinnews and Ligaments of all Bodies Politic; and where these are had in
Veneration, and observed with due respect, that People are as well United as
Humane Policy can aim at. Such as will not submit to such prudent and wholesome
Constitutions, do voluntarily shut themselves out of the Lines of
Communication. And when the door is open if they will not enter in to join with
us, they must stand exposed upon their own Legs, and expect no defense from
us, whose Communion they do causelessly desert. But to think the Walls of the
City are presently to be broken down to let in this Trojan Horse, (as a great
Prelate Bp. Lany.
expressed himself at Court) is an attempt like to be fatal, and a certain way to
bring in ruin.

5. That some should be obliged to obey the Laws and show Conformity, and
others be dispensed with, cannot stand with Equity. Aequalitas prima pars
aequitatis, says Seneca, Equality is the first and chiefest part of Equite.

We are taught also by a dear experience that such a dispensation will breed
division: for a division in Laws makes Oliver Ormerod. Puritano-Papismus. p. 29.
division in Kingdoms, a choosing of sides and a mustering into Parties, whence
strife infallibly, with Envy, Emulations, Contentions, and a Worldr of other
mischiefs do arise. And as Division in Laws causes division in Kingdoms; so
those divisions cause the subversion and overthrow of such Kingdoms. For it is
Gospel that a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. Satan's Kingdom thus
divided would come to desolation; how then can a Kingdom of Flesh and Blood, a
Kingdom of Mortal Men subject to impetuous passions, subsist under Agony and
conflict of divisions?

If there were no such danger likely to ensue upon a Toleration or Connivance;
yet it cannot stand with Decency and Honor, that one People, within the same
Land, and under the same Government, (and especially Monarchical) should be
under diverse Laws. It Is like an Oracle in Curtius, Ejusdem Juris esse debent,
qui sub eodem Rege Victuri sunt; Such as are under the Government of one and
the same King (within the same Land and Nation) should be under one and the
same Law, especially as to public Administrations.

6. But the prevailing Argument is, The Hellish Plots, the Implacable Malice,
and the Secret Combinations of the Popish party to destroy us; the
consideration whereof is thought sufficient to induce us to take into Union and
Association with us, all sorts of Dissenters, that have but Mettle and Edge
enough to encounter and oppose the Chuch of Rome.

But has the matter been duly weighed in an equal Balance? Or has not the
dreadful apprehension of a present attempt from the one party so far
transported us, as to make us forget the like (tho perhaps a little more
remote) danger which threatens us from the other? Queen Elizabeth (in her time)
thought it a measuring cast which of the two Factions was the more pernicious
to the Rights of the Crown, and the established Government. She knew the
Principles of these Dissenters, as well as those of the Popish Priests and
Jesuits; she observed their practices also and the Methods they took; Mr.
Isaac Walton in the life of Hooker.
that, although they began with tender and meek Petitions, yet they proceeded to
Admonitions; nay, to sharp and Satirical Remonstrances; and at last, having
Calculated their numbers, and Computed who was, and who was not, for their
Cause, they supposed themselves certain of so great a Party that they durst,
and began to threaten, first the Bishops, then the Queen and Parliament.

Hereupon the Queen having a strict Eye and Check upon them, in a Parliament
held the 28th. of her Reign, Commanded Sergeant Puckering, (who was then Her
Mouth, as well as the Speaker of the House of Commons) to declare her Majesty's
sense, and to caution her Subjects against them; which was done in these
expressions.

And especially you are Commanded by her Majesty ( says he) to take heed, See
a short view of the late troubles, etc. p. 13. 14.
that no ear be given, or time afforded to the wearysome Solicitations of those
that commonly be called Puritans, wherewith all the late Parliaments have been
exceedingly importuned. Which sort of men, whilst (in the giddiness of their
Spirits,) they labor and strive to advance a new Eldership; they do nothing
else but disturb the good People of the Church and Commonwealth; which is as
well grounded for the Body of Religion it self, and as well guided for the
Discipline, as any Realm that professes the Truth. And the same thing is
already made good to the World, by many the Writings of Godly and Learned Men;
See a seasonab^e Address to both Houses. P. 8.
neither answered nor answerable by any of these new fangled Refiners. And as
the present Case stands, it may be doubted, whether they, or the Jesuits do
offer more danger, or be more speedily to be repressed. For albeit the Jesuits
do impoyson the hearts of her Majesty's Subjects, under a pretense of
Conscience, to withdraw them from obedience due to her Majesty; yet do they the
same but closely; and only in privy Corners. But these men do both publish in
their printed Books, and teach in all their Conventicles sundry Opinions; not
only dangerous to the well settled Estate, and Policy of this Realm, by putting
a Pyke, between the Clergy and the Laity, but also much derogatory to her
Sacred Majesty and her Crown, as well by the diminution of her ancient and
lawful Revenues, and by denying her Highnesses Prerogative and Supremacy, as by
offering peril to her Majesty's safety in her own Kingdom. In all which things,
howsoever in many other points, they pretend to be at War with the
Popish-Jesuites; yet by this Separation of themselves from the Unity of their
fellow Subjects, and by abasing the Sacred Authority and Majesty of their
Prince, they do but join and concur with the Jesuits, in opening the door, and
preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion, that is threatened against the Realm.
This was the sense of that Great Queen and her Great Council. And hereupon such
Laws were Inacted, as were designed to strike equally at both Factions.

Now upon the premises the Quere will be, whether such as attempt to violate
and dissolve those Laws which she made to secure the Church and Kingdom as then
established, do Cordially affect the Authority she had, and the Government she
exercised.

In all reason such as pretend so great a veneration for her Name, should defer
some thing to her Judgment, and yield something to her Wisdom and Experience.

But if she were now alive might she not find just cause to expostulate with
Subjects, as our Savior did some time with his Disciples? Why call ye me Lord,
Lord, and do not the things which I say? You call me Renownd and Glorious, a
Queen of Blessed Memory, and you honor me with a piece of Formal Pageantry;
November 17.
but you have no Reverence for the Authority which I was invested with. For
have you not the same Crown, the same Sword, and the same Scepter still? Have
you not the same Government, the same Reformation, the same Religion, which was
publicly professed, maintained and honored in my Reign?

For where is the difference? No alteration, no addition has been made but for
the advantage of the Nation and the Protestant Cause in general, yet what
Elogies are given of her days? and how is the Protestant Religion cried up for
the flourishing condition of it under her Government? The Protestant Religion
(says Vox populi) in which they and their Fathers have been so many years bred,
and under which they have seen so many happy Days, freed from the tyranny and
oppressive Yoke of the Pope, etc.

What is the Reason we cannot live by the same Laws, and perform the like
Obedience as our Forefathers did? After such Elogies of that Queens times, and
such acclamations after her, is it not a wonder to see men act so Counter to
her Laws and Government? And is it not clear that the Change is solely in our
selves? That our hearts are not frought with the like Loyalty as theirs was,
and that we do not govern our selves by the same Principles of Duty and honor
as they did?

For shame let every man lay his hand upon his heart, and consult his own
Reason and be awakned to some degree of temper and sobriety; for it is as clear
as the Sun at noon day, that the change is not in the Constitution of the
Government, but in the Principles of our Loyalty and affection to the King and
Church. For,

Have we Popish Plots now among us? So they had in the days of Queen Elizabeth.
Are there attempts upon the life of our dread Sovereign? So there were likewise
upon the life of Queen Elizabeth. Have we designs on foot to extinguish the
Protestant Religion, to Subvert the Government, and introduce the Popish
Tyranny and Usurpation over us? The very same things were in agitation in the
days of Queen Elizabeth.

Did the Queen and her Council therefore bend all there force against those
Popish Conspirators, and indulge the Dissenters of the other Factions? No; If
the People in an Island are alarmed that an Invasion is designed, and that only
at one Port, and they become so foolish as for the guard of that, to neglect
and expose all other, they do but make the easier way, for their enemies to
land and overcome.
They know their Principles were no less Destructive to the established
Government, and therefore they had an equal Eye and Check upon them, and
provided to fortify the Government against them both.

What? Do we pretend to be wiser than the Queen and her whole Council? Or do we
take new Measures, espouse new principles and resolve upon new Models and Forms
of Government? if so, how this course will tend to the preservation of the
King's Person, the Protestant Religion and Government established, let wise men
judge.

But if it appears further that these Dissenters do manage and carry on the
same designs, A seasonable Address to both Houses. p. 9.
with the Jesuits and Popish Party; espouse and maintain the same Principles,
and improve the Popish Plots to their own ends of unhinging the Government to
get the Power into their own hands; what Union or Communion can be expected
with them?

Nor are these Hypotheses the Chimera's of a distempred Brain, or the wild
Caprichio's of an idle Fancy; our proofs of them come nothing short of
Demonstration; for indeed they are matters of Fact, and we shall produce no
less than Three Witnesses apiece to establish them.

1. That they study to improve all Po-Pish Plots, to advance their own ends, is
observed by many Judicious worthy Persons. The Reverend Dean of St. Paul's
Unreason. of Separat Preface. 36. etc.
takes special notice what influence the Discovery of the late most horrid Plot
had upon these men, and tells us. We were still in hopes that men so wise, so
self-denying, as the Non-Conformist-Ministers represented themselves to the
World, would in so Critical a time, have made some steps or advances toward an
Union with us. -- Instead of this, those we discoursed with, seemed further off
than before; and when we least expected such a blow, under the name of a Plea
for Peace, out comes a Book, which far better deserved the Title of A Plea for
Disorder and Separation, not without frequent, sharp and bitter Reflections on
the Communion of our Church, and the Conformity required by Law; as tho it had
been designed on purpose, to represent the Clergy of our Church as a Company of
Notorious, lying and perjured Villains, for Conforming to the Laws of the Land,
and Orders established among us. -- And all this done without the least
Provocation given on our side; when all our Discourses that touched them tended
only to Union and the Desireableness of Accommodation.

2. Our Second Evidence shall be out of The short view of our late Troubles,
Page 16.
etc. Where the Author rells us, That which afforded them ( the Dissenters of
those times) no little advantage, was that horrid Gunpowder-Plot (in the 3d. of
King James) being hatched by those fiery-Spirited men of the Romish persuasion,
whom the bloody minded Jesuits had influenced for that most wicked Practice.
For, after this, to terrify the People with the Church of Rome, their Sermons
were little less then Declamations against the Papist; aiming thereby to
represent them formidable and odious; insinuating to the World, that all the
fear of danger was from those of that Religion; whilst they themselves, in the
mean time, did insensibly poison the People with such other unsound Doctrines,
as became at length the Fountain of this late unparalled Rebellion, which
terminated in the execrable Murder of our late Gracious King: and would have
put an end to this famous and long flourishing Monarchy, had not Allmighty God
of his great Mercy miraculously prevented it. And to show that this sort of men
are not given to change.

3. The Author of the Seasonable address to both Houses takes notice of the
like Improvement of this present Plot, Page 3.
We have ( says he) been continually alarmed with Libels against the
Government; at last a discovery is made of a Popish contrivance, sifted as far
as possible by the King in Council; and after ( that) earnestly recommended to
the Parliaments further Consideration. This is pursued, but some men laying
hold on this, ( occasion) design to drive it on to further purposes; and under
pretense of defending the King's Person, and expelling Popery, ( to) set up
Presbytery and pull down the Monarchy.

That these Dissenters are of an humor not to Unite with the Church in the
time of Plots and troubles, but to improve the advantage to carry on their own
designs, by making the breach wider; has been observed by Cambden Annals
Engl. l. 3. p. 290.
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and upon the very Juncture of the Spanish
Invasion; For (says the Historian) Schismatical Impiety waxes allways
insolent when any Wars be stirring, nor ever did shameless or Rebellious
Impudence, and outrageous Malice more insolently beard the Ecclesiastical
Magistracy; ( than at that time.)

And this is our proof of the first Hypothesis, That these Dissenters, do
improve Popish Plots to their own ends, of unhinging the Government, to get the
Power into their own hands.

2. That they do espouse and maintain the same Principles with the Jesuits is
no less-evident. They deny the King's Supremacy and Headship (under Christ)
over the Church, or Churches within his Dominions: They deny his Power of
Calling Councils and Church Assemblies, of his presideing over them,
Moderating, Judging, and Determining in them; they grant him no Legeslative
Power in Matters Ecclesiastical: They make him but a Cipher as to the
Constitution of their Rules and Orders; and a Servant only, (to themselves) in
the Execution of what they prescribe. To this purpose, and in Confutation of
their Doctrine, Oliver Ormerod of Emmanuel College in Cambridge, wrote a Book,
1605. Entitled, The Picture of a Puritan, to which he has annexed a Discovery
of Puritan-Papisme. And after him David Owen wrote another (1610.) which he
styles, Herod and Pilate Reconciled, or, The Concord of Papist and Puritan, for
the Coertion, Deposition, and Killing of Kings. To the Dutiful Subject, in his
Epistle, he observes, that The Puritan-Church-Policy, and the Jesuitical
Society began together: The one in Geneva, 1536. and the other in Rome, 1537.
and the last Chapter of his Book, contains, the General Consent of the
Principal Puritans and Jesuits, against Kings, from the year 1536. until the
year, 1602. out of the most Authentic Authors. I shall refer the Reader to the
Book it self; which if it be out of Print, does very well deserve a new
Impression.

3. My Third Proof of this Assertion may be found in a late Book, being, A
short view of our late Troubles: Whereof, any man (that desires a full and
impartial account of those affairs,) may please to Consult the Parallel in the
Second Chapter.

Lastly, We do affirm, That these Dissenters and such as so eagerly abet them,
do carry on that very design, which they pretend to abhor with so great a
detestation in the Jesuits. And in order to the proof of this, let me take
leave to propound a question, viz. Whether to abolish those Decent Rites and
Customs, which were generally in use in the Primitive and purest Ages of the
Church, and to grant a Toleration of all Religions; or, to allow Conventicles
for the free and public Worship of Protestant-Dissenters (as they will needs
call themselves) be not an Argument of great Levity, a dishonor to the
Reformation, a Scandal to our own and foreign Churches, and a means as well to
betray our own profession, as to gratify the Common Enemy, by Complying with
such Methods as they have from time to time, contrived and practiced, for the
Subversion of the Church of England, which through Divine Providence, has been
so happily Reformed and settled, and so long preserved and prosper'd, to the
envy of some, and the admiration of others of our Neighbors?

The Reason of this Quere is,

1. Because it is the practice of the Popish Party to promote Change and
Innovations among us; and then to disparage our Religion upon the account of
Novelty. And by that Argument many times they prevail to make Proselites, and
to draw men from the Communion of our Church.

2. Because they have made it their great business to purchase a Toleration;
and to this effect, they have used all the Arts of Bribery and Crafty
Insinuation.

3. Because it is a matter of Fact and clearly evident, that their Priests and
Jesuits creep into Conventicles, and frequently make use of such Meeting to
pervert the Nation.

For all which we have sufficient evidence, and that solemnly deposed upon the
Corporal Oaths of the King's Witnesses.

First, Staffords Trial p. 17, 18.
Mr. Smith does Depose, That Abbot Mountague told him, The Popish Religion
would very soon come into England; and, upon his demanding a Reason for it; he
was pleased to give him these two.

1. That they did not doubt but to procure a Toleration of Religions, by which
they should bring it in without noise.

2. That the Gentry which went abroad did observe the Novely of their own
Religion, and the Antiquity of theirs, and the advantages that were to be had
by it. Ib. page 32.


A Second Witness is Mr. Jenison, who deposes thus, That Ireland and Jenison
did Declare, That for the Destruction of the Protestant Religion (he means that
established in the Church of England) they hoped to procure a Toleration; And
the way was (they said) by procuring a Sum of Money to bribe the Parliament.
But suppose the Parliament will not be bribed? Why? It is the same thing in
effect, whether we be bribed by Papists, or Cajoled by Dissenters, who have
imbibed their infusions; whether we take Money, or be ensnared by insinuation;
if we deny a Toleration, yet if we set open a Door to Conventicles, we give
them as fair an opportunity to do their business, as if a Toleration were
granted.

To this purpose the Evidence of Dr. Oats is very full and clear; His
Narrative, p. 67. n. 7.
For speaking of the Popish design for the Reduction of England -- to the
Popish Religion and Obedience, among other means, (he tells us) it was to be
done [By Seditious Preachers and Catechists set up, sent out, maintained, and
directed, what to preach in their own, and other private or public
Conventicles and Field-meetings. And he Deposes, Ib. pa. 29. n. 43.
That Father Moore and Father Saunders alias Brown, were sent into Scotland,
with instructions to carry themselves like Nonconformist Ministers, and to
preach to the disaffected Scots, the necessity of taking up the Sword, for the
defense of Liberty and Conscience. These the Deponent saw dispatched and ordered
to go by Father Harcourt in the name of Thomas White Provincial. Page 1. n. 1.
He deposes likewise, That Richard Strange Provincial, John Keins, Basil
Langworth, John Fenwick, and Mr. Harcourt Jesuits, did write a treasonable
Letter to one Father Swiman an Irish Jesuit at Madrid, in the Kingdom of
Spain, in which was continued their plotting and Contriving a Rebellion in
Scotland of the Presbyterians against the Episcopal Government. In Order to
which they had employed one Matthew Wright and William Morgan, and one Mr
Ireland to go and preach, under the notion of Presbyterians, and give the
disaffected Scots a true understanding of their sad state and condition, in
which they were, by reason of his Episcopal Tyranny exercised over them: and
withal to tell them, they had now a fair opportunity to vindicate their
Liberty and Religion; and that it could be done by no other way but by the
Sword, and that now the King was so addicted to his pleasure, that he would,
and could take but little care in that concern.

That the Popish Plot is carried on by the Schismatic ( whom he calls the
Jesuit in Masquerade,) is noted by Machiavil Redivivus (p. 68.) For (says he)
The Principal Contrivers of that Machination are now removed, the Jesuits
hanged, the Lords in the Tower, and the Great Men secured from Action: yet
nevertheless the same bloody Tragedy is still acting, and the cursed design
carried on, by the Popes other Engines; and the Spirit of Antichrist is sifted
from the Conclave to the Conventicle.

And this is further Evident from that late Plagiary, who has stolen Materials
out of Parsons the Jesuit, under the name of Doleman, to show that the
Monarchy is rather Elective than Hereditary. A seasonable Address to both
Houses of Parliament. p. 8.
The design of that Book in Queen Elizabeth's time was to distract the People,
and make way for the Spanish Conquest and Inquisition: And this Presbyterian
Transcriber proves himself of the same Jesuitical Principles, and with equal
honesty pursues the same ends, Usurpation and Slavery.

From which Testimonies it does undeniably follow, That such as do attempt.

1. Either to introduce a Toleration for the exercise of all Religions, Or,

2. To support Conventicles for the free and public Worship of all Dissenters.
Or,

3. To abolish those Decent Rites I have been credibly informed that the
Priests and Jesuits in France were so enraged with Dr Cosins for wearing the
Surplice at the burial of a Corpse, that he was in some danger of his life.
and Customs, which were generally in use in the Primitive and purest Ages of
the Christian Church. They are Factors for the Pope, I do not say directly, by
Confederacy and an avowed Consent, but yet really and in effect, they do carry
on the Plot and Design of the Church of Rome; which is to remove the King out
of their way, that they may destroy the Protestant Church of England and,
introduce the Popish Religion and Tyranny in stead of it.

Having made it thus evident, that these Dissenters hold the same dangerous
Principles as to King and Government, which are maintained by the Jesuits,
improve their Plots, and carry on the same design of Subverting the Protestant
Church of England; I shall proceed, with the Complaint of Liberty and Property
against Arbitrary Government. Page 1. and 2.


I would only desire the honest Reader to enquire who they were that first
cried out against Arbitrary Government, or the designs of it in the Reign of
King Charles the First? It was the Protestant Dissenters and principally those
then called Presbyterians. Who was it that animated the People to take up Arms
for Defense of Liberty and Property (invaded only by themselves,) against the
King? The very same.

Who maintained, continued, and finished the War, and the Tragedy of the King's
Murder? The same men, though now they had gotten new Frocks and Vizards on, and
called themselves Independents, or Congregational-Church-Men; a Name that
Comprehended all Sects and Opinions.

Who were they that banished his present Majesty, sought that life which could
not have been preserved but by a Miracle? Who composed and commanded Olivers
standing Army? Who commanded all the Garrisons, Forts, Castles, Ships? Who
ruled according to Will, without and against Law? Even the very same Men, the
the Godly Party of Congregational Protestant Dissenters.

Who are they that cry out now against the Government, and talk of the great
danger of Arbitrary Power? Search the City, examine the Country, Ransack the
Coffee-Houses, frequent the Clubs: If you hear any Person inveigh against the
Government, or Discourse of the fear of Arbitrary Designs, you may pawn your
life on it, you may find him in a Conventicle upon a Sunday, if he pretends to
any Religion, or reading Hob's Divinity, and Atheistical Principles at home.

It is an Old saying, He that accuses another ought to be clear himself: And
therefore (says that Author) for shame, let the Congregational-Men leave
clamouring about Persecution and Arbitrary Government, of which they are so
horribly guilty, and for which they have so great an Account to make to
Allmighty God.

And now let us appeal to the Common sense of all Mankind; is it reasonable,
that a Prince should give establishment to any party, that maintains Principles
destructive to himself and his Government? Sure no wise or Loyal Person can
imagine it. For if self-preservation be allowable in any Case, without doubt,
of all men the Sovereign has the fairest Title to it.

I remember Mr. Ormerod near Four Score Years ago, having made a Parallel
betwixt the Papists and Dissenters of those times, concludes his Address to
them in these words; And thus I leave you, wishing first of all your
Conformity: if that cannot be had, my next wish is, that you were dealt withal,
as Philip of Macedon dealt with two of his Subjects, in whom there was little
hope of Grace; he made one of them to run out of the Country, and the other to
drive him, so his People were rid of both. But this shall not be my Conclusion.

These Dissenters would have us comply with them: But in what? In the Change of
Government and Discipline in the Church according to their Fancies? in
abolishing the Forms of God's Solemn Worship, with the Rites of Decency and
Order to promote the same? We cannot in Prudency or Conscience gratify this
their humor against the general Rules of Holy Scripture, the light of Reason,
the Practice of the Primitive Church, and the Common sense of the most Sober
and Learned Protestants.

What then? Would they have us comply with them against the Church of Rome, and
the practices of the Jesuits? With all our hearts.

But we must remember the Jesuits have two Heads of Doctrine, both destructive
to the Principles of Christianity, wherein we utterly dissent from them. The
first in reference to God's Worship and Service; the second in reference to the
King, his Crown and Government. We renounce the whole: let them do so likewise;
else let them be looked upon as Parcel-Jesuites; for such they are, unless they
renounce not only such Doctrines as lead to Superstition and Idolatry: but such
also as lead to Sedition and Rebellion. Let them say the Pope is Antichrist;
and let them say the same (as the Apostle does, 2 These. 2. 4.) of every
Adversary, Deodati, Sclater. Dicson upon the place.
that resists the Lord's Anointed, that opposes and exalts himself above
Kings and Potentates to whom the name of God is attributed. In which sense, we
doubt not to say with St. John, 1 John 2. 18.
that even now are there many Antichrists.

Let them renounce those Popish and Jesuitical Principles, which were Condemned
for Treason in the Spencers Cooks Reports lib. 7. p. 11.
even by Papists themselves; Dr Falkner of Christian Loyalty. p. 356*
let them renounce,

1. That damnable Doctrine, of taking up Arms by the Kings Authority, to fight
against his Person. Which as is very well observed by a worthy person, * was
hatched under the Romish Territories, and made use of in the Holy League of
France.

2. That we may seize the Kings Revenues, stop his Customs, deny him all due
supplies to support and preserve the honor and Peace of his Crown and
Kingdoms, (as they did in 42.) and bring him into necessity, that we may reform
his mind, and gain our own ends of him Per Asperte, as Lawyer's phrase it, that
is, by rigor or constreint.

3. That if his Majesty will not repeal Laws and take off the wheels of
Government, and model it to our humor, we may enter into Leagues and
Associations without his consent, and Govern in aid of him.

There are Jesuitical Doctrines, and we desire they may join with us in a
hearty Renunciation of them. Let them also protest, they will never attempt,
what the Jesuits are presumed to have plotted and contrived, the Death of the
King, the Ruin of the Church with the Subversion of the established Laws and
Government. (For there is little hopes of a hearty Union till men come to so much
ingenuity and remorse as to acknowledge how far they have gone astray, and
declare their Change with a steadfast Resolution to return into the right way.)
Let them therefore Submit to the Laws established, and join with us in the
performance of God's Public and Solemn Worship. Let them Subscribe and preach
the Homilies against Rebellion, and declare (as we do) in the midst of their
respective Congregations, their unfeigned Assent and Consent to them. This will
secure the King's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Government
established. And (whatever becomes of the Protestants abroad for want of
supplies to enable the King to interpose on their behalf) it will certainly
Unite us at home in one Communion to the Emulation of our Friends, the Terror
of our Enemies, and our own lasting Peace and Happiness. Which God grant we may
be so wise as to discern and establish.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
BRutum Fulmen, or the Bull of Pope Pius 5th. concerning the Damnation,
Excommunication and Deposition of Queen Elizabeth; as also the Absolution of
her Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, with a Peremptory Injunction upon
pain of Anathema never to obey any of her Laws and Commands, with some
Observations and Annimadversions upon it. The Second Edition, By Thomas Lord
Bishop of Lincoln. Whereunto is Annexed the Bull of Pope Paul the Third,
containing the Damnation, Excommunication, etc. of King Henry the 8th. The
First Impression of the Book was Printed about 2. Months since in a large
Quarto and Letter, and is now Contracted into a less Volumn and Price.

The General Catalogue of Books printed in England since the dreadful Fire of
London in 1666. to the end of Trinity-Term 1680. (with the Term Catalogue since
Printed,) together with the Texts of single Sermons, with the Authors Names;
Plays Acted at both the Theaters; with the Abstract of the General Bills of
Mortality since 1660. with the Titles of all the Books of Law, Navigation and
Music, and a Catalogue of School-Books, the Third Edition. To which is now
Added a Catalogue of Latin Books Printed in foreign Parts and in England since
1670. Collected by Robert Clavel, in Folio stitcht. Those that desire either
the General Catalogue of English-Books or Latin-Books alone, may have them so.


