A VINDICATION OF The Archbishop And several other Bishops. FROM THE
IMPUTATIONS and CALUMNIES Cast upon them By the Author of the Modest Enquiry.
Whereas in a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A Modest Enquiry into the Causes of
the present Disasters, etc. We, whose Names are hereunto subscribed, are among
others represented as the Authors and Abetters of Englands miseries; and under
the abusive Names of the Lambeth Holy Club, the holy Jacobite Club, and the
Oeconomick Council of the whole Party, are charged with a Third Plot, and with
the composing of a New Liturgy, and using it in our Cabals; and whereas the
Clergy, such of them as are styled Malcontents, are said (together with
others) to have presented a Memorial to the King of France, to persuade him to
Invade England; and are also affirmed to have kept a constant Correspondence
with Monsieur de Croissy in order thereunto.

We do hereby solemnly, as in the presence of God, Protest and Declare:

I. That these Accusations cast upon us are all of them malicious Calumnies,
and diabolical Inventions; that we are innocent of them all; and we defy the
Libeller (whoever he be) to produce, if he can, any legal Proof of our
Guiltiness therein*

II. That we know not who was the Author of the New Liturgy, as the Libel calls
it; That we had no hand in it, either in Club, Cabal, or otherwise; nor was it
composed, or published, by Our Order, Consent, or Privity, nor has it been
used at any time by Us, or any of Us.

III. That neither We, nor any of Us ever held any Correspondence, directly or
indirectly, with Monsieur de Croissy, or with any other Minister, or Agent, of
France: And if any such Memorial as the Libel mentions, was ever really
presented to the French King, we never knew any thing of it, or any thing
relating thereto: And we do utterly renounce both That, and all other
Invitations, suggested to be made by Us, in order to any Invasion of this
Kingdom by the French.

IV. That we utterly deny and disavow all Plots charged upon us as contrived,
or carried on, in our Meetings at Lambeth; the intent thereof being to advise,
how in our present Difficulties we might best keep Consciences void of offense
toward God, and toward Man.

V. That we are so far from being the Authors or Abbettors of England' s
Miseries, (whatever the Spirit of Lying and Calumny may vent against us) that
We do, and shall to our dying Hour, heartily, and incessantly pray for the
Peace, Prosperity, and Glory of England; and shall always, by God's Grace, make
it our daily Practice to study to be quiet, to bear our Cross patiently, and to
seek the good of our Native Country.

Who the Author of this Libel is, we know not: But whoever he is, we desire, as
our Lord has taught us, to return him good for evil: He barbarously endeavors
to raise in the whole English Nation such a Fury, as may end in De Witting us
(a Bloody word, but too well understood!) But we recommend him to the Divine
Mercy, humbly beseeching God to forgive him.

We have all of us, not long since, either Actually, or in full Preparation of
Mind, hazarded all we had in the World in opposing Popery, and Arbitrary Power
in England; and we shall, by God's Grace, with greater Zeal again Sacrifice all
we have, and our very Lives too, if God shall be pleased to call us thereto, to
prevent Popery, and the Arbitrary Power of France, from coming upon us, and
prevailing over us; The Persecution of our Protestant Brethren there being
fresh in our Memories.

It is our great Unhappiness, That we have not opportunity to publish full and
particular Answers to those many Libels, which are industriously spread against
us: But we hope, that our Countrymen will never be moved to hate us without a
cause; but will be so just, and charitable to us, as to believe this solemn
Protestation of our Innocence.

W. Cant. W. Norwich, Fr. Ely, Tho. Bath, and Wells, Tho. Petriburg.

We are well assured of the Concurrence of our absent Brother the Bishop of
Gloucester, as soon as the Copy can be transmitted to him.
LONDON, Printed for James Adamson, and Sold by Randal Tailor, 1690.


