IMPRIMATUR.

Liber cui Titulus, A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Church of
England. H. Maurice Rmo in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Arciepiscopo Cant. a Sacris.

Jan. 24. 1687.
A SECOND DEFENSE OF THE EXPOSITION of the DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England,
Against the New EXCEPTIONS Of Monsieur de MEAVX, AND HIS VINDICATOR. The Second
Part.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVIII.

THE CONTENTS.
THE ANSWER to the PREFACE.
What little Cause those of the Church of Rome have to complain of the Evils of
Heresy and Schism? number. 2, 3. Whether Papists or Protestants have sought the
most advantageous Means for the redressing of them? n. 4. The Holy Scripture
the only sure Foundation whereon to build our Faith, n. 6. How vain the
Attempts of those of the Church of Rome have been in their Disputes against us?
n. 9. Of the several Methods that they have taken in them. n. 10. Their
Complaints of our Misrepresenting their Doctrines and Practices, groundless, n.
18. Of the first CONVERSION of the English by AUSTIN the Monk, n. 22. 47. That
neither did Austin teach, nor the British Churches believe or practice as the
Church of Rome does now. n. 24. That for a long time after Austin, both their
Belief and Practice was different from that of the Church of Rome at this day,
n. 28. Of King HENRY VIIIth, EDWARD VIth, Q. MARY, Q. ELIZABETH, and the State
of Religion in their days, n. 35. That the Papists have been underhand the
Causes of our Divisions, n. 42. Of the State of Religion under K. CHARLES Is It,
n. 45. How far we allow that Salvation is to be had in the Church of Rome? n.
48. Of the Original of our CIVIL WARS in K. CHARLES Ist's time, n. 51. Of the
State of Religion under K. CHARLES IId, and K. JAMES IId, and what was the
occasion, of our present Controversies and how they have been carried on? n.
52. What use our READERS ought to make of these Discourses, n. 60. And the
Method of my present DEFENSE, n. 64. The Vindicators Apology for their NEW
FRIENDS, n. 67. And his Presumption why they cannot be supposed to palliate
their Doctrine, considered, and refuted, n. 68. The OATH to be taken by a NEW
CONVERT, at his admission into the Church of Rome, n. 77.
Introduction.
THat our Adversaries advance nothing New against us, but repeat the same
things over and over, without taking the least notice of the Answers that have
been given to them.
The ANSWER TO THE First ARTICLE.
THe VINDICATOR an Instance of this. His first Article entirely stolen out of
T. G. and confuted by Dr. Stillingfleet above 11 Years since; page 45. number. 1.
That the true and genuine Sons of the Church of England, have constantly
charged those of the Church of Rome with IDOLATRY, n. 3. In particular those
whom he quotes to the contrary, viz. Dr. Jackson, n. 5. Dr. Field. A. B. Laud.
Dr. Heylin, Mr. Thorndyke, n. 7, 8. and Dr. Hammond, n. 9. His other little
Cavils as to this Point considered, n. 12. And the Authority of the Book of
HOMILIES asserted, n. 13. His particular Exceptions against my DEFENSE as to
this Article answered: And his shuffling exposed, n. 19, etc.
The ANSWER TO THE Second ARTICLE.
COncerning the Object of Religious Worship. p. 55. That the VINDICATOR has in
vain new modelled the B. of MEAUX's Position, n. 2. The Scheme which he has
laid down to justify the Doctrine and Practice of the Chapter of Rome in giving
Religious Worship to others besides God considered, in some short Reflections
upon the several Parts of it.
The ANSWER TO THE Fourth ARTICLE.
OF the INVOCATION of SAINTS. Of the State of the Question between us, and the
VINDICATOR's three Positions for the clearing of it, page 65. n. 1, 2. The Sum
of this Article reduced to II. General Points. I. POINT. Whether it be lawful
to pray to the Saints to PRAY FOR US?
Our Adversaries confess it not to be necessary, n. 4. That it is unlawful upon
the VINDICATOR 's own Principle so to do, viz. That we may not give any
religious Service strictly and properly so called, to any other than God ONLY,
n. 5, 6. That the Act of invoking the Saints is strictly and properly a
Religious Act: shown, 1st, From the very Nature of the Act it self, n. 7. It is
not an Act of the same kind with that of desiring of our living Brethren to
pray for us, n. 8. But attributes to the Creature the Perfections proper to
God. ib. The Bp of Meaux 's shuffling upon this occasion more particularly laid
open, n. 11.
2dly, From the Circumstances of it, n. 15. Of the Time, Place, and Manner in
which the Romanists invoke their Saints, n. 16. Of their offering up the Mass
to their HONOR; and desiring its Acceptance through their MERITS, n. 17, etc.
Of their making VOWS to the Saints, n. 19, etc.


II. POINT. What the true Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome is, as to
the Point of INVOCATION of SAINTS.
The Sum of this Part reduced to IV Considerations. SECT. I. Whether all the
Prayers that are made to the Saints by those of the Church of Rome, can fairly
be reduced to this One Sense, PRAY FOR US?
That they cannot, shown; 1st, From the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, and
of its Catechism, n. 25. 2dly, From the Opinion which those of the Church of
Rome have, of the State and Power of the Saints departed, n. 30. 3dly, From the
neglect of the Council of Trent, and of the Governors of the Church of Rome,
either to establish any such Interpretation, or to Censure those that have
taught otherwise. n. 33. 4thly, From the words of the Prayers themselves, which
utterly refuse such an Exposition. n. 35. And from the other Service which the
Church of Rome allows to the Saints, and which cannot be reconciled with these
Pretenses. n. 39. 5thly. From the Opinions and Practice of some of the greatest
Saints in the Roman Calendar; and of other Persons of especial Note amongst
them. n. 40. Examples of all this. n. 41, etc.
That the Holy Scripture is in vain alleged to countenance this Superstition.
n. 46.
SECT. II. After what manner it is that the Church of Rome prays to God through
the Merits of her SAINTS.
The VINDICATOR's Pretenses. n. 49. That the Church of Rome does truly pray to
God for Mercies, through the Merits of her Saints, n. 51. The VINDICATOR's
Excuses for this, considered and exploded. n. 53. That the Holy Scripture does
by no means countenance any such Practice. n. 54.

SECT. III. In which the VINDICATOR's Arguments for the Establishing of this
Worship are particularly considered, and their Weakness laid open. page 102.
That the practice of Invocation of Saints, is not to be proved by Holy
Scripture. n. 55. Nor has it the Antiquity that is pretended: shown in two
periods. Is It PERIOD.
That the Custom of Praying to Saints, had no being in the Church for the
first 300 Years. n. 57. The VINDICATOR's Proofs particularly examined, and
shown to be either False, or Ridiculous n. 59. That the Fathers of the first
three Centuries prayed to God ONLY. n. 66. My presumption heretofore alleged
for this; viz. That those Fathers did not believe that the souls of the Just
went immediately to Heaven; justified: and the VINDCATOR's Answer shown to be
insufficient. n. 73. Sixtus Senensis in vain Misrepresented by Him. n. 76. That
this practice did not pass quietly in the following Ages. n. 82. His pretense
that the Fourth General Council prayed to Flavian both false and impertinent.
n. 80. His little exception of the few Writings that remain of the Primitive
Fathers, neither true, nor to the purpose. n. 78, 85. How this Practice by
degrees crept into the Church? n. 89.
IId. PERIOD. What Grounds this Superstition had in the Fourth Century?
That most of the Addresses of this Age were rather Rhetorical Flights, than
formal Invocations. n. 92. Eight differences, proposed between what the Fathers
of the Fourth Age did, and what those of the Church of Rome do now, as to this
Matter. n. 96. That the Invocation of Saints was never solemnly established in
the Church before the latter End of the 8th Century. n. 97. etc.

SECT. IV. What our Reasons are against this Service.
The true state of the difference betwixt us as to this matter. n. 105. That
the Church of Rome does exact a compliance in this Practice, and ANATHEMATIZE
those who Oppose it. n. 106. That this is, 1st, Repugnant to God's Holy Word.
n. 111. 2dly, Contrary to Antiquity. n. 119. 3dly, Unreasonable in the
Constitution. n. 126. Because, They are neither certain that the Saints hear
their Prayers. n. 127. Nor that those whom they Pray to are indeed Saints. n.
128. And Pray to many as such, that never lived in the World. n. 130.
Such were, S. George. n. 130. S. Lazarus. S. Longinus. S. Christopher. S.
Ursula, etc.
A brief Account of whose Acts is offered, and their falseness observed. A
pleasant Relation of a Bishop and Martyr, made out of two words of an ancient
Inscription; and the great Miracles that were wrought at his Monument. n. 134.
That the wiser Papists complain of this Extravagance.
4thly. That it is unprofitable and Impious in the Practice. n. 139. That it is
Unprofitable. n. 139. That it is Impious. n. 143.
Several remakable Instances of Impiety in this practice. n. 147, etc.


The whole conluded with an account of the PROCESSION of the JESUITS of
LUXEMBOURG, May 20. 1685. n. 157, etc.
The ANSWER TO THE Fourth ARTICLE. Of IMAGES and RELICS.
THE Sum of this Chapter reduced to three General Considerations. SECT. I. Of
the Benefit of Pictures and Images. n. 4.
Concerning which it is observed: 1st, That the VINDICATOR ought not at this
time to confound PICTURES and IMAGES together. n. 6. 2dly, Nor single Figures,
and Historical Representations. Ibid.. 2. 3dly, That it is impertinent to this
Point to discourse of the BENEFIT, where the Dispute is concerning the WORSHIP
of Images. Ibid.. 3.
For that, 4thly, No Benefit, were it ever so great, would be able to excuse
this. Ibid.. 4. 5thly, That Images are not useful to the Ignorant, as is
pretended. Ibid.. 5. 6thly, But on the contrary, very pernicious and injurious.
Ibid.. 9.
An Account of Horrible Abuses in many of their Images and Pictures; Viz. Of
GOD the FATHER. n. 7, 8. Of the HOLY TRINITY. n. 9. Of our SAVIOR CHRIST. n.
10. And of the B. VIRGIN. Ibid. etc.
The Pretense, that there is now no danger of IDOLATRY in all this, proposed;
and the way opened to the refuting of it. n. 15, 16.
SECT. II. The Charge of Image Worship made Good; and the Evasions answered, by
which the VINDICATOR endeavors to excuse his Church from the Guilt of it. n.
17.
This is done in three Particulars. Is It, The Voice of the Chapter of Rome proposed,
in Her Definitions as to this Matter. n. 18, 19. IIdly, This Voice interpreted
by Card. CAPISVCCHI, who approved Monsieur de MEAVX's Exposition; and to whose
Book Mr. de MEAVX himself appeals. n. 20. After rejecting several Opinions,
which in the Cardinal's Judgment did not allow sufficient Honor to Images. n.
21, etc. He concludes it to be the CHURCHES SENSE, that the SAME Worship is to
be given to the IMAGES, as is given to the THINGS represented by them. n. 26.
That Aquinas allowed Supreme Divine Worship to the CROSS; contrary to the
VINDICATOR's Pretenses. n. 27. Some Reflections upon what this Cardinal has
said, with reference to the Point before us. n. 28, etc. An Account of one of
the Roman Church lately put into the INQVISITION, for denying the Worship of
Images, recommended to the VINDICATOR's Consideration. n. 32, 33.
IIIdly, This farther shown to be the Sense of the Church of Rome, from those
Authorized Practices I alleged in my DEFENSE. 1. The Instance from the Order
of Receiving an Emperor, justified. n. 35. 2dly, The Argument from the Office
of CONSECRATING A NEW CROSS made Good; and the VINDICATOR's Evasions shown to
be inconsistent with the Design of it. n. 36. Of their AGNUS DEI's; and the
Superstition that is committed in the Design and Consecration of them. n. 44,
45. Of HOLY WATER; and the Superstition committed in the Design and Use of it.
n. 47. Of INCENSE. n. 51. That the Primitive Church used Incense. n. 51. But
that this is no Plea for what the Church of Rome does now. The Consecrating and
Burning of Incense in that Church; Superstitious. n. 52. Idolatrous. n. 54.


3dly, The Instance of the GOOD FRIDAY Service farther vindicated: And the
Exceptions made against it shown to be frivolous. n. 56. That those of the
Church of Rome do suppose this to be a good Proof of their paying Divine
Worship to the CROSS. n. 60. Two extravagant Proofs to excuse this Worship from
being Idolatrous, proposed and answered. n. 61, 62, 63, etc.
4thly, The Argument taken from the HYMNS of the Church of Rome justified. n.
65. And the VINDICATOR's Interpretation of them, shown to be absurd. n. 69.



SECT. III. That the Church of Rome thus worshipping of Images, is truly and
properly guilty of IDOLATRY.
This made good in two Points, n. 76. I. POINT. Of the true Nature of IDOLATRY.
The late Notion of IDOLATRY proposed; and that in this sense we do not charge
the Church of Rome with it, n. 77. What IDOLATRY, according, to the Scripture
is; shown in two Particulars: Is It, Q. Whether according to the Scripture-Notion
of IDOLATRY, those may not be guilty of it, who yet both know and worship the
One True GOD? n. 78. That they may, made manifest from the Instances; 1st, Of
the Golden Calf; n. 80. 2dly, Of the Calves of Dan and Bethel, n. 86.
Other Arguments to make good the Affirmative of this Question: n. 93. That
this was the Notion of the Primitive Fathers, n. 94. And is confessed by the
principal Authors of the Church of Rome it self, n. 97.
IIdly, Q. How this may be done by them? Two ways proposed from what has before
been said, viz. 1st, By worshipping the true God after an Idolatrous manner, n.
101. 2dly, By giving Divine Worship to any other besides Him, n. 103.



II. POINT. That the Church of Rome in the Worship of Images is truly and
properly guilty of IDOLATRY.
This shown according to the VINDICATOR's desire in two different respects:
Is It, With reference to those who hold that Images are to be worshipped with the
same Worship as the things which they represent, n. 108. IIdly, As it concerns
their Opinions, who denying this, yet allow an inferior Honor to them, n.
113.



Of RELICS.
Two things proposed to be proved in answer to the VINDICATOR's Exceptions:
Is It, That those of the Church of Rome do truly and properly worship the
RELICS of their Saints. For their Expressions it is undeniable, n. 121. That
their Practice is agreeable to their Words; shown, 1st, In the instance of that
Worship which they give to the Wood of the true Cross, n. 122. 2dly, To all the
other RELICS that have ever touched our Savior Christ, n. 124. 3dly, From
their allowed practice of swearing by them, n. 125. A famous Story of S. GURIA
for the illustrating of this matter, n. 126.
4thly, From their other Practices; especially their carrying of them in
Procession, an instance whereof is given from the Roman Pontifical, n. 127,
etc.


IIdly, That they do seek to them for Help and Assistance. My Interpretation of
the Council of Trent in reference to this Point made good, against the new
Pretenses of the VINDICATOR, n. 129. The thing it self justified from the
Public Prayers of that Church, n. 130. And from a memorable Instance of a
Prince of the Family of the Dukes of Radzevil; with which the whole is
concluded.



ERRATA.
PAge 3. of the Contents, for Fourth Article, read Third Article. P. 6. number. 9.
line 4. r. our Schism. P. 8. n. 14. l. 5. r. Err. P. 11. n. 21. l. 3.
uncertain, r. unsincere. P. 18. n. 35. l. 17. r. Their Usurpations. P. 25. l.
9. r. were now. P. 32. n. 57. l. 7. del. after all P. 48. n. 9. l. 6. Images,
r. Angels. P. 87. l. 1. r. recising. P. 114. Marg. Expos. r. Def. of the Expos.
P. 120. Marg. r. lib. Carol. P. 127. Marg. r. Reg. Moral. 80. P. 133. l. 27.
For and I, del. and. P. 137. n. 154. l. 5. r. Moliri. Pervicacia. P. 138. l. 4.
r. Curarum. P. 167. l. ult. for V. r. VIth Cent. P. 187. n. 119. l. 3. r. upon
a verbal. P. 190. n. 124. l. 15. Cloth with which. P. 194. l. 25. and only,
del. and. P. 196. n. 132. l. 1. r. Radzevil.

The Pages are interrupted in two places, page 60. and p. 160.

AN ANSWER TO THE PREFACE.
THE Design of your Preface seems reducible to these two Points, viz.

I. Of the State of the Controversy between the Papists and Protestants in
general. And, II. Of the Disputes that have heretofore been, and are at this
day managed against you, by Us of this Church in particular.
2. Ad page 1.] The former of these you introduce with a short harangue of the
Mischief which Heresy and Schism bring along with them, not only to the
individual Persons that are guilty of them, but also to the Nations in which
they are propagated. You represent to us the miserable Broils, and other worse
Consequences that have attended these Controversies of Religion in this and the
last Age: And from thence you conclude, how much they are to be commended who
labor to establish Truth and Unity, and those to be condemned, who seek all
means possible to obscure the one and obstruct the other. 3. Answ.] To all
which I have only this to reply; that we need no Arguments to convince us of
these things. There are none more sensible of the Mischiefs of Schism and
Heresy than we are; or that do more truly lament the Divisions that are in the
Church, or would more heartily contribute, what in us lies, to the closing of
them. But then as we have good cause to believe both from the Authority of Holy
Scripture, and from the Nature of Mankind, that whilst there is a Devil in
Hell, and Men of Interest and Designs upon Earth, there shall also be Heresies,
1 Cor. xi. 19.
that they who are approved may be made manifest: So we cannot but complain
that those should be the most forward to charge us both with the Guilt and
Mischief of them, at whose doors the Crime, and therefore the Evil Consequences
of it, will one day be found to lie. The former of these, it will be the
business of the following Discourse to make good: And for the latter, whosoever
shall impartially consider the Origin of those Broils with which the World has,
you say, been agitated in this and the last Age upon the account of Religion;
not to mention those other Mischiefs of Treasons, Plots, Massacres,
Persecutions, and the like, will soon be convinced who they are that have cause
to complain of these Evils. For what you add, 4. Ibid.] That they who will but
impartially consider matters, will find that Catholics have upon all occasions
sought the most Advantageous Means to procure this Christian Peace; tho to
their grief they have still been hindered from effecting this Good Work.

Answ.] I do not well know what you design by it. If by the most Advantageous
Means, you understand those Means of Knowledge which God has given us whereby to
come to discern the Truth of Religion; such as, 1. A diligent reading of the
Holy Scriptures, the using of all imaginable Assistances for the understanding
the sense of them, by studying the Original Languages in which they were
written, searching of Antiquity, collating parallel places, and the like. 2.
The divesting of our selves of our Prejudices, and forming in our Minds an
impartial desire to find out the Truth, with an honest readiness to embrace it,
on what side soever it lies. And lastly, to all this add our earnest Prayer to
God for his Grace to bless and prosper our Endeavors; these I confess are the
best Means to discover Christian Truth; and to exhort all others to the use of
them, the most advantageous way to promote it. But then I cannot imagine why
you should seem to appropriate these Means to your selves, as if you only
sought Truth and Peace by them; seeing it cannot be denied but that We have
employed all these with as great diligence as you can pretend to have done it.
But now some other Means indeed there are, which you have pursued, and which it
may be you understand by this Expression: and then We neither deny your
Assertion, nor envy you the Glory of being singular in your Endeavors of
procuring Peace by them. Such are, 1. The Means of Force and Violence; your
Holy Leagues, and private Treacheries, your Inquisitions, Plots, Persecutions,
and such like. 2. The Means of Fraud and Deceit, your false Expositions and
Misrepresentations of your Doctrine to deceive the ignorant and unwary, till
you get them into your Nets. 3. The Means of Confidence and Incharitableness,
your bold Anathema's and vain thundrings of Damnation against all that differ
from you, your assuming the Name and Privileges of the Church Catholic to
your single Communion, and excluding all others out of it, as Schismatics and
Heretics. And lastly, to mention no more, the Means of gross Ignorance, and
blind Obedience; by depriving Men of their liberty of reading the Holy
Scripture by keeping your Service in an unknown Tongue, by teaching Men to
depend entirely upon your Churches Dictates, and not to depart from them, tho
Sense, Reason, Scripture, all be contrary to them. These are, I confess, some
of those peculiar Means whereby you have sought to procure Christian Peace; and
Experience tells you, that they are indeed the most advantageous of any to the
Cause you have to defend. And if these be the Means which you say we have
opposed, I hope we shall always continue so to do, and rather bear all the
Evils of these Divisions, than either buy Peace upon such Terms, or pursue it
by such Means as these.

5. Ad p. 2, 3.] To what I observed from the late Methods that had been taken
up in our Neighbor Country to avoid the entering upon particular Disputes,
which I said you were sensible had been the least favorable of any to your
Cause, you reply, " That you have never declined fighting with us at any
Weapon: which how true it is, the account before given of your managing the
present Controversy with us sufficiently declares. And indeed you seem in some
sort to have been sensible of it; and therefore recur to your Ancient Authors
for proof of your Assertion. The Sum of what you say is this: 6. Reply.] That
there have been three sorts of Protestants since the Reformation; 1. Some who
appealed to Scripture only, neither would they admit of Primitive Fathers nor
Councils. 2. Others who perceived that they could not maintain several Tenets
and Practices of their own by the bare words of Scripture, and despairing of
Fathers and Councils of latter Ages, pretended at least to admit of the first
four General Councils, and of the Fathers of the first three or four hundred
Years. 3. Others finally who ventured to name Tradition as a useful Means to
arrive at the true Faith. And all these you say you have convinced of their
Errors.

7. Answ.] It has always been your way to multiply Sects and Divisions among
Protestants as much as ever you were able, and then to complain against us upon
the account of them; and here you have given us a notable Instance of it. The
three Opinions you have drawn out as so many different Parties amongst us, do
all resolve into the very same Principle: That the Holy Scripture is the only,
perfect, and sufficient Rule of Faith: So that all other Authorities, whether
of Fathers, or Councils, or unwritten Tradition, are to be examined by it, and
no farther to be admitted by us than they agree with it. This is in effect the
common belief of all Protestants whatsoever, as appears from their several
Confessions, and might easily be shown out of the Writings of our first
Reformers, and the most eminent of those who have lived since, and built their
Faith upon the same Foundation. It is true indeed, there have been some who,
the better to maintain their Separation from the Church of England, have from
this sound Principle, That nothing is to be received by us as a Matter of
Faith, but what is either plainly expressed in the Holy Scripture, or can
evidently be proved by it, drawn a very ill Consequence, viz. That nothing
might lawfully be done or used in the Worship of God, unless there were some
Command or Example for it in Scripture; and have by this means run themselves
into great Inconveniences. But the Rule of Faith, which an uninterrupted
Tradition, by the common consent of all Parties of Christians, however
otherwise disagreeing in other Points, has brought down to us, and delivered
into our hands as the Word of God, this has among all Protestants been ever the
same, viz. The Holy Scripture. And if for the farther proof of the Truth of our
Doctrine, we have at any time put the issue of our Cause to the decision of the
Church of the first three or four hundred Years, it is not because we suppose
that those Fathers who then lived, have any more right to judge us, or determine
our Faith, than those that followed after; but because upon examination we find
them to have yet continued (at least as to the common Belief received and
established amongst them) in their Purity; and that what was generally
established and practiced by them, was indeed conformable both to their and our
Rule, the Word of God.

8. This then is our Common Principle, and this you cannot deny to be most
reasonable. For whatsoever Authority you would have us give to those Holy
Fathers, yet it cannot be doubted, but that,

1st, Being Durandus. l. 4. Sent. d. 7. q. 4. de S. Gregorio; Nescio cur non
possit dici quod Gregorius cum fuerit Homo, non Deus, potuerit Errare.
Men subject to the same Infirmities with our selves, they were by consequence
obnoxious to Errors as well as we; and therefore may not without all
examination be securely followed by us.

Especially if we consider, 2dly, That we are expressly forbid in Holy
Scripture, to rely on any Persons whatsoever without enquiry, whether what they
teach be true or not: Dearly Beloved, ( says St. John) believe not every
Spirit, 1 John 4.1.
but try the Spirits whether they be of God or no. The same is St. Paul's
Doctrine, To prove all things, and then hold fast that which is good: 1 Thessalonians.
5.21.
St. Peter exhorts all Christians to be ready to give a reason of the Hope that
is in them: 1 Pet. 3.15.
And our Blessed Savior himself once gave the same encouragement, of examining
even his own Doctrine; And why (says he) of your selves do you not judge that
which is right? Luke 12 57.


Nay but, 3dly, these Holy Fathers were not only capable of Erring, but in many
things they actually did Err, and are forsaken by you upon that account. The
Millenary Opinion was generally received in the first Ages of the Church. They
derived it from St. John to Papias, from him to Justin Martyr, Irenaeus,
Melito, Tertullian, etc. Yet is this Opinion now rejected by you. The Doctrine
of the necessity of Communicating Infants, was the Common Doctrine of the
Fathers in S. Austin's Time; and is confessed by your most Learned Men,
Cardinal Perron and Others to have been generally practiced in the Church for
the first six hundred Years: Council. Trid. Sess. 21. Can. 4.
Yet have you Anathematized those who shall now assert, with those Fathers,
that there is any necessity at all of communicating Children before they come
to Years of discretion. I need not say what Heats arose between One of your own
Popes and St. Cyprian about rebaptizing of Heretics; and both of them in the
wrong. The Ancient Fathers generally believed, that the Souls of the Blessed do
not yet enjoy the Vision of God: But from the time of Pope John the XXII. the
contrary is become the Catholic Doctrine among you. De Consecr. Did. 2. Sess.
13.
The necessity of communicating in both kinds, was believed in the Time of Pope
Gelasius, and the Council of Constance, in that very Canon in which it took
away the Cup from the Laity, Conc. Trid. Sess. 21. Can. 1.
yet confessed that Christ had established it in both kinds, and the Church
constantly administered and received in both kinds, in obedience to his
Institution: but it is now no less than damnation to say, that one kind alone is
not sufficient. In the primitive Church it was generally received, that the
Souls of the Faithful, after they are delivered from the burden of the Flesh,
are in Joy and Felicity. Now you teach that they go first to Purgatory, a place
of Pain and Sorrow, inferior in nothing but the duration, to Hell it self.

Other Instances I might add to show, that you your selves do no otherwise
follow the Fathers, than as you esteem them to have followed the Truth, and
therefore have thought fit to forsake them in the several Points I before
mentioned: And therefore certainly you ought not to condemn us, if we pay no
other deference to them: nor appeal to them but only as Witnesses of the
Doctrine of the Church in those Times, not as Judges and Masters of our Faith.

9. Ad Page IV.] Reply. And in all these several ways you say you have shown us
to be Mistaken, insomuch that there has not been any thing like an Argument
produced aginst your Faith, or to justify your Schism, but what has been
abundantly Answered and Refuted. 10. Answ.] This, Sir, is a Boast which I
believe the World will think you might very well have spared at this time. I
need not send you back, as you have done us, to our Ancient Authors; and desire
you once more to consider what has been offered, both from Scripture and
Antiquity, by Monsieur de Mornay, Aubertine, Chamiere, Blondell, Daille,
Larrogue, and Others abroad; by Bishop Jewel, Bishop Morton, A. B. Usher, Dr.
J. Forbes, Dr. White, Dr. Barrow, and many more of our own Country: and whose
Names among the wisest even of your own Church are much more valued, than for a
Coccius or a Brerely to be able to obscure them. I appeal only to the present
Times to witness against you; and would entreat you, before you tell us any
more of your Performances, to give some good Reply to that Catalogue I have
sent you of above forty Treatises lately published in all these kinds of
Arguments that you speak of; and your declining of which does not very well
suit with such vain Pretenses.

11. Ibid.] You add; That you have so far complied with the Infirmities of your
Adversaries, that you have left no Stone unturned to reduce them to the Unity
of the Faith, and that by meekness as well as powerful Reasoning. 12. Answ.] It
must be confessed indeed that you have not been wanting in your Endeavors to
convert us. Your Zeal has even equaled that which our Savior Christ once
remarked, or rather reproved in your Predecessors the Scribes and Pharisees:
and I would to God it had not too often produced the same Effect also. As for
the Means that you have made use of for the carrying on of this Work, I have
already in part recounted them to you. And shall only now add, that if your
Meekness has been no greater, than your Arguments have been powerful, we shall
have as little cause to applaud the One, as we have hitherto had to be
convinced by the Other. And indeed whosoever shall consider your behavior
toward those you call Heretics; will find that some Other word would better
have suited your Character than that of Meekness. If there be any, who deluded
by your present pretenses of Moderation doubt this, let them look only upon the
Actions of a neighbor Kingdom, and whose Clergy has ever been esteemed the
most moderate of your Church. For if such a deportment as theirs toward our
Brethren, be the Meekness you boast of; I shall only beg leave to say with
Solomon, Prove. 12.10.
that then the tender Mercies of some Men are Cruel. But you go on to show us
wherein you have made a testimony of this Meekness: You say, 13. Ibid.] You
have not only condescended to satisfy the curiousity of them that have more
leisure by writing large Volumes upon every particular Controversy -- but you
have gone a shorter way to work; and to some have manifested the unerrable
Authority of the Church of Christ, against which he had promised that the Gates
of Hell should not prevail. Others you have showed it from the nature of Truth
and Error, and the Impossibility that a Universal Tradition could fail,
especially when God had promised that the Words He would put into their Mouths,
should not depart out of their mouths, nor out of the Mouths of their Seed, nor
out of the Mouth of their Seeds seed, from hence forth and for Ever. To others
you have proved the Innocence and Antiquity of your Doctrine from the testimony
of learned Protestants themselves.

14. Answ.] This indeed was a great Condescension; that being so well satisfied
on all these accounts that you had the Truth your selves, you should so far
vouchsafe, as for our sakes, to prove that you had so. But truly, unless you
can produce some better proof that your Church cannot Error than this, that our
Savior once said of his Church, That the Gates of Hell should not prevail
against it, you will never satisfy any reasonable Man of it. How often, Sir,
have you been told, that here is something indeed to establish the Perpetuity
of the Church, but nothing of its Infallibility. Unless you will suppose (what
you know we utterly deny) that the Church cannot subsist except it be
infallible in every Point. The Church may fall into many Errors, and yet
continue a Church still. A Man is never the less a Man, because he has an Ague,
or some other Distemper upon Him. And whilst the Church thus subsists, Christ's
Promise is made good, that the Gates of Hell should not prevail against it.
Though now, 2dly, Were the Infallibility of the Church in this Text clear to a
Demonstration, yet still the main Thing would be wanting, how to prove your
Church to be the Catholic Church, and to have alone the right to this Promise,
which for ought appears from this Passage any Other may pretend to upon as good
grounds as She.

15. Again; As to the Point of Tradition, With what confidence can you say it
is impossible that should fail, seeing the Instances I have before given of
your departure from the Tradition of the Primitive Fathers in so many
particulars, plainly show that it has failed? For your argument which you
allege from Isa. 59.20. It has the same Faults with the foregoing, and one
more. For that passage; 1st, If it speaks any thing at All of these Matters, it
is for the Perpetuity, not Infallibility of the Church. 2dly, That there is not
One word in it of any privilege, either in the One or the Other kind bestowed
upon your Church in particular; and the Greek, or any other Church may as
reasonably argue from it as your selves. Nay, 3dly, It Is plain from the Context
that it does not belong to any of us, the Covenant here spoken of being made
with Zion, and those that turn from Transgression in Jacob; that is (as St.
Paul himself applies it, Romans 11.) to the Convert Jews, when they shall come in
and embrace the Gospel of Christ.

16. And for your last Method, the Concessions of Protestants themselves, this
will but little avail you: seeing if it could be proved that any of our
particular Writers had said some things in favor of your Doctrine, this would
be of no force against any but themselves, any farther than their Arguments
shall upon Examination be found to warrant their Assertions. We have often told
you, that our Faith depends not on any Humane Authority. Such Concessions may
show the weakness or Error of him that made them, but they are nothing
available to prescribe against the Truth of the Gospel. And this, I say,
supposing that you could produce the Opinions of Protestants (as you pretend)
in favor of your Doctrines! But now let me tell you, the Collection to which
you refer us, has been found so very insincere by those who have had occasion
to examine it, that should we allow these kind of Authorities to be as
conclusive against us as you can desire, you would not yet be able either to
advantage your selves, or to convince any others by them.

17. Ad Page 5.] You see, Sir, what little reason we have to expect very much
from these Methods, which in your great Humility you have condescended to make
use of in order to our Conversion. And we cannot but congratulate our good
Fortune, that you seem to tell us you have yet some better Arguments in
reserve; those which you say MIGHT have been brought to prove the Authority of
your Church. And though you think us so fond of flying off to particular
Disputes, that no Arguments can keep us from them; yet I do hereby promise you,
that whenever you shall have clearly made out this Proposition, That the
Church of Rome is Infallible, and whatsoever she proposes to be received by us
is the truly Catholic Faith, without which there is no Salvation; and then
show me, How I shall infallibly know, amidst so many different Proposals of her
Doctrine, what that Faith is which this Church teaches as necessary to that
End; I will from thenceforth become as blindly obedient a Disciple, as the most
implicit Believer whose Credulity you have ever yet imposed upon with these
Pretenses.

18. Ibid.] For your next Allegation, That you could never get us to take your
Doctrine aright, if what I have heretofore said be not sufficient; I will once
more put you in mind that you must first resolve to answer from Point to Point,
the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome truly Represented, before you
can expect to be credited by us. And if from what we have truly said concerning
you, you are indeed grown to be looked upon (in your own words) to be as bad as
Devils, and your Doctrines as the Dictates of Hell it self; though I believe in
this excess you do something misrepresent both your selves and us; you may
attribute it if you please to our Calumnies against you, but I believe all
indifferent Persons will be able to find out some better Reasons for it.

19. Ad Page 6.] As for your Expositions which you from hence thought fit to
publish to the World, as your last reserve for our Conversion; the World is
sufficiently satisfied with what sincerity you have proceeded in them. And for
what you add, in the close of this first Point, concerning the Character of the
Times that we are fallen into, such as you say S. Paul foretold, in which Men
will not endure sound Doctrine; it is indeed too true, but withal it is such a
Complaint as is equally made on all hands, whilst every one thinks his own way
the best. But I will, in return, send you to another Character of the same
Apostle concerning these Days, which is all your own, 2 Thessalonians. 2. verse. 3, to
the 13th; and I think it is so plain, that you may without an infallible
Interpreter understand the meaning of it.

20. And thus far you pursue the former Consideration, of the state of the
Controversy between the Papists and Protestants in general. Your next work is
to give some accounts of your Disputes with us of this Church in particular.

21. You begin with the History of the first Conversion of the English by
Augustine the Monk, sent hither by Pope Gregory the Great. But your account of
it is so very uncertain, that I would willingly hope, however you quote Bid
for it, yet that you never read one word of him, but took it upon the Credit of
one of your New Converts, Reason and Authority.
whose Errors in this Point you have as blindly embraced, as his Book testifies
him to have most implicitly taken up your Prevarications.

22. Ad Page 7.] Reply. You tell us, That notwithstanding the long want of
intercourse with Rome, and the Members of that Communion, occasioned by great
Oppressions and Persecutions during the reign of Pagan Kings, yet had there not
many Errors crept into this Christian part of the Nation. For S. Augustine
found only two Customs amongst them which he could not tolerate, the One their
keeping Easter at a wrong time, and the Other some Errors in the Ceremonies in
Administering Baptism. These two he earnestly solicited them to Amend, but they
were Obstinate, and would not suffer any Reformation in those two Points, TILL
God was pleased to testify his Mission, and the Authority he came with, by the
Authentic Seal of Miracles. 22. Answ.] In which Relation you are many ways
mistaken. For, 1st, As to the intercourse that you say was a long time lost
between Rome and the British Churches, by reason of the Persecutions of Pagan
Kings; this is not easy to be credited: It being the middle of the 5th Century
e're the Romans left this Island, and the Saxons were called into it. It was
near the middle of the 6th before the Britains were dispossessed of the rest of
their Country, and forced to retrench themselves within the Mountains of Wales.
During all this time their intercourse with Rome, if they had any, might well
have continued; and it was not fifty Years after, that Austin the Monk came
into England. 2dly, you say, that Austin found only two Customs among the
Christians here that he could not tolerate. It Is true indeed, upon the second
meeting that he had with the British Bishops, Bid Lib. 2. c. 2.
he told them, That though in many things they were contrary to the custom of
his Church, yet if in those two mentioned they would obey him, and join with
him in preaching the Gospel to the Saxons, he would bear with them in the rest:
But did they therefore acknowledge his Authority in complying with his Desires?
so you would make us believe. They were Obstinate, say you, TILL God was
pleased to testify his Mission, and the Authority he came with by the
Authentic Seal of Miracles. As for his Miracles, we have no great Opinion of
their Authority, since we read in the passage to which I just now referred you,
that Antichrist himself shall come with this Attestation. Gal. 1.9.
It is the Doctrine that must give credit to the Miracles, not these to the
Doctrine. Should an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel than that which
we have received, St. Paul has commanded us, for all the Wonder, to bid him be
Anathema. But I return to the History, in which you so notoriously prevaricate,
that I cannot imagine how one that pretends in this inquisitive Age to deliver
the Antiquities of his own Country, durst betray himself so notoriously
ignorant of it. See, Sir, Bid. Loc. cit.
the words of your own Author Bid, expressly contrary to your Allegation. But
they answered, that they would do nothing of all this, nor receive him for an
Archbishop. Insomuch that Austin came to high words with them, threatening them
with that Destruction which they afterward, to their cost, met with from his
new Saxon Converts. And your illustrious Annalist Card. Baron. Annal. Tom. 8.
An. 604.
Baronius, cannot forbear making some severe Reflections upon the State of our
Island at that Time, as if God had therefore given it into the hands of the
Barbarians, because of the refractory and schismatical Minds of these Bishops.

23. Ibid.] Reply. Your Adversaries (you say) acknowledge, that when St. Austin
came into England, he taught most, if not all the same Doctrines the Roman
Catholic Church now teaches, etc. 24. Answ.] If S. Austin (as you call him)
taught the same Doctrine which Pope Gregory the Great taught, who sent him
hither, and whose Disciple we are told he was, I must then put you in Mind that
a very Learned Man has lately showed you (and I may reasonably presume you
could not but know it) that he did not teach most, much less all the Doctrines
which you now teach. No, Sir, the Mystery of Iniquity was not yet come to
Perfection; and tho your Church had even then in many things declined from its
first Faith, yet was it much more pure than now it is. Protestants Apology, p.
57, etc. 2d Edit.
Had you when you took this Pretense from your Friend Mr. Brerely, looked into
the Answer that was at large made to it; I am persuaded you would have been
ashamed to have again advanced so false and trifling an Objection. Look, Sir, I
beseech you into the Protestants Appeal, Prot. Appeal, lib. 1. cap. 2.
or if that be too much for one of your Employments, look into the Treatise to
which I refer you: There you will find, 1. Vind. of the Answ. of some late
Papers, p. 72, etc.
That the Scripture was yet received as a perfect Rule of Faith. 2. The Books
of the Maccabees, which you now put into your Canon, rejected then as
Apochryphal. 3. That Good Works were not yet esteemed meritorious: Nor, 4.
Auricular Confession a Sacrament. That, 5. Solitary Masses were disallowed by
him: And, 6. Transubstantiation yet unborn. That 7. The Sacrament of the
Eucharist was hitherto administered in both kinds: And, 8. Purgatory it self not
brought either to certainty or to perfection. That by consequence, 9. Masses
for the Dead were not intended to deliver Souls from those Torments: Nor, 10.
Images allowed for any other purpose than for Ornament and Instruction. 11.
That the Sacrament of Extreme Unction was yet unformed; and even 12. The Pope's
Supremacy so far from being then established as it now is, that Pope Gregory
thought it to be the fore-running of Antichrist, for one Bishop to set himself
above all the rest. These are the Instances in which you have been shown the
vast difference there is between Pope Gregory's Doctrine, and that of the
Council of Trent; and which may serve for a Specimen to satisfy the World with
what Truth you pretend, that we acknowledge that S. Austin when he came into
England, taught most, if not all the same Doctrines that you now teach. And
this may also suffice for your next Argument founded upon it, viz.

25. Add page 7, 8.] Reply: That these Doctrines and Practices were either then
taught and exercised by the British Christians also, or they were not. If they
were not taught by them, certainly, we should not have found them so easily
submitting to them. If they were taught by the British Bishops also, then they
were of a longer standing than S. Austin's time: and we must either grant they
were introduced by the first Preachers of the Gospel here, or evidently show
some other time before St. Austin when this Church embraced them. 26. Answ.] A
Dilemma is a terrible thing with Sense and Truth, but without them it is a
ridiculous one; as I take this to be. For,

1. It is evident from what I have before said, that Austin did not teach the
same Doctrines, nor establish the same Practices that you do now teach and
establish; but did indeed in most of your Corruptions differ from you. So that
like the unwise Builder, you have erected a stately Fabric, and founded it
upon the Sand.

2. Had he been as very a Romish Missionary as your self, yet is your Argument
still inconclusive. For whereas you suppose the British Bishops submitted to
him, they were on the contrary so far from either obeying his Authority, or
following his Prescriptions, that, as I have shown you, they utterly rejected
both: and I will presently add, that for above a hundred Years after his Death,
they utterly refused so much as to communicate with his Proselytes, nor
esteemed them any more than Pagans. So that I may now turn your own Argument
upon you, that seeing they had such an Abhorrence for Austin and his Followers,
that they looked upon them no better than Heathens, it very probably was,
because they neither approved what he taught, nor saw any cause to submit to
that Authority to which he pretended. You see, Sir, what an admirable Argument
you here flourish with; and how little cause we have to expect any great
Sincerity from you in other matters, when in the very History of your own
Country you so wretchedly prevaricate, and against the express Authority of
that very Person whom you quote for your Relation.

27. Having thus given us a proof either of your Skill or your Integrity in the
account of the first Conversion of our Island under Pope Gregory the Great; you
next make a very large step as to the progress of your Religion, and such as
still confirms me more and more, how very unfit you are to turn Historian.

28. Add page 8.] Reply. This Faith and these Exercises (say you) taught and
practiced by St. Austin were propagated down even till King Henry the VIIIth's
time. Answ.] In which account, whether we are to complain of your Ignorance or
your Vnsincerity, be it your part to determine; this I am sure, they cannot
both be excused.

29. I have already shown you that that Faith which was found in the Church of
England in King Henry the VIIIth's time could not have been propagated down
from the time of Austin's coming hither, seeing that Monk neither taught nor
practiced the greatest part of those Corruptions which were afterward by
degrees brought into ours, as well as into the other Churches of the Roman
Communion. But however not to insist upon this Fundamental Mistake: Can you,
Sir, with any Conscience affirm, that the Doctrine which you now teach was till
King Henry the VIIIth's time without interruption received and practiced in
this Country?

30. First; For the British Bishops whom you before bring in as submitting
themselves to Austin; your own Author Bid expressly declares that in his time
(which was an hundred Years after the Death of Austin) they entertained no
Communion with them. Lib. 2. cap. 20.
Seeing (says he) to this very day it is the Custom of the Britains to have no
value for the Faith and Religion of the English, nor to communicate with them
any more than with Pagans. Which Henry of Huntingdon thus confirms: Lib. 3.
Hist.
That neither the Britains nor Scots, (i. e. Irish) would communicate with the
English, or with Austin their Bishop any more than with Pagans. So that for one
Age, at least, the British Bishops then neither owned the Authority of your
Church, nor had any manner of Communion with the Members of it. But,

31. Secondly; Have you never heard of some other Kings of England, who, with
their Parliaments, have most stiffly opposed the Pretenses of the Pope, and
refused all Messages from Him, and made it no less than High Treason for any
one to bring his Orders or Interdicts into the Kingdom? What think you of
another Henry, no less brave than his Successor, whom you so revile, in his
Defense of himself against his Rebellious Subject, but your Saint, Thomas a
Becket? I could add many Acts of Parliament made long before King Henry the
VIIIth's time to show you, that tho he indeed proved the most successful in his
Attempts to shake off the Pope's Authority, yet that several other of our
Princes had shown him the way, and that the Usurpations of that See were
neither quietly owned, nor patiently submitted to by his Royal Predecessors.
And then,

32. Thirdly; For the matter of your Doctrine, it must certainly be a great
piece of Confidence in you to pretend that this came down such as you now
believe and practice, from the time of Austin the Monk, to King Henry the
VIIIth's days. I speak not now of the great Opposition that was made to it by
Wickleffe, tho supported by the Duke of Lancaster, the Lord Marshall of
England, and diverse others of chiefest note in this Kingdom, in the time of
Edward the Third, and Richard the Second. I need not say in how many Points he
stood up against the Doctrine of your Church; what a mighty Interest he had to
support him against the Authority of the Pope, and the Rage of the Bishop of
London and his other Enemies on that account; so as both freely to preach
against your Errors, and yet die in Peace in a good old Age. The number of his
Followers was almost infinite, and tho severe Laws were afterward made against
them, yet could they hardly ever be utterly rooted out. But yet, least you
should say that Wickleffe was only a Schismatic from your Church, which
constantly held against him; I will rather show you in a few Instances, that
even the Church of England it self, which you suppose to have been so
conformable to your present Tenets, was in truth utterly opposite to your
Sentiments in many Particulars. And because I may not run out into too great a
length, I will insist only upon two, but those very considerable Points.

33. The first is the Doctrine of Transubstantiation: which as it came but late
into the Roman Church, so did it by Consequence into ours too. Certain it is,
that in the 10th Century the contrary Faith was publicly taught among us. Now,
not to insist upon the Authority of Bid, who in several parts of his Works,
plainly shows how little he believed your Doctrine of Transubstantiation; this
is undeniably evident from the Saxon Homily translated by Aelfrick, and
appointed in the Saxons time to be read to the People at Easter before they
received the Holy Communion; and which is from one end to the other directly
opposite to the Doctrine of the Real Presence as established by your Council of
Trent. And the same Aelfrick in his Letters to Wulfine Bishop of Scyrburne, and
to Wulfstane Archbishop of York, shows his own Notions to have been exactly
correspondent to what that Homily taught. The Housell (says he) is Christ's
Body not bodily, but ghostlye. Not the Body which he suffered in, but the
Body of which he spoke when he blessed Bread and Wine to Housell a night
before his suffering, and said by the blessed Bread, This is my Body, and
again by the holy Wine, This is my Blood which is shedd for many in
forgiveness of Sins. Understand now that the Lord who could turn that Bread
before his suffering to his Body, and that Wine to his Blood ghostlye, that
the selfsame Lord blesses daily through the Priests hands Bread and Wine to
his ghostlye Body and to his ghostlye Blood. All which he more fully explains
in his other Letter. H. de Knyghton de Event. Anglice l. 5. p. 2647, 2648.
Nay it appears by a Recantation of Wickleffe mentioned by Knyghton, that even
in the latter time of that Man's Life there was no such Doctrine then in
England as Transubstantiation publicly imposed as an Article of Faith. By all
which it is evident that your great Doctrine of the Real Presence with all its
necessary Appendages, was not, as you pretend, propagated down from Austin's to
King Henry the Eight's time, but brought in to the Church some hundreds of
Years after that Monk died.

34. The other Instance I shall offer to overthrow your Pretenses is no less
considerable, viz. the Worship of Images. It is well known what Opposition was
made not only by the Emperor Charles the Great, and the Fathers of the Synod of
Franckfort, but by the French Clergy in their Synod at Paris, and by almost all
the rest of the Bishops of the Western Church against your pretended General
Council of Nice, wherein this Doctrine was first established. The Definitions
of this Council being sent to the Emperor out of the East, he transmitted a
Copy of them into England. Hereupon Alcuinus, who had formerly been his
Schoolmaster, wrote an Answer to him in the Name of the Clergy of England, to
declare their dislike of this Doctrine: and the account of which our ancient
Histories give us in these words. In the Year from the Incarnation of our Lord
792 Charles King of France sent to Britain a Synod Book which was directed
unto him from Constantinople: Hoveden. Annal. ad Ann. 792. Simeon Dunelm. Hist.
p. 111. Mat. West. ad An. 793. Spelm. Conc. Tom. 1. p. 306.
in the which Book alas! many things unconvenient and contrary to the true
Faith were found: in especial, that it was establyshed with a whole consent
almost of all the Learned of the East, no less than of three hundredth Bishops
or more, that Men ought to worship Images, the which the Church of God DOES
UTTERLY ABHOR. Against the which Alcuine wrote an Epistle wonderouslye
proved by the Authority of Holy Scripture, and brought that Epistle with the
same Book, and Names of our Bishops and Princes to the King of France. And
thus neither was this Doctrine nor Practice propagated down from Austin to King
Henry the Eighth; but on the contrary unknown to Austin, and rejected as you
see by the Church of England, almost 200 Years after his first Conversion of it.

35. Ibid.] And this may suffice to show both your Skill in Church History, and
the little pretense you have for that vain and most false Assertion, that your
Religion was taught and practiced by S. Austin, and propagated down even to
King Henry the Eighth 's time; whereas indeed it is made up of such Corruptions
as crept into it long after his Decease. Your next business is to rail at King
Henry the Eighth, which you do very heartily, See Thuanus.
tho let me tell you that better Men than you are, even of your own Commuion,
and who were much more acquainted with the Affairs of those Times, speak better
things of him. And had he been as bad as you are able to represent him, yet I
could send you to some of the Heads of your Church, who have as far excelled
him in Wickedness as ever any of your Canonists have pretended they did in
Authority. But the Merits of Princes, as well as ordinary Persons, are measured
by some Men, not according to their real worth, but as they have served their
Interests, or opposed the Usurpations. And tho King Henry the Eighth be now
such a Monster, yet had he not thrown off the Pope's Supremacy, you would have
made no difficulty to have forgiven him all his other Sins whilst he lived, and
would have found out somewhat to justify his Memory now he is dead. We know how
one of the best Popes of this last thousand Years called Heaven and Earth to
celebrate the Praises of a Traitor that had murdered his Master, and possessed
himself of his Empire. And Cromwell himself, tho a Usurper, and Heretic, yet
wanted not his Panegyrists among those pretenders to Loyalty, who now cannot
afford a good word to the Honor of a Prince, from whose Royal Line their
present Sovereign at this day derives his Right to the Crown he wears.

36. But however, were the Vices of that Prince otherwise never so detestable;
yet I shall leave it to the World to judge who proceeded with the most Care and
Sincerity in the Point you insist upon of his Divorce with Q. Catherine: the
King who consulted almost all the Learned Men, as well as the most famous
Universities of Europe, and then acted according to their Determination: Or the
Pope who by his notorious juggling with him in the whole process of that Affair,
showed that he resolved to decide it not by any Laws of God or the Church, but
merely as his greater Interests with the Emperor or the King should move him to
do.

37. Ibid.] The next step you make is from King Henry, to his Son King Edward
the Sixth. And here you tell us,

Reply, p. 8.] That as Schism is commonly followed with Heresy, so now the
Protector, who was tainted with Zuinglianism, a Reform from Luther, endeavored
to set it up here in England. In which you again discover your Zeal against us,
but not according to Understanding. There is hardly any one that knows any
thing of the beginning of this Reformation, but will be able to tell you that
the chief Instrument of it was one whom you have not once mentioned,
Archbishop Cranmer. I will not deny but that the Protector concurred with him
in his design, but whether he was Zuinglian, or what else, neither you nor I
can tell. Dr. Heylin, See your Hist. Coll. p. 103.
who on this occasion is usually your Oracle, seems rather to think he was a
Lutheran, tho easy to be molded into any form. But this I know, that had you
been so well versed in these things, Hosp. Hist. Sacram. par. 2. p. 33.
Lampadius par. 3. p. 439. Scultetus Annal. ad An. 1616.
as one who pretends to write Historical Remarks ought to be, you would have
spared that idle Reflection of Zuinglius's being a Reform from Luther, it being
evident to those who understand his History, that neither himself, nor the
Cantons in which he preached were ever Lutherans. But on the contrary, whereas
Luther appeared but in the Year 1517, Zuinglius began to preach against the
Corruptions of the Church of Rome some Years before, when the very Name of
Luther was not yet heard of: And had several Conferences with Cardinal Matthews
then in Switzerland to this purpose, before ever the other appeared in public
against them. So unfortunate a thing is it for Men to pretend to be witty upon
others, without considering their own blind side. But you go on;

38. Ad page 9.] Reply. And from that time the Catholic Doctrine which had
been taught by our first Apostles, and propagated till then, began to be
rejected and accused as Erroneons, Superstitious, and Idolatrous, and they who
professed it, persecuted. Answ.] This is still of the same kind, as false, as
it is malicious. How false it is that the Doctrine you now profess was either
planted here by our first Apostles, or propagated till this time in the Church
of England, I have already shown. And for the Persecution you speak of,
methinks you should have been ashamed to mention that word, being to name Q.
Mary's Reign in the very next Line. But what at last did this Persecution
amount to? Were any Roman Catholics banished, or put to death for their
Religion? Were the Laws turned against them; or any Dragoons sent to convert
them? No; Bonner and Fisher, and two others, Heath Bishop of Worcester, and Day
Bishop of Chichester were deprived of their Bishoprics, and the three first
imprisoned. A very few of the inferior Clergy suffered in the same manner, and
all after much provocation. This was the very utmost of what you call
Persecution: and soon after we meet other kind of Trials: For this King dying,

39. Ibid.] Reply. You tell us The Catholic Religion began again to bud forth
under Q. Mary. Answ.] And then as if you were afraid of burning your Fingers in
those Fires which Her See Dr. Burnet's Cont. of his Refl. on Varillas p. 4, 5.
Persecution kindled against us; you immediately pass to Her Sister's
Succession: And to whose Reign I will so far comply with you, as to pass
without one word of reflection, which you know I might here have occasion
enough to make.

40. Ibid.] Reply. But that Bud being early nipped by her Death, Queen
Elizabeth, by the Advice of the new Council which she chose, and to secure her
self in the Throne, resolved to destroy the Catholic Interest, and set up a
Prelatick Protestancy, which might have the Face of a Church. But other
pretended Reformers opposed her Prelates, and called their Orders
Antichristian, and would needs have the Rags and Remnants of Popery, as they
called them, taken away: Telling them, that if the Word of God was to be the
sole Rule of Reformation, such things as were not to be found in that Rule were
certainly to be rejected. Answ.] The Method by which Queen Elizabeth proceeded
in her Reformation, was such as will sufficiently justify both her Piety and
Prudence in the choice of it. Never was more care taken that nothing should be
done out of Interest or Passion; but all things be established upon the best
and surest Foundations. And had not some misguided Zealots, out of a too great
Affection to those Models they had seen abroad, run into unreasonable
Oppositions at Home, the Church of England had at this day been the most
flourishing, as it is the most Primitive Church in the World.

41. But though this then be a Matter justly to be lamented by Us, yet
certainly you have no cause to complain of that great Queen's proceedings
toward you. It is well known how many Years passed before any severe Laws were
made against Recusants; and how the Attempts of the Pope, and the King of Spain
from Abroad, and of your Brethren in compliance with them at Home, forced her
to that Severity, which was afterward, but with great Moderation, used against
you. Bonner, though infamous for his Cruelties in Queen Mary's days, was yet
suffered to go in safety now. Heath lived not only in great security, but even
in favor with the Queen her self. Tonstal and Thirleby, found a Retreat with
the Archbishop at Lambeth: The rest of the Bishops continued in quiet amongst
us; only three chose to retire beyond Sea. When the High Commission was
established for visiting the Churches of England, they were expressly ordered by
her Majesty's Injunctions to reserve Pensions for those that refused to
continue in their Benefices: And the Reformation it self appeared so reasonable
to them, that of nine thousand four hundred beneficed Men in England, there
were but fourteen Bishops, six Abbots, twelve Deans, twelve Archdeacons,
fifteen Heads of Colleges, fifteen Prebendaries, and eighty Rectors of
Parishes that left their Benefices upon the account of Religion. Consider, Sir,
this procedure, and then compare it with that of the Queen her Sister; or if
these things be too far out of your reach, look upon the Methods that have been
used in our Neighbor Country, and that not in the severe Accounts of any
particular Persons, but in the public Edicts, in the Report which one of your
own Party, Monsieur le Fevre has published with the King's Permission; and then
say freely, which has most in it of the true Spirit of Christianity, the
meekness whereby this Princess established the Truth in her Kingdoms, or that
furious Zeal which has been employed to root it out of this Other.

42. Ad Page 9.] Reply. From that time (you say) the Nation has been variously
agitated with Disputes. Answ.] And give me leave to tell you we are in great
measure to thank you for it. They were your Brethren, that creeping into
Chambers and Conventicles, under pretense of a purer Reformation, endeavored
to divide us among our selves, and especially to draw as many as they could
from the Established Religion, which you have ever the most hated. Such was
Faithful Commin in the 9th Year See Foxes and Firebrands, Part 1, and 2.
: Father Heath in the 10th of that Queen's Reign: and both discovered to be
Priests in Masquerade. And it was in this very Year See Camden' s Eliz. ad
Annum 1568.
1568 that the Puritans chiefly began to appear: And the Heads of them which
our Historians mention, Hallingham, Coleman, and Benson, are named in a Letter
that dropped out of Father Heath's Pocket, Foxes and Firebrands, Part 1. p. 37.
Ed. 80. See A.B. Bramhall's Letter to A. B. Usher. p. 611.
to have been some of your Emissaries. How far the same Policies have kept open
our Divisions since it is now no longer a Mystery. We know how Provision has
been made to tutor up Scholars, not only in Learning, but in Handy-craft Trades
too, in Italy, France, Germany, and Spain: How they have been taught twice a
Week regularly to dispute pro and con, concerning Presbytery, Independency,
Anabaptism, Atheism; every one to take his part among us, according as his
Fancy or Genius leads him. Foxes and Firebrands, Part 1. p. 7.
Who was it but a St. Omer's Jesuit that confessed (as we are credibly
informed) that they were twenty Years in hammering out the Sect of the Quakers?
And indeed the Principle they go upon to refuse all Oaths, is a neat
Contrivance for Priests and Jesuits to avoid the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, without a possibility of being discovered. But this may suffice to
show how unreasonable you are to complain of those Divisions which your selves
have in great measure been the Authors of amongst us: and shall, I hope, make
us hereafter better understand one another, than to give you any longer the
opportunity of keeping up these Differences amongst us, and then I am sure we
need not much fear whatever you can do in your own Shapes to ruin us.

43. Ibid.] During this Time, you say, all things were carried to an Extremity
against you: so furious was our rage against the Truth. Answ. But certainly you
here again make History, and do not report things as they truly passed in those
Days. I am sure if we may conclude any thing, either from the Writings or
Actions of those Times, nothing can be more moderate than we shall find them
both to have been. It was then our XXXIX Articles were drawn up, and in which I
am confident you will not have the face to say, that things were carried to any
undue excess against you. And if the Homilies in some Particulars may seem
somewhat severe, yet I believe there are but few Expressions in them that you
have not very well deserved. But this first Dream gives you occasion in the
next Paragraph to run into a contrary Extravagance, and that as groundless as
the foregoing: For you add, 44. Ad page 9, 10.] Reply. That things growing
calmer in King James and King Charles the first Time, such Calumnies and
Accusations (as had before been used) were looked upon by the more Learned
Party as the Effects of Passion; and Moderation taught them to acknowledge the
Church of Rome to be a Mother Church, and that Salvation was to be had in Her.
That many of those Accusations which were brought against Her, were but the
Dreams of distracted Brains; and the more moderate Persons begun to look upon
Her with a more favorable Eye.

45. Answ.] I wish you had here given us some Proofs of what you say, that so
we might have known who these Learned Men were, and what those Charges that
they begun to leave off against you. It is well known how earnestly King James
wrote against your Church; King Charles the first was your avowed Enemy even to
his Death: The most Learned Men of those Times have left such Volumes against
you as you never were, nor ever will be able to Answer: and I shall hereafter
show you, that even those whom you allege as excusing you from Idolatry (which
is I believe in your own Estimation, our severest charge against you) are for
all your Pretenses, far from thinking that there is either Falsehood or Calumny
in such an Accusation.

46. It is therefore great Confidence in you, without the least shadow of
Authority for what you do, to represent such Eminent Persons as Favorers of
your Doctrine. But this has been ever your way, and we ought not to wonder at
it, seeing we can remember the time that we our selves were reported to be
Popishly affected: and it is but a few Months since that some of you put out a
book to show an Agreement at this day between the Church of England, and the
Church of Rome; though I suppose he may by this time begin to repent of an
undertaking, which has brought nothing but infamy to the Author of so false and
scandalous an Attempt.

47. What you mean by our acknowledging your Church to be a Mother Church, I do
not very well comprehend. We confess indeed it was a Roman Missionary that
especially contributed to the Conversion of the Saxons: and this I believe no
Man ever denied; but let me tell you, that if your own Historian Bid be to be
Judge, our Country was much more beholden to the Labors and Prudence of the
Scots and French, Answer to Reason and Authority page 83, etc.
than to the Romans. Look into the Account that has lately been given by a
Learned Person of our Church in His Answer to One of your New Converts. There
you will find that they were Columba, Aidan, Ced, Ceadda, Finan, Colman,
Trumhere, Agilbertus, and Felix, that restored Christianity and propagated it
among the Saxons; when the planting of it by Austin was almost lost. Insomuch
that at the Death of Deus-dedit Archbishop of Canterbury, there was in all
Britain but one Bishop of Roman Ordination, remaining; viz. Wini, who called
in two British Bishops to his Assistance for the Ordaining of Ceadda to be
Archbishop of York. And to show what great Obligations we have to own the
Church of Rome as a Mother Church; when things are now in peace, and the
Paschal Controversy laid aside, and great Hopes that all things would come to a
right understanding, Wilfrid returning from Rome, revived again the Old
Quarrels, and forced Colman and his followers to retire into Ireland, St. Chad
to leave his bishopric of York; and so deprived our Country of the benefit of
so many excellent Pastors, as Bede himself, no Friend to them, could not choose
but give an extraordinary Character of them. See Maso^ de Minist. Angl. l. 2.
cap. 4. Bid. l. 3. c. 6.
But that you may see what little reason we have to acknowledge your Church
above all Others to be our Mother Church, I will lay this whole Affair in short
before you. Our whole Island heretofore was divided into four Languages; of
Britains, Ibid. l. 2. c. 2.
Scots, Picts, and English. As for the Britains, they were so far from being
Converted by Austin, that at his coming he found an Established Church amongst
them, and that utterly refused to have any thing to do with Him. For the Scots,
Ibid. l. 1. c. 13.
they were established Christians before Austin's Time, under Palladius their
Bishop; Baron. ad Ann. 429.
and your own Annalist carries their Conversion yet higher. The Picts embraced
our Faith at the preaching of Columbanus, who came hither out of Ireland, 32
Years before Austin's arrival. And lastly, for the English, Bid. l. 3. c. 4.
tho we are far from detracting any thing from the Labors of S. Austin, yet
neither may we forget that the Glory even of their Conversion is not his alone;
but must be ascribed to those other Holy Men who were His Fellow-workers in the
Gospel, Felix, Aidan, Ceadda, Lethardus, etc. and some of which had begun
before Him, and prepared the way for that success which afterward attended his
Preaching.

48. As to what you add, that they began to confess then too, that Salvation
was to be had amongst you; it is what we do not any more deny at this day. We
do hope that some Men amongst you may be saved, because we hope there may be
some in your Church who live in a more excusable Ignorance of the Truth, and
that these holding still the Foundation, and being ready to submit to any
Conviction that should be offered, may by God's Grace, and a general
Repentance, even for their very Errors among the rest of their unknown Sins, be
saved through Faith in Christ Jesus. But yet that you may not mistake our
Charity, give me leave to tell you,

(1.) That we think it much more difficult for any one to be saved in your
Church now, than it was before the Reformation; because that then your Errors
were neither so well known, nor so fully refuted as they have been since: and
therefore Ignorance was in those Days much more invincible, and by consequence
more fit to excuse than it is now.

(2.) That for those who live, as you do, in a Country where you might, would
you sincerely apply your selves to it, find sufficient means of Instruction, it
is yet more dangerous than in those Parts where these Helps are wanting.

But especially (3.) will this hold good against you whom God has called to be
the Pastors of his Church, and whose Character engages them to be in an
especial manner, sedulous and inquisitive; Earnest in their Prayers, and
unprejudiced in their Desires to know the Truth, more than against the
Lay-members of your Church. So that however we will not judge you, yet neither
can we with any comfort say that God will acquit you.

And (4.) for those whom by this Argument you endeavor to draw away from us;
That we confess that Men in your Church may be saved, but that you utterly deny
that they can be in Ours, and therefore it is best for them to be on Yours,
that is, the safer Side. If they do indeed use all possible means to be
satisfied in the Points in debate betwixt us; if they indifferently apply
themselves to the examination of them; and after a diligent trial, remain at
last convinced in their Consciences that yours is the best and purest Church;
we shall then be encouraged to hope well of them, as we do of others of your
Communion, notwithstanding such a change. But now, should Interest, or
Prejudice, or any Humane Motives chance to have interposed to bias their
Judgments; if they choose your Religion, without this diligent, and impartial
Examination, and suffer themselves without Reason to be seduced by you: We must
freely profess our Charity in this Assertion is not meant for them; nor do we
think your Church in this Case any way of Salvation at all to such Converts,
much less a safer than that of the Church of England. In short, the Sum of this
Matter is; We hope honest Men may be saved in your Communion; but we are sure
they shall be in Ours. Whether God will condemn you for professing Errors that
you do not know to be such, we cannot tell, we believe he will not; Sure we are
he would damn us, should we who are convinced of your Corruptions, be seduced
by any base Motives to go over to you. And this is enough for us to know; The
Other is your Concern, and do you look to it. But you go on, and tell us;

49. Ibid.] Reply. That the Aversion which the People had imbibed from so long
continued Slanders, could not be removed; and the arising Factions in the State
blew up the Coals afresh, and pretended this Moderation was nothing but an
inclination to Popery, which so frighted the Mobile, that they were ready to
join with any Party that pretended to suppress such a Monster as they thought
it to be: From hence came Rebellions, and the horrid Murder of King Charles the
First. 50. Answ.] That the People had an Aversion to Popery then, I can easily
believe, from what I have the satisfaction to find in them at this day. But
that this Aversion sprung from any Slanders that had been laid upon you
heretofore, I no more believe, than I do that it proceeds from our
Misrepresenting your Doctrine now. No, Sir, believe me, there is enough in
Popery to make an honest Man hate it, without raising any Calumnies against it
to render it the more odious: and I do not find since your Endeavors to
vindicate your selves against us, that it begins to be at all more liked than
it was before.

51. For what you mention of the Original of the Civil Wars in King Charles the
First's Reign, I readily grant that the fears of Popery contributed much to
blow up the People into Rebellion. But I am persuaded we must look somewhat
farther, if we mean to rise up to the true Authors of them. Shall I tell you
freely what I think? I do believe there was more at the bottom of those Civil
Wars, than either the People did then believe, or it may be the wisest Men are
at this day able sufficiently to dive into. But yet thus much we do all know,

1st, That the King himself in the very first breaking out of them, observed,
that the Fanatics proceeded upon Popish Principles against him. See the King's
large Declar. about the Scotch Troubles, p. 3, 4.
Their Maxims (says he) are the same with the Jesuits; their Preachers Sermons
have been delivered in the very Phrase and Style of Becanus, Scioppius, and
Eudaemon Johannes. Their poor Arguments which they have delivered in their
Seditious Pamphlets printed or written, are taken almost verbatim out of
Bellarmine and Suarez; and the means which they have used to induce a Credit of
their Conclusions with their Proselytes, See his Majesty's Declarat. after the
Battle at Edg-Hill. Kings Works, part 2. page 213.
are purely and merely Jesuitical Fables, false Reports, false Prophesies,
pretended Inspirations and Divinations of the weaker Sex; As if now Herod and
Pilate were once again reconciled for the ruin of Christ and of his true
Religion and Worship.

2. That in the Year 1640, there was discovered to the Archbishop of
Canterbury a Design, in which the Pope, Cardinal Richlieu, many of the English
Papists, but especially the Jesuits, were concerned in stirring up those
Divisions that had just before broke out in Scotland, for the Ruin of the King
and of the Arch Bishop. This may be seen at large in the Histories of those
Times, Vol. 3. p. 13 10, etc.
and the very Papers themselves may be found in Mr. Rushworth's Collections.

3. That Sir William Boswell, his Majesty's Resident at that Time at the Hague,
and to whom this Discovery was first made; See in the Life of A. B. Usher,
Append. p. 27. Letter 17.
did find out that the Romish Clergy gulled the misled party of our English
Nation under a Puritanical Dress. That they had received Indulgences from the Sea of Rome and Council of Cardinals, to educate their Scholars in Principles
and Tenets contrary to the Episcopacy of the Church of England. That within the
compass of two Years, above sixty of the Romish Clergy were gone out of France,
to preach up the Scotch Covenant, and to pull down the English Episcopacy, as
being the chief support of the Imperial Crown of our Nation.

4. That Archbishop Bramhal being in France, some time after the King's Death,
did there learn how all these things were managed: See Ep Usher's Life, 293.
Letter, p. 611.
That in the Year 1646, above an hundred Romish Clergy were sent over into
England; who were most of them Soldiers in the Parliament Army; and were daily
to correspond with the Romanists in the King's Army: That in the Year 1647.
they had a Consult with one another, wherein they discoursed about the Death of
the King, and England's being a Commonwealth; that hereupon the Romish Orders
wrote to their several Convents, but especially to the Sorbonists, to know
whether it might be lawful to make away the King and the Prince? In short, that
the Sorbonists returned, That it was lawful for Roman Catholics to work
Changes in Governments for the Mother-Churches Advancement, and chiefly in an
Heretical Kingdom, and so lawfully make away the King.

5. Salmonet Hist. des troubles d'Angleterre, live. 3. p. 165.
That after the Engagement at Edgehill, several Romish Priests were found
among the slain of the Parliament Army. This Father Salmonet declares in his
History of those Civil Wars, printed in France, with the allowance of the King:
and adds, that the Parliament had two Companies of Walloons, besides others of
that Religion in their Army.

6. When the Rebellion broke out in Ireland, it was we know blessed with his
Holinesses Letters, and assisted by his Nuntio, whom he sent on purpose thither
for that Service.

Answer to Philanax Anglicus. page 61.
Lastly; that Monsieur du Moulin has confirmed this with several plain
Instances, which he declared himself ready to make a legal Proof of before his
Judges, and after 17 Years attendance, in a new Edition of his Book desired
once more that he might be called to account for it, and yet died without being
ever attempted to be disproved.

These things, I say, we know of this Matter, and therefore tho I do confess
that the Fears of Popery was the pretense to blow up the People, yet whether
there might not be some other Persons and Designs at the bottom, I shall leave
it to the Reader to consider what Credit he will think fit to give these
Relations, and then judge as he sees Cause.

52. Ad page 10.] Reply. During this War, there was (you say) a good
understanding between the Papists and the Prelatick Party, which was the cause
of a no less pleasing Union after the Restoration of King Charles the Second
till Shaftsbury and his Adherents invented a malicious Calumny, laying a
pretended Plot to their Charge -- The Truth of which being detected by a
subsequent real One, the more moderate of the Church of England again began to
favor them: Only still the Laws enacted against them being in force, there
were Persons enough ready to put them in Execution. Answ.] To all which I have
nothing more to say, but that being come now to the Affairs of our own Times, I
suppose every Man is already satisfied what to believe as to these things: Or,
if he be not, I am sure there is nothing here to direct him. The accounts of
these Transactions have been published by Authority; and those who desire more
nearly to consider them, may recur to the History of the latter of the Plots
mentioned; and to the several Trials and Narratives, especially to Mr.
Coleman's Letters, for his Information in the former.

53. Ad page 11.] Reply. In this posture were Affairs, when it pleased God to
take to himself his late Majesty: No sooner was his present Majesty ascended
upon the Throne, but he declared Himself a Catholic: yet was pleased to
declare that he looked upon the Church of England as proceeding upon Loyal
Principles, and that he would protect Her. This gained the Hearts of that
Party, and had so much Power over the Parliament, that notwithstanding the
Conclusion of a Sermon preached before them, in which it was declared, that an
English Man might be Loyal, but not a Papist, that Parliament testified its
Loyalty to such a degree as shall never be forgotten. And thus after a long
Story nothing to the purpose, and that too fraught (as we have seen) with many
Falsifications, we are at last come to the Point to be considered, of the
Controversies that are now depending betwixt the two Churches, and the Original
whereof you here recount to us.

54. Ad page 11, 12.] Reply. This was the occasion of our following
Controversies, and the first thing that appeared in Print against the Roman
Catholics, tho the Author of the Present State of the Controversies would not
take notice of it. And the more considering Men of your Party (you say) looked
upon it as the throwing out of the Gauntlet, and bidding defiance to all the
Catholics of England. This produced a Remonstrance from you, and that an
Answer from the Doctor, and there ( as almost all our Controversies have done
since) it ended, tho a Reply was prepared and approved of. But it was thought
fit by those (who were to be obeyed) to let the Controversy die, rather than
stir up a Religious Litigation upon a Point which not only the Protestations of
Catholics, but their Practices had justified them in. 55. Answ.] What you
thought of that Passage in Dr. Sherlock's Sermon I cannot tell; but others
think that by your Clamours against it you have given the Doctor occasion to
satisfy the World that what he had said was but too true. And since you tell us
that there is an Answer ready prepared and approved, and that the Controversial
Spirit is now let loose, so that our Quarrels will not be much increased by
such an Accession, I dare say the Doctor will be very glad to see that Answer,
and whether it has force enough to convince him of his Mistake. As for your
pretense why you declined engaging any farther in this Dispute, viz. That it
was a Point, which not only your Protestations, but your Practices had
justified you in; tho I readily acknowledge that the Englishman has in many of
your Communion been too strong for the Papist, (and far be it from us to
detract from their worth) Yet as to your Assertion in the general, that both
your Protestations and Practices have sufficiently justified you in this Point,
give me leave to tell you that we are not very forward to credit the One,
because we have known too much of the Other. We cannot so soon forget the Names
of Mariana, Suarez, Bellarmine, of Parsons, Stapleton, and many others of your
Communion, as not to remember what sort of Loyalty has sometimes been taught in
your Schools. Who were they that Sainted Thomas a Becket, and have applauded
even the Assassines of some Princes since, but the venerable Heads of your
Church? And in what esteem Campian and Garnet are at this day among you, we are
not ignorant. When that wicked Wretch J. Castle assaulted Henry the Fourth of
France, he found an Apologist among you; and the Arrest of the Parliament of
Paris against him, stands at this day among the prohibited Books in the last
Index set forth at Rome. They were these things that moved our King James the
First, to set out his Admonition to all Christian Princes against you; and even
that your Card. Bellarmine was not ashamed to answer, in defense of his
Doctrine of the Popes Authority over Kings: In short, he that would know what
Credit is to be given to you in your Assertion as to this matter, need only
recur to Mr. Foulis Collection, and I am confident he will then confess that
the distinction the Doctor made in behalf of his Countrymen of your Religion,
is the best Apology that can be offered, and the most to the Honor of our
Nation, tho it may be not so much for the Credit of your Church, viz. that your
Principles considered, the English Man may be, I will add, and has often been
found Loyal, but then he has laid aside the Papist to be so.

56. Ad p. 12.] Reply. You tell us, That this Imputation of the Doctor's,
joined with the Mistakes that most Men had conceived of your Doctrine, gave
occasion to the Representer to show your Doctrines truly as they are in
themselves, without the mixture of the particular Opinions of the Schoolmen, or
the Practices which are neither universally nor necessarily received. Answ.]
And this Book, tho it produced not any manner of Authority for its
Representations, and was contrary in most Points to the Opinions of the
chiefest Writers of your Church, soon received an Answer in every particular.
There your Doctrine was truly stated from your own Authors, his false Colors
detected, and to your shame never replied to. For I suppose no one will be so
far mistaken, as to think that Triflle that came out against it deserves the
Name of an Answer.

57. Ad page 13.] And whilst this Book yet subsists in its full force, and that
we have so effectually shown you the Opinions of the most Eminent Divines of
your Church, the Practice of the Generality amongst you, and the very words of
your Councils and Liturgies, to be utterly inconsistent with your new
Representations, that you are not able to make any reasonable Defense of the
one, and are forced utterly to reject after all the other; What a Forehead must
that Man have that can tell the World as you do, " That we CANNOT DENY (what
yet you complain of Me in this very Book for denying) that all Catholics do
believe according to that Doctrine which the Representer expresses, and which
you in vain endeavor (as I shall hereafter show you) to defend.

58. Ad page 14.] Reply. During this Dispute two Books (you say) were
published, with the same Intention: The first, The Acts of the Clergy of France
in their General Assembly, 1685. in which was shown in one Column the Doctrine
of your Church from the words of the Council of Trent, in the other the
Calumnies of Protestants against you, from the very words of their Authors. And
this you think to have been so clear a Proof of what the Representer had said,
that you suppose his Adversaries would not think fit to contest it longer
against such plain and ample Testimonies. Answ.] And here you think you have
found out somewhat to boast of: A Wonder indeed not every day to be seen; a
Book never yet answered by us. It Is true, I do not know of any one here at
home, that has taken the pains to examine the Clergy's Quotations, as the
Answer to Papists protesting against Protestant Popery has done, for the
Instances there offered by their Humble Imitator the Representer. But then the
discovery that was made by that worthy Author of the whole Cheat, by
distinguishing Matters of Dispute, from Matters of Representation, has
abundantly confuted all their Pretenses. We charge you (for Instance) with
Idolatry, for worshipping of Images, Praying to Saints, and for adoring the
Host. If you do not worship Images, nor pray to Saints, nor adore the Host,
then indeed we Misrepresent you. But now for the other Point, that therefore
you commit Idolatry, this is our Consequence which we draw from those
Practices, and must be put to the Trial betwixt us. If our Reasons be good, our
Conclusion will be so too: If they are not, we are then mistaken in our
Opinion, and you may say we are in an Error, but we do not therefore
misrepresent you. We never yet pretended that you thought Idolatry to be
lawful; or that you confessed that you committed it: We accuse you of it only
as a thing which upon the Premises before mentioned, we conclude you to be
guilty of; and in that certainly, if we misrepresent any Body, it must be our
selves, not you. Now this one thing being observed, the Book you mention is
utterly overthrown, and both the Artifice and the Evidence fall together.

59. Ibid.] The other Book you tell us you published was the Bishop of Meaux's
Exposition, and what has been done on this occasion is very well known, and I
shall not need to give any account of it.

60. Ad page 17.] And thus have we done with the two Points to which I reduced
the Sum of your Preface: What farther remains is your Advice to the Readers of
our Books, what they are to take notice of, and what to pass over in them. You
tell them that you will lay down the true State of the difference betwixt us,
and that whatever they find written by us that does not immediately oppose some
of those Tenets, they should pass it over, tho never so plausible or pleasing.

61. Now how Politic such an Advice as this may be to hinder the good effect
of our Writing, I will not dispute; but sure I am it is highly unreasonable.
For what if the very Subject of the Controversy should be (as indeed at this
time it is) whether those things which you here lay down be your Churches
Doctrine, or only your private Exposition of it? Ought not the judicious Reader
in this case to consider our Allegations, and see whether we have not reason to
say that you do endeavor to delude them, by pretending that to be your Belief,
which in truth is not received by the Generality of your Church as such? As for
instance: You positively deny that the Holy Cross is upon ANY ACCOUNT
WHATSOEVER to be worshipped with DIVINE WORSHIP. Now this we deny too, and
therefore as to this Point there can be no Dispute betwixt us. But now what if
I should undertake to show, that you here impose upon your Reader, and that
whatsoever you pretend, yet your Church does teach, that the Holy Cross IS TO
BE WORSHIPPED with DIVINE WORSHIP, and Practices accordingly? Is not this think
you fit to be considered by him? Or is the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition become
so far the Guide in Controversy in France and England, that all other
Expositions are to be looked upon as superannuated, and this only to contain
the true Interpretation of your pretended Catholic Faith.

62. But indeed I do not wonder that you would persuade your Proselytes not to
read our Books, since you easily guess that those things may well stagger them,
which were not your Obstinacy or your Prejudices too strong for your Reason and
Conscience to grapple with, must long e're this have convinced, as they have
sufficiently confuted, your own selves.

63. Ad page 27.] And because you are not willing to prolong Disputes, you do
here declare, that if the Defender do meddle hereafter with such Points as
those which are not of necessary Faith, you shall not think your self obliged
to answer him, tho after that he may perhaps boast how he had the last Word.
Answ.] That is to say, the great business of the Defender has been to discover
your true Doctrine, and yours to dissemble it. Now if the Defender makes any
Answer at all to your Reply, it must be to maintain those Doctrines to be yours
which he had laid to your Charge, and which you deny; And this if he does, you
here declare you will have done with him: Which I think is plainly to confess,
that you have had enough of this Argument.

64. But, Sir, the Defender has such a kindness for his Subject, and such a
respect for You, that he is resolved not to part either with you or it. And
therefore, for what concerns his Subject, he will still make good in the
several Points in which he advanced it, his distinction of Old and New Popery
against you, and which in your last Defense you have been shown your self to
allow of: He will prove that you do palliate the ancient Doctrine of your
Church; and that greater Men than any either the Bishop of Meaux or your self,
have and do interpret your Churches Sense in a much other manner than you
represent it. And to this you may return or not, as you think sit. For your
self, he is resolved to be so far your Humble Servant as to join issue with you
upon your own terms, and show you how you have abused the World to no purpose
at all; for that even taking your Doctrine as you misrepresent it, yet still we
are not able nevertheless to embrace it. But then for your other proposal, of
throwing aside all the rest of our Points, only for the sake of those two which
you mention, here he desires to be excused: It being much more for the
Edification of his Friends the Populace (and whose Applause you know he courts)
to give them a full prospect of your Doctrine, and your Misrepresentations of
it, than to run the Circle with you in the single Point of the Churches
Authority, in which they may more easily be amused and deluded by you. But you
say,

65. Ad page 24.] Reply. That you may be bold to foretell without pretending to
be a Prophet, that nothing of this will be done by Me, but that I shall either
still fly to the Tenets and Practices of Particulars, or misrepresent your
Doctrine, or fob off your Arguments with such an Answer as I think sufficient
to Monsieur Arnaud's Perpetuite, which I said wanted only Diogenes's
Demonstration to confute it. Answ.] I am very glad, Sir, you profess your self
to be no Prophet, (and I have long been convinced that you are no Conjurer) for
if your Arguments be no better than your Guesses, I shall have a very easy
Task of it. I have already told you what Method I resolve to proceed in, and I
hope you will comply so far with me as to excuse one part of it, seeing I go
utterly besides my measures to gratify your Desires in the other. As for your
fear that I should fob off your Arguments, by which I suppose you mean that I
shall endeavor to clude them with some imperfect Answer, I do promise you it
is groundless; I will very carefully sift your Reply to the bottom, and not let
any thing, that is not very impertinent, pass my Examination. But shall I beg
leave now that I have satisfied yours, to confess my own Fears; and that is,
that as far as I can yet judge by what I have hitherto read of your Reply, I
shall find but few Arguments in it either to fob off, or to answer. For having
already considered your Calumnies, I much doubt by that time I have rectified
your Mistakes too, I shall have little more remaining to encounter.

66. As to Monsieur Arnaud's Perpetuite, I do still say that Diogenes's
Demonstration is the best Confutation of it. The Case in short is this;
Monsieur Aubertine has shown in the first Ages of the Church, that the Doctrine
which we now embrace of the Holy Eucharist contrary to Transubstantiation, was
the ancient Catholic Doctrine of the Church. This he confirms by a multitude
of clear Testimonies drawn out of the Writings of those Fathers who lived in
those Times. Now for Monsieur Arnaud after this to think to confute this
Evidence by a Logical Argument, that had not the Doctrine of Transubstantiation
been the Doctrine of the Church at the beginning, it could never have become so
afterward; and that such a little shift is sufficient to overthrow all those
Testimonies, this must certainly be a mere Reverie, (you will I hope excuse me
that Expression, now you know the meaning of it) and needs no other
Confutation, than to show him that the Matter of Fact is evidently opposite to
his Pretenses.

67. Ad Page 25.] Reply. But such things as these (you say) are now adays put
upon the World without a blush: and they who are this day Ingenuous, Learned,
Honest Men, shall be to morrow Time-servers, Blockheads, and Knaves, if they
chance to cast but a favorable Eye toward Popery. Answ.] O Tempora! O Mores!
To what a sad State are we arrived, that Men should be able to do such ill
things, and yet not blush at them! But what now is the Matter? Why, Men who
were yesterday esteemed very honest Men, are the next found out to be Knaves
and Time-servers. Good Sir, be not too hasty; it is possible this may be done,
and yet no cause of blushing neither, unless for those Persons who are so found
out. For, 1. What if we mistook those Men for Honest Men, who at the bottom
were not so? And when we saw our Error, altered our Opinion? And as every thing
that is done, must be done some day or other; What if we took them for honest
Men to day, and to morrow find that they were not so honest? Is it any Crime
for one upon good grounds to change his Mind in this Case? Again, 2. There is a
certain Season when the worst Man first begins to be so. Now, what if one that
had hitherto done nothing to forfeit his Reputation, should begin to do such
notorious ill things as to deserve our Censure? Here we had both reason to
believe him an honest Man whilst he was so, and as much reason to believe him
otherwise, since his Actions have declared his Change. So that then, for ought
I can find, we must come at last to the grounds of these Charges, before we can
judge of them. And for that, whenever you will please to give us your Instances
of the Persons who have been thus censured by us; that have been heretofore
esteemed honest, ingenuous Men, and are now found out to be Knaves and
Blockheads; though I shall have no occasion to justify any such censure, till
you can prove that I have been concerned in passing of it; yet I doubt not but
those who have done this, will be able to give you abundant satisfaction for it.

68. Ibid.] Reply. You conclude all with an Insinuation, the most likely to
catch those that are not well acquainted with you, of any thing in your whole
Book: That it is not likely you should palliate your Doctrine to gain
Proselytes, seeing that Proselyte the first time he should see you practice
contrary to your Doctrine, would be sure to return and expose your Villainy.
Answ.] But yet to this I Answer; 1st, That it is possible you may palliate your
Doctrine, and your Proselyte never discover it. It is no such strange thing for
Men to profess one thing and do another; and yet by subtle distinctions j stify
themselves to those who are prepared to deny Sense and Reason, rather than not
believe them. You tell us for instance, that the Holy Cross is upon no account
whatsoever to be worshipped; And yet certainly your Good Friday Service
directly leads you to it. But then if your new Proselyte begins to enquire what
this means; presently you tell him a Story of Absolute and Relative Worship;
and he who knows nothing more of the Matter than you are pleased to let him,
humbly submits himself to yours and the Church's Judgment.

69. If we urge your Expressions against you, and he fortunes to get something
of this by the end; Either you confidently deny that you have any such words,
(a Case which has happened to my self in this very Allegation) or if you are
baffled there; then it is not (for instance) Come, let us Adore the Cross; but,
Come, let us adore Christ who suffered on it: concerning which we must
discourse a little by and by.

70. If this too fails, and we show you plainly that you say, We adore thy
Cross, O Lord: So that our Savior is himself distinguished from his Cross
which you worship; then the Cross there is put to signify Christ's Passion;
though I am afraid the Adoring of Christ's Passion is something like that which
you call Jargon, and we in plain English, Nonsense.

71. If even this be beaten off, and other Hymns produced in which that Cross
is plainly specified which bore Christ's Sacred Members; the Tree upon whose
Arms the Price of the World hung: then you have your Figures ready, it is a
Metonymie in one line, a Prosopopaeia in the next; in the third a conjunction
of both together: And with these Quirks the poor Implicit Proselyte's Head is
turned round. He believes there is something meant by all these hard words,
though he knows nothing of the Matter; and his Opinion of your Integrity,
joined with the good assurance with which you pronounce your Oracles, and
thunder out your Anathema's against us as Heretics and Schismatics;
Calumniators, Falsifiers, Misrepresenters, and what not? makes him that he no
longer questions your Pretenses.

72. As for your Authors he knows nothing of them; or if he did, yet those who
have so many tricks to elude such clear Expressions of their public Rituals,
could not want distinctions enough to expound them. Or however a general
outcry against them as private Men, and for whose Opinions the Church is not
to Answer, will at once silence all such Allegations that they shall not make
any the least impression upon them. By all which it appears that you may (as we
affirm you do) palliate your Doctrine, and yet your Proselyte be never the
wiser for it.

73. But now, 2dly, if he should discover something of this kind, yet is it not
necessary, that he should therefore presently return and expose your Villainy. I
will suppose that those few Proselytes you have made, may all be reduced to
these two kinds; Men of Conscience, or Men of Interest and Design. For the
latter of these, whilst they serve their Interests by the Change, there is no
great fear of their making any such dangerous Discoveries. Religion is not
their Concern; and whether it be New Popery or Old that they embrace, they
neither know, nor care: it is to them indifferent; and they understand, as well
as value, both alike. As to the Conscientious Converts, (allowing for their
Capacities, and that they are able to overcome all the forementioned
Difficulties, and to discover the Cheat, which I fear is what the much greatest
part of these are not able to do): It is indeed hard to say what a terrible
Conflict this will be apt to make in them. But yet the Point of Reputation, the
Opinion of the World, shame of Return, and the dangers those commonly run who
venture to reveal such Sacred Mysteries; these Considerations have sometimes
kept good Men a longer time in suspense, than any of your Proselytes have yet
had to resolve upon a return to us. And who can tell, what Time and Changes may
one day bring forth?

74. Again: We know there have been many in your Church, who though they have
discovered these Prevarications, yet have thought, that as long as they did not
themselves join in your Errors, they might hold their Tongues, and live quietly
in an External Communion with you: and their Eyes have been so dazzled with the
Splendour, Succession, Extent, etc. of your Church, that they have preferred it
with all its Faults to Others who seem to them to want these Advantages. Such
were the famous George Cassander, Father Barnes, and others that I might
mention. Nay, it is no very long time, since a Person yet living, Monsieur
Ferrand, has published a Book to show, that were the Church of Rome as corrupt
as we pretend it to be, yet we ought not nevertheless to separate from it. And
should any of your Converts be of this Persuasion, they may still continue to
all appearance in your Church, though they see the Errors, and your
falsifications of the true Doctrine of it.

75. But, 3dly, though I do affirm that what you publish is not the Ancient
Doctrine of your Church, yet I do not deny but it is that which you endeavor
to make pass with your Converts as such. This you teach your Proselytes, the
Bishop of Meaux his Diocese; and they rarely meet with any one that maintains
the contrary. But this does not hinder, that because this is the Popery of a
few English Missionaries, and French Expositors; that therefore it has been all
along the Common Doctrine of your Church; or is conformable to the practice of
other Countries at this day. And all Men have not the leisure to go into Italy
or Spain; or the ability to read over your several Authors for satisfaction in
it.

76. But, 4thly, to quit all these Suppositions; yet since you make it no less
than a Mortal Sin to have any Doubts of your Religion; you are sure, as soon as
any such arise in their Minds to hear of it in Confession from them. Being thus
acquainted with the first Motions of this kind, you presently take all the ways
imaginable to stifle them, and hinder them from coming to an open defection
from you. So that though your Proselyte should begin to stagger; yet unless he
utterly abandon your Party without ever consulting you in it, (which Men of
Conscience will never do) he is almost under an Impossibility of ever doing it
at all.

77. To all which I will add but this farther: Which well may, and I am
persuaded does keep many from telling of Tales, and exposing (as you call it)
your Villainy; and that is, that when you receive a new Convert into your
Church, you require a terrible Oath from him, never by any Argument to leave or
to forsake you, upon pain of Perjury and Damnation if he does. And to the end
the Reader may know, what is the last step he is to make, if he has any
thoughts that way; and to convince him what little force there is in your
Suggestion, I will here transcribe it from your Pontifical, in its full length.

The Oath that is ordered by the Church of Rome to be administered to a New
Convert. (Pontif. Romans Ord. ad reconc. Apost. Schism. vel Haeret.)
I. N. having found out the Snare of Division with which I was held, after a
long and diligent deliberation with my self, am, by the Grace of God, returned
with a forward and ready Will, to unity of the Apostolic See: And lest I
should be thought to have returned not with a pure Mind, but only in show, I do
hereby promise, under the pain of falling from my Order, and under the
Obligation of an Anathema to thee Bishop of such a Place; and by thee to Peter
Prince of the Apostles, and to the most Holy Father in Christ our Lord N. Pope,
and to his Successors, that I will never through the Persuasions of any Persons
whatsoever, or BY ANY OTHER MEANS return to that Schism, from which by the
Grace of our Redeemer freeing Me, I am delivered: But that I will always remain
in all things in the Unity of the Catholic Church, and in the Communion of the
Bishop of Rome; and therefore I do say upon my Oath, by GOD ALMIGHTY and these
SACRED GOSPELS, that I will without wavering remain in the Unity and Communion
aforesaid; And if (which God forbid) I shall BY ANY OCCASION or ARGUMENT divide
my self from this Unity, MAY I INCVRRING THE GVILT OF PERJVRY, BE FOUND
CONDEMNED TO ETERNAL PUNISHMENT, AND HAVE MY PORTION WITH THE AVTHOR OF SCHISM
IN THE WORLD TO COME. -- So help me God, etc.

Thus does your new Proselyte swear himself firm to your Party; at least I Am
sure he is here required to do it. And now you may as well expect that a fellow
Conspirator should discover the Treason he is to commit, as a Convert thus
engaged to you, (though he should find it out) expose your Villainy.

AN ANSWER TO THE REPLY, etc. Being a further Defense of the EXPOSITION of the
DOCTRINE of the Church of England.
INTRODUCTION.
IT was the Opinion of a late Author concerning a very short Treatise that he
had published upon most of the Points in Controversy between us and the Church
of Rome; that tho he had neither put himself to the expense of any new
Arguments against us; nor produced the Authority of either Ancient Fathers, or
even of Modern Writers to back his Assertions; he had nevertheless answered in
that one Treatise, not only all those late Discourses that had just before been
published by our Divines on those Subjects, but a great part of all the Books
and Sermons that had ever been writ or preached against his Church. Tho I am
not very fond of following any Copy which that Author can set me, and in this
especially do think his Vanity so ridiculous, that he is rather to be pitied
than imitated; yet being once more called upon for a farther Vindication of my
self, to another review of the most considerable Articles wherein we differ
from those of the other Communion, I cannot but observe, that not only my
present Adversary has not advanced in this new Attempt one jot beyond what I
had before confuted, but that in all their Books, their whole Business is
merely to transcribe one another; so that from the Sea the Reply, Pres. p. vi.
Bishop of Condom's Exposition, even to the The Original whereof was first
published in Spanish, Anno 1616.
Eye Catechism, there is nothing new; but the same Answer that is made to one,
does really in effect overthrow them all.

2. It Is this has put me upon the troublesome design, not only of resuming and
collating the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, and the Vindication of it, with the
Reply that is now before me on every Article; But to search all those other
Treatises that have been published since the Representer first broke the Peace
with us: To convince the World that Matters are now driven as far as they can
go; so that in reading any one of their Books they may really find as much, as
when they shall have taken the pains to consult them all. If this will not
engage them to produce something more than they have yet done to answer our
Arguments, it shall at least I hope excuse us, if we from henceforth dispense
with our selves the trouble of large Confutations; so that instead of
transcribing again our own Books, as often as they shall please to furnish out
a new Title to their old Objections, we shall need only to direct them to those
Replies that have been already made; and in which their Pretensions have been
confuted before they were published.

St. Austin. de Civit. Dei. lib. 2. c. 1.
3. It was the Complaint of S. Austin against such kind of Antagonists as these
in his Time; That whether out of too much blindness, by which even the clearest
things are not seen; or out of an obstinate stubbornness, whereby even those
things which are seen, are not endured, they would defend their own
unreasonable Notions after a full Answer had been given to them, as if it were
Reason and Truth it self that they maintained. -- And therefore (says he) what
End shall there be of Disputing, what measure of speaking, if we must always
answer those that answer us? For they who either cannot understand what is
said, or are so hardened with a Spirit of Opposition, that tho they did
understand, yet would they not submit; they answer, as it is written, and they
speak Iniquity, and are indefatigably vain. Whose contrary sayings if we should
as often refute, as they have resolved with an invincible Forehead not to care
what they say, so they do but by any means contradict our Disputations; who
does not see how infinite, and troublesome, and fruitless this would be?

The ANSWER to the FIRST ARTICLE.
YOU will excuse, Sir, this little Address to my Reader; I shall from
henceforth keep close to your Reply, Reply p. 1.
and notwithstanding St. Austin's Insinuation to the contrary, attend you once
more whithersoever you shall please to lead Me. And to show how exactly
applicable what I have before said of your Books in general, is to your Reply
above any in particular; the first Observation I have to make is, that for what
concerns the common Cause of Religion in this first Article, you have entirely
taken, or rather indeed stolen it (since I do not remember that you have once
mentioned your Author) out of T. G's Discourse against Dr. Stillingfleet, and
which that most Learned Man had fully answered some Years since. And yet you
neither take notice of his Answers, nor offer any one thing to prevent the same
Replies from being made by me to the same Objections.

2. You begin your Vindic. p.22.
Vindication with a scandalous Charge of " Calumnies, Misrepresentations, etc.
This you persist in in your Reply p. 2.
Reply; and so does T. G's first Answ. Pres. page 3.
T. G. against his Adversary. He tells him how in the prosecution of his
Argument, he should be forced to lay open his frequent Contradictions,
Calumnies, and Misrepresentations: By which the Reader may now see that you
meant me no Harm in all these hard words against me; but you found them in your
Author, and you transcribed the railing with as little Judgment as you have
done the Reason of his Books. After this short and civil Preface, you tell Me,
3. Ad page 2.] Reply. Reply p. 2.
That there was a time in which the T. G 's first Answ. Pref. page 15.
Genuine Sons of the Church of England, excused the Roman Catholic Church of
that odious Imputation of Idolatry; and T. G 's first Answ. pref. page 15.
SOME of them (never T. G 's second Answ. p. 15.
excommunicated nor censured by the Church of England for it) maintained, that
We cannot defend the Charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome, without
denying that Church to be a true Church, and by Consequence without
contradicting our selves, and going against the intention of the Reformation,
which was not to make a new Church, but to restore a sick Church to its
Soundness, a corrupt Church to its Purity, etc. [See T. G. first Answer, Pref.
p. 7.]

Answ.] Had you but ingenuously owned from whence you had taken this Objection
against our Church, the Reader would presently have known whither to have gone
for the Confutation of it. But seeing you are resolved to make it your own, I
shall answer two things; 1st, That what you have said is false. 2dly, That you
either did, or ought to have known it to be so.


4. First, It is false that those whom from T. G. you are pleased to style the
Genuine Sons of the Church of England, have excused your Church of that odious
Imputation of Idolatry, or by consequence did think that we could not defend it
against you without contradicting our selves, and going against the intention
of the Reformation.

Dr. Jackson, see his Works, 3 vol. Fol. Land. An. 1673.
5. Your first Author is Dr. Jackson; and he so far from excusing you in this
Point, as you most wretchedly assert, that in a set Discourse under this very
Title, Tom. 1.
Of the Identity or Aequivalency of Superstition in Rome Heathen, and Rome
Christian, he spends above 17 Sheets on purpose to prove the Charge of Idolatry
upon you: and answers all your Evasions, by which you endeavor in vain to
clear your selves of the Guilt of it. The very Subject of his first Chapter is
to show, That Rome Christian in latter Years, sought rather to allay than to
abrogate the Idolatry of Rome Heathen; p. 933. In his 25th Chapter, having
mentioned that Conclusion of your Church, " Page 946.
That Saints are to be worshipped with Religious Worship: He pronounces
Sentence against you in these very words, Page 946.
This we say is formal Idolatry. The Title of his 27th Chapter is positive,
Ibid. p. 954.
That the same Expression of our respect or observance toward Saints or Angels
locally present, cannot without Superstition or Idolatry be made to them in
their Absence. And in the 28th Chapter, speaking of your form of commending a
departing Soul;

[ Ibid. p. 961.
Depart out of this World in the Name of God the Father Almighty who has
created thee, in the Name of Jesus Christ the Son of God, who suffered for
thee; Breviarium Roman. de Ord. Commendationis animae Deo.
in the Name of the Holy Ghost, who was poured forth upon thee; in the Name of
Angels and Archangels; in the Name of Thrones and Dominions; in the Name of
Principalities and Powers; in the Name of Cherubims and Seraphims; in the Name
of Patriarchs and Prophets; in the Name of Holy Apostles and Evangelists; in
the Name of Holy Martyrs and Confessors; in the Name of Holy Monks and
Hermites; in the Name of Virgins, and of all God's Saints and Saintesses; This
day let thy Soul be in Peace, and thy Habitation in Holy Sion.]

If (says he) thus they pray with their Lips only, they mock God as well as the
Saints. If thus they pray with internal Affection of Heart and Spirit, they
really worship Saints with the selfsame Honor wherewith they honor God --
They might with less Impiety admit a Christian Soul into the Church Militant,
than translate it into the Church Triumphant in other Names besides the
Trinity. They might better baptize them only in the Name of God the Father, and
of S. Francis, S. Benedict, and S. Dominick, etc. without any mention of God
the Son and Holy Ghost, rather than join these, as Commissioners with them in
dismissing Souls out of their Bodies. To censure this part of their Liturgy as
it deserves, it is no Prayer but a CHARM, conceived out of the Dregs and
Relics of HEATHENISH IDOLATRY, which cannot be brought forth but in
BLASPHEMY, nor be applied to any sick Soul without SORCERY See more in express
words, cap. 24. 8. p. 943. cap. 27. 2. p. 956. Tom. 1.
.

6. This is the first of our Churchmen that you say excused you from the
odious imputation of Idolatry. And since I perceive his Authority is of some
weight with you, as being one of the Genuine Sons of the Church of England,
which T. G. would not allow his Adversary, nor it may be will you therefore
esteem Me to be; I hope you will for his sake, who here charges your Offices
with CHARMS and SORCERY, as well as with Superstition and Idolatry, be from
henceforth a little more favorable to my Reflection on another occasion of
your Which he also in express words charges your Adoration of the Cross with,
cap. 24.. 4. p. 941. oper. Tom. 1.
MAGICAL INCANTATIONS.

7. I have been detained a little longer than I designed in this first Author;
but I will make amends for it, by referring you for the Dr. FIELD. A. B. LAVD.
Dr. HEYLIN.
three next to the like account which See in the Preface to his first Book
concerning the Idolatry of the C. R. and his general Pref. to the several late
Treatises, etc. Land. 1673.
Dr. St. gave to your Friend T. G. from their own words: As for Mr. THORNDIKE.
Mr. Thorndyke, it is confessed he was once in the Opinion that you mention;
but you knew very well that he changed his Mind before his Death. You may see
by an Extract that has lately been Mr. Pulton considered. Land. 1687.
published out of his Will, what an ill Notion he had of your Church in
general, and for the Point before us, T. G's Reverend and Learned Adversary
eight Years ago published a Paper from Dr. Stilling. Conferences against T. G.
Land. 1679. page 89.
Mr. Thorndyke's own hand, in which, among other Exceptions against you, he
makes this his 12th: To pray to Saints departed for those things which only God
can give (AS ALL PAPISTS DO) is by the proper Sense of their words DOWNRIGHT
IDOLATRY. If they say their meaning is by a Figure, only to desire them to
procure their Requests of God; how dare any Christian trust his Soul with that
Church, which teaches that which must needs be IDOLATRY in all that understand
not the Figure.

8. Such was the last Judgment of this Learned and Pious Man in this matter. If
after this it be necessary to say any thing to his former Opinion; I will only
observe, that the ground of it was this Mistake, viz. Just Weights and
Measures, p. 6. Edit. Land. 1662. cap. 1.
That a Christian Church without renouncing the Profession of the true God,
cannot be guilty of IDOLATRY. Now this De Imag. lib. 2. cap. 24. page 2153.
Card. Bellarmine himself, and others of your Church, do utterly deny: For
(says he) it is Idolatry, not only when one adores an Idol leaving God, but
also when an Idol is adored together with God.

9. The last of your Divines whom you cite as excusing you from Idolatry, is
the Reverend Dr. HAMMOND Pract. Disc. Land. 1674. 44. p. 351. Sect. 50. p. 353,
354.
Dr. Hammond: but your falseness is as notorious in him as in all the rest. For
in a particular Discourse of Idolatry, 44. He approves and explains the design
of our Homilies against the peril of Idolatry:. 50. He says That your
worshipping of Images in the most moderate way that can be, is for ought he
knows a kind of Idol-Worship, but to be sure a prohibited Act:. 54. That to put
up those Petitions to the Blessed Virgin which are terminated in her self,
Sect. 54. p. 354.
(as many Forms, if not her whole Office may appear to be) are Acts parallel to
the Old Idolatry. Sect. 56. p. 355.
. 56. That your worshipping of Images, notwithstanding all your distinctions of
worshipping God mediante Imagine, Sect. 64. p. 357.
or relative, etc. is Idolatry.. 64. That the Worship of the Bread in the
Sacrament must certainly be Idolatry. That your Error about Transubstantiation,
and your good design of worshipping Christ there may, he hopes, be some excuse
for you; but that your Opinion will not hinder it from being at least material
Idolatry, and the worshipping of something that is not God.

10. So that now upon the whole it remains, that there is not so much as a
shadow of Truth in your Assertion, that the true and genuine Sons of the Church
of England have excused your Church of the odious Imputation of Idolatry. My
next business is to show, that you did or ought to have known that there was
not one word of Truth in what you said.

11. Now this will depend upon the Answer which I shall leave any honest Man to
give to these two plain Questions. 1. Whether when you stole all this out of T.
G. you either did not, or ought not to have known, that Dr. St. had answered
all these Cavils many Years since, and shown that there was no Truth nor
Sincerity in them? 2. Whether a Man that quotes but six Authors for an
Assertion derogatory to the Establishment of their Church, and contrary to the
public Doctrine of the Homilies and Injunctions; and to the private Opinions
of the Generality of the Divines of it, ought not to have been sure that those
Authors at least did affirm that which he pretends they did? The latter of
these will conclude against you, that you ought to have known that what you
here say is false, because you ought to have examined these Authors, and then
you would have known it to be so. And for the former (were not your Conscience
unfit to be appealed to in a matter of Truth against your self) I durst appeal
to your own Soul, whether you did not know, that the Learned Man I have so
often mentioned, had shown T. G. how false these Pretenses were? But I go on
with you to your next Paragraph: where you tell Me,

12. Ad page 2.] Reply. You would gladly know, wherefore at this time I charge
you with the odious Imputation of adoring Men and Women, Crosses and Images,
etc. Answ.] To satisfy you in which Demand, I reply, 1. That I charge you with
this, because it is true, and I have both shown it already, and will yet
farther show it to be so. 2. I do it at this time, because at this time you
have the Confidence to deny it, nay to charge us with Calumny, and
Misrepresentation for having ever accused you of it. So that your wise Question
is in effect but this; We the Vindicators and Representers of New Popery have
publicly exposed you to the World as a pack of Knaves, that have
misrepresented our Doctrine, and wherefore do you go about to vindicate your
selves, and not suffer us to make silly People believe in quiet that what we
say is true?

13. Ibid.] Reply. Where (say you) do I find any thing of this in the 39
Articles? and for the Book of Homilies, I must be little versed in our own
Doctrine not to know, that several eminent Divines of our own Church, do not
allow that Book to contain in every part of it the dogmatical Doctrine of the
Church of England [ Thus T. G. speaks into your Mouth, and you, as his Engine,
echo them to us. T. G's first Answer to Dr. St. Pref. p. 8, 9.] Answ.] Now to
this you should have known that Dr St. gave this Answer. Answer to several late
Treatises; by Dr. Still. Land. 1673. The general Preface.
That the Articles of our Church have confirmed those Homilies; That these
Articles were not only allowed and approved by the Queen, but subscribed by the
whole Clergy in Convocation, Anno. 1571. Now ( says the Dean) I desire T. G. to
resolve me whether Men of any common understanding would have subscribed to
this Book of Homilies in this manner, if they had believed the main Doctrine
and design of one of them had been false and pernicious, as they must have
done, if they had thought the Practice of the Roman Church to be free from
Idolatry. I will put the Case that any of the Bishops then had thought that the
Charge of Idolatry had been unjust, and that it had subverted the Foundation of
Ecclesiastical Authority: that there could have been no Church or Right of
Ordination, if the Roman Church had been guilty of Idolatry; would they have
inserted this into the Articles when it was in their power to have left it out?
And that the Homilies contained a wholesome and Godly Doctrine, which in their
Consciences they believed to be false and pernicious? I might as well think
that the Council of Trent would have allowed Calvin's Institutions as
containing a wholesome and Godly Doctrine, as that Men so persuaded would have
allowed it the Homily against the Peril of Idolatry.

14. For your Objection from T. G 's first Answer to Dr. Still. Pref. page 9,
10.
T. G. That several eminent Divines of our Church, do not allow that Book to
contain in every part of it the public dogmatical Doctrine of the Church of
England; and three of whose Names (from T. G 's first Answer to Dr. Still.
Pref. page 9, 10.
T.G. still) you adorn your Margin with. He answers, Dr. Still. ibid.
Be it so: Surely there is a great deal of difference, between some particular
Passages and Expressions in these Homilies, and that which is the main Design
and Foundation of one of them. But in this case we are to observe, that they
who deny the Church of Rome to be guilty of Idolatry, do not only look on the
Charge as false, but as of dangerous consequence, and therefore although Men may
subscribe to a Book in general as containing wholesome and Godly Doctrine, tho
they be not so certain of the Truth of every Passage in it, yet they can never
do it with a good Conscience, if they believe any great and considerable part
of the Doctrine therein contained to be false and dangerous.

15. Thus did this Reverend Person confute your Oracle: If you had offered any
thing to prevent the same Answer from being returned to you, I should have been
far from complaining against you for advancing of an old Argument with new
Strength: But when you saw how unable See Dr. Still. Conferences against T. G.
p. 22, etc.
T. G. was to defend these Cavils, nevertheless still to produce them; and tho
you could not but be conscious to your self at the same time that they were not
to be maintained; I shall only say, that it serves to convince me of the Truth
of what an ancient Greek Poet once observed, and the meaning of whose words you
may enquire among the Learned at your leisure; (...).

16. Ad page ^.] Reply. Your next Paragraph consists of a Story of Q.
Elizabeth, T. G 's Dialogues against Dr. Still. p. 17.
and that too echoed form T. G's Inspiration: But to this I have already
returned my Answer, and when you shall think sit to speak out what you mean by
it, you shall not fail of a farther Consideration from me, if I be not
prevented by your receiving it from a more proper hand.

17. And thus have we done with what concerns the general Cause, in this
Introduction; and the Sum of all is this; That of four Paragraphs of which it
consists; the first is Calumny; the second false (and I am reasonably persuaded
known by you to be so): the third impertinent, and long since answered (as was
also the foregoing) by the Reverend Dr. St. the last seditious: I go on to the
following part of this first Article, to examine what relates to my self in it.

18. Where first you except against my quoting your particular Authors to find
out your Churches meaning, and call it Calumny, tho what Calumny it is to say
that those Authors, whom you cannot deny but that I truly cite, have expounded
your Churches Sense otherwise than you and some others do, I cannot imagine:
But however you tell us; Ad p. 3, 4. Reply.] That you have nothing to do with
the Doctrine of the Schools: That I must take your Doctrine from your Councils;
the public, authentic, and universally recieved Definitions and Decisions of
the Church.

Answ.] And in this you still follow your old Guide T. G. Dial. against Dr.
Still. p. 56, 57.
T. G. But I have First Part Preface.
already shown you the weakness of this Pretense; and for your next supposal
that even those Authors do not say what I affirm they do, if your Proofs are as
convincing as your Assertion is confident, I have already promised you all you
can desire, Repl. p. 4.
That I will not fail to confess that you deserve not so ill a Character as I
thought.

Ad page 4.] Reply. Your next Paragraph charges me with VNSINCERITY in stating
the Question betwixt Catholics (as you call them) and Protestants, for that I
represented you as allowing us to hold the ancient and undoubted Foundation of
the Christian Faith. Answ.] And is it not the ancient and undoubted Foundation
of the Christian Faith which we hold, and which has been delivered down to us
in those very Creeds which your selves profess, and into the Faith of which you
still baptize your Children? Nay, do not you your self confess this to be true
in the very place where you cavil against me for this Assertion Vindic. Art. 1.
p. 24.
Vindic. p. 24. where you grant, that what we hold is the ancient and undoubted
Foundation, and only deny that it is entirely so? And again, in this very Reply
in which you repeat your Accusation; Reply, Art. 1. page 4.
P. 4. I told him (say you) that we do not allow that Proposition, ESPECIALLY
IF HE MEAN all Fundamentals. So that then the Vnsincerity lies not in my saying
that what we hold is fundamental; for this you tell me ( Vindicat. p. 24.) NO
BODY EVER DENIED, but for pretending that you allowed that we held ALL which
you esteemed to be fundamental. Now for this I must observe,

1st, That you dare not say positively that I affirmed any such thing, Reply;
See before.
I told him (say you) that we do not allow that Proposition, IF he mean ALL
Fundamentals. So that you positively charge me with Vnsincerity for pretending
that you granted what you do not, upon supposition that I MEANT any such thing.

2dly, That to make something of this charge, you are forced to go back from
your own Concession: Vindic. p. 24.
For whereas in your Vindication you had said plainly, that tho you do not
allow us to hold all Fundamentals, yet no body ever denied that we held some of
them; here you clap in an Insinuation even against this too: Reply p. 2.
I told him that we do not allow that they hold the ancient and undoubted
Foundation; ESPECIALLY, if he meant ALL Fundamentals. So that tho you do deny
it ESPECIALLY if we mean ALL Fundamentals, yet you do not altogether allow even
that what we hold is fundamental.

But, 3dly, Where at last do you find that I ever said, that you granted that
we held ALL which you esteem to be fundamental? In my Exposition, I tell you,
in the very next words to those you cavil at, that this was the thing to be put
upon the issue; Expos. C. E. p. ^.
Whether those Articles which you had added to this ancient and undoubted
Foundation as Superstructures to it, were not so far from being NECESSARY
Articles of Religion, as YOU PRETEND, that they indeed overthrow that Faith
which is on both sides allowed to be Divine. And when in your Vindication you
first made this little Exception; I again repeated it in these very words,
which you take no notice of in your Reply: But the Vindicator, Defen. of the
Expos. p. ^.
jealous for the Authority of his Church, and to have whatsoever she proposes
pass for fundamental, confesses that we do indeed hold a PART, but not ALL
those Articles that are fundamental. THIS therefore must be put upon the issue.
-- So that whereas you accuse me of perverting the Bishop of Meaux's Sense, it
is indeed you that have (I fear wilfully) perverted mine. What I said, both of
you acknowledge, viz. that what we hold is the ancient and undoubted Truth; and
you cannot deny the State of the Question to be just as I have said, Whether
what you farther advance, and what we-reject, be not so far from being
Fundamental Truth, that it is indeed no Truth at all, but rather contrary to,
and destructive of that Truth which is on both sides allowed to be Divine?

20. Ad p. 5.] Reply. But you go yet farther in this Point against me; and
accuse me in the next place of perverting your own Sense too, by saying that
you confess that those Articles which you hold, and we contradict, do by
evident and undoubted Consequence destroy those Truths that are on both sides
agreed to be fundamental. And you wonder with what Spectacles I read this.
Answ.] The Spectacles I use are plain Honesty and plain Reason; if you have
better, I envy you not. In stating the Question between us, I said Expos. C. E.
p. 5. Def. p. 5.
the thing to be put upon the issue was, Whether those Additions which the
Church of Rome has made to the ancient and undoubted Faith, were not so far
from being Fundamental Truths, that they do, even by your own Confession,
overthrow those Truths that are on both sides allowed to be Fundamental? This
you deny you ever said, and yet in the very next words you confess the
contrary: Reply p. 5. Vindicat. p. 23.
It Is true (say you) I tell him, that were the Doctrines and Practices which HE
ALLEGES the plain and confessed Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome,
he would have reason to say that they contradict our Principles: But I tell him
also that we renounce these Doctrines and Practices. But this is not now the
Question, whether you renounce these Doctrines and Practices or no: Did not you
confess that those Doctrines which I charge you with do overthrow the Truths
that are on both sides allowed to be Divine? This you cannot, nay you do not
deny: And this was what I asserted, and for which you most injuriously accuse
me of perverting your Sense. As to your denial of these things, that I have
already shown to be a groundless Pretense, and shall yet farther prove you to
be as guilty of prevaricating in your Evasion, as it is evident you have been
in your accusing of me.

21. Ibid.] For the Parallel you add between our charging you as guilty of
Idolatry upon the account of your Worship, and the Fanatick's Clamours against
us for our Ceremonies, and against the Justice of which you think we have
little to say, it still more confirms me that the ancient Poet I before
mentioned was a wise Man: For after so full a Confutation as has been given to
this Parallel by Answer to the Amicable Accommodation -- The View of the whole
Controversy, etc.
two several Hands, for you to presume still to say, that we have little to
reply to it; this would certainly have made any other Creature in the World
blush, but a Man that has taken his leave of Modesty.

22. Ad page 6.] For your last little Reflection, which you have dubbed with
the Title of Protestant Charity and Moderation; I shall only tell you, that to
charge you with adoring Men and Women, Crosses, Images and Relics, is no more
a breach of Charity, than it would be to charge a Man with Murder or Theft whom
I actually saw killing his Neighbor, or stealing away his Goods. If you are
indeed guilty of doing this, it is Charity to admonish those of their danger,
whom you might otherwise ensnare by your confident denying of it. But the truth
is, it is the Justice of this Reflection that so much troubles you: and you
could be well enough content we should accuse you of doing this, if you could
but find out any means to prevent our proving of it.

The ANSWER to the SECOND ARTICLE.
That Religious Worship terminates ultimately in God alone.
1. AD p. 6.] Reply. In the beginning of this Article you seem a little
concerned that I took no more notice of what you had said in your Vindication,
concerning your Distinctions of Religious Worship: You pretend that I did not
do it, because if I had, all my Quotations out of your Liturgies would have
signified just nothing; neither could I have made so plausible an Excuse for my
Calumnies and Falsifications: And you conjure me not to obstruct the Hopes of a
Christian Unity by a future Misapplication of these Terms. 2. Answ.] It is
perhaps none of the least Instances of that Perplexity, into which Sin and
Error commonly lead those who have been involved in them, to consider what a
multiplicity of obscure and barbarous Terms the Iniquity of these latter Ages
has invented to confound those things, which are otherwise in themselves of the
greatest Clearness and Evidence. Whilst Men kept to that Primitive Rule of the
Gospel, Mat. iv. 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him ONLY shall thou serve; the Law was
simple and easy, and there was no need of any Distinctions, either to excuse
or to condemn the Worship of any other besides him. The Command was so plain,
that the Devil himself had nothing to say to it: As for the Sophistry we are
now to encounter, (and by which you would have been able to have taken that
offer which our Savior refused, and yet have salved your Conscience of any
breach of the Precept too) he was either yet to learn it, or else it appeared
to him so thin and contemptible, that however he has since inspired others with
it, yet he was ashamed himself to insist upon it. But however, seeing Men's
words are their own, and let them express their Conceptions after what manner
they please, it is enough for us that we understand their meaning; I shall
content my self to draw up a short Summary of what you here offer, and which
indeed is all that your Party has to insist upon on this occasion, and we shall
hereafter see when you come to the Application of these Distinctions, whether
there be any thing in them to excuse you of that Guilt we here charge you with.

3. But before I enter upon this Enquiry, I cannot but observe the Change you
make in the Title of this Article. Hitherto we have had it in these words,
Monsieur de M. Expos. Art. 3. Vindic. Art. 2.
Religious Worship is terminated only in God: Now you add another Restriction,
Reply, Art. 2.
That Religious Worship terminates ultimately in God alone: By which you would
seem to imply, that Religious Worship may terminate upon the Objects to which
you pay it, as Saints or Angels; (and wherein you certainly depart from your
own and the Bishop of Meaux's former Principle) but that ultimately it must end
in God alone. But the truth is, ( Answer to Papists Protesting, p. 29, and
Sect. III.
what you have been already told) all Worship does properly terminate in the
Object to which it is given. You may honor a Saint for God's Sake, and it is
an honor to God by accident so to do: but when all is done, still the proper
Honor that is given to the Saint terminates in him, and does not pass to any
other. And this you must confess, unless you will spoil all your own
Distinctions. For whatever the Honor be that you give to the Saints, either it
must finally terminate in them, and then your new Addition is useless; or if it
pass on to God, you must either dishonor God if you give him such an inferior
Honor as you do the Saints, and which is altogether unsuitable to his infinite
Nature and Majesty; or if you give the Saints the same Honor you do God, then
you raise them up into a state above the condition of mere Creatures, and so
yet more dishonor God, by setting up Competitors with him in his Service. So
that then your new modelling of this Position will stand you in no stead: and
you must after all say, either that no Religious Honor must be given to any
other but God, (as our Savior has declared, and as we affirm) if you do truly
believe that all Religious Honor ought to terminate in Him alone; or you must
confess, that Religious Worship may be terminated, and that ultimately, upon
the Creature; which indeed your Practice shows you do believe, and for which we
justly accuse you of Idolatry.

4. But we will examine your own Scheme, that so we may the better understand
your Pretenses. And, Ad Page 7, 8.] Reply. 1st, As to the words (you say) That
Honor, and Worship, and Adoration, may admit of different Senses, and
according to them be differently applied. There is a Divine Worship proper to
God, and there is a Civil Worship that is paid to Men; and a Dulia, or inferior
sort of Religious Worship, that you give to Saints, Angels, and Holy Things.
2dly, That as to the outward Actions of the Body, whether Bowing, Kneeling,
etc. there may be a difference in these two; they being not so appropriated to
God, but that they may be paid to the Creature also. That therefore, 3dly, both
the Actions and Expressions are to be distinguished, according to the
Excellency of the Object on which they are terminated. If the Excellency be
natural, or naturally acquired; then the Honor that is paid is Civil or
Humane. If it be Supernatural, then the Honor is Religious. And this Religious
Honor is either a Sovereign Honor proper to God alone, called Latria; Or it
is Inferior, and of which there are several degrees according to the several
measures in which God bestows his supernatural Gifts upon his Servants; and is
that you call Dulia. And this inferior religious Honor may be paid, not only
to rational Natures, but sometimes also to inanimate Things.

5. Answ.] This I think is the sum of what you desire me to take notice of; and
I will now return you a few general Reflections upon it. And,

1st, Though we are contented to take all these hard words in your own Sense,
yet I must observe to prevent any misapplication of them to the Passages of
either Holy Scripture, or Primitive Antiquity, before St. Austin's Time. That
for what concerns the Hebrew Phrases of the Old Testament, by which this
Worship is expressed, they are all of them promiscuous, and indifferently used
with reference both to God and the Creatures. But now with the Greek Phrases in
the New Testament it is otherwise. One of them indeed, viz. that from whence
you derive your term Dulia, is ambiguous; but for the other two, (...) and Mat.
18.26.
(...), the former is never at all, the latter never but once, and that too in
a parabolical sentence, applied to any other Worship than that of God only; not
to any Humane or Civil respect.

2dly, As to the distinction you make between Civil and Religious Honor
properly so called, we readily embrace it: and we do confess, that the
difference must be taken from the diversity of excellency in the Objects on
which they are terminated. Reply, p. 7.
From which we infer, that there must be therefore the same proportion between
Civil and Religious Worship, as there is between God and Men. Seeing then there
can be no Analogy between these two, neither can there be any between the
Worship that is paid to the One, and to the Other. By consequence, that
properly speaking, there can be no other Honor attributed to a Creature but
what is Civil, and which must be diversified, according to the different
Excellencies of those to whom it is given. And this you your self allow in your
Vindication, [p. 28, 29.] where you declare that this Honor is but an
extrinsecal Denomination from the Cause and Motive, not from the Nature of the
Act; and that you do renounce any other sort of Religious Worship which is so
from the Nature of the Act, and by consequence only due to God. And here again
in your Reply you found the Appellation of Religious Honor with reference to
the Saints, either upon the Motive of it, which is religious; or, Ibid. p. 8.
because it ultimately refers to God, for whose sake, and upon account of whose
Gifts we honor them. Now taking this then to be not only your own private
Opinion, but the Sense of your Church; and that you may see, I desire to close
as far as possibly I can with your Notions, I add,

3dly, That as to the first of these, " The Religious Motive; We are content in
this respect to allow the denomination of Religious Worship to others besides
God. Such is the Honor we render to our Parents, to Civil Magistrates, etc.
upon the account of God's Command so to do. And thus the two terms of Civil and
Religious are not opposite, but coordinate, and consistent with one another.
Secondly, For the other Grounds on which you call this Honor, Religious,
namely upon the account of those Supernatural Gifts or Excellencies which God
has bestowed upon his Creatures; We are ready to allow of this too. And thus we
confess, that the Honor which we, as well as you, pay to the Saints, may be
called Religious; when we bless God for their Excellencies, and pray to him for
Grace to follow their Examples. We never denied but that godly and religious
Men were to be reverenced, not only for their other Qualities, but yet more
especially for their Sanctity and Devotion. But then,

4thly, As for Religious Honor properly so called, and as it respects not
merely the Religious Motive, or the Supernatural Gifts which God has bestowed
upon his Servants, but the very Nature and Quality of the Act it self; such
Acts by which we pay not only all that worship which may be due to the
Excellencies of a pure Creature, but the proper Exercises of Religion, as
Prayer, Confession, and such like; and these with all the Circumstances of a
proper, religious Worship; in the House of God, in the midst of his Solemn
Service; it may be in the same Breath and Form in which we address to the
Creator; this is that religious Worship which we constantly affirm, and which
you your self confess may not without impiety be given to any but God only; and
it is for this we charge you with that, which by your own acknowledgment none
of your Distinctions reach to, nor will therefore excuse you of, viz. Idolatry.

5thly, As for the outward Expressions of this Honor by bodily Actions, as
Bowing, Kneeling, Prostrating, etc. these we confess are ambiguous, and must be
determined by the other Circumstances. But then we deny that they are to be
interpreted merely according to the intention of him that performs them. There
is an External Adoration, which no Internal Act of the Understanding or Will
can excuse, if it be applied to any besides God. Such as is performed with
those Circumstances of a Religious Worship before mentioned, as to Time, Place,
Words, and the like. In short, it is, we say, Idolatry by any External Act
whatsoever, to show that we do attribute Religious Honor to any other but God
alone.

6thly, And for the rest, we do affirm, That there are some other kind of
External Actions so peculiarly appropriate to God, that they cannot without
Idolatry be attributed to any other. Such as, 1st, Sacrifice Bp of Meaux 's
Expos. Sect. III. p. 4.
, by your own Confession: See this prosecuted at large in Dr. Still. first
Answer to T.G. p. 190, to 283.
to which I will, 2dly, add all those other things of the like kind which God
appropriated to himself under the Law; as Religious Adoration, Erection of
Temples and Altars, Burning of Incense in token of Divine Worship, Solemn
Invocation, and Vows; in all which neither our Savior nor his Apostles having
made the least alteration, we ought certainly (as both the Jews and Primitive
Christians most undoubtedly did) to esteem them still his own peculiar
Prerogative.

Having thus established in General our Notion of Religious Worship; let us see
if any of these Distinctions will (as you pretend) excuse you of that
imputation which has been laid upon you.

ANSWER TO THE THIRD ARTICLE, OF THE INVOCATION of SAINTS.
IN the beginning of this Article I cannot but acknowledge a commendable
Endeavor in you to clear the true State of the Question betwixt us: Reply, p.
10.
And tho I am not absolutely of your mind, nor do I see any Cause for your
Supposal that Mr. P. 11.
Thorndyke spoke the Sense of the Church of England in every one of those
Particulars mentioned by you in Order thereunto, yet I will not enter into any
Controversy with you about them.

1. And first, Be it allowed that the Words Prayer, Invocation, Calling upon,
Address, etc. are or may be Equivocal; i. e. (as that Learned Man phrases it)
that we may make use of the same Expressions in signifying our Requests to God
and to Man; tho yet for the two first of these, viz. Prayer and Invocation,
they are seldom Applied to any Other than a Religious Sense. This T. G. long
since observed, and you have now borrowed it from Him; and you may make what
use of this Remark you please in managing of this Controversy.

2. We do not deny but that we ought to Honor the Saints departed, as well as
Holy Men upon Earth; Only we desire that that Honor be such as becomes them to
receive, and us to pay. We honor them when we praise, and much more when we
follow their Faith and Patience. And because the Reason and End of this Honor
is Religious, you may without being contradicted by me call the Honor it self
Religious too; seeing you explain your self to mean no more by it, than an an
External Denomination from the Cause and Motive, Vind. p. 28, 29.
but not from the Nature of the Act its self.

3. Nor will I dispute with you, lastly, Whether the Saints in Happiness do not
in General pray for the Church Militant: For it is to as little purpose to deny
what cannot be disproved, as to affirm what one cannot prove. I have as great
an Honor as any Man for Mr. Thorndyke's Memory; but yet I cannot see the Proof
even of this in those Scriptures which (as you say) He proves it by. Reply, P.
11.
Some Fathers I know have said so; but their saying it is not to Me a
sufficient Proof of a Point of Doctrine. When all is done, the Congruity of the
thing is the best that can be brought for it. And if upon this account you are
resolved to call them Advocates or Intercessors between God and us, Ibid.
you will I hope excuse me if I do not comply with you in it. That they are
full of Charity toward us who are Members of the same Body with them, I make
not the least Question: But how they express it I do not certainly know,
because many Particulars there are from whence such a Matter is to be
concluded, which are all hidden from my Knowledge. One thing I know, That we
have a Mediator at the Right Hand of God, who knows all our Wants, which I see
no reason to believe the greatest Saint in Heaven does. I am likewise assured
that his Right to intercede for us is founded upon the Sacrifice of his Death.
And since the Gospel gives this Honor and Prerogative to Him ONLY, to appear
in the Presence of God for us, I shall never whilst I live help forward an
Ambiguity in those Titles, of a Mediator with God, or an Advocate with the
Father, or an Intercessor in Heaven, by attributing of them to any Saint
whatsoever. These Expressions so applied are dangerous, and scandalous; and
it is but a frivolous Pretense for the doing of it, that possibly the Saints may
do something for us in Heaven, upon the account of which the Titles of our
Redeemer may in some sense be given to them.

Reply, p. 11.
2. As for the State of the Question which you next propose, you should know by
this time that we are by no Means agreed that the only thing in dispute betwixt
us is, Whether it be lawful for us to Pray to the Saints that they would Pray
for us? and, Whether such kind of Addresses as these are of such a Nature as to
make Gods (for so you tell me I very disrespectfully call them; Ibid.
tho I believe you will find it is your Misrepresenter's Phrase, and not Mine)
of Men and Women. You do indeed with your Guides T. G. and the Bishop of Meaux
tell us, that all the Prayers of your Church, be their Words never so
repugnant, must yet be reduced to this sense, PRAY FOR US: But you have often
been told, that this is utterly disallowed by us. However, to take off all
occasion of Cavil, as far as is possible, I will offer you the State of the
Question in such Terms as you shall have no just cause to except against it;
viz.

Whether it be Lawful to pray to the Saints, after the manner that is at this
day prescribed and practiced in the Church of Rome? And I will so far comply
with you, as to consider it in both respects: 1. According to your own
Representation of it: 2. According to that which is indeed your Practice, and
freely acknowledged by the greatest Men of your Church to be so.

I. POINT. Whether it be Lawful to pray to the Saints, to PRAY FOR US?
3. This is the least that can possibly be made of this Matter: And because I
would bring the Point to the fairest Issue that may be, as I have proposed the
Question according to your own desire, so I will dispute it with you upon your
own Principles.

4. And first; for what concerns the Terms of the Question, they are exactly
taken from your own Wards: You tell us in your Vindication, that all you say
is, Vindic. p. 30.
That it is LAWFUL to Pray to the Saints; and here in your Reply, That the
Difference between us is Whether it be LAWFUL for us to Pray to them? Reply, p.
11
In which yet you seem to fall a little below even the Bishop of Meaux Himself,
who tells us, That your Church teaches that it is PROFITABLE at least to Pray
to them. Exposit. Sect. IV. p. 5.
But however such is our Security according to Both of you, that neither You
nor He care to say it is our Duty so to do, or that we run any Danger in the
neglect of it. Whatever therefore be the Issue of this Dispute, it is wholly
your Concern to look to it; thus much we are Agreed in, That there is no Sin in
our Omission. For where there is no Law, there is no Transgression.

5. But I will now presume to go farther: And since you dare not say that such
an Invocation is Necessary, I will undertake to affirm, that neither is it
Profitable, nor indeed Lawful, but utterly forbidden. And for proof of this, I
shall lay down no Other Foundation than what you have your self established;
viz. That Religious Honor or Worship may be taken in a double Sense: See
Vidicat. p. 27.
First, Strictly, and so is due Only to God: Secondly, More largely, and so may
be paid to Creatures. And what you mean by these Terms, you thus more fully
express: Ibid. p. 28, 29.
That by Religious Honor in this latter sense, and as you apply it to the
Saints, you understand only an Honor so called by an extrinsecal Denomination
from the CAUSE and MOTIVE, but not from the NATURE of the ACT it self. That is
such an Honor as may be in it self Civil, and is only CALLED Religious because
it is done for God's sake, and in Obedience to God's Commands. But for a strict
and proper Religious Worship, such as is in its own Nature so, this you confess
with us to be due to God ONLY. From whence I conclude, That to give such a
Worship to any Creature, must be to pay that Service to the Creature which is
due only to the Creator; and that is, in Our Sense, to Commit Idolatry.

6. And now from this Principle which you have your self laid down, Vindic. p.
28.
and which you think will be alone sufficient to Answer all Objections brought
against your Doctrine; I take leave to infer, That if even such an Invocation
as you confess you pay to the Saints, be strictly a Religious Honor, in the
very Nature of the Act it self, and not barely by an Extrinsecal Denomination
from the Cause and Motive of it; it will then remain that you are guilty in
this Service of giving that Worship to the Saints which is due only to God, and
are by Consequence therein guilty of Idolatry And this I shall show, I. From
the very Nature of the Act it self. II. From the Circumstances of it.


I. That the very Nature of the Act it self of Invocating the Saints, does
show, that it is strictly and properly a Religious Worship.
7. This is what I know Monsieur de Meaux denies: He tells us, That when you
pray to the Saints, Expos. Artic. IV.
you do it in the same Spirit of Charity, and according to the same Order of
Brotherly Society, which moves us to demand Assistance of our Brethren living
upon Earth. Thus he smooths your Invocation of Saints departed, to make it lie
even with our desires of one another prayers. But did he in good earnest
believe, that nothing but a Spirit of Charity, and the Order of Brotherly
Society, is to be discerned in the Act of calling upon departed Saints to pray
for us? We have indeed that Charity for them, as to believe, that they have
Charity for us: and though they are highly advanced above us, we yet take them
to be our Brethren. But is this all that is implied in the Act of calling upon
them to pray for us? For my part, I cannot but believe, that Monsieur de Meaux
himself was sensible of a vast difference in the Case, as appears by his
endeavoring to blind it afterward. And I shall now offer some Reasons, that
may perhaps convince others, as they have fully satisfied my self about it.

8. For 1. If the Nature of that Act of Invoking the Saints in Heaven, be the
same with that of desiring my Christian Brother to pray for me upon Earth, then
on the other hand this is also of the same Nature with that. And by
consequence, I may as well fall down upon my Knees here in London, and desire
my Christian Brother, who is now, it may be, in Japan, or somewhere in the East
Indies, or perhaps on his return homewards, to pray for me, as do the like to
S. Peter or S. Paul, who, for any thing I can tell, are at a vastly greater
distance from me, than my Friend upon Earth is. But if there be something more
than a Spirit of Charity, or an acknowledgment of Brotherhood, in calling upon
my living friend, who is out of all natural distance of hearing, there is also
something more than this in calling upon the dead, who it may be are a thousand
times farther from me, than the living can be from one another. Would not such
an Invocation of my Friend, think you, suppose him to be more than a Brother,
or a Man? Would not the Nature of the Act ascribe to him not only the praise of
Charity, but likewise the power of hearing and knowing all that is said upon
Earth, at any distance whatsoever? I grant, that if this were indeed no more
than according to the Order of Fraternal Society; neither would it be any more
than so for you to call upon the Saints deceased to pray for you. But if the
former would be more, when you have said all that you can, the latter must
necessarily be so too: And you do thereby Elevate the Saints above the
condition of Creatures. For whether you believe them to be Omnipresent or not,
the very Act of invoking them indifferently in any place, and their being
called upon in several places at the same time, does imply their Omnipresence,
unless you could give us some other ground of certainty, that they hear you,
besides this, that wherever they are when they are spoken to, and wherever you
are when you speak to them, it is all one, they do as surely know what you say,
as if they stood within the common distance of hearing. Now that Action, which
in the very Nature of it ascribes an Immensity of presence to the Object, about
which it is conversant, is religious in the very Nature of the Act. And then I
leave it to you to determine whether it be Idolatrous or not, if it be paid to
any thing that is not God. But,

9. Secondly, If you are not yet satisfied, I would desire to know, whether
prayer to God, which you will not deny to be in its own Nature a religious Act,
be not so upon this account as well as others, that it is an Acknowledgment of
his Immense Presence. But how is it such an acknowledgment, otherwise than as
we do in all places, and at all times call upon him. Since therefore you do in
all places, and at all times call upon the Saints as well as upon God, I pray
tell us why this Invocation should not also be in its own Nature religious
Worship. If you allow this, then you have already passed sentence upon your
self: If you do not, I should be glad you would find a little leisure to show
us the difference. This is an Argument that has been often enough urged to be
taken notice of; and if you shall still go on to say nothing to it, we shall
conclude the reason to be, that indeed you have nothing to object against it.

10. And what I have now said of this Invocation, upon the account of the
distance of the Saints from us, that they are now out of the compass of all
Civil Commerce; and therefore to pray to them must be properly a Religious
Worship, will be yet further confirmed, Thirdly, by another of your practices;
in that your Church allows not only Vocal, but even Mental Prayer to be made to
them. Now this can be no Act of Civil Honor, seeing no creature, such as Man
(the Object of all Civil Honor) is, can be capable of searching the Heart, so
as to find out the secrets of it. For God, 1 Kings VIII. 31.
even God only knows the secrets of all the Children of Men. And therefore to
pray in our minds to the Saints, to offer up the secret aspirations of our
Souls, in Honor to any Creature, this must be an Act of Religious Worship, and
such therefore as by your own acknowledgment is due to God only.

11. Now that you could not be ignorant of these things, and by consequence are
the more inexcusable in this your Worship, appears from what Monsieur de Meaux
has told us; viz. That by addressing Prayers to the Saints, Expos. Sect. IV.
and honoring them all the World over as present, you do not attribute to them
a certain kind of Immensity, nor the Knowledge of the Secrets of the Heart,
which God has reserved to Himself; seeing it is manifest, that to say a
Creature may have the Knowledge of these things by a Light communicated to Him
by God, is not to elevate a Creature above his Condition. Thus he gives that to
the Saints in the Close, which He denied in the Beginning. They have not a kind
of Immensity, nor do they know the Secrets of our Hearts; No, by no means, for
that is necessary to be said to save your selves from giving Divine Honor to
the Saints: But for all that they have the Knowledge of these things by a Light
communicated to them by God; and this is also necessary to be said, to save
your Invocation of them from being a foolish and absurd Devotion. And for the
same reason he supposed before, that some Grounds, which He would not examine,
might be had to attribute to the Saints some certain Degree of Knowledge as to
those things that are acted amongst us, as also of our secret Thoughts. Thus he
doubles, and treads with fear, like a Man that has lost his Way in a dark
Night, and is afraid of a Ditch every Step he takes. To say that the Saints
know All our Wants and Desires, and the Secrets of our Hearts, is to give them
a certain kind of Immensity which He dares not say they have; and therefore
those Words are slipped in, that some Grounds may be had to attribute to them a
certain Degree of Knowledge, as to these things. Now a certain Degree of
Knowledge, seems not to be a certain kind of Immensity; and so you are for a
while safe on that side. Well, but a certain Degree of Knowledge as to these
things, will not serve to make all the Prayers of All Men, at any time, and in
any place, to this or that Saint, wise and profitable Prayers. For a certain
Degree is but a Degree; And to answer all that is, or that you would have to be
done in this kind, nothing will serve but a certain kind of Immensity. And
therefore on the Other hand, a Creature may have the Knowledge of these things,
i. e. of ALL these things. So that now the Prayers are profitable again; but
then what shall we do to keep off Immensity from being attributed to the
Creature? He has a Trick for that, and it is this; viz. That this kind of
Immensity or Knowledge of all Prayers that are or can be any where offered to
them, is communicated to them by God, and as long as God has made them thus
immense, we may do so too.

12. And thus he represents the Saints as Dii facti, Made Gods, and that by the
Almighty himself; which being done with respect to Omnipresence, may, whenever
a wretched Cause requires it, be done as well with respect to Omnipotence, and
all the other Divine Perfections; and in one word leads to such Consequences,
as cannot but stir up the Indignation of all good Men. Nothing should be
maintained in the Minds of Christian People with more care than the distinct
Notion they ought to have of God and his Creatures. But your Doctrine and
Practice in this kind does so confound these Apprehensions of the One and the
Other, that they cannot tell what Prerogative, as to the matter of hearing
Prayers, God has above his Saints; since they hear all, as well as He. Prayer
to God every where is that which principally supports in the Minds of Men the
apprehension of his being every where present: And tho much of it is due to the
natural Impressions which God has left of himself in our Souls, yet the
Reflections we make upon it, are chiefly owing to the frequent Addresses we make
every where, publicly and privately, to the Invisible Being, the Lord of All,
of whom we have some knowledge by Nature, and more by Christian Instruction.
But when Prayer is made to other Invisible Beings as generally as to God, how
can it be otherwise, but that the People should conceive them to be as
Omnipresent as God himself is? Especially if it be considered, that when their
Educated and Philosophical Men, come to vindicate their Practice and Doctrine
from this imputation, they cannot so much as speak sense about it, but with all
their Art, talk more meanly and confusedly than mere Nature would instruct an
Honest man to do. The difference between the People and the blind guides on the
one side, and between the Seers on the other, being only this, That the
Worship, and the Notions of the former go together, and are of a piece; but the
latter, with as bad a Worship, have better Notions; and give that Honor to the
Saints by their Practice, which their Notions (as they would have us think at
least) deny to them. But for that reason they are the more to blame; and tho
their Idolatry be not so gross as the Peoples, yet it is more inexcusable.

13. And yet if we may judge of their thoughts by their words, some of the
refined Controvertists do not come much behind the Common People in this
stupidity. If they think otherwise than they say, they are to answer to God for
that too Cardinal Bellarmine, and others, De Cultu ss. lib. iii. c. 9.
who had none of these Expounding designs to carry on, speak out freely, and
tell us, that the Saints are Dii per participationem, God's by participation;
and upon that account he justifies the Practice of the Church of Rome, in
swearing by them, and making Vows to them. Expos.. IV. p. 7.
Nor indeed do I see how that differs very much from Monsieur de Meaux's giving
them the Knowledge which the hearing of all Prayers requires, as by a light
communicated to them by God. For what is that but to say, that God has (in
effect) made them partakers of his Immensity? Nay, the Representer (if we may
conclude any thing from his arguing) seems plainly to yield, that the Saints
have a Natural Knowledge of our Prayers: Part 1.. ii. p. 3.
For (says he) Abraham heard the Petition of Dives, who was yet at a greater
distance from him (than the Saints are from us), even in Hell: and told him
likewise the manner of his living whilst as yet on Earth. Nay, since it is
generally allowed, that the very Devils hear those desperate Wretches who call
on them, why should we doubt that the Saints want this privilege?

14. No wonder therefore if Bellarmine makes a greater difference between the
Prayers to the Saints, and our desires of good men's Prayers upon Earth, than
Monsieur de Meaux seems willing to acknowledge; and looks upon it to be a
Worship due to them, Conc. Trid. Seff. ult.
thus (in the words of your Synod of Trent) suppliantly to call upon them: For
what can be more reasonable than to esteem that Prayer, the Invocation of
Suppliants, and the Worship of Invocation, which is made with such deference of
respect from the very Nature of the Act, as is due to God the only Omnipresent
Being? And what more unreasonable and foolish, than to call our desires of each
others Prayers by such Titles as these?

And hitherto have I shown, that in the very Act of praying to the Saints,
without any regard had to the form or substance of your Petitions, or the
circumstances with which you call upon them, you give proper, religious Worship
to them, which you acknowledge it is unlawful for you to do. I proceed,
Secondly, to show this yet more plainly,

II. From the Circumstances of it.
15. And here to avoid, if it be possible, all your little Cavils so usual upon
this occasion, as in speaking to the former part of this Argument, I have
managed it so as not to concern my self with any of your distinctions of
Supreme and Inferior Religious Worship; Reply, p. 7.
so here I will not insist on those Exterior Actions of the Body, which you
tell me are Equivocal, and of which Monsieur de Meaux roundly affirms, Expos.
p. 8.
That the Nature of that Exterior Honor which you render to the Saints, must
be judged from the internal Sentiments of the Mind. The Circumstances I shall
now insist upon are such, as are not liable to any of these Evasions; but will,
if not silence a Contentious Spirit, yet I am confident, satisfy any
unprejudiced Christian, that the Prayers which you make to the Saints are
properly a Religious Act, and not only called so by an external denomination
from the Cause and Motive of them.

16. For 1. What else can be gathered from those outward Circumstances, of the
Place, Time and Manner (to say nothing of the Gestures of the Body) with which
you call upon them? Do not all these speak plainly to us what the Nature of
this Worship is? You pray (for instance) to the Saints in the House of God, it
may be, in a Temple which you have consecrated at once to the Service of God,
and to the Honor of the Saint whom you invoke. You accompany these Prayers
with Incense smoking before their Images; a Circumstance which was once
reckoned as a peculiar instance of External Religions Adoration; and which was
therefore thought so appropriate an Act of Divine Worship among the Primitive
Christians, that they chose to die rather than to throw a little Incense into
the fire upon the Heathen Altars. You call at the same instant upon the One and
upon the other, and too often place them in an equal rank with one another.
Thus, Missal. R. in ord. Miss.
if you confess your sins, you do it to God Almighty, to the B. Virgin, to St.
Michael the Archangel, to S. John Baptist, to the Holy Apostles S. Peter and S.
Paul, and in short, to All the Saints: If you commend a departing Soul, Rituale
R. Ord. Comm. An.
you bid him go out in the Name of God the Father Almighty, who created him;
and of Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, who suffered for him; and in the
Name of the Holy Ghost, who was poured out upon him; in the Name of Angels and
Archangels, of Apostles, Evangelists, etc. If you conjure a Tempest, Ritual.
Fr. de Sales. p 77. in fin.
you call upon God and the Holy Angels; you adjure the Evil Spirit, you
contradict him, by the Virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Blessed Virgin
Mary. In the Offices of the Church, your Addresses to God, and the Blessed
Virgin, are so inter-woven with each other, that there is no alteration but
only in the manner of the Expression, and very often not in that neither: As
when you pray (for instance) "That the Virgin Mary and Her Son would Bless you.
Offic. B. V. page 84.
In the Doxologies of your greatest Men at the End of their Works, nothing more
frequent than to see " Glory and Praise returned to God and the Blessed Virgin;
and in your ordinary Conversation no exclamation more frequent than that of
Jesu-Maria. Pontific R. Ord. Excom. and Absolv. p. 196, 197.
Even your solemn Excommunications and Absolutions are made in the Name and
Authority of the Holy Trinity, the Blessed Virgin, and all the Saints; and the
Passion of Christ joined in equal rank with the Merits of the Virgin Mary for
the remission of their sins. By all which it undoubtedly appears, that either
your Invocation of God himself is not properly a Religious Act; or if that be
strictly a Religious Worship, the other will be so also.

17. Secondly, Another Circumstance which plainly shows your Invocation of
Saints to be in the very Nature of the Act a Religious Service, is, that you
offer not only your Prayers, but your very Sacrifice too to their Honor and
Veneration: And this I am sure you will not deny to be truly a Religious Act.
Thus in the Missal of Salisbury.

In Ord. Missae. fol. 146.
Accept, O Holy Trinity, this Oblation, which I, unworthy sinner, offer in
Honor of thee, and of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and of All Saints.

And in the Common Roman Missal,

Ord. Miss. p. 311. Paris. 1616.
Accept, O Holy Trinity, this Oblation which we offer to thee in memory of the
Passion. Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in Honor of
the ever Blessed Virgin Mary, and of the Blessed John the Baptist; and of the
Holy Apostles Peter and Paul.

And in the Post-Communio of the Mass of the B. Virgin.

Rituale Fr. de Sales. par. post. p. 19. Lion. 1632.
Having received, O Lord, the defense of our salvation, grant, we beseech thee,
that we may every where be defended by the Patronage of the Blessed Virgin, for
whose Veneration we have offered this to thy Majesty.

Now, not to enter on an Enquiry, how far these Expressions will in some
measure apply the very Sacrifice it self to those Saints; it being hardly
intelligible otherwise what Honor can be done to the Saints, by a Sacrifice
offered solely to God; it cannot be doubted, but that this being confessedly a
proper Religious Act, whatever Honor is hereby done the Saints, must be
strictly and properly a Religious Honor; not merely in denomination, but in
the very Nature of the thing it self. And I desire Monsieur de Meaux to tell
us, whether this too be done with the same Spirit of Charity, and in the same
Order of Brotherly Society with which we entreat our Brethren upon Earth to
pray for us. And what would be thought of him, that out of kindness or respect
to his fellow Christian, should offer up the Son of God for his Honor, or (as
the last Prayer has it) in his Veneration.

I do not pretend that this is properly an Act of Prayer to Saints; and
therefore I propose it only as a Circumstance from whence to conclude what the
true Nature of your Invocation of them is. For if it appear, that the other
parts of that Worship you pay to the Saints, are properly Religious Acts, it
will not be doubted but that your praying to them is certainly so too. And tho
you have restrained the terms of our Question to this one particular Instance,
of calling upon them, yet it suffices me in general to conclude against you,
that you do give proper Religious Honor to others besides God, if it appear,
that any part of that Worship you pay to the Saints is such.

18. Nor is it by any means to be forgot here, that in almost every one of
these Masses you desire to be accepted by the MERITS of that Saint in whose
Honor or Veneration the Mass it self is offered. I will give you an instance
or two of this.

Regard, we most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, Missale in usum Sarum. Fest.
Januarii. fol. x.
these things which we offer to thee: and by the MERITS of thy Blessed Bishop
Julian, deliver us from all sin.

Let the MERITS of S. Bathildis obtain, that these gifts may be accepted by
thee.

We load thy Table, O Lord, with mystical gifts, Ibid. fol. xiii.
in commemoration of S. Agatha thy Virgin and Martyr; humbly beseeching thy
Majesty, that by the help of HER MERITS we may be freed from all Contagions.

Thus (as I have heretofore observed) do you join the MERITS of Christ, whom
you suppose to be the Offering, with the MERITS of your Saints; and make a
Bathildis or a Julian, joint Intercessors with the Son of God for your
forgiveness. What is this but truly to ascribe to the Creature the Honor of
the Creator, and to worship them with a Religious Worship, in the utmost
propriety of the Expression?

19. I shall add but one Circumstance more, and that of another sort of Service
with which you sometimes accompany your Prayers to the Saints, and which I
think will undeniably convince you, that you do give them the most strict Acts
of Religious Service; and that is, Your making of Vows to them. That this is a
proper Act of Religion, Numb. XXX. Deutr. XXIII.
both the Holy Scripture evidently shows, and the reason of the thing it self
declares; A Vow being in its own Nature nothing else than a Promise made to
God; and such by which he is acknowledged to be the Searcher of the Heart, and
the just Avenger of all perfidious Promisers, as he is the bountiful Rewarder
of those who are faithful in his Service. Aquinas 22ae. Qu. 88. A. 5.
And your own Authors unanimously acknowledge it to be an Act, not only of
Proper, but of Supreme Religious Worship.

20. And yet even this too is paid by you to the Saints: and I desire you to
consider what you then did, when at the entry into your Order (if you herein,
as I suppose, agree with the manner of your Brethren the Dominicans), Vid.
Annot. Cajet. in D. Th Qu. 88. Ar. 5. p. 313. Lugd. 1562.
you solemnly vowed to God, to the B. Virgin, to S. Benedict, and to All the
Saints, that you would be obedient to your Superiors. Now this I the rather
remark, because the Answer that is made by your Writers, to justify this
Practice, plainly condemns you (not only in this Point, but in that of your
Prayers too) upon your own Principle, as Idolaters. They acknowledge the Act to
be PROPERLY RELIGIOUS; That these Vows are made after the very SAME MANNER to
God and the Saints. Ibid.
And Card. Cajetane anticipating this Objection, That to Vow is an Act of
Supreme Religious Worship; and how then may it be given to the Saints? Answers,
That it is an Act of the same kind to VOW and to PRAY; but (says he) We pray to
the Saints in Order to God, and therefore in the same manner we Vow to them
too. And the main Excuse which He makes for both, is the utter ruin of yours
and Monsieur de Meaux's Pretenses, viz. That the Saints are GODS BY
PARTICIPATION. Bellarm. de Cult. SS. Lib. iii. c. 9. p. 2235. D.
A Remark which Card. Bellarmine thought so considerable, that He from thence
distinguishes between the Promises that are made to Men on Earth, and to the
Saints in Heaven; so that the former are Only Promises, the latter are Vows;
Because a Vow does not agree Otherwise to the Saints, than as they are GODS BY
PARTICIPATION.

21. The Consequence of all is this plain Conclusion, That if a Vow be strictly
and properly an Act of Religious Worship, and not only called so by an
extrinsecal Denomination from the Cause and Motive of it; and Prayer (as Card.
Cajetane says) be an Act of the same kind with it; then are they both Acts, by
your own Acknowledgment, due only to God: And therefore it must be a Sin to
give them to any Other; and being a Sin in a matter of Religious Worship,
whereby that Honor is given to the Creature which is due only to God, it
remains, according to our Notion, that it must be Idolatry.

22. And thus have I hitherto argued against that Worship you pay to the
Saints, upon your own Principle, and according to your own Proposal: I shall
only add, to close this First Point, That whether these Arguments shall be
thought of force sufficient to convict you of what I am persuaded you are
guilty in this Service, it is your Concern alone to weigh. If they are, I need
not say any thing to exaggerate your Offense which you commit in this Matter:
If they are not, yet whilst we are neither defective in our Veneration toward
those Blessed Souls, but pay them all that Honor (as I have before shown) of
which they are now Capable; whilst we transgress no Command of God in our
Omission of these Superstitions; nor fail continually to Address our selves to
the Throne of Grace, through our Great and Only Mediator Jesus Christ; We are
not only sure of his Intercession, who we know is able both to Hear and Help
us; but also in a most likely way of obtaining the Charitable Assistances of
those Holy Souls too, who, if they have any Knowledge of us, or Concern for
what passes Here below, will doubtless need no Solicitation to be kind to us;
but without our Entreaty offer up their Prayers to God, for all those who thus
serve him in Sincerity and Truth.

23. But I must now go much farther, and bring my Charge more closely against
you, by showing, secondly,

II. POINT. What the True Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome is, as to
the Point of INVOCATION of SAINTS?
Now the Sum of this Point may I think best be reduced to these Four
Considerations, by which you endeavor in your Reply to justify your selves in
this Particular.

For, I. As to the Prayers themselves, you cannot deny but that in the natural
Sense of them they do imply a proper and formal Invocation of the Saints to
whom you Address: But then you tell us, That the Churches Sense is much
otherwise; and therefore that whatever their Words may seem to imply, yet the
Intention of them all is One and the Same, viz. PRAY FOR US.

II. That as to what We object concerning the MERITS of the Saints, your
coucluding of All your Prayers in this Form, Through Jesus Christ our Lord,
plainly shows, that you mean no more by it than this, Reply, Art. iii.. 18. p.
23.
That God would vouchsafe to call to mind the glorious Actions and Sufferings
of his Saints, performed in and by His Grace, and upon those Accounts accept
your Sacrifices, or hear your Prayers.

III. That for those Addresses you have the Warrant both of Scripture and
Antiquity. Whereas,

IV. We have neither against them: Those Pretensions I offered in my Defense
being either false or deceitful; or at least not conclusive enough to engage
you to lay aside a Practice which has been so many hundred Years in the Church,
and that by our own Confession.

This is the Sum of what is said on this Occasion, not only by your self, but
by the generality of your Party: And to this I shall answer with all the
Plainness and Candor that I am able.

SECT. I. Whether all the Prayers that are made to the Saints by those of the
Church of Rome, are fairly to be reduced to this One Sense, PRAY FOR US?
24. For thus it is that you Expound your selves.

That in what Terms soever those Prayers which you address to the Saints are
Couched, Reply, Art. iii. sect. 16. p. 22.
the Intention of your Church reduces them always to this Form, PRAY FOR US.
You charge me with VOLUNTARY fixing the Words of your Addresses, which are
Equivocal, to a Univocal Sense; and that Had I either as became a Christian or
a Scholar taken notice of this Direction laid down by the Bishop of Condom,
both in his Book, and in his Advertisement, I should have saved my self the
labor of Amassing such an Appendix as I have made to this Article, and the
Reader the trouble of perusing it to as little purpose. Since tho your Church
does indeed make her Addresses to the Saints for Protection and Power against
your Enemies; for Help and Assistance, and the like; yet it does Appear
manifestly to any one Who is not WILFUL in his MISTAKES, that all these are
reduced to an Ora pro nobis; it being a kind of Aid, Succor, and Protection,
to recommend the Miserable to Him who alone can succor them. 25. Answer.] Such
then are your Pretenses. To your Reflections I have spoken Already; I come now
to examine your Reasons: And to convince Others, if not You, that I was not
WILFUL in my MISTAKES as to the meaning of your Prayers, but that you are a
sort of Miserable Shufflers, in your pretended Expositions of them. For tell me
now, I beseech you, by what Authority is it that your New Guides Answer to Dr.
St. p. 399, 406, 407.
T. G. and the Bishop of Meaux undertake thus to detort the plain Expressions
of your Addresses to a Signification utterly repugnant to the natural Meaning
of them? Have any of your General approved Councils positively defined this to
be all your Design in them? Full Answer, p. 6.
And if they have not, are you not, according to your own Language, Ibid. p. 7.
in your accusing of me on this Occasion, a Falsifier, a Calumniator, and a
Misrepresenter TOO? Does the Council of Trent, where it decrees this Service is
to be paid to them, say that this shall be the Universal, Ecclesiastical Sense
of these Devotions? Nay, does but so much as One single Rubric in all your
Offices give us the least Intimation of it?

Catechism. Conc. Trid. Part. IV. p. 345. Tit. Quis Orandus sit?
26. It is, I know, pretended by Monsieur de Meaux, That your Catechism
authorizes this Exposition of them; where it teaches the Difference there is
between your Praying to God and to the Saints. For that you pray to God either
that He would give you Good things, or that He would deliver you from Evil; but
to the Saints, that they would undertake your Patronage, and obtain for you
those things you stand in need of. That from Hence arises two different Forms
of Prayer; for that to God you say properly Have mercy upon us, or Hear our
Prayers; but to the Saints, Pray for us.

27. Such are that Bishops Pretenses, and it must be confessed they have
something that is plausible in them; tho what will soon vanish when it comes to
be examined to the Bottom. For be it allowed, as He desires, that there are
here proposed two different Forms of Prayer; for indeed we do not deny but that
in General you may pray with other Sentiments to God, than to the Saints; tho
too often in your Prayers themselves we find no great care taken to distinguish
them: To God, as to the First and Supreme Dispenser of All Good; to the Saints
only as His Ministers, and inferior Distributers of it. But does this
therefore reduce all the Prayers you make to the Saints, in whatever Terms they
are conceived, to this One Form, PRAY FOR US? Judge, I beseech you, by those
Words which immediately follow in the Catechism, but were not for the turn of
an Expounder, and therefore His Lordship thought good to omit them: Catechism.
ibid.
Although it be Lawful, IN ANOTHER MANNER, to ask of the Saints themselves that
THEY WOULD HAVE MERCY UPON US, for they are very Merciful.

28. If this be ANOTHER MANNER from the foregoing then I am sure all the
Prayers of your Church are not to be reduced to that One Form, Pray for us. But
what is this Other Manner? Ibid.
We may pray (says the Catechism) that being moved at the Misery of our
Condition, they would Help us with their FAVOR and DEPRECATION with God. So
that Here then is somewhat more, at least in the opinion of your own Catechism,
than a mere praying for us; Here is Encouragement to ask not only their
Prayers, but also their Favor and Interest too. But indeed the Catechism goes
yet farther: For giving a Reason why Angels are to be invocated, They are (says
the Catechism) to be prayed to, Pars iii. de Cultu and Invocatione SS. n. 19,
20. p. 255.
because they both continually look upon God, and most willingly undertake the
Patronage of our Salvation which IS COMMITTED to them: And from thence in the
next Section it infers the like Necessity of Honoring the Saints.

29. This is plain dealing, and gives us an Authentic Exposition of that
Passage in the Council of Trent, whose Sense you no less pervert than that of
your Liturgies; Council. Trid. Sess. xxv. de Invocat. etc. p. 292.
viz. That for Obtaining the Benefits of God by his Son Jesus Christ, you
should betake your selves to their (the Saints) Prayers, Aid, and Assistance:
And to this End, that you should not barely invoke them, but invoke them in a
suppliant manner; as those who reign now with Christ. A Circumstance this which
was not put in by Chance, but was thought so considerable as to be mentioned in
Pope Pius's Profession of Faith, where nothing superfluous was to be admitted;
and where you declare, That you firmly believe that the Saints who REIGN
together with Christ, are to be Venerated and Invoked. Insomuch that (as I have
before observed) your great Cardinals, Cajetane and Bellarmine, doubt not to
call them Gods by Participation; and to deliver it as the Catholic Doctrine
(and we know how conformable the Catholic Practice is to it amongst you) That
the Saints are set over us, Bellarm. de SS. beat. L. I. c. 18, 20.
and take care of us, and that the Faithful here on Earth are RULED and
GOVERNED by them. By all which it appears with what Sincerity you pretend that
all your Church teaches is only to pray to to the Saints in the same Spirit of
Charity, Bishop of Meaux's Expos. Sect. IV.
and according to the same Order of Fraternal Society, with which you demand
the Assistance of your Brethren living upon Earth. And how false it is, that
you are taught to reduce all the Forms of your Addresses to this One Meaning,
Pray for us; seeing you both direct the Faithful to recur to them for their
Prayers, Aid, and Assistance; and suppose them capable as Reigning together
with Christ, and Gods by Participation, but especially as having the Care of
the Faithful committed to them, to Rule and Govern them, to lend you Other Help
and Assistance besides that of their Prayers, and (as I shall presently show)
pray to them accordingly so to do.

30. But Secondly, We will examine this Point a little further; for indeed the
whole Mystery of this Service in the Church of Rome depends upon a right
understanding of what Notion they have of the Saints above. And because I will
do this without any suspicion of Falsity, I will deliver nothing but from Card.
Bellarmine's own Words. In his Book of the Eternal Felicity of the Saints, De
aeterna felicitate SS. lib. 1. cap. 4.
among Other Reasons that he gives why the Place and State of the Blessed
should be called the Kingdom of Heaven, He has this for one, Because all the
Blessed in Heaven are Kings, and all the Qualities of Kings do most properly
agree to them. The Just (says He) in the Kingdom of their Father, shall be
themselves Kings of the Kingdom of Heaven; for they shall be Partakers of his
Kingly Dignity, and of the Power, and Riches, and other Goods that are in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Which is, I suppose, a plain Paraphrase of what he elsewhere
says, That they are Gods by Participation, See before.
or Partakers of the Dignity and Power of God.

31. Having thus established His Foundation, He now goes on to the practical
Demonstration of it. Lib. I. cap. 5. p. 20. Colon. 1626.
The Goods (says He) of an Earthly Kingdom are usually reckoned to be these
Four, Power, Honor, Riches, and Pleasure. An Earthly King has Power to command
His Subjects; If they do not obey Him, He can punish them with Bonds,
Imprisonment, Exile, Scourging, Death. Again; Kings will be Honored with an
Honor almost above the Nature of Men; for they will be adored upon the Knee;
nor will they vouchsafe oftentimes to hear those that speak to them, unless in
this bended posture, and with their Face down to the Ground. But yet (as He
afterward shows) this Power is mixed with Infirmity; this Honor oftentimes
changed into Disgrace. But with the Saints above it is much otherwise: For
their Power is exceeding great, Ibid. page 26.
and without any mixture of Infirmity. This He illustrates with a Story, which
at once shows what their Power is with reference to us, and How they are prayed
to in the Church of Rome upon presumption of it.

St. Gregory (says he) relates in his Book of Dialogues, Lib. iii. cap. 36.
That a certain Holy Man, being just ready to be slain by the Hangman, whose
Arm was stretched out, and Sword drawn for that purpose, cried out in that
Instant, " Saint John hold him; and immediately his Hand withered, that he
could neither put it down again, nor so much as move it. S. John therefore
(continues the Cardinal) from the highest Heaven heard the Voice of his Client,
and struck his Executioner with this Infirmity so suddenly, as to hinder the
Stroke already begun. This is the Power of those Heavenly Kings, that neither
the almost infinite distance of Place, nor the Solitariness of a poor and
u^^^m'd Righteous Man, nor the multitude of Armed Enemies, could prevent S.
John from delivering his SUPPLIANT from the Danger of Death.

32. I shall not need to transcribe what He in the next place adds concerning
the Worship that upon this and other accounts is paid to the Saints, beyond
that of any Earthly Monarch. But from what has been said, I conclude, That it
is the Opinion of those in the Church of Rome, that (as the Council of Trent
expresses it) The Saints reign together with Christ; and, are Gods by
Participation; that is, are made Partakers of the Dignity and Power of God. 2.
That therefore whatever Intercourse the Faithful upon Earth may have with them,
it must be vastly different from what they have with their Brethren here below,
who are neither admitted to such a Dignity, nor Partakers of this Power. 3.
That since the Saints are thus Kings in Heaven, when those of the Roman Church
address to them in a SUPPLIANT manner, as their CLIENTS, for Help and
Assistance, they do not do this in the same Spirit of Charity, Expos. Mr. de
Meaux, sect. IV.
nor after the same Order of Fraternal Society with which they would desire the
Prayers of their Fellow Christians yet living. And, 4. That seeing the Blessed
in Heaven have Power together with God of taking Care of us, and bestowing
Blessings upon us; there is neither Truth nor Reason in that vain Pretense,
Reply, p. 22.
That all the Prayers that are made to them, must be reduced to this One form,
PRAY FOR US; but that we ought indeed to understand them to desire of the
Saints, what both their Principles allow them to do, and their Words declare
that they do desire; viz. THEIR HELP and ASSISTANCE, as reigning TOGETHER WITH
Christ.

33. But, Thirdly, I have yet more to say in Answer to this Evasion. It is well
known how much those Prayers you make to the Saints, scandalized many of the
most Eminent Men of your Church. In Elencho Abusuum.
Wicelius doubted not to say of one of your Hymns, that it was full of
downright Blasphemy, and horrible Superstition; of others, that they were
wholly inexcusable. Ludovicus Vives professed, Lud. Vives Comm. in S. August.
de Civ. dei. lib. viii. cap. 27.
that he found little difference in the Peoples Opinion of their Saints, in
many things, from what the Heathens had of their Gods: and that numbers in your
Church worshipped them no otherwise than God. Now this the Council of Trent
could not but know, and it then lay before them to redress it. If therefore
those Fathers had thought, that there was no other form of Invocation allowable
to the Saints, than (as you now pretend) to Pray to them to Pray for us, is it
to be imagined, that at such a juncture as this they would have taken no care
about a thing so justly scandalous, not only to the Protestants, whom they
desired to reduce, but even to many of their own Communion? How easy had it
been for them to say, That to satisfy the complaints of these Learned Men, and
of their Enemies; and to prevent any mistakes of the like kind for the future,
it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to them to declare, that in what terms
soever the Prayers of their Church were conceived, yet that the Ecclesiastical
sense of them was in all one and the same, viz. Pray for us. But now instead of
such a declaration, and which such wise men in this case would never have
omitted, they regard no Complaints that were made against this Service; but
roundly decree an Invocation to be due to them, and establish it upon the Old
Foundation beforementioned, and which had given rise to all these excesses,
viz. that the Saints REIGN TOGETHER WITH CHRIST; and were therefore in A
SUPLIANT MANNER to be called upon; and that for the obtaining benefits of God,
they were to fly, not only to their Prayers, but also to their Help and
Assistance: And when according to their Order for reciting the Missals and
Breviaries, they were again set out, the one Four, the other Six years after
the Council was ended: the Hymns and Prayers were left still as we see, and not
so much as the least Note in a Rubric, for a right Exposition of them.

34. Nay, I will go yet farther: There was not only no Care taken then, but at
this day men are suffered to run, without Censure, into the same Excesses. We
know to what Extravagance Card. Bona, Father Crasset, and but the other day
Doctor J. C. our own Countryman, have gone; and no One of your Church censures
them for it. Cassander immediately after the Council, no less complained of
these things than Vives and Wicelius before; and that too was disregarded. On
the contrary, whilst the Extravagances of these Votaries are encouraged, the
moderation of the others is censured by the highest Authority of your Church.
The Psalter of S. Bonaventure goes abroad with permission, but the Comments of
Lud. Vives are put in the Expurgatory Index, and George Cassander's Works
absolutely prohibited. Crasset devotion veritable, pref. p. 2.
If Advices are given from the Blessed Virgin to her indiscreet Worshippers,
All the Servants of the B. Virgin run to Arms to encounter him: The Learned of
All Nations write against him, the Holy See condemns him, Spain banishes him
out of all its Dominions, and forbids to Read or Print his Book, as impious and
Erroneous. But if a Crasset in his Zeal for the Mother of God, runs into such
blasphemous Excesses as no pious Ears can hear, without indignation; If he rake
together all that the Folly and Superstition of former Ages has said or done
the most excessively on this Subject, to make up a Volumn scandalous to that
Church and Society that endures him; not only the Divines of his Order approve
it, but his Provincial licenses it to be Printed; the King's Permission is
obtained for it; and the Expounders themselves are so very good natured, that
they cannot see any harm in it. And then let the World judge what your true
Doctrine, as to the Invocation of Saints, must be. For,

35. Fourthly, Had the Council of Trent been of the same Opinion with Monsieur
de Meaux, I shall leave it to any reasonable man, that will but be at the pains
to examine your Offices, to say, whether there was not great need of some such
Advertisement as I before said. As for example: In the Office of the Blessed
Virgin you thus address to Her:

Officium B. Virg. p. 84. Antw. 1631.
We fly to your protection, O Holy Mother of God; despise not our Prayers which
we make to you in our Necessities; but deliver us from all dangers, O Glorious
and ever Blessed Virgin. -- And again,

Ibid. p. 103.
Vouchsafe that I may be worthy to praise thee, O Sacred Virgin: Give me
strength and power against thine Enemies.

Now that these Prayers are conceived in as formal terms as any can be to God
himself, is not to be denied: I desire you therefore to tell me by what Rules
of Interpretation, by what Public and Authentic Decree of your Church, we are
to expound a Prayer made to the Blessed Virgin, that She would give strength
and power, into a desire that she would pray to God that He would do this?

36. But however, let us for one moment suppose this to be reasonable, and try
whither such a method of interpreting will carry us. For instance, thus you
Ibid. p. 497.
Pray to the Apostles.

O ye just Judges and true Lights of the World, we pray unto you with the
Requests of our Hearts, that ye would hear the Prayers of your Suppliants.

That is to say, "We do desire you in a friendly way, and only after the Order
of Brotherly Society, though in complement we call our selves indeed your
Suppliants, and entreat you to hear our Prayers, that you would Pray for us.

Ye that by your Word shut and open Heaven, deliver us, we beseech you by your
COMMAND from all our sins.

That is, you who by your Prayers to God are able to incline him either to shut
or open Haven, we entreat you, that by YOUR COMMAND, meaning only your Prayers,
you would deliver us; that is to say, would Pray to God, that He would deliver
us --, from all our sins.

You to whose COMMAND the Health and Sickness of all men are submitted, Heal us
who are sick in our Manners, and restore us to virtue.

That is to say, O ye Holy Apostles, to whose command, as far as Prayers may be
so called, the Health and Sickness of all is subjected; forasmuch as your
Requests can prevail with God to submit it to you: Heal us, i. e. Pray to God
that He would Heal us, who are sick in our manners; and Restore us; that is to
say, entreat God, that He would restore us to Virtue.

37. Such, according to your Principles, is the Paraphrase of this Prayer. If
this be a natural way of Expounding, then be also your Pretenses allowed of:
But if to pray in such words as these, meaning no more than what I have
expressed, be a downright mocking both of God and his Saints, then let the
World judge what we are to think of your Interpretations.

38. But however, for once let us allow even this too: What shall we do with
those Prayers where God and the Saints are both joined together in the same
Request. As for instance,

Let Mary and Her Son bless us. Officium B. Virg. page 105.
Here, I doubt, it will be something difficult to reduce them to what you call
the Churches Sense, PRAY FOR US, unless you pray to God too as well as to the
Saints, to pray (to whom I cannot imagine) for you.

39. I shall add but one Consideration more, from your Service of the Saints,
to overthrow your new Expositions; but that such as I shall be very glad to
receive an Honest Answer to. For be it that in defiance of all Sense and
Reason, your Prayers to the Saints, in what terms soever they be conceived,
must all be interpreted, as you pretend. Yet what shall we do in those Cases
where the very Nature of the Service utterly refuses such kind of Colors? As,

I. When in your Vows, you vowed (as I before observed),

To God, and the Blessed Virgin, and to St. Benedict, and to all the Saints,
that you would be obedient to your Superiors.

II. When in your Doxologies, you give

Glory to God, and the B. Virgin Mary, and last of all to Jesus Christ. So
Greg. de Valencia.

Praise be to God, and the Virgin Mother Mary, also to God Jesus Christ, the
Eternal Son of the Eternal Father, be Praise and Glory. So Card. Bellarmine
closes this very Dispute of the Worship of Saints.

Honor and Glory be to God, and to the most Holy Virgin Mary, and to all the
Saints. So your Collector of the Lives of the Saints.

Contemplat. page 23.
" Verse. Open my lips, O Mother of JESUS.

"Resp. And my soul shall speak forth thy Praise.

" Verse. Divine Lady, be intent to my aid.

"Resp. Graciously make haste to help me.

" Verse. Glory be to JESUS and MARY.

"Resp. As it WAS, IS, and ever SHALL be.

So Dr. J. C. Now what you will think of all this I cannot tell, See below.
but sure I am S. Athanasius pronounces it to be downright Idolatry, and what
no good Christian would ever be guilty of.

III. When in your Commendation of a departing Soul, you bid him,

Rit. Romans Ord. Comm. Anim.
Depart out of the World, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; of
Angels and Archangels, of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and of all Saints, as
I have before at large recited it.

IV. When in the Confession of your sins, you confess,

To God Almighty, and the Blessed Virgin Mary, Missale R. in Ord. Miss.
to S. Michael, the Archangel, to S. John Baptist, to the Holy Apostles Peter
and Paul, and to all the Saints.

V. When in absolving your Penitents from them, you join,

The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, Rituale Romans de Sacr. Poenit.
and the Merits of the Blessed Virgin, and of all the Saints; together, for the
remission of all his sins.

VI. When in your Conjurings against storms,

You contradict the Evil Spirit by the Virtue of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of
the Blessed Virgin. Rituale Fr. de Sales. p. 77.


VII. When in your Excommunications, you shut men out of the Church,

In the Authority of God Almighty, the Father, Son, Pontific. Romans Ord. Excom.
and Absol.
and Holy Ghost, and of the Blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, and of all the
Saints.

VIII. When in Absolving them from this Sentence, you

Remit this bond, in the same Authority of God Almighty, Ibid.
and of the Blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul.

Lastly, When in consecrating of a Church or Altar, you

Bid this stone be Sanctified, and Consecrated, Ibid. de Consecrat. Ecclesiae.
p. 124.
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and of the
Glorious Virgin Mary, and of all the Saints. And again,

Let this Church be Sanctified, and Consecrated, Ibid. p. 127.
in the Name of Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; to the Honor of
God, and of the Glorious Virgin Mary, and of all the Saints.

Now in all these several instances, there is no room for any such
interpretation as you pretend in the Case of your Prayers; but here either your
hearts join in what your lips utter, and then it is plain you give as Proper
Divine Worship to the Saints as you do to God, which you confess to be
unlawful: Or if they do not, what is this but to speak words of Vanity in your
most Solemn Service, and in which you ought especially to take heed not to
offend?

40. Thus do the very Words of your Liturgies utterly refuse such an Exposition
as you pretend to be your only meaning in all your Prayers to the Saints. I
will add yet one Consideration more, to show the insincerity of it, Fifthly,
from the concurrent Practice of the most eminent Persons of your Church, and
whose Authority you cannot with any justice except against.

41. Now of this the famous Psalter of S. Bonaventure, may alone serve for a
sufficient Evidence; which as it has been publicly set forth, and authorized
amongst you, so I need not tell you, that the design of it was to apply all the
Addresses that are made to God in the Psalms and Hymns of the Church; nay, and
even the very Creeds to the Blessed Virgin.

Psalterium S. Bonavent. Psalm 2.
Come unto Mary all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and she shall refresh
your Souls. Come unto Her in your temptations, and the Serenity of Her
Countenance shall establish you.

Psalm. iv.
When I called upon thee thou heardest me, O Lady, and from thy high Throne
did vouchsafe to remember me. Blessed art thou, O Lady, for ever, and let thy
Majesty be exalted for evermore.

Psalm. vii. -- cvii.
O Lady, in thee do I put my trust, deliver my Soul from mine Enemies. O give
thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: O give thanks unto His Mother, for her
Mercy endures for ever.

42. I might pass at this rare through all the other Psalms, and to these add
the Te Deum, Speculum B. Virginis, etc.
Benedicite, Athanasian Creed, etc. all burlesqued to Her Honor: But there has
been so many large Collections of these already published, that I shall subjoin
only one Prayer at the close of all.

O my Holy Lady Mary! I commend to thy blessed Trust and especial Custody, and
into the Bosom of thy Mercy, this day and every day, and in the hour of my
Death, both my Soul and Body: I commit all my Hope and Consolation, all my
Troubles and my Miseries, my Life and the End of my Life, to thee; that by thy
most Holy Intercession and Merits all my Works may be directed and disposed,
according to THINE and THY SONS Will. Amen.

43. I will not now insist upon this, that this Book has been often Printed
among you with License and Commendation, and particularly my Editions of it;
the one Italian and Latin, Printed at Genoa, 1606. with the License of the
Superiors, and submitted by the Translator Giovan Battista Pinello to the
Censure of the Church; the other at Liege in the same Year, by le Sage: But
this last had the Honor of being particularly commended by the Vicar of that
Church, Permiss. Jo. Chapeaville. Leodii 17. Nov. 1606.
and Censor of Books, as a Piece that was profitable to be Printed, and very
piously and commendably to be recited by all Men in their private Prayers, to
the Honor of the B. Virgin. The Author of it is at this time a Canonized Saint
in your Church, and is now in his turn Worshipped by you. If therefore you
approve these Addresses (as I presume you must) be pleased to try, ('twill be a
pretty expounding Task) how you can reduce all these Hymns and Prayers to this
One Sense of your Church, "PRAY FOR US. But if you disallow these Addresses, as
(what in truth they are) Scandalous and Idolatrous, what then shall we say if
you pray to those as in Heaven now, who whilst they lived were guilty of such
desperate Superstitions?

44. And now I am instancing in your Saints, I cannot forbear presenting you
with a Strain or two of your Pious, but very Superstitious and Indiscreet St.
Bernard: and this too to try your Faculty of Expounding.

To thee, O Holy Virgin Mary, as to the Ark of God, Vid. in Psalm. S. Bonav.
Leodii, 1606. p. 238.
as to the Cause of Things, as to the Business of Ages, do all look that are
both in Heaven and Hell; both they that have gone before us, and we who now
live, and they who shall hereafter be born. -- All Generations shall call thee
Blessed, O Mother of God! -- In thee the Angels have found Joy, the Righteous
Grace, and Sinners Pardon for Ever. Worthily do the Eyes of the whole Creation
look upon thee, because in thee, and by thee, and of thee the kind Hand of the
Almighty has re-created whatever he had created. We embrace thy Footsteps, O
Mary, and with most devout Supplication we fall down before thy blessed Feet.
We will hold thee, and not let thee go till thou shall bless us. For thou art
able, etc.

Defense, Append. 2. Def. part 1. p. 89.
45. But I insist too long upon these Matters; and therefore in stead of
multiplying new Instances, shall refer you to those I have already offered: And
from your Saints descend to the Heads of your Church; Greg. VII. Baron. Ann. ad
an. 1080. T. xi. p. 532. See Platina in his Life.
One of which thus piously called upon S. Peter and S. Paul at the Head of a
Synod, in Excommunicating the Emperor Henry IV. Anno 1080. in these Words.

Blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and thou O Blessed Paul, Doctor of the
Gentiles; Vouchsafe, I beseech you, mercifully to incline your Ears unto me,
and hear me. And then, after some Particulars too large to be transcribed, He
thus goes on: Go to now I beseech you, O Fathers and Holy Princes, that all the
World may know and understand, that as you have in Heaven the Power of Binding
and Loosing, you have also on Earth Power over Empires, Kingdoms,
Principalities, etc. For you have often taken away Patriarchates, etc. from the
Wicked and Unworthy, and have given them to Religious Men. Let the Kings and
all the Princes of the World now learn how great you are, and how much you can
do, and fear to undervalue the Command of your Church: And execute Judgment on
the aforesaid Henry so suddenly, that all Men may know that he shall fall, not
by Chance, but by your Power.

This is a blessed Prayer for a Pope to make; and I doubt will be found to
signify somewhat more than to pray to those Saints to pray for Him. If you
think otherwise, let us see your Paraphrase, and then we shall be able the
better to judge of it. To conclude, Let any Man but read over the late Books of
Father Crasset, and Dr. J. C. and then I will leave Him to believe if He can,
that all you mean in your Invocation of Saints, is only to desire them to pray
for you.

46. And this may suffice to your first Pretense, of the Interpretation you
would put upon these Addresses. As for the Authority you would be thought to
have from Holy Scripture, for them, it is so very trifling, as not to deserve a
Consideration. For who would not laugh at that Man that should seriously argue
after this manner?

1. When the Children of Israel were under Oppression, Judges iii. 9.
God raised up a Deliverer or Savior for them, who delivered them: Therefore
it is lawful to pray to Saints as our Saviors in Heaven. Again,

2. Acts vii 35. Galat. iii. 19.
St. Stephen calls Moses a Ruler and a Deliverer of the Children of Israel; and
St. Paul a Mediator, because at the delivery of the Law God sent it by his
Hands to them: Therefore we may now give the Titles of Mediators and Redeemers
to the Saints departed, with reference to our Spiritual and Eternal Concerns,
tho they neither are, nor have been, either Redeemers or Mediators to us.

3. St. Paul tells Timothy, 1 Timothy iv. 16.
That if he discharged the part of a faithful Pastor, as He exhorted him to do,
He should be a blessed Instrument of Salvation both to Himself and Others:
Therefore we may now pray to Timothy as our Savior in Heaven.

47. Are not these, Sir, weighty Arguments? And were you not resolved utterly
to confound us, when you alleged such Proof out of Holy Scripture as this? But
you have one Passage at least that will do our Work.

Grace and Peace are the proper Gifts of God: Revel. 1.4.
But this St. John wishes to the Seven Churches of Asia, not only from God, but
also from the Seven Spirits which are before the Throne: Therefore We may
warrantably pray to the Blessed Virgin, Let the Virgin Mary and Her Son bless
us.

A notable Proof this, and almost as terrible as that which follows: The Holy
Scripture says of Princes, That they are Gods; therefore we may pray to the
Saints as Gods too. But we will consider every part of it. Grace and Peace are
the proper Gifts of God. This is confessed: What will you infer from thence?
But these St. John wishes not only from God, but also from the Seven Spirits. I
answer, 1. If your own Gloss be good, Gloss. Ord. in loc. Rhemists Test. p. 700.
those Seven Spirits are set to signify the Seven fold Gifts of the Holy
Ghost; and your own Rhemists in their Annotations (from whence I am apt to
believe you borrowed this Argument) confess it may be well understood so. But,
2. Not to deal too strictly with you; Let us allow these Seven Spirits to
signify Created Angels; What will be the Consequence? St. John wishes all
Grace and Peace to the Churches of Asia from God, by the ministration of his
Holy Angels, whose Ministry He employs in dispensing His Graces and Blessings
for the Preservation of His Church: Therefore we may wish to the Church now,
Grace and Peace from Christ and the Blessed Virgin, who is neither Angel nor
Ministering Spirit, nor that we know of any way employed by God for the Service
of it. Nay, but this will not do yet: We must carry it yet further. St. John
wishes all Peace and Happiness from God and his Holy Angels to the Church:
Therefore We may not only Wish the like from God by their Ministration, but may
solemnly pray to Saints and Angels themselves, together with God, for Grace and
Peace. And if this be your way of Arguing from Holy Scripture, it is well you
have Infallibility of your Side, for I am confident otherwise you would never
persuade any Man, by way of reasoning, to submit to your Conclusions.

48. But the Representer has yet a Passage to justify the utmost Extravagance
of former Times, and prove even that Prayer, which Bellarmine was fain to deny
they ever used, Of the Virgins commanding our Savior by the Right which as a
Mother she had over Him, to be most agreeable to Holy Writ. For does not the
Scripture say of Joshua, c. x. 14. That He spoke to the Sun, and it stood
still, the Lord OBEYING the Voice of a Man? This is an Argument that must be
carefully looked to, or, like Wit that depends upon a turn of Expression,
'twill be utterly lost. And therefore in the Vulgar Latin and Doway Bibles,
this is a good Proof; but in our own, it is none at all. For as we render it, it
would be a most wild Inference thus to conclude; Joshua prayed unto God that
the Sun might stand still; and God hearkened unto his voice, and answered his
Request: Therefore we may pray to the Blessed Virgin by the Right of a Mother
to command her Son.

But be it as he desires; God obeyed the voice of Joshua; i. e. as the Chaldee
Paraphrast has it, He accepted his Prayer; as the Doway Bible it self expounds
it, Doway Bible in loc. p. 488.
He condescended to work so great a Miracle at the Instance of his Servant: How
will it even thence follow, that we may desire the Blessed Virgin to command
our Savior by the Right of a Mother over him? But such Twigs as these must be
laid hold on, when Men are resolved to keep to their Conclusion, tho at the
same time they have not so much as the shadow of a Proof to support it.

SECT. II. After what manner it is that the Church of Rome prays to God through
the Merits of Her Saints? Reply, sect. xviii. p. 23, 24.

This is the next Point to be considered by us; and thus you establish it.

49. Reply, p. 23.] You tell us, that the Word Merit is Equivocal, and
misapplied by Me: That the Truth of your Doctrine is, I. To reduce all your
Prayers to this Form, That God would be pleased not to regard your
Unworthiness, but (the Merits of our Redeemer ever supposed) respect the Merits
of his Saints also, and for their sakes hear your Prayers, and accept your
Sacrifices. II. That this is plainly shown in your solemn concluding of All
your Addresses in this manner, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Whereby it
appears, that you mean no more, than to beg of God Almighty that he would
vouchsafe to call to mind the glorious Actions and Sufferings of his Saints,
performed in and by his Grace, and upon these Accounts accept you. III. And
finally, That for this you have the Authority of the Holy Scripture it self.
50. Answ.] For Answer to which Discourse, I must first desire you to come a
little out of the Clouds, and not play with us in ambiguous Terms, whilst you
charge Me with it. The word Merit, you say, is Equivocal; and the two Senses
you give it are, First, To signify that We do by our own Natural force alone
deserve the Reward of Grace and Glory. And in which Sense if you pretend that
we charge you with pleading your own Merits, you do certainly most falsely
accuse us. The other Sense you give the word is, That our Good Works may be
said to Merit, because they apply the Merits of Jesus Christ to us, and are the
Means by which we attain Eternal Life, in virtue of the Promises of God, and
Merits of our Blessed Redeemer. In which were you sincere (for all the
impropriety of the Speech) yet we should not be far from agreeing with you. But
now what is all this, to your praying to God to hear you by the Merits of the
Saints? This may do well in its proper Article; but here it serves only to
amuse the Reader with that which is nothing to the purpose, that so he may be
disposed to forget what you were to prove. Jam dic Posthume de tribus Capellis.

51. You tell us then, in the next Paragraph, That you pray, that God would not
respect your own Unworthiness, Reply, p. 24.
but regard the Merits of his Saints, and for their Sakes, i. e. for their
Merits, Hear your Prayers, or accept your Sacrifices. But where then is the
Misrepresentation? For this is the very thing we charge you with, viz. That not
content to Address your selves to God, in the Name and through the Merits of
our ONLY Mediator Jesus Christ, you have sought out to your selves other
Intercessors, in whose Name, and through whose Merits to offer up both your
Prayers and Sacrifices to God. And whether we do not in this very justly accuse
you, let your Addresses themselves satisfy the World.

O Blessed John the Baptist, reach out thy Hand to us, and be to us continually
a Holy Intercessor, to the Clemency of the most High Judge, that through THY
MERITS we may DESERVE to be freed from all Tribulation.

O God! by whose Grace we celebrate the Memories of thy Saints Saturninus and
Sisinnius, Grant that by THEIR MERIT we may be helped, through our Lord.

Mercifully accept, O God, our Offerings which we have made unto thee, for the
SAKE of the Passion of thy Blessed Martyrs Saturninus and Sisinnius; that by
their Intercession they may be made acceptable to thy Majesty.

And in the Breviary of Salisbury, we find this to be a part of the Constant
Service:

Be propitious we beseech thee, O Lord, unto us thy Servants, Breviarium in
usum Sarum in Servit. B. Virg. par. 2.
through the glorious Merits of thy Saints whose Relics are contained in this
Church; that by their pious Intercession we may be protected in all Adversities.

Grant we beseech thee, Almighty God, that the Merits of thy Saints whose
Relics are contained in this Church may protect us, etc.

It were infinite to recount all the other Prayers which run in the same strain
throughout all your Offices, insomuch that the very Missal. Romans p. 367.
Canon of the Mass is infected with it. I will mention only one Instance more,
which is indeed a singular one; not so much because of the Expression of it,
wherein the General word of Merit is restrained to the particular Merit of his
Death, as because it was made to one who died in Actual Rebellion against his
Prince; and concerning whom therefore it was for some time debated amongst you,
Whether he were damned or saved?

BY the BLOOD of Thomas (a Becket) which he SHED for THEE, make us to ascend to
Heaven whither He is gone. Mornay de la Mess, p. 826. Saumur, 1604.


52. It remains then, that you do recur to the Saints not merely for their
Prayers, but that by their Merits and Intercession they would obtain Grace and
Pardon of God for you. This is the Doctrine of your Catechism: Catech Trid.
par. iij. p. 256. de Invoc SS. n. 24. tit. Sancti suis Meritis nos adjuvant.
That the Saints help us by their own Merits, and are therefore the rather to
be worshipped and invoked, because they both pray continually for the Salvation
of Men, and that God bestows many Benefits upon us by their Merit and Favor.
It Is from hence that the Master of the Sentences interprets your praying for
their Intercession, to be the same thing as to pray that by their Merits they
would help you. And Aquinas, Aquin. 22dae. q. 83. art. 4.
We pray to the Saints (says he) not to inform God of our Petitions by them,
but that by their PRAYERS and MERITS our Prayers may become effectual. Bellarm.
de Beat. SS. l. 1. c. 17.
We may say to the Saints (says Card. Bellarmine) Save me, or Give me This or
That; provided we understand, Give it me by thy Prayers or Merits. So that in
all this we say no more of you, than what both your Doctrine and Practice
warrant us to do.

53. Let us see therefore how you excuse your selves in this Matter. You say,
That your Concluding of all your Prayers Through Jesus Christ our Lord, shows
that you desire all at last by his Merits. But indeed this is but a poor Shift;
and as a very Learned Man has long since told you, Dr. Jackson, Tom. 1. p. 941.
that Close comes in in your Addresses, much after the same manner that the
mention of a certain Sum of Money does in Deeds of Trust, only pro forma: And
you are never the less guilty, for this Conclusion, of what we charge you with,
viz. That you join the Merits and Intercession of the Saints, with the Merits
and Intercession of Christ for Pardon and Acceptance. And to the end that you
may see what senseless Petitions you hereby make to God in these Addresses, I
will only take one of your Prayers in the literal meaning of it, Idem. ib.
and apply it in a plain Paraphrase to your Pretensions, by way of Petition to
some Earthly Prince. Thus then you pray upon the Third of May.

Grant we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we who Adore the Nativity of thy
Saints, Alexander, etc. may by their Intercession be delivered from all Evils
that hang over us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now changing only the Names, this, according to your Exposition, will be the
Paraphrase of it.

I beseech your Sacred Majesty that you would vouchsafe to pardon my Offenses
against you, and deliver me from those Evils that hang over me for them, at the
Intercession of your Lord Chancellor, etc. and in Honor of this his Birthday;
and that for the Sake of the Prince your Son, our Royal Lord and Master.

In this extravagant Petition, the very Transcript of the foregoing Prayer, he
must be blind who sees not that the Conclusion of it, for the Princes sake,
etc. is very impertinent, and does not at all hinder but that the Request is
formally made by the Interest of my Lord Chancellor, and in Honor of his
Birthday: And therefore that notwithstanding this Conclusion (which is really
the Remains of your Old Forms, before ever any New Intercessors were put into
them) you remain justly chargeable with what I accused you of, That you make
the Saints joint Intercessors with Christ to God; and desire not only through
his Merits, but by theirs also, to obtain your Requests.

54. As for your last Pretense of Holy Scripture for this Practice, it is every
jot as little to the purpose in this, as I have shown it to be in the foregoing
Point.

1. God tells Isaac (say you) that he would bless him, Reply, p. 25.
for his Father Abraham's sake. Moses, praying for the People, desires God to
remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, i. e.

Because God, in pursuance of his Covenant made with Abraham, blessed his Son,
and Moses put him in mind of that Covenant, to appease his Anger, that he
should not destroy the Israelites; Therefore it is lawful now to pray to God
not only by the Merits of Christ (the only Mediator of God's Covenant with us)
but also of the Saints too, for Pardon and Salvation.

2. God, in remembrance of his Promise made to David, Reply, ib.
showed Mercy unto Solomon for his Sake: Therefore Solomon might have urged to
God the Merits of David for Pardon of his Sins; and therefore we (who have
another, and better, and only Advocate) may address to God by the Merits and
Intercession of the Saints for Forgiveness.

I wonder you did not put in the City Jerusalems Merits too, to prove that we
may not only pray through the Merits of the Saints, but of their Cities also:
For the Text seems as express in this, as in the other: 1 Kings xi. 32. But he
shall have one Tribe for my Servant David's sake, and for Jerusulems sake, the
City which I have chosen out of all the Tribes of Israel.

3. What you mean by your last Passage, Reply, ib.
I must confess I cannot divine; unless you think that because Elijah, who was
sent by God's express Command to make a Proof of his Divinity before all the
People of Israel, who were gone after Baal, began his Prayer with that usual
Character of his being the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; it was therefore
through their Merits that the Fire came down from Heaven, and burnt up his
Sacrifice.

SECT. III. In which the Arguments offered by the Vindicator for the
Establishing of this Worship are particularly Considered, and their Weakness
laid open.
55. Hitherto we have been clearing the matter of Fact, what your Practice in
this Invocation of Saints is; I come now in the next place to examine your
Arguments, and see what grounds you have to support so great a Superstition.

And First, for what concerns the Holy Scripture, I find you do not much care
to be tried by that: You plead Possession for your Warrant, and are resolved
that shall be sufficient, till we by some better right can throw you out of it.
Now in this I cannot but commend your discretion; for indeed those who go about
to found this Article upon the Authority of Holy Writ, do in the Opinion of
many of your own Church but loose their Labor, See Defense of the Expos. p. 8.
in annot.
since (as they tell us) for the Old Testament, the Holy Patriarchs and
Prophets that lived before Christ's Incarnation were not yet admitted into
Heaven, and therefore were not Capable of being prayed to; and for the New, it
was not expressed there for fear of Scandalizing the Jews, and least the
Gentiles should have been thereby moved to think, that the Worship of new Gods
had been proposed to them.

56. Wherefore passing by the Holy Scripture, which you look upon as unfit to
be appealed to in this Case, let us come to the Possession you so much boast
of; And see how you defend it against those Arguments I offered to prove That
this Custom of Calling upon the Saints had no footing in the Church before the
latter End of the IV. Defense. ibid.
Century; and was then but beginning to creep into it. And to reduce your
Confusion to the clearest Method I can, I will distinctly consider your
Allegations in these two Periods.

First, Of the first 300 Years, wherein I affirm that there was no such
practice in the Church.

Secondly, Of the Fourth Century; toward the latter End of which I confess it
began to appear; tho still with very great difference from what you now
Practice.

I. PERIOD. That the Custom of Praying to Saints had no being in the Church for
the First 300 Years.
57. Now for this I showed you in my Defense, Defense of the Expos. Art. 3. p.
6.
That the Fathers of the IV. Century did certainly herein depart from the
Practice and Tradition of the Ages before them; because * That you were not
able to produce so much as One Instance out of the first three Centuries of any
such Invocation: * But rather were forced to Confess, that nothing of that kind
was to be found amongst them. * That this was in effect what your greatest
Authors, Card. du Perron, Card. Bellarmine, and even the Bishop of Meaux
himself had done: * And that indeed your own Principles oblige you to this
Acknowledgment; seeing you both allow that without believing that the Saints
departed go forthwith to Heaven, they could not have prayed to them; and yet
cannot but say that this, the Holy Fathers of the first three Ages did utterly
deny. These were my Arguments; let us see how you clear your Possession from
the force of them.

58. First, Reply. p. 17.. 13.
You clap a Marginal Note upon my Assertion (in earnest of your future
Civility) Primitive Fathers CALUMNIATED by the Defender: And to wipe off this
Calumny you undertake to show that they did Pray to the Saints within the First
300 Years. This is I confess to the purpose, and if you can do it, let the Note
of Calumny stick upon Me; but indeed I rather think that this Undertaking will
fix another, and a much more proper Note upon You. But let us hear your Proofs.

Ibid.] And first you say, My Brethren the Centurists of Magdeburg acknowledge
that Origin prayed to Job, and admitted the Invocation of Angels. 59. Answer]
If this be true, then, Sir, I tell you in one word, that my Brethren the
Centurists were mistaken; and that, (considering the time they wrote in) is no
great Wonder. But now did you never hear in your Life, that your Brethren,
Erasmus, Sixtus Senensis, Possevin, Bellarmine, Baronius, Labbe, Du Pin, etc.
have all confessed, that neither the Tracts, nor Comments upon Job were
Origen's? Has no one ever told you, Secondly, Replique au roy de la Grande
Bretagne live. v. c. 13. p. 982.
that another of your Brethren Card. du Perron, has utterly rejected the
Authority of Origin, as an incompetent Witness in matter of fact, and that
especially in the very Point before us? Were you indeed so ignorant, Thirdly,
as not to know how opposite this Father is to you (as I shall presently show)
in his undoubtedly genuine Works as to this matter? As for the other Passages
you quote, Fourthly, out of his Comments upon Ezekiel; besides that He there
supposes the Angel present with Him: Could you look upon this place and not see
that another of your Brethren, your own Editor, calls it an Apostrophe to His
Guardian Angel; and I desire you to try if you can make any more of it. And
Lastly, for what you finally allege out of his Lamentations; did you in good
earnest not know that it was a Book marked, not by your Brethren only, but by
your Holy Father Pope Gelasius as Apchryphal; and rejected as such by all the
Learned Men of your own Communion? So unfortunate, or rather unfaithful have
you been in your first Entry upon Antiquity. It may be you will go on a little
better.

Reply p. 17. n. 14.
Reply.] You tell us in the next place a story of one Justina, how being in
danger of making Shipwreck of her Chastity by the Magical Art of St. Cyprian,
she had recourse to the Intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary, begging of Her
to assist Her whose Virginity was in danger. 60. Answer.] If by this Story you
design to prove the Invocation of Saints to have been the Practice of the
Church within the first 300 Years, (and indeed it is for this you do produce
it,) I must then again complain of your Unsincerity; seeing it is both
acknowledged by your own Authors, Reply p. 17.
and indeed confessed by your own self, that Gregory Nazianzen was mistaken in
the relation, and attributed that to the great St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage,
which could not belong to Him. See Baron Mart. ad 26. Sept. p. 376. Edit. Paris
1613. Et annal. ad ann. 250. n. 5.
As for the other Cyprian to whom Card. du Perron, Baronius, etc. apply it, He
is not pretended to have lived within that Period, and so your Proof is without
the Compass of what you undertook to show.

61. But Secondly, Had there been any truth in this Story, even with reference
to this other Cyprian, how comes it to pass that none of the ancient
Martyrologies, no not your own Breviary, since the Reformation of it, makes the
least mention of any such thing: Would all these have omitted so Considerable a
Passage had there been any grounds of certainty in it.

62. To Reply therefore to this Instance, I say, It is more than probable that
St. Gregory took up this Story either from some flying report, or out of some
Counterfeit Acts: For one part of it, at least that which relates to St.
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, you confess your Baronius calls it Explodenda
fabula. ad ann. 250. n. 5. Billius Caecutiisse hic Gregorium in Orat. annot.
Vid in Martyr. ubi supr.
selves that in this he was certainly mistaken. And if any other Cyprian we
hear nothing either in Eusebius, or any other Historian or Writer of that Age.
The first Cardinal Baronius has produced being Beda and Adelhelmus, who lived
not till the Eighth, and Metaphrastes in the latter end of the Ninth Century.
But however let us see even what they say of this matter. They tell us that the
Cyprian here meant was Bishop of Antioch, and suffered Martyrdom at Nicomedia
with St. Justina: And thus it stood in your own Breviary too till the
Reformation of it by the Order of the Council of Trent. Vid in Brev. Eccles.
Sariso. ad 25. Sept.
But now it is beyond dispute evident that this is utterly false; for that in
those times there was no such Bishop of Antioch, both the accounts of the
Succession of that Sea given us both by ancient and modern Historians plainly
show; and Card. Baronius himself confesses it: Who is therefore forced for the
credit of the business contrary both to his own Authors, and to your Ancient
Brevaries, Ibid.
to degrade him from a Bishop to a Deacon. And for this He has no Authority. So
evident does it remain, that this whole matter is what the Card. calls, one
part of it at least, a Fable to be exploded by all Wise Men. And this is
another Proof either of your integrity or ability in Church History. But we
will hope the next may be better.

63. Reply.] And thus you go on with your Undertaking, You tell Me you will not
cite Dionysius the Areopagite, Reply ibid. page 19.
because it may be I will not allow Him to be the Author of the Book under his
Name: Nor Justin Martyr, because I shall be apt to say he does not speak plain
enough: Nor Iren^us, though He says plainly that the Virgin Mary was made an
Advocate for the Virgin Eve (I presume you mean that Eve prayed to the Virgin
Mary 4000 years before she was born, Crasset par. 2. Trait. 4. qu. 3. p. 99.
as Father Crasset says they built Temples to Her ere she came into the World)
because it may be I shall find out an Evasion for that too. Horace de Art. poet.
64. Answ.] Quid dignum tanto feret. hic promissor Hiatu?

You will not insist upon Dionysius, nor upon Justin Martyr, nor upon Irenaeus:
But what then will you insist upon? for you have said nothing at all to the
purpose yet.

After all this Gaping, we have two Testimonies only offered to us for the
practice of 300 years: One a passage of Origin already rejected as Spurious:
And the other out of a Tract of Methodius, if not certainly Spurious, yet
justly suspected by your own Critick's, being neither quoted by any of the
Ancients, nor mentioned by Photius; and of a Style more Luxuriant than that
Fathers other Writings are; and that speaks so clearly of the Mystery of the
Trinity, of the Incarnation, and Divinity of the Word, whom He calls, in a
Phrase not well known in his time, CONSUBSTANTIAL with the Father; of the
Trisagion never heard of for above 100 years after His death; Bibliotheque. T.
1. page 530.
of the Virginity of Mary after Her Conception; and of Orginal Sin; that your
late Critic Monsieur du Pin had certainly reason to place it among his
Spurious Works, however it be now cited with such assurance by you.

65. But to quit this Exception against the Book: The very Passage it self is
so manifest a piece of Oratory, that had you ever consulted it, in the Greek
set out by Combefis, you could not have doubted of it. He had begun his
Apostrophe two or three Pages before what you produce; and he ushered it in
with this express Introduction, Methodius Gl. Edit. Combefis. Paris cum S.
Amphilochio. 1644.
to prepare us for it, That he would conclude his Speech with an Address to the
City of the great King, and to all his Brethren and Fathers there, as if they
were now present with him; and accordingly he Apostrophe's the City Jerusalem,
p. 426. The whole Catholic Church, p. 428. A. All the People of God, ibid. B.
The Blessed Virgin, ibid. C. Holy Simeon, p. 429. B. And so concludes all,
joining with that Blessed Man in his Address to our Savior Christ. And tho his
Expressions may be very high, (as the whole Sermon is) yet we cannot but think
it very unreasonable to conclude the dogmatical Sense of the Church from the
Rhetorical flights of a single Man, were the Piece otherwise never so Genuine:
But indeed it is worthily rejected (for the reasons before mentioned) by the
Learned Critics both of your and our Communion.

66. This then is the sum of your Arguments to Establish this Practice in the
first three Centuries. Were it necessary, after what has been done by so many
better hands, to recount the Opinions of those Holy Fathers as to this Point, I
should certainly be able to make some better Proof of the Antiquity of our
praying to God only, than you have been able to do of your Addressing to the
Blessed Virgin and to the Saints.

67. In the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna concerning the death of Polycarp,
Anno 167. we find that the Jews had persuaded the Heathens, that if they
suffered the Christians to have the body of that Holy Martyr, they would leave
Christ, to Worship Polycarp: Apud Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. iv. c. 15. p. 109.
B. Ed. 2. Vales. Paris. 1678.
Not knowing (says that Letter) that it is not possible for us to leave Christ,
who has suffered for the Salvation of all those that are saved in the World;
nor to serve or religiously Adore any other. For as for Jesus Christ, We Adore
Him as being the Son of God. But as for the Martyrs we love them as the
Disciples and Imitators of the Lord. And that very justly considering their
insuperable Zeal which they bore to their King and Master, and God grant that
we may be both the Disciples of their Piety, and partakers of their Glory.

68. This is indeed the true Spirit of Christianity, and the exact account of
the Honor we now pay to the Saints. We Adore only our Savior Christ, as the
Son of God, Edit. Usser.
and therefore (as the Ancient Latin Translation of this Letter reads it) we
pray to no other. But for the Saints, we Love and Honor them; we recite and
magnify their noble Acts: We encourage our selves by their Examples to the
like performances, as those who earnestly desire to be partakers of their
Glory. This is all the Honor they are now capable of receiving; and this was
all that the Primitive Church in those best Ages, was ever known to have given
to them. Irenaeus lib. ii. c. 57. p. 218. Ed. Paris. 1675.


69. The Church of Christ (says Irenaeus) does nothing by the Invocation of
Angels, nor by any other perverse Curiosity; but by addressing her Prayers
purely, and only, and openly to the Lord who has made all things.

70. In Romans l. viii. c. 10. Tertull. de Orat. cap. 1. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.
Origin tell us, that to Invocate the Lord, and to Adore God, are the same
thing. So do Tertullian and Cyprian, using the words to Pray and to Adore
promiscuously in the same signification. In a word, this was the constant
Doctrine of those first Ages; and I will choose to deliver it in the words of
that Father whom you have especially alleged to the contrary: We Worship (says
Orig. contr. Cells. lib. viii. page 386. Ed. Cantabr anno. 1658.
Origin) the one only God, and his one only Son, and Word, and Similitude, with
our utmost Supplications and Honors; bringing our Prayers to the God of all
things, through his only begotten Son; -- Ibid. 395.
We must pray to God only, who is over all, and to his only begotten Son the
first born of every Creature, and beseech Him as our High Priest to carry our
Prayers which we make to Him, to his God and our God, to his Father, and the
Father of all those that live according to the Word of God. -- Ibid. page 400.
This is our Profession of Faith, which we constantly maintain as long as we
live, by the blessing of God, and of his only Son Jesus Christ, who was
manifested amongst us. As for the favor of others, (if that be to be looked
after) We know that thousands of thousands stand before him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand minister unto Him. These as our Brethren and Friends when
they see us imitating their Piety toward God, work together to the Salvation
of those that CALL UPON GOD, and PRAY as they OUGHT to do.

71. I will add but one Testimony more in a matter both so plain in its self,
Novatian de Trinitate. c. xiii. p. 17. A. Ibid. C. D. ad fin. Tertull. Paris
1675.
and so often insisted upon by others, and it is of Novatian proving the
Divinity of Christ, from the Churches praying to him, For none but God (says
he) knows the Secrets of the Heart as our Savior did -- If Christ be only a
Man, how is He every where present to those that Call upon him? Seeing this is
not the Nature of a Man, but of God, to be able to be present in every place.
If Christ be only Man, why is a Man called upon as a Mediator in Prayers,
seeing the calling upon a Man is judged of no value to give Salvation? If
Christ be only Man, why is any Hope put in Him, seeing that Hope is represented
as Accursed that is placed in Man?

72. Such was the Opinion of the Church in the first three Centuries: As for
that extraordinary discovery you are pleased next to make, Reply p. 19.. 14.
That all you do in your Liturgies is, to beg of God to hear the Prayers of his
Saints, and that for this you are able to furnish Me with many Examples out of
the ancient Liturgies and Fathers within the first 100 Years; it is so false an
Assertion, and so vain an Undertaking, that either you must be ignorant even to
astonishment both in the Doctrine of your own Church, and in the Acts of
Primitive Antiquity, or else most certainly you never believed, either what you
say or what you promise.

73. But tho you are not then able to answer my Challenge of producing any
Warrant from the Fathers of the first 300 years for this Doctrine and Practice;
it may be you are able at least to answer my Presumption from those times
against it: viz. That those Fathers did not believe that the Souls of the Just
went straight to Heaven, and therefore by your own Principles could not have
believed that they ought to be prayed to as there.

74. Reply] To this you say, Reply p. 15.. 12.
That you are not bound to defend every Argument that Bellarmine and Suarez
bring, especially when Others of your Writers think them unconclusive. In
short, you cannot deny the matter of Fact, tho you would be thought to suppose
rather than allow it to be true; And all you have to say is, That whatever they
believed besides, sure you are they did pray to the Saints. 75. Answ.] That the
Fathers about the latter end of the IV. Century began to Invocate the Saints we
do not deny; though it were rather in the way of a Rhetorical Compellation, than
of a formal Address. And if herein they contradicted any other of their
Principles, we know they were but Men, and as such might possibly in their
Religious heats do some things not entirely consonant to themselves in their
Cooler hours. Now then taking it for granted that those Fathers I heretofore
mentioned did teach, that the Saints departed do not yet enjoy the Beatifick
Vision, I say with those great Men of your Church, whom you here forsake, that
they could not reasonably pray to them. Since it is upon this Vision,
especially, that you found your Opinion of that particular knowledge you
suppose they Ordinarily and Constantly have of those things that are done here
below, and without which it would be Vain and Absurd to call upon them. And
therefore tho you have no regard to Bellarmine's or Suarez's Authority, yet for
the sake of Sense and Reason answer their Arguments; and tell us a little (upon
your own Principles) how those Fathers could think the Saints were fit to be
prayed to, if by denying them to be yet in Heaven, they by consequence must
have denied them to have any ordinary and certain knowledge of what is done
here upon Earth?

Reply, p. 16.
76. Reply.] But Sixtus Senensis (you say) after all concludes, That those
Fathers do not intend to exclude the Saints departed from the Beatifick Vision,
but only from that Perfect Happiness which we shall enjoy after the
Resurrection. And it would have been much more Christian-like in Me, to have
imitated his Example, than to argue as I do against their Praying to Saints
from this Principle. 77. Answ.] Had I been crampt, as he was, with a
Defininimus of my Church, I might possibly have been tempted to make Excuses
for those Fathers, as he did. But a Man need only look upon their Words, as
they are cited by him, to see how little such shuffling will avail, to reduce
their Doctrine to your Pretenses. And the truth is, this Sixtus Senensis was so
Honest as to confess, tho you were not so Honest as to take notice of it. For
having offered that Exposition of their Words which you mention, he immediately
subjoins, Thus (says he) have I interpreted the Expressions of S. Ambrose,
Austin, and Chrysostom. But if there be some Sayings of the Holy Authors which
CANNOT suffer such an Interpretation, yet we should at least remember that this
ERROR ought not to prejudice the Learning and Piety of such Illustrious
Fathers, seeing the Church in their time had not yet determined any thing
Certain to be believed in this Matter. Thus Sixtus Senensis; ingenuously
confessing how the Case stood. And this you cannot be presumed not to have seen
in him, seeing they are in the very same place with what you transcribed from
him. And what then must I think of such a One, as values not how he reports
things, so he may but by any means seem to say somewhat; tho he knows at the
same time, that he cannot expect long to triumph in his Unsincerity.

78. And now there is but one thing more remaining, to get over this unlucky
Period of the First 300 Years.

Reply, p. 18. sect. 14.
Reply.] For what if the few Writings of the Ancients of the First 300 Years
which remain, be silent in this Particular, does it follow that they approved
not the Practice? Answ.] No, Sir, this in not the Case: We do not pretend to a
bare Silence of those Holy Fathers, but we produce their express Authorities
against you: And that I hope is a good Argument that our Possession is at least
300 Years better than yours; and that you, not we, have been Innovators in this
Particular.

79. Reply. Ibid.
] Had this Custom of Praying to Saints been only introduced in the Fourth Age,
and been so dangerous as Moderns would persuade the World that it is, certainly
the succeeding General Councils would have taken notice of it, or some One of
the Fathers would have written against it. But, on the contrary, we find the
Fourth General Council allowing this Invocation in the Third Person, Let
Flavian the Martyr Pray for us. 80. Answ.] To your Instance from the Fourth
General Council, I reply, That besides that you your self confess that it is
nothing to the purpose, there being a mighty difference between wishing that
the Saints would pray for us, and praying to the Saints for their Aid and
Succor, you should have known that this Council was held in the middle of the
F^^th Age, and so is without the compass of what I am here to consider.

81. But I will go yet farther with you as to this Instance; and to that end I
must tell you, that your Authors have very much deceived you in their Accounts
of it. For first, It was not the Synod, but only a Party in that Synod, that
cried out, Let Flavian the Martyr pray for us. And secondly, Even they that did
cry out thus, were as far from designing to pray to Flavian at all, as you were
from understanding the meaning of their Exclamation. Labbe Conc. Tom. iv. Act.
xi. p. 697. B.
The Occasion of those Words in short was this: In the Eleventh and Twelfth
Actions of that Council there arose a difficult Debate concerning Bassianus and
Stephanus, whether of the two was lawful Bishop of Ephesus. Bassian had this
Plea, That he had held it quietly Four years; that Proclus and his Successors,
Bishops of Constantinople, had communicated with him as lawful Bishop of that
See; among whom was Flavianus but lately deceased. Upon this the Fathers that
were of Bassianus Party urged to the Synod, that Flavian by communicating with
him, had acknowledged him to be lawful Bishop of Ephesus: And thereupon press
the Holy Bishops to have this respect to Flavian a Catholic and Martyr, as to
acknowledge Bassianus to be the true Bishop, seeing he had Communicated with
him as such. And here comes in among other Expressions, this that is the
Subject of our present Debate. The Bishops and Clergy of Constantinople cry
out, in Honor of their late Martyr, This is the truth; this we all say: Let
the Memory of Flavian be eternal; let the Memory of the Orthodox Flavian be
eternal: Flavian lives after his Death; Let the Martyr pray (or entreat) for
us; Flavian judges with us. This was the Occasion of those words; and it
plainly shows, that all they meant by them was, That the Judgment of Flavian, a
Holy Bishop and Martyr, should prevail with the Synod to judge of Bassianus
side, with whom He had Communicated.

82. As for your Argument, That had this Custom of Praying to Saints been
introduced in the Fourth Age, it would certainly have been condemned in the
following: I reply, First, That this is at most but a mere Presumption, against
plain and undoubted Matter of Fact, and such as not only this, but too many
other Corruptions which have crept into the Church, without any notable
Opposition for some time made to them, abundantly overthrows. But, Secondly,
Tho your Argument therefore (if we should allow it) would be good for little;
yet it has another Misfortune too, which most of your Proofs labor under, that
it is as false as it is unconclusive. For, Good Sir, did you never, in your
Enquiry into these Matters, hear of such a Canon as the Thirty fifth of the
Council of Laodicea, Anno 364. expressly condemning the Worship of Angels? Did
you never meet with such an Order as that of the Third Council of Carthage in
S. Austin's time, Can. 23.
commanding all the Prayers that were made at the Altar to be directed to the
Father? At least I am confident you cannot be ignorant what Vigilantius did in
opposition to this Superstition; and whose Piety S. Hierome himself (tho his
hot Antagonist) could not but acknowledge. Nor was he alone in this Quarrel: S.
Jerome speaks of several Bishops that were of his Party, and joined with him in
his Endeavors against this growing Evil. Even S. Austin himself, as appears
from many Places of his Works, spoke not a little contrary to it, Vid. Epist.
ad Januar. Ep. 119.
and plainly insinuates he would have done more, had not this Practice already
so possessed Men's Minds, that it was not safe so to do.

83. But to quit all these, The public Declaration which Epiphanius made
against the Collyridians (a sort of Women in those days Superstitious in their
Honor of the Blessed Virgin) is alone enough to show that this practice did
not pass without Opposition in those times. It Is true (says he) the body of
Mary was holy, Epiphan. Haeres 79. page 1061. C.D.
but She was not therefore God. She was a Virgin, and highly honored but She
was not set forth to us to be worshipped; but She her self worshipped him who
was born of her flesh. And therefore the holy Gospel has herein armed us before
hand; Joh. 2.
our Lord himself saying, Woman, what have I to do with thee? Wherefore does he
say this? But only least some should think of the Blessed Virgin more highly
than they ought; He called her Woman, as it were foretelling those Schisms and
Heresies that should arise upon Her account. -- But neither is Elias to be
adored, tho he be yet alive: Nor is St. John to be adored; nor Tecla; Ib. 1062.
C.
nor any of the Saints -- If God will not permit us to worship Angels how much
less the daughter of Anna? -- Let Mary be held in Honor, Ib. 1064. D.
but let the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be worshipped. Ib. 1065. B.
Let no one worship Mary. For tho She were most fair, and Holy, and Honorable;
yet She is not therefore to be adored. In a word; Ib. 1066. D.
Let Mary be held in Honor, but let God be Adored.

84 To conclude this Point you tell us; Reply] That it seems most extravagant
to you that Protestants should demand of you to show them some testimonies of
the Fathers of the first Three Hundred years, Reply, page 18.
who lived under persecution, few of whose Writings remain, the greatest part
being lost and destroyed, and yet reject the Fathers of the IVth. Age who wrote
when the Church began first to be in a flourishing Condition. Can any one
imagine that the Church when in Grots and Caverns taught one thing, and when
She came into the light practiced another?

85. Answ. What mere Harangue is this? But we must be contented where better is
not to be had. And therefore I reply, 1st. As to your insinuation, which since
Cardinal Perron first invented it, has been the constant common place of the
little crowd of Controvertists that have followed after, viz. That the Fathers
of the first Three Hundred years lived under persecution, and therefore wrote
but little, and of that little the greatest part was lost too; tho I can easily
excuse this in you as a Sin of Ignorance, yet I must needs say of the Cardinal
and Others, that they have herein greatly injured those Holy Men; who were
neither so lazy nor fearful as they have represented them to have been.

86. For not to say any thing of the foundation of all our Religion, the Holy
Scriptures, which were written within this period; how large a Catalogue has
Eusebius alone preserved of the works of those Holy Fathers: And yet how many
of the Latin Church has he omitted: Look into his History, and there you will
find those great names, Clemens Romanus, Papias, Quadratus, Aristides,
Hegesippus, Justin Martyr, Dionysius of Corinth, Pinytus, Apollinarius, Melito,
Modestus, Irenaeus, Theophilus, Tatian, Bardesanes, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Rhodo, Miltiades, Apollonius, Serapion, Heraclitus, Moscarinus, Candidus,
Sextus, and Arabien; all to have been Writers of the Second Century:
Tertullian, Judas, Beryllus, Hippolytus, Caius, Africanus, Dionysius
Alexandrinus, Nepos, Cyprian, Origin; in the Third. And the Writings of which
last Author only were said to have amounted to Six Thousand Volumes; and which
tho St. Jerome retrenched to a third part, yet still he left Two Thousand to
him.

87. In what sort of Writings were these Holy Men defective? Some published
Apologies for our Religion; Others disputed against the Heathens, the Jews, the
Heretick's of those times. Some wrote of the Discipline of the Church; Others
moral Discourses, for the direction of Men's Lives and Manners. Their Histories,
their Accounts of the Holy Men, who suffered for the Faith; their Comments on
the holy Scripture, their Sermons are yet upon Record: And when such was their
diligence, why should it be insinuated as if living under persecution they
wrote but little; and therefore that it is unreasonable to appeal to them?

88. Nor is your next pretense any better: that their Writings are lost and
destroyed: For tho it be indeed in great measure true, that in respect of what
they wrote there is but a small part brought down to us (and we have some
reason to believe that the Opposition they made to your Corruptions has been in
some measure the Cause of it; See Def. of the Expos. p. 127. etc.
) yet have we still enough to show us what the Faith of those times was, and
how vastly you have declined from it. And when both the Writings of Holy
Scripture, and of those Fathers that do remain speak so plainly against you, we
have no great reason to believe that those which are lost were at all more
favorable to you.

89. But can any one Imagine, Reply. p. 18.
that the Church when in Grots and Caverns should teach one thing, and when it
came into the light practice another? I answer, yes; this is very easy to be
imagined. Affliction keeps men close to their duty, whereas Prosperity too
often corrupts the best manners. When it pleased God to convert the Empire to
Christianity, there were but too many instances of Heathen Customs,
accommodated to the principles of the Gospel; and this was one. Whether it were
that they could not so soon forget their ancient Rites; or that they thought it
a religious policy to extend the pale of the Church by suiting Christianity as
much to the Heathen Ceremonies as it was possible, and to dispose men thereby
the more readily to embrace it; Or whether finally, that simplicity of the
Gospel which suited well enough with a State of persecution, was now thought
too mean for an Established Church, the Religion of the Emperor, and they were
therefore willing to render it more pompous, and set it off with greater luster
in the Eyes of Men, tho in so doing they a little departed from the purity of
their lower and better State.

90. Let us add to this, the Opinion which then began to prevail among those
Holy Fathers, of the particular intercession of the Saints for us; and which
both the prayers that were made in those days at the memories of the Martyrs,
and the Miracles God was sometimes pleased to work there; not to say any thing
of the Visions and Apparitions that were sometimes thought to be seen there,
very much confirmed them in. Now this naturally prepared the way for the
Invocation which followed upon it. For now the Poets began instead of their
Muses, to call (more Christianly) upon the Saints and Martyrs to assist them.
The Orators, following the Genius of the Age, indulged themselves all the
liberty of their Eloquence, in Apostrophe's to the Saints at their Memories.
And as things seldom stop in their first beginnings, by degrees through the
Ignorance of some, and superstition of more; they fell into a formal
Invocation, about the beginning of the Vth. Century.

91. But here another accident fell out for the carrying on of this Service.
For about this time Nestorius began to teach that men ought not to call the
Blessed Virgin the Mother of God. Now this made some think his design was
secretly to revive the Heresy of Arrius or Sabellius under a new Cover; and
their Zeal for the Divinity of Christ made them in the Council of Ephesus, Anno
431 condemn his Opinion as Heretical; and in Opposition to Him they fell into
the contrary extreme, of an immoderate magnifying of Her; though (as I shall
presently show) they still continued within much better bounds than you do now:
It being almost Three Hundred years after this, before ever the Invocation of
Her or the Saints, was publicly Established in the Church. And this brings me
to my next Proposal; which was Secondly;

II. PERIOD. To consider what Grounds this Superstition had in the IVth.
Century.
92. And here, first, to what I said concerning the first beginnings of this
Invocation, viz. That the most part of your Allegations from this Age were
rather Rhetorical flights than formal prayers; you return very pleasantly.

Reply.] That the Rhetoric lies wholly at my door, who fly to so poor a shift.
That these passages are some of the duriores loci more difficult places which
some only nibbled at; Others could not digest; and I shift off under the notion
of Rhetorical Flights or Novelties. 93. Answ. One would think by this Droll you
had been lately reading the judgment of your University of Doway concerning
Bertram. Although (say they) we do not much value that Book, yet since he has been
often Printed and is read by many, and that in other ancient Catholick's we
tolerate many Errors, and extenuate, or excuse them; often times find out some
contrivance or other to deny them, or to set a convenient Gloss upon them when
they are Opposed to us in disputes, or in engaging with our Adversaries; we do
not see why we should not allow the same Equity to Bertram.

94. But what now is this shifting? Why I said that, which all the learned Men
in the World must allow to be true, viz. That the Fathers of the IVth. Age were
many of them great Orators, and made use of Rhetorical Addresses to the Saints.
And that from those conditions they sometimes expressly put into their Writings,
(...), etc. If thou have any sense, If thou have any concern for what is done
here below, and the like; we may reasonably conclude, that this was all they
meant, even where they do not express any such thing.

95. But did not those Fathers do somewhat more than this? Can all their
Expressions be fairly reduced to such Apostrophe's? To this I have already
said, that We do acknowledge that about the latter end of this Century, S.
Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen, amongst the Greeks, and their great
Imitator S. Ambrose among the Latins, did begin to Invocate the Saints. And had
you thought fit to consult that Excellent Treatise to which I referred you,
Discourse of Worship of Saints in Answer to Mr. de Meaux's Appeal to the IV.
Age.
or rather to take notice of what was said there, (for I am apt to believe you
did Consult it) I should not have been troubled with these impertinences here.
And therefore tho it were not difficult to find some considerable faults with
those few passages you have alleged from those Holy Men; (as when you say that
S. Basil exhorts those who are in Tribulatian to fly to the Saints, those who
are in joy to have recourse to them, whereas He only Historically relates what
they did do, He (says he) who is afflicted flies to them, He who is in joy runs
to them) yet I shall quit all to you, and without either shifting or nibling
leave you to make the most you can of them.

96. But then that you may not put any more such Crude notes upon your Reader
as you have done here, where you say, That Protestants grant Praying to Saints
to have been established in the IVth. Age: I will very briefly transcribe from
two Learned Men of our Church some considerable differences between what the
Fathers of this Century did, and what you do now; and of which if you will not
yet be persuaded to take any notice, I hope at least all indifferent persons
will see by them how impertinently you allege their Authority for your Excuse.

First, That in your Church, Ushers answer to a challenge. P. 409.
Prayer to Saints is looked upon as a part of Worship that is due to them;
insomuch that (as I have shown) Cardinal Bellarmine places it among one of
those Advantages that accrues to them upon their Canonization: But this those
Holy Fathers never believed; on the contrary they absolutely define prayer, as
a service proper to God only, and argued against the Arrians upon this very
Topic, that Christ must needs be God, because the Church prayed to him.

If you pretend that there are two sorts of Prayers, one proper to God, another
that is not: I reply, 1. That this is false, because (as we have seen) all
Prayer is a Religious Worship, and therefore proper to God only. Secondly, It
concludes nothing; because you offer the most proper sort of Prayer for Help
and Assistance to the Saints, that you can do to God himself.

P. 401.
Secondly, In your Church you allow mental Prayer as well as Vocal to be made to
the Saints: But in the Primitive, this was reserved as peculiar to Him who
searches the Heart, and alone knows the Secrets of all the Children of Men.

P. Ibid. etc.
Thirdly, In your Church it is resolved that the Saints are capable of hearing
and knowing your requests: In the Primitive this was never determined, and the
contrary seems to have been the most generally received.

P. 405.
Fourthly, In your Church formal Prayers are made to the Saints; But the
Addresses of these Holy Fathers were either wishes only, or requests of the
same nature with those which are in this kind usually made to the living; where
they who are requested, be evermore accounted in the Number of those that pray
for us, but none of those that are prayed unto by us.

P. 408.
Fifthly, In your Church the Saints are made not only joint Petitioners with us,
but Advocates too; and that to plead not only Christ's Merits, but their own
likewise. But against this these Fathers openly protested as an open derogation
to the high prerogative of our Saviors meritorious Intercession, and a manifest
encroachment upon his Great Office of Mediation.

P. 410.416.
Sixthly, In your Church it is thought a more proper way of access, and a surer
means of obtaining your requests to address by some Saint to God, than to go
immediately to the Throne of Grace, through our Savior Christ. But this those
Fathers earnestly opposed, exhorting all men to go directly to God by his Son
Jesus Christ.

Seventhly, In your Church the Saints are indifferently called upon all the
World over; Discourse in Answer to Mr. de Meaux's Appeal to the IVth. Age. p.
82. etc.
which does in effect attribute a Divine perfection, viz. That of Omnipresence
to them: But in the Primitive Church, those who sought the Intercession of the
Saints, limited their presence to some determinate places, as particularly to
their Memories, where they thought them within Hearing; and did not call upon
them indifferently every where.

Eighthly, This in your Church is an established practice; they who oppose it
are declared to do wickedly, and an Anathema is pronounced against them on that
account. But in the Primitive there was no Rule, or Order for it; it was the
effect of a private and voluntary Zeal, encouraged it may be by the Guides of
the Church, but no part of the established Service of it.

97. And this may suffice to show how vain your pretenses to the Antiquity even
of this Age are to warrant your Superstition; and upon what slender grounds you
affirm, after your Master the Bishop of Meaux, that this Invocation of Saints
was Established, nay that we grant it was Established in the Fourth Age. But to
convince you yet more with what little reason you either boast of this, or tax
us with receding from our old principle of being tried by the Fathers of the
First Four General Councils; upon this account I will now make you a more
Liberal offer; and that is to prove if you can any Authentic Establishment of
this Service in the Church. I do not say now in the Sixth Century; but in the
Seventh: Nay or even before the latter end of the Eighth: In short, I do affirm
that the first solemn Establishment of it was in the Second Council of Nice
787. and indeed that Synod which decreed the Worship of Images in opposition to
the Second Commandment, was the most proper to define the Religious Invocation
of Saints contrary to the First: And because there is something almost as bad
in the manner of the Establishment, as in the thing it self, I will close all
with a brief account of it.

98. About the end of the Sixth Century both the Worship of Images, and the
Invocation of Saints, having taken deep root in the minds of many Superstitious
persons; Controversies began to arise about them; and generally the same
persons were found to be either Friends or Enemies to both.

In the year 754 Constantine Copronymus called a Synod of 338 Bishops, to
Examine into these matters, Baron ad Ann. 754. N. 38. Spondane. Ibid. N. 6.
and both the Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images utterly condemned by
them.

99. Binnius in Syn. Constable p. 1663. T. VI. Council. Labbe.
Thirty years after this Council the Abettors of there Superstitions
prevailing, another Anti-Synod Was convened by the Authority of the Empress
Irene at Nice. In Action. VI.
this the Acts of the former Council of Constantinople were recited, and
instead of the Canons which they made in condemnation of this Worship; Defin.
XV. XVII.
two others were read in their Names, Establishing of it. How this came to pass
it is not known; but this the Annot. Epi-Phan. in def. XVII.
Nicene Fathers themselves acknowledge that the other Synod had established the
quite contrary: Nay they were such Enemies to this Invocation, that Binius
tells us, they exacted a solemn Binnius Annot. in Council. Constable. T. VI. p.
1663. Baron. l. c.
Oath of all their party, That they would never invocate the Saints, Apostles,
Martyrs, or the Blessed Virgin. And yet have these good Fathers transmitted
down to Posterity those two spurious Canons of the Council of Constantinople,
as approving that very Worship, which the Council in the true definitions of it
had utterly disclaimed.

100. As for the Synod of Nice its self; if the definitions there made were of
any force; that of Frankford, seven years after, has utterly taken it away;
Act. Council. Franc. in lib. Cant. praef. in l. 1.
in which it was so wholly abrogated, and annulled, as not to be placed in the
number of Synods, or be any otherwise esteemed of than that of Ariminum. And I
should be glad you would find me any other (but pretended) establishment of it,
before your Synod of Trent in the very last Age.

I have only now remaining in the last place to show;

SECT. IV. What our Reasons are against this Service?
101. You had asked me in your Vindication, What Authority have you to oppose
us? You say that [ to invocate Saints] is repugnant to Gods Word: Vindic. p. 30.
Show that word, if you cannot we are in possession, and the Antiquity and
Un-interruptedness of our Doctrine, besides the reasonableness and innocence of
it, confirms us in our belief.

102. To this I answered; That every text of Scripture that appropriated Divine
Worship to God alone was a demonstration against you: Def. page 9.
And that that one passage of St. Paul, Romans X. 14. How shall they call upon
bim in whom they have not believed? were not men willing to be contentious,
might End the Controversy. And for the Authority you speak of, that it was
rediculous to pretend prescription for that, which has not the least foundation
neither in Holy Writ nor in Primitive Christianity; of which not one instance
appears for the first Three Hundred years after Christ, and much to the
contrary.

103. Reply p. 21.. 16.
To this you now reply in your Margin with great Assurance; Protestants
destitute of Scripture Proofs against the Doctrine of Invocation of Saints: But
all you have to say in the Book is, That you do not give Divine Worship to the
Saints, nor call upon them in that strict sense in which they are Duties only
to be paid to God. That is to say, you play with Words, and make use of such
distinctions as if they were allowed, a man might evacuate any other of Gods
Commands, without a possibility of being confuted. And I desire you to tell me
what answer you would make an Impudent Woman that should give her Husbands Bed
to another, and being charged by you for breaking the Seventh Commandment,
should tell you that you were not to be so uncharitable as to judge of what she
did by the External Act, that the Law forbad only lying with another man, as
with her Husband; and that in this strict sense she was still Innocent, by
reserving that highest Degree of Conjugal affection to him only, the giving
whereof to another would make her guilty.

104. But since you are so desirous to know what our Reasons against this
Invocation are, I will now very freely lay them before you, if you will first
give me leave only to prepare the way for them, by stating truly the difference
between us in this matter, which you are wonderfully apt either to mistake or
to palliate.

105. You tell us in your Vindication, Vind. p. 30. Repl. p. 11. Expos. Sect.
IV. p. 5. Papist Rept. N. 2. p. 2.
That All you say, is that it is lawful to pray to the Saints; and so again in
your Reply. The difference (you say) between us is, Whether it be lawful for us
to beseech or entreat them to pray for us? Monsieur de Meaux in the same
moderate way tells us, that the Church teaches that it is profitable to pray to
the Saints: And the Representer (from the Council of Trent) says of a true
Papist, That his Church teaches him (and he believes) that it is Good and
profitable, to desire the intercession of the Saints, reigning with Christ in
Heaven. In your Discourses with those of our Communion, there is nothing more
Ordinary with you, than to make them believe, that you value not praying to the
Saints, nor Condemn any for not doing it. That if this be all they scruple in
your Religion, they shall be received freely by you, and never pray to a Saint
as long as they live. Nay I have heard of some who have gone so far in this
matter, as to venture their Religion upon it, that you do not necessarily
require the practice or profession of this service at all; nor pronounce any
Anathema against us for opposing of it.

106. But this is not ingenuous; nor as becomes the Disciples of Christ. For
tell me now I beseech you: If we unite our selves to your Church, will you not
oblige us to go to Mass with you? Or can you dare for our sakes to alter your
Service, and leave out all those things that relate to the Blessed Virgin and
to the Saints in it? Shall we be excused from having any thing to do with your
Litanies and Processions, your Vespers or your Salves? Or will you purge all
these too in Order to our Conversion? When we lie in our last Agonies, will you
be content to Anoint us in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and
leave the Angels, Archangels, Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, Virgins, and all the Saints out of the Commission? And when our
Souls are now expiring, shall we be sure you will not then at least trouble us
with that long Beadroll which your Office prescribes to be called upon in that
Ceremony? If you have indeed the Liberty to do this, why do ye not use it, and
remove so great a stumbling block as this out of our way? But if you cannot
dispense with these things for our common Conversion, how shall we believe that
you can do it to satisfy a private Proselyte?

107. The truth is Invocation of Saints in your Church is not esteemed so
indifferent a matter as you would have it thought to be. It is a Worship you
suppose due to them: And to which they acquire a right by their Canonization.
So Cardinal Bellarmine informs us: And therefore in your Profession of Faith
set forth by the order of Pope Pius IVth. you are obliged with a firm Faith to
believe and profess, that the Saints, who reign together with Christ, are to be
Venerated and Invoked. And tho the Alarm which the Council of Trent was in upon
the News of the Popes sickness, and the haste which thereupon they made to
conclude that Synod permitted them not to frame any Canons in this last, as
they had done in the other Sessions; yet the materials put together in the
Chapter shows us what Anathema's would have been thundered against us. Council.
Trid. Sess. 25.
For to take it only as it lies in that Session. There we find the Bishops and
Pastors of the Church commanded to teach ( what therefore I hope is undoubtedly
the Churches sense in this point) That the Saints who Reign together with
Christ offer up their Prayers to God for Men: That it is Good and Profitable in
a suppliant manner to call upon them: And that for the obtaining benefits of
God by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is our only Savior and Redeemer, we
should fly to their Prayers, Aid and Assistance. They declare that those who
deny (which you know we all do) that the Saints who enjoy Eternal Happiness in
Heaven are not to be invoked, or say that this Invocation is Idolatry (as we
generally believe it to be) or that it is contrary to the Word of God; or
derogatory to the Honor of the One Mediator between God and Man Christ Jesus;
or that it is foolish to supplicate those who Reign in Heaven in word or in
mind; do think WICKEDLY.

108. These are the words of your Council. If therefore you permit your
Prosolytes to profess what they do not believe; if you receive those as good
Catholics into your Church, whom nevertheless you know to remain still
infected with wicked Opinions, contrary to the Doctrine and Practice
established amongst you; If you allow them to assist at your prayers, without
any intention to join in them, nay in an Opinion that they could not pray with
you, without committing a grievous sin; Then go on to make folks believe, as
you do, that you oblige no body to pray to the Saints, and that they may be of
your Church, and yet still believe or do what they please in this matter. But
if otherwise this be all gross Hypocrisy, if there be nothing but cheat and
design in these pretenses; then may I humbly desire all sincere Members of our
Communion to beware of such Guides, as value not how they charge ours, or
palliate their own Religion, so they may but by any means draw unwary men into
their Net.

109. But the Council of Trent goes yet further: It does not only Establish
this Doctrine, but in express terms Anathematises those who oppose it: Council.
Trid. Ibid.
For in the close of that Chapter I but now mentioned, thus it decrees: If any
one shall teach or THINK contrary to these Decrees: let him be ANATHEMA. All
which your Epitomator Caranza thus delivers in short, Caranza Sum. Sess. XXV.
Conc. Trid. p. 482. Lovanii 1681.
'The Synod commands (all those who have the care of Souls) that they should
teach the Invocation of Saints; the Honor of Relics; and the Use of Images;
and that those who teach otherwise do think WICKEDLY. And if any one shall
teach or think contrary to these Decrees, Let him be ANATHEMA.

110. It remains therefore that your Church does teach and require of all its
Members both the profession and practice of such an Invocation, as I have
before explained: And of which I now undertake to show: 1. That it is repugnant
to Gods Holy word. 2. Contrary to Antiquity. 3. That is unreasonable in the
constitution; and 4. Unprofitable and unlawful in the Practice.


I. It is repugnant to Gods Holy Word.
111. And here, First I will not doubt once more to tell you that to pray to
Saints after the manner that it is now done in the Church of Rome, is contrary
to all those passages of Holy Scripture which attribute Religious Worship to
God only; such as Deuteronomy. VI. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve Him,
and swear by his Name; and again Chap. X. 12, 20. XIII. 4. etc. All which our
Savior Christ has taught us to interpret with such a restrictive term, as
excludes all others from a share in our Service. Mat. IV. 10. It is Written,
Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and Him ONLY shall thou serve. I have
already shown that all Prayer made to a person that is absent, with a
Confidence that he is able both to know our wants, and to hear our Prayers, and
to answer our desires, is in its own nature a Religious Worship. Now then from
these places of Holy Scripture, I thus argue: It is repugnant to Gods Word to
give any proper Acts of Religious Worship to any but God only; but all such
prayer as is made in your Church to the Saints departed, are proper Acts of
Religious Worship; and therefore it must be contrary to Gods Word to pray to
any but God only.

112. Nor am I here at all concerned in your distinctions of a Supreme and an
Inferior Religious Honor; seeing both you and I are agreed that all Honor
properly Religious (such as Prayer) is comprised under these prohibitions. If I
were, I would then tell you that the Devil here did not require of Christ such
a Supreme Worship, but on the contrary acknowledged himself to have a Superior,
from whom He derived his Power of disposing of all the Kingdoms of the Earth,
and the Glories of them. All he desired was to have some Religious Honor paid
to Him. And our Savior by alleging this Sentence of the Law against it,
Evidently shows that it is not only such a supreme Religious worship as some of
you pretend, but that all such Honor in general, is the peculiar service of
God alone. But this (if you stand to your own principles) you cannot object,
and for others, what I have now said may suffice to obviate their pretenses.

113. Secondly, What I have now concluded from this general Principle of Holy
Scripture, I will in the next place more particularly enforce from these other
passages, where the worship of Creatures is expressly prohibited. In the Xth. of
the Acts, when Cornelius fell down at St. Peter's feet, and would have
worshipped him, ' he took him up saying, I my self also am a man. Acts X. 25.
It is a poor shift here to say, that Cornelius would have worshipped St. Peter
with a supreme divine worship; he was not certainly so ignorant as to think,
that when the Angel bid him send to Joppa for Simon Peter, who lodged with
Simon a Tanner, he meant he should send for the great God that had made Heaven
and Earth. Nor is it of any more moment which others amongst you suggest, viz.
That Cornelius did well to adore him, but that St. Peter out of modesty refused
it. And the answer he gave, ' I my self also am a man, utterly overthrows all
such insinuations; being as much as if he had said, that no Man whatsoever was
to be worshipped.

114. But this will more evidently appear in another instance, viz. that of St.
John, Revel. XIX. 10. Rev. XIX. 10. XXII. 8.
who when in his Ecstacy he fell down and would have worshipped the Angel that
discoursed with him, the blessed Spirit utterly forbad him; See (says he) thou
do it not, for I am thy fellow servant: WORSHIP GOD. In which words are plainly
established these two Conclusions against this service; 1st. That Angels (and
so likewise the Saints) being our fellow Servants are not to be worshipped:
2dly, That God only is to be adored.

115. But St. Paul is yet more plain: He exhorts the Colossians in general, and
in them us: Colos. II. 18. Colos. II. 18.
Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping
of Angels. It is answered by some among you, that this was said in Opposition
to the Heresy of Simon Magus who would have Sacrifice offered to the Angels:
Or at least of some Others, who thought that though Christ had abolished the Law,
yet was it still to be observed out of respect to the Angels by whom it had
been delivered. But besides that I do not find any such thing charged by any of
the Ancients upon Simon Magus, as is pretended; had S. Paul designed only to
forbid one particular Act of Religious Worship being paid to them, would he in
General have said that they were not to be Worshipped? Or had he intended to
signify the abolishing of the Law, would he not have said so here, as well as
in his other Epistles; and not have given such an obscure insinuation of it, as
when he meant to forewarn them against observing the Law, to bid them have a
care of worshipping Angels. But the truth is the meaning of the Text is too
plain to be thus eluded. And I shall give it to you in the words of an ancient
Father who lived in those very times in which you yet pretend such a service
was established: Theoderet in loc.
Those who maintained an Observance of the Law together with the Gospel, taught
also that Angels were to be worshipped; saying that the Law was given by them.
This Custom remained a long time in Phrygia and Pisidia. Upon which account the
Synod of Laodicea in Phrygia, forbad them by a Law to PRAY TO ANGELS. But.

116. Thirdly, And to come more immediately to the Worship of Invocation. Romans
X. 14.
The same Apostle in that Question, Romans X. 14. How shall they call upon Him in
whom they have not believed? furnishes us with another maxim of Holy Scripture
against all such Prayers; viz. That no one is to be invoked in our religious
addresses, but He only in whom we believe. But now Reason, Scripture, the
Common Creeds of all Christians show that we are to believe ONLY in God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and therefore upon Him ONLY must we Call. As for
your distinction that this indeed in one sense is very true, but then in
another and secondary sense Others besides God may be both believed in, Reply.
p. 21.
and called upon; if you mean in a civil respect, it is indeed very true, but
nothing to your purpose, seeing in this sense we can no more believe in than we
can call upon such persons as are absent from us, and know nothing at all of
us, which is the Case of the Saints departed. But for believing in a religious
sense, as it is properly an Act of Divine Faith, and the foundation of that
Assurance with which we call upon God by our Savior Jesus Christ; this admits
of no distinction, nor may it by any means, or in any measure be applied,
without Sin, to any other than God alone.

117. I will add but one principle more of Holy Scripture against this Service,
and so close this first Point. Romans XIV. 23. Romans XIV. 23.
That whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. But now those Prayers which have no
foundation in Holy Scripture cannot be of Faith; for (says the same Apostle
Romans X. 17.) Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the word of God; And
therefore such Prayers must be Sin. If God has any where revealed it to you,
that you may lawfully give such a religious Worship to the Saints, show this,
and our dispute is ended. But if you cannot do this, nor by consequence cannot
pray to them with any well grounded persuasion of Conscience, that this is what
God allows, and what the Saints are capable of receiving, I do not see how it
can be avoided but that to you it must be sin so to do. S. Basil. Reg. Miral.
78. cap. 22.
(...). As an ancient Father argues from this very principle in the like manner.

118. For the Other part of this Service, the intercession of the Saints for
us; I might to this Oppose all those passages of the New Testament, where
Christ is set forth to us as our only Mediator. But I shall content my self
with one single text, 1 Timothy II. 5, 6. There is one God, 1 Timothy II. 5.6.
and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
Ransom for all. Now if there be but one Mediator, then Saints and Angels are
not Mediators as you pretend. If the foundation of Christ's Mediatorship be
this, That he gave himself a Ransom for all; then seeing the Saints have not
done this, it must follow that neither can they be our Mediators. And this cuts
off your new distinction of a Mediator of Intercession, and a Mediator of
Redemption; which besides that it is the issue of your own Brains, and was
invented only to support a tottering Cause, is here utterly destroyed; seeing
the Foundation of Christ's Mediating now in Heaven, and appearing in the
presence of God for us, is by virtue of His being our Mediator of Redemption
upon Earth; and he therefore is become our intercessor there, because He shed
his blood for our Expiation here. This is that great Argument upon which the
Author to the Hebrews so much insists, Chap. IX. X. And the Analogy of the High
Priest under the Law, making first the Expiatory Sacrifice for the people, and
then Entering into the Holiest to appear before God for them, most evidently
confirms it to us. And this may suffice for the 1st. Point, That this Service
is contrary to the principles of Holy Scripture.

II. It is Contrary to Antiquity.
119. And here I am fallen into a vast Ocean; and should never have ended,
should I go about particularly to show how vain your pretenses are to
possession for this superstition. It shall suffice me at present only to point
out to you a few of those Remarks which others have more largely pursued; and
which do abundantly declare how little conformable the best and highest
Antiquity has been to what you now practice.

120. I have already given some short account of the first three Centuries: And
how little able you are to lay any claim to the Authority of them. You have
there seen what the Opinion was of those Holy Fathers, touching the State of
the Saints departed: How they thought that they do not yet enjoy the Beatifick
Vision, and by consequence were not in a condition to be called upon by the
Church on Earth. I have shown you the Fathers arguing against the Arrians for
the Divinity of Christ from the Churches praying to Him; and which evidently
proves that they thought none but God was capable of such a service. I have
offered you the definition which those Holy Men gave of Prayer; viz. That it
was an Address to God, a Conversing with God, and the like; and in all which
they still restrained it to Him as His own peculiar prerogative. There we find
no mention of any calling upon the Blessed Virgin or the Saints. No distinction
of supreme and inferior religious Worship; of Mediators of Redemption and
Intercession: in short none of those Evasions with which all your discourses on
this Point are now filled; and without which indeed, according to your
principles, it is impossible to explain it.

121. But I will now add yet more. It was a general custom in the third and
following Ages (concerning which we are particularly to enquire) to pray for
the Saints departed, for Martyrs and Confessors, Discourse of Purgatory and
Prayers for the dead.
nay for the Blessed Virgin her self, as has been elsewhere fully proved, and I
suppose you will not have the confidence to deny it. Now let me appeal to any
reasonable man to say; could the Church in those times have prayed in a
suppliant manner to the Saints, as Reigning with God, nay and Gods themselves
by participation, to aid, and assist them, when on the contrary they thought
them in such a State as to need prayers to God for them? Is it to be believed,
that they Addressed to those as Mediators and Intercessors with God, for whom
they themselves interceded to God? It is a memorable remark that has been made
to confirm the force of this Argument, that since the prevalency of this
praying to Saints in the Church of Rome, your public rituals have had a
notable change. Those very Saints which in your ancient Missals you prayed for,
being now a la Mode prayed to. Thus upon IV. Kalends of July in the
Sacramentary of Pope Gregory I. Sacrament. Greg. p. 112.
above 600 years after Christ we find this Prayer made in behalf of S. Leo, one
of your Popes.

Grant O Lord that this Oblation may be profitable to the Soul of thy Servant
Leo.

But in the present Roman Missal, the Collect is changed, Missale Romans page 6
12.
and the Address made by the Intercession of the Saint now, that was formerly
made by way of Intercession for Him.

Grant to us, O Lord, that by the Intercession of Blessed Leo, this Offering
may be profitable to US.

And of this change, Decret lib. 3. tit. 41. p. 1373, 1373.
Pope Innocent the 3d. gives this honest account: Viz. That the Authority of
Holy Scripture says, that he 'injures a Martyr, that prays for a Martyr;
(wherein yet his Infallibility mislead him, it being S. Austin and not the
Scripture that said so) ' and they do not want our Prayers, but we theirs.
Which the Gloss thus more fully expresses; It was changed (viz. this prayer for
Pope Leo) because anciently they prayed FOR Him, but now TO Him. And from
whence therefore we may warrantably infer, that in those first Ages praying TO
Saints was not established, seeing it was then the general Custom to pray FOR
them.

112. The truth is, the whole face of the Ancient Church seems clearly opposite
to the present practice: Some doubted whether the holy Saints departed, do at
all concern themselves for us, or conduce any thing to our Salvation. So
Origin. And these to be sure never prayed to them. Others made open opposition
to such service. So the Council of Laodicea; S. Epiphanius, Vigilantius, and
others before mentioned. Now you Canonize Saints, and esteem it necessary so to
do, to prevent men's praying to those in Heaven, who are it may be at this time
tormenting in Hell. But in those first Ages we find none of these Apotheoses;
De beatit. SS. lib. 1. C. 8.
and Bellarmine himself could not find out any instance of any Saint that was
Canonized before the VIIIth. Century. If we go into your Churches, we find them
filled with Altars and Chapels, Images and Relics of the Saints: Candles are
lighted up before them; Incense is burned to their Honor: But in those
Primitive Ages, not the least shadow is to be met with of any such
Superstitions. Your Books of Devotion are now filled with little else than
advises how to pray to the Blessed Virgin; to list your selves into her
service; to vow your selves to her Worship; her Psalter, and Rosary, and
Salutation is in every part of your performances. Even the Catechism of the
Council of Trent it self, the most Cautious Book that has been set forth for
some Ages in your Church, having taught you first how to pray to God, fails not
to instruct you that you must in the next place have recourse to the Saints,
and make Prayers to them.

How comes it to pass, if this were the primitive practice too, that none of
those Holy Fathers, in any of their practical discourses have ever treated of
these things? Nay on the contrary, they every where thunder in our Ears, that
Protestant, Heretical Maxim, that we must pray to GOD ONLY, and that we ought
not to address our selves to any other.

123. In all your Sermons, you call upon the Blessed Virgin for assistance. In
the Ends of your Books, her Name seldom fails of standing in the same return of
praise in which God and our Savior are Glorified. Your public service, and
private prayers, are all overrun with this superstition. But is there any
thing of this in the Primitive Rituals? Look I beseech you into the account
that has been given us of the public service of the Ancient Church by Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, nay by the Clementine Constitutions themselves: Consult the
Relation which Pliny made to the Emperor Trajan of their Manners. Try those
famous Liturgies of the Church within the first 100 years, Reply. p. 19.
which no body has the happiness to be acquainted with but your self; see if
you can pick us up but one instance, but some shadow of an instance to flourish
with on this occasion.

124. What are the Lives of your Saints, but continued Histories of their
Devotion to the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints, and the favors which upon that
account they received from them? But in the ancient Compilers of such kind of
Discourses, we find only dry accounts of their Piety toward God; of their Zeal
and Constancy in the Faith; of their patience in suffering any thing, rather
than submit to such superstitious practices as these, which the Heathens indeed
would have drawn them to, but which the Church utterly abhorred. But for their
knight errantry in Honor of the Blessed Virgin; for watching whole Nights
before her Images, or in her Chapels; for turning Vagabonds in order to the
visiting her Chamber at Loretto; or fetching a Feather from Compostella; of
this New Method of Piety there are not the least traces.

125. I might run out these remarks into almost infinite Examples, were they
not things as well known, as your contrary superstition is notorious. But I
shall reserve these, and some other Observations of the like kind, till you
think fit to call me to account for them. In the mean time I conclude from this
short specimen I have here given, that certainly the face of the Church must be
very much changed as to these things; Or otherwise that so great a difference
could not possibly be found in the Lives, the Writings, the Actions, the
Customs, the Opinions, the Expressions, Prayers, Practices, of those holy
Fathers, from what we see and lament in your Church at this day. I go on
thirdly to show;

III. The Unreasonableness of this Service.
126. And for that I shall offer only this one plain Argument; If the Saints
cannot ordinarily hear your prayers, nor are able to attend distinctly to those
Addresses that are made to them: If those whom you Canonize are not indeed such
as you suppose, but many at this day tormented in Hell, upon whom you call for
assistance in Heaven: If some of those to whom you pray never had any being,
but either in the Heralds Office, or in the fruitful Womb of a Legendaries
Brain: Then it cannot be doubted but that to pray to the Saints must be the
most unreasonable Devotion in the World; you speak to the Wind, and call upon
them to as little purpose as if you should here in England make an Address to a
Man in China or Tartary; and you might as well have continued the Deities, as
you do the practice of the ancient Heathens in this service: It being
altogether as wise a Devotion to pray to a Jupiter or an Apollo that never
lived in the World, as to a St. George or a St. Christopher that never had any
more being in it than they. And yet were we now to inquire into these
Circumstances, without a full knowledge of which this Invocation can never be a
reasonable service, what uncertain accounts should we receive from you. For,

In his suppressed Edition. Expos. of Mr. de Meaux. Sect. IV. p. 7.
127. First. As to the main foundation of all Whether the Saints hear your
prayers? In what doubt is your Bishop of Meaux still in his Exposition, and you
know he was once in a great deall more? All he has to say is that you teach
That your prayers to the Saints are very profitable, Whether it be that they
know them by the Ministry and Communication of the Angels; or whether it be
that God himself makes known to them our desires by a particular Revelation; or
whether it be that he discovers the secret to them in his Divine Essence in
which all truth is Comprised. If we enquire of your more Ancient Authors, we
shall find all full of Uncertainty. Lombard sent. lib. IV. did. 45. Scotus
ibid. Qu. 4. Gabr. Biel. in Can. Miss. l. 31.
Lombard thought it was not incredible to suppose that the Saints might know
the prayers that were addressed to them. Scotus went a little farther, and
judged it to be probable that God revealed these things to them: And so did
Gabriel Biel. Those who pretend to more certainty yet are able to give but very
little reason why; Bellarm. de Eccles. Triumph. l. 1. cap. 20.
unless you will take this for a reason, that their Church generally belives
so, and that otherwise it would be vain and absurd to pray to them. In short,
how the Saints hear your prayers you do not pretend to know; and I desire you
to give Me but one rational Argument to convince me that (by whatever means it
is) they do ordinarily, and constantly, and certainly, and particularly,
understand the Addresses that you make to them. For to deal freely with you, I
never yet met with any thing that but inclined me to believe this, but much to
the contrary.

128. Secondly, Concerning the Canonization of your Saints, may I beg leave to
ask you: Are you sure that all those whom your Church has placed in Heaven are
truly there? if you are not, I am sure you do very unreasonably to pray to
them. Now this I the rather desire to be satisfied in because here again I find
your Authors very much unresolved what to say.

Bellarm. l. 1. de. Beat. SS. e. 8. 9. Vasquez. l 1. de Ador. disp. V. c. 3.
First, It is but the common Opinion, (no matter of Faith) that the power of
Canonizing Saints belongs to the Pope; and therefore it cannot be without all
doubt whether those whom he Canonizes are infallibly Saints or no.

Secondly, The Jesuit Vasquez tells us, there are Catholics (He means those of
your Communion) who do not think it without doubt that all whom your Church has
Canonized are indeed Saints: Cajetane. libr. de Indulg c. 8. Canus loc. Theol.
lib. 5. c. 5. Gerson de 4. dom. cons. 2. etc. de Exam. doctr. cons. 1. See
Bishop Taylours Polem. disc. page 333.
And he mentions no less a man than Cardinal Cajetane for one. And that
Cardinal in the book to which Vasquez refers, alleges the great Doctor of
your Schools S. Thomas for another. To these I will add Melchior Canus,
Antoninus, and Gerson, who at most esteem it but piously credible, not
absolutely certain. But Augustinus Triumphus goes farther; and doubts not
freely to declare that all who are Canonized by the Pope cannot be in Heaven.
And Prateolus tells us that Herman the Author of the Heresy of the Fratricelli
was for twenty years together after his death honored as a Saint, and then his
body was taken up and burnt for a Heretic. And now if you are not yet sensible
of the danger you run by this means, whilst you not only call upon a damned
soul for aid and assistance, but (as in some of your prayers you do) pray unto
God so to give you Grace on Earth as he has glorified them in Heaven; De SS.
beat. l. 1. c. 9. Sect. secundo.
I shall leave it to your own Cardinal Bellarmine to inform you of it.

Thirdly, It is confessed by those of your own Church that among your Canonized
Saints, some there have been whose Lives were not to be commended: Others whose
Opinions have been condemned as Heretical; and for my part, when I consider the
Character of some to whom you pray, such as Thomas a Becket, Dominick, etc. I
cannot but say, that if these be the men whom you place in Heaven, what the
poor Indians did of the Spaniards, that then the other is certainly the more
desirable portion. For, and I am persuaded that were but S. Martin again alive
to summon their Souls before him, as he once did that of a supposed Saint in
his time, Vid Bellar. de beat. SS. l. 1. cap. 7.
they would make the same Confession that wretched Spirit is reported to have
done, and prove much more worthy your Compassion than your Adoration. Now that
which the more increases this danger is

Fourthly, The almost infinite Number of Saints that have been received amongst
you, and whose Consecration depending wholly on matter of Fact, in which you do
not pretend the Pope to be Infallible, it can hardly be supposed but that he
must have very often proved mistaken. For to keep only to your own Order; a
late Author of yours tells us, Calendarium Benedictinum ad 26. Dec.
that your Domestic Saints alone did long since by computation amount to
forty four thousand. And I find another Dr. Jackson T. 1. p. 937.
list increasing them to fifty thousand. Now to consider all the Arts and
Intrigues that are used to procure these Canonizations; by what Popes many of
them have been placed in Heaven; what Characters several among them have in
your own Histories of their Lives; these and many other Reflections would I
confess prompt me, were I otherwise as well satisfied of the Innocence of this
Worship, as I am fully convinced of the unlawfulness of it, yet to pray to the
greatest part of your Saints, as he once did to Saint Cutbert; Si Sanctus sis,
Ora pro me: IF THOU ART A SAINT, pray for me.

129. It is I know, the last refuge of many, who consider this uncertainty, to
say, That at least your good intention shall render these Prayers acceptable to
God; Vossius These. Theol. p. 106.
for what (says the Learned Erasmus) if the Saints do not perceive our desires,
yet Christ does know them, and will for them give us what we ask? But yet still
this will not make it a reasonable Service; nor can you with a firm Faith call
upon those in Heaven, of whom you have at most, but a Pious Credulity that they
are there: And tho some of your Authors do believe, that your own Piety shall
excuse you, yet others utterly deny it, and doubt not to say, that you may as
well excuse the Heathens themselves, Catherinus Annot. in Cajet. dogm. de
Canoniz. page 135.
who in worshipping the parts of the World, supposed (according to Varro's
Divinity) that they Worshipped the Divine Nature, that was diffused through it.
But

130. Thirdly, That which is the worst of all, is, that you have not only no
certainty of the Happiness of those Saints whom you Canonize, but you pray to
some who (for ought appears) never had any Being in the World.

Now among these, I shall not doubt in the first place, to account our own
Country Saint and Champion St. George, and of whom our English Legends still
recount so many Miracles; though Cardinal Baronius himself has confessed that
they are for the most part absolutely false. Baron in Martyr. R. Apr. 23.
In the Roman Breviary since the Reformation of it by Pope Pius V. there is no
account at all of his Life; and your own Ribadeneira. ad 23. April.
Authors tells us the reason is, because there is no certain truth of any of
those things that are extant concerning him. And indeed, if the Ancient
Histories of this Saint were justly censured by Pope Gelasius, as Apocryphal,
we have no great reason to believe, that the latter Legends deserve any better
reception. As for the famous Story which still continues in those equally Books
of the Ignorant, The English Lives of the Saints, and the Sign Posts; where we
see this great Champion, like another Perseus, mounted to deliver the fair
Andromeda from the Dragons Mouth; Baronius charges Jacobus a Voragine with the
pure Invention of it, and almost every Body now, but our English Compiler, is
grown ashamed of it. In short, if there be any Foundation at all in Antiquity
for this Story, it is but little for the satisfaction of those who Worship this
Saint. Your own Authors confess, that this George lived about the time of
Dioclesian, that he was by Birth a Cappadocian; that he had Encounters with
Athanasius a Magician: Now all this seems to persuade us, that our S. George
was no other, than George the Arrian Bishop, who was also a Cappadocian by
Birth, who had Encounters with S. Athanasius, whom the Arrians called a
Magician; and who was Deified by those Heretics, after his violent Death in
the time of Julian. And in Memory of which perhaps it was, that they first
mounted him upon a Camel, (being led through the Streets upon one) and then for
greater decency changed it into a Horse; to which Jacobus a Voragine added the
Dragon and the Lady; with the Warlike Equipage of Cask and Lance: And thus is
our Tutelary Saint, brought under suspicion of being, if any thing at all, a
wicked Heretic; that persecuted one of the greatest Bishops of his time, for
asserting the Divinity of the Son of God; and yet is this Man still prayed to
in your Church; and I have now by me an Ancient Ritual in which he is seen
Armed at all points, his Spear in the Dragons Mouth, the Lady by him on her
Knees: and these Prayers addressed to him.

Saint GEORGE, famous Martyr; Praise and Glory become thee: By whom the
princely Lady being grieved by a wicked Dragon, was preserved.

Almighty and Everlasting God, who mercifully hear the prayers of those who
call upon thee; we humbly beseech thy Majesty, that as for the honor of thy
Blessed and Glorious Martyr S. George thou causedst the Dragon to be overcome
by a Maid, so by his Intercession thou would vouchsafe to defend us against
all our Enemies visible and invisible, that they may not be able to hurt us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now what is this but to mock God in his solemn service? To pray to him through
the Intercession of a man that either never lived in the World, or it may be
was one of his most hated Enemies; and deified by a crew of wretched Heretics,
for his fury in opposing the Eternal Generation of the Savior of us all.

131. And what I have thus chosen more particularly to insist upon in this
Example, I might show in several others not a whit less fabulous. Our Savior
in S. Luke gives a parabolical account of the different States of men in the
other World, under the names of Dives and Lazarus. As for the former there was
no great danger of making him a Saint. But for Lazarus he is transubstantiated
into a real man. Temples are built among you to his Honor: Baron. Ann. ad Ann.
3.. 44.
Anniversary solemnites are Consecrated to his memory, and because he was
represented in Scripture as full of sores, he is now made the Patron of the
Lepers in Heaven. From the Greek word signifying a Spear, you have first found
out a name for the Centurion that ran our Blessed Lord into the Side; and
having metamorphosed the Spear into a Man, it was no hard matter to make the
Man a Saint: Baron. Not. in Mart. XV. March.
And now upon the 15th. of March, who so much Honored, as S. Longinus. Nay
what is yet more pleasant, Baronius assures us that his Venerable Body is kept
in the Church of St. Austin at Rome.

132. S. Christopher is another of your Saints that never lived. He is
pretended to have suffered under Dagnus King of Lycia, who also never was in
the World; and being of a Giantly stature to have dwelt by a River side where
there was no Bridge, and there he made it his business in Charity to carry over
all that passed that way: Which our Savior so much approved as to suffer him
once upon a time to carry himself over upon his shoulders. Not. ad Martyrol.
Jul. 25.
Now all this Cardinal Baronius confesses to be a mere Legend; but our thorough
paced English-Irish-Collector, tho he confesses he never saw any approved
Author that said it, yet for the Pictures sake which are so common amongst you,
declares generously that he was resolved to believe it. And the ancient Ritual
I before mentioned, prays to our Savior that in consideration of his riding
over the River upon S. Christophers back, he would deliver you from all dangers.

133. I should never have done should I insist on this manner upon all the
other Imaginary Saints whom you Worship. Such were our own Country-woman again,
S. Ursula and her 11000 Virgins; who is pretended to have been Daughter to
Dionet King of Cornwall, in the time of Marcian, when there was no such King in
England; and to have been Martyred at Cologn, whither she went by Ship, being
the first and last that ever sailed thither; and yet this Lady makes no mean
Figure in your Church. She is Patroness under God and the Blessed Virgin, of a
whole Religious Society; and with great Devotion prayed to, December 21. I
might to this Visionary Saintess, add others of the same Sex; S. Catharine, S.
Margaret, etc. But I shall content my self with one Memorable Instance, not so
commonly known, which may suffice to show with what uncertainty you pray to
many in these Devotions. The account is given by one of your own Communion, and
who himself discovered the mistake.

134. About eight Miles from Evora a City of Portugal, Ressendii Epist. ad
Barthol. Kebedium. page 168.
there is a place which they call the Cave of the Martyrs; where they pretend
were slain a great number of Christians with their Bishop and his two Sisters;
to one of which, called Columba, there was a Chapel erected, and in the place
where the other was slain, there issued out a Spring of sweet Water, called to
this day, Holy-well, and very good for curing a weak sight. The Sepulcher of
the Bishop himself is in a Church of the Blessed Virgins, empty, and open. Over
it is a Table of Stone supported by four Pillars, so that a Man might go under
it. Hither came all those that had Pains in their Loins, and imploring the aid
of this Martyr, they went away certainly Cured. There was also the Picture of
this Bishop: and upon this Stone Table they Sacrificed the Mass, in Honor to
him, calling him by his proper Name VIARIUS.

135. This was the ancient Tradition, and Worship. When Ressendius, who relates
this Story, came hither, in order to the publishing the Life of this Saint,
among others he was then Writing; he desired the Priest who had given him this
account of their Martyr, to show him if there were any ancient Records, or
Inscriptions, that confirmed it. Upon this he brought him to the Altar before
mentioned, and there he found this Inscription.

S. Q. JVL. CLARO. C. V. IIII. VIRO VIARVM CVRANDARVM ANN. XXI. Q. JV L.
NEPOTIANO. C. I. III. VIRO. VIARVM CVRANDARVM. ANN. XX. CALP. SABINA. FILIIS.



The Priest pointing with his Finger to these Words VIARUM CVRANDARUM, See
(says he) the proper Name of the Martyr VIARIUS: And for CURANDARUM, it is as
much as to say Cura Cutarum, i. e. a Bishop. As for the other Names (continued
he) I suppose they may be the proper Names of the other Martyrs that suffered
with him.

136. Ressendius held his Countenance as well as ever he could, but went
immediately away to Cardinal Alphonsus, who was at that time Bishop of Evora,
and told him all that had passed, and how a couple of Heathens, Overseers of
the Highways, had been Worshipped there for Christians, and Martyrs. The
Cardinal commanded the Tomb to be stopped up, to the great discontent of the
people, who had been wont to receive mighty relief by their Addresses to this
Viarius; and cursed the Learning and Curiosity of Ressendius, that had deprived
them of so great and useful a Saint.

Cassander Consult. p. 971.
137. I shall make no other Application of this Story, than what I find in the
complaint of another Learned man of your Church, as to this very matter. There
is also (says he) another Error, not uncommon; that neglecting, in a manner,
the ancient and known Saints, the common People Worship more ardently, and
diligently, the new and unknown; of whose Holiness we have but little
assurance, and some of which are known to us only by Revelation; insomuch that
of several of them it is justly doubted, Whether EVER THERE WERE ANY SUCH
PERSONS IN THE WORLD.

138. From all these Considerations, I now conclude against the reasonableness
of this Invocation. 1. No Man can reasonably pray in Faith to such Persons, as
he can never be sure are able either to hear his Prayers, or to answer his
desires: But you can never be sure that your Saints are able to do either of
these; and therefore you cannot reasonably pray with any good assurance to
them. 2. It is unreasonable to pray to those as Saints, who, it may be, are not
in Heaven, nor ever shall be there: But this is very probably the Case of many
of your Saints, and you cannot be sure it is otherwise, when you address to
them; and therefore it is unreasonable in you to pray to them. 3. To pray to
those who never were in the World, is the most unreasonable thing that can be
imagined; but in your Prayers to many of your Saints, you address to those that
never were in the World; and therefore upon this, and upon all the foregoing
Accounts, I conclude it very unreasonable to pray to the Saints at all.

There is yet one thing more remaining to finish this whole Subject of
Invocation of Saints, viz.

IV. That it is Unprofitable, and Impious in the Practice.
First, That it is Unprofitable.

139. And if the former consideration stand good; this will necessarily follow
from it. For if either those whom you pray to are mere figments of your own
brain, that have neither Truth nor Existence; or if tho they do Exist, yet they
are not Saints as you suppose; or tho they should be Saints too, yet have no
means ordinarily and particularly to hear your prayers, nor can attend to those
numberless addresses that are at the same time from all the parts of the World
put up to them; it must then be a most unprofitable, as well as a most
senseless practice to pray to them; and what our Savior once objected to the
Samaritans, will be found no less true of you, that ye worship ye know not
what, nor why.

140. But let us allow that you invoke none but what have lived, and are
sanctified: Let us also grant that which yet the Holy Fathers so much doubted
of, that the Saints do already enjoy the Beatifick Vision; and therefore
(according to your Divinity) are capable of understanding your prayers, by
whatsoever way it be that they do so: I dare yet ask of you, what profit is
there in this service? For tell me now, I beseech you, O ye Worshippers of deed
men? 1 John II. 1.
Have we not an Advocate in Heaven, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the sole
and full propitiation of our sins? Jo. XIV. 13. Ib. VI. 6.
Has he not promised that whatsoever we ask the Father in HIS NAME, we shall
receive it? Has he not told us that he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life? And
that no one can come to the Father but by him? Is it not he that has set us an
Example how we ought to pray; when ye pray say, Our Father which art in Heaven:
Show us if you can any precept, or encouragement, or Example, for going to any
other. Is it that our Savior Christ has not compassion enough for us, that you
go to others as more merciful? Thus some of you I know have said: But on the
contrary the Scripture tells us 'That we have not a High Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, Heb. IV. 15, 16.
but was in all points tempted like as we are: And from thence presently infers
'Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need. Or is it finally, that the
interest of the Blessed Jesus is not great enough with his Father; unless you
add a mad Francis, a bloody Dominick, a Rebellious Becket, an enthusiastic
Ignatius, to be joint Advocates with him? If these indeed be your thoughts, let
us plainly know the impiety of them? And upon what unchristian foundations the
benefit of this practice is established by you? But if you dare not say that
any Saint in Heaven can prevail, where Christ alone cannot; if you are ashamed
to own, that you think any one can love us more dearly, than he who gave
himself for us, and redeemed us with his own most precious Blood; or by
consequence can be more ready to hear and intercede for us: Tell me then, what
profit is it, that having this fountain of living water, you run to the broken
Cisterns of the merits and intercession of your fellow Creatures, which can
hold no Water.

141. But I will go yet further, to show you the unprofitableness of this
service. It was objected by a great Man of your own Church; Durand. in sent.
IV. d. 45. q. 4.
If (says he) the Saints know our necessities, and those defects which we
express in our Prayers: How comes it to pass that we do not oftener find our
selves relieved by them? To this he answers; 'That although the Saints in Heaven
have doubtless the greatest Charity imaginable for us, yet they have withal
their Wills so entirely conformed to the Will of God, as not to lend any
assistance to us, but according to what they see the Knowledge and Will of God
disposed toward us. An excellent reflection certainly; and which no one can
doubt to be most true. But then it will follow from it, that you do in vain
solicit the Saints, who cannot lend you any assistance, till God is pleased
to permit himself to be entreated for you. Whilst our Heavenly Father is our
Enemy, all the Host of Heaven are so too. We must first be reconciled to him,
before ever we can expect any favor or acceptance with them. In short, it was
the Conclusion of an ancient Father, whom I before mentioned, That the only way
to make the Angels and Saints our Friends, is to make God so first: And though we
know little of what those blessed Spirits above do for us, yet we have all the
reason in the World to believe that they Love and Hate according to the Divine
Pleasure; and if they do pray for us, the most ready way to obtain their
Prayers, is to be constant, and zealous, and persevering both in our Prayers
and Piety toward God, through his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

142. I shall conclude this with the words of S. Austin, De vera Religione. p.
290. Lugd. 1664.
Let it not be any matter of Religion to us to Worship dead Men; because if
they have lived well, they desire no such Honor, but rather that we should
Worship him; by whose Illumination they rejoice, that we are Companions of
their Piety. They are therefore to be Honored for our Imitation, not to be
Worshipped out of Religion -- And the same let us think of Angels; that they
above all things, desire that we should, together with them, Worship God only,
in whose Vision they are happy -- Tying our Souls to him alone, from which
Religion derives its very Name, let us lay aside all Superstition. Behold I
Worship one God, the One principle of all things -- Whatsoever Angel loves this
God, I am sure that he loves me too. Whosoever remains in him, and can
understand the Prayers of Men, in him he hears me. Whosoever has God for his
Good, does in him help me -- Let the Adorers of the parts of the Universe tell
me: What good person is there that he does not reconcile to himself, who
Worships him only whom every good person loves, and in whose knowledge he
rejoices, and by recurring to which principle, he becomes good. Let therefore
Religion bind us to the One God Almighty, etc. But I insist too long on these
Reflections: I add only,

Secondly, To close all, That this Invocation of Saints departed, is as
Impious, as it is Unprofitable.

143. For First, To take this Practice in the most Moderate Sense that may be,
yet to pray to any Creature after the manner that you do to the Saints
departed, is to make them the Objects of a proper Religious Worship, and to pay
that Service to the Creature, which is due only to the Creator; and this
certainly cannot be done without a very great Impiety.

144. Secondly, To pray to the Saints but only as Intercessors, even this does
usurp upon the peculiar Prerogative of our Blessed Savior, who is our only
Mediator, and whose singular Privilege it is to appear in the presence of God
for us. And to join others with Christ in his great Office and Employment, to
make to our selves new Mediators; what is this but tacitly (at least) to
imply, that we dare not trust either his Mercy, or his Interest; in the concern
of our Everlasting Salvation. But then

145. Thirdly, To pray, as you evidently do, not only that the Saints would
intercede for you, but that God would be merciful to you, not only through the
Merits of Christ, but of the Saint whose Memory you celebrate; this is a
downright undervaluing of our Savior's Blood, and does despite unto the
Covenant of Grace.

146. Fourthly, To pray to the Saints, (as if we may be allowed to understand
the meaning of plain words you do) as the Arbitrary Dispensers of Benefits to
you, that they would themselves grant you those things which you ask of them;
this makes your Service yet more intolerable. And though you seek to evade the
justice of this Censure by those unreasonable Expositions of your prayers, I
have before refuted, yet I am sure it ought to be more than enough to make us
avoid that practice which cannot be excused but by such forced Interpretations,
as should men use the like on other Occasions, all Society must be overthrown,
and Men's Words be no longer relied upon as sufficient to declare the Sense of
their Minds.

147. Fifthly, As to what concerns the practice of the people in this point, it
cannot be denied; nay, it is by some of your own Church openly complained of,
how much their hope and confidence, their Love and Service are hereby lessened
toward God; and what greater signs of Zeal appear in them toward the Blessed
Virgin, than toward our Savior Christ himself. And indeed, you who ought to
have better informed them, are the very Persons that have especially helped to
mislead them. It Is from you they have learnt, as a great practice of piety, to
salute her ten times, for God's once. It Is you that have taught them to join
Mary still with Jesus in their Mouths: Insomuch, as if it be possible, to let
her Name be the last Expression of their dying Breath. It Is you that have told
them, that to list themselves into her Fraternity, is one of the surest means
in the World to ascertain their Salvation. From you they learn in all their
prayers to call upon her: at the sound of a Bell thrice every day wherever they
are, or whatever they are about, to fall down upon their Knees and salute her.
Your Confessions, Absolutions, Excommunications, Vows, Thanksgivings,
Visitations, Commendations, Conjurations, are all transacted in her Name, as
well as in the Name of the Holy Trinity. Whilst our Savior Christ is
represented by you either as still in the state of Pupillage, an Infant in her
Arms, or expiring upon his Cross, she has her Crown, and Glory about her Head;
sometimes the Moon under her feet, and not seldom the whole Trinity joining to
set forth her Honor. Her Titles in all your Offices are Excessive: The Queen
of Heaven, the Mother of Divine Grace, the Mirror of Righteousness, the Seat
of Wisdom, the Cause of our joy, the Tower of David, the Ark of the Covenant,
the Gate of Heaven, the Refuge of Sinners, the Help of Christians, the Queen of
Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and all Saints:
These are the common Names you give her, in your Hymns, your Litanies and
Prayers to her. And what Impression all this must make upon untutored minds;
how much greater value they will be hereby apt to set upon her than upon Christ
himself, every man's reason will soon tell him, and a sad experience confirms it
to us.

148. But indeed Sixthly, Isaia XXIV. 2.
It is here (in the Words of the Prophet) As with the people so with the
Priest: Your Superstition is not at all less, tho much more inexcusable than
theirs. Witness those great Names for whom you have appeared to be so much
concerned; St. Bernard, St. Germain, St. Anselme, St. Antonine, St. Bernardine,
etc. And whose Blasphemous Devotion I have before exposed to the World. Let the
Writings of Card. Bona, and Father Crasset, the Contemplations of the Blessed
Virgin, and the late Apology for them in our own Language be considered. For I
am very much mistaken, if it be possible for the most ignorant Zealot to be
more unreasonably extravagant, than these Learned Men have approved themselves
to be.

149. Nor may you turn off these with your old distinction, that they are but
private persons, and for whose Excesses therefore your Church is not to Answer.
They were approved in what they did, and many of them are at this day
Worshipped by you as Canonized Saints; and 'twas this Superstition that
especially contributed to their Exaltation. Who was it that composed that
exorbitant Hymn, yet used in your Church, Ave Maris Stella, but your devout St.
Bernard? S. Herman, another of your own Order, made those others neither less
extravagant, nor less authorized by you, Salve Regina, Alma Redemptoris Matter,
and Ave Regina Caelorum. And the late Editor of his Life tells us, Calendar.
Benedictin. To. 3. Jul. 19.
That being Lame in Body, and Dull in Mind, he prayed earnestly to the Blessed
Virgin in this Romantic manner: Help, O help, the doubly wretched Herman. His
Prayer smote the tender hearted Virgin, and immediately she appeared to him,
and offered him his choice, whether he would have firmness of Body, or
Accuteness of Mind. He chose the latter, and expressed his Gratitude to his
great Benefactress, by composing those famous Hymns beforementioned to her
Honor.

150. It was another of the same Order, and that had in your Opinion two the
greatest Characters any Man can pretend to; Pope Urban 11. Ibid. Jul. 29.
a Pope in the Church Militant, and now a Saint in the Church Triumphant, who
appointed the three Solemn Devotions I have spoken of, to be every day paid to
the Blessed Virgin at the sound of a Bell, and composed the Course of the
Virgin, that what was done before by the Monks only, might from thenceforth
become the Public Service of the Church to her.

151. What is the great Commendation that is given of S. Gerard, Ibid. Sept. 24:
and he too a Saint of your own Order. But that having caused an Image of the
Blessed Virgin to be curiously wrought, he set it up in a Chapel built on
purpose for it, and appointed Incense and sweet Odours to be every day for ever
burnt to it. That he taught the Hungarians to call her their Lady, having
persuaded their King Stephen to make his Kingdom Tributary to her. In short,
that he never heard the Name of Mary pronounced, but he Worshipped it, bowing
his Face toward the Ground.

152. Call. Ben. To. 4. Sept. 30.
'Twas this was the great thing for which yet another of your Order St. Joscio
was Canonized. Whose Piety to the Virgin whilst he lived, was rewarded with a
notable Miracle at his death. For no sooner was he dead, but there grew five
Roses of an extraordinary sweetness out of his Head, two out of his Eyes, two
out of his Ears, and one out of his Mouth; and upon every one of them a Letter
of the Virgin Mary's name; so that the whole M.A.R.I.A. was composed by them.

153. Thus has this devotion to the Saints, almost wholly overcome your piety
toward God. Your Devotions, your Histories, your Lives, your Miracles, are all
framed to promote it. And now I am mentioning those Evils which from these kind
of Legends have been derived to corrupt both the Opinions and Practice of those
who are acquainted with little else than these Fables: I will refer it to your
self to tell me, whether you can endure to see the Dignity of our Savior, and
the Majesty of God himself, so lessened as it is by many of your Communion, to
increase the Veneration of the Saints.

154. Ibid. ad IV. Maii, p. 320. To. 2.
When St. Gothardus was chosen by the Emperor Henry to succeed Bernard in the
Bishopric of Hildersheim, and the Monk modestly declined that Honor; the
Blessed Virgin the same night appears to him, and sharply reproves him in this
Ranting Rhetoric, Scito Imperatorem MEO id JVSSV motiri. Peccasti penicacia
tua in M E and filium. Know (says she) that the Emperor has done this at MY
COMMAND; Thou have sinned by thy obstinacy, against ME and MY SON. This indeed
was as became the Queen of Heaven; and one would think by it, that she still
maintained the RIGHT of a MOTHER over Her Son.

155. But you have dealt yet worse wirh our Savior than this; your Writers
represent him at this day as a little Child in Heaven, as if he were ever to
continue in the same impotent State, in which your Pictures and Images express
him. Thus we read in the Life of St. Paula, Call. Ben. To. 1. Jan. 5.
That the Blessed Virgin appeared to her with her LITTLE BOY, who kissed Paula,
and squeezed some of his Mothers Milk into her Mouth. Nor was this any thing
extraordinary; The Writer of her Life assures us, that she was often wont to
take him into Her Arms and play with him. And the like happened to many other
of your Saints; as for instance, Ibid. Mart 30.
Saint Aldegundis, St. Francisca, of whom we are told, that being committed to
the care of an Archangel, she did oftentimes read the Office of the Blessed
Virgin in the night, lb. Mart. 9.
by the Light that proceeded from his Rays: And was for her diligence in it so
acceptable to the Virgin, that she several times came down from Heaven to
refresh her, and offered her Son to be kissed, and embraced by her.

Tom. IV. p. 590. Dec. XI.
156. But the Favors of the Blessed Virgin to St. Ida were of all others the
most considerable. For coming down into Her Cell with her INFANT JESUS; Behold
(says she) O Ida! thy Love: Take Him into thy Lap, and satisfy thy self with
the Kisses and Embraces of him whom thou love. -- My Author goes on beyond
all bounds even of common decency: But I must stop here, and not repeat those
Blasphemies, which cannot be read without trembling. But, O Blessed Jesus! How
long will thou suffer this dishonor? and permit an unbounded Superstition to
run to these Excesses I appeal to all the Christians of the World, what mean,
dishonorable Notions must they have of the God of Heaven and Earth, that in
such a discerning Age can presume to publish such Romances? These Stories might
indeed become a Homer, or a Virgil; But what is fancy in them, being applied to
a Venus and a Cupid, is an unpardonable Blasphemy to be thus used of the
Savior of the World, who is God over all blessed for ever.

157. These are the effects of this Superstition: I might add many other
Examples no less Horrible, in which our Blessed Lord has been diminished to
make up the Honor of his Servants. But I shall shut up all with an Impiety of
another kind, though the effect of this Worship; and which ought the more to be
taken notice of, both because it was done by a Society which would be thought
at least the most zealous of any for their Faith; and was exposed publicly in
the sight of the Sun, and before the Eyes of many to whom I now write. See the
Account published by that Society: La Ste Vierge Patron Honoree and
Bienfaisante dans la France and dans le Luxembourg.
The thing I mean is the late Procession of the Jesuits at Luxemburg, May 20.
1685. designed for the Glory of the Blessed Virgin the Honored and
Affectionate Patroness of France and Luxembourg.

The Procession indeed was singularly extravagant; and it needed the skill of
that Learned Society, to put Profaneness into so Scholastic a dress. Heathenism
and Christianity walked together, as if the Fathers of the Society had equally
reverenced the Ancient Deities of the One, as the Modern Deities of the Other.

On the one side were carried the Image of the Blessed Virgin, and the Holy
Sacrament. On the other, Mars, Vulcan, the Cyclops and Nayades, Ceres, Flora,
Pomona, etc. And these too with all the Pomp, and even under the Names of GODS
and DIVINITIES.

At several Stations, where the Procession was to rest, Theaters were erected,
to serve to inspire agreeably (say the Learned Fathers in the Account which
they printed of this days Work) a Piety toward our Lady of Consolation. So the
Blessed Virgin there is called.

The second of these Theaters, was for the GOD MARS; who commands his Warriors
to take heed not to commit any insult from henceforth upon the Chapel of our
Lady of Consolation. This is Mars's care: And the Device for the GOD Mars, was

Procul, o, procul ite profani.
Virg. In the third Theater, Ceres, Flora, Pomona, etc. rejoice at the return
of our Lady of Consolation. And their Motto, still under the Title of
Divinities, was

Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna.
It were too long to transcribe all the other Follies and Impieties of this
days Solemnity, in which the Holy Scripture found no room; the Sacrament but
very little: The whole Piety was designed to the Blessed Virgin; and because
Christianity had not Gods enough in it, to set forth her Glory, all the Poetic
Deities were revived, to inspire agreeably a Devotion into the People for Her.
This was indeed a Masterpiece of Contrivance; and what Invention shall next be
had, to excite a Devotion to her, we may expect to see the first time the
Gentlemen of the Society shall have Occasion to make their complying
Consciences do something extraordinary, for the Flattery of a Prince so much
their Friend, and therefore so much their Favorite as he, for whose Honor
this Solemn Procession was in great measure designed. In the mean time, I shall
leave it to the Reader seriously to consider, what sad Effects such a Devotion
as this has given birth to; and what just Cause we have to oppose a
Superstition, contrary to the Holy Scripture, unknown to the best and most
Primitive Antiquity; unreasonable in its self, and which is worst of all, not
only very Unprofitable, but very Wicked too in its Practice.

ANSWER TO THE FOURTH ARTICLE, OF IMAGES and RELICS.
IN the beginning of this Article you tell me (but with very little reason)
that you might have past over this point without any further consideration;
Reply, p. 23.
the best Argument you bring for it, being, if I mistake not, this, That you
are not obliged to defend what I had advanced against you upon it. And indeed
tho the reason be but a poor one, yet I am persuaded you had done better both
for the interest of your Cause, and for your own credit, to have contented your
self with it, and have past over this Article altogether; rather than by giving
such loose Answers to my Allegations, to have satisfied the World, that you
have no just Exceptions to make against them.

2. Were I minded in return to excuse my self the trouble of any farther Answer
to you, I could, I believe, give you some more plausible pretenses for it. I
might tell you, (1st,) That your Distinctions are now so well known, and have
been so often exploded by us, Reply, Ibid.
that there is no longer any danger that even my friends the Vulgar should be
circumvented by them. I might add, (2dly,) And that with great truth, that this
whole subject has been utterly exhausted by that Learned Man, I have so often
mentioned, in his Defense of the Charge of Idolatry against T. G. and from whom
you have here again borrowed your chiefest strength. I might mind you, (3ly,)
How after two endeavors to reply to him, T. G. was forced to give over; and it
is now above eight years since neither he nor any of your Church has thought
fit to carry on the Dispute. I might desire you, (4thly,) To compare your
performances upon this point with what the Representer ventured not above a
year since to make a flourish with; and see if you could find out but any one
thing in all you here repeat, that his learned and judicious Adversary had not
utterly confuted. But he too has forsaken the Cause; and I am now called upon
to give you the same Answers that have been made to both these, Reply, Pref.
and then without pretending to be a Prophet, I dare be bold to say for all
your blustering, you will go off the Stage as tamely and quietly, as any of your
Predecessors have done before you. There is a certain Circle of Shifts and
Distinctions which you all run; and no sooner are those spent, but your bolt is
shot; you drop the Question, and begin again upon a new score.

3. These and many other reasons I might offer to decline any farther
Examination of this Point; but I have promised you before, Reply, Pref.
that I would neither misrepresent your Doctrine, nor FOBB OFF your Arguments.
And I will here perform it with such exactness, that even your Incense and Holy
Water shall not be forgotten. And if for our diversion you shall think fit the
next time you write to add to these all your other follies, of Holy Ashes,
Consecrated Candles, Agnus Dei's, and in one word, whatever Superstitions of
the like kind, your Pontifical, Ceremonial, Missal, Breviary, Office of the
Blessed Virgin, with all the Rationals and Comments that have ever been written
upon them can furnish you with, I do once more promise you, that no pretense of
their Impertinence shall hinder me from sifting both them and you to the
Bottom. As to the present subject, I shall observe this plain Method: I. I will
make good the Charge of Image Worship against you. II. I will show you, that in
this service too, you are truly and properly guilty of Idolatry.


4. But before I enter upon these Particulars, I must stop so long as to
consider the new Introduction you endeavor to amuse your Reader with: viz.

SECT. I. Of the Benefit of Pictures and Images. Reply, p. 26,

AND which brings to my mind what Tully (reckoning up the several Opinions of
the Philosophers concerning the Nature of the Soul) said once of Arist^^enus,
Tusc. Qu. l. 1. Sect. 17.
who of a Fiddler became a Philosopher, and asserted the Soul to be a Harmony;
"Hic ab artificio suo non recessit, and tamen aliquid dixit. You tell us then,
5. Reply,. 19.] That they are the Books of the Ignorant, Reply, p. 26, 27.
silent Orators, apt to increase in us the lo^^ of God and his Saints, and (O
Elegant!) BLOW UP the DYING COALS of our AFFECTIONS into a FLAME of DEVOTION,
That the representations of Holy persons, and of their glorious actions, do by
their powerful Eloquence inflame us toward an imitation of their Graces and
Virtues, and renew in us afresh the memory of the persons whom they represent,
with a reverence and respect for them.

6. Answ.] In all which tho you fight with your own shadow, and say nothing
that either contradicts our Principles concerning Worship, or justifies your
practices; yet have you been so unhappy as to offer just matter for our
Animadversion: For,

1st. It is no small mistake in you, thus to join Pictures and Images together,
as if they were all one; when yet both your own Superstition, and the Opinion
both of the Jews and Gentiles (as to the point of worshipping of them) have
always made a very great difference between them. As for the ancient Heathens,
they adored their (...), Statues, or Graven Images; because they conceived them
most apt to be animated by their Gods, of which they were the resemblances.
Whereas Pictures were not thought so capable of receiving that animation. The
same was the distinction of the Jews too, (...) Maimon. See Dr. Hamm. of
Idolatry, Sect. 40.
who upon this very account have always looked upon the former sort of
Sculptures to be the thing especially forbidden in the second Commandment;
insomuch that they thought it unlawful to have them even for Ornament; but for
(...) Id. Ibid.
Pictures painted or woven, those they did not esteem to have been absolutely
forbidden to them. And at this day in your Church, your Images are set up with
solemn Consecrations to receive your Adoration. But I do not know that any
Pictures are dedicated for Altar-pieces, or other uses, with the like solemnity.

2. Another Confusion of the like kind you make in what follows, in speaking of
the Pictures not only of Holy Persons, but of their Actions too. For every body
knows how much more use there may be, and how much less danger there certainly
is in Historical Representations, than in single Figures, but especially Carved
Images.

3. Were the benefit of Images never so great, yet you know this is neither
that which we dispute with you, nor for which they are set up in your Churches.
Your Trent Synod expressly defines that due Veneration is to be paid to them.
Your Catechism says that they are to be had not only for Instruction, but for
Worship. And this is the Point in Controversy betwixt us. We retain Pictures,
and sometimes even Images too in our Churches for Ornament, and (if there be
such Uses to be made of them) for all the other Benefits you have now been
mentioning. Only we deny that any service is to be paid to them; or any solemn
Prayers to be made at their Consecration, for any Divine Virtues, or indeed for
any Virtues at all, to proceed from them. This is our Business; the rest is all
Impertinence in such Discourses as these, where men are to dispute, not
harangue. And for Images set up in Churches, with these Ceremonies, and for
this purpose, I add

4. That were the benefits of them otherwise never so great, yet will not this
be any manner of Excuse to you for the violating of God's Law, seeing, as you
have been often told, and indeed do your self confess, No Evil is to be done,
for any Good whatsoever that may come of it. Tho now

5. I am not altogether satisfied of the great usefulness of Images for the
instruction of the Ignorant. They may indeed serve to call Good things and
Persons to their remembrance, when they have before been instructed, and by
consequence in that respect are no longer ignorant of what is represented by
them. But let a man, that is properly Ignorant, Rev. XII. 1.
i. e. who never heard of the XIIth (for instance) of the Revelations, see the
Virgin Mary ten thousand times painted with a Half Moon under her feet, I do
not believe he would become one jot the Wiser for it. Nay,

6. In opposition to your Pretenses, though all this is out of the way, yet I
dare affirm, lastly, that for such Images and Pictures as are too often found
both in your Churches and Houses, they are so far from serving to any of those
Uses you pretend, that on the contrary, if Men are not very well instructed,
they will be apt to beget in them most pernicious Notions, contrary to the
Honor of God, to the Nature of our Savior Christ, and to the Covenant of His
Gospel.

7. For tell me, I beseech you; Was not this the great reason wherefore God
forbad any Resemblance to be made of Himself under the Law, Deuteronomy. IV. 15.
Isa. XI. 18.
that it was a lessening and debasing of his Nature so to do? And does not St.
Paul urge this very consideration against the Athenian Idolatry? Acts XVII. 29.
Act. XVII. 29
And is not the Divine Nature as excellent now, and as much debased by yours,
as ever it was by their Representations of it? I need not tell you of the
frequent Pictures of God the Father in the shape of an Old Man, and commonly in
a Pope's Dress; and the meaning of which (if one may conjecture the design of
this by the Natural tendency of it) can be no other than this, viz. to persuade
the Ignorant, that as you sometimes call the Pope a God on Earth, so God is no
other than the Pope of Heaven.

8. And this, were it only in some Sacred Places, would yet be too profane for
any Pious Christian to endure. But alas! you have not been so reserved. Every
Office carries this Abuse in it; Hardly a Psalter or Catechism without it: Nay,
I will add, what I should hardly be credited in, had not thousands among us
with indignation beheld it, that in the open Streets of your Cities, we may see
That God who is over all blessed for ever, exposed to the scorn and meanness of
a Sign-post.

9. How miserably have you by these Pictures, abused the Mystery of the Sacred
Trinity; sometimes you make it a Monster; As where you paint one Body with
three Heads; One Head with three Faces; sometimes one Body with two Heads, and
a Pigeon in the midst; of which Card. Capisucchi makes mention. Capisucchi,
page 613. Gerson.
The Sacred Trinity in the Belly of the Virgn, which Gerson says, He saw with
his own Eyes in a Church of the Carmelites; the most ordinary Figures are,
Either an Old Man holding a Crucifix in his Hands, and a Pigeon upon his
Shoulder; Or, (as in your Eye-Catechism) on one side an Old Man with a Globe,
on the other a Younger with a Cross upon his Shoulder, and a Dove betwixt them:
And what is all this but to debase the glorious Godhead? In St. Paul's Phrase,
Romans I. 23, 25.
to change the truth of God into a lie, by representing the Incorruptible God
by an Image made like unto a Corruptible Man? And where is there a Christian so
insensible of that dishonor that is hereby done to the Majesty of that God,
whom the wiser Heathens themselves never debased to the likeness of any created
Being, as not with the same Apostle to have his Spirit stirred within him, Acts
xvii.
at the sight of such Impiety?

10. Nor are you at all less excusable in your Representations of our Blessed
Savior, and the Holy Virgin; not to descend to any other of the Saints. For
besides that such Similitudes exhibit only one, and that his inferior Nature,
viz. his Manhood; how do these Pictures insensibly breed a mean Opinion of him,
in the minds of the Ignorant and Unwary? As 1st, Nothing is more ordinary in
the most solemn Places of your Worship, than to see our Blessed Lord still set
forth as a Child, in the Arms of his Mother. And what Notions this has bred in
many of your Communion, I would to God the greater esteem they seem to have for
the Virgin, than for Christ, did not too plainly show. But that which renders
this more intolerable, is, that you thus represent him not only upon Earth,
but at this time even in Heaven; and indeed, seeing in your Legends, you speak
of him as a Child still, I do not wonder if in your Pictures, you represent him
too as such.

11. Thus in one of your Eye-Catechisms, set forth in Portugal, for the
Instruction of the People; the latter part of the Ave-Maria, is set in this
manner before them. All sorts of Men and Women upon Earth, are drawn in an open
Scene, upon their Knees, and Hands lifted up to Heaven, and in the Clouds over
them, the Blessed Virgin in Glory with our Savior (as a Child) in Her Arms;
and under it this Inscription, O Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us Sinners
now, and in the hour of Death. Amen. Jesus.

12. In the Calender of the Saints of your Order, There is a Figure of St.
Odilo, Tom. 1. Jan. 1.
devoting himself to the blessed Virgin in this manner. O most Holy Virgin, and
Mother of the Savior of all Ages, receive me from this day forward as your
Servant, and in all my Causes, be my most merciful Advocate. For from this
time, after God, I set nothing before thee, but voluntarily deliver my self for
ever to be your Possession, as your proper Servant. Amen. Above Him sits the
Blessed Virgin in Glory, with our Savior in her Arms, holding her about the
Neck, after the manner of a little Child. Many of the like kind are there in
those Volumes; but I may not insist upon them; I will add only some of those
Figures, in which the whole Trinity are made to concur to her Honor. Thus in
the Office in the Virgin, printed at Antwerp. She is set forth in Glory in
Heaven, with God the Father on the one side, and God the Son on the other,
holding a Crown over her Head, the Holy Ghost above overshadowing Her, and all
the People on the Earth below Adoring.

13. I will not deny, but that these may be very good Instructions for Father
Crasset's, or Doctor J. C's Disciples. But I cannot see how any of the
Expounding and Representing Party, will be able to prove such Pictures as
these, to be much for the Edification of the People. I shall finish these
Remarks, (which have already run out into a greater length than I designed, tho
I might have added much more) with the account which the Learned Gerard Vossius
gives us, of a Picture over an Altar in Flanders, in which that blasphemous
Epigram is expressed of Men's doubting whether they should run to the Blood of
Christ, in which alone there is Redemption to be obtained; or to the Milk of
the Virgin. This is certainly to contradict the very Foundation of the Gospel;
and to lead the Ignorant into Error in that Point, in which it is of all others
the most dangerous to be mistaken; viz. Whether they ought to place the Hopes
of their Salvation in the Redemption of Christ, or in the Mercy and Interest of
his Mother.

14. You may at your leisure consider how to improve these things into Helps of
Devotion, and useful Instructions for the illiterate Populace. I might have
added, what has lately been elsewhere observed, of the Profaneness of many (in
Italy especially) in this Point: Where the most celebrated Madonna's, are the
Pictures of the Painters Whores, set up in their Churches, as Objects of the
Peoples Veneration. But this and other Excesses of the like kind I purposely
forbear, lest I should be thought to please my self in your Impieties, which I
heartily lament, and earnestly be-beseech God to reform in you. Nor should I
have said thus much, but only to show how little Reason you had to enter on
this new and most Impertinent Subject of the Benefit of Images; and that were
our Cause to be tried by this alone, we might even so expect to carry it
against you. And this to your first Pretense.

15. The next thing you offer in favor of your Images, is Reply 20.] That
there is no now danger of Idolatry in this Practice, seeing all Persons are
taught that there is but one God, to whom Adoration is only due; and therefore,
that they cannot be capable of erring so grossly, as to give Divine Honor to an
Image, or to think any Virtue annexed to them for which they ought to be
adored. In short, it is (you say) by the subtilty of the Devil (who hates any
thing that excites Devotion) that these helps to Piety, are now branded with
the horrid Note of Idolatry, and Catholics represented, as if they paid the Act
of Adoration to the Images themselves. 16. Answ.] That the Devil is an Enemy to
Piety, and to all those things that may any way serve to promote it, I can
easily believe; but that it is He, who upon this account stirs up us to oppose
your Idolatry, I shall hardly Credit, tho you should give me as good an
assurance of it, as ever your Brother the old Monk did the second Council of
Nice, when he told them that the Devil himself had confessed to him, how much
he hated your Holy and Venerable Images. De Idololatria
I am sure Tertullian was so far from this, that he thought 'twas the Devil
that instigated Men to bring them into the World, and not to help to cast them
out. But to overthrow at once, both your Reflection and Argument together, I do
here roundly affirm, That what you say is so far from being true, That there is
now no danger of Idolatry in the Worship of Images, that on the contrary I will
show, that in the Worship of them publicly authorized and practiced amongst
you, you do actually commit it. And then every Body will see what Spirit it is
that Acts us in opposition to this Service; and who it is that blinds you so
far, as to make you contend for that, which both the Holy Scripture condemns,
and the Primitive Christians neither knew, nor would have endured. And this
brings me to my first Proposal; wherein I am

SECT. II. To make good the Charge of Image Worship against you, and Answer
those Evasions, by which you endavour to clear your selves of it.
17. NOW that you give Religious Worship to Images, has been so fully proved in
that Learned Book I have before referred you to, in Answer to T. G. both from
the Definitions of your Councils of Nice and Trent, and from the unanimous
Voice of almost all the great Men of your Church, who have written any thing of
this matter, that I shall need say but very little here in Confirmation of it.
And therefore not to mustiply Quotations by transcribing what has been already
collected as to this matter, I shall content my self with this plain, and I
think unexceptionable manner of proceeding against you; 1st, I will propose to
you the Voice of your Church in her Definitions. 2dly, I will give you the
Interpretation of her Sense in these Definitions, from Card. Capisucchi only;
and out of that Book to which Mons. de Meaux himself appeals. 3dly, I will from
both vindicate the Account I have given of the Practice of your Church, in
Conformity to these Principles.


18. 1st, For what concerns the first of these, the Voice of your Church, as to
this Point; the Council of Trent declares, That the Images of Christ, of the
Blessed Virgin, and of the Saints, are more especially to be had and retained
in Temples, and that due Honor and Veneration is to be paid to them. Not that
it should be believed that there is any Divinity or Virtue in them, for which
they are to be Worshipped; or that any thing is to be Asked of them, or that
any Trust is to be put in Images; but because the Honor which is given to
them, is referred to the Proto-types which they Represent; so that by the
Images which you Kiss, and before which you uncover your Heads, and fall down;
you Adore Christ, and Worship the Saints which they Represent.

19. Thus that wary Synod; Neither determining what Honor should be given to
Images, nor yet setting any bounds to any. But then, as it expressly allows them
the external Marks of Divine Worship, so by fixing the Grounds of this Honor
to be the passing of it to the Proto-type, not only Soto, Turrian, and
Naclantus, three great Divines concerned in that Synod, but also the Generality
of those who have treated since of this matter, have concluded, that the same
Adoration is to be paid to the Image, and the Proto-type; So that if Christ
himself be worshipped with Divine Worship, then must the Crucifix also be
worshipped with the very same. But this will better appear,

19. 2dly, From the Account I am to give of the Doctrine of your Church, as to
this Worship, from Cardinal Capisucchi.

And to whose Book since Mons. de Meaux has thought fit to Appeal, I am content
to submit the Decision of this Controversy to his Sentence, and shall leave the
World to judge whether I have M srepresented, or whether the Bishop and You have
not departed from the Doctrine of the Council of Trent.

20. Now that we may know precisely, what in his Opinion, that due Honor and
Veneration is, which you pay to Images, and which the Council so cautiously
declined the telling us; we will consider first of all, what was thought to be
so by them, whose Opinions he rejects, as not fully delivering your Churches
Sense. Such were

Card. Capis. Controv. p. 624, 625.
21. First of all Durandus; Who thought that properly speaking, the Images are
not to be Adored; but because they resemble things worthy Adoration, which by
remembrance are Adored in Presence of the Images, therefore the Images
themselves improperly are, and may be said to be Adored. Now this he Rejects,
because (says he) in truth, Ibid. 625.
it takes away the Worship of Images; and concludes it with another of your
great Men, Raphael de Tuire, to be Dangerous, Rash, and savouring of Haeresy;
or as Ferdinandus Velosillus phrases it, False, Rash, and Erroneous; but
especially, since the Definition of the Council of Trent.

Card. Capis. Ibid. par. ii. p. 625.
22. The next whose Opinion he Rejects, is Vasquez; Who taught that the Images
themselves were no otherwise to be Adored, but because in the Presence of them,
and about them, are exhibited the external Signs of Honor, such as Kneeling,
Kissing, uncovering the Head, etc. But that for the inward Act of Adoration,
this was by no means to be directed to the Image, but to the thing represented
by the Image. And this too he Rejects upon the same Grounds that he did the
foregoing, viz. Because that by Asserting, that the inward Act of the Adorer
terminates only upon the thing represented by the Image; he does by consequence
affirm, that the Images themselves are not TRULY and PROPERLY to be ADORED.

Id. par. iv. p. 634, 635.
23. The next Opinion which he rejects, is that whereby an Inferior Honor is
supposed due to Images, and not an Honor of the same kind with that which is
paid to the Exemplar. And this has been proposed with some variety. Catherine
and Peresius thought that no other Worship besides this inferior, honorary
respect, was due to them. Sanders distinguished, That the Images considered by
themselves, and without any regard had to the Exemplars, deserved only an
inferior Honor; but being considered conjunctly with the Exemplar, were to be
worshipped with the very same Worship that the Exemplars themselves were. And
this was also the opinion of Suarez, That Images considered only as Sacred
Vtensils, were to have no other Honor than was usually given to any other the
like holy things; but that being considered as Images, they were to have the
very same Worship with the Proto-types whom they represented. Lorca delivered
his Opinion yet more subtly: 1. That the Image of Christ might by accident be
adored with the same adoration as Christ himself; but that this was only
improperly called the Adoration of the Image, it being Christ himself that
alone was truly and properly adored. 2. That for that Adoration which
terminates on the Image, it is an Adoration much inferior to that wherewith
Christ himself is adored. 3. That tho the Adoration wherewith the Image of
Christ is adored, be in the kind of the Act different from that with which
Christ himself is worshipped; yet that it proceeds from the same habit, the
virtue of Religion, from which the Adoration of Christ himself proceeds, and
upon that account may be called by the same name with it. And all these
Opinions the Cardinal still rejects upon his old principle, That the Image is
adored with the very same Act with which Christ himself is adored, and by
consequence must be worshipped with the same Divine Worship.

24. The next whose opinion he refutes, is Card. Bellarmine; Capis. Par. V.
page 636.
who supposed that, The Worship which is properly given to an Image, is not the
same with that which (for instance) is given to Christ Himself; but a sort of
imperfect Worship, which may by a certain analogy be reduced to the same kind
of Worship that is paid to the Exemplar. But yet that the Image may by accident
be worshipped with the same Worship as the Exemplar, when the Exemplar is
considered as shining forth in its Image. This also he refutes, utterly denying
that any inferior honor is to be given to an Image, which requires properly,
and in its own nature the very same Worship that is paid to the Exemplar which
it Represents.

25. Lastly, Cardinal Lugo's Opinion was, Ibid. Par. VI. page 637.
that the Image and the Exemplar were to be adored as two distinct Objects of
Adoration; as when a man sees the Son of his friend, he at the same time loves
both the Son and the Father, not together with the very same Act, yet both
directly: The Son for the Father's sake, and the Father accidentally upon the
occasion of the Son's bringing him to his remembrance. Thus in the present
case, When a Christian beholds the Image of Christ, presently he calls his
Blessed Savior to mind, and directly worships both the Image for Christ's
sake, and Christ for his own. And this also the Cardinal rejects, not so much
for that it does not give sufficient Honor to the Image; for Lugo also held
that the same Divine Honor was to be given both to Christ and his Image, as
because it distinguished the Objects; whereas according to Card. Capisucchi,
Christ and his Image are to be Adored not only with the same Act, but also as
the same Object of Worship.

Card. Capis. contr par. VII. p. 639.
26. Having thus rejected all those several Opinions, he finally concludes, That
the true Opinion, and which ought to be held, is, that the worship of the
Images and the Exemplars, is one and the same; so that the worship of the
Images is not distinct from that of the Exemplars, but they are both worshipped
together. This he proves to be the CHURCHES SENSE by a Cloud of Witnesses, from
St. Thomas to this day; and shows it to be what both the second Council of
Nice, and the later Synod of Trent designed in their definitions. And then
finally, closes all with the instance of Aegidius Magistralis, I heretofore
mentioned, who having denied that Divine Worship was to be paid to Images, was
forced by the Inquisition to recant and abjure it as Heretical; and exhorts all
those to consider it who find fault with St. Thomas for saying that the CROSS
and IMAGES of CHRIST were to be ADORED with SUPREME DIVINE WORSHIP. Vid. p. 649.


27. And this may suffice by the way to answer your Exception against the
Authority of Aquinas; who as you see allowed a true and proper worship to be
paid to the Cross as well as to Christ. Reply, p. 29, 30, 31.
And that you may not shift off this REPLY (as you have done my former Answer)
only with scorn and derision, I must mind you, that it is not now a Doctor of
the Populace whom you think incapable of penetrating into the profound
Mysteries of Scholastic Niceties, Reply, p. 31.
that says this; but Card. Capisucchi, a Schoolman and Disciple himself of St.
Thomas, and whom perhaps you will allow to have as deep a reach as your self in
these matters. For Vasquez having brought the very same interpretation of
Aquinas's Doctrine that you now insist upon against me, Capis. contr. p. 630.
the Cardinal thus roundly answers him, That according to St. Thomas the Image
of Christ is absolutely and simply to be adored with the same Adoration with
which Christ is adored: -- And that therefore the same Adoration which is given
to Christ, ought to be given to his Image also.

27. And thus have I in short laid before you the sum of this Cardinal's
Doctrine, who both approved M. de Meaux's Exposition, and to whom Monsieur de
Meaux himself appeals for the Vindication of this very part of it. I have
already sufficiently shown how inconsistent these two are with one another; I
will now only apply what I have here further added to my former account of this
matter, to the point before us. And,

28. First, It may not be amiss to observe what great diversity of Opinions
there has been in stating of that Worship which is paid by you to Images, and
what difficulty you have found to defend your practice against that Charge of
Idolatry we have so justly brought against you upon the account of it. How the
Caution of some, and the distinctions of others amongst you, have been branded
by the rest as Scandalous and Erroneous; and one forced to abjure as Heretical,
what others have set up as the only true Exposition and Representation of the
Churches sense. And this you will give me leave the rather to remark, because
you are so often pleased to reflect upon our divisions, which yet are neither
so frequent nor dangerous, as among you who pretend not only to Truth, but
Infallibility in all you believe. And if the consequence you are wont from
thence to draw against us, That because we differ in some things, therefore we
have no certainty in any, be good, (as you say it is) you may now see that it
will equally fall upon your selves too; and by so much the more heavily, by how
much your pretenses in this matter are greater than ours. But,

29. Secondly, Tho there be then such a diversity of Opinions amongst you as to
this Worship; yet it is to be remarked that they who have allowed the least
Honor to Images, Capisucchi, Ib. page 605.
have yet still confessed that some Honor was due to them. In this ( says
Capisucchi) all Catholics do agree that Images are to be worshipped, and are
rightly worshipped by the faithful. Even Durandus himself, who disapproves the
Images of the Holy Trinity, yet allowing both the use and Worship of other Holy
Images. From whence therefore I conclude, That those, in this Cardinal's
opinion, are no Catholics who tell us that, All the Honor they have for them,
Reply, Pref. p. 17, 18.
is only such a respect as they pay to any other. Sacred Vtensils. That if they
seem to act in their presence some external signs of Veneration, this is meant
ONLY to the persons whom they represent, but NOT to the Images themselves,
which can claim NOTHING of that KIND from us. In short, as Monsieur de Meaux
expounds it, That they do NOT WORSHIP the Images; No, GOD FORBID; but ONLY make
use of them to call to mind the Originals. The Council of Trent teaches NO
OTHER USE of them.

30. Thirdly, It may from hence farther appear, that the Worship which this
Cardinal thought due to Images, was not an improper, accidental, abusive
Worship, but a true, proper, and real Adoration; the Image being to be adored
in the very same act with which the Exemplar was. So that now according to this
Exposition, the Cross of Christ is to be worshipped truly and properly with a
Supreme Divine Adoration. And that not only as to the outward acts, but by the
inward sense of the Soul too; all which are so to be paid to Christ, as to
terminate at once both upon him, and upon the Crucifix by which he is to be
adored. And this,

31. Fourthly, We are to look upon, not as a private opinion, or a mere
Scholastic Nicety, but as the true and proper sense of the Church, and to be
held of all. So the Cardinal expressly declares, as being the Doctrine of the
Councils both of Nice and Trent; and for denying of which, Aegidius Magistralis
was by the Inquisition forced to recant, and renounce his Doctrine contrary
thereunto, as Heretical.

32. This is an Instance which with Card. Capisucchi I will take the liberty to
recommend to your consideration. For certainly if what he says be true, you who
deny that the Cross is upon any account whatsoever to be worshipped with Divine
Worship, Reply. Pref.
can be no otherwise than a downright Heretic. And tho you are at present
secure in a happy Expounding Country, where you may safely make what
representation of your Doctrine you please, or rather that the necessity of
your present circumstances moves you to do, without any other danger than that
of losing your credit with honest and inquisitive men, which you do not seem
much to value; yet should time and other circumstances invite you hereafter
into a hotter Climate, you might run some worser hazards among those who have
not given themselves up to follow your Innovations. Relation del'. Inquisition
de Goa, page 14, 15. cap. 2, 21. cap. 3.
It happened not many years since, that a French Gentleman being traveling in
the East Indies, fell into some company at Goa, and there discoursing about
matters of Religion according to your Principles, maintained, That the Crucifix
was no otherwise to be adored, than by reporting all the Honor to our Savior
Christ represented by that Image. And another time, he fortuned to say of an
Ivory Crucifix which hung up at his Beds-head, that it was only a piece of
Ivory. For this he was clapped into the Inquisition, and after some years
imprisonment for his Heretical Sayings, hardly escaped the fire, with this
Sentence, that He was declared Excommunicate; Ibid. cap. 27. page 151, 152.
Edit. Leyd. 1687.
that for reparation of his fault, all his Goods should he confiscated; Himself
banished the Indies; and condemned to serve in the Galleys (or public Prisons)
of Portugal five years; and further accomplish those Other Penances which
should more particularly be enjoined Him by the Inquisitors. As for his Crime,
it is thus set forth in the Preamble to his Sentence, That he had said that we
ought NOT to ADORE IMAGES; and had BLASPHEMED against that of a certain
Crucifix, by saying of a Crucifix of Ivory, that it was a piece of Ivory.

33. This was plain dealing, and a sensible conviction that it is not merely a
Scholastic Nicety with the Fathers of the Inquisition, 'that the CROSS is to
be worshipped with DIVINE WORSHIP. The truth is, the contrary Opinion of
Durandus, Holcot, Mirandula, and some others, (and who allowed all the Acts of
external Honor to be paid to them, only they denied them that inward
Veneration which makes it properly a religious Worship) has been always
esteemed as false and scandalous, and savouring of Heresy; and is expressly
censured as such by those great Men, Suarez, Medina, Victoria, Catherine,
Arriaga, Cabrera, Raphael de Turre, Vellosillus, and many others at large,
collected by Cardinal Capisucchi on this occasion, as Abettors with himself, of
a true Divine Adoration to be paid to the Holy Cross, and other Images of God,
and the Blessed Trinity. I go on finally from these Principles,

34. Thirdly, To vindicate the Account I have heretofore given of your
Practices in consequence to this Doctrine.

And first, I observed that in the solemn Procession made at the reception of
the Emperor, the Legat's Cross is appointed by the Pontifical to take place of
the Emperor's Sword, because LATRIA or DIVINE WORSHIP is due to it.

35. This you cannot deny to be faithfully quoted out of your Pontifical:
Reply, p. 31.
but you say there is some kind of impropriety in the Speech; and we must
understand it so, not as if Divine Worship were due to the Cross, but to Christ
crucified upon it. A strange liberty of interpreting this, which turns plain
Affirmatives into downright Negatives; and this contrary to the sense, not only
of your greatest Authors, (as I have shown) but in their opinion contrary to
the sense of your Church too. These all say with the Rubric, that a Divine
Worship is due to the Cross; you declare it is no such thing; No, God forbid.
Such Worship is upon NO ACCOUNT WHATSOEVER to be given to the Cross, but only
to Christ represented by the Cross. I will not desire you to consider what wise
arguing you make of what your Pontifical here says; That the Cross must take
place of the Emperor's Sword, because Christ is to be worshipped with Divine
Worship: It shall suffice me to leave you to the Censures of your own Learned
Writers and Inquisitors, who have already pronounced this Exposition to be
false, scandalous, and savouring of Heresy. Only let me once more caution you
to remember the hard fate of poor Monsieur Imbert, of Aegidius Magistralis, and
the French Traveller I just now mentioned; For however it may be safe enough to
dissemble with us here, yet will it behove you to take great heed that you
alter your tone, if ever you should chance to fall into those Parts, where the
Old Popery Doctrine is still the measure of the Inquisitors Proceedings.

36. My next Instance was from your form of blessing a New Cross: To your Cavil
about my omitting some words, I have said enough heretofore; but the dear
Calumny must be continued, tho not only those two words were added, but so many
more set down, that you seem as much dissatisfied with my length here, as you
pretended to be with my brevity before.

37. You pray, That the Wood of the Cross which you bless, may be a wholesome
remedy to mankind: a strengthner of Faith; an increaser of Good Works; the
Redemption of Souls; a Comfort, Protection, and Defense against the Cruel Darts
of the Enemy. You incense it; you sprinkle it with Holy Water; you sanctify it
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and then both the Bishop and
People devoutly ADORE it, and Kiss it.

38. This is in short the sum of that Ceremony; In which you desire to know
what is Amiss? I answer; That take this whole Office together, with the
Ceremonies, Prayers, and other Circumstances of it, and it is Superstitious and
Idolatrous; and I shall not doubt once more to repeat, what before so much
offended you, That the Addresses you here make, look more like Magical
Incantations, than Christian Prayers. For,

39. First, If we enquire into the design of this Ceremony; it is to Consecrate
a piece of Wood or Stone, that it may become a fit Object of Adoration: which
being directy contrary to the Second Commandment, cannot be done without a very
great Sin.

40. 2dly. To this End, secondly, you pray that several benefits may proceed
from this Wood of the Cross; and if those words signify any thing, whereby you
beseech God, that it may be a wholesome remedy to Mankind, a strengthner of
Faith, etc. We must then look upon it, that you do believe, that by this
Consecration there is a Virtue, if not residing in it for all these purposes,
yet at least proceeding from it; which your Council of Trent confesses was one
of the things that made the Worship of Images among the Heathens to be
Idolatrous. Nor will your little Evasion here stand you in any stead; Reply, p.
32.
that you pray only that the Cross may be a means for the obtaining all these
Benefits; and that this is no more than a Preacher may desire for his Sermon,
or the Author of a good Book for what he is about to publish: For, 1. A piece
of Wood or Stone, carve it into what Figure or Shape you please, is not
certainly so proper a means for the conveying of such Benefits to men, as a
good Book or a good Sermon are: And therefore what may be very naturally
desired for the One, cannot without great Superstition be applied to the Other.
I may, and I heartily do pray, that what I am now writing may be a saving
remedy to you, by correcting your Faith, and increasing your Charity; because I
am persuaded here are Arguments proper to such an End, if it shall please God
to dispose you impartially to consider them; but now, I believe, you would
think me very Extravagant, should I pray to God to sanctify the Paper on which
it is printed, or my Bookseller's Sign that sells it, as you pray to God to
sanctify the WOOD of the Cross; that as often as you see the leaves of this
Book, or look upon the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, these good
effects may be wrought in you.

41. Again, 2. As the thing it self is not a proper means of producing these
Effects in us; so the manner by which you pray it may be done, renders it yet
more Superstitious. To get instruction by hearing or reading; to have ones
Faith confirmed, or Charity enlarged, or Zeal heightened, by pious
Considerations, or powerful Motives, all this is very natural; and we may
therefore lawfully pray to God for to bless them to us in order to these Ends.
But to pray to God, that by bowing our selves down before a Cross, we may find
health of Soul and Body; to sanctify a piece of Wood, that by ITS MERITS it may
free men from all the Sins they have committed, this must be more than a
natural Effect, neither the thing nor action being proper to produce it; and
whether such Requests be not more like Magical Incantations than Christian
Prayers, I shall leave it to any indifferent person to consider.

42. But 3dly, That this which you pretend, is not all that your Church designs
by those Prayers, is evident, in that this Exposition cannot possibly be
applied to several of those things which you ask of God in those Addresses. For
instance, you pray, That the blessing of the Wood upon which our Savior hung,
may be in the Wood of the Cross which you consecrate; and that by the Holiness
of that, he would Sanctify this; that as by that Cross, the World was delivered
from Guilt, so by the Merits of this, the devout Souls who offer it, may be
free from all the Sins they have committed. Now tell me in Conscience, if you
dare speak the truth; Is not all this somewhat more, than to pray that the
Cross may accidentally become a means of working good Effects in you, Reply p.
32, 33.
by putting you in mind of the price of your Redemption? Do you not here see
somewhat, which your Council of Trent calls the Idolatry of the Gentiles? viz.
an encouragement to Worship the Cross, as if some Divine Virtue were in it, for
which it ought to be Adored. For, so certainly he must do, who believes that by
these Prayers, the blessing of that Cross, on which our Savior hung, is in
this which he Worships; and that bowing down before it, he shall find Health
both of Soul and Body. Nay, but

43. 4thly, I must once more ask you that Question, I before proposed on this
Occasion; and which, tho you heartily rail at, yet you shift it off without
answering one wise word to it. If you design no real Virtue to proceed from the
Cross which you thus consecrate, nor allow any Adoration to be paid to it, but
intend it merely for a memorative Sign, and no more: To what purpose all these
Prayers, and Sprinklings, and Smokings, and Blessings, and other Ceremonies for
the Consecration of it? As to your Question, why we dedicate our Churches to
God? I will then allow it to be a Parallel, when you can prove that we pray
that God would Sanctify the Walls or Seats of them, That they may become a
wholesome Remedy to Mankind, and by their Merits free us from all the Sins we
have committed. In the mean time it shall suffice to tell you, that as all we
design in those Ceremonies, is no more than a solemn setting of it apart for
Prayer and Devotion to God only; so all we desire, is, that God would vouchsafe
favorably to accept our Offering of that Place to his Service, and give a
blessing to those Holy Offices that are from thenceforth to be peformed in it.

44. But 5thly; and to conclude this Point; He that would know what your
Intention in these Prayers is, need only consider what Prayers you make in
behalf of other things of the same Nature: And in which you so evidently desire
a Divine Virtue may proceed from the very things themselves which you Sanctify,
that there is no doubt to be made of it. I shall give but one Instance of this,
viz. the Prayer you make at the Consecration of your Agnus Dei's; in which you
thus Address your selves to God.

Do thou vouchsafe to Bless, Sanctify, Sacrar. Cerem. Lib. I. c. de Consecr.
Agn. Dei.
and Consecrate them, that being sanctified by thy liberal Benediction, they
may receive the same Virtue against all diabolical Subtilties, and the deceits
of the evil Spirit; that for those who carry them devoutly about them, no
tempest may prevail against them, no Adversity may get the Dominion over them,
no pestilent Breath, no Corruption of the Air, no Falling Sickness, no Storm at
Sea, no Fire, nor any Iniquity may overcome them, or prevail against them. 45.
Such are the admirable Virtues which you desire may proceed from these little
Images; and by the Prayers you make at the Consecrating of these, we may
easilly understand how to interpret your Addresses for the same purpose in the
other. But now to make your Practice exactly parallel with the old Heathen
Superstition; I must observe, That it is not enough that you carry these Agnus
Dei's devoutly about you, but they must be Worshipped too; For so your Prayer
of Consecration says; Bless, and Sanctify these blessed things, that through
the VENERATION and HONOR of them, the Crimes of us thy Servants may be blotted
out.

And now I shall leave it to you, to try once more your gift of Expounding, and
see if you can bring all this to your new Sense: And for your Encouragement in
it, I will promise you if you can, to give you something more of this matter,
which will be more difficult, and which I forbear at present to insist upon.

46. I should now go on to the next Instance; but I must entreat the Reader's
excuse, if I stop one moment to follow your rambling Discourse in two Points,
as little to your purpose, as the handling of them will appear to have been for
your Reputation.

Reply p. 33.
47. I. The first is concerning the Use of Holy Water.

Reply] Which you tell us was established by Pope Alexander the I. An. 121. and
is good for dispelling Incantations and Magic Frauds, rather than introducing
them; and has been famed for sundry Miracles, which God has been pleased to
work thereby in several Ages.

48. Answ.] For the Antiquity of this Usage, I wonder you should stop at Pope
Alexander I. when had you but looked into the Clementine Constitutions (a much
more authentic Piece than your Decretal Epistle) you might have found St.
Matthew to have been the Author of it. Lib. VIII. cap. 35.
And the one would have been as easily believed as the other.

49. Nor have you been less defective in setting out the Benefits of it, than
you were in your account of its Antiquity. And therefore to spare your Modesty,
I will help to publish them for you. Holy Water then (if all be true that is in
Print) is good, See Domenico Magri Nortizia de Vocaboli Ecclesiastici in aqua
Benedicta. Marsilius Columna Hydragiolog. Sect. 3. c. 2.
not only to drive away Evil Spirits, but more over to cure Infirmities; to
wipe out Venial Sins; to cleanse the Pollutions of defiled Consciences; to cure
Distractions; to elevate the Mind, and dispose it for Devotion; to obtain
Grace, and dispose Men for the Holy Sacrament. It cures Barrenness, preserves
the Health, purges the Air from Pestilential Vapors; besides a great many
other good things that are not so fit to be named. All the mischief is, that it
is nor certain it does any of these things; because (as De Cultu ss. l. 3. c.
7. p. 2226. B.
Bellarmine well observes) there is no Promise of God made to it; but yet being
sanctified by the Prayers of the Church for these ends, you may as securely
believe it, as many other things that have no better a Foundation.

50. And are not these now rare Follies for a Man to force us to publish
whether we will or no? Did ever any Mountebank set out his false Ware with
greater Vanity, than those of the Church of Rome have here done theirs? And
indeed was there ever less reason to believe his Remedies, than in this Case
there is to Credit your Pretenses? In short, seeing you sanctify Water in the
Name of God, by Prayer for these Ends, either show us some Promise, some
Warrant at least from the Holy Spirit of God so to do; or all reasonable Men
will look upon this after all you have said for it, as none of the least both
of your Follies, and of your Superstitions.

II. The other thing you mention is your Incense.
51. And this is indeed to our purpose; and I shall presently show you how
little you considered your own interest in the mention of it. I pass by your
pretended significations of it, as impertinent in a Discourse where Truth only
is sought. For the Antiquity of it you refer us to Dionysius and St. Ambrose;
in which you again show your skill in Church History. The one of these being an
Author that lived not till the latter end of the Fourth Century, and the other
probably much later. But now the use of Incense, in the Greek Church
especially, was of a much earlier date. The Apostolical Canons speak expressly
of it: And if that Oration of Hyppolitus about the End of the World, be truly
his, as from St. Jerome's mentioning of it in his Catalogue it seems to be; we
have then two considerable instances to assure us that it was in use in the
Greek Church even in the Third Century. You see how far I am from detracting
any thing from the force of your Argument: But yet now after all, without fear
of censuring Primitive Antiquity in this matter, whose Innocence I as freely
acknowledge, as I heartily honor its piety; I shall not doubt to say that the
present usage of it in your Church is so far from being innocent, that it is in
truth Superstitious and Idolatrous.

52. First, it is Superstitious. For indeed what else can we make of your
praying to God, Pontifical. Rom de Benedict. Nov. Cruc.
(as in this very Ceremony of Consecrating a Cross you do) that, He would
Bless, and Sanctify this Creature of Incense, that all weaknesses and
infirmities, and all the snares of the Enemy perceiving its smell, may fly and
be separated from his Creatures; that they may never be hurt by the biting of
the Old Serpent, who have been redeemed with the precious blood of his Son.

53. Now if you make this prayer in faith, that it is pleasing to God, and have
a confidence that it shall be accepted by him, you must then show us some
grounds, some security in the Word of God for it. But if you cannot do this,
what is it but Superstition, that is, a vain and fond service, to entreat the
favor of God in the usage of a thing to which he has neither annexed any
promise, nor for the doing whereof has he any where given us the least
encouragement. But,

54. Secondly, The Use you make of this Incense, is yet worse than the
Consecration of it. You offer it up to Creatures, nay to the very Images which
you worship; and in doing of which I do not see how you will excuse your selves
of being guilty of Idolatry. That the burning of Incense was part of that
Religious Worship under the Law, which God was pleased to appropriate to
Himself only, is not to be denied. It was indeed a more peculiar act of Divine
Worship, than that of bloody Sacrifices themselves. And therefore both the
Altar on which it was offered was covered with Gold, and it stood in a more
Holy place than that of the Burnt-offerings; and is in a more singular manner
said to be ' Most Holy unto the LORD, Exodus XX 8, 10. 2 King. XVIII. 4.
Bellarm. de SS. Beatit. l. 1. p. 2026. c. 13. D. Vasquez. in 3. Vol. 1. q. 25.
Disp. 104. Art. 3. c. 5. p. 735.
Exodus XX. 8, 10. Hence it was that King Hezekiah immediately brake to pieces
the Brazen Serpent, as soon as he considered that the children of Israel burnt
Incense before it. And yet if we enquire into the use that is made of it in
your Church, we shall find it offered not only to the Saints, but even to their
very Images and Relics. Vasquez ingenuously confesses, that the Israelites
gave no other Worship to the Brazen Serpent than what you give to your Images
at this day; and that Hezekias therefore commanded it to be broken in pieces,
not that he thought the people adored it as a God, but because he saw such a
Divine Worship paid to it. It is one of the chief things remarked by your own
Writers in the Life of a great Saint of your Order, St. Gerard Bishop of
Chanade in Hungary, Vie des Sts. Calend. Ben. ad Sept. 24.
whom you Commemorate September. 24. That he caused a Church to be built in
Chanade, His Episcopal See; and in it dedicated a Chapel to the Honor of the
Blessed Virgn; where having set up her Statue, He every day offered Incense to
the Figure, and took care by an Ordinance which He made, that Her Altar should
never be without fine Odours upon it, which should continually smoke to Her
Honor.

55. Now this being the undoubted Practice of your Church, and such as you
cannot deny to be contrary to the express Command of God under the Law;
Bellarm. de Imag. SS. l. 2. ^. 17. p. 2144.
insomuch, that Cardinal Bellarmine freely confesses it would have been
Criminal in a Jew to have offered Incense to any besides God only; either you
must evidently prove to us, That those Acts which were then appropriate Acts of
Divine Worship, are not so now, but remain indifferent to be paid to the
Creature, as well as the Creator; or you must give us leave to conclude, that
you do in this, attribute that Honor to an Image, which God has reserved as
peculiar to Himself; and are by so doing, guilty of Idolatry.

56. And thus have I dispatched the two Things you called me, without any
Provocation of mine, to examine; and which it may be you will now begin to
think you might as well have let alone: I return to my Defense, in which I am
next to consider, what you have to except against my third Argument, which I
brought to show, that you do truly and properly Adore the Cross; and that was
from your Good Friday Service.

Reply.] To this you Answer, Reply p. 35.
That you had here also shown my UNSINCERE TRICKS, in adding and diminishing
Words, to make your Church speak as I would have it. And you pronounce me once
more a CALUMNIATOR, for saying, that this proves that your Church does Adore
the Cross, in the utmost propriety of the Phrase. 57. Answ.] These are hard
Words; but I have always observed, that men are most uneasy when Truth touches
them to the quick. If you are not yet sensible that it was indeed a pitiful
Cavil to pretend I had false translated your Service, by what I have offered in
my former part from Mons. Imbert's Case, and who for opposing that
Interpretation of those Words which I delivered, was used after the manner that
I have declared; I am confident you are the only Person even of your own
Church, that needs to be convinced of it. In all the French Translations of
your Missal, I have ever seen, it is rendered in the very words that I gave it,
Behold the Wood of the Cross, come let us Adore I T: And particularly in that
of Mons Voisin, approved by those of your Church, even to excess, you will find
it in these express terms, Voila le Bois de la Croix, R. venez Adorons L E.

58. In the Missal of Salisbury, the Determination of that Address to the
Cross, is undeniably evident. The Priests uncover the Cross, and sing the whole
Antiphone, Behold the Wood of the Cross, come let us Adore; to which the Quire
kneeling down, answer; We adore thy CROSS, O Lord. And I cannot but observe,
that when Jo. Aegidius Canon of Sevil (of whom I have so often spoken) was
forced to retract, as Heretical, his denial of Supreme Divine Worship to the
Cross; Lud. de Par. de Orig. S. Inquis. l. 2. tit. 3. c. 8. n. 19.
Ludovicus de Paramo tells us, that the Fathers of the Inquisition convicted
him of his Heresy, especially by this Argument, taken from your Good Friday
Service; viz. That the Church on that solemn day did truly and properly Adore
the Cross, when it said, We Adore thy CROSS, O Lord.

Reply p. 37, 38.
59. And this may by the way suffice, to show how falsely you expound even those
Words, not to signify the Cross of Christ, but his Passion. Which besides,
that it is foreign to the Ceremony of Worshipping the Cross, which you are then
about; and not a little Nonsense into the bargin; is here interpreted, not only
by me, but by the Fathers of the Inquisition, of the Cross properly so called;
and whose Authority I presume you will not care to despise. Reply p. 38.
And now I shall leave it to any Jury that you please, to judge of my
Translation; and what Character you deserve for your little Reflection upon me.
And I do assure you withal, that I will never from henceforward so far distrust
my Reader's Memory, as to say the same things again, tho you should give me the
same occasion.

60. For the other Point; That this does plainly show, that your Church Adores
the Cross in the utmost propriety of the Phrase; If you will allow those great
Men I before quoted, to understand the Sense of your Church in this Point, then
it is plain, that my Assertion must stand good. You see they freely confess it;
nay, what is more, they pronounce you a Heretic for denying it. As for your
applying of this Worship to our Savior Christ; if you mean thereby to signify
that Christ only is worshipped in this Ceremony, exclusive to the Cross; it is
evidently false, seeing the whole Action; as well as Words, show, that the
Cross is at least worshipped together with him; or rather (to speak more
precisely) Christ is worshipped together with the Cross. Nor will Cardinal
Bellarmine, to whom you direct me, stand you in any stead. For even he allows
the Cross to be improperly and accidentally Worshipped with the same kind of
Worship that Christ himself is. And if you please to let me send you to another
Cardinal, Card. Capis. ib. ub supr. and par. XVI. page 670.
and who being both a great Schoolman himself, and Master of the Sacred Palace,
may be presumed to know somewhat of your Churches Sense, he will tell you that
your Cardinal Bellarmin was too wary in his Distinctions: And that he ought
without any of those softning Limitations, freely to have asserted, That the
Cross was truly and properly to be worshipped with Divine Adoration. And that I
think, is much the same with what I said, That you do Worship the Cross in the
utmost propriety of the Phrase.

61. But you have here two singular Arguments to excuse this Service from the
charge of Idolatry, and which ought not to be forgot. For,

Reply.] First, Reply p. 38.
St. Paul (you say) looked upon it to be no Superstition, to fall on our Face in
the assembly, and Worship GOD, 1 Cor. XIV. 25. Answ.] Ergo (o Lepidum Caput!)
If St. Paul may be Judge, it is no Idolatry in you to fall on your Faces in the
Assembly, and worship the CROSS. What would T. G. have given to have met with
such a Consequence in his Learned Adversary? But indeed we needed not this
Proof to convince us (in that Gentleman's Phrase) that you never looked over
Aristotle's Threshold, however your ill Genius has prompted you to become a
Controvertist.

62. Well, but if St. Paul wont do, yet at least you are sure the Primitive
Christians were on your side. And you prove it by an Instance most fit to keep
company with the foregoing Argument. The Case in short is this.

Reply.] St. Athanasius relates how some Jews in his time, Reply p. 38.
in the City of Berthus (Berytus) in Syria, used great Indignities to a
Crucifix, which a Christian had accidentally left behind him, when he removed
from his Lodgings. And you desire your Antagonist to answer you this Question:
Whether I would have excused those Jews, because they did those Actions to an
inanimate Being; or would not rather have interpreted their Intention, as
passing from the Cross to our Blessed Savior. 63. Answ. This is indeed a most
melting Argument, and which as I remember, set all the good Fathers of the
second Council of Nice, a crying. But Sir, be not you too much affected with
it, for I will venture to give you that Consolation, which one of your De la
conformite des merveilles anciens avec les moderns, Par. 1. Chapter 25. P. 389.
Brethren once did his Congregation in France; when having preached in a most
Tragical manner about the Passion, not of a Crucifix, but of our Blessed
Savior himself, insomuch, that the whole Assembly was in Tears at it; the good
Father bid them not weep, for that, after all, it may be it was not true. For

1st, As to the Book which you cite for this goodly Story, it is certain it was
written above 420 years after Athanasius was in his Grave, and is of no manner
of Credit among the Learned.

2dly, As to the Story: It was invented in the time of Irene the Empress, when
all the World was set upon making and finding out Fables and Miracles, for
establishing the Worship of Images.

3dly, All the Authority we have, that ever there was any such thing done, and
that it was not a mere Invention (as were many others of the like kind at that
time) is that of Sigebert, whose Chronicle besides, that it was written yet
another 400 years after this supposed Insult upon the Crucifix, Bell. de Scrip.
Eccles. p. 283.
was also an Author whom Bellarmin himself confesses, is not to be credited in
every thing he says. And especially, when in all probability he had no other
Warrant for it, than the Acts of the Council of Nice, and the pretended
Treatise of St. Athanasius, which you quote for it. So unlucky a thing is it
for you to meddle with Church History.

64. But whether the Relation be Truth or Fable; The Question is put, and must
be Answered: Would I not have thought that these Jews hereby intended to
affront our Savior Christ? I answer, Yes; No doubt they did. And why then (say
you) should I not in like manner interpret this Service of yours to terminate
not upon the Crucifix, but to tend to him who suffered upon the Cross? I
answer, 1. That had you put your Question as you ought, you should have asked,
Why then we do not look upon your Intention to be to Honor, not the Cross, but
Him that suffered upon it. Now there is a very great Difference between these
two. And however your Friend T. G. supposes, That Actions must necessarily go
whither they are intended; yet I think both he and you ought by this time, to
be satisfied of the falseness of that Maxim? And therefore should we allow your
Intention to be only to worship Christ, and not the Cross, yet it does not
thence follow that all your worship must by the Interpretation of Gods Law
terminate upon him. But now, 2. I have shown, that for all your Pretenses, it
is not your Intention that your Worship should so terminate upon Christ, as not
to terminate also upon the Cross together with him. 3. If it were, yet for all
your intention you would nevertheless be far from Honoring Christ: seeing that
to worship Christ by an Image is a prohibited Act; and God cannot be Honored
in the very same Act in which he is disobeyed. And though an intention to
dishonor Christ, by abusing his Image, is sufficient to do it, (as in all
other Cases, one ill Circumstance will make the whole Action to be Evil;) yet a
good intention alone is not sufficient to make an Act good, nor by consequence
for the glory of God, unless that Intention it self be also governed by the
Rules of His Commandments. For otherwise a man might do the worst things with a
Good intention, and that should be sufficient to sanctify all his Villainies. So
far have you hitherto been from producing the least shadow of an Answer to
overthrow the force of my Allegations. My Last Instance was:

65. Fourthly; From the Hymns of your Church. Reply, p. 39.
In which I showed that you address your selves to the Cross, and beg spiritual
Graces of it; and that you could not say the Cross was here put by a Figure to
signify Christ crucified upon it; because the very words of the Hymns show,
that it is the Material Cross as distinguished from Christ, of which they speak.

66. And here you are in a great distress; you catch at every thing that comes
near you; but for the most part without considering whether it be to any
purpose or no. As for instance: You observe, First, That I am brisk and
confident, and have a mind to ' expose your Literature as well as your
Idolatry. But, Sir, may I beg leave to ask you on this Occasion the very same
Question that you do Me. Who is it you mean, when you say, Ib. p. 40.
I have a mind to expose YOUR Literature? If you understand that of your Party,
I must tell you I am so far from exposing it, that I shall presently show you
that they are the most Learned Men of your Church whom I follow in the
Application of that Hymn I alleged. But if by YOUR Literature you meant your
own, you have then made a most unlucky piece of Work of it, in joining your
Literature and your Churches Idolatry together; and I doubt your Brethren will
have but little cause to applaud the Comparison. For do but grant it to be as
easy to Prove the One, as it is to Expose the Other, and I will never desire a
fairer Advantage against both, than you have here offered to Me. For,

67. Secondly, You say I must confess that your Churches Hymns were made by
Poets, unless I will be so great a Hypocrite as to deny that Prudentius and
Fortunatus were Poets. I suppose Prudentius and Fortunatus clubb'd together to
make the Hymn that I refer to: Only the mischef is, that the One lived in the
End of the IVth, the other not till about the middle of the Vth Century. Nay,
but what now if neither of these were Author of that Hymn? I am sure Gretser, a
very inquisitive Man in these matters, speaks very doubtfully of it, Lib. 1. de
Cruce, c. 35.
and leaves it in Question, whether Venantius Fortunatus, or Theodulphus Bishop
of Orleans, was the Author of it; and He lived yet later, about the beginning
of the IXth Century. But to let this pass; and consider,

68. Thirdly, How you prove these Men to be Poets, for indeed it is very
remarkable. You tell me, that if I will but look into the Corpus Poetarum, I
shall find them to have had a place among the Poets. A most undoubted way this,
to find out whether an Author were a Poet or a Schoolman; And I dare say you
were beholden to no man's Literature but your own for this Remark.

69. Well, but to grant that which I perceive you do not know very well how to
go about to prove, that the Author of this Hymn, whoever he was, was a Poet;
what will follow? Why then you say, Fourthly, I shall presently find the Figure
he there uses; his Title being not Of the CROSS, but of the PASSION of our
LORD. And then you take a great deal of pains to prove, what no man ever
denied, that the Cross in Holy Scripture is oftentime put to signify, the
Force, Effects, and Merits of Christ's Death and Passion. Now if this be any
thing to the purpose, as all that drops from a Person of your Literature must
be supposed to be; then I must conclude, that seeing the Title of that Hymn is
'Of the Passion of our Lord, wherever I meet the word CROSS in it, I am to
understand it not of the Material Cross, but of Christ's PASSION. This you must
mean, or else all this ado is mere Reverie, and Impertinence. Now then let us
see what mad work we shall according to this new Exposition make of that Hymn.

The PASSION of our King comes forth; The mystery of the PASSION shines; upon
which PASSION the Maker of our Flesh was hanged in the Flesh.

Beautiful and bright PASSION! Adorned with the purple of a King. Chosen of a
fit Stock to touch such sacred Members.

Blessed PASSION! upon whose Arms the price of the World hung. Hail, O Passion!
our only Hope; In this time of the PASSION, increase righteousness in the
Godly, and give pardon to the Guilty.

70. Now this I am confident a man of so much Literature as you are, will not
allow to be a proper paraphrase of this Hymn: And if instead of the Passion,
you put Christ for the Cross, this will yet more increase the Nonsense and
Confusion. In short; If all the Corpus Poetarum were alive, and should lay
their Heads together with you, they could not find out any of their Figures
that would do the business; but must have some new Ecclesiastical Figure found
out to make the Cross signify Christ and his Passion, at the same time, and in
the same place in which it distinguishes both from the Cross. And such a Figure
I do say would be as Great a Mystery, in Verse, as Transubstantiation is in
Prose. And I desire you, if you can, to give me but one parallel Text of
Scripture, in which the Cross is at once taken both literally for that Cross on
which Christ suffered; and figuratively, for Christ and his Sufferings upon it.

71. In the mean time it shall suffice me Once more to mind you of what I
perceive you have nothing to say to; viz. That Aquinas and his Followers, who
have been sometimes reckoned men of Literature in your Church, have understood
this Hymn according to the plain and literal meaning of it: and that so
confidently as to conclude from it, that your Church holds Divine Honor to be
due to the Cross. We ought to worship the Images themselves ( says Soto) for
the Church does not say, We worship THEE, O Christ; Soto de Just. and Jure. l.
2. q. 3. Art. 2. Cathar. de Cult and Ador. Imag. p. 133.
But, We adore thy CROSS, O Christ. And again, O CRVX AVE, etc. We direct our
Words and signs of Adoration to the Images, (says Catherine) to which likewise
we burn Incense: as when we say to the CROSS, O Crux Ave. And to the same
purpose, Marsilius ab Ingen; Ludovicus de Paramo; Philippus Gamachaeus, etc.
See Dr. St. Answer to T. G. Part 2.

72. But if all this will not yet satisfy you, but you are still resolved to
adhere to your new Figure, I will then give you another Instance, and which I
believe may be Prose, for I do not remember I ever saw it in the Corpus
Poetarum, though this I shall leave to your Literature to determine: And I pray
be pleased to send us the Paraphrase of this Antiphone, according to your New
Method of Expounding: O CROSS! brighter than all the Stars; famous in the
World; Breviar. Romans May 3. p. 797. Paris 1643.
exceeding amiable to Men; more holy than all things; which alone have been
thought worthy to bear the weight of the World. Sweet Wood! bearing the sweet
Nails, and sweet burdens; SAVE the present Company gathered together this day
to THY PRAISE.

And this may serve for the Second Point; which was, To make good the Charge I
had brought against you, of giving Divine Worship to Images. I proceed now
finally to show;

SECT. III. That the Church of Rome thus Worshipping of Images is truly and
properly guilty of Idolatry.
73. THERE is nothing in all our Disputes with those of the Church of Rome that
seems so much to offend them, as this Charge. They think it not only
unreasonable to suppose that men in the clear light of Christianity should be
capable of falling into Idolatry, but even destructive of the very nature of a
Church, and by consequence contrary to all those Promises of Christ in his
Gospel, 'That the Gates of Hell should never prevail against it; And indeed
were our Notion of Idolatry the same with what some of their late Advocates
have set forth as the true and only Notion of it, Reasons for Abrogating the
Test, p. 80, 81.
I should not at all wonder at their resentments; but rather confess that we
had justly deserved all those Reproaches which their intemperate Pens have of
late bestowed upon us.

74. But whatever their opinion of the true and only Notion of Idolatry be, yet
common equity should have taught them to confess, that we mean no more in our
charge of it against them, than this, That those of the Church of Rome, in
their worship of the Host, of Saints and Images, do give that Honor to the
Creature, which ought to be given only to God. We do not pretend that you have
either renounced the Worship of the Supreme Deity; or that you do adore either
the Sun, Moon and Stars; or even Angels and Saints as such. And therefore
howsoever you may dislike our Notion of Idolatry, yet you ought not to revile
us for fixing a false Charge against you, but to show that we give an ill Name
to a true Charge. And because I now desire not to be mis-understood, I do first
of all declare, that by my present Conclusion I intend no more than this, That
you do give the proper Acts of Divine Worship to Images, as I have already
showed you do to Saints; and that this is truly and properly Idolatry.

75. To discharge therefore this last part of my Undertaking as I ought to do;
I will proceed distinctly upon these two things, Is It. To fix our Notion of
Idolatry, against those New Idea's that have of late been given of it. IIdly.
To show, that according to the true Notion of it, the Church of Rome in her
Worship of Images is guilty of Idolatry.


I. POINT.
I. Of the true Nature of Idolatry.
76. This is what you desire me to reflect upon, Reply, p. 29.
and I hope it will not be thought amiss if I here with all imaginable
tenderness communicate my Reflections to you.

Reply, p. 28.] Three things (you say) there are required to make that Honor
which we do pay to any thing, become Idolatrous. 1st, The Understanding must
acknowledge an Excellency in the Object truly Divine, and worthy of Adoration
in the strictest sense, where really there is no such Excellency. 2dly, The
Will must have a propension and inclination to it as such, and pay that Honor
to it. And Lastly, the Body must pay the exterior Obeisance, of bowing,
kneeling, prostrating, kissing, etc. in pursuance of this interior Love and
Knowledge. 77. Ans. That is to say, that no One is an Idolater, but what takes
somewhat to be God that indeed is not so, and upon that account gives the
Worship due to the Supreme God to a Created Being. And this explains what you
had said before; Reply, p. 27.
that you wonder how it could enter into the Minds of Men of common sense to
conceive it possible, that in the clear light of Christianity, where all
Persons are taught there is but One God to whom Adoration is only due, they
should yet fall down and Adore a Stock or a Stone, and pay divine Honor to it.
That the Idolatry of the ancient Jews and Heathens consisted in believing a
plurality of Gods, and adoring them as such: Ibid. p. 28.
So that in short, let men but keep to the Knowledge of the One true God, and
not worship Saints, or Images, as such; and then there is no danger of Idolatry
for any Other Worship that may be paid to them.

78. Reasons for Abrogating the Test, p. 71, etc.
And now let Idolatry be as stabbing and cutthroat a word as it will; Be its
punishment, if it were possible, greater than what a Reverend Author has lately
told us is its least, Death and Damnation; If this be the only Idolatry, viz.
to worship somewhat else besides God, as supposing it to be very God; I dare
confidently affirm in behalf of all those Popular Divines that have ever used
that scolding word, That the Church of Rome is not Idolatrous in the worship of
Saints or Images, nor has it in this sense ever been charged by us as such. But
to show the Vanity of this Pretense; and yet more clearly express what we mean
by this Charge, I will now very plainly examine these two things: I. Whether,
according to the Scripture-Notion of Idolatry, those may not be guilty of it,
who yet both Know and Worship the One true God? II. How such Persons may become
Guilty of it?


I. Whether, according to the Scripture-Notion of Idolatry, those may not be
guilty of it, who yet both Know and Worship the One true God?

79. And here it is not my design to enter on any large Discourse about the
general Nature of Idolatry; but still remembering the particular Point before
me, to prove it only in such Instances, as are more immediately applicable to
it. And such are especially these two: 1st, The Idolatry of the Golden Calf.
2dly, Of the Calves of Dan and Bethel.


Reasons for Abrog. the Test, p. 85.
80. As to the former of these, it has of late been suggested, That it was made
by Aaron as the Symbol of the Egyptian Apis or Osyris; and to whose Idolatry
the Israelites now returned in the Worship of it. But this is indeed a very
weak Suggestion; and whosoever will but consider the Circumstances of what was
done by that People on this occasion, will presently see, that they designed
that Calf to be the Symbol not of any Egyptian Deity, but of the true God, whom
accordingly they worshipped in presence of it. And this will appear;

81. 1st, From the occasion of this Idolatry; which was not any Infidelity as
to the true God, or that they had now any better Reasons given them for the
Worship of others besides him; but because Moses delayed to come down from the
Mount, Exodus XXXII.
therefore they urged Aaron to make them a God, that might go before them. They
had now rested a long time in that place, and were impatient to go on toward
the Land of Promise. But having now no Moses to enquire of Gods Pleasure, they
wanted an Oracle to consult upon these Occasions. And therefore they cried out
unto Aaron, Up, make us Gods that shall go before us, for as for this Moses the
man that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of
him.

82. Now that this was all they intended by it, will appear, 2dly, From the
Character which the People presently gave to the Calf, as soon as it was made:
This is thy God; Ibid. ver. 4.
or as the Chaldee Paraphrast renders it, This is thy Fear, O Israel, which
brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. For sure the People were not so
stupid as to think it was either that Image which had brought them up out of
Egypt; or that the Gods of Egypt had plagued their own People for their sakes,
and with a high hand delivered them out of their Power. No, doubtless they
understood by it their God, Exodus XX.
who but just before at the delivery of the Law, had assumed this as his own
peculiar Character, I am the LORD thy God, which have brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt, and out of the house of Bondage. And this naturally Suggests to
me a third Evidence of this Truth.

83. From the Title which Aaron himself gave to that God, of which this Calf
was the Symbol. Ver. 5. And when Aaron saw it, Ibid 5.
he built an Altar before it; and Aaron made Proclamation and said, To morrow
is a feast unto the LORD. This was the peculiar and incommunicable name of the
God of Israel, which he assumed unto himself, Exodus VI. 2. when he renewed his
Covenant with them; and we do not find any one place in all the Holy Scripture,
where it has ever been attributed to any other.

84. 4thly, Had the People hereby designed this to be the Symbol of the
Egyptian Deities; how comes it to pass, that (as we read in the next Verse)
they offered Burnt-offerings, Ver. 6.
and Peace Offerings unto it. For this, both the Scripture tells us, Reasons
for Abr. the Test, p. 114, etc.
was an Abomination to the Egyptians; and a late Advocate for you, freely
confesses, that they esteemed Bullocks and Rams to be Sacred Animals, and
therefore never offered any of them to their Gods.

85. Lastly, The Scripture plainly distinguishes this Idolatry from that of the
Egyptians, and makes the one to have been the Punishment of the other. It is
confessed, or rather contended for by the Author I but now mentioned, that the
Egyptian Idolatry consisted in worshipping the Sun, Moon and Stars, as the
Supreme Deity: Now, this St. Stephen tells us, that God afterward permitted
them to fall into, and therefore it must have been some other Idolatry, which
in this Case they were Guilty of; For speaking of their setting up the Golden
Calf, Acts VII. 41. He thus goes on, ver. 42. THEN God turned, and gave them up
to worship the Host of Heaven.

86. As for the other Instance I proposed to consider; The Calves of Dan and
Bethel; the Occasion of their making, was this. When the ten Tribes had thrown
off Rehoboam from being their King, and had chosen Jeroboam to Reign over them;
This new Usurper, fearing lest if the People went up at the yearly Sacrifices
to Jerusalem, where Rehoboam still Reigned over the other two Tribes, it might
in time occasion their falling away from him, set up two Calves in Dan and
Bethel, and made Altars before them, and persuaded the People, 1 Kings XII. 28.
saying, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: Behold thy Gods, O
Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt.

87. Now that Jeroboam intended these Calves to be Symbols of the God of
Israel, appears, 1st, From most of those Reflections I before made. He gives
them the same Character by which they constantly understood the God of Israel;
Behold (says he) thy God, that brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. He
offered Sacrifies before them, and consecrated the Priests that Ministered unto
them, with a young Bullock and seven Rams. 2 Chronicles XIII. 9.
All which is exactly agreeable to what God required of them, but was utterly
inconsistent with the Idolatry of Egypt. But

88. 2dly, We have some more peculiar Proofs of this matter. I speak not now of
the readiness of the People in complying with him, which it is not imaginable
they would so easily have done, had he intended to lead them to the Worship of
strange Gods. Nor will I insist upon the danger, which so sudden an Innovation
might have brought to this new King, and who was not so little a Politician, as
to attempt such an Alteration at a time when he was hardly yet well established
in his new Usurpation. These are indeed great Probabilities, but such as this
Cause needs not; seeing it has the Evidence of Holy Scripture fully confirming
it; It being certain that the Idolatry of these Calves did not take them off
from the Service of the true God. Let us examine all along the History of the
Kings of Israel; we shall find them constantly worshipping the Jehovah, the God
of Israel. Jehu was zealous for him; he destroyed the Idolatry of Baal out of
his concern for the Lord; and had the Kingdom by Gods own immediate Promise
settled upon his Posterity for his so doing. 2 King. X. 29.
And yet it is expressly said of him, Howbeit from the Sins of Jeroboam, who
made Israel to Sin, Jehu departed not from after them, viz. the Golden Calves
that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.

89. Who was it but the true God for whom Elijah appeared so zealous? 1 King.
XVIII. when he entered into that famous trial with the Prophets of Baal; If the
Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, than follow him. And the Fire came down
from Heaven, and burnt up the Sacrifice, and all the people confessed, saying,
Ibid. 39.
' The Lord he is the God; The Lord he is the God.

90. Hence it is, that when Ahab fell into that other kind of Idolatry which
consists in worshipping of false Gods, he is represented as much more heinously
offending God, than the other Kings of Israel, who worshipped the Calves of Dan
and Bethel, 1 King. XVI. 31.
1 Kings XVI. 31. And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him
to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, that he went and served Baal,
and worshipped him.

91. By all which it undoubtedly appears, that in both these cases, they
designed by those Calves to worship the true God; and then seeing it is confessed
they did commit Idolatry in that service, it must remain that men may know, and
serve the true God, and yet by worshipping him in this prohibited manner, may
in the interpretation of the Divine Law commit Idolatry.

92. I shall conclude this with that Confession which the Evidence of truth in
this matter has extorted from Cardinal Bellarmin and and some others of your
own Communion; where answering this objection, that when the Golden Calf was
set up, Aaron proclaimed a Feast not to any other strange God but (...) to the
LORD, to the Jehovah, Bellarm. lib. 2. de Imag c. 13. p. 2 130, 2131.
It is (says he) the solution of Abulensis and others, that there were two
sorts of Idols among the Hebrews. One without the name of any certain God, as
that of Micha, Judges XVII. and perhaps the Golden Calf which Aaron made, Exodus
XXXII. and Jeroboam renewed, 1 King. XII. for the Scripture does not call the
Calf the God Moloch, or the God Baal, but always says, 'These are thy GODS, O
Israel. The other sort of Idols had a certain name; as Baal, Moloch, Ashtoreth,
Chamos, etc. as is plain, 1 King. XI. etc. They say therefore, and that not
improbably, that it may be admitted of the former kind, That the Jews did think
that in the Idol THEY WORSHIPPED THE TRVE GOD.

93. And now tho this might suffice to show how consistent the guilt of
Idolatry is with the acknowledgment of one true God, yet will I add a
reflection or two more, for the farther confirmation of it. For,

First, Were such a Notion as this of Idolatry to be admitted, it would serve
no less to excuse the Heathens than those of the Church of Rome of the guilt of
it. For however they worshipped other inferior Deities, as these do Saints and
Angels with a lower degree of Religions Honor; yet even they too acknowledged
one supreme God, who was over all, and to whom the highest Worship and
Adoration alone was due. Defense of the Disc. of Idolatry, par. 1
This has been so largely proved by T. G's worthy and learned Antagonist, not
to mention any others who have occasionally treated of this Argument, that I
shall not need to enter on any particular induction in order to the asserting
of it.

94. Secondly, It cannot be questioned but that this new Notion of Idolatry,
set up on purpose to excuse you from that Imputation, is utterly repugnant to
the Principles of the Ancient Fathers, who certainly charged those with
Idolatry, who yet believed and worshipped the very same God with themselves.
Thus St. Athanasius charges the Arrians with Idolatry for adoring Christ,
Athanas contr. Arrian. Orat. 1. p. 286.
whom they esteemed to be a Creature. He tells them, that no supposition of any
Excellencies whatever in him, although derived from God, would excuse them. But
that if they thought him a mere man, and yet adored him, they would be found
worshippers of men for all that. Ib. 387.
Nay he doubts not to parallel them with the Gentiles, and to compare the
service they paid to our Savior upon this supposition, with that which the
other gave to their inferior Deities. And the same was the opinion of all the
rest of those great men, Gregory Nazianzen, Nyssen, Epiphanius, etc. and whose
words are so well known, that I shall not need to transcribe them.

95. But now that I have mentioned Epiphanius, I may not forget another sort of
Idolatry exploded by him, and yet more near our purpose than the foregoing. I
mean that Worship which some Superstitious Women in his time paid to the
Blessed Virgin by offering a Cake to her. Now this that Holy Father condemns as
downright Idolatry, and the device of the Devil. And to show how consistent the
charge of Idolatry is with the worship of one God, he gives us a similitude
that would almost imply a necessity of acknowledging the one true God to
complete the nature of it: Idolatry (says he) comes into the world through an
Adulterous inclination of the mind, which cannot be contented with one God
alone: Like an Adulterous Woman that is not satisfied with the chaste embraces
of one Husband, but wanders in her lust after many lovers. So possible did
those Ancient Fathers think it to be for Men in the clear light of
Christianity, and retaining the acknowledgment of the true God, nevertheless to
commit Idolatry.

96. I might add here the Exhortations of the New Testament, where both S. Paul
and S. John, among other Cautions to the Christians of their Times, place that
of fleeing from Idolatry; and this in such a manner, as evidently supposes them
very capable of continuing the Profession of Christianity, and the Knowledge and
Worship of God, and yet of falling into it. But I shall content my self,
lastly, to close up this with the Confessions of Learned Romanists themselves,
who have acknowledged Idolatry to be consistent with the Worship of the true
God.

97. S. Thomas defines Idolatry to be a Sin, 22dae q. 94. Ar. 3. resp. ad 2.
Cajet. page 340
whereby the singularity of God's Dominion is taken from him: And Card Cajetane
in his Notes upon this same Question, supposes that a Christian may commit
Idolatry, and yet be so far from renouncing the true God, as not to violate any
part of his Faith in him. Gregory de Valentia, says it is Idolatry; Lib. 1. de
Idol.
Whenever a Man intends to apply to a Creature, either by Words or by
Actions, any estimation which is proper unto the Majesty of God, whether it be
done directly or indirectly. Vasquez in 3. T. 1. p. 721.
Vasquez reckons those to be Idolaters, who give to an Image the Service due to
God; and defines an Idol in general to be, Whatsoever is worshipped as God that
is not truly so. Now all these either manifestly suppose the Knowledge of the
True God, or at least do not exclude it.

98. But what need I insist upon Generals, seeing if we may believe those of
your own Communion, you are not only capable, for all your Christianity, of
falling into Idolatry; but in this very Point of Image Worship, are actually
guilty of it. For,

1st, Bellarm. de l. mag. Ss. l. 2. c. 24. p. 2153. C.
Cardinal Bellarmine disputing against that which I have shown by such a number
of Witnesses to be the True Doctrine of your Church, viz. That the Image of
Christ is to be worshipped with proper Divine Worship; doubts not to say this
is Idolatry; And therefore argues in this manner against it: That this Worship
is either given to the Image for it self, or for the sake of another. If for it
self, it is plainly IDOLATRY; if for another, it is not proper Divine Worship,
because the very Nature of that is to be given for it self. Again; Either the
Divine Worship (says he) which is given to the Image relatively for another, is
the same with that which is given to God, or it is an inferior Worship. If it
be the same, then the Creature is equally worshipped with God, which CERTAINLY
IS IDOLATRY. For Idolatry is not only when GOD IS FORSAKEN, and an Idol
worshipped, but when an Idol is worshipped together with God. If it be an
Inferior Worship, then it is not the proper Divine Worship.

99. So that now then the Point is reduced to a fair issue. Either we must pay
the same Adoration to the Image that we do to the Original, and then Card.
Bellarmine pronounces us Idolaters; Or we must give it only an Inferior Honor,
and then Card. Capisucchi, and the Inquisition, damn us as Heretics. Nay, but
there is Idolatry committed go which way you will. For Vasquez, In 3. T. 1. p.
778.
another Learned Jesuit, and whose Works have been no less approved than Card.
Bellarmine's, tells us; That if a Man give inferior Worship to an Image,
distinct from that which is given to the Thing represented by it, he thereby
incurs the guilt of IDOLATRY, because he expresses his submission to a mere
inanimate Thing, that has no kind of Excellency to deserve it from him. And
now seeing there is so much danger of Idolatry, whatever the Honor be that is
given to Images, I hope we may be the easier excused, if admonished by these
Confessions, and directed by God's Commandments, we refuse to give them any
Honor at all. And thus much be said to the first Point, That a Man may be
capable of falling into Idolatry, though he continues both to know and worship
the One true God. My next Business is,

2dly, To show, How this may be done by him.

100. I shall mention only two ways, and which I have already before
insinuated; viz.

1. By worshipping the True God after an Idolatrous manner. 2. By giving Divine
Worship to any other besides Him.
1. By worshipping the True God after an Idolatrous manner.

101. This was the Case of the Israelites, in the Examples I have before
mentioned, of the Calves of Aaron and Jeroboam. They directed their Adoration
to the JEHOVAH, the LORD their God that brought them up out of the Land of
Egypt. To him they proclaimed the Feast, and offered Burnt- Offerings and
Sacrifices upon their Altars. Yet because they set up a Symbol of him, contrary
to his Command, and worshipped him after an Idolatrous manner, they are
expressly charged as Idolaters in Holy Scripture; and the Worship that was
intended by them to God, is represented as given to a Molten Image.

102. And the same was the Case of that other Image which Card. Bellarmine
joins with these, viz. the Teraphim of Micha, Judge. XVII. that these were
designed for the Service of the True God, is plain, seeing both his Mother is
said to have consecrated the Silver of which they were made (...) to the
JEHOVA, Verse. 3. and Micha himself hired a Levite of the LORD's to be his
Priest, Verse. 10, 11. And he comforted himself upon this consideration, Verse.
13. Now know I that the LORD will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my
Priest. And again, Chap. xviii. 5. The Priest asked Counsel of GOD; for some of
the Danites that enquired of him, and GOD, or the JEHOVA, gave them a true
Answer. It is supposed by some in favor of this Micha, that being a Religious
Man, and the public Service of God being very much obstructed by the miserable
Violence of those Times, he made himself a little Oratory, and placed in it all
the Furniture of the Tabernacle, with these Teraphim to resemble the Cherubims
of the Ark, whose Figure S. Hierome and others suppose them to have had. But
whatever becomes of this Fancy, that which I have to observe now is, that what
the Original Hebrew styles Teraphim, the old Vulgar Latin calls Idols; and in
that famous Passage, 2 Samuel xv. 23. they are both joined in the same rank of
Ilness with one another; For Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft; and to
transgress an Idol and a Teraphim: (...), so Symmachus renders it; and so both
the (...) and (...) in that place must undoubtedly be understood. Comm. Jude
17. Verse. 2.
And indeed Card. Cajetan himself confesses as to the very Point before us,
that the whole Work (however Micah intended it) was in God's estimation without
question Idolatry: And to whose Opinion we have already seen Card. Bellarmine
to have agreed; not to mention Tostatus and others whom he refers to as
acknowledging the same likewise.

103. 2dly, As for the other way by which a Man may commit Idolatry, who yet
both acknowledges and worships the True God, viz. by giving Divine Worship to
any other together with him; I have already offered Instances of that in the
Cases of the Arrians and Collyridians; the one of which for worshipping Christ,
whom they supposed to be but a Creature; the other for offering a Cake to the
Virgin Mary, are charged by the Ancient Fathers as guilty of Idolatry. Nor is
this without foundation from the Holy Scripture. For besides, that first of all
we find there " all Religious Worship appropriated to God only; and therefore
to give such Worship to any other, must be practically to set up another God.
To say nothing, 2dly, that if any such Worship has at any time been offered any
Holy Men or Angels, they have not only constantly refused it as a great
Abomination, but have still given this Reason for it, that they were Creatures,
and by consequence not to be adored: Stand up (says St. Peter to Cornelius) for
I also am a Man. Acts 10.26.
Sirs, Why do ye these things? Acts 14.15.
(says St. Paul to the Men of Lystra, who would have offered Sacrifice to him)
We are also Men of like Passions with you. Rev. 22.9.
See thou do it not, (says the Angel to St. John) for I am thy fellow Servant:
worship God. All which sufficiently show, that to worship any other besides
God, is to raise them above the state of Creatures, and in effect to make Idols
of them. We may observe, 3dly, That to give even the least part of that Service
which is due only to God to any Creature, is expressly called Idolatry. Thus
because we ought to trust in God only: Covetous Men who (as St. Paul tells
them) trust in uncertain Riches, Colos. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.5.
are in the New Testament called Idolaters. And sure those do not less deserve
this Character, who trust in the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, or by any other
Act of proper religious Worship, such as Prayer, and in one word all those
other Instances of religious Adoration I have heretofore mentioned, show that
they divide the proper Service of God with them.

Bellarm. L. C.. 98. supr.
104. Let us add to this, 4thly, That Cardinal Bellarmine himself confesses that
Idolatry is committed, not only when God is forsaken and an Idol worshipped,
but when an Idol is worshipped together with him. And this he proves from Exodus
xx. 23. Ye shall not make WITH ME Gods of Silver, etc. (...) i. e. says your
Learned Vatablus, Vatabl. in Loc.
to worship them together with Me: For I will that ye should worship ME ALONE,
and not join any Companion WITH ME.

105. I shall finish this with the Consideration of that Charge which S. Paul
brings against the Gnostick Heretics, and in which he plainly argues against
their Idolatry, Romans 1.25. " That they changed the Truth of God into a Lie, i.
e. says Theodoret, they gave the name of God to an Idol: and worshipped or
served the Creature (...) besides, but yet together with the Creator, who is
blessed for ever, Amen. For whereas ( says the same Father) they ought to have
worshipped the true God, they gave Divine Worship to the Creature; To the same
Accusation are they subject, who calling the only begotten Son of God of a
Creature, do yet worship him as God. For they ought in their Divinity either
not to rank him among the Creatures, but with God that begat Him, or if they
will have Him to be a Creature, they ought not to give Worship to Him as a
Deity.

106. Tom. 1. p. 385. C.
Hence Athanasius calls this the folly of the Arrians and Greeks: to worship
the Creature, besides or with the Creator. And again, The Apostle (says he)
accuses the Greeks that they worshipped the Creatures, seeing that they served
the Creature besides the Creator; seeing then the Arrians say that our Lord is
a Creature, and serve him as such, wherein do they differ from the Greeks or
Gentiles? And lastly, S. Jerome in answer to the charge of Vigilantius, who
accused them of Idolatry for worshipping the Relics of the Martyrs, utterly
renounces the Charge upon the same Foundation: Jeronim. Epist. ad Ripar. T. 3.
Erasm. fol. 54.
But as for us (says he) so far are we from adoring the Relics of the
Martyrs, that we do not worship the Sun or the Moon, not any Angels or
Archangels, not the Cherubims nor Seraphim, nor any Name that is named either
in this World or in that to come, lest we should serve the Creature rather than
the Creator, who is blessed for ever.

107. And thus have I endeavored in as short a compass as I could, to clear
the general Notion of Idolatry, as far as concerned the Point before me, and in
which I suppose you to have erred more for your Churches sake, than for any
great difficulty there is in understanding the nature of this Sin. It will now
be an easy task from these Principles to infer, (which is my next Point.)

II. That your Church in the Worship of Images is truly and properly guilty of
it.
And this I shall show according to what you desire; 1st, With reference to
those who hold that Images are to be worshipped with the same Worship as the
Things which they represent. 2dly, As it concerns their Opinion, who denying
this, yet allow an inferior Honor to them.


First, That they are guilty of Idolatry, who worship Images with the same
Honor as the Things which they represent.
108. Where first I must observe, that this, however of late opposed by you and
the rest of our new Representers, is yet not only the most general received
Doctrine of the Roman Church, but so esteemed to be the sense of your two
Councils of Nice and Trent, that Card. Capisucchi produces a long Catalogue of
your greatest Writers who have looked upon it as savouring of Heresy to oppose
it. And not only Monsieur Imbert in France, but also Aegidius Magistralis, and
the French Gentleman, whose Case I before represented, will assure you, that in
the Inquisitions of Italy, Spain, and Portugal, it is somewhat more than a
Scholastic Nicety, or a probable Opinion, which may without danger be opposed
by you. And therefore, tho to make good my promise, I shall also dispute this
Point with you too upon your own Principles; yet I must needs declare that it is
here I esteem my self truly to oppose the Doctrine of your Church in this
particular.

109. Now that they who hold this sort of Image Worship are thereby guilty of
Idolatry, is so evident that your own Card. Bellarmine could not forbear
reproaching them with it: And whose words I will once more produce, not more
for the Authority than the Weight of them; where maintaining this Conclusion,
That Images of themselves and properly are not to be worshipped with the same
Worship with which the Exemplar is worshipped, He thus argues against the
contrary Opinion: "Either that Latria or Divine Worship which is given to the
Image, for another is the same with that Worship which is paid to God, or it is
some inferior Honor: If it be the same, then the Creature is equally
worshipped with God himself, which is certainly Idolatry; For it is Idolatry,
not only to forsake God and worship an Idol, but to worship an Idol together
with God. As it is written, ye shall not make Gods of Gold or of Silver
together with Me. Thus this great Writer. And tho I ought not to expect such
free Declarations from you, whose business it is to dissemble, and soften, and
accommodate things all you can, yet have you plainly enough insinuated the very
same. For when you lay down this Position, Reply, Pref. page 18.
That the Image of our Savior Christ, or the Holy Cross, is upon no account
whatsoever to be worshipped with Divine Worship, that Worship being due only to
God: All you have to say for the other Opinion is, that it MAY, nay that is not
enough, it MAY POSSIBLY be defended, which is, I think, a tacit Confession,
that, to say the truth, you doubted it could not. It Is true, you afterward
grow more confident, and improve your POSSIBLY into EASILY; I say these
Expressions of the Schools MAY be EASILY defended; but then you add, that it
must be done by interpreting them so as not to shock this first Principle, That
God alone is to be worshipped; That is to say, by changing the Conclusion; and
whereas they say, That the Cross is to be worshipped together with Christ with
Divine Worship; you give it the new turn, That not the Cross, but Christ in
presence of the Cross is to be worshipped with Divine Worship. For otherwise
you had before told us, that the Holy Cross it self must upon no account
whatsoever be worshipped with Divine Worship; and again here, this first
Principle (say you) must not be shocked, That God alone is to be adored with
Divine Adoration.

110. It appears by this how uneasy you are in this Case, and it is not a
little Confirmation to us of the Security of our Condition, to see that you
whose concern it so much is to be very well assured of what you do, yet cannot
agree among your selves what Honor is to be given to Images. But one Party
thinks that cannot be maintained without Idolatry, which the other declares may
not be denied without Heresy. As for the Images of the Blessed Virgin and the
Saints, that those commit Idolatry who worship them with the same Religious
Worship that they pay to the Exemplars, will follow from what I have before
said of your worshipping the Blessed Virgin and Saints themselves. For if it be
Idolatry to give Religious Worship to the Prototypes, it must then be much more
so, to pay it to the Images.

111. For your other Images, those of our Savior Christ and the Holy Trinity,
I shall need no other Argument than that of Card. Bellarmine beforementioned,
to show the Worship of those too to be Idolatry. It being evident that to give
Divine Adoration to any Creature, that is, to worship any Creature as God, is
to make an Idol of it, and therefore the Service that is thereby paid to it
must be Idolatry. Now that this is the Case of those who hold this Opinion, if
what I have already cited from them be not sufficient to show, and especially
where they declare (as we have seen) that not only Christ, but the Image it
self too is to terminate the Divine Worship which is paid to Christ by it; I am
sure the Reason which they bring to establish their Conclusion will be more
than enough to do it: viz. That the same Indivisible Act is at once and
indivisibly the Worship both of the Image, Card. Capis. de cult. Im. qu. ii.
par. 9. page 650.
and of Christ represented by the Image. And if the Image of Christ be adored
with the same indivisible Adoration with which Christ is adored, that Adoration
must be the supreme Divine Adoration, seeing with such only Christ is to be
adored.

112. But how then does the Cardinal excuse this from being Idolatry. Ibid.
par. 18. p. 677.
He answers, That it is not Idolatry, because the Image as an Image is in that
respect Christ himself. For in this respect (says he) the Image of Christ is
not considered PRECISELY as it is a CREATVRE, but as it is a Divine Thing, and
Christ himself by Representation. And then he dogmatically concludes, That it
it not at all inconvenient that a CREATVRE as it is a Divine Thing, Ibid. 679.
and after a certain manner one with God, should be honored with the very same
Divine Honor, with which God himself is honored. In short, he confesses that
the Images of Christ, upon the account of their being so, may be adored with
the very same Adoration that Christ himself is; and that in such a respect it
is not at all inconvenient for the Creature to have Divine Worship paid to it.
He looks upon Idolatry to be then only committed when the (...) worshipped
exclusively to God, but that it is none to worship God by an Image, or to
worship an Image together with God. But yet since he confesses that Images
considered as Images, in their Representative Natures, are still but Creatures,
and to worship any Creature with the Worship due only to God (whatever the
pretense be for the so doing) is in effect to set up another God, which must
needs be Idolatry; It will remain that no pretense of Scholastic Niceties will
be able to excuse this great Man from Card. Bellarmine's censure of Idolatry;
Seeing (as he truly tells us) it is Idolatry not only to forsake God and
worship an Idol, but to worship an Idol together with God. But all this will
more evidently appear from the other Consideration, in which I am to show,

Secondly, That even those who deny this Supreme Divine Honor to Images, are
yet guilty of Idolatry in what they allow to them.
113. The truth is, the case of these Men is, I think, rather more inexcusable
than that of the other kind, because that (in S. Paul's words) Romans 1.32.
Knowing the Judgment of God that they which commit such things as these are
worthy of Death, they not only do the same, but (...). They assent to those who
do them. (...), so Theophylact; they defend and patronize them: (...). As
Theodoret very well observes upon this place.

114. Now that this is indeed truly your Case appears, 1st, In that at the same
time that you assert in express terms, that you do not worship Images, God
forbid: That the Cross is upon NO ACCOUNT WHATSOEVER to be worshipped with
Divine Worship; you nevertheless comply with those others before mentioned in
all the most forbidden Instances of Divine Adoration. You incense them, you
carry them solemnly in Processions, you consecrate them for this very end that
they may be worshipped, you prostrate your selves before them in the Church of
God, and in the time of Prayer, you desire several Graces to accrue to you by
your serving of them, nay you address your very Prayers to them, which your own
Aquinas makes use of to prove that a proper Divine Adoration is due to the
Cross; for having laid down this Conclusion, that the Cross is to be adored
with the same Adoration that Christ himself is; He immediately subjoins, Aqu.
3. p. qu. 25. ar. 4. in Corp.
And for this cause it is that we speak to the Cross, and pray to it as to
Christ himself. Where you must observe (says Card. Cajetan in his Notes on that
Passage) that S. Thomas brings our speaking to the Cross as an effect of the
same Adoration with which Christ is adored. For because we speak to the Cross
as Christ, it is a sign that we recur to the Cross as to Christ. By all which it
appears that you are in this matter (...), or self-condemned: If you believe
this Worship to be lawful and yet deny it, of Hypocrisy toward us; if you
think it to be Idolatrous, and yet comply with it, of a great Sin toward God.

115. And that which yet farther confirms me in this is, to consider what
wretched Evasions you make use of to excuse your selves in these Particulars.
Can any thing be more pitiful than the Expositions you have here offered, of
your Consecrating of Crosses, of your Good-friday-Service, and of the Hymns of
your Church, which I had alleged as Instances of that Worship you give to
Images? Do not these plainly show a desperate Cause: and that you are but too
sensible that your old Practices are not to be reconciled with your new
Pretenses.

116. If while I am endeavoring to convince you of Idolatry, I do by the way
discover your Insincerity, it is what I cannot help. But all the use I shall
make at present of these Remarks shall be to observe, that even those among you
who pretend the most to deny a Divine Worship to Images, yet must allow such
Acts of it as these I have here recounted. Now that even this will involve you
in this Guilt, is evident from the Scripture-Notion of Idolatry before
established. For I desire you to tell me, if you can, what did those Israelites
do when they worshipped the Golden Calf, that you do not at this day practice
in the very same manner? Was it, 1. that they worshipped God by an Image? But
if this be Idolatry, you cannot deny but that you do the very same. Or, was it,
2. that they did not refer their Worship finally to God, but terminated their
Adoration upon the very Image it self? Nay, but Aaron in express terms
proclaimed a Feast unto the Lord; and to whom can we suppose that they offered
their Burnt-offerings and their Peace Offerings, but to the same LORD to whom
the Feast it self was proclaimed?

117. To conclude; There is nothing in that whole History to make us doubt but
that they designed that Calf only as a Symbol of the God of Israel: And their
Idolatry by Consequence was no other than what the most moderate Men of your
Church must confess themselves to be guilty of, viz. That, contrary to God s
express Command, you set up Graven Images as Representations of our Savior
Christ and the Holy Trinity; and worship the infinite and incomprehensible God,
in a Figure made like unto a Mortal Man: Which God himself has warranted us by
his holy Word to call Idolatry.

118. It remains therefore upon the whole, that either you must show us to be
mistaken in our Notion of Idolatry; or you will never be able to acquit your
selves of the Charge of it. And when you have done this, we shall then only
tell you, that you commit a Sin in this Service, that you violate God's holy
Law which forbids it; but for the denomination of it, we shall leave it to you,
whose Sin it is, to give it what particular Name you your selves think fit.

Of RELICS.
119. IN the Point of Relics you offer only two things in answer to all that
I had said upon that Subject, Repl^ p. 42. etc.
viz.

Reply] First, That the whole of my Discourse proceeded upon verbal Dispute,
what we are to call that Honor which you give to them, and which you deny to
be properly Worship. Secondly, You once more egregiously cavil about the
Translation of that Part of the Council of Trent which concerns this Subject,
and deny that you seek to the sacred Monuments or Relics of the Saints for
the obtaining of THEIR Help and Assistance. 120. Answ.] For answer to which
Pretenses, because I as little love to prolong Disputes at any time, Reply,
ibid.
as you do when you have no more to say in order to the carrying of them on; I
will lay aside words, and bring the Issue to the things themselves, and show
how miserably you have prevaricated in this Point too, as wellas in the
foregoing, by proving, I. That you do properly worship the Relics of your
Saints. II. That you do seek to them for Help and Assistance.


And when this is done, I shall not need say any thing to prove that you here
also commit Idolatry; seeing you allow the Cases of Images and Relics to be
the same; Reply, p. 44.
and the Council of Trent makes this to be the very difference between the
Heathens and them, and that by which they hope to escape the Censure of
Idolatry, viz. That they do not believe any Divinity or Virtue in Images for
which they ought to be worshipped, or that any thing is to be asked of them, or
any trust to be put in them. Tho how truly they declare this, the account I
have before given of your consecrating both of Crosses and Agnus Dei's will
sufficiently show.

I. That you do truly and properly worship the Relics of your Saints.
121. This is a Point that in any other Age, or Country but ours, would have
needed no Proof. And it is not the least Argument of an innovating Spirit in
you, that no Words or Expressions are of any value with you, as often as you
are minded to give us what you call the Churches Sense. Let your Writers use
never so many Phrases to assure to us their Opinion that Relics are to be
worshipped, all this signifies nothing, they meant no more by it than an Honor
or Veneration due to the sacred Remains of those Saints who were once the
Temples of the Living God; Reply, p. 42.
and not a Worship or Adoration taken in its strict Sense. There is hardly an
Expression that can signify a proper Worship which your own Authors have not
made use of to declare the Service they thought due to them. I ADORE, WORSHIP,
embrace the Relics of the Saints, said one in the second Council of Nice, and
the whole Assembly resolved, Act. IV. That their Bones, Ashes, Rags, Blood,
and Sepulchers, should be ADORED, only Men should not offer Sacrifice unto
them. Card. Baronius speaks of it as an Honor done Him by Pope Clement VIIIth,
Annal. ad. Ann. 821.. 14.
that tho most unworthy of so great an undertaking, he was yet sent by him to
examine and ADORE the venerable Body of S. Cecilia. And though the cautious
Synod of Trent said only that Relics should be VENERATED, yet seeing it
neither condemned the Opinions of those who taught they were to be worshipped,
but rather allowed the Acts of proper Divine Service to be paid to them. What
can we conclude, but that they made use of a loose Expression to satisfy the
more moderate Party of your Communion, at the same time that they resolved by
their practice to favor the Superstition of those who properly adored them?

122. Now that this was truly the Case, will appear,

First, From what I have before said, concerning the Holy CROSS; which is
considered by you in a double Capacity, both as an Image and as a Relic; and
is upon both accounts declared to be worthy of the very SAME ADORATION that
Christ himself is; And I hope that is a proper Worship in the strictest sense.
For thus St. Thomas argues; Aquin. 3. Par. Qu. 25. Art. 4.
If we speak of the very Cross upon which Christ was crucified, it is to be
worshipped with Divine Worship, both as it represents Christ, and as it touched
the Members of Christ, and was sprinkled with his Blood. And for this Cause we
both speak to the Cross and pray to it, as if it were Christ Crucified upon it.
Where note, (says Cajetane) That our speaking to the Cross is here produced as
an Effect of the same Adoration with which Christ is adored. This I think is
plain enough, Cajet. in Th. Ibid.
and may serve to show both with what sincerity you deny that properly speaking
you do worship Relics; or that it is not the Cross, but Christ Crucified upon
it, to whom you speak in these Addresses; and which I have before vindicated
against your Cavils.

123. Now this is the more to be considered, in that here you cannot say, as
you do in the Case of Images, that the Figure and the Proto-type are in a
manner united together, and that therefore the Image in its representative
Nature is in some sort very Christ: The reason of this Worship being only a
former Relation to our Savior; Aquin. loc. cit.
because (says Aquinas) it heretofore touched his Sacred Members, or was
sprinkled with his Blood. Upon which single account Cardinal Capisucchi doubts
not to affirm, Paragr. Appendix. p. 690.
That the Wood of the Cross is so sanctified and consecrated by Christ, that
every the least Particle of the Cross divided from the whole, and from the
other parts does remain Consecrated and Sanctified; and therefore that every
the least piece of the Cross is to be adored with the very same supreme Divine
Adoration that Christ himself is. So truly have you told us, that you do not
allow Relics a Worship or Adoration taken in its strictest sense. Reply, p. 42.


124. And what I have now said of the Cross, will in the next place no less
hold for the Nails, Lance, and other Instruments of his Passion. Vid. Card.
Capisuch. l. c.
Upon which account, as we have seen that you address to the Cross, so you also
do to the Lance; Hail O triumphant Iron! Happy Spear! Wound us with the Love of
him that was pierced by thee. It is possible you may find out this too in the
Corpus Poetarum; and by the same Figure that the Cross signifies at once both
the Material Cross, and our Savior that hung upon it, may make the Spear here
signify at once both S. Longinus's Spear, and the Body of Christ that was
wounded with it. And that you may see how much it will be worth the while to
have such an Ecclesiastical Trope invented. I will add one Instance more of
another Relic that has an Address made to it altogether as much wanting it as
either of the foregoing. The Relic I mean is the Veronica, or Cloth which our
Savior Christ wiped his Face, and left the Impression of his Visage upon it.
And to this you thus pray; Hail Holy Face of our Redeemer, printed upon a Cloth
white as Snow; purge us from all Spot of Vice, and join us to the Company of
the Blessed. Bring us to our Country, O happy Figure! there to see the pure
Face of Christ. This is I suppose a plain Instance enough what kind of Honor
you pay to Relics. And that this Cloth might never want Votaries to worship
it, your Pope John XXII, has vouchsafed no less than Ten thousand Days
Indulgence to every repetition of this Prayer. I might add other Instances of
this kind of Superstition: But I go on,

125. Thirdly, To another Instance of your giving religious Worship to
Relics; and that is your allowed practice of swearing by them. Now that to
swear by another, is to give that thing by which you swear the Worship due to
God only; both the nature of an Oath, which implies a calling of God to
witness, and therebly acknowledges him to be the Inspector of the Heart, and
the just Avenger of the falsehood of it, and the Authority of Holy Scripture
plainly declare; Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, says Moses, Deuteronomy. vi. 13.
and shall serve him only, and swear by his Name. How shall I be favorable unto
thee? says God by the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. v. 9. Thy Children have forsaken
me, and sworn by those that are no Gods. But now the Catechism of your late
Synod of Trent allows you to swear by the Cross, and Relics of your Saints;
In 2. praec. decal. p. 267.
and there is nothing more common among you than so to do. When the Emperor
comes to Rome to take the Imperial Diadem at his Holiness's Hands, he thus
swears: I King of the Romans SWEAR -- By the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and
by the VVood of the Cross, and by these Relics of the Saints, etc. In which
we find the Holy Trinity joined in the same rank with the Wood of the Cross,
and with the Relics of the Saints.

126. Nor am I here concerned in those Pretenses that are sometimes brought to
excuse this, viz. that you hereby intend no more than to swear by God, seeing
it is plain that you do it at once both by God and Them. And again; That you do
not believe that thereby any strength is added to the Oath which it would not
otherwise have; for allowing this, yet still you do swear by them; and if there
be neither any reason for it, nor benefit in it, you are never the less
culpable, but the more inexcusably so upon this account. But indeed you do
expect a benefit by this swearing; and suppose that the Saints do hereby become
Sureties with God to you to see the Oath fulfilled, and to punish the Perjury
if it be not. And so you not only swear by the Relics as well as by God, but
ascribe all the reason and design of an Oath to the Saints in common with God.
I will illustrate this in one of your own Instances, which will clear this
Matter to us. It happened that one of your Saintesses, S. Guria, was married to
a Goth, a Soldier in the Roman Army, that was sent to deliver the City Edessa
from the Hunns. The Siege being raised, and the Army recalled, the Soldier
required his Wife to go home with him. Her Mother could not bear this; but
being forced to comply, she brings the Soldier and her Daughter to an Altar,
under which were buried the Bodies of three Saints. And being there, she thus
spoke to him; I will not give thee my Daughter, unless laying thy hand upon
this Tomb, in which are contained the Relics of the Holy Martyrs of Christ,
thou shall swear that thou will treat my Daughter well. This he readily did:
But yet soon after, without any regard to his Oath, he used her very ill. It
were too long to recount all the Circumstances of her Misfortunes, or her
miraculous deliverance out of them, by the aid of these Holy Martyrs. I observe
only as to my present purpose, that being reduced to the utmost degree of
despair, the Saint now, as her last refuge, puts the Holy Martyrs in mind of
her Husband's swearing by their Relics, and how they were thereby become
SURETIES to her Mother for her good Entertainment, and ought not to suffer her
to be thus abused. Immediately, the Martyrs spoke to her, and told her, that as
FAITHFUL SURETIES they would deliver her: and straightway she was miraculously
brought out of a Coffin under Ground (for her Husband had buried her alive) to
the very place where their Bodies lay, and where her Husband had sworn to her.
And then they once more spoke to her to this effect: We have now satisfied our
SURETISHIP, Go to thy Mother. It was not very long after this, that the War
breaking out again, the same Soldier came back to Edessa, where he was
surprised to find his Wife alive; and being prosecuted for the Injuries he had
done her, and for the Perjury he had committed, was condemned to be hanged for
it. But,

127. Fourthly, And to conclude this Point. I will to these add those
Superstitions which are your common practice; and of which every one that has
lived any time among you, must needs have been Eyewitnesses. Such are your
running to visit the Shrines of your Saints upon their Solemn Festivals; which
with what devotion you do it, all Paris on the 3d of January every Year is
sufficiently sensible. Your carrying them in Procession is indeed very
remarkable; and of which I shall leave those who have ever known a dry time in
the City I last mentioned, to consider what they have then seen. But because I
must not expect to be credited by some Men in any thing that can possibly be
denied; I will leave these Matters of Fact to those who have been Spectators of
them: and for the satisfaction of those who have not, will give a short extract
of the form of Procession, with which you bring the Relics of your Saints
into a New Church.

128. Pontific. Roman de Benedictione Ecclesiae, p. 119, etc.
First the Bishop with his Clergy leads the Procession to the place where the
RELICS were lodged the Night before; When they are come to it, they sing this
Anthem, Move your selves, O ye Saints of God from your Mansions, and hasten to
the place which is prepared for you. Then the Bishop uncovering his Head before
the RELICS prays thus. Grant unto us, O Lord, we beseech thee, that we may
worthily touch the Members of thy Saints that are more especially dedicated
unto thee.

Then the Incense being prepared with the Cross, and lighted Candles leading
the way, and followed by the Clergy, singing their Anthems, the Priests
appointed take up the Carriage, and one going by them all the way incenses the
Relics. The Bishop and Clergy singing, among others, this Anthem, Rise up ye
Saints of God from your Habitations; SANCTIFY the PLACES; BLESS the PEOPLE, and
KEEP us sinful Men in PEACE. -- Walk O ye Saints of God; Enter into the City of
the Lord, for a Church is built unto you, where the People may adore the
Majesty of God.

Being come to the Door of the Church, they make a stop whilst some other
Ceremonies are performed. Then the Bishop crosses the Door with Holy Chrism,
and bids it be Blessed, and Sanctified, and Consecrated, and Consigned, and
Commended, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And so they carry in
the Relics, the Bishop and Clergy singing as before.

This is the Order of that Solemnity. What Name it deserves I shall leave it to
others to say. But sure I am, that all this is somewhat more than such an
Honor and Respect which you pretend is all that you give to them. Let us see,

IIdly, Whether you do not seek to these Sacred Monuments for Help and
Assistance?
129. It is indeed a hard Case that we must be forced now to prove that which
is a known practice of daily experience amongst you. The Council of Trent it
self confesses, That by them many Benefits are bestowed by God upon Men; and
then I am confident it will not be thought at all improbable, that it should
encourage Men to recur to them for their help. But here you have a notable
evasion. Full Answ. page 6.
You do not deny but that Men go to these Sacred Monuments and Relics to
receive Benefit; but this you say will not justify my Translation unless when
they come there they pray to the Relics, instead of desiring the Saints,
whose they are to pray for them. And to make this look like a Rational Answer,
you change the Terms of the Question; which was not (as you falsely insinuate)
whether the Council of Trent directs you to Full Answ. Ibid.
IMPLORE the Aid of the Monuments or Sacred Relics; But whether it does not
condemn those who say that for the Sea Expos. p. 17. Defense, page 25.
OBTAINING of THEIR Help the Memories of the Saints are in vain frequented. And
though they do not PRAY to the Relics; yet if for the OBTAINING their Help
your People do recur to them, which you cannot deny but that they do, the
presumption offered in vindication of my rendering that Passage of your Council
is still good; and you have shown nothing but your own falseness in this new
Answer to it. If it were necessary to prove that you do pray to Relics, you
may see by what I have already offered, that even so you would not have secured
your self from having made your self a false Translation, where you charge me
with One. But you have chosen your Jury, and I accept of it; and only for their
better direction, I must desire them to look the words in the Council it self,
and not in your Transcript of them; who have purposely omitted all the
Antecedent to which the EORVM refers; that so they might be sure to see no more
than what made for your Purpose. Should I have done this, I should have found
all the variety of hard words mustered up against me, Mutilation,
Falsification, False Imposition, wilful Prevarication, wilful Mistake,
unsincere Trick, etc. that either your Margin could have contained, or your
Malice have invented; And the Truth is, I should have deserved them. But I
shall leave this also to your Jury to judge of: And for all your good assurance,
I dare venture all my little Learning, against all your Little, that the
Verdict is brought in against you; and that you are concluded in this Matter to
have been either very blind, Aut illud quod dicere nolo.

130. For what concerns the thing it self; Whether you do not seek to the
Monuments of the Saints for the obtaining the Help of their Relics; this is
what will need no proof to those who are but never so little acquainted with
your Superstition: And have seen with what Zeal you touch your Beads and
Psalters at the very Shrines in which they are contained, to sanctify them
thereby. How upon all occasions they are brought forth by you: To cure your
Sickness; to preserve you from Tempests at Land, and in Storms at Sea; but
especially to drive away Evil Spirits, for which they are the most beneficial.
The Messieurs du Port Royal, Reponse a un Ecrit publie sur les Miracles de la
St. Espine. p. 15. Page 18, 22.
have given us a whole Volume of the Miracles wrought by the Holy Thorn. There
you may see how Sister Margaret, one of the Nuns, being ill of the Palsy, was
carried to ADORE the Holy Thorn. How another being sick, recurr'd to it for its
help, and found it too; having no sooner ADORED the Holy Thorn, and kissed it,
but she was well of her Infirmity. Infinite Examples of the like kind might be
produced, but I shall content my self to show what Opinion you have of the
Power of your Relics, Pontific. Romans page 164, 165.
from the very Prayer that you make at the blessing of those little Vessels in
which they are put.

We most humbly beseech thee Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that thou would vouchsafe to bless these Vessels that are prepared for the
Honor of thy Saints through the Intercession of the same Saints: That all
those who shall venerate their Merits, and humbly embrace their Relics [may
be defended] against the Devil and his Angels, against Thunder, Lightning and
Tempest; against the Corruption of the Air, and the Plagues of Men and of
Beasts; against Thieves and Robbers, and Invasions of Men, against evil Beasts,
and against all the several kinds of Serpents and creeping things, and against
the wicked Devices of evil Men.

Here I hope are benefits enough to invite a Man to seek to them, and if they
can help in all these Cases, we need not doubt but they shall have Votaries
enough to recur to them for it.

131. But that which is most admirable is, that in all these Cases, false
Relics are every jot as good as true ones; and which makes somewhat for the
Opinion of Vasquez, that provided a Man does but think it is the Relic of a
Saint, he may securely worship it, tho it may be it is no such thing. We have
before heard what mighty Cures were wrought at the Monument of the famous
Bishop and Martyr VIARVM CVRANDARVM: See above Art. 3.
And whether the Council of Trent prescribed it or no, Ressendius assures us,
all the Country round about did come to the Monument of this pretended Saint,
for the obtaining Help and Assistance, and fancied at least that they found it
too. Tho it afterward appeared that 'twas an old Heathen Inscription, and
those words far enough from signifying either the Name of a Man, or the
Character of a Bishop. Many have been the Cheats of the like kind, and which
ought very much to lessen the Credit of those Miracles that you pretend are
wrought in your Church: But I shall finish all with one so much the more to be
considered, in that it was the happy occasion of undeceiving a very great
Person, and disposed him to receive that Truth he afterward embraced: And may
it please God, that the recital I shall here make of it, may move those who are
yet in Captivity to these Superstitions to deliver themselves from the like
Impositions.

132. Prince Christopher, of the Family of the Dukes of Radzecil, a Prince much
addicted to the Superstitions of your Church, Drelincourt Response a M. le
Landgrave Ernest. p. 348.. lx.
having been in great Piety at Rome to kiss his Holiness's Feet; the Pope at
his departure presented him with a Box of Relics, which at his return soon
became very famous in all that Country. Some Months had hardly passed when
certain Monks came to him to acquaint him that there was a D. Man possessed of
the Devil, upon whom they had in vain tried all their Conjurations, and
therefore they humbly entreated his Highness that for his relief, he would be
pleased to lend them his Relics which he had brought from Rome. The Prince
readily complied with their desires, and the Box was with great Solemnity
carried to the Church, and being applied to the Body of him that was possessed,
the Devil presently went out with the Grimaces and Gestures usual on such
occasions. All the beholders cried out, A Miracle! and the Prince himself
lifted up his Hands and Eyes to Heaven, and blessed God who had favored him
with such a Holy and powerful Treasure.

It happened not long after that the Prince relating what he had seen, and
magnifying very much the Virtue of his Relics: One of his Gentlemen began to
smile, and show by his Actions how little Credit he gave to it. At which the
Prince being moved, his Servant (after many promises of Forgiveness)
ingenuously told him, that in their return from Rome he had unhappily lost the
Box of Relics, but for fear of being exposed to his Anger, had caused another
to be made as like as might be to the true one, which he had filled with all
the little Bones, and other Trinkets that he could meet with, and that this was
the Box that his Monks made him believe did work such Miracles.

The Prince the next Morning sent for the Fathers, and enquired of them if they
knew of any Demoniaque that had need of his Relics: They soon found one to
act his part in this Farce; and the Prince caused him to be exorcised in his
presence. But when all they could do would not prevail, the Devil kept his
Possession, he commanded the Monks to withdraw, and delivered over the Man to
another kind of Exorcists, some Tartars that belonged to his Stable, to be well
lashed till he should confess the Cheat. The Demoniaque thought to have carried
it off by horrible Gestures and Grimaces, but the Tartars understood none of
those Tricks, but by laying on their Blows in good earnest quickly moved the
Devil, without the help of either Hard Names, Holy Water, or Relics, to
confess the truth, and beg Pardon of the Prince.

As soon as Morning was come, the Prince sent again for the Monks (who
suspected nothing of what had passed) and brings their Man before them, who
threw himself at the Princes Feet, and confessed that he was not possessed with
the Devil, nor ever had been in his Life. The Monks at first made light of it,
and told the Prince it was an Artifice of the Devil who spoke through the Mouth
of that Man. But the Prince calling for his Tartars to exorcise another Devil,
the Father of LIES, out of them too, they began presently to relent, and
confessed the Cheat, but told him they did it with a good Intention to stop the
Course of Heresy in that Country.

Upon this he dismissed them, but from that time began seriously to apply
himself to read the Holy Scriptures, telling them that he would no longer trust
his Salvation to Men who defended their Religion by such pious Frauds, so they
called them, but which were indeed Diabolical Inventions. And in a short time
after, both himself and his whole House made open Profession of the Reformed
Religion. Anno 1564.

And thus much be said in Answer to your IVth Article.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell
A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Quarto.

A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented]. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church]. Quarto.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; against
the Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator.
4o.

A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome. With
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. 8o.

A Papist Represented and not Misrepresented: being an Answer to the First,
Second, Fifth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Papist Misrepresented
and Represented]; and for a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, Quarto.

The Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. Quarto.

The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 24o.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Answer to THREE PAPERS concerning the Unity and Authority
of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of England. 4o.

Mr. Chillingworth's Book, called [The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation] made more generally useful by omitting Personal Contests, but
inserting whatsoever concerns the common Cause of Protestants, or defends the
Church of England, with an exact Table of Contents; and an Addition of some
genuine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworth's, never before Printed, viz. against the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an
Account of what moved the Author to turn Papist, with his Confutation of the
said Motives.

An Historical Treatise written by an AUTHOR of the Communion of the CHVRCH of
ROME, touching Transubstantiation. Wherein is made appear, That according to
the Principles of THAT CHVRCH, This Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith. 4o.

The Protestant's Companion: Or an Impartial Survey, and Comparison of the
Protestant Religion as by Law established, with the main Doctrines of Popery.
Wherein is showed, that Popery is contrary to Scripture, Primitive Fathers and
Councils; and that proved from Holy Writ, the Writings of the Ancient Fathers
for several hundred Years, and the Confession of the most Learned Papists
themselves. 4o.

A Sermon preached upon St. Peter's day: By a Divine of the Church of England.
Printed with some Enlargements.

The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth mentioned by S.
Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 3. Verse. 15. 4o.

The Peoples Right to read the Holy Scripture Asserted. 4o.

A Short Summary of the principal Controversies between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome; being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in
Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [Protestancy destitute of Scripture
Proofs.] 4o.

An Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [The Judgment and Doctrine of the
Clergy of the Church of England concerning one Special Branch of the King's
Prerogative, viz. In dispensing with the Penal Laws.] 4o.

A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in the two great Points of the Real
Presence, and the Adoration of the Host; in Answer to the Two Discourses lately
Printed at Oxford on this Subject: To which is perfixed a Large Historical
Preface relating to the same Argument.

Two Discourses; Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

The Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined
and confuted. 4o. With a Table of the Contents.

Preparation for Death: Being a Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper of which she died. By W. W. M. A. 12o.

The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
opposition to a late Book, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and Church of Rome.

A PRIVATE PRAYER to be used in Difficult Times.

A True Account of a Conference held about Religion at London, Sept. 29, 1687,
between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Tho. Tenison, D. D. as also of that which led to
it, and followed after it. 4o.

The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the
Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit, Schoolmaster in the Savoy; together with some
Account of his Discourse with Mr. Meredith.

A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer Side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that Their Religion is the
surest Way to Heaven. 4o.

Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist, wherein is showed, that the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religions.

A Discourse concerning the pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction; with an
account of the Occasions and Beginnings of it in the Western Church. In Three
Parts. With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

The Pamphlet entitled, Speculum Ecclesiasticum, or an Ecclesiastical
Prospective-Glass, considered, in its False Reasonings and Quotations. There
are added, by way of Preface, two further Answers, the First, to the Defender
of the Speculum; the Second to the Half-sheet against the Six (...).

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the new Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The FIRST PART. In which the Account that has been given of the
Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully Vindicated; the Distinction of Old and
New Popery Historically asserted; and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in
Point of Image Worship, more particularly considered. 4o.

The Incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome. By the Author of the [Six
Conferences concerning the Eucharist.] 4o.

Mr. Pulton Considered in his Sincerity, Reasonings, Authorities: Or a Just
Answer to what he has hitherto Published in his True Account; his True and
full Account of a Conference, etc. His Remarks; and in them his pretended
Confutation of what he calls Dr. T's Rule of Faith. By Tho. Tenison, D. D.

A Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to
the Eucharist, wholly different from those of the Present Roman Church, and
inconsistent with the belief of Transubstantiation. Being a sufficient
Confutation of CONSENSVS VETERVM, NVBES TESTIVM, and other Late Collections of
the Fathers pretending to the Contrary. 4o.

An Answer to the Representer's Reflections upon the State and View of the
Controversy; With a Reply to the Vindicator's Full Answer, showing that the
Vindicator has utterly ruined the New Design of Expounding and Representing
Popery.


