The Opinion OF THE ROMAN JVDGES Touching Imprisonment, and the Liberty of the
SUBJECT, OR, A SERMON Preached at the Abbey at Westminster, at a late public
FAST, JAN. 25. 1642*

ACTS 25. V. 27. It seems unreasonable to me to send a Prisoner, and not to
signify the crimes against him.

By J. V. Prisoner.

Printed in the year of our Lord, 1643.

TO THE READER.
THe occasion of this Sermon was the importunity of Prisoners, and by the same
importunity it is printed without addition or detraction of any thing
material, Acts 24. 1.
not with a majestic style, like Tertullus the Orator, but like Paul a
Prisoner; neque altum semper urgendo, neque dum procellas, cautus horrescis
nimium premendo, Littus iniquum: It was Preached on the day of Paul's
Conversion, and the Subject is Paul the Prisoner, and on a Fast day, a day of
Humiliation, and who is so humbled as a Prisoner: If any receive profit
thereby, Let him pray for Prisoners.

J. V. (...)

A Sermon preached at the Abbey at Westminster, on the last public Fast,
January 25.
ACTS 25. 27. It seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner, and not withal
to signify his crimes against him.
I Read since our Savior Christ of a fivefold persecution; (...).
the first, the persecution of the high Priests, the Archierarchical
persecution, Act. 4. 1. And when they spoke these things to the people, there
rose up against them the Priests and Sadduces, and Rulers of the Temple, being
filled with rage against them, because they taught the people, they laid hands
on them, and put them in (...)
custody, afterward into the common Jail: this is the Judaicall persecution
that lasted 40. years after Christ, as it is in the Syrian Paraphrase.
Secondly, when this began to cool, then followed the persecution of (...).
Arethas.
old Rome by the Cesars, which continued about 600. years, till Constantine
the great. By Tres Fontane.
Nero Saint Paul was decapitated at Rome at the (...). Epiphan. Oecumen. (...),
Eusebius. 13. Nero.
three Fountains, and Saint John banished to the Isle of Patmos.

When Constantine came, then omnia nova, all things were new, and he saw a
sign from Heaven, In this sign thou shall prevail.

Thirdly, there followed (...).
persecutio Haereticorum, whereof Epiphanius and others write. I begin with the
Gnostics, and I find in Epiphanius, first (...), Epiphan.
they despise dominion, to which Anabaptists succeed. Secondly, (...), Epi.
(...), Epiph.
they deny the Law, as the Antinomians now do, that say, God sees no iniquity
in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel, and all the sins they commit are
works of the outward man, not of the mind. Thirdly, they understand not, nor
allow the Hebrew text: The Hebrew and Greek these unlearned men regard not,
though they be the languages of the holy Ghost. Secondly, Euchitae, such as
abused the saying of Saint Paul, (...).
Pray continually, to vain babbling, and think that God is persuaded by
Battalogies and Tautologies, yet in Eccles. 5. 1. it is said, God is in heaven,
and thou on earth, therefore let thy words be few. Thirdly, the Pelagians and
Semipelagians, to which the Arminians now succeed for their Liberum arbitrium,
free will. Fourthly, the Enthusiasts, that pretended Enthusiasme, and that they
spoke by the Spirit, as Brownists now do. Fifthly, Arrians, to whom the
Socinians answer, that deny the Divinity of the Son of God. Sixthly,
Donatistae, etc. S. Austin.
Donatists, that are separated from the Church, and and so the Separatists.
Seventhly, Marcianites, that held Epiphan.
second Baptism, as Anabaptists now do: Thus much of the persecution of the
Heretics, which were limbs and forerunners of Antichrist.

Fourthly, the persecution of the Turks, which was about the year 666. by the
computation of Lyranus. Fifthly, the persecution of Antichrist, which begun at
the same time, Revel. 13. ver. ult. The number of the Beast is 666. that is,
the time of his rising, and his fall shall be 1260. years after, that is,
near a thousand years he has already continued by Nauclerus, and the
Magdeburg Centurists: then Constans the Emperor gave to Pope Vitalian,
Imperium urbis, the rule of the City; and this is the worst persecution of all
the former, because the Heretics are incorporated into a body, and the united
force is stronger. The reason of my large Preface is this, because my Text
falls under the second persecution: for Festus was Deputy under bloody Nero,
who wished that Rome had only one head, that he might cut it off at one blow,
who clothed Christians in beasts skins, and after devoured them, who ripped up
Agrippina his mother, to see the place of his generation; yet I shall speak
tria memorabilia, three memorable things in commendation and discommendation of
this Deputy: His Dictamen rectae rationis.
right opinion of the person, and of his cause, It seems to me unreasonable;
therefore he had reason, and the Heathens had the Law (...), Romans 2.
written in their hearts. And in Isa. 24. 5. They have made void the
everlasting covenant, or covenant made with the (...)
whole world, this is the law of Nature: First, he approves of his appeal to
Caesar, as the chief of the Senate, Act. 25. 25. Because he desires to be kept
to the hearing of Caesar, I have determined to send him. Secondly, he approves
of his cause, he had done nothing worthy of (...) Sir.
death, or bonds. Thirdly, he calls him to speak for himself, after eight or
ten days he came to Cesarea, Act. 25. 6. and the next day sat on the
Judgment seat, he did not stay two or three years, or ten years; the Jews
after five days came down, Act. 24. 1. they delayed not, but hastened his
doom. Fourthly, not before mean, ignoble men of no reason, birth or education,
but by a (...), Oecumen.
Roman Deputy, a King, Queen, Chiliarch, and chief of the City, he says, I
have brought him before you, and specially before thee, O King Agrippa. A King
is of Royal blood, and will not trample upon a worm; but a poor man
oppressing the poor, is a sweeping rain, that will leave no food. The Lion is
the King of Beasts, and is satisfied with homage, Corpora magnanimo satis est
prostrasse Leoni. Augustus Caesar was called Pater atque Princeps, Hor.
Father and Prince. Fifthly, he thinks it unreasonable to send a prisoner, and
not signify the crimes. Sixthly, to signify them in (...) Sir.
writing, for perpetual memorial.

But here is a grand objection: Were not grievous crimes objected against the
Apostle? as first, that he was a pestilent fellow, that is, a man dangerous,
as one infected with the pestilence, or a (...) Chrysostom. Gr. Basil.
pernicious fellow, as it is in the Syrian. Secondly, a sower of sedition among
the Jews in the whole world, Acts 24. 6. That he (...) Sir. a (...) Sir. (...)
raised sedition, and spread it, and Gr. (...). Epiphan. Beda, Jerome.
obstinately maintained it. Thirdly, a Ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens,
this crimination overthrowes the former; Nazarens were Christians, and Christ
was Prince of Peace; and his Ministers, Ministers of peace, how then should he
sow division? Fourthly, a prophaner of the Temple, that is called by Josephus
the (...) Antiq. 15. cap. 14.
holy place: So Christ says, When ye see the abomination of desolation stand
in the holy place. These are the crimes objected against Saint Paul, and the
Jews affirmed, or as the Father says with imprecation, that these things were
so.

To the first he makes no answer; (...). Oecumen.
for it was in general, that he was a dangerous fellow: and a general proves
nothing, neither is worthy of an answer by the divine Apostolical wisdom.

To the second he answers by way of negation, that he was no sower of
sedition, but that they themselves first caused the tumult, (...) Sir. and
Vatab.
Acts 24. 19. The Jews that came from Asia caused the tumult, for they saw him
in the Temple, and stirred up the people against him, and laid hands on him in
that sacred place and Sanctuary, Men of Israel, help, this is the man that
teaches against this people in every place, Acts 21. 27. he was accused by
them that were the only actors in the tumult. Hence we learn to stand for
peace, and avoid sedition. In the 120. Psalm, ver. 5. Woe is me that I
sejourne with Mesech, and have my dwelling in the tents of Kedar. Mesech and
Kedar are Tuscany and Turkey, by Kimchi out of Joseph ben Gorion. Here are the
two great enemies of the Church, in whose person David here speaks. His
sojourning with the Tuscans was tedious, and his dwelling with the Turks
called Kedar, so the tongue of Kedar is the Arab. in Abben Ezra, and in Arab.
the Alcoran is written. My soul has long dwelt, he says not his body; but
he was grieved at the heart that he dwelt with such ill neighbors, (...)
with him that hated peace, he says not with them, but with him, because
there was one a ringleader of the rest; neither does he say unquiet, but that
hates peace, and will never admit (...)
reconciliation. And he adds, I am peace, God is love, Christ is out peace,
and the Church is peace, yet not without truth, though it be not expressed, it
is understood; for peace and truth do meet together, and sweetly kiss each
other. Christ is our peace, and yet he is truth: But when we speak for peace,
they are for war. If we pray, or petition, or preach for peace, they are for
war; what shall I say of them? they are Mesech and Kedar.

To the third he confesses, that according to the way that they call Heresy,
so he worshipped the God of his Fathers: Here we learn three things, Faith,
Hope, and Charity.

1. Faith, to believe the Law and Prophets as he did, to worship the God of our
Fathers, not new Gods, and in a new way; enquire for the old way and walk
therein, that is, the way of the Law, not in the way of our Fathers, against the
Law, Prophets and Apostles before the Reformation; To the Law and the
Testimony, if they walk not by this rule there is no light in them, with the
heart man believes, and with the tongue confession is made to salvation.

2. We learn Hope, for if we believe we shall have hope toward God, Acts
24. 15. no hope in our selves, but in him.

3. We learn Charity, the third Theological virtue, v. 16. for this cause I
labor, this is the labor of love, love to all, as in Romans 13. 8. Owe nothing
to any man but love, pay to every man his due, Custom to whom custom, tribute
to whom tribute, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor; custom is
ordinary, tribute extraordinary, both due to the Roman Caesar's, persecutors of
the Christians, Justin Martyr, and Tertullian in their Apologetikes prove this
duty from thence, and that Tribute they paid, was employed for the eradication
of the Christians, but they suffered, and the blood of Martyrs was the seed of
the Church, the arms whereof were prayers and tears, so then fear God, and
honor the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change; Again,
love works no ill, shall I say that he who kills and robbs his brother loves
him? seeing love fulfills the law, and if a man have this worlds good, and see
his brother in want, and shut up his bowels of compassion, how dwells the love
of God in that man? Micah. 6.
Three things are required of a man, 1. to do justly, 2. to love mercy, 3. and
to walk humbly with God, Love is above all, above Tongues, faith of Miracles,
Prophecy, Knowledge, Alms, Burning, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. It bears all things,
hops all things, endures all things; embrace this charity with peace, and
the peace of God be with you.

To the fourth he answers and denies, that he was a prophaner of the Temple,
but they profaned it by raising a tumult in it, as is showed before, a thing
abhorred of Heathens, I read in Herodotus, that certain profane Atheists
robbed the Temple of Venus, and the Goddess, by way of punishment, sent the
(...), Herod.
faemineall disease among them, thought to be new, but Elder then Herodotus.

Thus I have done with the right opinion of this Heathen deputy.

Now I proceed to show how Antichrist is opposite in every particular, and his
persecution worse then the Pagans, out of three prophecyes of Dan. 7. 25. he
shall speak words on the side of the most high, this I take for granted, by
the best expositors, that it is meant literally of Antiochus, mystically of
Antichrist, that is, pro and contra, for and against Christ, a little home in
his beginning, but has eyes and policy, and a mouth, speaking great things,
he shall wear out the Saints of the most high, those that have gray hairs
here and there upon them, he wears out by long imprisonments without cause, as
in the Spanish and Italian Inquisitions he is kept 2. 4. years, all the days
of his life, and no accuser known, but they ask him what he has done, what
enemies he has, etc. The Roman deputy allowed appeal to Caesar, In utroque
jure sunt tituli de appellationibus.
but the Conclave and their adherents deny all appeals, and trample upon
Princes, and depose Kings upon suspicion of another Religion: The Romans after
a small time called the Apostle to his answer, and not before ignoble, but
honorable persons; but Antichrists limbs to the greater disgrace, judge them
by mean persons, of no birth, education, or religion: The Romans thought it
reasonable to signify the crimes, but these imprison without any crime, except
bare affirmation without oath prove a crime: The Jews affirm these crimes
forenamed against Saint Paul; but he says, They cannot prove the things
whereof they do accuse me, Acts 24. 13. In the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word shall stand. Thus by tedious delays of judgment and
imprisonment, Antichristians wear out the Saints, And he shall think to
change times and laws, Dan. 7. 25. he shall think to make a new Heaven and
Earth, a new Church and State, a new Sun, Moon and Stars, which God made for
times and seasons, he shall make new Laws, abrogate the old, and all shall be
delivered into his hand, for a time, and times and half a time, that is, three
years and a half, In Queen Maryes time the presecution was about three years
and a half, and in the last times of Antichrist shall be the like, Rev. 11. 7.
The bodies of the witnesses lie unburied three years and a half: In Dan. 8.
10. it is said, the horn shall grow great to the host of Heaven, and shall
cast to the earth some of the host, and of the starves, and trample on them,
not only shall Antichrist throw out of their places, but by contumelies trample
the Ministers of Christ in the mire, And he shall take away the daily
sacrifice, this signified the public forms of Gods Chrysostom.
worship, as in Ps. 141. 1. My prayers as incense* and lifting up of my hands
as a daily sacrifice, in Dan. 11. 36. it is said, that Antichrist shall presume
to be a King, and do, or make War according to his will, by an arbitrary
government, not by any law, and shall exalt himself (...) Heb.
above every God, that is, every King who is called a God in Scripture, so 2 Thessalonians. 2. every (...).
Augustus or Caesar, And be shall not regard the God of his Fathers, but a new
God, and a new Religion; Nor the desire of women, that is spiritual
fornication with Idols he shall detest, but shall commit sacrilege, And he
shall honor the God of forces, he shall ever be for war, and not for peace;
so Mahomet propagated his Religion by war, Christ Jesus by peace, A bruised
reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, because David
had shed much blood, he must not build the Temple, and in the building no Tool
of Iron was heard, for it was a House of peace; but Antichrist is all for the
God (...) Dan. 11.
of forces.

Thus I have done with the first thing imitable in this Roman Deputy, his Right
Opinion.

Secondly, his humanity, In sending a Prisoner, so says the Text, and it is
expressed in what manner he was sent elsewhere, (...) Sir.
Acts 27. 3. The Centurion showed pity to S. Paul, and suffered him to go to
his friends to refresh himself, he suffered him to go to his friends, a great
favor, much more then to suffer his friends to come to him, he gave him
Potestatem egredieuti, Cartluisian.
power to go forth, there was an opening of the Ports, that he might be
refreshed with food and raiment necessary: Likewise the other Roman Deputy
Petix, Acts 24. 23. He commanded a Centurion, no meaner man, to keep him, not
to hurt him; Sir. (...)
with gentleness, not rigor and fircenesse, (as the Jailer in Acts 16. that
put them in the hole, in the stocks) and that he should forbid, or restrain,
or Sir. (...)
discourage none of his acquaintance to minister to him; And when he was in
Rome two years, he dwelt in his own hired house, and received all that came
unto him, preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching with all liberty, no man
forbidding him; but Antichristian sectaries forbid all to publish any doctrine
against their way, as appears in Waldus, the Albingers, Husse, Jerome, Luther,
etc. neither will they afford bread to eat, raiment to put on, or house
wherein to hide their heads, or bed to rest upon, more cruel then bloody Nero
to the Christians and Doctor of the Gentiles.

Some read De suis sacultatibus, Gloffa ordinaria.
none of his goods were restrained from him in his Imprisonment, but such men
take away both liberty and goods at once.

Thirdly, observe the justice of the Romans, Acts 25. 16. It was not the manner
of the Romans to give up a man, till his accuser came face to face, to justify
the crimes objected, and that he have Sir. (...)
space and place to answer for himself; but among Antichristians, no accuser
shall appear, but the same man shall be accuser, Judge, and witness; or if he
do appear, it shall be as a backbiter, not face to face; or if he confront
the defendant, he shall have convenient place of Apology, but among his
enemies, to be derided as Sampson was; or he shall have no space for his
defense, but he must answer Oretenus and ex tempore, according to their ex
temporary prayers and sermons: Is this justice? Likewise the Romans stood much
for the Liberty of the Subject, Acts 22. 25. Is it lawful for you to scourge a
Roman, and uncondemned? The Orator said, that Citizens of Rome may not be
scourged, whether they were borne Romans, or Cives Romani verberibus caedi non
possunt, Cicero. Nati, and Civitate do nati Ciceo. (...)
made free, there were two kinds; now Saint Paul was borne free, for his Father
was a Oecumen,
Roman, and Chrysostom. Oecumen. Theophylact.
Cilicia was under Rome, or Tarsus was called Dio. Cassius.
Juliopolis, howsoever it were, he had the Liberty of a Subject and Citizen of
Rome; but if a man's goods be taken away by violence, and himself imprisoned,
where is the Roman Liberty? Pagans shall rise up in judgment against
Antichristians: Yet more, the Romans rescued from violence such as were
Freemen, Acts 23. 10. The chief Captain fearing lest Paul should be torn in
pieces in a Tumult, sent Romans to deliver him; far it was from him to send
Troops to destroy his own Citizens, as Antichristians have done: and he
further says, Acts 23. 26. The Jews took this man, and I came with the Sir.
(...)
Roman Soldiers and rescued him, understanding that he was a Roman.

Lastly, they opposed all private ordinances, and inventions of men, therefore
Festus says of Paul, his accusers stood up against him, Sir.
and could prove no evil accusation against him as I supposed, but had certain
questions of their own superstition, private ordinances and inventions Act. 25.
18. 19. he stood for the Roman laws, which were so good that the Plutarc, in
vita Came.
Falisci did choose rather to serve the Romans then to be free. The use hereof
is in Mal. 6. He has told thee, O man, what the Lord requires of thee, to do
justly, as this Roman, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God, which are
the three and all to be imitated in this Roman spirit.

Now briefly I come to the other three which are to be avoided. First,
Popularity. Secondly, Bribery. Thirdly, Obloquy.

1. Popularity, Acts 25. 2. Festus would do the Jews a pleasure, and Felix
Acts 24. 27. because he would do the Jews a pleasure he left Paul bound, but
this popular Air is but a staff of reed bruised, and shaken with the wind,
Gaius Marius, who was seven times Consul, and the third Nobilium turba,
Quirilium Odi profanum vulgus and atceo. Malignum spernere vulgus. Horat.
(...). Plutarch. in Mario.
Founder of Rome, yet by envy expelled; so Coriolanus and Scipio Africanus that
won his name Ejus qui domita nomen ab Africa, Lucratus rediit. Incendia
Carthaginis impiae. Rejectaeque retrorsum Hannibalis minae.
from the subduing of Afrike, the burning of Carthage, the victory over
Hannibal, and had marble inscriptions to his honor, yet loosing the popular
respect, was banished for ever, de repetundis.

The people almost in one breath cried Hosanna, and crucify him: Sir.
Inscriproque notis marmora publicis.
Herod Agrippa, Acts 12. 2. Killed James, and because it pleased the peopeople
imprisoned Peter, under the custody of Sir. Non Vox hominem sonat.
sixteen soldiers, but observe his end, the people cried, The voice of a God
not of a man, and he became worms meat. How can you please God that seek
honor one of another?

The second blemish in the Roman is bribery, not expressed in the text, but
employed, he desired to do the Jews a pleasure, it was hot for nothing. And of
Felix his predecessor it is said, he hoped that money should have been given
to him, by St. Paul, Act. 24. 26. The Romans were covetous, and therefore
bitter was the Sarcasme of Methridate upon them, that the Founders of Rome,
Romulus and Remus, were nursed by Some say Lupa was a Woman.
a hungry wolf, and therefore the posterity were so greedy of wealth, that
Tertullian says, he not Non solum spcrabat, sed clam tractabat.
only hoped, but privately dealt for bribes.

The third fault in this Roman was obloquy, Acts 26. 24. (...), Oecumen.
out of wrath and fury, when St. Paul made his Apology, Festus exclaimed, Thou
art mad, much learning has made thee mad; so the limbs of Antichrist,
Ieroboams, and Micah's Priests, cry out, of learned men that they are mad,
because themselves cannot understand them: If they be mad, it is for Christ;
and oppression often times makes a wise man mad: but indeed they are not mad, but
speak forth the words of truth and soberness, (...), 2 Timothy 1.
They have not the spirit of bondage or fear, but of a sound mind.

Let us eschew bribery, popularity, and obliquv, loquy, for who shall dwell in
Gods Tabernacle? First, He that backbitoth not with his tongue, that makes not
his tongue, (...)
his foot to trample the reputation of his neighbor in the mire. Secondly, In
whose eyes a vile person is contemned, therefore he is no man-pleaser. Thirdly,
That takes no reward against the Innocent, yea says Solomo Jarchi, that takes
no reward to do justice; therefore he is no briber, He that does these things
shall never fall, Psalm. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc.

Thus I have described a Roman spirit, and compared the Romans and
Antichristians together, who are the greater persecutors; which may be, first a
premonition to us in these last days, to expect perilous times for three
years and a half, Revel 11. 7. worse then those of Jews, Turks, and
Infidels; even the times of Hypocritical Antichristian Heretics, 2. Tim. 3.
1. Secondly, an exhortation to patience, for he that kills with the sword,
shall be killed with the sword; he that now leads into captivity, shall be led;
he that robbs, shall be robbed; here is the patience Revel. 13.
of the Saints, Zach. 9. 10.
Return to the strong hold, ye prisoners of Hope, this day I declare unto
you, that I will restore double to you.

And as I have preached for Love and Peace, so let us conclude with a Prayer,
for the peace of God that passes all understanding, to guide our hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the
Father and Holy spirit, be honor and glory throughout all ages. Amen.

The prayer before SERMON.
O Eternal, the high and only 1. Tim. 6.
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, before whom thousands of Dan.
7.
Angels do minister, and ten thousand times ten Thousand do stand before
thee, who make thy Angels Spirits, and thy Ministers a flame of fire, who
ridest on the wings of the wind, and make the cloud thy Psalm. 104. 2. 3. v.
Pavillion, and art clothed with glory and Majesty. At the footstool of thy
Throne are we prostrate, sinful dust and ashes, beseeching the Ezra 1.
God of heaven to have mercy upon us miserable sinners. Have mercy on us, O
Lord, and according to the Psalm. 51.
multitude of thy mercies blot out our offenses, in thought, word, and deed,
and thou that have proclaimed the name of the Lord, the Lord God Exodus 34.
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, abundant in kindness and truth, for
giving iniquity, transgression and sin, and showing mercy to thousands: show
mercy to us the chief of sinners, forgive our Psalm. 51.
original sin wherein we were borne, our actual sins, the sins of our
youth; Remember not how Psalm. 25.
ignorant we have been of thy truth: Psalm. 19.
Lord, who can understand his errors, who knows how often he has offended.
Then cleanse us from our secret sins, forgive our presumptuous sins,
perpetrated with a Numb. 15.
high hand, and our rebellions wherein we have warred with the Almighty, and
keep back thy servants from the like iniquity, so shall we be innocent, and
avoid the great transgression, and though we sin of weakness, or ignorance
Eccles. 7.
(for no man lives on earth that sins not) yet restrainus by thy grace from
sins of stubbornness, which is as Idolatry, and from the Matthew. 12.
irremissible sin against the spirit of grace. John 17.
Holy Father, we desire not only remission of sins, but the sanctification of
the Holy Ghost, though sin tyrannize and dwell in us, Romans 5. Galath. 5.
so that we cannot do the things we would, yet let not sin Romans 6.
reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the lusts thereof,
that we who are dead to sin, may live no longer therein, but Romans 6.
as Christ is risen from the dead, so we may rise to newness of life, and as
we have yielded our members servants to iniquity, so to yield them weapons of
righteousness unto holiness, the end whereof may be everlasting happiness,
and as we rise, so help us to ascend with Christ to heaven, minding heavenly
things, Col. 3.
where Christ sits at Gods right hand, teach and enable us to do justly, to
love mercy, Micah 6.
and walk humbly with our God, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
walking holily, righteously, and soberly in this present evil world, waiting
for the Titus 2.
appearing of the glorious Judge to Judgment. We believe O Lord, the way of
man is not in himself, neither is it in man to guide his steps, it is not in
him that wills, nor that runs, but in God that shows mercy, who has
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. Give therefore
grace, O heavenly Father, for Christ's sake: In whose name we pray not only
for our selves, but for the whole estate of Christ's Church on earth, distressed
and dispersed. The Spouse of Lament. 1.
Christ sits as a widow that is desolate, her hair hanging down, rivers of
tears falling from her eyes without intermission, and it is nothing to all
them that pass by the way, Lament. 1.
no sorrow is like to her sorrow, yet none of her sons does comfort her, none
does turn out of the way to ask how she does, Lament. 2.
the breach is like the wide sea, who can heal it? there is no balm in
Gilead, there is no Physician there. Ier. 4.
O thou sword of the Lord, when will thou be quiet, when will thou return into
the sheath, and be at rest? When, O Father of mercies, and Lord of hoasts,
will thou turn the edge thereof against the Heathen that know thee not, and
call not on thy Name? Shall thy wrath burn like fire against Germany, which
before the Civil war was as the garden of Eden, but now is a desolate
wilderness, and many years bath groaned under that unnatural intestine war?
Psalm. 90.
Thou have turned man to destruction, say likewise return to life ye sons of
men. Just art thou, O Lord, to punish their Idolatry, sacrilege, and high
contempt of the Ministry; Habak. 3.
but in the midst of thy Justice remember Mercy: And forget not our brethren
in Ireland, who have suffered cruel mockings, scourgings, bonds,
imprisonments, rapines, deaths under the merciless Rebels, that curse Isay 8.
their God and their King, and look upwards; They have bewed in pieces thy
Prophets, thrown down thy worship, and killed thy servants with a rage that 2 Chronicles. 28.
reaches to heaven. Thy truth falls in the streets, and righteousness
cannot enter. O God of truth, justice, and vengeance, show thy self, let not
the sons of wickedness ever prevail. More especially we entreat for England,
wherein we are a Zephan. 2.
Nation that is not worthy to be beloved, for there is no truth, or mercy, or
Hos. 4. 1. 2. 3. 4.
knowledge of God in the Land, but by swearing, lying, killing and stealing, we
break out, and blood touches blood, we have oppressed one another, and
therefore are justly Gal. 5.
devoured one of another, every one by the hand of his neighbor, friend, and
brother, Manasses, Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses, and every one eats the Isay 9.
flesh of his own arm, the son rises up against the father, and the father
against the son, to put him to death, and they John 16.
think in so doing, they do God good service. Who could have thought that this
flourishing Country should have become a sea of blood, and this Eden a dead
sea? Oh the severity of Gods justice against our sins Ezekiel, 16.
of Sodom, such fullness of bread, abundance of idleness, and oppression of
the poor and needy; our crying sins have called for plagues of leading into
captivity, and complaining in our streets. Oh ever happy England, the glory of
Nations is now become the seat of Sects and Heresies, the daughter of Babel,
the mother of all confusion, Gods Temple profaned, his Ministers misused,
Jeroboams and Micaes Priests of the lowest of the people substituted. To thee,
O Lord, we make our complaint: Ezech. 20. last.
This is, and shall be a lamentation, Ierem. 13.
O thou hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble, why should
thou be as a wayfaring man, as a traveller that abides for a night? Awake, O
Lord, have mercy on Sion, that sits as a woman, Ierem 30.
or cast away, that none looks after; build up the walls of Jerusalem, restore
her Teachers, as at the beginning. Have mercy on our dread Sovereign Lord,
CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of Great Britain France and Ireland,
Defender of the true ancient Catholic, and Apostolic Faith, and in all
causes, and over all persons Ecclesiastical and Tempor all supreme moderator
and Governor, bind up his Soul in the 1 Samuel 25.
bundle of life with the Lord his God, as for his enemies sling them as a stone
out of the middle of a sling, cloth them with shame, but upon himself let his
Crown flourish. According to his present afflictions let thy Comforts refresh
his soul. Give not thy Honor to another, but for thy Names sake (who have
said of Princes, ye are Gods Vicegerents) save the face of thy Anointed from
the tongues of men, and in the midst of weapons of war, that no weapon framed
against him may prosper, that every tongue which shall rise up against him, may
be condemned, and he in due time restored to his former and greater royal
splendour and dignity, and after this trial may come forth as gold: And as a
Father of the Country may pity his children, and lament the shedding of the
blood of his sons and daughters. Bless the Queens most excellent Majesty,
ourillustrious Prince CHARLES, and the rest of the Royal Progeny, that they
may be like Olive plants round about their Table, suffer not the sons of
wickedness to afflict them. We pray likewise for the Lords of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Counsel, the True hearted Peers and Commons assembled in
Parliament: Give Ephesians. 4.
them the spirit of Unity in the bond of Peace, the spirit of Phil. 4.
Moderation between the two extremes, that by the wise accommodation, this
civil war may cease, the head and body may be united, Religion restored,
Sectaries and Heresies restrained, and so Prince and people, Church and State
their due repayed, that we may owe nothing, Prove. 24. Romans 13.
but to fear God, honor the King, and love one another. Uphold the Ministers
of thy holy Word, by what names or titles soever dignified or distinguished,
though they be Dan. 8.
trampled under foot by Antichristians, yet raise them up again, to shine like
Stars in the firmament, all clouds of obscuration and opposition scattered and
consumed, and for a continual supply of them, Bless the two Universities,
Cambridge and Oxford, that from thence religious and learned men may come
forth, whose Mal. 2.
lips may preserve Knowledge, and disporse it through the whole Land, that the
Psalm. 107.
mouth of ignorance and iniquity may be stopped. Remember all that are
afflicted, especially thy servant that desires the prayers of this
congregation: Oh Father of mercies, and God of all consolations, comfort those
that be any Way cast down. The living, the living, shall Isay 38.
praise thee, the dead cannot praise thee, nor such as go down into silence; O
great Physician of the bodies and souls of thy servants, heal those whom thou
have wounded; Ier. 10.
Correct them, but in thy judgment, not in thy fury, lest they be confounded.
Neither ought we in this day of humiliation, to forget our thankesgivings unto
thee, O Father of mercies, who have chosen us in Christ before the Ephesians. 1.
foundation of the world was laid, to the glory of thy grace, wherein we are
accepted in thy beloved, who have called us with an holy calling, and sealed us
with the earnest of the Spirit, who have persuaded us of thy love here, Rom 8.
and given us some hopes of glory hereafter, who have fed us all our life long,
even from our mothers breasts, and will bear us even in old age when our
strength fails us, who have led us by the Word and Spirit, and drawn us by
cords of love by the Hos. 11.
bands of a man, who have delivered us in seven troubles and in eight, that
they have not hurt us. To thee Ioh. 5.
be glory and praise for ever and ever. Oh let the thoughts of our hearts, the
words of our mouths, and the works of our hands, be Psalm. 19.
now and ever acceptable in thy sight. O Lord our strength and our Redeemer,
Chro. 29.
keep these good imaginations in the hearts of thy people for ever, and prepare
our hearts unto thee, put thy fear into us, and cause us to walk in the way
of thy Commandments, that we may never depart from thee; at this time teach
us the way, and lead us O God of our salvation, for we are children and cannot
go. Help us by power from on high, that we may begin, continue, and end in
thee, by the help of Jesus: In whose Name and words we conclude our prayers in
the most Matthew. 6.
absolute form of Prayer which he has taught us in his holy Gospel. Our
Father, etc.

FINIS.

