THE PAMPHLET ENTITLED, Speculum Ecclesiasticum, OR AN ECCLESIASTICAL
PROSPECTIVE-GLASS, CONSIDERED, In its False REASONINGS AND QUOTATIONS.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

IMPRIMATUR, Hic Liber cui Titulus, [The Speculum Ecclesiasticum, etc.
Considered, etc.]

Oct. 24. 1687. Hen. Maurice Rmo. in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a
Sacris.

THE PAMPHLET ENTITLED, SPECULUM ECCLESIASTICUM: OR, AN Ecclesiastical
Prospective-Glass, etc.
THere can be no greater Argument of a baffled and erroneous Cause, than when
the Assertors of it are forced to maintain it with manifest Impostures. The
Religion of the Church of Rome is in great measure owing to Legends and Forged
Writings: With the first they deluded the vulgar; and with the second,
circumvented the wiser part of mankind. The Usurpation of the Sea of Rome was
never submitted to, nor its Primacy believed in the West, till the spurious
Decretals of Isidore Mercator were universally received by a blind and ignorant
Age, and believed to be the genuine Decrees of Ancient Popes. No sooner did
Learning begin to flourish in the last Age, but these Phantasms disappeared,
were decried, and disowned by all learned and ingenuous men. To produce them
anew upon the stage, and urge the Authority of them in this learned age, can be
no other than the last efforts of a despairing and dying Cause, which wants
both Reason and Truth to uphold it. To recur to these Forgeries, after the
falseness and folly of them has been detected and demonstrated by learned men
of both Communions; is an invincible Argument, that the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome was at first founded on them, and cannot now be maintained without them.

It may justly be wondered, that men whose office and design it is to uphold the
Cause of the Church of Rome, and persuade others of the truth of it, should
make use of such artifices, as will infallibly, when discovered, make all sober
men suspect her Cause of falseness, and accuse her Agents of dishonesty. Yet
this has been lately done by some Gentlemen of the Church of Rome, in a little
Pamphlet, called Speculum Ecclesiasticum, or an Ecclesiastical
Prospective-Glass; wherein all the Ancient Forgeries of the Church of Rome are
reproduced, and alleged as undoubted Testimonies of Antiquity. An Imposture so
gross and palpable, that if unadvisedly committed, the Ignorance of this Author
must be deplorable; if voluntarily, his Fraud must be detestable. Such
miserable delusions are unfitly calculated for our Age, and can serve for no
other end, than for what they were at first invented, to amuse Children, and
seduce weak people.

The Author divides his Prospective-Glass into eight Parts or Columes; and in
them undertaketh to prove the Doctrines of the Church of Rome from Scripture,
and the Testimonies of the Fathers of the Church for the first 500 years. The
proofs of Scripture I shall not consider, because they are either wholly
impertinent, or have been often answered by the Writers of our Church; and upon
the Testimonies of Antiquity, I will only make some few Observations: For so
idle a Paper deserves not a strict and severe Answer.

The first Column of our Adversary treats of the Churches continued
Succession, and the tradition of all Christian Doctrines through all Ages of
the Church. This might well have been spared, and concerns no more the Church
of R^me, than it does any other particular Church. In the Church of England we
have a Succession of Bishops continued down from the Apostolic times to this
day. The nomination or particular enumeration of them, is neither necessary nor
useful. None will deny the Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, and Philadelphia to
have enjoyed a continued Series of Bishops from the Apostles times; yet are the
names of the far greater part of them unknown. Neither is the Succession of the
Bishops of Rome certain and undoubted. The immediate Successors of St. Peter
are at this day unknown. Linus most probably died before him. Cletus and
Anacletus were most certainly the same person. In succeeding Ages many great
and long Schisms happened, wherein two, and sometimes three Popes together
pretended to the Papal Chair, whose right was so dubious and uncertain, that
Wernerus Rolluinck Fascic. Temp.
professes, most learned and conscientious men could not discern to which
party they ought to adhere. And at this day, the French and Italian Writers
agree not in composing a Catalogue of Popes; the first placing diverse among the
Popes, which the second reject as Antipopes. No other eminent See of the
Catholic Church has suffered these divisions: So that the Succession of the
Bishops of Rome is more doubtful and uncertain than any other Succession of
Bishops in the World. St. Irenaeus indeed, St. Augustine, and Optatus, alleged
by this Writer, disputing against the Heretics, object to them that they are
upstarts, men of yesterday, who could not deduce their Succession from the
Apostles; whereas their Catholics had a visible Succession of Bishops
presiding in their Churches from the Apostles times: and to prove this, produce
the Succession of Roman Bishops, not as of so many Heads of the Universal
Church, but as of the Bishops of the most eminent See of the Western Church.
For the force of their Argument lay not in the particular Succession of the
Roman Bishops, but in the several Successions of all the Catholic Bishops of
the Universal Church; of which they produced that of Rome as an example. This
appears plainly from the words of Irenaeus, who prefixeth this Preface to his
Catalogue of Roman Bishops: Seeing it is too much to reckon up the Succession
of all Churches, I will instante only in that of Rome: As for Succession of
Doctrine, we may with far greater justice claim that, than do our Adversaries.
For the Church of England admits, receives, and believes all Doctrines
which have been universally taught and delivered down by all Churches in all
Ages; and proposes none to her Children as necessary to be believed, which
have not that universal testimony: Whereas the Church of Rome commands
several Doctrines to be believed upon pain of Anathema, which were unknown to
Antiquity, and are at this day denied by the greater part of Christians.

The Fourth Column of the Unity of the Church, is of the same stamp. We, no
less firmly, than our Adversaries, believe the Catholic Church to be one: We
willingly allow that there is no hope of Salvation out of the Pale of that
Church, and have always asserted Schism to be a damnable sin. But that the
particular Church of Rome, or in Communion with the Sea of Rome, is that
Universal Church; that a small and corrupt member of it is the whole; and that
all Churches not Communicating with the Bishop of Rome, are Schismatical; this
we neither believe, nor can our Adversaries prove: Certainly all the
testimonies here alleged insinuate no such thing. But if Schism be so great a
sin, if wilful and unnecessary Separation from any part of the Catholic Church
be damnable; What shall we say of those persons, whose office and employment it
is to promote and foment this Schism, and draw the Members of the Church of
England into an unlawful separation from her? To accuse the Church of England
of Schism or Separation from the Papists, is to go contrary to sense and
reason: For it is notorious to the whole World, that all the Subjects of England
communicated with our Church till the 10th year of Queen Elizabeth; when upon
the Pope's prohibition, a small party flew off into separate Assemblies, who
have since continued their separate Meetings under the name of Roman
Catholics. And shall the Church of England be said to have separated from
those men? This cannot be said with any color of Truth. That Papal prohibition
began the Schism, which till then had no existence. For the Church of England
never did by any judicial act forbid her Children to Communicate with the
Catholic Churches beyond Sea; nor require of her Communicants the belief of
any point denied by them, or disbelief of any point maintained by them.

The third Column, of the Churches Infallibility, is of the same nature, and
equal impertinence. We believe there ever was since the time of Christ, and
shall be to the end of the World, a Church, or collection of men, believing all
things necessary to Salvation. But that this Church is no other than the
particular Church of Rome; and that to the belief of all necessary Articles,
some false and erroneous Opinions never was, nor shall be intermixed; we do not
believe, and it never can be proved. Now all the Testimonies alleged by our
Author amounts to no more than this, That the Church of Christ is indefectible,
ever did and always shall exist. That the whole Faith of Christ is always
taught and preserved in it; and that in her Bosom Salvation may ever be found
and obtained: But all this does no more concern The Church of Rome, than it
does the Church of England. Our Author indeed alleges Three passages, wherein
the Church of Rome is particularly mentioned: The first is a Complement of St.
Cyprian's to Pope Cornelius, That to St. Peter's Chair Infidelity cannot have
access. Perfidia.
This has been oftentimes answered by our Divines, and is indeed a mere
Compliment, or at most, a declaration of his expectations grounded upon the
prospect of a Learned and Orthodox Clergy, which then presided in the Sea of
Rome. Besides infinite places of the Ancients might be produced, wherein they
bestow no less Encomiums upon particular Churches, which by the confession of
our Adversaries not only may, but have actually fallen from the Faith. Thus St.
Ignatius says, Epist. ad Ephesians.
the Church of Ephesus was predestined before all Ages, to continue for ever
in a permanent and unchangeable glory. An expression which infinitely
surpasses St. Cyprians Compliment. The Second passage is taken from Victor
Vitensis, whom our Author ignorantly calls Vticensis, where Eugenius Bishop of
Carthage being urged by the Arian Tyrant Hunnericus to give an account of his
Faith, desired leave to send to all his Fellow Bishops in the whole Catholic
Church that they might meet in a General Council, particularly to the Bishop of
Rome, who was the most eminent Bishop of the Western Church and first Patriarch
of the World. For no General Council could be held without the presence of all
the Patriarchs either by themselves, or by their Legates. That Eugenius desired
not the presence or advice of the Pope for any belief of his Infallibility, is
manifest from what Victor De Persecut. Vandal. l. 2.
immediately subjoins, that Eugenius said this, not because there were wanting
men in Africa, who were able to refute the objections of the Arians, and
vindicate the Catholic Cause: But that such Bishops might be drawn into
Africa, as feared not the threats and violence of Hunnericus, being none of his
natural Subjects. The third is a passage of St. Cyril of Jerusalem in his
Apology against Rusinus, that the Roman Faith, commended by the Apostles,
cannot be changed. Of this Apology I shall speak somewhat hereafter: To the
words alleged, I need only say, our Adversaries can never prove that
unchangeable Faith, which the Apostle commended, to be the Faith of the present
Church of Rome.

Thus have we proved three of our Authors eight Columns to be wholly trifling
and impertinent; I will next observe his ignorance and mistakes of Chronology.
St. Cyprian is by him placed before Origin; when as the latter was a famous
Writer of the Church long before the first was converted to the Faith. Gregory
Nyssen and St. Hierom are ranked before Athanasius; who was a Bishop before
either of the other were born. Tertullian before Theophilus Antiochenus, who
was a Bishop near Twenty five years before the other was made Priest. Victor
Vitensis placed in the beginning of the 4th Age, who lived in the end of the
5th. But our honest Author, because he writ of a Persecution, thought he must
necessarily mean an Heathen Persecution, and therefore set him before
Lactantius. In the same manner he places St. Cyril of Alexandria before St.
Chrysostom; and St. Ambrose before St. Athanasius. But Chronology is not the
business of our Author. Let us next view his Criticism: where we shall find all
the Fables and Forgeries of Ancient and latter times adapted and produced by
him.

I begin with the Decretals of the Ancient Popes; out of which he cites the
Epistles of St. Clemens, Anacletus, and Pius. It were superfluous to resume an
Argument so often cleared, and to prove these Epistles to be spurious, if we
had not to deal with a generation of men, whose either ignorance or effrontery
requires it. This has been often confessed, and at large demonstrated by
Learned Writers of the Church of Rome, but more fully by the Reformed Divines:
Insomuch that it is long since become a received and undoubted opinion among
all the learned men of both Communions. And indeed the thing is manifest beyond
all contradiction; For no Pope, Father, or Writer, before the 9th Age ever made
mention of them. The Vulgar Version of the Bible is constantly used in them,
which was not composed till the beginning of the fifth Age. They are almost
wholly made up of an infinite number of passages stolen from the Writings,
Canons and Constitutions of Authors, Councils, Popes and Emperors, who lived
between the Third and the Ninth Age. They are neither adapted to the genius,
nor necessities of those times: Frequently they oppose Heresies, which began
not till the 4th Age. Are full of ridiculous Anachronisms, barbarous Phrases,
and foolish Solecisms, which those first and purer Ages could not be guilty of.
Lastly, they mention many points of Discipline and Ecclesiastical Terms, which
were unknown to the three first Ages, and not introduced till some Ages after.
Not only the falsity of these Decretals is apparent and confessed; but their
Author and age can be assigned. They were first published to the World by
Riculphus Bishop of Mentz, who received them from Isidore Mercator in the
beginning of the Ninth Age. Bellarmin, Baronius, Perron, and Petavius
acknowledge them to be dubious, and dare not defend them. But latter Critics of
the Church of Rome openly confess them to be spurious. Thus Labbe and Cossart
in their Collection of Councils, affix a note of falsity to every one of them:
And particularly give this Censure of most of them: That they are esteemed
supposititious by learned Catholics. Baluzius A prefat. ad Reginon.
gives an account of their Original, progress and reception in the Gallican
Church: And Du Pin affirms, They are rejected with a common consent.

The spurious Writings of Dionysius the Areopagite, come next to be considered:
Which forgery our Author so fully believes, that he ever places them
immediately after the Holy Scriptures. That they belong not to the Areopagite
is manifest from the universal silence of the ancients, till the Sixth Age: The
subtle argumentation and elaborate style of them far different from the
simplicity of the Apostolic times. They were writ in the flourishing estate of
the Church; and therefore make no mention of Martyrs or Persecutions; but
rather frequently oppose the Heresy of Arius. The Author of them cites the
Apocalypse of St. John, and Ignatius his Epistles, particularly that to the
Romans, written just before his Martyrdom in the year 107. long after the
Areopagites death. I might add, that he mentions many Ceremonies not introduced
into the Church till the Fourth Age; speaks of the Order of Monks, and cites
St. Clemens of Alexandria. But I need not insist any longer upon a thing so
evident. The falsity of these Writings is confessed, and demonstrated by
Petavius, Morinus, Launoy, Oudin, Du Pin, and many other learned Authors of the
Church of Rome.

The Commentaries of Theophilus Bishop of Antioch upon the Gospels, are most
certainly the product of a Latin Writer, and therefore spurious. Such
Commentaries were indeed anciently extant under Theophilus his name; but were
rejected by St. Hierom De Script. Eccl. cap. 25.
as supposititious. As for those we now have, they were forged after St.
Cyprian's time. For the Author transcribes a passage out of Cyprian's sixth,
Epistle to Magnus. Upon which account, Labbe and Du Pin do esteem this Work to
be spurious. The Oration of St. Hippolitus the Consummation of the World, is of
the same stamp, as appears from the barbarous style, childish expressions, and
foolish Fables, which may be found in it. For which reasons Du Pin says, It is
very uncertain, and may be justly called in question.

But to what miserable shifts is our Author reduced, when he cites the Epistle
of St. Athanasius to Pope Felix; an Epistle forged by Isidore Mercator,
together with the Decretals, and almost wholly patch't up out of the Acts of
the Lateran Council under Pope Martin, in the year 649: And wherein Athanasius
tells Faelix; that he had been ordained Bishop at Rome by his sacred hands;
whereas the true Athanasius was ordained at Alexandria more than Forty years
before Faelix was made Pope. Binius acknowledges it to be spurious, and Labbe
Council. Tom. II. p. 844.
gives this scornful censure of it Ad malas Mercatoris merces has ineptae
farraginis quisquilias. Baronius, aliique eruditi viri ablegant; which I will
not translate, lest I should be thought to rail, instead of confuting.

However, to allege a spurious Writing, may be only a matter of artifice to
impose upon an unwary Reader: But to cite the undoubted Work of one Author,
under the name of another, to whom it was never before attributed, can be no
other than gross ignorance. Our Author cites St. Hierom's Third Apology
against Ruffinus under the name of St. Cyril of Jerusalem, who was dead many
years before the name of Ruffinus was known, or this Apology written. Whether
this was a matter of design, that the Reader might never be able to consult the
place, our Author can best tell. Certainly the passage is infinitely trifling
and impertinent. For St. Hierom accusing Ruffinus of a forgery in publishing at
Rome an Apology for Origin, under the name of Pamphilus the Martyr, tells him
he had mist of his design; For the Romans did not believe it to be the Work of
that Martyr: And then adds, that the Roman Faith, commended by the Apostle,
could not be imposed upon by such tricks. This is a piece of flattery, which
even no sober Papist will allow to be strictly true. For all grant that the
whole Church may be deceived in judging a matter of fact; such is, whether this
or that Author writ such a Treatise. And the Church of Rome has been actually
deluded by many Impostures of this nature, as the Spurious Decretals of Isidore
Mercator, which she received and used as genuine for many Ages. But not to
depart from this very instance, St. Hierom has sufficiently refuted his own
words by imposing upon the Romans, in persuading them that this Apology,
translated and published by Ruffinus, was not the work of Pamphilus, but of
Eusebius. For it truly belonged to the former. Eusebius indeed added Five Books
to it. But those were not translated by Ruffinus.

That the Book de Caena Domini should in this Age be cited under the name of
Cyprian, may be justly admired; when it is not only confessed by all to be
spurious, but the true Author of it is known, Arnoldus Abbot of Bonvalle in
France, in the Twelth Age. To him do Raynaudus, Labbe, Oudin, Du Pin, and
almost all Manuscript Copies ascribe it.

St. Ambrose's Work of the Sacraments has been called in question by many
great and learned men of the Reformed Churches. If it should be allowed in the
main to belong to St. Ambrose; they must, however, grant that it has been
miserably interpolated and corrupted by latter hands. For Bertram cites
several places out of it, which cannot now be found in it. But if this be
dubious, it is most certain that the Sermons of St. Ambrose are spurious: Being
no other than a Collection of the Sermons of several Authors, some more, others
less ancient. This Bellarmin and Labbe acknowledge. Many of them may be found
among the Sermons of Maximus Taurinensis, and particularly that of St. Peter
and Paul, cited by our Author. The books de Paenitentia, Petrus Soto Institut.
Sacerd. tit. de necess. Confess. Lect. 2.
maintains to be spurious; and some learned men have subscribed to his Opinion.
In like manner Erasmus contends that the Homilies of Origin upon the Psalms are
spurious, and Bellarmin places them among the dubious Writings. But in these
Two last Cases, nothing certain can be determined.

The books de Visitatione Infirmorum, cited by our Author, under the name of
St. Augustine, Bellarmin and Labbe confess to be spurious. That they are so,
need no other argument than the foolish arguments and barbarous style of them,
unworthy of the judgment and learning of St. Augustine. Erasmus gives this
Censure of them, The work of a prating Fellow, who had neither Wit nor
Learning. What shame or reason have those persons left, who obtrude such
Writings to us under the name of Augustine? Our Author refers us to the Second
book of this Treatise for a proof of Sacerdotal confession. There indeed we may
find this Confession commended, advised and enjoined (which is also done by the
Church of England) but in the mean while the necessity of it disowned, and the
sufficiency of a private confession to God acknowledged. For the Author blaming
some persons who dehorted men from Sacerdotal confession, says, Let not the
superstition of these Dreamers seduce you, which confirms sinners in their
resolutions of not confessing to a Priest, Quia salvat Sacerdote inconsulto ad
Deum peccatorum confessio: Because confession of sins to God without consulting
any Priest, is sufficient to Salvation: Where he plainly allows the truth of
this proposition, but blames the ill application of it. But because our Author
refers us to this spurious Treatise; O exterminanda cordis caecatio. O
perditionis animarum occasio. l. 2. c. 8.
I would desire him to turn one Page farther, where he will find the Doctrine
of doing any Penance after Death, and consequently of Purgatory, called a
detestable blindness of heart, and occasion of the destruction of Souls.

The Quaestiones ad Graecos, cited by our Author under the name of St. Justin
Martyr, are on all sides confessed to be supposititious, particularly by
Bellarmin, Labbe, and Du Pin. The justice of this Censure is evidently evinced
from the frequent mention therein, made of the Manichees, who were not heard of
till more than a Hundred years after Justin's death. The Lamentation of Origin
is the trifling product of some foolish Latin Writer; and therefore justly
rejected as spurious by Bellarmin, Baronius, Ad an. 252.
Labbe, Huetius, and Du Pin. I might add, that it was formerly condemned by
Pope Gelasius, if his Decretal were not equally spurious. However, that
excuses not our Author; since that Decretal is universally received by all the
Writers of the Church of Rome.

Our Author cites, Two Fragments of Eusebius Alexandrinus out of Jodocus
Coccius. But we have great reason to believe, that they are not genuine. For
Eusebius Caesariensis Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 2.
in mentioning Eusebius Alexandrinus, speaks not one word of his Writings;
which that accurate. Historian would by no means have omitted, if there had
heen any known in his time. No one of the Ancients make the least mention of
such a Writer: Nor was he ever heard of till Coccius and Turrain produced some
fragments out of his Homilies. As for Coccius, he had not skill enough in this
kind to pass a critical judgment upon the Writings of the ancients: and Turrain
cannot be securely trusted. For all the World knows with how great violence he
maintained the Apostolic Canons and Constitutions to be genuine: A position
which none but fools and mad men can believe.

The Arabic Canons of the first Council of Nice, are a no less foolish than
evident forgery of latter times. All the Greek and Latin Copies give us no more
than XX. Canons of that Council. Gelasius Cyzicenus says Hist. Con. Nic. l. 2.
c. 30.
no more were made. The African Bishops sending into the East for true and
correct Copies of them, receive from Atticus of Constantinople, and Cyril of
Alexandria no more than XX. and these LXXX. Arabic Canons were never heard of
till brought out of the East in the last Age by the Legates sent by Pius IV. to
the Patriarch of Alexandria to invite him to the Council of Trent. But I need
not use many arguments. They sufficiently betray themselves by the frequent
mention of Names, Rites, and Customs which obtained not in the Church till
after the Council of Nice. I will instance only in their several Constitutions,
about Monasteries, Monks and Nuns, as that they be shaved, and use a distinct
habit from the rest of mankind; customs which were not known till some Ages
after. And that we may not seem singular in making this Censure, the Learned
Abraham Ecchellensis Prefat. ad Version.
confesses, That many of them were forged, others changed, and all
accommodated by the several Sects of the East to their several Ages and
Persuasions.

The sincerity of our Author deserves next to be considered, which I fear
would be found very small if I had time and leisure to compare all his
Citations with the Originals. Those few which I have compared, give me a just
suspicion of his fraudulent dealing in the rest, and may reasonably create the
same prejudice in all his Readers. I will produce a few Instances. In the Fifth
Column he cites these words of Irenaeus (a), How can they be assured the Bread
is made the Body of our Lord? In the Original it is esse Corpus suum, where he
has Translated esse to be made. A few lines after he produces a passage of
Tertullian, which no man in his right wits could ever have alleged for
Transubstantiation: For the entire sentence is one of the most pregnant
Testimonies of all Antiquity, against that monstrous opinion; the words are
these L. 4. c. 57.
, The Bread taken and distributed to his Disciples, ( e) Adv. Marcion. l. 4. c.
40.
he made his Body, by saying, This is my Body, that is, the Figure of my Body.
Our Author has cut off the latter part, and given us only the first words of
this Passage. What name ought justly to be given to this Artifice, let others
judge; but certainly none can call it sincerity. The corruption of Justin Martyr
in the 7th Column is no less gross and evident; where our Author cites these
words out of his Second Apology: We worship them (the good Angels) both by
words and deeds, even as we our selves have been taught and instructed. The
Greek words are these, (...); honoring them both in word and deed; and freely
teaching every one who desires to learn those things wherein we been
instructed. A little before, he had cited Dionysius the Areopagite, for Prayers
to the departed Saints, where he wilfully mistakes that Writers meaning; and
what the Counterfeit Dionysius speaks of the Prayers of our pious
Fellow Christians here on Earth, applies to Prayers made to departed Saints;
and not only so, but falsifieth his words in more than one place; the passage
is this De Ecclesiast. Hierarch. c. 7.
; (...), -- (...). This I affirm consonantly to the Scripture; That the prayers
of holy men are very useful in this life, this way. If any one desiring the
Divine Graces, and be well disposed for the reception of them, shall (as being
conscious of his own unworthiness) come to some holy man, and desire him to
assist him, and pray together with him, he shall receive hence the greatest
benefit. The words thus justly Translated, do neither favor nor relate to
Prayers to the Dead. In the same Column he has produced some words of St.
Chrysostom Orat. de SS. Bernic. and Prosdoce.
, with no more ingenuity; for he translates (...), Let us pray to them; indeed
the word (...) follows, Let us desire them, (which yet our Author after his
wonted manner exaggerates, Let us heartily beseech them): But that this was a
mere rhetorical Flight, may be demonstrated beyond all doubt; for in the
immediately foregoing sentence he speaks much greater things of their dead
Relics, and Repositories; to which yet even our Author will grant that
Prayers are not in a strict and proper sense to be addressed: In this Fire of
Devotion, says he, let us fall down to their Relics; let us embrace their
Repositories; for even the Repositories of Martyrs have great Virtue, as the
Bones of Martyrs have great Force. These Rhetorical Apostrophes are frequent to
all Orators, and ought not to be drawn into Dogmatical Propositions.

I return now to consider our Authors Columns separately. The Second is about
the Primacy of the Pope, and consists of some Testimonies of the Fathers, which
abating the spurious ones, insinuate no more than that St. Peter was Prince or
First of the Apostles, the Foundation upon which the Church was built, and the
Keeper of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; all this we readily acknowledge:
None ever denied a Primacy of Order to St. Peter; the Scripture assures us that
the Apostles were all Foundations of the Church; and our Savior committed the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to them all: If any of these Testimonies seem to
attribute somewhat greater and more eminent to St. Peter, we are to consider
that Orators seldom contain themselves within the severe bounds of truth, when
they set themselves to make an Encomium of any. The Ancients speak no less
things of St. Paul, and attribute to him no less swelling Titles, as might
easily be proved, if our intended brevity would permit it. I will produce only
some passages of St. Chrysostom Hom. in Romans xvi. 3. in terra mot. and Laz. in
Paulum, etc.
, who calls him The Tongue of the World, the Light of the Churches, the
Foundation of Faith, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, the Vessel of Election,
the Temple of God, the Mouth of Christ, the Harp of the Holy Ghost, the Doctor
of the World, the Teacher of Divine Opinions, the Schoolmaster of the World,
upon whom the eyes of the whole World were cast, and upon whom the care of all
the Churches in the World depended; to whose Government God had committed the
whole World, Hom. ad eos qui scandalizati sunt Hom. de esemos. and collat.
to whom the whole World was committed, and all the Churches under the Sun, who
governed all the Churches, People, Nations and Cities of the Earth, to whom
none can be equalled, (...).
who had the Primacy, greater than all others; to Michael was committed the
Government of the Jews, but to Paul, the Earth, the Sea, both the habitable,
and inhabitable World, the Illuminator of the World, the greatest of all Men,
who alone possessed all the perfections of the other Patriarchs, Apostles,
Saints and Martyrs, who is admired and honored beyond all the other Apostles.
None of them was greater than him, (...).
yea none was equal to him. I am confident no passages can be found in all
Antiquity in favor of St. Peter, which can equal these produced out of one
Author in favor of St. Paul. The most express passage which our Author
alleges, is that of Tertullian Lib. de Pudic.
, where he is supposed to call the Pope Chief Pastor, Bishop of Bishops, and
Blessed Pope. But alas! all these are Ironical Expressions, directed to, not
the Pope, but the Bishop of Carthage, as has been invincibly proved by a
Learned Man Alix. Dissert. de Script. Tertul. p. 70.
, now of our Church. The more express Testimonies which remain, are only the
first and the last of this Column: The first our Author thought so
considerable, that he chose against his usual custom to give it us in Latin: It
is part of the Inscription of St. Ignatius's Epistle to the Romans, wherein he
calls them the sanctified and illuminated Church, which presides in the Country
of the Romans. These inscriptions of Epistles were according to the Custom of
the Eastern Nations, filled with great and swelling Titles, of which unhappily
this to the Romans was one of the most modest; for he bestows far greater
Titles upon other Churches in some of his Epistles, and particularly calls the
Church of the Philadelphians (...) raised to the utmost pitch of perfection; as
for the word illuminated, it is a Title which the Ancient Christians bestowed
upon all Baptized Persons, whom they called (...) and (...), as Baptism was
commonly called (...). And then for presiding in the Country of the Romans,
every particular Episcopal See presideth in her own Diocese; and therefore
Ignatius does not say, which presideth in the whole World, but which presideth
in the Province of Rome. The last Testimony is taken from Socrates and Sizomen
attesting that the Eastern Synods were not valid, unless confirmed by the Pope;
that he had a peculiar Privilege of restoring Bishops unjustly deposed, and
that to him belonged the care of all the Churches. But first, neither of the
Historians affirm, That the Pope had any such privilege which was not common
to the other Patriarch. For it was the constant custom of the Ancient Church,
that in all emergent occasions of the Church, the Patriarchs should interpose
their judgments, as being more peculiarly obliged to it, by that eminent
station which they held among other Bishops: Not that the judgment of every one
was authoritative, or immediately put in execution (for their judgments were
oft-times contrary) but they thereby only declared what they thought just and
Canonical, which if it was not performed, they with the Bishops subject to
them, used to deny communion to the other party. Besides, there was a
particular reason in the case mentioned by these Historians. For Athanasius
being deposed by the Arians, both Catholics and Arians had submitted the
Arbitration of the whole cause to Pope Julius. As for the confirmation of
Councils; no Council could be General, till approved by all the Patriarchs; and
therefore if a Synod were held in the East, wherein the Roman Patriarchs was
present, neither by himself, nor by his Legates; no wonder if the Decrees of it
obliged not the Western Patriarchate, till confirmed by the Pope. For no more
did the Western Synods oblige the Eastern Churches, till confirmed by the
Eastern Patriarchs.

The Fifth Column treats of Transubstantiation, wherein most of the
Testimonies produced by our Author, say no more than that the Eucharistical
elements after Consecration are the Body and Blood of our Lord. This we also
assert and believe; but then the question remains still, in what sense they
are the body and blood of Christ; of the remaining citations the most express
are those of Just in Martyr, St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine. The first even in
the words cited by our Author affirms, That our Flesh and Blood are nourished
by the Eucharistical elements; and therefore could not believe
Transubstantiation. The Second indeed says De initandis, cap. 9.
that a preternatural change is made in the elements after Consecration, and
the Bread then becomes the Body of Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary,
was crucified and buried. But that he means his typical not natural body, is
manifest from the beginning of this Chapter, where he compares this heavenly
food to Manna, or the Bread of Angels; and prefers it because that is subject
to corruption, if it be kept from day to day; but this is free from corruption,
which whosoever religiously tastes, cannot suffer corruption. From which words,
Three several Arguments of a typical sense may be formed. For first, as Manna
was not truly, but typically the Bread of Angels: So neither is the consecrated
Bread truly, but typically the Body of Christ. Secondly, The consecrated
elements are as to the matter of them subject to corruption: And therefore St.
Ambrose believed not the matter of them, but only what they represented, to be
the body of Christ. Thirdly, He affirms this incorruptible Body of Christ to be
received only by the Religious communicant: Whereas if Transubstantiation, be
true, it is equally received by the most Irreligious person. St. Augustine in
the place Comm. in Psalm. 33.
cited by our Author expressly denies all natural presence. His words are
these, When our Lord Jesus Christ spoke of his Body, He said, Whosoever eats
not my flesh, and drinks not my blood, shall not have eternal Life: For my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. His Disciples, who followed
him, were afraid, and scandalized at that speech, and not truly understanding
it, thought that our Lord spoke somewhat harsh, as if they were to eat that
flesh, and drink that blood, which they saw. They could not bear this; as if
they had said, How can this be? Error, ignorance and folly had possessed them:
Where he goes on to show that this aversion of the Apostles proceeded from a
misapprehension of our Lord's meaning; as if he intended to give them his
natural flesh and blood to eat: Sacramenta praedicabat.
Whereas our Lord knew what he meant; he spoke of Sacraments, or a sacramental
presence. This passage sufficiently explains the following Clause cited by our
Author, unless we can suppose St. Augustine in this obscure sentence to have
contradicted the Doctrine by him plainly delivered in the precedent Words.

The Sixth Column corncerns Sacramental Confession, Priestly Absolution and
Penance; and in all respects is wholly impertinent; as may appear by these few
considerations. First, Then the Church of England retains and advises to her
Children Confession, Absolution and Penance; But then she makes not the first
absolutely necessary to Salvation; nor the Second a judicial, but only
declaratory act; nor the Third properly satisfactory for sins: Nor do any of
the Testimonies produced by our Author, prove these positions. Secondly, The
Confession used in the ancient Church was not Auricular, but public; not
lodged in the breast of the Priest, but made before the whole Congregation. And
when afterward about the time of the Decian Persecution these confessions
became so numerous, that the Church could not hear them all, a Paenitentiarius
was chosen out of the Presbyters to receive them, he did not keep them secret
to himself, but only pass judgment which were fit to be made known to the whole
Church, and to be performed in the public Congregation, and which not. 3.
Absolution of the Priest was not believed to be judicial or authoritative, and
immediately to absolve before God, but only declaratory of the promises of
pardon made by God to all penitent sinners, and to have no other necessary
effect, than the restoring of the penitents to the peace of the Church. This
may be proved by that very passage of St. Hierom, which our Author cites,
where he compares the Priestly absolution, to the cleansing of Lepers by the
Priests under the old Law; a comparison very frequent with the Fathers. For as
the Jewish Priests made not the Lepers clean, but only declared them so to be,
and supposed them to be clean before their declaration; otherwise the
declaration would not in the least have contributed to their cleansing: So a
sacerdotal Absolution remits not the guilt of sins, but supposes them to have
been before remitted by God, and declares so to be; otherwise the absolution
of a Priest will avail the sinner nothing, nor set him right in the Court of
Heaven. 4. Penance in the ancient Church was chiefly intended, not as a
satisfaction to God for the violation of his Laws, but as a satisfaction to the
Church, for the scandal given to others, and reproach drawn upon the whole
Church by the former crimes or irregular practice of the penitents: And
therefore was ever augmented or relaxed according to the various exigencies or
necessities of times. 5. In the ancient Church, Penance ever preceded
Absolution, and was the means of obtaining it: Whereas in the Church of Rome,
the Penitent is first absolved, and then some subsequent Penance is imposed on
him: Which takes away the very nature of Penance, Confession and Absolution, as
they were used and designed the ancient Christians; and tends only to the
interests of the Priest, and delusion of private souls.

The Seventh Column undertaketh to prove the lawfulness of Invocation or Prayer
to Saints, and that they pray for us: the latter we need not deny; but
maintain, that that will not warrant the former. So that when all the spurious
Testimonies, those which we have already answered, and those which prove only
that the departed Saints pray for us, be expunged; there remain no more than
one of St. Ambrose (for that of St. Hierom is a plain historical Apostrophe)
and one of Theodoret. As for the first, I might justly oppose the authority of
some learned men, who maintain this Book de Viduis, whence the passage is
taken, to be supposititious. But I will content my self to say, That our Author
has falsely translated the place, by rendering Obsecrandi sunt Angeli pro
nobis, ut, etc. Obsecrandi sunt Martyrs, We are to desire the assistance of
the Angels; we are to pray to the Martyrs: Whereas the words do not in the
least insinuate an Exhortation of Prayer to be made to them by us; but only a
wish, that they would pray for us, and that we should gratefully accept their
charitable kindness in so doing. The Passage De curand. affect. Graec. Orat. 8.
of Theodoret, as cited by our Author, is a plain forgery. For Theodoret speaks
not one Syllable of praying to the Martys; and what our Author translates,
beseech them as Holy men to intercede to God for them, is no more in the Greek
than this, (...). We honor, or reverence them as holy men.

The last Column treats of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead. The first we
believe to be a Fable, and to have no ground, either in Scripture or Antiquity.
The second our Church does not condemn, only has prudently omitted it in the
public Service, because it is a thing dubious in it self, and not approved by
Scripture. The use of it in the Ancient Church, does not in the least prove the
belief of Purgatory. For they anciently prayed for all Saints departed
whatsoever, even for the blessed Virgin, Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors; and
their Prayers respected not alleviation of freedom from any internal
Punishment, but only the day of Judgment, that God would hasten it; and when
that comes, receive all departed Souls into the beatifical Vision, which they
generally believed was not bestowed to the departed Saints till the day of
Judgment. That Purgatory was anciently believed, our Author's Testimonies do in
no wise prove. Some of them indeed mention a purging Fire; But that Fire was
not to exist till the Day of Judgment, when all Souls were to pass through it,
and to continue a shorter or longer time in it, according to their greater or
lesser Purity. No intermediate punishment between Death and Judgment was
believed, besides the delay of Resurrection; if that can properly be called a
punishment.

There remains only to consider our Author's Catalogue of general Councils:
Wherein he has committed many gross, and, as I fear, wilful mistakes. He makes
Pope Sylvester preside over the Council of Nice; but Eusebius and Socrates,
whom he cites, say no such thing. Baronius indeed says it: but all the World
knows the contrary. For Hosius Bishop of Corduba presided, and subscribed in
his own name before the Legates of Pope Sylvester. That Damasus presided over
the first Council of Constantinople, is so egregiously false; that that Council
was both begun and ended without so much as the knowledge of the Pope, or any
other Western Bishops. That Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria, not Pope Celestin,
presided over the Council of Ephesus, is manifest from the Acts of that
Council, from the Commission given to him by the Emperor for that purpose, and
from all the Historians of those times. Cyril indeed acted for Pope Celestin,
but not as president, but as one Fellow-Bishop manageth the Proxy of another
here in England, in the House of Lords. In the Council of Chalcedon Pope Leo's
Legates were so far from presiding, that all the Canons of the Council were
made in their absence, and not only without, but against their consent. For
when the Legates in the next Session protested against the Canons, they were
overruled by the Council and forced to submit. That Pope Vigilius presided
over the Fifth General Gouucil, or Second of Constantinople, is so impudent a
Falsehood, that it might with equal reason be pretended that Luther or Calvin
presided over the Council of Trent: For Vigilius who was then at
Constantinople, gathered an opposite Convention of Western Bishops, wherein
publishing a long Constitution or Decree in favor of the Tria Capitula, he
concludes with a severe Censure and Condemnation of all who should hereafter
Write, Teach, or Propose any thing contrary to his Decree, which he knew was
then in doing in the General Council. The Popes Constitution was read in the
Council, and notwithstanding it was Decreed, Can. 12, 13, 14. That whosoever
defended the Tria Capitula, or even did not Anathematize them, should be
himself Anathematized. After the Conclusion of the Council, and not till then,
Vigilius submitted, and writing an Epistle to Eutychius Patriarch of
Constantinople, who had presided over the Council, professes he was now very
sorry that by the instigation of the Devil he had dissented from the Council,
and in contempt of brotherly Charity had openly disagreed from them, and
contended with them; that now he was convinced of his Errors, and therefore
retracting his former actions, ratified and submitted to the Decrees of the
Council. In the Seventh General Council our Author reckoning up the Heretics
condemned by it, as Paulus, Sergius, Cyrus, Theodosius, comes off with an etc.
the meaning of which may easily be discovered; for this etc. was invented to
save the reputation of Pope Honorius, who together with the rest was
Anathematized by the Council as a notorious and pestilent Heretic. The Second
Council of Nice was formerly denied to be General by Theodorus Studites, although
a great Patron of Image Worship; and was condemned in the same age by the great
Council of Francfort. The Fourth Council of Constantinople in the Year 869 was
ever accounted a Schismatical Conventicle by the Greek Church. All the
following Councils were confined to the West, and wanted both the Presence and
Suffrage of the Eastern Patriarchs, and consequently were not Ecumenical: Many
of them are not at this day universally received in the Church of Rome; and
others are rejected and condemned by the Gallican Church, as the First Second,
Third, and Fourth of Lateran, First, and Second of Lions, as to the
Constitutions and Canons injurious to the Civil Right of Princes: The Councils
of Florence, and Fifth of Lateran, are wholly rejected by her, and the Council
of Trent but in part received: Our Author pretends, that in the Council of
Florence the Greeks were united to the Church of Rome, and subscribed the
Union. If a forced compliance of a few Bishops compelled by the threats and
force of their Emperor can be called an union, this was indeed one: But many of
them subscribed for fear of Death, and most for fear of starving, as Sylvester
Sguropulus an Eyewitness assures us; and all of them when returning home,
were so detested and hated by their Countrymen, that they were esteemed worse
than Infidels, and not permitted to be buried in holy Ground.

I might make some farther Observations upou our Authors Paper, as why he left
that of Constance out of the number of General Councils, and yet afterward
produced its Authority; how disagreeing the forms of Recantation, prescribed to
Berengarius, are to the present Belief of the Church of Rome, and how little
the Testimonies produced by him in favor of Apostolical Traditions, concern
the Romish Doctrine of Traditions. But what I have already said, is enough to
show that there is a Generation of men in the World, who adding a profound
Ignorance to a false Zeal, fear not to sacrifice all considerations of Shame
and Honesty, of Truth and Reason, to a present Interest, and the poor advantage
of a short-lived Imposture.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church; more
praticularly of the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon other Sees, By
WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. 8vo.

An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's [Sure Footing in Christianity] concerning the Rule
of Faith. With some other Discourses. By WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D. 4o.

A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in Answer to a
Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders.
By GILBERT BVRNET, D. D. 8vo.

An Abridgment of the History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By
GILB BVRNET, D. D. 8vo.

The APOLOGY of the Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio, a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both In Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of Salisbury; Made
English by a Person of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop;
Collected and written by the same Hand, 8vo.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL, D. D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland, Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Weddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition of Sevil) in Matter of Religion, concerning
the General Motives to the Roman Obedience. 8vo.

The Decree made at ROME the Second of March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits, and other Casuists. 4o.

A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. 4o. First and Second Parts.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
4o.

A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented] 4o.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church] 4o.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; against
the Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator, 4o.

A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome. With
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England 8vo.

A Papist Represented and not Misrepresented, being an Answer to the First,
Second, Fifth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Papist Misrepresented
and Represented]; and for a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, truly
representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome. 4o.

The Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. 4o.

The Plain Man 's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 24o.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. 4o.

A Vindication of the Answer to THREE PAPERS concerning the Unity and Authority
of the Catholic Church, and the Reformation of the Church of England. 4o.

Mr. Chillingworth's Book, called [The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation] made more generally useful by omitting Personal Contests, but
inserting whatsoever concerns the common Cause of Protestants, or defends the
Church of England, with an exact Table of Contents; and an Addition of some
gennine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworth's never before printed, viz. against the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an
Account of what moved the Author to turn Papist, with his Confutation of the
said Motives.

The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth, mentioned by S.
Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 3. Verse 15. 4to.

The Peoples Right to read the Holy Scripture Asserted 4to.

A Short Summary of the principal Controversies between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome; being a Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in
Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [Protestancy destitute of Scripture
Proofs.] 4to.

Two Discourses; Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead.

An Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, [The Judgment and Doctrine of the
Clergy of the Church of England concerning one Special Branch of the King's
Prerogative, viz. In dispensing with the Penal Laws.] 4to.

The Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined and
confuted. 4to.

Preparation for Death: Being a Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper of which she died.

The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
opposition to a late Book, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and Church of Rome.

A PRIVATE PRAYER to be used in Difficult Times.

A True Account of a Conference held about Religion at London, Sept. 29. 1687.
between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Tho. Tenison, D. D. ss also of that which led to
it, and followed after it. 4to.

The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the
Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit, Schoolmaster in the Savoy, together with some
Account of his Discourse with Mr. Meredith.

A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that Their Religion is the
surest Way to Heaven. 4to.

Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist, wherein is showed, that the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religion.

A Discourse concerning the Pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction, with an
Account of the occasions and beginnings of it in the Western Church. In three
Parts; With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

The Pamphlet entitled, Speculum Ecclesiasticum, or an Ecclesiastical
Prospective-Glass, considered, in its False Reasonings and Quotations. There
are added, by way of Preface, two further Answers, the First, to the Defender
of the Speculum; the Second to the Half-sheet against the Six Conferences.

In the Press.
A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against the new Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The FIRST PART, in which the Account that has been given of the
Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully Vindicated; the Distinction of Old and
New Popery Historically asserted, and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in
Point of Image Worship, more particularly considered. 4o.

The Incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome. By the Auther of the [Six
Conferences concerning the Eucharist.] 4o.


