THE Insinuating Bawd: AND THE Repenting Harlot.

Written by a Whore at Tunbridge, and Dedicated to a Bawd at the Bath.



LONDON Printed, and are Sold by most Booksellors.

Books Printed and Sold by J. How, in the Ram-Head-Inn-Yard in
Fenchurch-Street; and by M. Fabian, at Mercers-Chappel.
1. SOt's Paradise: Or the Humors of a Derby-Ale-House: With a Satyr upon the
Ale. Price Six Pence. 2. A Trip to Jamaica: With a True Character of the People
and Island Price Six Pence. 3. Ecclesia and Factio. A Dialogue between
Bow-Steeple-Dragon, and the Exchange-Grashoper. Price Six pence. 4. The Poet's
Ramble after Riches. With Reflections upon a Country Corporation. Also the
Author's Lamentation in the time of Adversity. Price Six pence. 5. A Trip to
New England. With a Character of the Country and People, both English and
Indians. Price Six pence. 6. Modern Religion, and Ancient Loyalty: A Dialogue.
Price Six Pence. 7. The World Bewitched. A Dialogue between two Astrologers and
the Author. With Infallible Predictions of what will happen from the Vices and
Villainies Practiced in Court, City, and Country. Price Six pence. 8. A Walk to
Islington: With a Description of New Tunbridge-Wells, and Sadler's
Musick-House. Price Six pence. 9. The Humors of a Coffee-House: A Comedy.
Price Six Pence. 10. A Frolic to Horn-Fair. With a Walk from Cuckold's-Point
through Deptford and Greenwich. Price Six pence. 11. The Dancing-School. With the
Adventures of the Easter-Holy-Days. Price Six pence. 12. The First Volume of
the LONDON-SPY: In Twelve Parts. 13. The Second Volume of the LONDON-SPY: In
Six Parts. Price Six Pence each; or they may be had both Volumes Bound
together; and also Bound with the rest of the Authors Writings. 14. The
Metamorphos'd Beau, etc. 15. The English Nun: Or, a Comical Description of a
Nunnery. With the Lives and Intrigues of the Priests and Nuns. Price Six Pence.
16. Laugh and be Fat: Or, an Antidote against Melancholy. Containing great
variety of Comical Intrigues in Town and Country. To which is added Nine
Delightful Tales. Price One Shilling. 17. A Step to the Bath: With a Character
of the Place. Price Six Pence. 18. Labor in Vain: Or, what Signifies Little or
Nothing, viz. I. The Poor Man's Petition at Court. II. Expectation of Benefit
from a Covetous Man in his Life time. III. The Marriage of an Old Man to a
Young Woman. IV. Endeavors to Regulate Men's Manners by Preaching or Writing.
V. Being a Jacobite. VI. Confining an Insolvent Debtor. VII. Promise of Secrecy
in a Conspiracy. VIII. An Enquiry after a Place.
THE Repenting Harlot TO THE Insinuating Bawd.
Most Hypocritical Beldam!
SVRE nothing but the Vilest Complication of all manner of Devilism, could have
Acted a Judas's part with so much subtilty, for the Lucre of a few base Pence,
as your abominable self, thou Hodg Podge of all Wickedness; in deluding a poor
Innocent Creature, by the bewitching Sorcery of your Insinuating Tongue, to
satisfy the Lust of an Ungrateful Sinner, to her whole Life's Misery.

I am Pleased with nothing in this World, but to hear the Venereal Remains of
your Juvenal Debauches, have sent you Packing to the Bath, to there Parboile
your filthy Carcass, with a Vain hope of Repairing your Rotten Limbs, which I
believe the best Preserver of Humane Bodies, is unable to keep Alive from
Stinking. Some Cripples I have heard, have been so perfectly restored to their
Healthful Abilites by the Bath, as to leave their Crutches behind'em: But I
question not, if there be any Justice in Hot Water toward thee, the most
Infamous of Sinners: If you leave any thing behind you, 'twill be your Nose, or
your Shinbones, in order to Punish you, for those Ills which you have not been
Contented to Practice your self, but to draw Innocence into.

The Sufferings and Sorrows I now Labor under, are all owing to your
Confounded Ladyship, and your Ecstasies of Joy with a Pox to 'em, (for so I Have
found 'em) have struck up such an unextinguishable Fire in my most Pleasurable
Apartment, that I fear its past the Power of Tunbridge Waters,
Aqua-Tetrachimagogon, or the Pick-a-dilly Engineer, to stop the Flames from
consuming the whole miserable Tenement.

My Sinful Life, which was at first owing to your self, has brought me Early
under Affliction; and that Affliction, I thank Providence, to an Early
Repentance: But if I cannot become a sincere Penitent, without forgiving you,
my Unpardonable Enemy, who first seduced me into a State of Corruption, I shall
certainly hazard my Salvation, upon a breach of that part of Christianity; and
Dye with as much Malice toward thee, the betrayer of my Innocence, as ever did
poor Jacobite Plotter bear to a Confederate, who first drew him into the
Design, and afterward, to save his own Life, hanged him upon his Evidence.

Under a Serious Reflection, on my miserable Condition at Tunbridge: I writ the
following Poem, which I have Dedicated to your Sinful self, to Remind you of
your past Wickedness; and to Caution Young Ignorant Creatures, how they are
Deluded by such Insinuating Beldams, such Kidnappers of Virginity, into the
like Unhappiness: So Wishing you may Dye in a Ditch, and Rot like a Dead Horse,
that the Boys may make Catsticks of your Leg Bones, and Raisers of your Ribs,
to Play at Trap Ball with, in the Bartholomew Holydays, I Remain a Miserable
Wretch, and your Bitter Enemy till Death.

D. B.

THE Insinuating Bawd: OR, THE Repenting Harlot.
HAPPY was I, before I knew to Sin;
All Charms without, all Innocence within;
No Hateful Envy, my Content withstood;
All things were Grateful, whilst my self was Good:
Unsulli'd Pleasures in my Bosom dwelt,
My Peaceful Soul no Headstrong Passion felt:
No Shame pursued, or, did my Mind Affright;
But every Hour administered Delight:
Blessed as the Aspiring Angels, ever they Fell;
The World seemed Heaven, for I knew no Hell.
No Pride or Lust, my Virgin Brightness Stained,
Or Vicious Thoughts my Virtuous Will Profaned:
My Looks and Actions Artless did appear;
Though each Obliged, yet both Unstudy'd were;
Without Design, all Innocent and Free;
I knew no Sin, and could no Curse foresee.
My Beauty and Deportment were approved,
By the Old Applauded, by the Young Beloved.
Thus was my Youth by Virtue's Charms inspired,
By all Respected, and by most Admired;
Proud was the Man, and Blessed the Happy He,
That could obtain one minutes Company;
Which then to the false Sex I could impart,
And feel no Feverish Throbing in my Heart.
Talk of Chaste Love, and raise no ill Desire,
Toy without Kindling up a Lustful Fire;
Could Wander without Fear from Field to Grove,
And think of nothing but the Name of Love:
Yet found my Sweeter Innocence supplied
The want of Joys my Tender years denied.
Thus I remain*d from Sinful Sorrows free,
No Saint on Earth could sure more Happy be;
Till I the Term of Sixteen years had been
A Faithful Subject to bright Virtue's Queen;
And then my own Base Sex seduced me first to Sin.
One who by long Experience knew the way
To raise Desires would Tender Youth betray,
And make the Giddy Maid, with Eager haste,
Pursue those Pleasures, it is a Crime to Taste.
The insinuating Temptress, thus began
To Bribe my Ears, and Bend my Thoughts toward Man.
Madam, Since Heaven so largely has bestowed
On you those Blessings, but to few allowed*
And now your Charms, in Natures Law's Untaught,
Are by Ripe Years to full Perfection brought;
It Is to the Donor sure a great abuse,
When grown Mature, to keep 'em back from Use:
By our Grave Guides, how often are we told,
How much the Miser Sins, that hoards his Gold.
If you those Charms from their true Use Conceal,
You're doubtless Guilty of as great an Ill.
Beauty, like Money, 's made to be Employed;
And not by Age to molter Vn-enjoy'd:
For it were, where would the difference be,
Betwixt the Fairest, and the Homely'st She?
The soft Young Damsel, with her Magic Eyes,
And all the Charms Dame Nature can Devise,
If she but Tempts to what must be Denied,
Imprisons Beauty by a Senseless Pride;
The Dowdy's far more Blessed, that freely is Enjoyed.
For Niggards, though Possessed with useless Store,
Through Willful wants, Live Poorer than the Poor:
Consider, Child, what Pity it would be,
That Fruit like yours, should Wither on the Tree:
Those Rubie Cheeks, that look so Fresh and Gay,
Will in short time, if not Enjoyed, Decay.
That warm Complexion, that preserves the Grace
Of each soft Feature in your Lovely Face,
Will Sickly grow, and Fade in spite of Art,
Lest the Blind God, soon Bleeds you with his Dart:
See how Lucinda's Charms at once are gone,
Whose Eyes of late, with so much Luster shone;
And all the Roses that her Cheeks Adorned,
Are into Yellow Fading Tulips turned;
Her Limbs, that with such Air and Freedom moved,
Are Lazy grown, unfit to be Beloved:
Her depraved Stomach does for nothing Call,
But Cinders, Oat-Meal, 'Baccopipes, and Wall:
Her Blood's Corrupted, and her Breath's grown Short;
And all for want of Love's Salubrious Sport.
Therefore, Dear Madam, don't Repent too Late,
That you are fallen beneath Lucinda's Fate;
B^^^^se the happy means that may prevent
Those Ills occasioned by severe Restraint:
Such Knowledge you will find, such Pleasure take
In the first Sweet Experiment you make;
You Will own each Blissful moment you Employ,
Is worth an Age Exempted from the Joy.
Your Soul will find an Ecstasy so great,
What now you Fear, you will Study to Repeat.
The Vnexperienc'd Nymph that is Chaste and Fair,
Does but the Fetters of Blind Ignorance wear;
Whilst she that is Wise, dissolves the feeble Chain,
By Vent'ring once to lose what is kept in Pain.
When I first took the Counsel that I give,
Such Pleasing Knowledge did my Soul Revive,
I Would rather Feast and Dye, than not to Taste and Live.
Madam, said I, I know not what you mean,
Something methinks I want, but fear to Sin;
You Talk of Joys to such a Blessed degree,
What Is sure so Pleasant, cannot Sinful be;
And yet methinks, who'd Heavens Laws Control,
Were it not Pleasure that beguiled the Soul?
Barely the Hopes, not certainty of Joy,
Did Eve, amidst her Innocence Decoy;
'Twas not the Fruit, but what the Tempter said,
That her weak Nature to his Will Betrayed.
If Talk of Pleasures will the Mind subdue,
What then must Joys in full Fruition do.
The very Words are Pleasant you impart,
And makes a Welcome Fever in my Heart:
My Soul Divided, struggles hard within;
Betwixt the Hopes of Joy, and Fear of Sin:
A warm Desire through every Fiber glides;
Something I want, which something else forbids,
What it is you have made me Covet to Possess,
Dear Madam tell me, for I cannot guess.
With Looks disordered, I approached more nigh,
And eagerly attended her Reply.
Finding her Words had some Impression made,
She took me by the Hand, and thus she said:
Madam, The Joys your full-blown Years require,
Are Just to Act, and Natural to Desire:
It Is the sweet Game that all Mankind pursue,
The Prince, the Peasant, Priest, and Poet too:
It Sweetens Life in every Degree;
Makes Crowns sit Easy, and the Pen run Free:
It is the Virgins Hope, the Wives Delight,
The Business of the Day, the Bliss of Night.
It begets Friendship, puts an end to Strife,
Is the Blessed Warmth that gives the World new Life.
Such are the Joys, you now are Ripe to Prove,
In The Sweet Embraces of a Man you Love,
Hugged in his Arms, if Pliable and Kind;
There, there, the Happy Secret you will find.
But Man, said I, I Have heard my Mother say,
Is False, and cannot Love above a Day;
Will Swear ten thousand Lies, to be Believed;
And Fawn, and Flatter, till h'has one Deceived:
But when h'has gained his End, inclined to Rove,
Slights what he Vowed he could for Ages Love.
And leaves the Sighing Wretch he has betrayed,
To drown in Tears, the false kind things he said.
How then can I such Happiness obtain,
From Faithless Man, so Fickle, and so Vain.
Methinks, I only could the Youth approve,
That could, like me, for Ever ever Love;
Conform to the Sacred Tie, make me his Wife,
And bind himself to Love me for his Life:
In such a Man, I Am sure I could Delight,
Please him all Day, and Hug him close all Night.
Dear Child, says she, You much, Alas! mistake;
Those Bonds are Tiresome which we cannot break:
Fear, Jealousy, and Doubt, Improve the Bliss;
The Pleasure's Lost, when Chains have made you his.
Our Sex too often has Confessed, in Tears,
Cupid withdraws, when once the Priest appears:
Marriage and Love, we by Experience find,
Differ like Freedom, and Restraint, in kind;
And if they mix, it is with much Pains and Toil,
As Skilful Cooks, mix Vinegar with Oil.
Therefore in Love, if you would happy be,
Keep, whilst you're Youthful, Unconfined and Free:
And if your weary Confident should Range,
The Bonds are Void, and you your self may change:
Your Love, whenever your Gallant has Erred,
May to another justly be Transferred:
But if in Wedlocks Fetters, you are Bound,
For Wrongs you Suffer, no Relief is found;
Slights and Neglects; nay, Blows perhaps endure;
And bear with Patience, what Revenge should Cure:
Husbands maintain an Arbitrary Sway,
Whilst the Poor Wife must Suffer, and Obey;
And like a Kingdom into Slavery drawn;
Through Fear, not Love, upon her Tyrant Fawn.
Thus must you Study (though Oppressed) to Please,
All other means are worse than the Disease.
Marriage, as used, is but a Woman's Yoke;
A Knot for Life, too Stubborn to be broke;
A Prison, which if once you're into it Cast,
Makes the Sweet Fruit, but Nauseous to the Taste.
Therefore the Freedom you Enjoy, Maintain;
Liberty Lost, is difficult to Regain:
Whilst Single, you may many Hearts subdue;
Discharge the Faithless, and Oblige the True;
If tired with Old ones, change 'em still for New.
But if you're Married, you're at once undone,
And made a despicable Slave to one;
Your Actions all, are Watched by many Eyes;
Your very Servants that attend, are Spies;
And each chance Folly, though you meant no hurt,
Is made Suspicious, by their false Report.
But in the State of Freedom, you're at Ease;
At Leisure may your self or others Please;
Fear no Reproof, be under no Command;
List who you Please; and when you Please, Disband:
Gain, with your Smiles, fresh Conquests every hour;
Hero's themselves will yield to Beauties Pleasing Power.
Nature b'ing Headstrong, and my Virtue Weak,
Methoughts, I could for ever hear her Speak;
I fond of Joy, and Pleased with what she said,
Too soon Believing, was too soon Misled.
Virtue, it is true, some Opposition gave;
But Rebel Nature would the Conquest have;
And every Vein with willing Warmth inspired,
To Play it is part in what the whole desired;
B'ing Ripe and Eager now to be Undone,
I to my Temptress thus again begun:
Madam, said I, But where is the Man so just,
With whom a Virgin may her Honor trust?
Of all the Sex, I most admire a Beau,
But fear he will Boast the Favors I bestow;
Yet to a Beau, I could my Heart Resign,
He Looks so Prim, so Pretty, and so Fine;
Is so Obliging, Complisant and Free;
Dances, and Hums about so Prettily:
What would I Give, or what but I would do,
Could I so dear a Creature but subdue?
Oh how I Would Love him, his Esteem to Gain,
Methinks a Beau, is a Delicious Man.
The Cunning Dame, who now my Pulse had felt,
To raise Desire, these Pleasing Measures dealt:
Madam, The Pritty'st Gentleman I know,
You ever saw, or all the World can show;
Whose Comely Stature, and Engaging Mein,
Would Tempt a Princess, nay, a Saint, to Sin;
So Brisk and Youthful, Vigorous and Gay,
So Courteous, and Obliging every way;
Earth cannot sure produce a Maid that can
Resist the Charms of so Complete a Man;
H'has seen you twice, I Have heard him since often say;
One time at Church, another at a Play:
And Vows, you are the Sweetest Pretty Rogue,
That Mortal Man would ever desire to Hugg;
Swears he could Dote upon your Lovely Face,
And gaze all day upon each Charming Grace:
Your Eyes have Pricked his Breast with such a Dart,
He Would give ten thousand Worlds to gain your Heart.
When I Have but Named you, he has seemed so glad;
Toward you such kind and pretty things has said,
Sighed, Stretched, and Vowed, he always could adore;
And still Enjoy, yet still Love more and more:
Had you been by, you could have done no less,
Than Yielded what he Covets to Possess:
Against such Force, no Virtue could maintain
Its Ground, Oh, he is a wondrous pretty Man!
This false Suggestion, set me all on Fire;
And turned my Fears into a Strong Desire:
Her Verbal Witchcraft did my Heart subdue;
And made me Languish, for I know not who.
Madam, said I, But when shall I obtain,
A Sight of this sweet Miracle of Man;
And do you think he Loves me? Yes, said she,
O then thought I, how happy shall I be;
Handsome, Obliging, Young, not given to Rove:
Such a dear Man, I could for ever Love:
O let me see him, and the Youth shall find,
If he will be true, I Will Study to be kind.
When the Dame found, she my Consent had won,
And I was thus inclined to be undone.
Put on your Hood and Scarf, dear Child, says she,
I Will make you Happy; come along with me,
And you shall see, ever a few hours be Past,
The Lovely Tree, and it is sweet Fruit shall Taste:
Do you but like the Charming Youth be kind,
And you this Night, a Blissful Heaven shall find:
Your Soul shall surfeit with Delights unknown,
And Sum up all the Joys on Earth in one.
Like our first Mother I was Loath to miss,
What false Report had rendered such a Bliss:
But with my best Attire, my Charms improved,
Fed with vain hopes of b'ing the more beloved;
Wash, Powder, Patches, all the alluring Arts,
Practiced by Ladies to ensnare Men's Hearts.
Thus did I Labor (Curse upon the Day)
To Tempt that Breast, wherein the Serpent lay:
Wretch that I am, was hasty to destroy
My whole Life's Comfort for a moments Joy.
So Insects fly to Flames which they should shun,
And fond of Light, are by the Fire undone;
When dressed, some Checks within my Soul I found,
But flowing Vice, the Guardian Angel drowned:
A Storm of Lust had so enraged my Blood,
Alas, I could not Listen to my Good.
When thus Equipped, we made our next approach,
To the Street Door, and becken'd to a Coach.
My base Conductress did Directions give,
And bid the Churl, to the inward Temple drive;
Where Lived my unknown Love, so Gay and Fine,
Before made Privy to the Cursed design:
When I alas, to the Sinful Mansion came;
My Pulse beat high, my Cheeks were Died with Shame:
She knocked, and such an Angel let us in,
Whose outside out-shone all I Would ever seen:
His Gown with Red, Blew, Yellow Stripes was crossed,
Gaudy as Flame in a hard Winters Frost;
Clad in the Morning Trapings of a Bean;
He Bowed, and Cring'd, and made a Lovely show:
His Lips as soft as Leaves of Roses felt,
His Breath, like an Arabian Garden Smelt.
From his kind Tongue all Love and Sweetness flowed,
And every gentle touch his hand bestowed,
Made a strange Ebolition in my Blood.
He brought forth Sack, and Drank, but I denied,
Till begging he prevailed, and I Complied.
Thus Entered, the Procuress took her Leave;
That she would return, did an Assurance give;
Feigned business, and entreated me to stay,
Whilst she dispatched Affairs some other way:
Rid of her Presence, he began his Court;
Hugged me, and Kissed me, till my Breath grew short;
Called me Fair Angel, and his Charming Saint,
Smothered with Kisses, I began to Faint;
Was sometimes Cold, and then again grew hot,
Panted and Trembled, at I knew not what.
In this disorder by indecent Force,
He something did that made me ten times worse;
With all my Might, I struggled; but half Dead,
With his strong Arms, he tossed me on his Bed;
Where over his Victim he Triumphant got,
And did 'twixt Pain and Pleasure, Heaven knows what:
When thus Corrupted with the first Delight,
He then persuaded me to stay all Night,
I yielded, but the false seducing Dame*
Regardless of her Treacherous word never came;
At first he proved all Love; I too was kind,
Expecting still more Joys than I could find:
But when few hours was spent, he turned his Back,
And grew, methoughts, Cold, Negligent, and Slack:
I called him dear, but could not make him Speak;
I Hugged him, Tugged him, but he would not Wake:
In The Morning Early, by the break of the day,
He roughly told me, that I must not stay;
I much ashamed arose, and Weeping went away.
I Vex^d^and Angry to be thus Misused,
Though as I found, I Would been by both abused;
Discov'ring, when too late, the Jilting Dame
Sold me to quench the Leachers Lustful Flame:
And went wi'th' Judas Pence, she would basely gained
To the Bath, to have her Rotten Corpse new cleaned;
There Stew her Crazy Limbs, with a Vain thought
Of Curing Pains her Youthful Sins begot.
When entered thus, I the tempting Vice pursued,
And from my first Corruption grew more Lewd;
Till by Promiscuous use, I found in the end,
The Sowrest Pains, the Sweetest Sins attend:
Such Poisonous Ulcers did my Crimes ensue;
I nauseous to my self and others grew:
Thus were my Pleasures punished with a Curse;
No Leprosy of Job, could sure be worse;
My Blood did into Loathsome Issues melt;
The parts that Sinned the most, most Torment felt.
Beneath these Miseries, I to Tunbridge went,
Backward to Dye, but willing to Repent;
In hopes the cooling Waters would have eased,
Or quenched those Fires, my stubborn Lust had raised.
But when I found the Wells yield no Relief,
My hopes were turned into Despair, and Grief.
I then reflecting on my wretched State,
In Tears, did with my self thus Ruminate:
Alas what am I! whither am I strayed?
By Lust and Pride, from Virtues Paths missed:
What shameful shadows of my Guilt draw near?
How Black and Monst'rous, do my Ills appear?
My thoughts, like Ghastly Fiends, my Soul affright,
And threaten her with sad Destruction's Night:
How Pale and Yellow, these poor Cheeks are grown,
Which once looked fresh, as Roses newly Blown?
How Lank my Breasts, how Nauseous is my Breath?
O where is my only kind Physician, Death?
How happy was I once, when I was free
From Sinful Thought, from Shame and Misery;
When every Eye my spotless Charms admired,
Enjoying all my Virtuous Life required?
Where are the Flatt'rers, that my Love pursued,
And would have given whole Worlds to do me good?
Alas, too late, to my sad Grief I find,
'Twas Innocence alone made all things kind:
Sweet Innocence, that can it self defend,
And make Ill-natured Envy prove it is Friend:
Bright Innocence, thou Blessed and Charming Dove,
Whom every Mortal must Admire and Love;
When thee I lost, my Guardian Angel fled,
And ever since, I Have been unhappy made.
Lust in thy Absence, got the Upper-hand,
And made me Servile to its base Command:
O that I Would been but some poor Bargeman's Wife,
To Have Lugg'd and Tugged, at the great Oar for Life:
Or what is worse, had been a Botchers Spouse,
To Have Mended nitty Coats, and stinking Hose;
For one Days Living, to have two Days Starved,
So that my Health and Virtue, I Would preserved;
I Would been more happy than the fairest she,
That L(...) Liberty.
Curse on the Female Tongue, that drew me in;
And for base Lucre, Taught me first to Sin:
May her Nose fall, her Reins and Shinbones Rot,
And begging without pity be her Lot:
May her Vile Womb Incessant Fury have;
And her Limbs drop by piecemeal to the Grave:
And may that Man, that bribed her to seduce
Me Wretched Creature, to his Beastly Use,
Be Doomed the only Stallion to her Lust,
Till Pox and Age, dry both into a Crust.
Ladies beware* let Miserable me
The sad Example of a Harlot be:
Let not Loose Women Tempt you to the Hook,
With which themselves unwarily were took;
For if you're once betrayed, you will surely find,
You're Cursed from the first moment you are Kind.
FINIS.

