THE INFALLIBILITY OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH AND HER MIRACLES, Defended
against Dr Stillingfleets Cavils, Unworthily made public In two late Books,
The one called, An Answer to Several Treatises etc, The other, a Vindication of
the Protestant Grounds of Faith, Against the Pretense of Infallibility, IN THE
ROMAN CHVRCH etc.

BY E. W.

The first Part.

ANTWERP, Printed by MICHAEL CNOBBAERT, at the Sign of. S. Peter in the Year.
1674.

Permissu Superiorum.

THE PREFACE
NIne years, or there about, are pas't, Since Dr Edward Stillingfleet set
Printed Anno 1669
forth a voluminous book, entitled, A rational Account of the grounds of
Protestant Religion, and exposed it, to the view and examination of others.
Many both learned and judicious, have in their several latter works, discovered
here and there, no Small, but great Errors in it. Among the rest, one worthy
man not scared with the fearful bulk of the book, fixed upon the whole, engaged
to examine it, and to return the Dr a full, just, and complete Answer, but it
pleased God to call him out of this world before he saw an end of his labors.
While he yet lived busy at work, I ventured upon the chiefest Points of
Controversy handled by the Dr, not willing to meddle with the whole book,
because another had it in hand. I thought then, and do so still, that Dr
Stillingfleet came much too short of a right Reckoning The one Printed Anno
1668 The other, 1672
in his Account, and therefore plainly laid down his Mistakes and errors in
two Treatises. Protestancy without Principles. Reason and Religion etc. Ever
since, year after year, I expected the good hour, when Mr Dr would please to
just Accounts with me, for he had been long in debt, and give (like a good
Correspondent) satisfaction to the many exceptions I made against his Account.
At last, two other books containing his after Reckonings appear, not like the
grand volume Bulkie, and so far praise worthy, who ever says more to their
commendation loses credit with me. When these books came to my hands, one
long after the other (the distance of place would have it so) I read all, and
examined every particular diligently, still hopeing, as I went along to find
the Dr more rational, and better at his Reckonings now, then he had been in his
former VVritings, but after an exact perusal, I saw clearly my hopes
frustrated, and Dr Still: just like himself, not only unmethodical, but
besides a mere Shuffler in the main matter he was obliged to give Account of,
as will be made out hereafter. The first of his volumes is called. An answer
to several Treatises, occasioned by a book etc. The other bears the name of a
Discourse, in vindication of the Protestant grounds of Faith, against the
pretense of Infallibility in the Roman Church, in Answer to the Guide of
Controversies by. R. H. Protestancy without Principles and Reason and Religion,
or the certain Rule of Faith by. E. W. with a particular Enquiry into the
Miracles of the Roman Church. In these Treatises, where Mr Dr should have made
a right Reckoning with his Creditors, (those I mean who trusted him with the
best wares they had) he in recompense falls into hitter fitts of passion, and
railing at them, One is blind, another has neither fear nor wit, a third is a
popish Leviathan etc. And thus hurried on (you shall have the list of his
obloquies more complete presently) he thinks not one only, but Se the Dr's
general Preface
all he deals with half martyred by him, and that none has more felt the
weight of his heavy hand, than E. W. To give the man his due, if cursed language
can kill one, he has behaved himself stoutly, and knocked E. W. down (more
like a Wood-river with a beetle, than a Scholar by strong Arguments) a hundred
times over, yet thanks be to God. E. W. is alive, well able to keep Accounts
with the Dr, whose furious Doings and feeble pen Labor, he fear's not. For
proof hereof, I remit you, Gentle Reader, to the following Treatise. Peruse and
censure freely; I appeal to your Judgment.

In the mean while, it will not me thinks be amiss, for the better clearing of
Accounts between the Dr and me, to preacquaint you with some few, yet real
exceptions, I justly make against an very ill Respondent. A main one is, that
as you se by the Dr's Title, he pretend's to answer my two last Books already
named, whereas the Contrary is evident, and proved in this Treatise. He answers
nothing, nor so much as offer's to meddle with such matters as are deservedly
esteemed by all Polemical writers the most substantial, or of greatest concern.
For example. I told the Dr as plainly as any man can speak, that never Book
merited less the Title, than his Rational Account of the grounds of Protestant
Religion, and upon this very account I excepted, both against the Book and
Author, and said, that the Dr never yet went about to tell us, what is meant by
his Protestancy, much less to settle one Tenet of it upon any Principle,
express Scripture, universal Tradition, or the Authority of any Church held
Orthodox by the Christian Reas and Relig: 1. c. 20. and Disc. 3. c. 18.
world. Not a word of answer has the Dr returned to this most just and urgent
exception. Besides I told him, that his Protestancy which he supposes well
grounded, want's the very Essence of Religion, and consequently subsist's upon
no grounds; and that in Protestancy, as it is distinguished from Catholic
Religion, and all known condemned Heresies, there is not so much as one Article
revealed by Almighty God, taught by any Orthodox Church or Judged by the
Professors of this Novelty, necessary to Salvation. This I thought, and think
still, a charge very Material, yet Mr Dr waves it, not because he deem's it
little (for nothing can be more destructive to Protestancy) but because he
knows not what to answer. Yet more. Protestants grant, and so far the Dr sides
with them, that the Roman Catholic Church once pure in Faith, sincerely
conveyed to posterity the great Mysteries concerning Christian Religion, of the
sacred Trinity, the Incarnation, the Resurrection of the dead etc, but say
withal, that after so much good service done, She perversty brought in, and
publicly taught (contrary to truth) many both new and dangerous doctrins.
Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, and Purgatory, with a mighty deluge
of other gross errors. I have amply proved this charge of errors; and change
of Religion, entering a whole Church, to be utterly impossible, and rely upon an
undubitable Protest: without Princ: Disc. 3. C. 13. n. 5.
Principle. Viz. These Supposed Novelties being plain matters of Fact, could
never get into Christianity, without public Defense in those who first
broached them, and public Resistance in others, that (had they been errors)
publicly opposed them; but never Since Christ's time, was there any such
public defense, or public opposition as is largely proved in the place now
cited. Here I add one Consideration more. Sectaries who lay this foul aspersion
on the Church must Judge the whole body of Christians, Princes, Prelates and
People, all over Germany, Italy, Spain, France, and England etc stark madd at
once, that is, to have unanimously conspired in a belief of
Transubstantiation, (for example) never held before, and this is as great a
Paradox, as if you Should suppose, that Catholics now, might universally agree
in one belief, and steadfastly maintain, that the Water in Baptism is really
Christ's sacred blood as worthy Adoration, as a Consecrated Chalice is; yet
(and here is the wonder) no man, forsooth, must be thought to take the least
Notice of so universal a dotage, nor of the prodigious change made in Christian
Religion by it. Tell me, Courteous Reader, were such a Novelty brought this
present year into the Church, would not Jews, Turks, Heathens and all
Heretics (if none else did it) raise loud Clamours against the great body of
Christians, observe all that is done, and ieer at us in the public Streets? On
the other side, if Sectaries say, these supposed Innovations were first begun
by Some few, two or three in corners, got growth in time, and at last became
believed Articles of Faith all over the Christian world; I answer, this is more
impossible, yea the greatest Chimaera Imaginable. Viz. That such gross
Novelties should steal into a Church, and be publicly taught by a few,
without opposition or notice taken by other sound Christians, far more
numerous and learned (for now we suppose, all ran not mad at once). Here also
the Instance already given, has the like force. Should a few men in a town or
City publicly teach that the water in Baptism is Christ's real blood, would
not the whole Body of sound Christians, both censure and decry the error as
horrid and blasphemous? Nothing can be more evident. Besides, all know, how
exact the Church of Christ has been in condemning Heresies as they rose up, the
time when they began, and the Persons that introduced them, remain still upon
record, but here are Novelties spoken of, and unworthily charged upon a whole
Church, yet hush! All passed in silence, no man mentions them, no Author friend
or Enemy left them upon Record. The Dr may remember, how he impugn's that
matter of fact concerning the miraculous Translation of the house of Disc. 2.
P. 451.
Loreto from Nazareth, where he tells us, because three Authors, Dantes,
Petrach, and Boccace men most inquisitive, omitted to mention it, the wholly
Story was to be thought an incredible fiction. But here a matter of Fact, and
of far greater concern, the palpable change of Christian Doctrine from what it
was anciently, is supposed to enter the world, not mentioned by any one Author
friend or enemy, Therefore according to the Dr, it is to be judged a forged
tale, a mere whimsy, improbable, and incredible. Much more then this comes to,
I urged against the Dr, and here remind him of his grand Omission, for to this
very day, though he pretend's to answer my book's, yet be never meddled with
this one point, most weighty, and of greatest Importance. I call it weighty,
for upon these unanswerable proofs, Protestancy is ruined, and the Church no
less demonstratively cleared from that unjust calumny of altering Her Doctrine,
which She received from Christ and his Apostles.

But the greatest Omission of all, where the Dr's dull proceeding with me
appears most, remain's yet untouched. Those who have read my last Treatises
know, that the chiefest thing I insisted upon, and aimed at, was to prove
Protes: without Princ: Disc. 1. c. 2. n. 9.
a Truth which must stand, or Christian Religion falls to nothing. It is, the
Roman Catholic Churches Infallibility in every Doctrine She obliges Christians
to believe. I told the Dr if all Pastors all Bishops, and the Church with them,
be so fallible in delivering Christian Doctrine, that when it is ultimately
applied to the Hearers, the Doctrine may be false, God never sent them to teach
it. I proved the Assertion. God sent not Christ our Lord, nor Christ his
Apostles, nor the Apostles others, to teach any Doctrine but that which relies
upon the first Verity infallibly revealing truth, but such a Doctrine can
neither be fallible nor false, but most true and infallible, if therefore the
Church teaches not that Doctrine as it is true and Infallible, but may change it
into mere fallible and perhaps false Doctrine, She ceases, eo ipso, to be a
Church, and all the Doctors that teach so, are no Catholic Doctors. Moreover I
said, If Reas: and Relig: Disc. 2. c. 19. n. 12.
God has not purposely made Religion a matter of eternal debate; if he has not
cast Christians upon endless uncertainties what to believe; if both the Truth
and infallibility of his revealed Doctrine, stand firmly upon the first Verity
(not separable there) and be revealed for this end, that all assent to it, as
it is true and Infallible; If finally the very fundamentals of Faith necessary
for Salvation, as registered in Holy Writ, be still liable to disputes amongst
the learned of different Religion; If these things be, as they all are, clear
Evidences; Nothing can be more manifest, than that the All-seing Providence
has empowered some Oracle, to compose such strifes raised among Christians, and
to teach Christ's Doctrine as it deserves to be taught, truly and infallibly.
These Arguments with many others not to be repeated, I have clearly proposed,
and often Called on Mr Dr to reply, but in the very nick and occasion when he
found himself obliged to answer, he warily slip's aside to another Byquestion
about the resolution of Faith, and there, forsooth, because the matter of its
own nature is hard, and speculative, not easily understood by every vulgar
Reader, he thought he might well lie hid, free from the Censure of such men
whom he court's, though he speak, as be often does plainly from the purpose.
Whereas, had he proceeded downright, and directly fallen upon my reasons
alleged in behalf of the Churches Infallibility, every judicious Reader
(though little versed in speculative Learning) would have soon seen, whether of
us (I in arguing or he in his answers) deserved reproof, and stood grounded
upon better Principles. Notwithstanding this pretty Subterfuge, the Dr has got
little by waving the main Question, Reas: and Relig: Disc. 2. c. 5. n. 5.
for I have followed him closely in the Speculative matter he lead's me to, and
made it manifest, that he neither bitt's upon the right resolution of Faith,
nor indeed understand's where the real difficulty lies. One thing yet remain's,
and I much wonder the Dr never meddled with it. I said, who ever impeaches the
Roman Catholic Church of error in points of Faith, is sure to be worsted in
every rational Contest held upon that subject, and ought to own the supposed
error so remediless an Evil, that it must remain as it is, without all hope of
bettering it. The Assertion stand's firm upon this ground. No man can
rationally charge error upon a whole Church (never censured by any in former
Ages, but known and condemned Heretics) without Principles more convincing,
weighty, and ponderous than the Churches Sole Authority is. But there are no
Principles in Being powerful enough to uphold any such discourse; and not to
make long work about a manifest Truth, pray tell me, vvhither can the Dr go
for Principles, whereby the Church is proved so much as liable to error? Will
he take recourse to the unanimous consent of Fathers? The attempt is desperate,
while they generally teach quite contrary Doctrine, as is amply proved in my two
last Treatises. Nay more, can the Dr produce Se Reas: and Relig: Disc: 2. c.
14. n. 10. ^1.
one ancient Father, who says plainly the Roman Catholic Church can err? I
will return him hearty thanks if he point out one, but suppose (which is false)
one or two glance at any such thing, have their doubtful words, think ye,
force enough to Counterpoise the Authority of So renowned an Oracle as this
Church is? Say I beseech you, what if one or two English Dr's should boldly
tell us, that the nine and thirty Articles are matters of Divine Faith, and
that all who teach the Doctrine, are by Divine Assistance made Infallible
Oracles, is this sufficient to overthrow the Sentiment of the whole English
Church, which hold's Herself fallible in delivering the Doctrine She
maintains? No certainly. Much less, say I, can the Authority of one or two
Fathers, only supposed (not proved) of a different opinion in judging the Roman
Catholic Church errable, avail one whit to make it probable, that She is
guilty of error or liable to it, when contrary to Protestants, both She and
all the learned Dr's of one Faith with her, boldly assert She cannot err.
Hence I infer, that no Authority taken from this or that ancient Father, much
less from this or that private man, can rationally oppose the Church in her
just claim to Infallibility,

The next Principle the Dr and others use to rely on, is taken from General
Councils approved by the Church. How I beseech you, or in what manner? Did any
Council ever yet expressly define, that the Church can err? You will say no,
but these Councils contradict one another, and no infallible Oracle does so.
The weakest Pretense and least worth of any. For does not Holy Scripture also
seemingly speak contradictions in many Passages? You will say, though they
appear like Contradictions, yet learned men have already cleared such
Antilogies. Besides Scripture is God's word, and all know that God cannot
contradict himself. Very right; this is my Answer also. The learned of our
Church have over and over cleared all such passages in Councils as appear to
some short sighted eyes contradictions, from all opposition, and we more
assuredly know, that the Roman Catholic Church is God's own infallible Oracle,
than any Sectary can show by reason, that Scripture is the word of God, or
written by Divine Inspiration. Please now to compare Principles together. The
Dr impeaches this Church of error, and takes his proofs from the seeming
Contradictions of Councils. A Catholic Adversary no less learned than he,
solves all the Dr Objects. The Church, while these two Combatants are hot at
work, stand's by, and positively declares, She never delivered contrary
Doctrine in any of her Councils. Here is the Clear Catholic Principle. Against
this Principle the Dr makes his exceptions, which thousands and thousands as
learned as he, judge to be feeble, forceless, and long since ruined Fallacies.
The Question is now, and it is worth the while to drive it on further, because it
is most useful in all debates with Sectaries. The Question I say is, who shall
judge in this Contest between the Church and this Dr, with all his exceptions?
Have we means to know who speaks truth in so weighty a matter, and upon
whom the error lies? To clear this you shall se how indifferently I proceed,
I will as yet, neither suppose the Church nor the Dr blamable, but leave this
to the just trial of some Judge, let that Judge be named, and much is done. The
Church never censured by any Orthodox Christian, and defended by the most
learned in the world, think's her own Authority worth something, and powerful
enough to bear up her cause against a single Dr, with all his crew of
Sectaries, but let that be yet disputable, whither will the Dr lead us for a
final Sentence in this yet debatable case? Has he any ancient Church, any
consent of Fathers, any one word of Scripture, any received Tradition, whereby
he evinces the Church errable in her Councils. These are excellent Principles,
but I absolutely assert he has none of them; not one was ever yet produced by
him, nor shall hereafter be brought to light while the world stands, as is
clearly made out both in this, and my former Treatises. Contrariwise, it is
certain that the Church and all her learned Doctors plead strongly by every one
of these Principles, therefore She stand's upon surer grounds than the Dr, who
as, I now said, has none of them. The Dr may reply, These very Scriptures and
Fathers, the Church plead's by for her not erring, are only doubtful proofs,
and therefore convince nothing. I answer if these be doubtful, the Dr's
Assertion, while he says They are doubtful, is I am sure no selfe-evident
Truth, but (either utterly false) or at least fearfully doubtful, and therefore
must be proved by a stronger Principle, than his own proofless word. Leave us
not now, Mr Dr, in darkness, give us, I beseech you, some light of that
Principle, or ultimate proof, whereby it may appear, that you speak truth, or
so much as Sense when you tell us: All our proofs alleged in behalf of the
Churches Infallibility, are doubtful and controverted. Name the Church, the
Fathers, or Councils (Scripture you have none) that speak as you do. You may
introduce Sectaries who say so, but they come unarmed without Scripture,
Church Authority, Fathers, or Tradition, and to these (men of yesterday), we
oppose thousands more ancient on our side. Thus, Mr Dr, we proceed in every
other particular Controversy, and will show you when you please, so non-plus't,
and soon driven to an end of all discourse for want of Principles, that the
ultimate proofs of your Assertions, whether you defend Protestancy, or impugn
This great truth, I intend to enlarge further upon another Occasion.
Catholic Religion, Shall at last be brought to nothing but to your own bare,
naked, and unproved Assertions themselves, which stand tottering, unprincipled.
Now that you may se I speak seriously, I challenge you once more, to discuss
with me this particular Question concerning the Churches Infallibility, and if
after all you have said, or can say, I make not what is here asserted,
manifest, I will acknowledge my error before the whole world. The ground I
stand upon is solid, and in a word thus. All Principles imaginable (plain
Scripture excepted whereof there is no danger) thought fit to carry on a
discourse against our Churches Doctrine, will be at the very most, (if they get
so high) dubious only and uncertain, usually polish't with Sectaries glosses,
But it is evident, that unprincipled Glosses set upon doubtful Authorities, are
too trivial and forceless to weaken or to discountenance a long standing
Church in the just claim she lays to Infallibility, She by her Self, is
strong enough to vvithstand such feeble Effort's, and more than these come to,
you never yet had, nor shall have hereafter from Sectaries. Nothing therefore
ever appeared to me more simple and senseless, than is the desperate attempt of
Novellists, who will, forsooth, reform a Church in points of Faith, before
they have so much as probability of their own half well-done Reformation; But
this, (though exception enough) is not all, there is yet more against them.
Observe well. Sectaries are confessedly fallible, and upon that account, may
not only spoil all they take in hand to mend, but morally speaking, seem
necessitated to do so, because nothing in nature (or what reason dictates)
nothing in Grace (or what God has revealed) nothing that Antiquity ever
taught, can yield them so much as the least glimpse of any Principle, to reform
the Church by. O! this want of Principles ruin's our Dr. Hence proceed's his
intolerable Shuffling, his empty dispirited, and faint strain in writing, all
along as visible to a judicious Reader, as the paper is be cast's his eyes
upon; All along, lame and halting, yet hauty (that must help out) and
disdainful. Hence it is, that where he should prove, he falls to These
particulars are demonstrated in the Treatise following
Drollery, and when he cannot answer, he either reviles his Adversary, or quite
leaves the difficulty. Hence finally it is, that his great Design in writing
Controversies, is not only blasted, but utterly broken, for either he intended
his own credit by Scribbling, and that to my certain knowledge is lost even
among no small number of his own Brethren; or hoped to gain some Proselytes
from Catholic Religion, to that Protestancy he professes, herein he is
beguiled, and has caught none, but chased away some^ng under his tutoring, to
seek Satisfaction els^here, which at last they found, by reading ^ose very
Catholic books he contemn's. And ^us, Courteous Reader, you se how unsuc^sful
men are that run on headlong in their ^setled ways, and write Controversies of
Reli^on without Principles. The Arguments ^itherto compendiously set down, and
many ^ore, I have proposed in my former Treatises, ^d thought the Dr would at
least have nibled ^, or taken notice of some, but he was so wise ^ to pass by
them, yet you must believe, or ^e will grow angry, that he has answered my
^oks, or to use his own phrase, drawn off ^^ the Spirit he could find in them.
If ^e Fancy please, let him play with it.

Having said thus much of the Dr's Omis^ons, or his constant waving what I have
^ged against him, we are now to lay forth ^e few of his Commissions, methinks,
^ainst the rule of right Reason and common ^vility. And first his endless
Drollery, and ^ter foul Language dealt frankly among ^ Adversaries, after many
fair Pro^ises to the Contrary, is unexcusable. Had they been men of clouts, no
mala^ tongue could have used them worse. ^ how He court's them. One is like ^
blindeman running a Tilt, anoth^ more wary steal's quite behind the D^ book,
and begin's to confute it at ^ wrong end. One is the knight, and ^solving to
encounter the Dragon, bu^les on his armor, mounts his stead, ^ direct's his
lance into the Dragons mou^ another is the Squire following a^ convenient
distance who had a Spi^ the Dragons tail, and without fear^ wit falls
unmercifully upon it, and in^ opinion, has chop't it into a thousa^ pieces.
One, a young Sophister, w^ his Pamphlet and dapper piece, bid's ^ be of good
heart, for by letting fly so^ Squibs, and crackers, he doubted ^ but to put
the Monster into such a ^^ as to make him fall upon himself; ^ other full of
phlegm, is to be dealt w^ roughly in due time and place. ^ set's forth a
railing book, which ^ perhaps be answered at leisure, tho^ Mr Dr loves not, to
have to do ^ madmen, no not in their lucid In^vals, another glories in his
pusion^ with a sheet and half of paper etc. ^ much for an Essay only, the
following Tr^se as occasion falls out, will afford more. ^ ^o these and the
like piquant expres^s, laid before the Doctors eyes, what ^s he? Marry, be
manfully vows, and ^ouches in one Preface, He writes sober^, as becomes an
Ingenuous Adver^y; that he is far from throwing ^t into men's faces, that
smartness ^expression, is like throwing of vinegar ^ hot coals, that soon
vanishes into ^oak. So it must be in the Dr's new Dia^. Though he call's men,
blind, stupid, ^d, and witless, yet all is Moderate, gentle, ^d well ordered
Language. You have ^re in another Preface. He will not, ^sooth, so much as
desire God to rebuke ^em, No; he has learned from one, ^o when he was reviled,
relviled not ^ain, not only to forbear from repro^ing, but to return good for
evil, and ^ pray for them etc. It seems he has ^ned his lesson well, when to
ieer, taunt, ^d scorn, to talk of Knights and Squires, is ^roduced by him, as a
new Form of praying. ^ enough of this levity and shuttleness, the ^'s head is
too full of it. Add hereunto, ^ vain, and intolerable boasting, even when ^s
most shamfully baffled by his Adversaries, ^ you may justly wonder. I will
briefly ^e a glance at one or two passages relating to ^ers, what concerns my
self, you will find ^ the Treatise. I. W. an excellent Divine, smartly and
learnedly in his short but nervo^ Treatise, makes use of what the Dr grant'^ Dr
Stillingfleet, against Dr Stillingfleet.
Viz. That Catholics are in a tru^ way to Salvation, and Consequently ^ having
conformed to its directions ^ may be saved. The Sophistry of the Part. 2. Page
24
says Mr Dr, is so palpable that the weakest eye may discern it, for it
suppo^ the true way to Salvation, to be a ve^ safe and secure way. I answer,
the Su^position is most right, without any shad^ of Sophistry, for the true
way, (as true, lead's none into error, and upon that accoun^ must be safe and
secure, because nothing ^ found in a true way, but truth and Sec^rity. Swerve
not therefore from the true w^ which certainly lead's to Salvation, it is
i^possible to leave off the safe and secure wa^ to it. O! but, says our Dr,
The doi^ P. 45.
all that is necessary to Salvation, is n^ bare believing the necessary
articles ^ Faith contained in the Creeds, but o^ eying the will of God, which
cann^ be done by those who wilfully adhere^ gross and open violations of it.
Here^ Sophistry enough, and much Nonsense besid^ Speak out Dr, and tell us;
whether these supp^sed gross and open violations of God's W^ quite cast
Catholics out of the true way ^ Salvation, or yet permit them to walk in ^
Grant the first, you mercilesly throw them i^ a damnable Condition, upon this
very a^count that they are now thought by you out of the true way of Salvation,
which yet your judgment of Charity (as you call it) allows them, because they
still retain the Essentials of true Faith, and live conformable to them. Say.
2. (and you must say it) that these Supposed gross and open violations, are
consistent with their living in the true essential way to Salvation, those who
follow this way are in spite of all opposition in a safe and most secure way,
because, as I said, the true way is safe and cannot damn any, that conform
their lives and actions to it. Your error, Mr Dr, lies here, that you unwartly
stretc'h these supposed violations too far, and make them do what they cannot
do; That is not only to Obstruct, but also to cut off. the true way of
Salvation from Catholics, which is impossible, unless you destroy your own
ground and Supposition with it, in granting plainly, they may be saved in their
Religion. What I assert here is evident. Lay before you, Mr Dr, on the one
side, all those errors or actions you account gross. Worshipping Images,
Idolatry, praying to Saints, Transubstantiation with the rest, and distinguish
well between these, and those other you call the Essentials of Faith owned and
believed by all Catholics. The belief of these Essentials, and living
Conformable to them can damn none, as you grant. I ask now, whether their
worshipping Images, their maintaining Transubstantiation etc. put's them in a
damnable condition, or openly hazard's their Salvation? Affirm; and you hurry
them, eo ipso out of the true way, which yet you, and your Bishop freely allow
them to walk in. Say contrary, that the Particular Tenants now mentioned, damn
them not, your Judgment of Charity, leaves them still in the true way to
Salvation which cannot, if followed, but save them, unless you will have them
saved and damned at once, Saved; by the true way they follow, and damned also
by reason of their particular Tenants. This discourse I hold demonstrative, and
so I do all the rest, strongly proposed by. I. W. against your P. 19.
empty way in answering his Arguments. Now one word briefly to your judgment
of Charity. You account this Adversary disingenuous because, say you, he barely
opposes a judgment of Charity concerning their Church, to a Judgment of
reason concerning the nature of actions. A more ridiculous distinction never
came from Doctor. First, Charity being an act of the Will, judges not, but is
ever regulated by a rational prudent judgment, even in circumstances, when by
error we are deceived, as if one charitably give an Alms to a seeming poor
man, who is a counterfeit, the Judgment that regulates Charity, is both
prudent and rational. Ergo, when you, Sr, Judge Catholics in a true way to
Salvation because they still retain the Essentials of a true Church, your
judgment is either prudent and rational, or your Charity ceases to be real
Charity. Again, If you prudently judge them in a damnable condition by reason
of their supposed Idolatry and other wilful errors, its no prudent Charity but
madness, to allow them Salvation upon any other account what ever. So it is, if
you judge a vicious abominable Liver in all wickedness, liable by his lewd
Courses to damnation, you cannot by any other prudent rational judement (unless
he repent) yield, that he is in the true way of Salvation. But Catholics, Say
you, by reason of their gross and open Violations in not obeying the Will of
God, are liable to damnation (gross and open Violations of God's will deserve
no better), Therefore you cannot by any other prudent rational judgment grant,
that they are in the true way to Salvation. A plain Answer to what I Shall now
demand will clear the whole matter. Are Catholics in the true way of Salvation
upon their retaining the Essentials of Faith and living Conformable to them?
This your prudent and rational Charity allows them, or it allows nothing.
Again, are they out of the true way to Salvation, or in a damnable Condition,
by reason of their wilful errors and gross violations of God's will? Admit
this also, and your prudent rational Charity, quite blown up, vanishes into
Smoke, because you put men in a State of Salvation who deserve it not. Here in
a word, Sr, is a Dilemma for you and all I would say. If you, by your prudent
rational Charity, judge Catholics may be saved, notwithstanding these grosser
Violations now mentioned, you cannot by that other judgment of reason
Concerning the nature of actions, make them liable to damnation. Contrariwise,
if by this Judgment of reason, you account them liable to damnation, you
cannot, by that other prudent rational judgment of Charity, place them in a
State or in a Condition of Salvation. The reason hereof is clear: Two quite
Contrary Judgments pronounced with the same breath, the one tending to damn
men, the other to save them, in the Same unvariable Circumstances, cannot be
true or reasonable. The one therefore must necessarily be rash, imprudent, and
unreasonable. Thus much in effect, your learned Adversary. I. W. by the force
of Arguing extort's from you, Though in stead of returning thanks for his pains
in laying down your errors, you use him more like a slave and varlet, than an
Ingenuous Adversary, and this, Mr Dr, is your ordinary trick, when most
Pinched, you are then most peevish and testie, with those you deal with. Fie
for shame man, what an uncivil Apostrophe have you directed to. I. W? Hark,
Reader, how it thunder's, how he is sent away with a Vengeance. Go thy way
then for the eight Champion of Christendom, enjoy Part. 1. P. 71.
the benefit of thy illustrious fame, sit down at ease, and relate to thy
immortal honor, thy mighty exploits; only when thou have done, remember thou
have encountered nothing but the wind-mills of thy own imagination, and the man,
whom thou though'st to have executed by his own hands, stand's by and laugh's
at thy ridiculous attempts. Sardonius risus, much talked of, is only grinning,
or a feigned laughter, laugh on, if you like it, all will end in sorrow at
last, for believe it, Mr Dr, Vlciscentur te mores tui. I say no more, but only
crave the Reader to tell me, whether these disdainful expressions may pass
current for one of the Dr's devout prayers, promised his Adversaries? Much more
I have to say in behalf of others, most notoriously injured by this Adversary.
The learned and worthy Doctor. T. G. both abused and mistaken, has a share
with the rest, as will be evidenced in this Treatise, Chap. 4. n. 20. But stay
Reader, I have all this while cast an eye upon our Dr's vvritings, to se where
Satisfaction is given, A. B. who excellently well makes it out and solidly
proves, what he asserts, Viz. That Dr St: A. Bs. first letter Page 3. and 4.
is a very Fanatic, as right an Euthusiastick in Judgment and Belief, as any
one in all England, yet after a diligent search have met with no answer to the
Author of that pithy letter. These things and many more would time permit I
should insist upon, and must though it lengthen's the Preface a little, take
notice of one particular, the foulest, and most gross, I ever read in any. You
have it in the Doctors General Preface, where he bitterly inveigh's General
Preface Paulo ante medium.
against the Doctrine of Attrition, which the Church and all Catholics hold,
though by it self it justifies not, yet in the Sacrament of Penance it
disposes a Sinner to See the Council of Trent, Sess 14. c 4. ^um tamen ad
Deigratiam in Sacramento disponit.
impetrate and obtain the Grace of God. Whether it be a full sufficient
disposition in the Sacrament to grace without Contrition, is another Question.
Now comes the Dr and demand's. How do They (the damned) want the Sacrament of
Penance in Hell, for no doubt there is Attrition good store there. The
Sacrament of Penance in Hell, Dr! Attrition good store in Hell! I read these
words with horror, and stand astonished at this height of stupidity. Pray, Sr,
who can absolve in Hell? What Devils? Or who are there capable of Absolution?
Damned Souls? Answer I beseech you. Are such Souls in your opinion capable of
Baptism, or of that you call the Lords Supper? You will say no. In like manner
say I, and speak with the whole Christian world, they are as incapable of the
Sacrament of Penance. Sacraments, Good Sr, serve only for the living on their
way to Eternity, and benefit none departed this life. O! but Attrition, whereof
there is good store in Hell, troubles the Dr. Here you have also the like gross
Ignorance, and therefore I answer in a word. If the Dr call eternal horror,
everlasting shame, and despair, Attrition, he may find great store indeed, but
these miseries inseparably attending the damned, are as remote from that
Attrition which the Church and Catholics maintain, as Hell is from Heaven.
The Catholic attrition, as the Council now cited, declares, is Dei donum, the
gift of God wrought in a Soul by the impulse, and motion of the Holy Ghost, and
though it tend's upon a less perfect Motive than Contrition, yet it is a
Supernatural Operation. If you, Mr Dr, speak not of this Attrition, you fight
with Shadows, and touch not Catholic Doctrine. I might in this place also
show, how grossly the Dr is mistaken in his quoting Gregory de Valentia, but I
hasten to my own affairs, and shall briefly tell you, how and in what manner
I proceed with this Adversary

The Dr, you know, has employed himself and time upon two very different
Subjects, the one hard and Speculative, the other more easy, containing matters
of Fact, set forth with this Title. An Enquiry into the Miracles of the Church
of Rome. In this first Part I follow him as he goes along, and reply to his
Cavils, not one I am sure (if any be worth notice, as few are) is omitted by
me. I discover also his Shuffling, and as occasion falls out, mind him here
and there of what he should prove, though he never does it. I show moreover,
that the grand Principle he relies on, called a Faculty of discerning, allowed
every one to judge of the Scriptures Sense in the most necessary points
concerning Salvation, is not only evidently unsound, but likewise highly
injurious to God, and Truth, for by it he licenses every Arian every Anabaptist
every Fanatic, and Quaker, who have as good discerning Faculties as the Dr can
glory in, to uphold that Sense they draw from Scripture, and maintain it as
true, though false and heretical, and this, forsooth, is done, because malice
will not brook God's own Oracle to teach, when we stand most in need of
Instruction. After my grounds given for the Churches Infallibility, I urge the
Doctor to produce a Proof from any received Principle, whereby it may but
probably appear, that a Church once confessedly Orthodox and right in Faith, is
errable, or ever erred. In that speculative Contest about Faith transcending
the certainty of Motives, I evince, that not only the Dr does de facto, but all
others must subscribe to the truth I Propugn, and own it as an undisputable
Verity. Much more I have against the Doctor, better known by a full perusal of
the Treatise, than by any Summary laid before the Reader in a short Preface. In
case he will reioyn, I vvish him (what ere becomes of the rest) not to pass
over my two last Chapters, where first, I largely insist upon that he call's
his rational Evidence of Christian Religion, which I show every way defective,
and besides demonstrate, that the true Evidence for Christianity is not (as the
Dr would have it) either destroyed, or in the least measure endamaged by the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation. In the 10th and last Chapter, I discover the
Dr's too manifest error in his unskilful charging a vicious Circle on us.
while we resolve our Catholic Faith. I tell him (which he knows not) what a
vicious Circle essentially implies, and demonstratively clear the Church from
all shadow and danger of a Circle. May it please the Dr to give me Satisfaction
in these two main matters, now Specified, (My exceptions against him are plain)
and also vouchsafe, to solve another difficulty proposed in this Treatise,
concerning the means Christ has left, to bring all open Dissenters in the
fundamentals of Faith or Necessaries for Salvation, to one belief, that is, to
understand the true genuin Sense of God's word, without an Infallible Church.
May it, I say please the Dr to do only thus much, I will not only highly
applaude his labors, but freely quit him of blame, though he trifle never so
much with me in his Answers to the rest of this Treatise. Now in case he take
courage to reply (whereof I doubt very much) it is hard to say what humor he
will be in, what Vizor or Shape he may assume. Perchance he will appear with
his pageant-like piety, and renew his promises of vvriting fairly, as becomes
an Ingenuous Adversary. Very good, if he answer as fairly, and home, I am well
content. It may be quite contrary; he will bear me down with bigg words, and
call me Philosophical fool, vvitless fellow, brainless, Saucy, bold, and all
that naught is. No matter, say I, if he answer's my objections, I can digest
all. It may be, he will without much notice taken of my Arguments repeat all,
or the most he has said already (it is a usual trick of Sectaries) and entitle
that an Answer to this Treatise, if so; he will need no great Sophist to lay
open the cheat. But what if he take Pet? What if passion and ignorance drive
him into a humor of Contempt? What if he lay all thought of answering aside,
and Satisfy some few of his own Gange by an odd Querie, as he once did? Cannot
a dull book come out with my name in the Title, but I must be obliged to answer
it? No, I assure them, I know better how to spend my time. Well, Courteous
Part. 1. Page. 72.
Reader, if he run this way, I have done, and say no more but what all will
vow, that the of oil of the Doctors lamp is well nigh, if not wholly spent.
Among the many ways here briefly hinted at, time, I hope, may tell us how he
will behave himself. I expect his Answer.

A word now if, you please, of what I shall handle hereafter. Dr Still: has
published two spiteful ridiculous Treatises, justly offensive to every
Judicious man, the one is his simple charge of Idolatry shamefully and without
judgment laid upon the Roman Catholic Church, thanks be to God he has been
soundly baffled for it. The other is his wild Enquiry after Miracles wrought
in the same great Moral body of Christians, and this I engage to answer, though
indeed, the juggling, the palpable Sophistry, the manifest falsities wherewith
that whole Discourse is seasoned, return you the best Answer, and plainly tell
you The Enquiry made by him, is in a word vvorth nothing, abating this one
point, that it exposes the Author, as he deserves, to public contempt. What
in Gods name, came into the Dr's head, to write as he has done against all
Miracles? Many Protestants, I am sure (as you shall see afterward) ingenuously
acknovvledge true Miracles to have been wrought in the Roman Catholic Church,
others of the worser sort, allow at least an appearance of them, though perhaps
done by the help of Devils, but the Dr seems in Several Passages not to allow
us so much as the outward Semblance of a Miracle, and all along own's not one
of them, true. What shall ^e say to this man. Will he grant that the Jews
bad true Miracles among them, and deny the like Grace and Privilege to the
Christian Church? Will he allow the gift of working Miracles to two great
Prophets, Enoch and Elias at their appearing again, when the Church will be
near an end, and take from her all Signs, all true Miracles, during the vast
space of time between the Apostles, and the latter days of these two Prophets?
Will he say (and he must say it) when Antichrist comes, that, that false
Prophet will do strange wonders; yea in appearance great Miracles, though all
rotten and full of guile: and shall Christ's own Spouse, the true Christian
Church be so abased, so vilely thought of, by one that professes Christianity,
as never to have wrought by God's special favor so much as one true Miracle;
never to have Showed any other vvonder but what Devils have done, and
Antichrist will do by his charm's, when he comes to delude the world? Gentle
Reader, these things are horrid; and better befit a Proficient in Atheism, than
one that bear's the name of a Christian. But more of this in the Treatise,
where I shall discover the Dr's intolerable frauds which run through his
whole Discourse, and show also, what Catholics understand by Church Miracles
wherein the Dr grossly err's, for he thinks every uncertain Story, related by
this or that too credulous Author (often censured by the Church) passes amongst
us for a Church Miracle. There is no such matter, the Miracles we chiefly rely
on and defend, are rigidly examined, attested by oath, and made every way so
morally certain before they gain Approbation, that no man in prudence can call
them into doubt. Those other, related by private Authors, are either probable,
dubious, or manifestly false. If all Circumstances Considered, they appear
probable, we own them as such, and go no further: If dubious; we suspend our
judgments and leave them in that uncertain Condition: If false, (which is
easily known upon Examination) we utterly reject them. The rest that belongs
to this weighty matter Concerning Miracles you shall have, God vvilling,
hereafter, part whereof is added to this Treatise. The remainder, I hope,
will follow, before many Months come to an End.

Farewell, Courteous READER.
THE CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. What moved the Author to write this short Treatise? How weakly Dr
Stilling: trifles with his Adversaries; A touch of the Dr's new way in Arguing.
Of his simple exception against the word Infallibility. How the Infallibility
in the first Propounders of Faith depend's upon the present Guides of the
Church? Page 1 CHAP. II. A few Considerations premised concerning
Infallibility. Express Scripture proves The Church Infallible. No one word for
her Fallibility alleged by the Dr. An Argument proposed against the Doctor. 32
CHAP. III. Doctor Stillingfleets Rule and ground of faith proved no Rule. It
lessens not in the least the Churches Infallibility. 42 CHAP. IV. Doctor Still:
Arguments answered. His unintelligible jumbling discovered. A word briefly of
the ground of the Churches Infallibility. The Churches Guides teach infallibly.
61 CHAP. V. Doctor Stillingfleets pretended Answer to E: Ws: Two books,
Protestancy without Principles, and Reason and Religion, showed no Answer, but
a mere shuffling, or palpable digression from the main point bandled in those
Treatises. How the Dr shift's off the only difficulty, wberein satisfaction is
required? 96 CHAP. VI. Dr Still: grant's that Faith transcend's the Certainty
of those Motives which induce to believe. Independently of his concession, that
verity is proved, and the ground thereof firmly settled. How necessary it is to
distinguish betvveen the Credibility of a Mystery, and the infallible believing
it true. Objections ansvvered. Other difficulties proposed. 123 CHAP. VII.
Reflections made upon the Doctors follovving Discourse. Of his Mistakes
concerning the Churches Testimony, and the obscurity of Faith. 154 CHAP. VIII.
The Doctor's Discourse from page 400, to P. 416. Considered, and found
vveightless. 174 CHAP. IX. Dr Stilling: pretended Evidence for Christian
Religion proved nothing like Evidence. His Evidence taken from Sense in the
Mystery of the holy Eucharist demonstrated Senseless. How vainly he endeavour's
to prove by Miracles related in Scripture the Truth of the Doctrine there
registered. A word of his Tradition, and many other errors. 193 Of the Dr's
error in conveying to us by Tradition, what Christ did, and spoke. 226 CHAP.
X. The Church proved Infallible before She interpret's Scripture. The reason
hereof. The Doctors gross error in charging a Circle on us, in the Resolution
of Faith. What a vicious Circle implies, and how it differ's from a rational
Regress in Discourse. 236
THE CHAPTERS OF THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. How I formerly argued in behalf of our Churches Miracles. The Dr in
his Enquiry waves my Arguments. Of the difference between Christ's Miracles,
and those wrought by the Apostles, and in the Church. What is meant by Church
Miracles. Of the Cheats which run through the Dr's whole Enquiry. 3 The
Miraculous Translation of the Chapel of Loreto, defended against the Doctor.
Authorities for the Translation, Produced. 14 CHAP. II. Of the Dr's proceeding
against me. What he supposes, destroies it self. What weight Church Miracles
have? None of wit or judgment ever contradicted them. How the Dr juggles in
appealing to Apostolical Miracles. The Miraculous Translation of the sacred
house of Loreto, manifestly proved against the Dr's weak and unvvorthy Cavils.
19 CHAP. III, The Dr's ridiculous cavils at Teremanus his Table, showed
Nonsense. The main Objection against the Chapels Translation, proposed, and
solved. A difficulty moved Concerning the strange Translation of Protestaney
into Germany and England. 37 CHAP. IV. More witnesses produced for the Chapels
Translation. Whether Baronius proves Pope Joan to have never been, by a
Negative Argument, or Silence merely? Of the Dr's gross Errors and unworthy
dealing 45 CHAP. V. The Dr's frivolus Objections against the Miracles wrought
at Loreto, dissolved. A word of his other frauds. 68
COURTEOUS READER
The Printer of this Treatise, is wholly ignorant of the English tongue, many
faults therefore have slipped the pr^sse, Some are already Charitably corrected
by others, if more be found, please to mend, or pardon them.

ERRATA.
PART. I. In the Title of the first 31 pages. For Triefling, and etc, read
trifling Page. 5. Line. 22. r. overcharged P. 13. l. 15 r. Scholar. P. 49. l.
30. r. Imaginable. p. 49 p. 202. Margent. r. of p. 212. l. 31. r. acquiesce.

PART. II. P. 31. l. 28. r. taken thence. p. 31. l. 16. r. appertaining p. 72.
l. 12. r. Narration. p. 35. l. 16. r. thrown out. p. 78. l. 23. r. accuses p.
3. l. 10. r. humane. N. for. u and u. for n. h. for b. an. u. for. i. as
unsufficient for insufficient, please to correct, faults very discernable.

THE INFALLIBILITY OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHVRCH, And Her Miracles defended
against Dr Stillingfleet's Cavils. THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I.
What moved the Author to write this short Treatise? How weakly Dr Stilling:
trifles with his Adversaries; At ouch of the Drs new way in Arguing. Of his
simple exception against the word Infallibility. How the Infallibility in the
first Propounders of Faith depend's upon the present Guides of the Church?

1 SIx years are now past, since I set forth a book, entitled Protestancy
without Principles, and after that another, called Reason and Religion. My
chiefest aim and end in both, was to fix in all a firm belief of a Truth,
which neither Doctor nor Devil shall overthrow. It is the asserted
Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church, then largely discussed, with an
express intention to oppose Dr Stillingfleet. The Dr after a long silence
replies, as you se, and pretend's to answer these two books. Moreover to
persuade all, he has answered home, hear how Champion like he beats the Air
with a large sized Brag. When we (says he in the Preface to his first The Drs
vast brag.
Part P. 3.) set our selves to Answer their books, we endeavor to state the
Controversy plainly* to examine their proofs, to apply distinct Answers to their
Arguments: we make use of no tricks to deceive men nor Sophistical Cavils to
perplex things. We dare appeal to the judgment of any person, who will take
the pains t^ examine the matters in difference between us. But they (Catholics)
seek to avoid the mai^ things in Dispute etc. Thus the Dr, and ^ am sure, never
Paragraph had more empty Nothings crammed into it, that this of our glorious
Antagonist.

2 Wherefore I deal Heartily, an^ must tell the naked truth (for truth will
out) and prove it in the ensuing Discou^se. This Dr neither states the
Controversy rig^ between us, nor examin's the proofs produc^ by me in behalf
of the Churches Infallibilit^ but contrary wise waves the very best and mo^
substantial reason I allege. Again, he is ^ far from giving pertinent
distinctions to my Arguments, that I verily believe by what hitherto appears,
he neither knows how, or where to distinguish. No. His strange new mode in
Arguing, most opposite to all close reasoning, is, bluntly and blindly to lay
about him with huffs and Cavils, light where they will, he heed's not. For as
much as concern's his tricks and Sophistry, I will say in a word, they may
(though far from being magical) perhaps ensnare some vulgar people, who decry
all that relishes Popery, but to shock the judgment of any prudent man, very
few, for ought I know, have found their brains troubled with them. At least
hitherto, I never heard of one man, bred up in a right belief, gained to the
Dr's opinions, by his Sophistry, tricks, or scribbling books.

3 Now to prove what is here briefly hinted at, and to show the Dr's rash and
why the Author returned this Answer
inconsiderate Answer, to be in real truth nothing like an Answer to my books,
I have writ this short Treatise, where I discover his shallowness in learning,
and would, if possible, make him more wise, than vainly to boast of doing that
which he neither has, not can perform He tell's us in his General Praeface,
What an excel^ent chemical Controvertist he is in drawing off all the Spirit he
could find in Reason and Religion, whereas it is evident and here demonstrated,
he never meddles witth that which is most material, and should be called the
Spirit, though I urged him again and again, as you may se in the Preface, to
answer for himself. So little of the Spirit have I met with in these two
discourses of the Dr, that some may justly wonder, and perhaps mislike my pains
taken in following too exactly his pitiful Cavils, while they plainly se, that
the very most which looks there like substance has been refuted in my two last
Treatises, and so penurious he is in producing any thing new against me in
these his discourses, that I could most easily, have replied to all in one
sheet of paper, but that would have galled Mr Dr and raised Clamours, as if I
either could not, or would not answer him in his own way. To dead these false
Alarms, I was necessitated to turn over much rubbish, to travel through the
very most of his slight stuff, for want of better substance to work upon.

4 Courteous Reader, my intention My intention purely good in order to the Dr,
and Every one.
is purely good to the Dr, in whom, i^ possible, I would work a meaner conceit
of himself, seeing plainly, the more he writes the more credit he loses, and
why should we not, if we can take the man off, hinder him from incurring more
disgrace, he has enough of that already? In case my endeavor prove
unsuccesful to the Dr, I doubt not, but that I shall unbeguile some over
credulous People, whose opinion he courts, and would swell up with a high
esteem of his parts. Here lies his last aim. To do this, I shall by Gods grace
evince, that He err's grossly, in the main matters of Faith, want's learning,
judgment, and common Civility. His defect in learning appears most in this
Treatise. His want of Judgment, Truth, and Sincerity will be more manifest in
my second Part, where I rescue the glorious Miracles wrought in the Roman
Catholic Church from a vast number of forgeries and Calumnies. His
transgression against Civility is so notorious, that almost every page in his
books, overcharged with it, cries shame upon him. Wherefore wonder not, if here
and there I twitch him a little, though with no proportion to his rude and
uncourteous handling me and others. Thus much noted, know courteous Reader,
that,

5 The most or rather all, Doctor Stilling fleet has against me in his first
discourse, besides much ill language cast out of that sanctified mouth to
embellish his general Preface with, you have at his 77. page. There lies the
main business I am to consider, though all is so profoundly simple, that I am
ashamed to read it. As for the sornful words he gives (no more regarded by me
then the chattering of a magpie) I tell you plainly they shall never break my
head nor vex my heart. Let that young Cock crow on his own dunghill, if it do
him good, let him peck at what dead skull he pleases, no great hurt say I,
while no more is done. My task is to look after substance, could I meet with
it, but I am fob'd off with mere tittle tattle all along, with jeers and
drollery, and therefore must deal ingenuously (courteous Reader) and openly
Nothing like a difficulty proposed by the Dr.
profess before God and the world, that though I have with all possible
diligence weighed the utmost strength of Dr Still: Arguments against our Church
Doctrine, yet I find not one that carries with it so much as the face, or a
shadow of difficulty, as shall by God's Assistance be proved in this short
Treatise. And I easily believe, that those other worthy Authors the Doctor
slights, and flurts at (all have their lashes) well able to answer for them
selves, will manifestly make it out, that he only trifles, and speaks nothing
to the purpose against their learned labors My endeavor is to answer for my
self. Se more in the Preface to the Reader.

6 Doctor Still: in the page now cited pick's up a few of my Assertions taken
out of the Book entitled. Protestancy without principles, and after his usual
manner, proceed's very disingenuously; for he either mangles them as best
served his turn, or wilily strip's them of all their proofs, which without any
labor might have been added, and given vigor to every Proposition. Finally he
wholly waves the ultimate reason I allege for the Churches infallibility,
Protestancy without Princ: P. 28. where I prove; that Christian Religion is
ruined, if for ought any man can know, all Churches, all Pastors, and Guides
teach Christ's Doctrine so fallibly, that it may be false.

7. Now a word or two of my Assertions, related by the Dr. I say first. All
true believers (not all men as the Dr miscites) in the Assent given to Gods
revealed verities are infallible, and prove the Assertion. God the first Verity
reveal's infallibly eternal truths for this end, that all believe him as he
speak's, if therefore he speaks infallibly, all that believe him as he speak's,
believe infallibly. I ground this Doctrine upon the Apostles words. 1.
Subiective Infallibility in true Believers.
Thessa: 2. v. 12. Therefore we thank God without intermission, because when ye
received the word of God which you heard from us, ye received it not as the
word of men, but at it is indeed the word of God, who works in you that
believe. Hence I inferred. He that receives the delivered word of God, as it is
truly God's word, and not the word of man; He in whom God work's belief by
Divine grace, believes Gods revealed truths infallibly; And then Concluded.
Whoever disown's such infallible Believers jointly disown's infallible Faith,
and said, this reason proves a subjective Infallibility in true Believers. Thus
the Blessed Apostles who received the word of God from Christ our Lord had
Divine Faith, and firmly assented to Christ^ sacred Doctrine, were first
infallible believers, and afterward infallible Teachers also. What harm in
these Assertions? I challenge the Dr to speak a probable word against them upon
any known or owned Principle, for hitherto he has returned no Answer.

8. I Assert. 2. P. 20. He that hear's an infallible Teacher has the Spirit of
truth, and he that hear's not an infallible Teacher wants the spirit of truth.
Holy Scripture speaks as I speak John. 1. c. 4. v. 6. we are of God, he that
knows God, hear's us, he that is not of God, hears us not, hereby we know
the Spiririt of truth and the Spirit of error. Hence I inferred, that a
fallible teaching of Christ's Doctrine, which by the force of its proposal or
delivery may deceive and be false, is liable to cavils and disputes. In saying
this, I wrong not in the least Christ's infallible Doctrine, but only assert,
that a fallible or false delivery which may easily deprave it, is not Christ's
infallible Doctrine, because as yet it is not made sufficiently Credible, nor
ultimately applied to a Hearer as Christ's Doctrine. An Arian, for example
read's these words. I and my Father are one, and so also does Dr St. Both read
the Doctrine of Christ, yet contradict each other, and the one depraves and
perverts it by his false and fallible delivery, I say this false and fallible
teaching, most easily distinguished from revealed truths in Gods word, is not
Christ's infallible Doctrine. If the Doctor boggle at this distinction whereof he
takes no notice, the worst I wish him is, more light, and learning.

9. The Doctor says I assert in my. 21. Page No man can be an Heretic that
denies the obiective verities revealed in Gods word, unless he be sure that his
Teacher reveals those verities Infallibly. There is no such Proposition in
that. 21. page, much less any words importing that a Teacher reveal's. Teachers
in this present state (good Dr) propose infallibly the ancient revealed
Verities and often add a clearer explication which implies not (if we speak
properly) any new Revelation. You have more of my Propositions in Dr St: which
I own and will defend as they stand with their reasons in my Book, even to the
very last. P. 22. and. 24. where I say. As long as the infallibility of a
Revelation is remote from me for want of an undoubted application made by an
Infallible Proponent, the Revelation can no more convey certainty into Faith,
then fire at a great distance warm. I give this reason, omitted by the Dr. It
little avail's to know, that God speak's infallibly (for every one has that
assured) unless in the circumstance he speak's to me and for my salvation, I
yield my infallible assent to his word, which cannot be without assurance had
from the Proponent of Faith, that he Speaks as I ought to believe, infallibly
If therefore the Proponent says only doubtfully. I think God speak's as I
teach, but am not certain, the Assent given to his teaching is only doubtful.
If he truly say. I teach infallibly what God reveal's, the Assent in a
faithful Believer answer's, and is infallible. See more hereof in the pages
now cited, all waved by the Dr.

10. P. 79. Having slightly run over my assertions the man begin's to bristle
up. This says he is the sum of the Principles of that Metaphysical wit. Hold
there good Doctor. In the 28. page. n. 9. wholly omitted by you, I give a
better Sum, and tell you that none can teach Christian Doctrine who truly ownes
not God, an Infinite, verity, the Author of it, but he that only teaches
fallible doctrine which may be false cannot truly own God, the Author, but some
other fallible Proponent that may both deceive and be deceived. Whence I
conclude, that God never sent Christ our Lord, nor Christ his Apostles, to
teach a Christian Doctrine, which by virtue of all the Principles it has or can
rely on, is merely fallible and may be false, Therefore some other God never
sent any to teach fallible Doctrine, which may be false.
malignant Spirit and not God, sent Sectaries to teach their supposed fallible
and easily falsified Doctrine. Upon this ground, more amply explained in the
place now quoted I rely, as on an invincible proof, and petition the Dr to
return a close Answer, without trifling, needless parergons, vain distinctions,
and yet slighter stuff, which ever take up the most room in his books, and
weary a Readers patience. Se now how roughly he begins with me.

11. Sure, says the Dr (alluding to my Assertions) a man must have his brains
well confounded by School Divinity, and hard words, before he can have common
sense little enough, to think he understand's them. For ought I ever yet saw in
Dr St: writings, his brains are not too much burdened with that dangerous
learning, had he more of it, common sense (not easily lost by School Divinity)
would have guided him to write more to the purpose. But stay, Courteous Reader,
is this the Doctors The Drs new way in answering.
new mode of confuting Propositions? First lamely to set them down, and then to
rail at the Author? Would not his Doctors hip take it ill, think ye, should any
one confute all his late books by saying barely, his brains were so turned and
confounded with Heretical fancies that in real truth he knew not what he wrote?
What was it that galled him? How could he wrest any thing said by me to the
least offense? I set down plainly my Assertions, and he answers not one, but
becomes peevish, surly, and outrageous. Is this a Christian way of writing
Controversies? If he thought my Assertions deserved not a scratch of his pen,
why did he meddle with them, and allow them so much room as to fill two pages
in his book? And if he judged them worthy to appear there, why has he not
replied to some of them? Hear the Doctors excuse.

12. I never loved, says he, to spend time How peevish and blunt the Dr is,
in confuting a man who thinks himself the wiser, for speaking things which
neither he nor any one else understand's. Can any thing be more blunt? What if I
cheer up into some briskness and tell him, wiser than he, far more grave and
learned, have without rubbing their foreheads, easily understood all that he
slights? What if I add, it is a hard matter for one who has been long in
Schools, to deal with a half Scholar, unacquainted with speculative learning?
(Though what great speculation have we in any one of my Assertions?) Such men
as these, when their brains reach only to a vulgar notion of things, think all
amiss, if you follow them not just in their old hackney pace, or say any thing,
though never so little, above their Ken. In case the Dr account me uncivil for
touching his talent in learning, let him thank himself, who first began the
quarrel.

13, Next he run's God knows whither, and says he rather chose to put
together such Propositions as might give account of Christian Faith without all
this Iargon of infallibility, And, as I take it, he relates to the Principles
which slipped from his pen in one hour or other when his head turned round, and
are yet to be seen at the end of that pitiful Book concerning the Idolatry
practiced by the Church of Rome. If so; good Dr, follow friendly Counsel, and
as you tender your credit talk no more of those Principles, for they are not
only torn in pieces by four at least of your Adversaries, but moreover to my
certain knowledge are scorned by some of your own learned coat, who look on
them as the most senceless things you ever writ, next to your late infamous His
unreasonable Cavil.
piece of Idolatry. But in passing, what shall we say to his Iargon about
infallibility? Is not I beseech you, Iargon, a far more obscure Term; then the
word Infallibility? Yet the Dr Complains's of hard words. Few I think of the
vulgar know that Iargon signifies sustian language, ped^ers French, or a
barbarous jangling, yet all have a clearer notion of the word Infallibility,
and does not Mr Dr apply it a hundred times over in his Account, to God, to
Christ our Lord, and to the Apostles, who were all infallible in what they
taught the world? Now if he hold it not rightly applied when we speak of the
Church, he is to impugn that by reason, and not to quarrel with a harmless word
as if witchery lay in it.

14 Soon after this raillery, he tells us, he will fix the Notion of
Infallibility for says he, as it is used, it seems a rare word How, and to
what Infallibility is rightly applied?
for jugglers in Divinity to play tricks with. For sometimes they apply it to
the object that is believed. He mean's (or it is Nonsense) to all that God
reveal's and call that Infallibly true. Very well done I think, for so that
word of Faith which S. Paul preached Romans 10. 8. with testifying to Jews and
Gentiles. Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, was Acts. 20 21. obiectively taken,
infallibly true. Does the Apostle juggle here? O, but sometimes they apply it
to the subject capable of believing, and say all persons ought to be certain,
that what they believe is infallible true. Most undoubted also; if they believe
what God speak's. Let all the house of Israel most certainly know that God has
made him Lord. Acts 2. 36. I know whom I have believed and am certain. 2. Tim.
1. 12. And to show how firm and Infallible Divine Faith is in the hearts of
true Believers, the Apostle tell's the Galatians 1. 8. Although we, or an Angel
from heaven preach to you otherwise then that we preached to you, let him be
accursed. Thus Scripture speak's of Divine Faith, and attributes certainty to
it. What juggling lies here? Sometimes they apply it to to the means of
conveying that infallible Truth to the faculties of ^en, and these, they say,
must be infallible. Very right, no Juggling yet. The Galatians c. 1. 24.
accounted S. Paul no Jugler, when they glorified God because one that in time
past had been a Persecutor, now preached and conveyed the truths of Jesus
Christ to the world. Again, if Faith comes by hearing, and none can hear
without a Preacher. Romans 10. 14, And if God has appointed Pastors and Doctors
for the work of the Ministry, to the end we be not carried a way with every
wind of Doctrine by the deceit of men. Ephesians. 4. 12. If these Assertions I say
be true, we are secured by Divine Scripture without juggling, that God will ever
provide his Church of infallible Teachers, who by special assistance are to
convey and propose to us infallibly, what is infallibly revealed, chiefly then,
when the Mysteries of Faith transcend all natural reason, or lie obscurely in
Gods written word. But of this particular whereat the Doctor boggles most, more
hereafter. In the mean while you see that if Catholic Divines who apply
infallibility to Gods Revelation, to the Faith of such as assent to that
Revelation, and finally to the Oracle that proposes Faith be a juggling,
Scripture it selve juggles with us.

15 Our Dr proceed's. But the subtility of these things (he means of the
distinctions The Drs ill worded Definition, rejected.
hitherto given) lies only in their obscurity, and the Schoolman is spoiled,
when his talk is brought out of the clouds to common sense. In good sober
earnest. Schoolmen will never be spoiled by such a Bungler as the Dr is. But
will you hear how Eagle like he mount's the clouds, and at once profoundly dives
into the depth of this doubtful Term, Infallibility, if yet it signifies any
thing. Infallible, is that, says the Dr, which cannot be deceived. Now we are
to suppose ourselves brought down out of the clouds. Most pitiful. What cobbler
is there in England that by mere hearing the word Infallibility, understand's
not as well the sense of it, as he does after the Doctors ill worded
definition? In God's name, how does his definition charm greater clarity into
the word Infallible, than it had before? Again, was Infallibility when I used
it, pedlers french, and fustian language? How happen's it now after the
Doctor's mouth has hallowed the Term, to become a less Iargon? Or, does he
only tell us by his definition what a Iargon or fustian language signifies? We
only ask here, whether the very word deserves contempt, and shall enquire
afterward to whom it is applied? Lastly the Dr is Shamefully out, for the
Infallibility proper to Divine Faith is ill expressed by Saying barely. It
cannot be deceived, much more is required, And it is, that as the true
Proponent of Faith (whether Christ, Apostle, or Church) can neither deceive not
be deceived, So a true Believer, by Virtue of his Faith, can neither deceive
nor be deceived. The Dr has not yet done. If no one (thus he speak's) will say
that a Proposition cannot be deceived, it is absurd to say, that it is
Infallibly true. A Proposition deceived, good Dr. Propositions are not (if I
understand English) properly said to be deceived, but the Proponent that makes
them, when falls, is deceived, neither do we say in Schools. Propositio
fallitur, but, est fallax, aut falsa, and Proponens fallitur. But let this
pass. The Dr's meaning may be a homely spun thing, and import this sense. If
every one will say, that a Proposition may be false, it is absurd to say it is
infallibly true. No hurt in this; no more harm can I discover in those other
flat Propositions which follow. P. 82. viz. That the impossibility of being
deceived does in truth belong only to an Infinitely perfect understanding, for
what ever understanding is imperfect, is of it self liable to error and
mistake. 2. Yet an understanding liable to be deceived may not be deceived, and
be sure it is not. 3. The assurance of not being deceived, is from Gods
revealing any thing to men; for we know it is impossible that God should' be
deceived, or go about To deceive man kind in what he obliges The Drs
Propositions to no purpose in this place.
them to believe as true. 4. It is granted that what ever person speak's from
God, he cannot be deceived in it, but men may be deceived in thinking they
speak from God when they do not. These I call loose and dull Propositions fit
to fill paper, for to what other end they serve in this place, standing as they
do alone, and unconnected with the main Business now in hand, no man I think
can tell me. Had the Dr come to the point, as he might have done well on this
occasion, and proved closely by positive Arguments, that the Roman Catholic
Church dispersed the whole world over is fallible, or that we are deceived in
thinking God speak's infallibly by this Oracle (when he does not) his
propositions had been to the purpose. But both here and all along, he waves
these express positive proofs which should make directly against us, and only
skirmishes with some few Arguments of Catholics (God knows most weakly)
whereby they endeavor to evince the Churches Infallibility. Besides such faint
attempts with flurts here and there at Popes and Councils, you have nothing, as
shall appear hereafter.

16 The ensuing talk in the Dr's three next Pages, may be briefly reduced to
three or four Assertions. Having told us that particular persons may be
deceived in believing those inspired, who are not, he says, nothing can be
sufficient to prevent His error concerning private Inspiration, discovered.
this, but Divine Revelation to every particular person, that God has
appointed infallible Guides in the Church, to assure men, he had at first
settled his Church by persons that were infallible. What can the Dr mean? Will
he say that God whispered every Primitive Christian in the ear, and declared by
private Revelation when the Apostles preached, that they were his Infallible
Oracles? Or supposing that the Roman Catholic Church be infallible, must God
therefore communicate that secret by private Revelation to those many millions
who have been and yet are professed members of it? What proof has the Dr for
this unmaintainable Assertion? In a word, thus much we have by express
Revelation, That the Church is the pillar and ground of truth. That he who
hear's the Church, hear's Christ. That Pastors and Doctors will ever li^ in
this great body and preserve it from the circumvention of errors, and these
Revelations with many others of the like nature in Holy writ, are taught by the
Church for this end, that every particular person after a due application made,
may submissively yield a most firm assent to them. This Assent proceeding from
Divine grace, we call Supernatural Faith, and hold it infallible. Now, if the
Dr will call these Verities recorded in Scripture particular Revelations,
because they are ordained by Providence to ascertain every one in particular of
what God speak's, no hurt at all, I easily accord, but his words and meaning
Seem quite contrary, for first he will have all the Guides of the present
Church inspired in their teaching as the Apostles were inspired (by some
celestial vision or Divine illustration) Or, he thinks, they cannot teach
Infallibly. Nay more. Nothing says he. P. 82 Can make the Faith of particular
persons Infallible, but private Inspiration, which must resolve all Faith into
Enthusiasm, and immediate Revelation. Were this true, which the Dr never
offer's to make out by any proof but his own fallible word, every private
person might as securely write holy Scripture as any Prophet or Apostle, for
the chiefest Prerogative granted these great Masters was, that the very words
they wrote, expressed the internal inspiration of the Holy Ghost, or his
private Revelation, and upon this account are rightly called Gods own words,
When the inspiration was clear, they expressed it clearly, when obscure,
obscurely, as we se in the dark Prophesies of the old Testament, and in the
Book of the Apocalypse.

17 Catholics in lieu of the Doctors Inspiration and Revelation ordinarily use
The word Assistance used by Catholics.
the word Assistance or Guidance of the Holy Ghost, which neither implies
Enthusianism, private Revelation, or Prophetical illumination, but the safe
conduct and infallible direction of that Blessed Spirit, whereby the Guides of
the Church are preserved from error in the substance of that Doctrine they
oblige Christians to believe, whereof see more in my last Treatise, Disc: 3. c.
12. n. 9. To assert therefore as the Dr does, that nothing can be more absurd
than to say. There are infallible Believers without infallible inspiration is
not only an unproved whimsy, but to speak in his homely language more then
absurd, if he knows what Inspiration properly import's.

18 P. 83. He says first, that those persons whom God has employed to make
known his Doctrine, must give assurance that he has secured them from mistake
and error, and then add's. But to suppose that we cannot believe the first
Infallible Proponents (he means the Apostles) unless there be such in every
age, is to make more difficulties, and to answer none. And therefore he says
in the foregoing Page. It is unconceivable, that' persons should be more
infallible in judging the Inspiration (read Assistance) of the present Guides,
than of the first Founders of the Church. For then all my belief of the
Infallibility of the first Proponents must depend on the evidence which the
present Guides of the Church give of their Infallibility.

19 This vulgar Objection solved over and over in my two last Treatises,
contain's nothing like a difficulty, and the Dr (who will not I hope disdain to
be one of the Guides of the English Church) must confess it to be wholly
strengthles, for when he preaches to his people in The Dr's objection, solved
Holborn, and doctrinally explain's that great Mystery of the Incarnation, or
tells them (I suppose truly, though not infallibly) of an admirable
Hypostatical union whereby two distinct natures, Divine and humane, are joined
together, subsisting in one Divine person, and in saying thus much gain's
belief from his Auditors, when this, I say, is done; One that is curious
demand's of those Hearers, upon what motive dare they ground their faith in
believing so sublime a Mystery? It Is answered, they believe it, because God an
Eternal Verity deliver's the truth in Holy Scripture. But ask again, whether
Scripture in express Terms makes mention of that Hypostatical union, or of the
two different Natures united together? They answer No; Yet tell you, that their
Doctor to lay forth the Mystery more fully assures them all is true, and
because he is their Guide, they no more suspend their Faith, but believe, Now,
if in the third place you demand whether the Verity of this Mystery depend's
upon the Dr's teaching, which is the only thing here stumbled at? They answer,
no; for the Verity was proposed from Christ's time, yet this influence his
Teaching has over their Faith, that he both shows what was anciently revealed,
and now applies that ancient Doctrine to their weak capacities, not hitherto so
exactly conceived, or laid forth.

20 Here you have something like that I would express, and if the Dr were as
infallible in his teaching, as we now suppose him to speak truth, we should
soon agree. In a word. Catholic Faith as S. Thomas excellently well observes.
1 Part. q. 1. art. 8, ad. 2. necessarily relies upon the Revelation made to the
ancient Prophets and Apostles, who wrote Divine Scripture, and yet more
primarily upon Christ our Lord's teaching. Now as the Apostles often declared
more fully what our great Master of truth infallibly delivered, and in this
sense explained and completed his Doctrine, so also the Church of Christ in all
Ages since, declared more amply what both Christ and the Apostles taught
concerning the Mysteries of Faith, and in this sense not only explain's what
they taught, but proposes it also infallibly, as the certain Doctrine delivered
by Christ and his Apostles, and upon this account is rightly called Conditio
applicans, a necessary condition applying it to our capacities. Hence you se,
though the ancient Truths were primarily matter of Faith, yet to Believers in
succeeding Ages they stand, as it were, remote from all, and need this
immediate Proposal of the Church living, and actually teaching.

21 The reason hereof, if you make a true Analysis of Faith, is clear. For ask
why I believe the Incarnation? I answer, the first Guides of the Church
revealed it in Scripture, but enquire again, what assurance have I of that
Revelation which is not exterminis evident, much less are all the particulars
belonging to the Mystery already laid forth, evident, I answer the Attestation
of the present Church manifested by supernatural wonders gives me my last
assurance, and How the Infallibility of the first proponents of Faith depends
upon the Churches present Guides?
therefore either is a partial formal object of Faith, as I defend Reason and
Religion, Disc. 3. c. 12. n. 8. 9. or at least an intrinsical necessary
condition, as shall be afterward declared. Thus you se how, and in what manner,
the belief of the Infallibility of the first Proponents depend's on the
rational Evidence, which the present Guides of the Church give of those first
Proponents Infallibility. The verity of the Mystery attested and considered in
it self, depend's not upon the present Guides, for it was true before they
taught, but a farther and more exact declaration of it, not discoverable before
the Church speak's, and the immediate application of it respectively made to
Believers, depend's on these now living Guides. And this also the Dr must
confess, when by his preaching he truly applies the high mysteries of Faith to
the understanding of his Hearers.

22 The Dr takes not his measures right in what follows. If men says he,
cannot be infallible in believing the Apostles unless there be other infallible
Proponents in every Age, to assure them that the Apostles were inspired, why
must not the Infallibility of these present Proponents be likewise so attested
as well as the Apostles? He would, I think, ask in clearer terms, Why should
not the Infallibility whereunto the now living Guides of the Church lay claim,
be as well attested and applied by another Infallible Attestation as the Church
attest's or applies to us the Infallibility of the Apostles? And thus (as he
insinuates) we must go on endlesly in these Applications and Attestations; or
at last rest in that first Attestation or application made by the Apostles.
Were it worth the while, it would be easy to show how the entangled Dr must
solve his own difficulty, if in lieu of Infallible, you will use the word,
Truth. He declares to his Hearers, and truly as we suppose, some dark Mystery
of Faith, and with that you have his true Attestation or application of it. But
must that Attestation ere Faith be truly conveyed into his Hearers be applied
and attested by another Attestation distinct from Scripture and the Dr^ The
Dr's Simple Discourse Concerning endless Attestations, refuted.
own last delivery? If so, we go on endlesly in Attestations. In a word, the
Answer most fully laid forth in my last Treatise, is thus. As when the Apostles
preached they rationally proved themselves by the signal wonders they wrought
to be Gods own Infallible Proponents or Oracles, and therefore needed no
further Attestation of their Infallibility in that Age, so the Church ever
since, evidenced by the like visible luster of rational marks and wonders,
proves Her self Gods own Infallible Oracle, and therefore is without any
further Attestation the Primum Credible in order to Christians. But the first
most immediate known Oracle made, by her self and for her self Credible (in
so much that we cannot in this present state infallibly adhere to that the Dr
calls Apostolical evidence or the Divinity of Scripture without the Churches
Attestation) needs no further witness or attesting Authority. Se more hereof.
Rea: and Relig: Disc: 3. c. 12. n. 4. c. 15. n. 3. and c. 16. per totum, but
chiefly. Disc. 2. c. 11. where it is proved, that as no Prophet was ever
comparable to Christ our Lord, so no Church was, is, or shall be comparable to
the Roman Catholic

23 By thus much here briefly hinted at, and amply proved in the places now
quoted, you se the Dr knows not what he says. P. 84, where he tell's us, If
we rest not satisfied with the rational Evidence which the Apostles inspired by
God gave the world, there will either be an endless infallibility, or Faith at
last must be resolved into Enthusiasm. Again let the world judge, says he,
whether Christ and his Apostles did not give stronger evidence that they were
sent from God, then the Guides of the present Church do?

24 Because a less wary Reader may be here affrighted with big words, we will
lead the Dr with his Bible to a Synagogue of Jews, or to an Assembly of
learned Heathens, and desire him to lay forth that stronger rational evidence,
whereby these Aliens from Christ ought to be induced to believe that infallible
Divine Inspiration imparted to the Apostles. If his answer be direct and
pertinent, he will relate their Miracles. The blind se, the lame walk, the dead
rise etc. And are these, say the Heathens, The Dr's supposed rational Evidence
gives no Satisfaction to Jews and Heathens.
your best rational Evidences Mr Dr? Know, good Sr, that once (if true) they
were Evidences to those who saw them, but now cease to be so to us, and
therefore may be better called matters revealed, than rational Evidences. Now
if the truth of that Revelation concerning the Apostolical Inspiration be only
proved by Miracles not known or attested, but by a Revelation wholly as obscure
as the thing is, which should be proved by them, such Miracles far recede from
the Nature of Evidence. Remember Dr your own words P. 110. That a proof ought
always to be more evident than the thing proved by it, but here the Miracles
produced by you as a Medium to prove the Apostles Divine Inspiration, are
wholly as obscure to the Heathens as that inspiration is they should prove, for
both are only supposed, not yet proved Revelations, therefore they far recede
from the nature of rational Evidence.

25 On the other side, could our Dr evince those Scripture Miracles upon The
Dr, to bring in Atheism, ru'on's the true rational Evidence.
the Attestation of a Church which God from the beginning of Christianity has
gloriously marked out by as signal and sensible wonders as ever the Apostles
were evidenced; could he make use of these later Signs and show them to be no
natural, but supernatural effects proceeding from an Infinite Power and wisdom,
and only peculiar to the Roman Catholic Church; could he tell us he own's a
Church which both Heaven and earth have so far approved, that never any known
Orthodox Christian laid censure on it, or condemned its Doctrine; He might well
give in strong evidence indeed, and powerfully plead against Jews, Gentiles,
and all Heretics, but the unfortunate man ruin's all this rational Evidence,
and to his eternal disgrace, lays a charge of Idolatry upon this renowned
Church, though by virtue of her glorious wonders She has drawn the very best,
the most choice and learned of the Christian world to Her belief. And thus as I
noted. Reas: and Reli: Disc: 3. c. 16. n. 28, He destroies Scripture, deads
Faith, makes Christian Religion unreasonable, and does his utmost to bring in
Atheism. But of this more largely hereafter, when we shall discover the Dr's
fraud and fallacy concerning his pretended Evidence.

26 P. 84 He end's with me. And in the next. 85. attaques that learned and
laborious Author. N. O. His whole endeavor is to show, we may have Sufficient
certainty of Faith without the Infallibility of the Church. Though it would be
incivility on my part to reply for N. O, best able to answer for himself
(neither can I, for I have not his book) yet by that erudite Authors leave, I
will make a few reflections upon Dr Still: unknit rambling discourse, and
evince that he speaks nothing against the Infallibility of our Church. This I
do, because I have not yet seen the Dr's second part, where I am told he has
much against me.

CHAP. II.
A few Considerations premised concerning Infallibility. Express Scripture
proves The Church Infallible. No one word for her Fallibility alleged by the
Dr. An Argument proposed against the Doctor.

1 IT is prodigiously strange to se how uniustly we Catholics are dealt with,
who, before these rambling Novellists began their new whimsy of reforming and
deserted the old way of Truth, stood in a peaceable possession of this great
Verity. The Roman Catholic Church was, is, and ever shall be Infallible in
what She clearly obliges her children to believe. We then produced, and yet
Catholics highly injured
allege as plain Scripture for the Assertion, as ever God inspired the first
great Masters of the Gospel to write. We here publicly avouch, and will make
it good, That God's word is as express and significant in behalf of the
Churches Infallibility, as for the most primary and fundamental Articles of
Christian Religion. We confirm our Assertion by the unanswerable Authority of
ancient Fathers, and learned Councils, we add here unto the Authority of a
Church never yet censured by any but known Heretics. Upon these grounds we
stand. Now hear I beseech you, how we are treated. There is a young hot
Antagonist named Dr Still: who call's this claim to Infallibility. Page. 84. an
unjust usurpation, a thing notoriously false, an arrogant pretense of an
usurping faction etc. Is it not, think ye, The Dr called to an account.
high time after such rattling language, to give this Bragger a just challenge,
to call him to a rigid account before God and the world, and force him to prove
what he says? Scripture, Councils, and Fathers without glosses shall speak for
us, these shall determine the cause, and end it. My evidences are as strong, as
known. 1. Tim. 3. 16. That thou mais't know how thou oughs't to converse in the
house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of
truth. Matthew. 2. 8. 20. Go therefore teach all nations, Teaching them to
observe all things what ever I have commanded you, and behold I am with you all
days to the end of the world. What Christ here promises, is certainly
performed, therefore his Protection over the Church will never fail. John. 14.
15. I will pray the Father and he will give you another comforter that may
abide with you for ever, The Spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive. The
spirit of truth abiding with that Society of Christians it is promised to, is
opposite to error and falsehood. Ephesians. 4. 11. We read of Apostles, Prophets
Evangelists, of Pastors and Doctors, given by God's special Providence to the
consummation of Saints, unto the work of the Ministry, unto the edifying of
the body of Christ etc. If you ask how long this incomparable Scripture plain
for the Churches Infallibility
blessing shall last? It Is answered. v, 13. until we all meet in the unity of
faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, Demand again, for what end those Guides
are? verse. 14, return's this Answer. That we be not like Children wavering,
tossed to and fro, or carried about with every wind of doctrine by the deceit
of men etc. But if those Guides can be circumvented with error, how is it
possible to secure Christians committed to their charge from being carried away
with the wind of false Doctrine? No Catholic, though he study for it, can speak
more significantly the Churches sense concerning the Infallibility of her
Guides, then the blessed Apostle here amply expresses. Thus much briefly for
an Essay of Scriptural proofs. Fathers and Councils shall follow on a fitter
occasion, when the Dr requires them.

2 In the mean while, this Dr who makes the Church and all her Guides fallible
(for her Infallibility, says he, is a thing notoriously false) is called on to
confront these Authorities, and to prove his own Assertion by plain and express
Scripture, or by so much as one Text that meanly and remotely hints at the
fallibility of this great extended Body. Where, Sr, read we in holy Writ any
thing tending to your sense, That the Church is not the pillar and ground of
truth? Where have we, that God who promised to be with the Church to the end of
the world, would desert Her in one Age or other? Where; That the Spirit of Not
one word in Scripture to prove her fallible.
truth should leave this Oracle? Where find we (o horrid blasphemy) that all
Her Guides, all the Pastors and Doctors grossly deceived themselves, may suffer
millions of souls under their charge to be carried away with a whole deluge of
error, and one no less then professed Idolatry? Speak out Dr and produce
your Scriptures, as plain for the Churches fallibility, as mine now alleged
are for Her Infallibility.

3 Hence I argue. If the Infallibility of the Church be a notorious falsehood,
or as the Dr makes it in his Account. P. 101 ridiculous, yea really distructive
to Christianity, Her Fallibility is a Notorious truth which mainly supports
true Religion. An Argument proposed.
But God certainly has not omitted to register in holy Writ a truth so
notorious, as mainly support's true Religion, therefore he has not omitted to
set down in plain Terms the Churches Fallibility. But this most evidently is
not done, wherefore I tell the Dr that not only he, but all the Doctors on
earth, shall sooner lose their eyes, then find one single Text in the whole
Bible which so much as seemingly makes the Church fallible, in what the obliges
Christians to believe. But if this cannot be evinced by Scripture (laid as a
foundation to the Dr's discourse) he may better go to bed and sleep, than
meddle any more with the Question of Infallibility, For all he says or can say
upon the Matter, will be mere empty talk, without proof and Principles.

4 I urge this Argument further, and ask. Whether to believe the fallibility of
the Church be a fundamental Article of the Dr's new Faith, or only one of his
Inferior truths which Scripture expresses not, nor requires belief of,
necessary to Salvation? Grant the first. He is obliged to prove it by God's
express word, for as he thinks all fundamentals are there. Make. 2. this
asserted Fallibility to be only one of his Inferior truths wholly waved by
Scripture, and not necessary to Salvation, the Dr spoil's his own Scriptureless
cause. With what face then dare he tell us in his Account cited above, that our
pretense to Infallibility overthrowes belief, destroys Christianity, and
tend's apace toward Atheism. Whilst God never yet spoke any such unheard
Assertions, Never Church taught them, Never Fathers owned them, Never Councils
defined them; only the disordered phansy of a young Dr begot them in Ignorance,
and malice, as you se, has set all forth in print. If I speak rashly, the Dr
has all liberty to shame me, and one single passage in God's word whereby this
fallibility is proved, shall lay an eternal disgrace upon me, but as I am sure
there is no such passage, so I fear not any the least disgrace.

5 What no such passage may one reply? Surely I mistake. For does not Mr Still.
in his Account. Part. 1. c. 8. ^blot page after page to prove the Church
fallible, and by express Scripture also? I answer, he touches not the
difficulty we here insist on, but ^uggles all along. We require one plain Text
whereby the Christian Church is proved fallible. And he gives this Title to
his. 8. Chapter. The Churches How the Dr juggles in his Account.
Infallibility not proved from Scripture; whereas this or the like Title, could
he have made it good, had bin to the purpose. The Churches fallibility proved
by Scripture. That first Title only gives occasion (and he does no more) to
interpret and gloss such Scriptures as are usually alleged for the Churches
Infallibility, but the second, would have obliged him to produce positive
Scripture whereby that Oracle is proved fallible. This he waves and must wave,
because there is no such Testimony in the whole Bible* You will say if the Dr
makes it ou^ that the Churches Infallibility is no^ proved by Scripture, He^
evinces Her fallible. Very false Doctrine, for the Church was proved Infallible
before Scripture appeared in the world, an^ yet is proved infallible
independently of Scripture; But let this pass. How will the Dr make it out,
that Scripture proves not the Churches Infallibility* whilst I allege
Testimonies as plain for this Catholic Tenet, as the Dr ca^ produce for any
fundamental Article o^ Christian Faith? For example Chri^ says. I am with you
always to the ^ of the world? The Conforter the Holy Gho^ shall abide with you
for ever. The words as fully express a continual assistance granted the
Successors of the Apostles, and that for ever, as any Text in the whole Bible
proves the Mystery of the Incarnation. Now all the Dr does or can do by way of
Answer to these passages, is after his wonted fashion, to gloss them, as you
may se in his Account P. chiefly 254. And cannot an Arian as nimbly gloss the
strongest Text allegable for the Incarnation? (For example). I and my Father
are one) as the Dr glosses this Text. I am with you always etc. I yield says
the Bishop cited in that page a continual Assistance granted the Apostles and
their Successors in Christ's promises, but in a different degree. For it was of
continual and Infallible Assistance to the Apostles, but to their Successors of
Continual and fitting Assistance, yet not Infallible. Mark the gloss, (no
Scripture God knows) and note likewise, how the Arian keep's him company. I
grant, says he, a unity or Oneness between the Father and Son not in nature or
Essence but in love and affection only, and that is a fitting unity, the other
in nature appears unbeseeming God, yea Impossible.

6 Thus you have two fallible Glossers Dr: Still: and Dr Arian, delivering their
fallible sentiments. But how a poor The Dr and an Arian gloss scripture alike.
Christian, who would fain learn what Christ has infallibly taught, can be one
whit the wiser by his hearing such men talk, is a riddle to me and every one
besides, For I think there is none but can easily argue thus. That fitting
Assistance maintained by you; Mr Dr; which excludes infallible assistance, is
no more Gods express word, or the Doctrine of any Orthodox Church, than that
fitting unity excluding a real unity, maintained by an Arian, is God's word or
the Doctrine of any orthodox Church. Or if it be, produce your Scripture. What
is it then? A conceited gloss which stand's unprincipled by it self. Observe I
beseech you. We enquire whether the Church be not proved Infallible by the
plain sense of Christ's words now cited. I am with you always to the end of the
world. the Dr and his Bishop say no, because Her assistance is a sitting one
but not Infallible. Here is their last proof, and it is no more but their own
weak Assertion, that gives all the strength to the thing which should be
proved, and consequently nothing like Christ's Doctrine that ever stand's firm
upon undubitable Principles. Nay more. That whole blundering discourse held on
by the Dr in his Account. P. 255. amount's to thus much only, that now and then
he hint's at something which should be proved, but never proves it. And were he
only once faulty in this dissatisfactory proceeding, it might pass, but I must
say more to unbeguile those who read the Dr, and make this great truth known to
all Viz. That when he handles these matters of Faith, and either opposes our
Catholic Tenets, or goes about to establish his Protestancy, the beginning,
the progress, and end of his discourse, are naked and destitute of proofs.
Neither Scripture, nor Church Authority speak in his behalf, whence it is that
Cavils, jeers, drollery and impertinent excursions take up the greatest room in
his writings, glosses you have without end, but no Principled Doctrine to gloss
for. How easy were it, had the Dr any thing like a good cause in hand, to prove
his gloss of a fitting but fallible Assistance by Scripture, or Church Doctrine?
But we need not fear, for I tell him when that is done, the Arian will advance
his gloss as far, and altogether as wisely, unhinge one prime Article of
Christian faith.

CHAP. III.
Doctor Stillingfleets Rule and ground of faith, proved no Rule. It lessens not
in the least the Churches Infallibility.

1 OUr Dr by what I read in this first Part, chiefly build's his whole Religion
upon the sufficiency of Scripture, easily understood in Necessaries by a
Faculty that every man has of discerning of truth and falsehood, wherein he
much cleaves to Socinianism, and follows exactly the steps of Mr Chilingworth.
Here and there he recurr's to Gods Grace and to other helps, but says not
plainly what those helps are, neither can he, while his whole endeavor is to
exclude the Church from being the Rule or ground of Faith.

2 In behalf of Scripture he lays down this Proposition. P. 99. Although we
cannot argue against any particular way of Revelation from the necessary
Attributes of God, yet such a way of writing being made choice of by him, we
may justly say, that it is repugnant to the nature of the design and the
Wisdom and Goodness of God, to give Infallible assistance to persons in writing
his will for the benefit of mankind, if these writings may not be understood by
all persons who sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of them in all such
things as are necessary for their Salvation. From this Principle he would
conclude, that if those writings may be understood by all persons, its needles
to rely on any Church (whether fallible or infallible) for our instruction in
necessaries, because Scripture alone without the Church is the Master-Teacher,
and a faculty granted every man of discerning truth and falsehood, which cannot
but hit right upon these necessaries, knows them all.

3 This Principle learnedly refuted by the Ingenious Author of
Errour-Nonplus't. P. 81. supposes what neither is proved Dr Still:rule of Faith
proved no rule.
nor ever shall be made probable. Viz. That an infinite Wisdom and Goodness has
made choice of a Bible only with this design, that his will be known in things
necessary to salvation, which is no more but a vain Supposition: For if eternal
Wisdom besides the means of written Scripture has appointed another far
easier, whereby his will may be known, and without which Scripture cannot be
understood, it is only supposed and not proved, that every vulgar person, who
relies on his private judgment, is secured from error after a sincere
endeavor to find his faith of all necessaries in Scripture alone. And this I
shall evince against the Dr by urging one Argument, proposed in my Two last
Treatises.

^ Cast your thoughts seriously upon those vast multitudes who call themselves
Christians, and observe how they stand divided or parted in Faith. Take these
for example. The Arians, Antitrinitarians, the Manicheans, Protestants and
Papists also. Most certainly all these together, neither believe nor defend the
true Doctrine of Jesus Christ, for they hold plain contradictions, and this not
only in lesser matters esteemed by the Dr unnecessary to Salvation, but in the
most primary Articles of Christian Religion. Some deny Christ our Lord to be
truly the high God, and Consubstantial with his eternal Father. Others to be
truly Man. Some speak well of God's unity, but refuse to own a Trinity of
persons. Others finally submissively yield to these great Mysteries and hold
them as undoubted revealed verities, the belief whereof is necessary to
Salvation, after a due Proposal. Of such Articles I profess to speak, waveing
at present all others, if any be of lower concern, and now propose my Argument.

5 Christ our Lord who delights in no man's perdition, but will's all to be
saved, and come to the knowledge of his revealed truths. 1. Tim. 2. 4. has
either pointed out a clear way, or given some obvious and certain means whereby
these Christians that hold contradictions in the very Necessaries for
Salvation, may be brought to a unity in Faith? Or contrariwise, has not left
any such easy way, or means. If not; Christ is a most uncharitable Savior, who
on the one side obliges us to believe the fundamental Necessaries, yet on the
other, cast's all even the most learned upon an impossibility of ever finding
them, for if the certain means whereby to find what we seek for, fails (as is
now supposed) our enquiry after Necessaries, is merely a lost and fruitless
labor.

6 Doctor Still: who tells us, that God is not wanting in Necessaries to the
Salvation of mankind, thinks, as you have heard, That Scripture pondered by
every man's discerning faculty, without any other infallible Guide, is the best
Teacher, the clearest light, and chiefest means whereby all sincere
Endeavourers may easily attain the knowledge of these Necessaries. First, the
Dr makes here too much have, for he should on this occasion have given in an
exact Catalogue of his Necessaries, these being of so high concern, that if one
be mistaken, or left out of his catalogue which is absolutely Necessary, Faith
faulters, and Salvation depending on Necessary Faith, miscaries also. But our
Dr was wise, and thought it best to sculk in Generalities for fear of being
caught. To be brief, let us suppose the belief of the Incarnation, that is of
Christ's being really true God and true man, may be deservedly called one of the
grand Necessaries for Salvation. If the Dr boggle at this, I know well how to
proceed with him. Thus much supposed.

7 My Argument goes on. The Learned Socinians, the learned Arians My Assertion
proved.
with others, read and ponder the same Scripture you read Mr Dr. They want no
more the Faculty of discerning between Truth and falsehood then you. They
pretend to have as much of Gods grace as you can pretend to, and are as loath to
damn themselves by maintaining a wilful error against Scripture, as you. Yet
this matter of fact is evident, That they plainly contradict you in the belief
of Necessaries, and so do other most learned Christians also. What redress
now? Where have we the means prescribed by Christ to make us all of one Faith
in this one Necessary already Specified? Scripture you se abused, by you or the
Arian breed's these dissentions, though none yet knows by your Rule who is in
fault, and therefore can be no fit means to end them, for the sense of it in
the matter now proposed, is the only thing in controversy. This ground failing,
all sincere endeavor to learn what that book teaches without more help, fail's
also.

8 Because the Drs Faith is as much unknown to me as his person, (by some hints
I guess it to be a very odd one) I will press my Argument farther, and demand.
Whether, if a learned Arian, after an exact perusal of Scripture, makes this
sincere judgment by his discerning Faculty, that the high God head of Christ
is neither revealed in that book nor worthy belief, he may boldly abjure
Christ, God and man, and yet be saved? In like manner I ask, whether, a learned
Protestant, if after a serious reading he judges that Christ is truly God and
believes quite contrary to the Arian, may be saved also? In case the Dr say,
all these, though of a most opposite belief concerning Necessaries may attain
Salvation (and I verily think his Principles carries him A difficulty proposed
concerning necessaries.
to that desperate concession) with what conscience can he oblige Christians
under pain of damnation to believe Christ's Godhead, as a revealed verity most
necessary to Salvation? For in real truth it is not so, because men professing
Christianity may be saved without that belief, and if Salvation may be had,
though this Mystery be with contempt rejected, it follows, that nothing of
Christian Doctrine can be judged more Necessary, and so the Turks belief of one
God, will be Faith enough to save all. I might here add more, and tell you,
that the ancient Church most injuriously censured the Arians as Heretics
liable to damnation, upon their denying Christ's Godhead, for that denial, in
the supposition made, is not damnable.

9 Perhaps the Dr will say. Some only of these open Dissenters who hold
contradictions in Necessaries are in the right way to Salvation, but others
not, because his Rule is neglected, for some out of slothfulness or for want of
God's grace, endeavor not sincerely to know the Scriptures meaning in such
matters. If this be his reply, the difficulty proposed return's again as
vigorously as ever. We therefore ask by what clear way or means (Christ most
certainly has afforded means) can a serious Seeker after Necessaries, discern
between these sincere not erring Christians, and those others who err? Unless
these be easily distinguished, unless it be known to what particular Church
those first belong, under what Pastors they live, what sure Guides they rely
on; And the second misled be likewise pointed out as perverse and negligent, an
Enquirer after Necessaries may as well close with the Arian and believe as he
believes, as ioyn with the most Orthodox Christian in the world. The reason
hereof is evident, for to know only in a general way that some Christians have
a right belief, and others not (while all of a different faith profess to
believe right) can never bring any to this determinate judgment. These are the
sincere Believers, Those others easily pointed out, are not. And without this
particular None can know by the Drs rule who are sincere believers, who not.
distinguishing knowledge, Necessaries wholly out of our reach, are (as if they
were not) useles and unprofitable; An Instance will give more light. One is
assured that some craftily devise to take away his life, but after much Enquiry
knows not in particular who it is, for all ^rofess the dearest friendship
imaginable, (as all profess themselves right in the belief of Necessaries.)
Can this man avoid the mischief intended, by virtue of a general knowledge,
that some would destroy him? It is impossible. This is our very case Mr Dr.
Either you or the Arian intend mischief to the Christian world. The one or
other would bereave us of life, Faith I mean Necessary for Salvation, but by
your Rule we know not particularly which of the Two go about to ensnare us,
both of you cannot be supposed invincibly ignorant in a matter of so great
consequence. Say now by what means can a diligent Enquirer know in particular
the man that intend's our ruin? Shall we put the Bible into both your hands and
bid you clear the cause there? It is mere labor lost, you may wrangle till
both be tired, and all tired that hear you, yet you are where you began in a
Labyrinth, nothing is ended the way, nothing concluded. Will you say the Arian
wants Gods grace? He verily judges you want it more, and wh^ is to be believed?
Will you say the learned Socinians or Arians are invincibly ignorant concerning
Necessaries? They will cast that foul aspersion upon yo^ and your Party. And
who know^ what is true here? Will you accu^ them of negligence in searching
Scriptures? They recriminate as boldly, and with good reason, for their books
show them more versed in Scripture then you, that being made their only study?
But whether you or they rightly understand Scripture, is yet a secret not
knowable by your Rule.

10 By what is said you se the disconsolate condition all zealous Seekers after
truth are left in. The Guidance of an Infallible Church is set naught by. The
necessary truths for salvation, cannot, as we have proved, be known by
Scripture only? The unnecessaries, say ^ou, need not to be known, Therefore ^en
may get to Heaven without faith ^ad of either of Necessaries, or unnecesaries,
that is, as I take it, without any faith at all.

11 You may se. 2. The force of my argument hitherto proposed by these
^terrogatories. Please to reflect a little. ^ it true, that Christ our Lord who
will's ^ to be Saved has afforded means ^th easy and certain, whereby
Necessa^s to Salvation may be known? It is ^e, that innumerable learned men of
a ^ite different belief, after an exact ^usal of Scripture are at high
dissentions about these Necessaries? Is it The force of my Argument, yet more
illustrated.
true, that all these cannot be supposed voluntarily to damn themselves by
impiously imposing a false sense on God^ word? Is it true, that no few among^
these many, wrong the most suprea^ Verity, and believe what God never revealed?
Is it true, that none ca^ yet distinguish by Scripture alone or a^ private
discerning faculty, who at this v^ry day do this wrong, or Contrarywi^ are
right in the belief of Necessaries* Is it true, that if every private man ^
sufficiently taught by reading Scriptu^ only, all recourse to our Spiritual
Guid^ though appointed by Christ to instr^ us, becomes useless and
unprofitable* If these particulars already laid forth, ^ manifestly proved, as
I am sure they a^ Dr Still: Rule for the finding out Nec^saries by Scripture
and the sincere ^deavour of private men, is not only ^ slight Error, but in a
matter of great^ consequence intolerable, yea and dre^ful upon this account,
that it enlighte^ none in the search after Necessaries ^ cast's all upon an
impossibility of find^ what they seek for. Now we proc^ to another Argument.

12 Admit Scripture were as plain^ the Dr can wish, Admit also that ^ may be
understood by all Christians, who sincerely endeavor to know its meaning in
Necessaries. A great difficulty remain's concerning Jews and Gen^ils. Viz. How
such Aliens from Christ may be gained to believe the Necessaries we speak of? I
ask therefore, has Christ afforded means to reclaim these from error or no?
If not, God contrary to the Dr's assertion is wanting in Necessaries, and
consequently, no man can prudently labor for their conversion? If means be
allowed, that most evidently cannot be Scripture. Perhaps the Dr will say his
Rule above, belong's not to Jews and Heathens but to Christians only. If this
be his Answer, ^ shall by Gods assistance hereafter clear^y show, that, that
rational Evidence for Christian Religion whereon the Dr re^ies, avail's just
nothing to the Conver^ion Neither the Drs rule, nor his rational Evidence
avail's to the Conversion of Jews and Gentiles.
of either Jews or Heathens. Here ^ am to prove that Scripture is not the
means. First because such men after their reading it, slight and contemn all
that Christ and his Apostles taught, and one reason of their contempt, as a Jew
^tely observed, is grounded upon the ^orrid dessentions amongst Christians
^thanks be to Luther and Calvin for them) concerning the canon and sense of
Scripture. Who, said he, can move me to believe in Christ by Scripture, while
some called Christians deny his Godhead, Others his humane nature, some say his
body is really present under a wafer, Others deny that, and thus, forsooth,
Scripture must prove both parts of the Contradiction? Again though Scripture
were supposed clear in Necessaries, it is yet far enough from being a self
Evidence, as to the Divine Truth, to the infallibility, or the plain sense of
these Necessaries. Nay, who can know by Scripture which and how many the^
Necessaries are? For example, I think S. John record's a Necessary, when ^
tells us. The Word is made flesh, yet by ^ bare reading and pondering the
words, ^ cannot without more light peremptorily avouch, that they contain a
Necessary for Salvation, or that they evidence to me ^ Divine infallible truth,
much less can I sa^ the sense of them is as I judge, while w^se Christians so
highly at contest about the sense, that they maintain open contradictions. And
this opposition alon^ upheld by the judgments of private me^ very learned,
makes the Truth and Inf^libility of every Revelation a thing only doubtful. and
conjectural. All this being undeniable,

13 I say first, if a true belief of the Divine word made flesh be a necessary
for Salvation; and if the Truth, the Infallibility, or sense of the Revelation
whereby the Mystery is attested lies dark, (yea impossible to be found out by
Scripture alone) one of these two things inevitably follow. Viz. That the wise
Providence of God has either appointed some oracle distinct from Scripture to
discover that yet concealed Infallible truth and sense also, or that Christ is
wanting in Necessaries to Mankind. Now that not only Truth but an Infallible
Divine truth, and the genuine sense of Gods Revelation are objects of faith
when we believe Necessaries, is most undeniable, unless one will say that we
believe truths, but abstract or regard not, whether they be Divine and
Infallible truths, we believe the words of Scripture without their sense etc.

14 I say. 2. There is an Oracle appointed by God to declare the Truth the
Infallibility, and sense of every revealed Necessary, and prove my Assertion.
The The necessity of an Infallible living Oracle.
end of Divine Revelation is to settle in all faithful minds a firm belief
concerning the Truth, Infallibility, and meaning of every revealed Necessary
(for why does God reveal truly and infallibly but to beget in us true and
Infallible ^aith?) But Scripture it self evidences not this Divine truth,
Infallibility, and meaning, nor tell's us which are Necessaries, therefore an
Oracle appointed by God, is both empowered and obliged to declare these
particulars certainly and Infallibly. I say Infallibly, for if it faulter but
in one, or give us only weak Topics and doubtful probabilities, the end of
God's Infallible Revelation is frustrated, and our Faith can be no more but
wavering and uncertain, that is, no Faith at all. This Argument I urged against
the Doctor, Reas: and Religion. Disc. 2. c. 19. n. 2. 3. But no answer from him
yet.

15 I Argued 2. what ever Necessary for Salvation is proposed doubtfully and
fallibly, may by virtue of that proposal be a fiction and false, But a
Necessary thus doubtfully proposed, appears not like to one of God's
infallible revealed Necessaries (for what God reveal's is infallibly true)
therefore as doubtfully proposed, it appears a changeling only, a fallible
truth, wholly unfit to support Divine Faith. Some will say it is yet in it
self a Divine truth, though proposed fallibly. Who knows that? If neither
Scripture, nor Oracle distinct from Scripture, nor all the Doctors and Pastors
on earth can infallibly avouch that S. John spoke a Divine Infallible Truth
when he said. The Word is made flesh, much less can they ascertain any of the
sense of these Infallible and moral Certainty imply a difference.
words, or evince that they contain a Necessary for Salvation. One may yet
reply. The Truth, the Infallibility and sense of these words are morally
certain, and faith of Necessaries requir's no more. To Answer, I suppose, that
moral certainty as it is distinguished from Infallible certainty may in rigor
be false, or if not; that moral, and Infallible certainty import the very same
thing, or degree of certainty. Thus much supposed. I ask, when we affirm, that
God has revealed the Mystery of the Incarnation in Scripture, do we say, he
has told us that Secret by a Revelation, which because only morally certain,
may be false or a lie? Its blasphemy to judge so, for all that the first verity
speaks, is most Infallibly certain.

16. Or contrary wise, do we say that Divine Faith terminated upon the
Revelation, though likely to be true, is yet because only morally certain,
possible to be false or a lie? Grant this, and it follows that, that high
perfection of Infallibility intrinsic to Divine Revelation lies out of sight,
and in order to Faith is, as if it were not, and therefore can have no
Influence upon belief. The reason hereof is manifest, for although we know if
God Speak, he speak's infallibly, yet all the men on earth cannot know
infallibly by Faith, or by any other act previous to faith, that his infallible
Revelation engaged in this Mystery, assert's it, or is certainly in being,
because the best and surest certainty men can attain in this life A moral
certain Faith which may be false is not Faith.
of any Revelation is only Moral and may be false, But such a knowledge
determin's none without fear and hesitancy to judge absolutely that God speaks
infallibly, or that he speak's as beseem's God, for our Salvation. By this
short Discourse you se, it is in effect the very same to say. God reveal's not
infallibly any one Necessary, as to say, we neither know nor can believe that
he reveal's it infallibly. For what strength or virtue can that perfection of
Infallibility impart to faith, if none can assent to it as it is infallible, or
apply it to his intellectual Faculty, but only by a moral certain Faith, which
may be false? Who ever desires more of this subject may peruse Reas: and Relig:
Disc: 2. c. 15. Where I show that neither God, nor Christ (God and man) nor
Apostle, nor Orthodox Church ever patronized a certainty in matters of Divine
Faith which may be false, nor to my knowledge, did ever any Heterodox Christian
content themselves with it in such Tenets as they held Essential, or were with
them matters of Belief. I proved. 2. n. 11. That none but Eternal Truth it
self who is the first Revealer, the Apostles, and the Roman Catholic Church
which proposes the high Mysteries of Faith, can give Infallible assurance of
their being infallible Divine Truths

17 Now this Church evidenced by Supernatural wonders, (neither Prophet or
Apostle had ever greater) is the Infallible Oracle I have hitherto pointed at
in general Terms only. Her Conversions, Miracles, and other public Signatures
of Gods infinite Power and Wisdom whereby she is proved God's Oracle, are
particularly declared Reas: and Relig: Disc: 3. c. 15. And her Infallibility is
amply evinced in three whole Chapters. Disc. 2. c. 14. 15. 16. But I know not
how it falls out, Dr Still: has waved all my Arguments and not answered one.

18 After a full consideration had of what is proved in this one Chapter, all
ingenuous Readers will, I think, conclude with me, that never wise man made
such a foolish Choice or exchange of means for Salvation as this Dr has done.
Observe I beseech you. Instead of Infallible certainty terminated upon Gods
Revelation, he is so strait hearted, that nothing is allowed by him but a great
moral probability which may be false. In lieu of an Infallible Church which
plainly declares her Necessary Doctrine, he thrusts into The Drs foolish Choice,
and exchange of Principles.
our hands a Bible most certainly obscure, and in place of the Guides of the
Church who are by Christ's ordination to teach, he substitutes his own fallible
discerning Faculty, or the private Judgment of all the Illiterate persons in
his Parish. These must read Scripture, gloss and interpret Scripture, and when
that is done, all of them like Quakers, after some few humms and pauses, may
believe what they think is true, but not one amongst them shall ever know this
way, That God speak's in Scripture as he thinks and judges. Pray tell me. What
if some of the Doctors own Auditors with their sincere and serious endeavor
made concerning Necessaries, dissent from him? What if they undervalve his
private discerning faculty, and prefer their own, quite opposite to his? May
both he and they hold contradictions in the most essential Points of Faith, and
be saved? If the Dr has not such Latitudinarians, I am sure there are a world
of them in England. Be it how you will, his Principle is not only unsound, but
pernicious also, and distructive to Christian faith, as is now proved.

19 You may here expect that I solve the Dr's Arguments alleged in behalf of
his Principle, or 13 Proposition, cited above, I shall briefly touch some few
though its scarce worth the pains, for they fall of themselves to nothing by
what is said already. The rest I leave to his learned Adversary. N. O. and
could have wished to have seen in the Dr's two last little Books something that
bear's the face of an Objection against the Churches Infallibility, but he is
wary and knows well to shuffle, when need is.

CHAP. IV.
Doctor Still: Arguments answered. His unintelligible iumbling discovered. A
word briefly of the ground of the Churches Infallibility. The Churches Guides
teach infallibly.

1 THe Dr P. 100. demand's whether Christ our Lord and the Evangelists may not
justly be charged with not speaking the will of God plainly, if those who heard
them understood not their Doctrine? I Answer first, in case of not
understanding, they had infallible Teachers at hand for their further
instruction and made use of them: you, good Dr, have none such. I Answer. 2. It
import's little to our present purpose, whether they understood or no without
more light, when Christ for example said. I and my Father are one while
Christians both now, and in former Ages highly differ about the sense of that
speech, and cannot certainly say, this is God's true meaning, or that the words
are his without an Infallible Teacher. But what, may one reply, can we infer
because some mistake the sense of Scripture, therefore all do so? No truly; but
this Inference is good, if some mistake and others not, its Necessary to have
the mistaken clearly distinguished from the sincere Believers, otherwise a
Seeker after truth, may as well become an Arian as a sound orthodox Christian.
The Question therefore is how, or by what means this severing the faithful
from the misled, wholly necessary for Salvation, may be exactly done without
erring?

2 The Dr. P. 101. most tediously rambles on to no purpose at all. Is not
Christianity, says he, therefore highly recommended to us in the new Testament,
because of the perspicuity, wherein the Doctrins and Precepts thereof are
delivered? And yet after The Dr is to show what Christianity among so many
Dissenters, is commended in Scripture.
this, cannot the most Necessary parts of it be understood by those who
sincerely endeavor to understand them? To answer this mere nothing, it is
enough to ask. What Christianity is commended to us for its clearness and
perspicuity? Is it Arianism, Nestorianism, or Protestanism? It little, God
knows, avail's to know in General that some Christians are right in the
belief of the Scriptures most necessary Part, while no man can say to what
Church they belong, or who they are? 2. It is most evident, notwithstanding the
Scriptures supposed perspicuity, that very learned grossly err in the prime
Necessaries for Salvation, and do all these clearly se the right meaning of
it? Here the Dr is obliged to tell us, who are the blind or misled, and which
he ever unluckily waves, how those he call's sincere Endeavourers may be
distinguished from others supine and negligent? And they ought to be known in
the Dr's Principles, for if the discerning FAculty in every man can easily find
out the necessary truths for Salvation by reading Scripture, it may, I hope,
more easily discover the open Professors of these truths, or that Christian
Society where such truths are taught. 3. Suppose Scriptures were writ for this
end to teach all Necessaries, how can the Dr prove, that the search after them
is committed to every private man's erring changeable Faculty? Why not as well
to the Pastors and Doctors of that Church, whereof private men are members? Now
(and here arises an insuperable difficulty) what if these private men highly
dissent from their Pastors concerning Necessaries (five or six for example in
Holborn from Dr Still? Those deny Christ's Godhead which he believes) Both
produce Scriptures and sense them differently, who is to yield in this contest,
the Dr to his Hearers, or they to the Dr?

3 This difficulty the Doctors worthy Adversary proposes with reference to the
Church Governors, and ask's whether these may not be presumed to understand
the Scriptures meaning in order to Necessaries, as well as ordinary Rusticks,
and if these be supposed to use a sincere endeavor in their pondering
Scripture, much more may we suppose it not wanting to the Guides of the Church?
And are we not here again, says. N. O. arrived at Church Infallibility? Se the
Drs first part. P. 138.

4 Never was man more entangled in hammering out a solution to any Argument The
Dr much entangled, in Solving a difficulty
than our Dr is here. First he wishes N. O. had kept to his own expressions and
not forced in that term of Infallibility, then to divert the Reader with
nothing, he repeat's again his whole 13 Proposition, and because he well
understand's not what is meant by men being infallible in Necessaries, he makes
it capable of three several senses. 1. That men are infallible in judging of
Necessaries to Salvation. Or. 2. That they are infallible in teaching others
what are Necessaries to Salvation. These two meanings, the Dr rejects, and yet
approves a third. Viz. Men are infallible in believing such things as are
Necessary to Salvation. 1. e. That such is the Goodness of God and the
clearness of Scriptures, that no man who sincerely desires to know what is
necessary to Salvation shall be deceived therein. Yet more. Though, says he, I
know no reason for useing the term Infallibility thus applied, yet the thing in
it self I assert in that sense, And what now can be inferred from hence but
that the Guides of the Church, supposeing the same sincerity shall enjoy the
same privilege?

5 If all this be not an unintelligible jumbling, I never read any. Pray
reflect, Men are infallible in believing such things as are Necessary for
Salvation, and yet are not infallible in judging of these Necessaries. How can
they infallibly believe Necessaries and not infallibly judge of them by that
very infallible assent they give to Necessaries? Again, They are infallible in
believing Necessaries, but not infallible in teaching others the Necessaries to
Salvation. What is this to say? Cannot men commissioned to instruct others,
teach that infallibly which they believe infallibly? The Dr believes infallibly
the high God head in Christ, cannot he open his mouth and convey infallibly
this Truth to others capable of believing infallibly, were he lawfully sent to
Preach?

6 Now if by those obscure Terms, What are Necessaries to Salvation, he only
mean, that none can tell How many Necessaries are, he speak's a truth in his
own Principles, but nothing to the present purpose, for here we only enquire,
whether the Guides of God's Church, are not empowered to deliver infallibly so
much as one particular Necessary which they believe infallibly? No, says the
Dr, because Scripture is so clear in Necessaries, that no man who sincerely
desires to know them, shall be deceived. I answer first. Were it ten times
clearer, the perspicuity hinder's not these Guides from declaring infallibly
what Scripture speaks infallibly? The most that can be inferred from hence
(were all true as its false) is, that the Churches Guides need not to declare
any thing; but that their declaration therefore ceases to be infallible, shall
never be probably made out. 1 Answer. 2. The Dr grossly mistakes, for most
evident experience teaches, that thousands and thousands called Christians are
deceived, who sincerely desire to know what is Necessary to Salvation. Is it
not manifest, as I said above, that the Arians, Pelagians etc. Or the Dr with
his Partisans, run on in a false belief of Necessaries? This matter of fact
supposed, the Question proposed above return's again. What means has Christ
left whereby all may certainly know the deluded or erring Party? And this
proves the Scripture obscure, or not perspicuous in all Necessaries, unless
the Dr infuses a clarity into it which no man's eyes ever yet saw but his own,
and a few Sectaries with him. The next pretty whimsy is, that he knows no
reason for useing the Term Infallibility, yet i'ft be applied to Infallible
Believers of Necessaries he asserts it in that sense. Is not this right as it
should be? He has no reason for useing the Term, but great reason to use the
thing signified by the term. Let this pass, the worst is yet to come.

7 The Guides of the Church, says he, P. 141. Supposing the same sincerity,
shall enjoy the same Privilege with Rusticks: That is, they may believe
Infallibly as Rusticks do, yet none can Teach Infallibly. First, this Answers
not my difficulty above, when I asked, if these Guides and the Illiterate under
their charge ponder Scripture, and use all sincere endeavor to understand its
meaning, yet mainly differ in the belief of Necessaries, what remedy in such a
case? Is not our Dr obliged to propose some fair easy means whereby these
Guides and people may be united in one faith, or at least to tell us, on which
party (whether Pastors or People) the blame lies, to the end all may avoid
them? Scripture most evidently makes not the blamable known, nor unit's all in
one Faith. An infallible Church is rejected, the discerning Faculty of
dissenting men run's, as we se, contrary ways. Therefore all may believe, as
they Judge, whether true or false, or suspend their belief until Dr Still:
lays down a better rule. To that other part, I say, the Guides of the Church
can teach infallibly the Necessaries they believe (and I still insist upon
Necessaries only) The reason is given already. To believe the Infallible Truth
of a Divine Revelation expressing a Necessary, is absolutely necessary to
Salvation; but this, neither Scripture it self, nor the discerning faculty of
any fallible man can declare or make known; therefore the Guides of The reason,
why the Guides of the Church teach infallibly.
the Church empowered by Christ to instruct (qui vos audit me audit) are to
declare the Truth, the Infallible truth, and sense of every Revelation,
relating to Necessaries. Now further. If this declaration be so fallible that
it may be false, neither Jews nor Gentiles nor Christians, yet seeking after
these main truths, can come to any acquiescency. For what have they to lean
upon in the least degree, Satisfactory? While fallible men agitate the cause,
fallible Discourses carry it on, and fallible Principles are the only support
of all that is, or can be controverted? Please to se this Argument further
enlarged. Reas: and Relig: Disc. 2. c. 16. n. ^8. whereunto our good Dr
return's no Answer.

8 Next vouchsafe to cast an eye upon his. 147 page, and consider how lamely he
handles a matter of greatest importance. We are, Says Dr Still: far from
denying all reasonable and just Authority to be given to the Guides of the
Church. Very general talk. Perhaps that Authority must be only reasonable which
he judges reasonable. But of what Church does the Gentleman speak here? The
Arians and Protestants have their dissenting Churches, will you have the Arians
follow their Guides and the Protestants theirs? Herein he resolves nothing, but
sometimes remit's us to the Primitive Church which breeds endless disputes,
because we yet agree not, what that Church taught, nor shall ever learn, but by
the voice and Tradition of the present Catholic Church. Have yet patience to
hear the Dr. We say that their Authority (that is of the Guides of some
Church, but God only knows which it is) not being absolute, is confined to
some known rule. O, this Rule would do us noble service, but the mischief is,
our shuffling Dr clap's it under lock and key, like a lewel worth hiding. You
have it by the name of some known Rule though no body yet knows what it is, or
where to find it. He cannot in this place mean Scripture, for its sense is most
unknown, and the bare letter, as we have seen, causes open hostility, no less
between the Guides of the Church and refractory subjects, than The Drs general
talk of unknown rules, enlightens none.
amongst the Guides of two dissenting Churches. In a word, If Dr Still: shall
please to lay down a plain certain rule, whereby all dissenting Christians may
be brought to one true Faith, even in Necessaries, he will deserve immortal
renown, and do more then all the Heretics since Christ's time have done. But to
perform this his intrigues concerning Some Rule and no man knows what Rule,
can never do his business, whereof more presently. Now listen well to the end
of his Discourse. Where there is a rule for them (he mean's the Guides of the
Church) to proceed by, there is a rule for others to judge of their
proceedings, and consequently, men must exercise their judgments about the
matters they (the Guides) determine, whether they be agreeable to that rule or
not?

9 Still we are put off with general words. One rule it seems is allowed the
Guides of the Church to proceed by, an other, if the Layity dissent, to judge
of their Guides proceedings. Yet no man must know in particular what these
Rules are. Is not all this tattle something and nothing; empty stuff without
substance? But say on. What if these two Imagined Rules breed everlasting jarrs
between the Guides, and the Guided, who is to yield, and to whom? Or rather we
ask, what means has Christ appointed to end these differences by? If he say no
dissentions can arise either about Necessaries or any other matter of Faith in
case his two yet unknown rules be followed. I answer it is impossible in the
Dr's Principles to prescribe or to set down clearly any such Rules. I prove the
Assertion.

10 Put case, that the Guides of two dissenting Churches, Arians for example
and Protestants, contest about Necessaries for Salvation, or any other matter
of Faith (the like is, if dissentions arise between the Guides of either
Church, and lay men under their charge). All these jarring Spirits, as we now
suppose, are fallible, and may err in what they judge concerning their own
Tenets. Now if the supposed rules pitched upon be as fallible, a like faulty,
and as liable to error as these Contenders are, they can never rectify them,
nor bring any to a settled union in Faith; But all the Rules assignable in the
Doctors Principles (be they what you will) are thus faulty and fallible,
therefore most unfit to set any man right in Faith, for a fallible crooked rule
applied to the fallible crooked judgments of others at high dissentions
concerning belief, regulates no better than if the blind endeavor to lead the
blind. Pray tell me, did you ever know wise Man, after his hearing two
litigious persons at earnest contention about Meum and tuum, act the part of a
Judge, by Saying. My masters be gone, you are both wranglers. Here you have the
very case of all Heretics laid open. I speak boldly, and am ready to defend my
Assertion before the whole world. What ever Rule Dr Still: can make use of for
the ending of differences between him and Arians (for example) what ever Judge
he dare appeal to in this contest, can pronounce no other sentence but this. Be
gone you are all wranglers. The wisest on earth is not able to say more to your
never endless quarrels The reason a Priori of my Assertion and all hitherto
said, is thus. The certain Rule which regulates Faith can neither be taken In
the Drs Principles, no rule is assignable to end contentions.
from any controverted passage in Holy Writ (for that only yeild's uncertainty)
much less from the fallible and errable conceptions of those who believe
contradictions; Here is all the Dr can pitch upon for his unknown rules.
Tradition fail's him, if all the Churches in the world be fallible, and have
actually erred, for who dare, even upon moral certainty, trust the Tradition of
condemned Heretics, or of an Idolatrous Church, as in the Dr's Opinion the
Roman is? The Fathers are fallible, and all of them, or the very most, infected
with Popery. The Doctrine of the Primitive Church in controverted matters
afford's no certain indisputable rule. Long therefore may the Dr overlook his
Note-books before he find a rule for the Churh Guides to proceed by, and for
others to judge of their proceeding.

11 Perhaps, his, 266 page will give more light, where we are told, That the
supposition of Guides in Religion does depend of some common Principles of
Religion, that may be known to all, and that within the compass of these plain
duties, lies the capacity of persons judgeing of their Guides, but if they
carry them out of this beaten way, or tell them, they must put out their eyes
to follow them the better, what reason can there be, that any should commit
themselves to the absolute conduct of such unfaithful Guides? Once more, you
have here the like dull, phlegmatic, and general talk, you had just now,
nothing particularized, nothing proved. And all is tacitly to countenance that
foul illegal Schism, and open rebellion made against the Church, when a few
desperate Novellists headed by two ungracious wretches, Luther and Calvin,
condemned her of error, and this before no other Tribunal but themselves who
were the Rebels. Here one common Principle of Religion (and a main one too)
which obliges Christians to obey their lawful Superiors, was against all
conscience shamefully violated. Here the beaten way wherein millions had walked
peacefully to Heaven, became deserted, and in lieu of that, Meanders, By-ways,
and intricate cross windings, were made choice of. Now the time was when people
(sure blind with too much light) went about to pull out the eyes of their own
ancient Guides, and saw more then ever the world saw before these new eyes were
set in their heads. We need not, Dr, to stand indenting with you for these
truths, They are as clear as the Sunshine; But as you sow, you may hope to
reap, you have cast the seeds of dissension into our once most Catholic
England, and I tell you before hand (look to it) you will find confusion at the
harvest, and most likely sooner. In the mean while, I tell you again, there is
not one true Principle within the bounds of Christian Religion, that
capacitates particular persons to judge their Guides proceedings, Name this
Principle and I yield up the whole cause. Answer if you can. And thus much of
the Drs Rules.

12 Other petty objections I find in this first part scattered up and down
scarce worth reflection. P. 109. His Adversary. N. O. quotes that Text of S.
Peter. Epist. 2. Chap. 3. 16. where its said, There are certain things in S.
Paul's Epistles hard to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable deprave,
as also the rest of Scriptures to their own perdition. These things being
certainly of consequence, if perdition follows the depravation, we ask what is
become of Dr Still: discerning truth from falsehood by Scripture A simple Answer
of the Dr, refuted.
only, and his discerning faculty? Hear his frivolous answer. But does S. Peter
say that Scriptures are so hard that sober minds cannot learn therein, what is
Necessary to Salvation? Yes Dr, he says it expressly, for some (say I beseech
you who they are) pervert Scripture to their own perdition, that is to
damnation. Now if you quibble about Sober and devout minds, the Arians will
tell you, they are as sober and devout as you, therefore unless you plainly
point out those you call sober minded, you may be as well listed amongst the
perverse as any other, accounted by you depraved or ill minded. Solve this
difficulty if you can.

13 The Dr in his 144. P. cloyes us with other Testimonies of Scripture no more
to any purpose, than if he had cited the first Chapter of Exodus. Thessal: 1.
2. 12. The people are to hold fast that which is good. Very true. But are they
here commanded to hold fast to what their private judgment tell's them, and
not to adhere to Apostolical Doctrine, and the Spirit of the Catholic Church?
Acts. 17. 12. They searched Scripture daily whether the things proposed were so
or not. What wonder here, if after S. Paul's large discourse concerning Christ
never heard so fully before, they searched Scriptures and found all true he
taught, having still an Eye more to the Apostles expounding Scripture, than to
their own private judgments? The other passages alleged, For example. We must
not believe every Spirit but try the Spirits etc. We must earnestly contend
for the Faith once delivered. We are to beware of false seducers etc. have no
weight for the Drs intent, unless he show by Scripture that this trial, this
contention, and wariness ought to be done by every man's private judgment only,
without any other rule. O, but there is a stinging Text. John. 7. 17. where our
Savior expressly promises to those that do the will of God, they shall know of
his Doctrine, whether it be of God. Very true. But how shall we discern those
that do the will of God, from others that do it not? Are those the Doers of
Gods will who reject their Guides, and follow their own Judgment in matters
they understand not? Answer Mr Dr.

14 In his 143. P (for I run up and down to find any thing like an Objection)
we are told that all who consider the excellency of Christian Religion cannot
but give it pre-eminence before Judaism and Mahometism. Very true, Mr Dr: yet
you touch not the difficulty, unless you tell us which Christian Religion
amongst so many dissenting Sects, even in fundamentals, may be called the only
true Christian Religion. If Arianism, or Palagianism, or Protestanism, damn men
as deeply as Judaism, what matters it, if one profess Judaism? I assure you
Doctor, I have heard some great A fallible Doctrine which may be false,
destructive to Faith.
men say, that if all who profess Christian Religion believed fallible Doctrine
which may be false, they would not give a pin to choose, whether they were
Jews, Arians; or Protestants. But why have not you in this place or through
your whole large Account, set forth the Excellency of your Protestancy, and
preferred that little late unknown thing, before all other Religion? Some cause
there is of your deep silence, and I have not dissembled it in my
Advertisement. You really know not what to say of it.

15 P. 132. We have this Proposition. Infallibility in a body of men is as
liable to doubts and disputes, as in those books from whence only they derive
their infallibility. Sr, if I well understand this some what dark Assertion,
please to tell me. Were not the Apostles an Infallible body of men? And was not
their Infallibility owned as clear from doubts and disputes, when God had
evidenced them by clear visible Signs and Wonders to be his faithful Oracles,
even before their writing Scripture? Or did theyderive their Infallibility from
the books they wrote? The true answer to these demands will be our Answer. The
Church is as rationally proved an Infallible Oracle by her Illustrious signs
and wonders (and appointed by God to teach) as ever any Apostle was, this I
hold clearly evinced in my last Treatise Disc: 3. c. 15. n. 3. and c. 16. n. 5.
If you Mr Dr can except against my proofs, please to speak, for hitherto you
have answered nothing. I show also, Prot: without Princi: c. 8. n. 2. 3. That
God neither will, nor can, permit a false Religion to be more speciously
illustrated by rational Signs, then his only true Religion is. Were this
possible, he The true Church made discernable, from all false Sects,
would (contrary to Truth and Goodness) oblige reason to embrace a false
Religion. If therefore the only true and infallible Religion be manifestly
discernable or made known by the luster of Supernatural Motives from all false
Sects, we have enough. For it is most evident that our ever marked and
Signalized Catholic Religion, illustrated by Miracles, and approved by the
public judgment of the very best and most learned who have lived since the
Creation of the world, is the undoubted true Religion, where we learn what
Christ taught, and what Doctrine the Apostles preached. And thus Dr Still:
imperfect discourse P. 143 where he gives the pre-eminence to Christianity in
general, above Judaism, Mahometism etc. is driven home to that one only
Religion amongst Christians, which must save Souls.

16 We say: 2. That this evidenced Catholic Church proves her self infallible
Independently of Scripture, as the Apostles did before they wrote their sacred
Books. It is-true, after those writings are proved Divine to us upon Church
Authority, we Argue from them, and evince her Infallible, but this only is done
upon the Supposition of that proof, and not before; For we say and make it out
clearly in the Treatises now cited, That the Church being the light of the
world, and a City placed upon a conspicuous And proved infallible without
recourse to Scripture.
mountain, demonstrable as S. Austin teaches by every man's finger, is the
Primum and indemonstrabile principium, the very first and indemonstrable
principle proved by it self and for it self to be Gods Infallible Oracle,
whereof more hereafter. Hence you se. 3. that as the Apostles neither proved
nor derived their Infallibility from the Books they wrote, so we in the first
place (if a true Analysis be made) prove not the Churches Infallibility from
Scripture, but evince this truth upon other Principles as is now declared. But
says Dr Still. It is against all just laws of reasoning to make use of the
Churches Infallibility to prove Scriptures by. Why so noble Dr? I am sure for
the reasons already given, you will be forced to retract this inconsiderate
Assertion. Do not you know first, that the bare letter of Scripture breed's
endless divisions even in fundamentals, not only between man and man, as is
evident by the jarrs you have with Arians, Pelagians etc. but also between God
and man, while all your vehement contentions are driven at last to know,
whether your discerning Faculty, or the Arians hit right upon the meaning of
what God speak's in Scripture, it being most certain that Verity it self
approves not your open contradictions? Who can decide here but an Infallible
Church? Do you not know. 2. That it is more then ridiculous to draw either Jew
or Heathen to believe these contradictious Doctrins as Divine or reasonable,
while neither you nor Arians can ascertain any, that what either of you teach
is from God, or a truth revealed by him? Who ought or can speak here but the
Church? Do you not se. 3. That the clearness of Church Doctrine (universally
known to all, whether Orthodox or others) beget's faith more easily then
Scripture, yet obscure and unsenced? Hence it is, as I noted in my last
Treatise. Disc: 2. c. 16. n. 11. That few or none Question what this Oracle
teaches, as necessary, for that is plain, yet there are endless debates about
the Scriptures meaning, and this only is Gods word, not intelligible in a
hundred passages without the Churches interpretation. 4 As I noted also. The
Infallibility and Truth of every Divine Revelation relating to Necessaries, so
necessarily The Church decides many doubts, not decideable by 'Scripture.'
terminat's Divine Faith, that whoever believes and abstract's (as it were)
from this double perfection intrinsic to what God speak's, believes not,
because God speak's, but upon some other fallible Motive? Now none can
ascertain any, that this or that particular Revelation is true and Infallible
but an Infallible Church only. Therefore you err, Mr Dr in saying, that the
Infallibility of the Church is as liable to doubts as that of Scriptures, if
you speak as you must of the Scriptures genuine Sense, Truth, and Infallibility.

17 The Dr P. 113. proposes one of the rarest objections, ever man (I think)
yet heard of. Had Christ, says he, intended Infallibility as the foundation of
Faith, how easily might all contentions in the world have been prevented, had
he said. I do promise my Infallible spirit to the Guides of the Church in all
Ages, to give the true sense of Scripture in all Controversies which shall
arise amongst Christians etc. Answ. I verily judge, Christ has fully said thus
much. He that hears you, hears me. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against the Church. Pastors and Guides are given to the end, we be not carried
about with every wind of Doctrine etc. But suppose Christ, or any Evangelist had
used your very expression, how easily would you, Sr, have sound a pretty gloss
for it, and told us, That such a promise was, forsooth, only conditional, if
the Guides followed Scripture, or some like whimsy, which phansy might have
suggested. Now tell me, seeing your invention falls so luckily upon new coined
Promises, why have we not in Scripture a promise suitable to your new faith?
Viz. I promise no other Spirit to any but such an one, as may serve for the
moral certainty of belief, which is fallible, and may be false? Or rather
thus. I do promise that who ever read's Scripture and understand's it
according to his private Judgment, though he err's in matters of Faith (yea
even in Necessaries) is yet in the way to Salvation and need's not to consult
any Guide for his better instruction. Thus contentions would have been easily
prevented, and license given every man to believe what he pleased. Such
promises as these would have fitted you right, Mr Dr, but there are none of
them in God's word.

18 P. 150. He thinks to destroy the Evidence of sense, and consequently the
Grounds of Religion, because we believe not that to be bread in the Holy
Eucharist, which sense tell's us is so. Never ancient Church, nor Councils, nor
Pastors nor Doctors, nor any Orthodox Christian pleaded thus for sense, for all
unanimously believed that really not to be bread, which yet in outward
appearance seems bread, as is demonstrated against the Dr. Reas: and Religi: c.
12. 13. Whereunto he never yet returned word of answer, though I solved this
very Objection to satisfy the Gentleman, and told him, that the immediate
Object of sense is not the inward Substance of bread but The object of sense
not destroed in the Holy Eucharist.
color or light with other accidents, and these remain after Consecration
visible, and sensible as before. It is true, reason upon the Suggestion of
sense would judge, what we se to be bread, were it not overawed by a stronger
Principle, which is Gods express Revelation. To this we submit, and our crime
^s that we prefer the words of eternal truth before weak reason, easily
beguiled. ^ray tell me had the Dr seen those ^wo Angels who came to Lot Gen: 19
in the shape of mortal men, had he eat with them at Lots table, would he not
have thought them men like others living in Sodom? But had God then told him by
an express Revelation, they were indeed Angels and not men (which verity is now
known) he would, I hope, have believed God and yielded up his reason to that
Supreme Verity. Thus we proceed in the belief of the blessed Sacrament,
whereof se more Reas: and Relig: Disc. 3. c. 18. n. 4. I shall add hereafter
other considerations little to the Dr's Comfort.

19 Page 151. The Dr would fain know, whether there be not some points of Faith
and parts of our duty so plain, that no Church Authority, determining contrary
ought to be obeyed? I answer were any so plain, as few are in the very
fundamentals of Faith, witness those great Mysteries of the Trinity, and the
eternal Godhead of Christ) the Catholic^ Church cannot by reason of Gods
specia^ Assistance determine the contrary, or contradict it self in any
universal doctrine and therefore that Non-obedience hint^ at, is a Chimaera, or
a thing not at a^ supposeable. It seems our Dr would have the not worshipping
Images to b^ one of his plain delivered points. A gross mistake, as his worthy,
learned Adversary Doctor. T. G. whose works and Person I honor, pithily
demonstrat's in his late excellent book. Catholics no Idolaters Part 1. chiefly
c. 3. and 4. Now because I mention this Reverend man, I cannot but reflect upon
another intolerable mistake of Dr Still:

20 Dr T. G. said in his preface to the Reader. It is a known Maxim That none
can give to another that which he has not himself. If therefore the Church of
Rome be guilty of Heresy, much more if guilty of Idolatry, it falls under the
Apostles Excommunication (Gal. 1. 8.) and so remains deprived of lawful
Authority (mark the words) to use and exercise the power of Orders, and
consequently the Authority of Governing, preaching, and administering
Sacraments, which those of the Church of England challenge to themselves as
derived from the Church of Rome, can be no true and lawful jurisdiction, but
usurped and Antichristian. The plain and obvious An other gross error of the Dr
sense is, He who has no jurisdiction but is deprived of it by the Churches
Censures, cannot give it to another. Neither can he that has no lawful
Authority to ordain, lawfully ordain any, or give Authority lawfully to ordain
others. Now comes Dr Still: in his General Preface to ward off this blow, but
never man did it less dexterously, and we must wholly attribute it to his
little skill in fencing. He tell's us that the council of Trent pronounces
Anathema against those that deny the Validity (observe here also the word
validity) of the Sacrament administered by one in mortal sin, in case he
observes the Essentials of it, and in this gross error he run's on for nine or
ten pages, Citing Author after Author to prove that the Sacrament of Order is
validly given by one in mortal sin, or excommunicated. But what is all this to
Dr. T. Gs. Most true Assertion? That none guilty of Idolatry or Heresy can give
Jurisdiction to any of the Church of England (which they must have from
Catholic Bishops or wholly want it) or empower them to ordain others lawfully,
when they are deprived of all lawful Authority to use o^ exercise the power of
Orders? Hence you se Dr Still: blindness, who argues from the validity of
giving Orders to the lawful giving them, and from the no power of giving
Jurisdiction (the chiefest thing aimed at by D. T. G.) to impart it to men in
England, incapable of all Jurisdiction, by reason of their Heresy. Thus much by
the By, the rest I leave to Dr. T. G. best able to answer. Let us follow our Dr
a little, not long I promise you.

21 In his. P. 174. (for I pass over all that old trash examined a hundred
times over, concerning Liberius, the Bishops of Istria, Pope vigilius, and God
knows who besides, for none of these concern the Churches Infallibility, and
are all threadbare worn out difficulties) I come, I say, to the page now
quoted, where we are told, that of five parts of the Christian world four of
them (Viz. The Nestorians the Iacobits the Greek Church, and Protestants) are
all agreed, That there is no Necessary of living in subjection to the Guides of
the Roman Church, but they are all under their own Guides, which they do not
question will direct them in the right way to Heaven.

22 I am apt to think, Mr Dr, you question it as little, for it seems by this
The Dr seems to patronize the Guides, among known and Condemned Heretiquet.
your odd expression and some other which follow, any thing true or false will
serve the turn, and set men in the right way to Heaven. But say on I beseech
you. Are these dissenting Christians to be listed among such as you call
sincere Endeavourers, who cannot but know what is necessary to Salvation by the
clearness of Scripture? If you affirm; none of them err in Necessaries or the
Fundamentals of Faith, and consequently the Nestorians, Eutychians, and Arians
are in a safe way to Salvation. Would to God, Sr, you would once declare your
self plainly, that we may hereafter know of what belief you are in heart, of
any, or none, or of one as bad as none? Now on the other side, if you number
not these among your sincere Seekers, but account them misled and deceived, to
what purpose do you produce such examples? Is it to tell us, because their
Number is great, you would have them therefore thought of greater esteem, or
more valvable, then the Catholic Church, whereof they were once members, and
from which Church their first Guides (like you) ungraciously receded? This way
of arguing will ruin Christian Religion, for Heathens, Turks, Jews, and
Atheists are far ore numerous then these. O! say you. P. 143. Every man when
come to years of understanding see's upon his own Judgment and reason, an
Excellency in Christian Religion above Heathens Turks etc. This, Sr, is my
Answer. Every man at such years, if he will open his eyes, cannot but se an
incomparable greater luster and Excellency manifest in the Catholic Church, as
Antiquity, Conversions, Miracles, than in all those other Societies, though
called Christians, who abandoned it. It is true they ran out of this Church,
but left behind them Gods own Signatures, Marks, and Signs of true Christianity
upon it still, these they could never rob us of, nor appropriate to themselves,
and therefore (its Gods just judgment upon them) remain as they do, obscure
and contemptible. Perhaps the Dr intended by his instances to give some little
countenance to his Protestancy. If so, I answer. This Protestancy has the worst
luck of all other Sects in the world, its like another Ismael, as it stand's up
against all called Christians, so all are against this Novelty, and discard it
as Antichristian. Neither the Greeks, Abyssins, or Nestorians can endure it,
whereof some of them scarce hold it a Christian Religion. Read Prince Radzivil
in his Ierosoly. Peregrin: Antwerp print. 1614. P. 109. Wherefore I se no
reason, why Protestants should like these men cut off from the Church or seek
patronage And Complement's those that Condemn Protestancy.
from them, for all of them have their Altars, and own the Sacrifice of Mass,
adore the consecrated Host, pray to Saints, and in a word are as great
Idolaters as Papists, to whom our kind Dr with much difficulty grant's
Salvation. Now why such men should be courted, complemented, or thought worthy
to discountenance God's Church, is a riddle to every sound Christian. Yet more.
There are evident contradictions maintained among Nestorians, Iacobits,
Eutychians, Grecians, and others, who pretend to believe Catholic verities.
And here our difficulty proposed above recurr's again, concerning the plain
obvious means left by Christ to bring all these to one unity in faith, and this
the Dr shall never clear without liberty granted every one to believe what is
fancied true, not what God has truly revealed. Judge whether this be a sound
way, or no?

23 Page, 180. Our Dr appeal's to the Doctrine and practice of the truly
Catholic Church in matters of difference between Protestants, and the Church
of Rome. A piece of wise nonsense. Let him first tell us plainly where this
truly Catholic Church was, distinct from the Roman, universal, and Catholic,
before Luther's Schism, and we will stand to Her Judgment, He appeals to a
Church never in being.
but he must not fool us with empty words. Before hand, I tell him plainly
there was no such Catholic Society in being, for all nameable, besides the
professors of our ancient Church, were condemned Heretics. Now if he run up to
the Primitive Church acknowledged by all most Orthodox, let him say without
fumbling, what Protestants hold essentially Necessary to Salvation, and then
prove, that the Primitive Church taught so much Doctrine and no more as
Necessary, and he will dispatch a great piece of work, but I assure him, he
will sooner grow gray, than give satisfaction in this particular.

24 P. 196. Dr Still: says, the places of Scripture which are alleged for an
infallible Judge (or Church) are the most doubtful and controverted of any.
Answ. The proof of this Assertion stand's only upon his own proofless word, and
licenses every Arian to make all the passages in Scripture relating to the most
necessary fundamentals of Faith (the high God head of Christ for example)
doubtful and controverted. For if the Dr by adding his sense and glosses to
such passages as significantly express the Church to be an Infallible Judge,
will have them after his labor idly spent, doubtful and controverted; why
may not an Arian by setting his sense and glosses upon the clearest Text in
holy Writ alleged in proof of Christ's Godhead, make those also doubtful and
controverted? But here is not all. I say in a word, if the Passages in
Scripture usually produced for an infallible The Dr argues against himself
Judge (or the Churches Infallibility) are to be accounted doubtful and
controverted, much more ought those places which the Dr alleges to prove this
Judge fallible (were there any such in Holy writ) to be esteemed in like
manner, doubtful and controverted Hence it follows, that the Dr is at a Non
plus or an end, of all his Arguments against the Church, while he plead's by
Scripture only, for, if none can raise from a doubtful or controverted
Principle any Proof, rationally certain; how will the Dr evince by Scripture
only, that the Church is fallible, or impugn the Infallibility she lays claim
to by this Scripture, which he says, is both doubtful and Controverted?

25 Page 197 He enquires into the Necessity of an Infallible interpretation of
the doubtful places in Scripture and here loses himself, for in my whole life
I never saw such a far fetched rambling discourse as he begins with. P. 197.
which summed up amount's only to this, that you must either believe the Dr
infallible in giving an account of the proceeding of the primitive Church in
this matter, or remain as ignorant as you were before. For my part I dare not
trust the Dr, for by what I have perused, he is horribly out of all sound
Principles. Be it so or no, I am wholly unconcerned in this controversy, having
hitherto only enquired after the means how to understand the sense of Scripture
in such passages as relate to the prime Necessaries of Salvation. The Godhead
of Christ. A Trinity of distinct persons etc. Now when the Dr gives
satisfaction in these particulars, have at him for the rest, In the mean time I
supersede the labor which might be spent, and leave that to the accurate
review of his worthy Adversary N. O. Thus much of the Dr's first part. And it is
more then I was obliged to take notice of, but because I wanted a long time his
second discourse, I chose rather for the little leisure allowed from my other
employments, to make the few reflections you have already, than to be forgetful
of my good friend Doctor Stillingfleet. Now we enter into his second Discourse.

CHAP. V.
Doctor Stillingfleets pretended Answer to E: VVs: Two books, Protestancy
without Principles, and Reason and Religion, showed no Answer, but a mere
shuffling, or palpable digression from the main point handled in those
Treatises. How the Dr shift's off the only difficulty, wherein satisfaction is
required?

1 THere are, as I conceive, two ways of answering a book. The one to follow
an Adversary step by step, the other to reverse his Principles, or at least to
solve such Arguments as the Author judges worth an Answer. If he judge amiss,
or thinks weak arguments strong ones, a Respondent ought fairly to lay forth
their want of strength, and show wherein they are fallacious. The thing I
chiefly aimed at in both Treatises was, as those know who read them, to
vindicate the Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church from the unjust
censure of Sectaries, whether you take it as a large body spread the whole
world over, or consider its Representative in general approved Councils. Dr
Stilling: as appears by his Title undertakes to answer these books, but does
it after a new mode, or the strangest way I ever yet saw in any. He waves all
my Arguments, which I judge, prove clearly the Churches Infallibility, and
entertain's himself with some few Bymatters, little or nothing relating to
this main difficulty.

2 You will perhaps better understand my meaning, if I briefly sum up The
chief Contents in the Drs second Discourse, briefly Collected,
the chief contents of this Doctors idly spent labor, in the second
discourse from his 2. Chapter page 329 to page 433. Thus it is. First he enters
into a serious matter with mere Drollery, and spiteful language. 2. He
transcrib's some parcels of my Doctrine mangled, as he thought best for his own
design, and leaves all as he found it, though here and there he featly
intermingles some scoffs, thought by him pretty lests, and to make greater
confusion, now you find him like a rat nibbling at one of my Treatises, now at
the other, without method or order, and the whole strain of his writing is
either to tell the Reader, what he says without the least shadow of proof,
which directly makes against the Churches Infallibility, or barely to relate
what I assert for it, but replies not at all to the Arguments I chiefly insist
upon, as will presently appear. It is true, about his page. 362 he would fain
batter my Answers to two Objections taken out of his Account, which merely
touch upon a Scholastical point. (How weakly we shall se hereafter) but all
this while not a word comes from him, which directly tend's to prove the Church
fallible, nor can I find any of my Arguments solved. Yet this is the man, that
in his Title Page pretend's to Answer my two books. 3. After some quarrels with
the Supernaturality of Faith, and its obscure tendency, He slip's aside into
another Scholastical point, concerning the Resolution of Faith, and because the
matter of it self is hard (and made harder by his jumbling) he get's into a
Labyrinth of his own making, called the Rational Evidence of Christian
Religion. My chief endeavor shall be to wind him out of it, which would soon
be done, were he better versed in speculative learning.

3 The Dr as I said now, some what waspish, lays aside much of his gravity,
and begins with, Ironies, Mockeries, and bitter language, called by some Jest
earnest, and discharges that rounder shot of Toys, Triffles, and Fancies, very
thick upon me. Is not this hard proceeding? Methinks these men of the new
Gospel are strangely privileged to reproach, when the Of the Dr's Ironies and
bitter Language.
spirit moves. What a gallant lesson had he learned us in the. 5. Page of his
Preface to the former book: Not to revile though he be reviled, and here, weak
man, he breaks his purpose, forget's his lesson and reproaches boldly? And will
you know why? Forsooth, he takes it ill that I joined him in my Title Page with
Atheists, Jews, Turks, and Sectaries. In real earnest, Mr Dr, though I said it
not in plain terms, yet I thought you well deserved the place, but seeing you
resent my putting you after that rabble, you shall in my next book be upermost,
and have a palce before them all. But in God's name what unluckie Spirit light
on you in that deep Exclamation? O! what a pestilent Heretic is this
Stillingfleet. Look to it Doctor. Ridentem dicere verum quid vetat? If you in
raillery make your self heretic, and others judge you one of the worser sort
I will pray for you, but can not clear you of the guilt before you deserve
better. There is more of this rambling. He tell's me. If either of my books
were thrown at his head, he would have enough to defend himself, for they are
very thick and heavy; But how would he defend that precious Pate, were his
voluminous Account thrown after them? I am sure that is thicker, and heavier. To
my great comfort, says he, I never yet saw two such bulky books, whose
Substance might be brought into a less compass, or more full of Tautologies,
and tedious repetitions. A homely complement. I hope, Sr. you except your own
bulkie Account, or ought in all reason to do so, for in my whole life I never
read any thing more stuff't with empty words, and superabounding Tautologies.
To be short, I dare wager ten to one, if ever you and I meet in Holborn, that
for one Tautologie in mine, I will show five in yours, with a pretty addition
of new ones in these your two last Treatises. Now whereas you tell me, the
whole substance of my books lies in this one word, Infallibility, Know, Sr, you
get the worst here, for the whole substance of all you have said, or can say,
confessedly lies in a far weaker word called, Fallibility. Here it seems, the
Dr is willing to leave off his long Tattle, for fear of more Advertisements.
And is it possible, could that harmless and well meant Advertisement wherein
nothing can be found offensive, stir up thus much unruly passion in a Dr? I
know no remedy, yet hope the Preface to this Treatise, will a little calm it.

4 To end. He ierk's me once more, and will need's suppose that Protestancy
without Principles was disposed of to better uses, than to be read, because
forsooth he More jerks yet.
never heard of one man in England, that read it over. A weak proof of a false
supposition. Good Sr, are all truths conveyed to your ears, do not some miss
their way thither? Be it how you will, hear, or pretend not to hear, most
certainly that book was read by many, not only in England, but Ireland also.
Nay more; all the Copies above six hundred (excepting some few seized on) were
in a short time bought up, In so much, that a Gentleman of our Nation, offered
three Crowns for one single Copy, yet could not after long enquiry meet with
one. These truths known to the Printer and others, are sufficient to evert your
false supposition, and your weak proof added to it.

5 And thus much of the Dr's Comical Introduction. If he thinks me too pert or
pleasant with him, I answer. Benedictis si certasset, audisset been. Had not a
fermentation The Dr's vast conceit of himself.
of blood transported him beyond all bounds of common civility, no ill word
should have fallen from me, but when we find a vain Bragger gloriously
enthrown'd in a vast conceit of himself, as if all he treat's with, were
desplicable Mushromes, it is Charity, I think, not to sooth him up in his
folly, but to tell him his own home, as S. Hierome once did an Adversary. Quae
voluisti locutus, quae non vis audire debes. Time I hope may make the Dr wiser.
Let us now go on.

6 I said above Dr Still: answers not directly one Argument proposed by me for
the Churches Infallibility. If I prove the Assertion it follows clearly, that
either he understand's them and will not answer, because he finds them too
strong for him: Or, 2, he cannot answer, because he penetrat's not their force.
Grant the first, he is a mere cheat, and deludes the Reader with a seeming
reply, which is none in substance. Say. 2. He understand's not the force of my
Arguments, and cannot answer, he is unworthy to be dealt with, and ought in
that measure to be despised, as he despises others.

7 Now I prove my Assertion. I say as he relates, P. 331. That without an
Infallible The Dr answers net my arguments.
Church (he means in this present state as I often inculcate) there can be no
certainty of Faith, and have established the Assertion upon these grounds.
Neither the Canon, nor Divinity, nor the Infallible truth, or sense of
Scripture, even in points Necessary to Salvation, can be probably, much less
certainly assured to any in this present state, but by the Authority of an
Infallible Church. To this not a word of answer is, or can be returned by the
Dr.

8 I Assert. 2. As the Dr cites, that the Roman Catholic Church only is God's
Infallible Oracle, and prove it, Reas. and Relig: D. 2. c. 14. n. 10. 11. from
Scripture, Fathers, and most pregnant reason. 1. If any Church be Infallible it
is the Roman Catholic, for all others disclaim the Guidance of an Infallible
living Oracle. 2. As nothing can more discountenance the worth of true
Christianity, than a steadfast persuasion of it is fallibility, or easily being
false; So nothing can fix in us an undubitable belief of Christ's Doctrine, but
an Oracle not liable to error. 3. And chiefly, If no Church be Infallible to
whose Authority Christians must submit, when dissentions arise concerning the
Fundamentals Proofs for the Churches Infallibility.
of Faith, and the genuin sense of Scripture, both Jews and Heathens may most
justly despise Christian Religion, and scorn all our endeavors to make them of
one Faith with us, upon this ground, That none can certainly say, what Doctrine
Christ our Lord or his Apostles taught the world. So it is, Mr Dr, our debates
about the prime Articles of Faith (no satisfactory means to end them, but
Topics and fallible reasoning) are so many, that all taught Doctrine lies like
an undecided Process in law still disputable, and therefore of no credit or
estimation, unless an Infallible Church decide them, and bring Christians to
acquiesce in one Faith. These Arguments and many more I proposed against the
Doctor in the Discourse now cited, and all the Answer I have, is, that he set's
down some mangled parcels of my Tenants, or barely tells me what I say. For
example. I assert, Protestancy without Prine: Disc. 1. c. 2. That a Doctrine
which by virtue of all the Principles it has, is merely fallible and no more,
may be false, but Christian Doctrine (say Sectaries) as it is taught by all
Pastors is thus fallible, therefore it may be false: But God never Sent Christ
our Lord, nor Christ his Apostles, or any, to teach Christian Doctrine that may
be false, Ergo he sent none to teach mere fallible Doctrine. This Reason our Dr
blindly hints at. P. 333. but leaves it without any Answer. And thus he run's
on to his 339. P. where he tells me. He has laid together so many parcels of
my rambling discourse, as were necessary in order to the examination of it. To
the examination of it, Mr Dr! Not one word true. This had been material to show
my Arguments for the The Dr flies from the main difficulty
Churches infallibility unconcluding, (you touch not these), or at least to
prove by some solid reasoning that the Church is fallible, this point you most
shamefully shift off, and in the next page tell us, that the necessity of
Divine grace is no way pertinent to our present purpose, the Question only
being of an external infallible Proponent in order to Faith. Sr, what you make
to your purpose I know not, nor much care. It was my duty and pertinent, when I
undertook the full and adequate Resolution of Divine Faith, to lay down all the
Principles it relies on, and a main one, is the internal assistance of Grace.
Had I omitted to treat of an external infallible Proponent, you might have
justly quarrelled, but when that particular is largely handled through the five
last chapters of the second Discourse (and not a word replied to any of my
Arguments) your accusation is without either shame, or grace, most unjust.

9 From P. 340. to 362. the Dr gives me but little entertainment, save only to
make a few reflections upon his too many Parergons, and one repeated over and
over (yet the good man will be free from Tautologies) is, that the difficulty
now in hand only concern's an external Proponent, such as the Church is. Shall
we condescend to his humor, and debate that sole Question? I am content upon
one condition, that he plainly solves this plain difficulty. If all the men in
the world (as we now suppose) considered merely as nature has framed them be
fallible; If none of them have infallible assistance to teach the very
fundamentals of faith infallibly, and, if notwithstanding God obliges all to
believe his infallible revealed verities without mixture of error; If finally,
we evidently se Christians at high Contradictions and of a different belief in
such Necessaries, of no less concern then their eternal Salvation. I say, if
all these And leaves all to believe what they list.
particulars be undeniably manifest, either you, Mr Dr ought to assign some
clear certain means whereby Christians may be brought to union in one true
Faith, to profess and believe one and the same Doctrine of Jesus Christ, or you
must leave all to believe as they list, or what pure fancy teaches. My Tenet is
that none can do this but an Infallible Church, nor so much as bring us to any
Unity at all, were faith, as you make it, only morally certain.

10 P. 341 He demand's where have I showed that the Supernatural Principles of
Faith do never cooperate but where the Church infallibly proposes, and thinks I
never attempt this. He wrong's me exceedingly. Se Reas and Relig. Disc. 2. c.
15. There I prove at large, that Divine Faith in this present state requires no
less an Infallible Oracle, then the belief of the Primitive Christians required
Infallibility in the Apostles. As therefore the supernatural Principles of
those first Believers never could operate, contrary to the Doctrine taught
Infallibly by the Apostles, so they work not in true Believers now, but when
they fall right upon the Infallible Doctrine taught by the Catholic Church. The
reason hereof is clear. God cannot concur or incite any by Supernatural
Principles to believe a falsehood, The Revelation therefore which support's
Divine Faith, must not be merely apparent, but real and truly in being, for
then only Divine Grace cooperat's with Faith, not otherwise. So true it is,
that the Infallibility in our internal Assent of Faith, ever supposes and
necessarily prerequires Infallibility in the last ground thereof, which is
God's veracity, as likewise in the immediate Proponent, I mean the Catholic
Church. But says our Dr very wisely. If the Infallible certainty of Faith
depend's upon Divine concurrence, the Infallibility of Faith may be had without
an Infallible Proponent. A most pitiful reply. It seems he cannot well
understand how one act of Faith depend's upon two distinct Principles, yet the
instance now given will enlighten him a little. Did not the Faith of the
Primitive Christians depend upon the Apostles infallible The necessary
principles for Faith
teaching? None questions that. And had not Divine grace influence upon it
also? Most undoubtedly certain. Ergo two different Principles, an Infallible
Church and Divine Assistance necessarily support one act of Faith. The reason
is clear. Faith is the Gift of God and therefore without the cooperation of
Grace cannot be Divine or Supernatural, and without an Infallible Proponent no
man certainly knows what to believe. For who can say indubitably this is the
sense of God's word, herein lies the Truth and Infallibility of a Revelation,
if an Infallible Church be rejected? Hence it is that the Primitive Church
while She condemned all ancient Heretics, and established the contrary truths,
never proceeded doubtfully, or probably, but spoke as Gods Oracle ought to
speak, infallibly.

11 The Dr P. 342. Shows himself a mere Rambler, multiplies words, and proves
just nothing. First he tells me six or seven times over (yet he is far from
tedious repetitions) if Faith depends on Grace, an external infallible
Proponent seems needless, Then he thinks I destroy my self, because I say the
Infallible certainty of Faith comes from Gods interior illumination, as it
more lively set's forth the formal object assented to. What Is next? Marry, he
has often heard of the great Assistance Jesuits have in writing their books,
and Imagins that some Enemy has put these things into my head. Sr, without
doubt you have heard many a magnifyed untruth, and this, if it relate to any
Assistance given me, is a loud one, as all who know me can testify, and will
avouch, that I needed no assistance to answer an Adversary, so well tamed, and
broken as you are. Now, if you will rely so much upon Hearsay, know, Sr, I have
also heard something, and had it from men of good repute, and credit. It is,
that the most able, at Cambridge, with one likewise at Oxord, aided you to the
purpose, in setting forth your tumbling Account, and I am apt to believe this
true, because some who know you, Conceive you not a man so expedite and nimble
at work, as to dispatch such a volume in a twelve months time, though to gain
applause, this must be insinuated in the first words of your preface. These
things I have heard, whether all be true or no, you know best.

12 Soon after, to fill paper, you tell me again what I say, then that I shake
hands with Calvin, and some old Enemies in this matter of Grace, that I hold
you a Denier of Grace, and much more to little purpose. Concerning the
Assistance of Grace in order to Faith, I say, that Faith being a Gift of God
Necessarily depend's on a supernatural Principle, and this is Catholic Doctrine
taken from Scripture, Church authority, and holy Fathers. What I hold
particularly of its giving more clarity to an obscure Revelation, though only
an opinion in Schools, (maintained by some, denied by others) is sounder
Doctrine then your skill in Divinity can refute. You have The Dr's fouling me
with Calvinism, showed sencles and ridiculous.
it largely set down. Reas. and Relig. Disc. 3. c. 9. n. chiefly 13. Your
wilful fouling me with Calvinism becomes one that knows better to calumniate,
than to argue. Had Calvin owned the Church infallible as I do in all she
obliges Christians to believe, and dutifully submitted to her judgment; his
Faith would have been right, and Grace answerable, Supernatural, but because he
slighted that Oracle and believed what mere fancy suggested, he abused Grace,
and had no true Faith. Should I, Sr, maintain a light of Faith allowed men at
random, to believe what their private judgments tell them concerning Gods
revelations in Scripture, independently of all Infallible exterior Propounders
of Faith, I should not much differ from Calvin, but when I only assert it to
serve for a better manifestation of such truths as an Infallible Church
delivers, which are known without that light, though by an inferior degree of
certainty, the Calvinism is more in your head, then in my Doctrine. To say more
of this subject, were only to transcribe what I have in the place now cited.

13 P. 347, to P. 361. I find the like bundle of trash all along. Now moral
certainty refuted above comes in again. Now the Question in this Controversy is
Stated a new. Viz. Whether the Spirit of God may not by moral Arguments work in
men's minds such a certain assent of Faith as The Dr err's in stating the
question
the Scripture requires for Salvation. Here the Dr err's for the Question is
not whether Arguments morally certain may induce to believe, but whether Faith
relying on moral inducements only, be Divine and Supernatural? This I deny. The
next Question started P. 349. is, whether Supernatural Faith be at last
resolved into God's Verity known by natural reason, which is only a Theological
controversy, wholly impertinent to our present difficulty of the Churches
Infallibility, or the undoubted certainty of Faith? Grant or deny, no hurt to
either? My opinion is (and it is no more but an opinion) That Faith relies not
upon that veracity as known Scientifically, though I am far from excluding the
natural knowledge thereof, from our capacities, before we believe a Divine
Revelation. But says the Dr. Supposing God had never discovered his own
Veracity in Scripture, could not men have had Divine Faith? Yea, and with the
Assistance of Grace Supernatural Faith also of God, as he is a Rewarder. Heb:
11. 6, in case they had never heard of either Church, or Scripture? To such,
God speak's by his visible and Admirable Providence over the world, For his
invisible perfections are manifested from the creation of the world. Romans 1.
19. The Heavens declare his glory etc. But what is all this to our matter in
hand, when we have Gods veracity, and Revelation proposed by Church and
Scripture, and easily suppose that first perfection known by natural reason?

14 In the next place the Dr has a fling at Cardinal Lugo. Suares, with others,
and court's them after his homely manner with ieers and reproachful language.
Poor man! Were these profound Doctors living, he would not be thought worthy to
turn over books for them. Soon after he would have the terms of Divine,
Supernatural, Infallible, and Inevident Faith banished Schools. That Of the
Dr's rambling.
is, because he understand's them not. Next he tell's us. P. 358. These things
were necessary to be premised, before we could come to the true state of the
Question, and thus it is. Whether in order to the certainty of our Faith
concerning Gods Revelation, an Infallible Testimony of the Church be necessary.
This he proposes, and denies, yet never so much as offer's to meddle with And
intolerable Shuffling.
the Question. What is done? Marry, he first makes another large excursion, and
relates some broken pieces of my Doctrine, then shamefully slip's aside, and
enters upon a mere speculative Scholastical difficulty, concerning the
Resolution of Faith. Is not this worse then shuffling. Suppose that neither Mr
Dr nor I, give the best Resolution in this matter, does i^ therefore follow
that Faith requires not the Churches infallible Testimony in this present
state. No more follows from this, (were all true) save thus much only, that
neither of us as yet have hit right upon the true Resolution. In a word, the
necessary dependence of Faith upon the Church, is proved in both my last
Treatises, because none can have certainty of the Divine Inspiration of
Scriptures, of the Infallible truth of Scriptures, or finally of their genuin
sense, unless an Infallible Church ascertain these particulars, and to these
convincing proofs (wholly independent of the Dr's Resolution, and mine) no
answer was ever yet, nor can be hereafter returned.

15 The Dr told us just now, he would come to the true state of the Question
concerning the Churches Infallible Testimony, and to comply with his promiss,
as I said above, he meddles not at all with it, but. P. 361. attaques my
Resolution of Faith, and does it in such an unlearned manner, as never Dr I
think, did before him. First he lays down a part of my Doctrine, but as his
custom is, answers nothing. 2. In lieu of answering, he object's, and tells us
again an old story partly taken out of his Account. What proceeding is this?
Our method is quite contrary, we ever solve an Argument directly when it is
proposed, and should be laugh't at, did we to avoid the difficulty, only throw
an another objection at an Adversary, to stop his mouth with.

16 A word now of my Doctrine, to the end all may se how this man deal's with
me. Reas. and Relig. Disc. 1. c. 1. and. 6. I Assert. That as the primitive
Christians resolved their Faith, just so we resolve ours, and argue thus. Had
one demanded of those first converted multitudes after the Canon of Scripture
was written, why they believed Christ to be the Son of God and Savior of the
world? They might have answered, Scripture, as we are taught, expresses these
verities. But ask again, how know you, that your Scriptures are not
suppositious We now resolve our Faith, as the primitive Christians did before
us,
as some Gospels have been? They would have said (for we suppose them
reasonable) this we believe upon the undoubted Testimony of those blessed men
the Apostles who wrote that Holy book. Yet another Question ensues. How do you
know that these Apostles were not Cheats, for there have been false Prophets
and Apostles, but men inspired by Almighty God to teach and write his sacred
verities? Had they proved this by Scripture the Circle would have been
inevitable. For to say Scripture is Gods word because the Apostles tell us so,
and to say the Apostles were infallible Oracles of truth, because the Scripture
affirm's that, implies a most vicious circulation. Their rational Answer
therefore would have been, for there is no other. The manifest wonders done by
the Apostles, their strange Miracles and Conversions wrought the whole world
over, their eminent Sanctity and sheding of blood for the Doctrine delivered by
them, proved those blessed men to be Oracle divinely inspired, Gods most
faithful and Commissioned Teachers. But all this Discourse hold's exactly,
applied to the Roman Catholic Church, for She evidences the like undeniable
Miracles, greater Conversions, more martyrdoms since the Apostles days, most
admirable Sanctity in thousands and thousands, therefore She in like manner is
proved God's Oracle, as is more largely declared in the place now cited.

17 This Argument I urged against the Dr, and told him c. 6. that he was either
obliged to show wherein those first Apostolical Miracles and Conversions
surpassed these latter of the Church, or rationally to blame my inference, as
defective and unconcluding. Viz. That the Church is not as fully evinced by her
Signs to be God's Oracle, as the Apostles were by theirs. You may read. c. 6.
n. 5. how egregiously the Dr trifled with this difficulty in his Account, and
here he is worse, though he had seen all my exceptions made against him in his
Answer returned to T. C. Observe I beseech you.

18 Against this, says the Dr (he means of paralleling the Churches Miracles,
Conversions etc. with those of the Apostles) I objected three things. Object
Mr. Dr! In this place you are not to object, but to Answer the main ground I
rely on in my Resolution, that is to show wherein the parity between the
Apostolical Church, and ours fail's, or is faulty; or if that cannot be done,
to admit of my Inference. You perform neither, but The Dr instead of answering,
object's again what had been solved.
shamefully shift off what most presses, and it is done most unluckily, for
your objections contain nothing but what is directly replied to by me in the.
1. 2. and 3. Chap: of that. 3. Discourse. You say first. This way of resolving
Faith seems unreasonable, because an assent is hereby required beyond all
degree of Evidence, no grounds being assigned for it, but the motives of
Credibility which are fallible. Here are three errors at once, plainly refuted
in the Chapters now cited, where I say, our true Christian Faith in this
present state no more goes beyond the proportion and degree of evidence (be yet
this unexplicated evidence what you will) then the Faith of the Primitive
Christians went beyond it. And I urged you again and again to give a disparity,
or to show wherein the tendency of their Faith was different from ours. 2. It
is a flat calumny to say as you do, that, I assign no other grounds for Faith
but the motives of Credibility, which you suppose faillible. C. 2. n. 8. I say
expressly, our Assent to matters of Faith is ultimatly grounded upon God's
Divine Testimony, and not (as Faith) upon the motives, which induce to believe,
and there parified the ground of the primitive Christians Faith with the ground
we rely on, and their Motives with ours. For example. Some of them saw, others
heard of the Apostles strange Miracles, admirable Sanctity etc. and thence
rationally inferred that they were men sent from God and believed their
Doctrine, though hard and difficult, upon their infallible words. Thus I
discourse as to the Church, and wish the Dr, would show where I miss, or give
any shadow of Difference. 3. If the motives of credibility have a certain and
infallible connection with the Divine Revelation, which I grant, The Dr's
supposition of fallible or probable motives in this place is wholly
impertinent, and makes nothing against my Analysis.

19 Still he rambles on and knows not, I think, what he would be at. It is not
sufficient (says he) to say, that the Infallibility of the Churches Testimony
makes the Assent infallible, for the Assent is not according to the objectiue
certitude of things, but the Evidence of them to our understanding. Of what
objective certitude or evidence of things An obiective certitude spoken of, not
explicated by this Dr.
can this man speak, think ye? Will he say that a mysterious Trinity, or the
Incarnation are evident to us, while we walk by Faith? Or dare he assert that
the Truth, the Infallible Divine Inspiration, and true sense of Scripture
appear evidently to our understanding; While we se innumerable called
Christians at implacable variance about these matters? Unless this be
maintained, wholly improbable, the evidence here mentioned concerning no man
yet knows what things, is plain Nonsense. Again what evidence has the Dr of
these ignote Things, who gives no greater certitude to any Assent but a moral
one, which may be false? Yet he run's on. Supposing the Testimony of the Roman
Church to be really infallible yet since the means of believing it are but
probable and prudential, the assent cannot be according to the nature of the
Testimony considered in it self, but according to the reasons which induce me
to believe such a Testimony infallible. By the means here pointed at the Dr
understand's the motive of credibility only, and therein err's, for we shall
show hereafter other means. But had we none, who tells him that the Motives are
only probable, or barely prudential? I say they are infallible and essentialy
connected with the Divine Revelation, though were they only moral, the
certitude of Faith is yet defensible, as will appear in the next Chapter. 2. If
the Churches Testimony considered in it self be infallible, as he supposes, it
cannot but be known as it is infallible, for no man will say, that God founded
an infallible Church with intention to hide or remove from our sight her
infallible Testimony, whose final end is to teach all infallibly. Therefore
providence has left certain means, whereby the learned may come to the
knowledge of that necessary truth. I have spent three whole Chapters in the
third Discourse upon this subject, yet the Dr replies not to one of my
Arguments. 3. What ever he urges here concerning the means of believing, upon
probable inducements (and it is all raked out of his Account) I have not only
answered in my last Treatise, but retorted also, as you may se. Disc. 3. c. 2.
n. 5. 6. 7

20 I suppose there, that S. John expressed an Infallible revealed Verity
concerning the Mystery of the Incarnation, when he told the world. The word is
made flesh. I then thought Dr Still: yielded an Assent so firm and infallible
to the Revelation, that though an Angel should have preached contrary, he would
not upon any reason proposable disbelieve it. But that Mystery is no Self
evident truth to us, neither can it be Scientifically proved by an other
revealed verity, wholly as obscure: all therefore that can be done is to make
it evidently credible, by motives extrinsick to the Mystery believed? For
example, as the Dr insinuates by universal Tradition, the exterior Consent of
many learned men etc.

21 Hereupon ensues a troublesome difficulty. This humane fallible Tradition,
this Consent, and all other Motives previous to the belief of the Incarnation,
are in the Dr's Principles fallible, and may be false, yet his Faith terminated
The Dr raises his Faith higher than the Motives can lead to
upon the revealed Incarnation, is so certain that it cannot be false, Ergo his
Faith fixed there, is raised higher, and stand's firmer on that ground, then the
Evidence of his Motives can induce to. And thus the Dr goes beyond all the
proportion or degree of Evidence, preambulatory to his certain belief, and
consequently must solve his own Argument. This and more I have in the place now
cited, but the Dr's courage failed to return an Answer. Perhaps he will tell
me, his belief of the Incarnation goes not beyond the uncertain lights of his
fallible motives. Grant this, and it follows evidently. 1. That he
contradict's himself, as will be proved in the next Chapter. It follows. 2.
That his Faith of this fundamental Mystery, for ought any man living can know,
may be a Lie. 3. That all Christ's Doctrine as it is now believed by Faith, may
be both fallible and false. 4. That God obliges the whole Christian world to
believe that, as an infallible truth, which really may be a falsehood. Lastly,
that all the glorious Martyrs in forgoing Ages, were bound to maintain that
with the loss of their lives, to be a truth; which only apparently was so, and
might in reallity be no truth. If the Dr subscrib's to these consequences, he
has not one dram of true Faith in his heart. Now one word more with the Dr

CHAP. VI.
Dr Still: grant's that Faith transcend's the certainty of those Motives which
induce to believe. Independently of his Concession, that verity is proved, and
the ground thereof firmly settled. How necessary it is to distinguish between
the Credibility of a Mystery, and the infallible believing it true. Objections
answered. Other difficulties proposed.

1 Dr Still: in his Account. Part. 1. c. 7. P. 207. Speak's thus. Moral
certainty yields sufficient assurance, that Christian Religion is infallibly
true, and he proves the Assertion, because moral certainty may evidently show
us the Credibility of Christian Religion, and that from the credibility of it,
the infallible truth of it may be proved, will appear by these two things. 1.
That where there is evident Credibility in the matter propounded, there does
arise upon men an obligation to believe: And that is proved...... from What the
Dr teaches.
Gods intention in giving such Motives, which was to persuade them to believe,
as appears by multitudes of places of Scripture; and withal, though the mere
credibility of the Motives might at first suppose some doubts concerning the
Infallibility of the Doctrine, yet it is not consistent with any doubt as to the
obligation to believe, because there can be no other reason assigned of those
Motives of credibility, than the induceing on men an obligation to Faith.

2. That where there is such an obligation to believe, we have the greatest
assurance that the matter to be believed is infallibly true: which depend's on
this manifest proof, that God cannot oblige men to believe a lie, it being
repugnant to all our conceptions of the veracity and Goodness of God to Imagine
that God should require of men (on the pain of eternal damnation) to believe
something infallibly true, which is really false. Thus the Dr. Reflect
courteous Reader. Is it so, that from the Credibility of Christian Religion,
the Infallible truth of it may be proved? There is then no doubt at all, but if
it be Advantage given by the Dr's own Doctrine.
proved infallibly true, it may be also believed as it is, infallibly true.
Does the Dr concede, that from the Evident Credibility of Christian Doctrine,
there arises in all men an Obligation to believe it, and that this obligation
is not consistent with any doubt, as to the obligation of believing it? I wish
no more from an Adversary, having enough to make good all I say concerning the
Infallibility of Divine Faith. Does he finally assert, that where there is such
an obligation we have the greatest assurance, that the matter believed is
infallibly true, because God cannot require of men to believe that as
infallibly true, which is really false? I wholly agree with him thus far, yet
withal affirm that he plainly contradict's his own Doctrine. For, if when there
is such an obligation to believe, we have the greatest assurance (that is
infallible assurance or nothing) that the matter believed is infallible true,
it is undisputably clear, that Faith which has that greatest assurance, goes
far beyond the certainty of the Motives which is only moral, and not so
infallible certain as the very act of Faith is. Hence it follows that the Dr
contradict's himself in all he teaches concerning the moral certainty of Faith,
and must, while he hold's Faith infallibly certain grant, that as terminated
upon the truth of a Revelation, it rises higher and goes beyond the strength of
the motives, which only afford moral certainty, and not greater. But of this
more presently.

2 In the mean time, I wish the Dr would make what he says here, to agree with
some odd expressions in his precedent page 206. There we are told, that
certainty implies the taking away all suspicion of doubt, but in moral things
all suspicion of doubt is removed upon moral evidence, and here he says.
Though the mere Credibility of the Motives (only morally certain) might at
first suppose some doubt concerning the Infallibility of the Doctrine, yet it is
not consistent with any doubt, as to the obligation to believe. I Say contrary,
if it may at first suppose some doubt, it must ever suppose it, for this moral
certainty grounded on the Miracles internal to Scripture, as the Dr teaches,
grows not less nor more persuasive in time, but is always the same, and
therefore cannot remove all doubt from a Believers mind.

3 Hence I argue. This moral certainty at first capable of doubt, comes in time
to be infallible certainty, or still retain's some doubt. In case it be
improved, and grow up to infallible certainty, it yields not in certainty to
the very act of Faith, where unto it persuades, and so the Dr's distinction,
between moral certainty, and An Argument proposed.
his term's Infallibly true, becomes frivolous. Moral certainty, says he,
yields us sufficient assurance that Christian Religion, is infallibly true. Say
now, that this moral certainty is still consistent with some suspicion of
doubt, it must either derive that doubt into the very act of Faith, and make
that doubtful, or it ought to be granted, that Faith rises higher, and goes
beyond the strength of that moral doubtful certainty, contrary to the Dr's
Principles. I wish also he had explaind him self better in this other dark
Proposition. Moral certainty may be as great as Mathematical and Phisical,
supposing as little reason to doubt in moral things as to their natures, as in
Mathematical and Phisical, as to theirs. These words. Supposing as little
reason to doubt, spoil all he says, for if moral certainty ever supposes some
suspicion of doubt, how can that be as great as Mathematical or Physical, which
supposes none? But enough of this jangling.

4 We now come to the main point, and shall endeavor to show, that, although
the Motives were only Morally certain, and not (as I hold) infallibly connected
with Divine Revelation, yet the act of Faith it self, is infallibly certain,
and consequently rises above that weaker light of the Motives. This I say to
vindicate the absolute infallibility of Faith from all just exceptions, while
Divines vary about the connection of the Motives, with the Divine Revelation.

5 The proof of my Assertion stands firm upon two Principles laid down Prot.
without Prin. Disc. 1. C. 5. n. 6. 7. And Reas: and Relig. Disc. 3. C. 8. n.
16. In the first place I say (and its a Maxim known by the light of nature)
that God, who is Supereminently more infallible than all men and Angels are,
ought to be believed answerable to his Excellence, with a most firm assent. In
the second place I assert, though we have not Evidence of the Divine Testimony
in it self, yet when it is made evidently credible by clear Signs that God
speaks to us, and for our Salvation, By Faith we assent not to the bare
credibility of a Mystery.
we, as rational creatures, are obliged to submit and believe him, because he
command's us to believe, and are thereupon bound to assent, not to the bare
credibility of the Mysteries proposed, but to the very truth of them, which is
a further step; and we must step so far, because the evidence of the obligation
grounded on Gods Command, will have us do so. Here then is our assurance of the
truth of the Revelation assented to. And is not this what Dr Still: teaches in
express terms? Though the mere Credibility of the Motives might first suppose
some doubt concerning the Infallibility of the Doctrine, yet it is not
consistent with any doubt as to the obligation to believe. Yet more plainly.
Where there is an obligation to believe, we have the greatest assurance that
the matter to be believed, is infallibly true.

6 For a further explanation of this speculative matter. Note first. That known
distinction between the Credibility of a Mystery and the Truth thereof, is
carefully to be reflected on, which the Dr and all those who cry against the
raising Faith above the Motives, unskilfully confound. Their error lies here,
that they only consider the connection But to the Truth.
of the Motives with the Truth of the Mystery, and say, the understanding by
virtue of the Motives (only Morally certain) cannot assent to that Truth, and
they say very right; but ponder not on the other side the weight of God's
Command, which obliges us to trust the first Verity, though we have no evidence
of the Revelation in it self. And thus, to use the Dr's Instance. P. 362. one
not versed in Mathematics, who cannot assent to the truth of a Demonstration
in a demonstrative manner, may yet firmly believe it demonstrative upon his
Masters credit, who knows the truth scientifically, and were that Master
Infallible, he might justly chastise his Scholar, did he boggle in believing
the Truth. Much more does this hold in God, when he command's our assent to a
Truth evidently seen, by the Divine understanding, though obscure to us.

7 Note. 2. The motives we here speak of may, as I observed in my last
Treatise, be considered two ways. First as anteceding Faith, and naturally
known ex sensatis, being objects of sense, seen, or heard of by undoubted
History. Thus we have assurance that there is in the world a great Moral Body
of men called Catholics, agreeing in the use of Sacraments, professing
Obedience to one supreme Pastor, who manifestly show the Succession of their
Pastors from the Apostles times, give evident Signs of Sanctity in thousands
and thousands, relate such and such Miracles wrought in the Catholic Church
etc. 2. These Motives may be considered as objects of Faith, and numbered among
other Cred^nda, for we believe Christ and his Apostles to have wrought true
Miracles, the Church to be Holy and universal The twofold acception of Motives,
declared.
etc. And thus the Motives assented to, are not inducements to believe, but
Believed Articles. This double acception of Motives all must own: For before
the Apostles believed in Christ, they knew him to be a rational man, saw his
Miracles, and by manifest signs discovered his Innocence and Holiness of life,
yet afterward they believed by Faith, that he was truly man, and not in
appearance only, that he wrought true Miracles, and believed him as we now do,
both Holy and Innocent.

8 Note. 3. God has right to command us two ways. First by making his revealed
will evidently known, which implies, as Divines speak, Evidentiam in
Attestante, or a clear sight of his command, and speaking. 2. This supreme
Lord, in case he make his will known by Signs evidently Credible, has yet as
much right to require obedience from us as if it were evident, he speak's. One
clear Instance will give light to my Assertion. An absolute Prince set's forth
a Proclamation, and some eye or eare-witnesses receive it from his own mouth,
and know it to be his: Soon after the public Crier proclaim's it in other
places, distant from the Court. I say those who hear it proclaimed, and se it
attested by the Princes own marks and signatures, are as much obliged to yield
Obedience to it, as if they had received the contents of it from the Prince
himself. The right God has, to Command Faith.
Pray, tell me, did you ever yet know that any town or City in England though
distant from Court, when his Majesty set's forth a proclamation authoritively
sealed by his own hand, boggle thus? It may be the public Crier seign's, what
is not. It may be he has received a forged Writ, It may be, he knows not the
King's mind, therefore we will neither obey, nor assent to the Truth of it, but
after all these Cries and Signs only hold it credible, that such is the Kings
pleasure, his will, and command.

9 Apply this to our present case and you have all. God's Revelation has been
proclaimed the whole world over. Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and the Church
commissioned to speak aloud, have Age after age published it, and made the
truth of it evidently Credible by clearer Signs then ever Prince set forth his
Proclamation. Have we the Princes own Seal and Marks for the one, we have Gods
own Seal and Marks for the other. It is true, we saw not the Prince subsigning
his law or Proclamation, and therefore want that evidence of Truth considered
in it self, no more saw we the Truth of God's Revelation when he first spoke by
his Prophets, and Apostles, How faith is mode Credible.
but the Signatures of his Truths annexed to his Revelation remain still, and
will do so to the worlds end. And what after all these glorious signs, shall we
stand trifling with God in so weighty an affair as concern's eternal Salvation?
Shall we tell him, because we se not evidently the Truth of his Revelation in
it self, but only the evident Credibility of it, we will proceed warily and
assent to its Credibility, but with all either abstract from the Truth, or
absolutely deny it. I am sure Christ delivered contrary Doctrine, when he told S.
Thomas. Beati qui non viderunt and crediderunt, nameing those blessed, who se
not, yet believe. Thus much noted.

10 I say first. The evident Credibility of a Revelation, obliges all to accept
it, not only as evidently Credible (for so much is manifest without any what
the Motives persuade to.
Submission) but to assent to it as most absolutely true, and in this sense
Faith goes above the light of Motives. One reason hereof is already given. If
an earthly King can oblige his subjects to obey a law as truly his, made
evidently Credible as is now declared, much more can the King of Kings lay that
obligation upon all, when his Revelation is made evidently Credible by Signs
surpassing the power of nature. Again. Evident Credibility founded on rational
Motives perswad's and oblig's men to believe some thing, as the Dr grant's. I
ask what? They need not to persuade to a belief of themselves, because their
Evidence is seen before assent be given to the Revelation, and therefore both
persuade, and oblige all to believe the Infallible Truth of the Revelation,
though not evidently seen.

11 I Argue. 3. and this reason convinces. The blessed Apostles firmly believed
Christ our Lord to be truly God, a Redeemer, and the long expected Messiah, and
rested not in this judgment alone. It is only evidently Credible, that Christ
is God, or the true Messiah; and How the blessed Apostles believed?
consequently their Faith went above the force of all the Motives laid open to
their eyes, and senses.

12 I prove the consequence manifestly. Consider that great Miracle of raising
Lazarus from his grave, merely as seen or known by sense, and preceded Faith,
none can say that, that wonder (the like is of all other Miracles) evidently
proved Christ to be God, or the true Messiah. For God might have wrought that
Miracle for some other end, than to assure any of Christ's Divinity. Nay, he
might have empowered an Angel or a man not privileged with the Hypostatical
union to call one dead, to life again, as the Prophet Elias did. Kings. 3. 17.
21. Yea and to do all the Miracles which Christ wrought. What follows
therefore from the sight of these Miracles? Thus much only and no more, that as
that poor widow of Seraptia truly judged Elias, after his giving life to her
Son, to be a man sent from God, and that all be spoke was true, so the Apostles
might rationally have concluded, that our Saviors Miracles were indeed from a
Power above the force of What force Miracles, as seen have?
nature, but that He was thereby evidently proved God, appeared no evident
infallible verity deduced from his wonders. Yet those blessed men, and the
Primitive Christians firmly believed all these Truths by Infallible Faith, and
therefore as I said now, went above the certainty of the Motives, which, as
seen, afforded no such infallible certainty.

13 Some may say. If all those glorious Miracles wrought by our Savior,
neither gave evidence of his being God, nor solely taken, ultimately determined
any to believe his Divinity, or so much as one Revealed verity; How came the
Apostles and all Orthodox Christians with them to raise their Faith so high, as
to believe infallibly Christ's sacred Doctrine? I answer. Three things chiefly
brought their Faith to Three things necessary for faith,
this perfection. Prodigious works, or Miracles (as seen) persuaded much; Our
Saviors sacred words, as heard, by those he taught, added more strength, and
finally the pious affection of the Will in every Believer that saw these works,
and heard his words, when drawn on and encouraged by Christ's Command to
elicite Faith, passed through all difficulties to the Contrary, and moved the
understanding to believe infallibly the truth of what ever that great Master
did speak.

14 Shall I yet touch upon these particulars more plainly? All know that the
greatest Miracles which were ever done without words or Doctrine delivered by
him that wrought them, make not our Christian Verities known, for had Christ
appeared in the world and given life to twenty dead men, and all that time
never spoken word of his Doctrine, none could have apprehended what to believe
of our Christian Mysteries. Those therefore who saw his Miracles might well
have thought him some extraordinary person sent from God (because are further
explicated.
Devils cannot restore life to the dead) but could never know by those wonders,
what he judged of Divine matters, before they heard him speak. 2. Words alone
without miraculous works induce none to believe; wherefore, had Christ come
amongst us, and only told us, he was God and the true Messiah, and wrought no
Miracles, showed no sanctity, or austerity of life, neither Jews nor Gentiles,
nor indeed any, could in prudence have believed him. Hereof, se more in my
notes upon Pooles Appendix n. 21. and learn withal; that Christ's admirable
works and sacred words jointly taken, highly conduce to beget Divine Faith in
all. I say Jointly taken, whereof we have an Instance in that glorious
Transfiguration upon Mount Thabor. The Disciples there present, saw our
Saviors sacred face shine like the sun, and his garments white as snow. Yet
that vision alone, no way apt by it self to persuade any of his being the Son
of God, might have left the Apostles in suspense concerning that Mystery. 2.
They heard a voice, as S. Peter speak's z. Epist. 1. 17. from the magnificent
Glory. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. That voice added to
the vision, gave more strength. 3. An express command Close ensued upon that
Vision and voice. Ipsum audite. Be sure to hear my beloved Son. Here all
further delay ceased, and a strict obligation was laid on them to raise their
Faith above all they saw or heard, as also most firmly to believe the truth of
what ever Christ our Lord spoke.

15 Upon this one Instance, all I would say is grounded. Ask therefore, why I
by Faith go above all the Signs and Miracles which Christ or his Church The
effi^acy of God's Command in order to Faith
shows me, or why I infallibly believe the truth of every Revelation proposed?
I answer the reason is, because God who has right to oblige, when he intimat's
his will by clear Signs, prodigious works and words) command's me to do so, and
I am as much bound to obey him upon such summons, as if the truth of the
Revelation were made evident to me. Here you must either deny that God can lay
such a command upon men, which is evidently false (for a temporal Prince as is
now proved can do it) or grant, that I am obliged to obey his Command, and
therefore can ascend with my Faith above the strength of all Motives, and
believe the Truth of his Revelation infallibly. Otherwise you must say, God
command's me to do what I cannot do, just as if he should bid me fly through
the Air when I have neither power, nor wrings to fly with.

16 Now mark I beseech you. All our Adversaries Arguments either tend to prove
that God cannot lay that obligation upon us when he gives such Motives as
persuade to believe (which yet says Dr Still: appears by multitudes of places
of Scripture) or evince, that nothing can bring men to believe the Truth of a
Revelation, but the evidence of it, or a clear sight of that Truth we assent to
by Faith, which is manifestly false. Reflect once more upon the vision in Mount
Thabor. The Apostles saw there our Savior all in glory yet knew not evidently,
what it meant. They heard those words. This is my most Dear Son. Mark. 9. 7.
and understood their obvious sense, yet had no evidence of the Truth signified
by those words. Finally, they received that command. Ipsum audite. Hear and
believe all that this dear Son deliver's to you, but were yet far from having
the truth of that command, or any thing he spoke, laid out evidently before
them. Notwithstanding, they believed the very truth of those words, and Command
also, and thus their Faith led on by clear signs, admirable works, sacred
words, and an express command, transcended the certainty of what ever they saw
or heard.

17 From what you have already noted, it follows. That if by Faith we believe
the very truth of a Revelation, and not only its Credibility, the act of Faith
cannot but be of a higher certainty than all the exterior Signs and Motives,
as known by sense, can persuade to. The reason now given is clear. All these
outward Signs and Motives manifested to the world, are reduced to the admirable
works, miracles for example, Neither the Apostolical words, nor Works can
evidence the truth of Divine Revelation.
done by Christ, his Apostles, and the Church; as also to the plain
signification of words these Oracles spoke, But neither the works which Christ
showed, nor the words he spoke (though plainly significant) made the truth of
his Revelation evident, as is now proved, but only evidently credible,
therefore if by Faith we believe the very truth of a Revelation, which all
grant, and rest not only upon its Credibility, we go, Eo ipso, beyond the
certainty of that judgment whereby we know it to be evidently credible, though
not showed evidently true. Hence I said, Prot: without Prin. Disc. 1. c. 5. n.
6. that all the power in Heaven cannot separate Infallibility from an act of
Faith settled upon the Truth of God's Revelation, though Divines yet question
whether by the absolute power of God, all these outward Signs we se or hear of,
might not have been the very same in appearance as they are now, had God never
revealed any thing.

18 Some less skilful may reply. The words the Apostles heard on Mount Tabor
and understood, were plain and significant enough, what need Truth is not
always Spoken by words, most significant.
is there of more? A simple objection. Are I beseech you all significant words
true? Grant this, and no man can tell a Lie, or a false story, for in such
cases, words are very significant, yet far from truth. Now the Apostles did not
only know the signification of that voice heard, but also believed its Truth,
though not made evident to them. This is ever to be reflected on.

19 You will say again. Those words and all other written in Scripture, are
either evidently Credible, or evidently true. Answ. Words evidently Credible in
this place, imply a piece of nonsense, when by themselves they are evidently
heard, and their open signification (If clear) evidently known, without any
more light. Speak therefore thus properly. The true signification of words in
Scripture, is made evidently Credible, and (when clear) believed true by Faith,
yet are not known evidently or Scientifically true, and the objection becomes
forceles. Here I expect that such an Adversary as Dr Still: may object. 3. From
this discourse it follows. Though one read Scripture a hundred times over, and
add to that the interpretation of the Church, yet after all, he cannot know
that Christ our Savior is God, and the true Messiah. I Answer, none can know
these truths Scientifically, or upon clear evident Principles, I grant it. None
can infallibly believe them, by virtue of God's Revelation made evidently
credible by clear signs, I deny it. After all this trifling,

20 Follows another objection much to this sense. There seems an open contest
between these Signs or the Motives inducing to Faith on the one side; and God's
express command whereby we are obliged to believe the truth of his Revelation,
on the other. The Motives draw one way, and license us not to go one step
further than to assent to what they show, which is only to acknowledge God's
Revelation evidently Credible, but not infallibly true. God's Command pushes
further, and will have all to believe the Truth of a Revelation, though we se
no reason, to go so high by Faith. This objection contain's nothing but what is
solved already. I therefore answer An objection taken from the Motives, and
Gods Command, solved.
in a word. We se no reason to go so high, while we rest upon the Motives
only, I grant it; we se no reason to go so high, if we attend to God's command
manifested by clear signs, I deny what is assumed. For, this command, and the
Majesty of the commander, is both reason and a law more prevalent than all
Motives are, solely considered, or, as known by sense. Therefore unless the
weakness of these Motives can as it were abate or infringe the strength of God's
Command and make me to judge he command's none to believe without evidence had
of his Revelation, I both can and will captivate my understanding, in obsequium
fidei, and say absolutely, what ever you my God speak (made evidently credible
by clear signs) is not only Credible, but infallibly true. And this is to
proceed rationally, for if I ought to believe a Mortal man reputed honest and
sincere when he speak's, though I have no evidence of what he interiourly
judges, because he may deceive, much more am I obliged by captivating my
understanding to believe God, who cannot deceive, when I have the greatest
moral Assurance imaginable, that he speak's to me, and for my Salvation.

21 Now here enter's that other Principle hinted at above, I mean the pious
affection of the will in every Believer, which power when once enlightened by
the previous judgment of Credibility, grounded upon rational Motives (for
nihil volitum quin praecognitum) has from that judgment assurance that no
assent of the mind, is, or can be of greater concern, than an humble submission
to what ever God speak's and command's, though no evidence of his speaking, be
drawn from the Motives inducing to believe. The reason hereof is clear, because
upon this assent eternal Salvation depend's, and the omission of it brings with
it eternal misery. Besides, the great confidence all have of pleasing God who
command's us to believe, and the fear we may justly apprehend of wronging his
Divine Majesty in case we demurr or boggle, when we are thus incited to
believe, cannot but drive the Will forward with all the force it has, to move
the intellectual Faculty to a most firm and infallible assent of Faith. Hence
it is, as S. Bonaventure observes, cited Reas and Relig: Disc. 3, c. 8. n. 15.
What power the will has to ^liei^^ Faith.
that men truly prudent and apprehensive of their eternal good, are not drawn
by torments or inticements to deny in words any revealed verity, yet few in
their wits, says the Saint, will venture to do so for a truth known by natural
science. Whereupon he inferr's, that Faith is not so much a Speculative act, as
practical in order to the real effects of suffering and dying for God and his
truth, attested by Revelation, though not evidently seen.

22 Some may here demand, whether the Will can make the Motives inducing to
Faith, to appear stronger then they are in themselves? I answer it cannot: For
all know, that as ratio Very, or truth, moves the understanding, so ratio Boni,
or Good moves the will, and is its proper object. The will therefore can
strongly adhere to what it rationally loves, and move the understanding to obey
God, when it is evidently credible by clear Signs that He speak's, and requires
obedience from us, but to force the intellectual power to se more light in the
Motives than they of their own nature can give, is impossible. One may here
ask. How then can the will, as Divines teach, supply the inefficacy of the
Motives were there want of efficacy in them, as there is none in my Opinion,
for I hold them infallibly connected with the Divine Revelation? I answer. No
otherwise, then by adding constancy, and a strong practical firmness to the
assent of Faith; so much flame and fervor, that if the intellectual power had
yet more evidence, the adhesion would not be greater. And thus, as both Holy
Scripture and the ancient Fathers speak, cord creditur ad Salutem. A pious
will can captivate the understanding, and move it to believe to Salvation.

23 By what is here said and further explicated in the place now cited, you se
Dr Still jumbling discourse. P. 398. most weak and fixed upon no rational
ground. If the Will, says he, can determine the understanding to assent beyond
the strength of the Motives, it may determine it to assent with out any Motives
at all. Not so, Mr Dr. It is far easier to assent upon some Motives, though
weak ones, then for none at all, as is evident in the rash judgments men
usually make, when by the perverseness of the Will, they strongly judge upon
most slight reasons such an one to be an Enemy, who never The Dr's ill way of
arguing, rejected.
intended mischief to any, much more therefore, can this power by her pious
affection when She has grave and most weighty reasons proposed to obey God,
move the understanding to comply with that obligation, and to believe most
firmly.

24 Now comes in the Dr's jumbling! If, says he the infallible assent of Faith
comes from the power of the Will, then to what purpose is any formal object
enquired after, or Motives of Credibility either? Mark first an improper
speech, of an Assent coming from the power of the Will. The assent, Sr, comes
from the understanding commanded by the will to assent. He goes on. The Formal
Object does assign a reason of believing from the Object it self, of which
there can be none, if the Will by her own power elicit that which is the
proper assent of Faith. I Answer. The understanding, if we And his jumbling
also.
speak properly, elicit's the assent of Faith, that is produces it, and not the
Will. Now if the word Elicit import only a command, it is more then profoundly
simple to assert as the Dr does, that, that command takes away from the formal
Object, all reason of believing. Observe I beseech you. God obliges all to keep
his precepts, and one is to believe the Incarnation upon this Motive or formal
object, that eternal Truth has revealed it. The Will because God requires that
assent, readily submit's, and command's the understanding to believe the
Mystery. How can this command of the will any way lessen or take from the
formal Object all reason of believing, when it moves the understanding to
believe, because God speak's and will have us to believe so? It is impossible,
unless You Will say, that because God enioyn's me not to steal, and the Will
thereupon moves me to abstain from Theft I take away God's law by my obedience,
which is a blasphemy. It is true, could the will, being of it self a blind
faculty, elicit or produce Faith by its own power without any reason proposed
(and this gross error lay deep in the Dr's head when he The Dr's error.
Wrote) he might then talk at random, and tell us as he does, of no need of any
Motives of Credibility, of taking away the formal Object of Faith, and such
like Nonsense, but all is contrary, For the Will can never move the
Understanding to elicit Faith, without first having the formal object of Faith
rationally proposed, and applied by most grave and weighty Motives, as shall be
now briefly declared.

25 I observed above. n. 5. That the Motives of Credibility may be considered
two ways. First, as rational lights preceding Faith or known by natural
discourse, answerable to our Saviors words. Matt, 11. 4. Tell John what you
have heard and seen. 2. As Truths believed by Faith, wherein there appears no
difficulty at all, if which is evident, one and the same Object can terminate
two different cognitions. Thus the Apostles conversing with our Savior, knew
him by natural reason to be truly man, and yet induced by prudent Motives, they
raised their Faith above sense, above all natural knowledge, and believed, he
was indeed, Our Saviors Miracles as seen, were rational Motives to a belief
of their truth.
true Man. They saw the outward appearance of his glorious Miracles, but by
sense and natural discourse had no strict evidence of their being Truths (for
sense may be deceived) or of the end for which they were wrought, however, led
on by prudent Motives they believed them true Miracles, and not in appearance
only. Now I ask, why could not our Saviors own Miracles, as seen, become
rational inducements to believe the real truth of them, not evidently seen? All
confess that, as seen and known by discourse, they had force enough to persuade
to a Belief of what ever Christ spoke, and God revealed. If so; There can be
no reason why they might not also induce to a firm belief of their own being
true Miracles; For, if the sight of them had so much force as to cast light
upon another Object. Viz. The Divine Revelation, and to make the truth thereof,
evidently Credible; that very sight was no less powerful to give the like
clarity of their being evident credible Truths. At least all must say (and it is
mainly for my present purpose) that our Saviors Miracles, together with the
other external Motives seen or known by Natural discourse, did ultimately
constitute the Divine Revelation in a complete state of Credibility, which we
call Gods own rational speaking to the world by Signs, or the last application
of his speaking.

26 Now further. When this rational Proposition or ultimate application of
God's speaking was made by miracles and other Motives, and laid open to the
understanding of primitive Believers, who saw Christ's wonders, the Will thereby
enlightened, could easily with her pious affection, move the Intellectual power
to elicit a most firm assent of Faith, because God speak's, or command's
Belief: which assent if ultimately resolved, we shall find securely fixed both
upon the Truth of the Revelation, as also upon the real Truth of the Motives
also, jointly believed. And thus the Motives which were only inducements to
Believers (solely considered) that is as they constituted a Revelation and
themselves evidently credible, can under the notion of Truths, conjoined with
the Divine Revelation terminate a certain, and infallible assent of Faith.

27 Perhaps some half Scholars in speculative learning, will esteem all now
said confused stuff, and very likely, as Half Scholars talk, not valved.
the Dr expresses himself (P. 427) desire the Reader to try his faculty upon
it, whether it be intelligible? No great matter for that say I. Let Smatterers
talk, I appeal to the judgment of such as have been long versed in Schools,
and hope to enlighten the unlearned by this one clear Instance.

28 Had Christ our Lord after his raising Lazarus from the dead, said only thus
much to the then present Spectators. You have seen this one great wonder; my
Disciples, and others have been Eyewitnesses of many more An Instance gives
light to my Assention.
wrought by me. I speak now to you in the words, which my Evangelist shall
hereafter register in the Gospel. John. 10. 25. The works that I do in my
Fathers name, they give Testimony of me, and withal declare, that I am truly
God and the Messiah sent into the world. Believe me, induced to assent by the
works you and others have seen, and moreover believe, that these seen wonders
are not counterfeited, but true Miraculous works. In this case it is clear,
that the same Miracles first known by sense, or as they applied the Divine
Revelation to the Believers understanding, made themselves together with the
Revelation no more but evidently credible and therefore forced none to believe,
but left that free, yet they imposed an obligation upon all rational men of
believing the real truth of these Miracles, and the Truth of the Revelation,
whereof, neither those primitive Christians, nor we ever yet had any Evidence.
This is to say in plainer terms (and mark well the distinction) Miracles and
all other exterior Motives, as seen or known, move to a belief of themselves
under the notion of Truths, though not evidently seen or known as Truths, but
believed. so.

29 The whole discourse in this Chapter goes upon a supposition, that the
Motives of credibility are not essentially connected with the Divine
Revelation, though if that essential connection be admitted (which is true
Doctrine, and much avail's to raise Faith above the strength of all exterior
Motives) An act of Faith terminated upon the Revelation and the truth of the
Motives, more certain than humane knowledge.
yet the act of Faith terminated upon the Revelation and the Truth of the
Motives, far surpasses in certainty the knowledge which any in this life can
have of that connection: for the knowledge of that Connection is only got by
natural discourse, whereas the assent of Faith it self rest's upon the most
supreme Verity, I mean, God speaking, to the world. And thus in all opinions
the certainty of Faith is defensible. As a rational assent, Faith depend's upon
the Motives of Credibility, because God speak's by such Signs. As purely
Divine, it rest's upon the Divine Revelation applied by rational Motives,
whereunto I add the lumen fidei, which represent's the Truth of the Motives,
and the Revelation more clearly and immediately, then any natural discourse can
do, and upon that account much conduces to the Infallible certainty of Faith,
as is largely declared. Reas. and Relig: Disc. 3. c. 9. n. 6 The last certainty
comes from the pious affection of the will, as is already declared. Having said
thus much, I desire Dr Still: to weaken any one of these Principles, upon Good
Authority, or solid reason,

CHAP. VII.
Reflections made upon the Doctors following Discourse. Of his Mistakes
concerning the Churches Testimony, and the obscurity of Faith.

1 I Am forced, courteous Reader, to pass by many impertinent excursions of
the Dr, his ill language also with other lesser faults, for fear of making this
Treatise too bulky, which may displease him, neither do I need to enlarge my
self much upon his objections, from P. 365. to P. 400. For they are all solved
in my two former Treatises. Some few particulars I shall add, more to satisfy
others in this speculative matter of our Analysis, than to answer the Dr who in
very deed has his full Answer already.

2 In the. P. now cited he complain's of my shuffling, because he hear's no
more of the Churches infallible Testimony, whereby men believe the Scripture to
be the word of God. I stand astonished at this clamorous Adversary. Where were
his Eyes, where was his attention, if ever he read my Treatises? The very chief
aim whereof, is, to show not only to Christians, but to Jews and Gentiles
also, that the first known ground of true Religion, is a Church manifested by
Supernatural Motives proceeding from an infinite power and wisdom. This Church I
have amply proved, to be God's own assured Oracle. The Primum credible, or
first believed Teacher in this present state, and that God speak's as
immediately and infallibly by it now, as ever he did by Prophet or Apostle. As
therefore those, whom the blessed Apostles taught, having seen the Apostolical
Signs, immediately believed upon their word; So with as great reason may we,
having penetrated the Churches glorious Marks, assent immediately upon Her word,
and believe all She obliges Christians to believe. But to have assurance of the
Scriptures Divine inspiration, as likewise of its true infallible sense, are
believed Articles grounded upon the Churches Infallible Testimony, or rather
upon God speaking by this Oracle, and here we must rest, or can believe
Nothing. The Churches Testimony, God's own Testimony
I must therefore once more blame the Doctor, who forsooth thinks, the Faith
whereby the Churches Infallibility is believed ought to have such a Divine
Testimony, and so a process in Infinitum, or a Circle will unavoydably follow.
Such a Divine Testimony. Mr Dr, you understand not what I teach. I say
expressly, that the Churches Testimony is God's own Testimony, as immediately
assented to upon Church Authority (for he that hear's the Church hear's God) as
ever Doctrine was believed upon any Apostles word. Thus much supposed and
largely proved what need have we of another Testimony, distinct from that of
the Church? Out of all, I concluded, that as there was neither vicious Circle
nor process in Infinitum in those who terminated their faith upon S. Paul's
preaching, for example, so there is neither the one nor other fault in me, when
I assent to this truth. The Churches Testimony is God's own Testimony, and
ground my faith upon it. Se more of this subject. Reas. and Relig: Disc. 3. C.
6. n. 26.

3 We have another quarrel. P. 367. Where I am told, if all the necessity of the
Churches Proposition be no more, then to convey the Divine Testimony to us (and
the Dr who cites my. 3. Disc. c. 4. n. 18. wishes me to take pains a little
better, in proving that Such a condition must have Infallibility belonging to
it) I answer, Mr Dr misrelates my Doctrine, for I speak not in that place of,
the Churches Proposition, but of her Motives whereby the Divine Testimony,
whether God speak's by Scripture or the Church, is applied to us. Let him
therefore take the pains to cite more exactly, or surcease to charge me with
that I never taught. From this very gross error, proceed's another.
Infallibility (says he) is then only necessary when it is relied upon, and is
the ground of believing, and not where it is a mere condition of understanding.
In real truth, there is nothing here but a want of understanding in Mr Dr.
Pray, Courteous Reader, peruse what I have. Disc. 3. C. 6. n. 18. 19. where I
say, the Churches Testimony, is not a mere extrinsical condition, disposing to
believe upon the Divine Testimony in Scripture, but a joint Motive with it,
which compleat's the ancient Revelation in order to the belief of our
Christian Mysteries. Therefore, when I believe the Church to be infallible,
because S. Paul teaches, She is the Pillar and ground of truth, and believe it
also because God speak's that very truth by the Church, I no way separate the
ancient Revelation from the Churches Testimony, but by one Indivisible act of
Faith, be-lieve both at once. Hereof I have given a clear Instance, in the
Chapter now cited. n. 22. 23. And constantly find by experience, that to
evacuate the Dr's Arguments, no more is necessary, but only to point at what is
noted in my former Treatises.

4 P. 369. He first pretend's to tell us What these Motives of Credibility
are. 2, How far they are necessary to Faith. 3. What influence they have upon
the assent of Faith. Had he followed these particulars closely according to his
own opinion, he might well have given no little advantage against himself, but
in lieu of doing so, he wisely start's aside, and for two or three pages, only
relates what Suares, Cardinal Lugo and other great Divines say of these
Motives, and though all of them speak much to my sense, and in things material,
have nothing contrary to me, Yet P. 375. He blames me because I must say, that
the proofs taken from these Motives do not persuade men to believe, or which is
all one, have no Influence upon the act of Faith. Would to God this Dr would
either not write evident untruths, or consider better what he writes. Pray you
reflect. Do not I say. Protest: without Princ. Disc. 1. c. 5. n. 11. That the
Motives to Faith manifestly point out that true Society of Christians wherein
Gods Verities are taught, and make it discernable from all heretical
Communities? Do not I say. n. 12. That if Gods goodness could permit these
Motives like false Charms to delude the world, all might with just reason
exclaim, as Rich. de S. Vict: once did. If we believe an error it is you, o
God, who have deceived us. Do not I say. n. 14. That without Motives, never any
since Christianity began, rightly believed in Christ our Lord, in Apostle, or
Church? Have I not. Reas. and Relig. Disc. 2 through two whole Chapters laid
down the Efficacy of these Motives, and showed what influence they have upon
Reason and Faith also? Have I not proved them. c. 7. n. 3. 4. to be God's own
Language, or public way of speaking The Dri unjust Cavils.
to the world? And. c. 16. n. 30. plainly assert, that to separate the luster
of Motives from Christ and his Church, implies a subversion of Christian
Religion? And yet with me, says our worthy Dr they persuade not to believe,
nor have influence upon the act of Faith, though I say Faith never was, or can
be without them.

5 But from whence comes this gross mistake of the Dr? Marry from hence,
because I say that the act of Faith (as Faith) wholly relies upon other
Principles. Good Mr Dr, cannot you conceive how one indivisible act (where in
there are no separable parts) wholly relies or depend's upon several
Principles, though with a different respect? Take One act of Faith Necessarily
depend's upon several Principles.
for example a Conclusion deduced out of well ordered Premises, as a vital
operation, it wholly depend's upon the intellectual faculty, that produces it;
As a thing in being, it wholly depends upon Gods general concurse which gives
existence to every creature, yet as a Conclusion it wholly relies on the
Premises. The whole influence of one of these different Principles abates
nothing, but is well consistent with the whole influence of their other
associated causes. Just thus it is in an act of Faith. As vital, it wholly
depend's on the Intellectual power, as supernatural, wholly on the infused
habit, or something equivalent. For its Being, it depend's on Gods universal
concurse, whereby every thing exist's, but as a rational operation, it wholly
depend's on the Motives inducing to Faith, not that the motives, considered
merely as inducements, concur by way of efficiency to that act, any more then
premises to a conclusion, but because the judgment of Credibility, which
actually inform's the mind in the very instant a Believer first elicit's Faith,
illuminates his intellectual power, and manifestly shows what he is ready to
believe, is evidently Credible, or worthy a most certain assent, because God
speak's by his own Oracle. O! but the act of Faith precisely fixed upon the
Divine Revelation reasons not, and consequently, says our Dr seems
unreasonable, or has no ground to rely on.

6 This difficulty I have both proposed in express terms, and solved. Reas.
Relig: Disc. 3. C. 16. n. 25. and say there, an act of Faith may be considered
two ways. First as it is a prudent reasonable submission to what ever God
reveals. 2. as terminated upon the Revelation proposed by the Church, or any
other infallible Oracle. Under the first notion of a prudent submission, it
either necessarily implies, or presupposes the rational prudent judgment of
credibility set fast on such Motives as converted the world, which judgment
rightly denominat's Faith a reasonable Obsequiousness. But again consider the
act in it self, I mean as it precisely tend's upon the Revelation, and a
Mystery not evidently seen, it where an Act of Faith reasons not?
cannot reason at all, nor more prove, or Scientifically know its object (as it
rest's there) than Science as science believe. Thus I then answered, and though
the Doctor hitherto never took the least notice of my reply, yet we shall find
him hereafter when his rational Evidence of Christian Religion comes to a
trial, much born down with this very difficulty.

7 In the mean while to give some hints at what I shall then say. I ask when
the Dr (who talks much of Faiths evidence) believes the Mystery of the
Incarnation upon this sole ground that God reveals it in Scripture, what
rational evidence can he derive into his Faith, if you precisely consider it,
as fixed upon the Revelation and Mystery together? None arises from the nature
of these things purely believed, unless he stoutly affirm (and he is as like to
do it as any man living) that he evidently see's by his new eyes of Faith the
intrinsic infallible truth of the Revelation in it self, as also the two
natures in Christ, Humane and Divine. I say by virtue of that act, as it is
precisely terminated upon the object believed, which if I rightly understand
him. P. 387. fine, he acknowledges to be obscure, and upon that account unmeet
to ground Evidence? What then is to be done? O, says the Dr I will fetch my
Evidence not from the Nature of the things believed, for they are remote and
dark, but from the evidence of sense as to the Miracles wrought by Christ, from
the Testimony of those who saw Christ our Lord, and have delivered his Doctrine
to us, and given the greatest Evidence of their fidelity etc. Se his pages. 387
and 416. Very good, let all yet be as he pleases.

8 Hence it follows first. That the Dr's act of Faith as it tend's upon the
Revelation, not evidently seen, and an obscure Mystery together, is so far
blind, yea and like a Mole, working without light (They are his own words P.
353) as that Faith is, which he would impugn, The Dr own's Faith both clear and
obscure
and this I chiefly insist upon at present. It follows. 2. That his one
indivisible act of Faith is both clear and obscure; as fixed upon his supposed
evident Motives, it is clear, and under another respect obscure, as it adheres
to an obscure object believed. For so he speak's. P. 387. I had rather thought,
says he, the more obscure the object had been (for its little better then
Nonsense to call an act of Faith obscure) the greater necessity there had been
of strong evidence to persuade etc. One word, Mr Dr by the way. I think it far
greater Nonsense to call objects a part rei obscure, if we use proper
language. A pore blind man stumbles at a stone, is the stone therefore obscure,
while another sees it clearly, and stumbles not? Thus all objects obscure to
our weak Capacities, are clear and evident to God and Angels. Clarity and
obscurity, Mr Dr, as I have often noted (but you never mend your faults when
told of them) are inseparable proprieties of vital operations, and belong not
to Things in rigor of speech, though in a vulgar way with a respect to our
acts, the language may pass. Again, shift all you will, if the object in your
sense be obscure, your act of Faith, as it is fixed upon that clouded verity,
cannot but under that notion and respect, be obscure also.

9 It follows. 3. That, had the Dr pitched on the true Evidence of
Credibility, which is not done, I have all that for my Faith with much more to
boot taken from the Churches long continuance, Her Miracles, Sanctity,
Conversions, and other Motives. Whereof see, Reas. and Relig. Disc: 2. C. 7. 8.
9. 10. 11. Now if the Evidence of Credibility once established necessary in the
Church, be ever prerequired as an inducement to believe (as all confess) it
little import's Christianity, whether it be discovered by the very act of
Faith, or the Judgment previous to Faith, supposing, as I said above, that
this judgment inform's and illuminat's the understanding, chiefly at every
man's first Conversion. Did I come short of the where the Evidence of
Credibility is found.
Dr in the evidence of Credibility, he might justly blame me, but when in
reallity he has none, as we shall se hereafter, and I introduce such an
Evidence as converted the world, Say I beseech you wherein am I faulty? Marry
in this may the Dr reply, that I allow not evidence to the very act of Faith,
but only to the previous judgment of Credibility. No hurt at all, while the
mind has the evidence of Credibility laid open, and the Dr's very act of Faith
(such an one as it is) is partly clear, partly obscure.

10 But to quiet the Dr I can without prejudice to my Opinion, much less to
Christian Religion, grant with many learned Divines, that one indivisible act
of Faith rest's both upon the Motives, and the revealed Mystery together. Nay
more, I do hold that the Motives are God's own language whereby he speak's to
the world, not imitable by any Enemy, for, etiam factis loquitur Deus, as S.
Austin often cited, affirm's. Se Reas. Relig: Disc. 3. I say. 3. The The
obligation of believing arises from the Motives.
obligation of believing first arises from the light of these Motives, for no
man says, he believes, because he believes, but therefore believes, because
antecedently to his Faith, he judges it most reasonable note the rational
ground.
(upon God's command) to believe, what is revealed. The Revelation therefore
obscurely proposed to us cannot, as obscure, be the rational ground of our firm
assenting to it, and for this reason to avoid confusion in the Analysis, I
attribute Evidence to the previous judgment of Credibility and not to the very
act of Faith. Though I scruple nothing to grant that I believe also for the
Motives, which, as I now said, have their influence upon Faith, and therefore
the Dr flatly calumniat's, when he tell's me over and over, that I believe
without reason, without grounds and Motives; That I have Motives and evident
Motives (P. 382). yet after all this Evidence, believing has nothing to do
with them. Just as if a man should say (P. 384.) there is a particular way of
seeing with ones eyes shut. He might better have said, his intellectual Eyes
were darkened when he read my The Dr's cavil, groundless.
Treatise, for no Author ever gave greater strength and efficacy to the Motives
then I have done, when I say not only Faith, but Christ also, the Church,
Scripture, and all true Religion goes to wrack without them. I further assert,
that a Believers mind is so far from being in a state of darkness, in the
instant it elicits Faith, that even then it is environed with the light of
these Motives, clearly represented by the judgment of credibility, the luster
whereof is so great, that as many Divines teach, they make Faith evident in
Attestance. This opinion I could maintain, and yet defend the obscurity of
Faith in order to its Material object, as the Dr withal his pretended Evidence
must do, whereof more presently.

11 P. 376. He seems some what resty, ruminates again his old difficulty and
ask's, whether in requiring an Infallible assent of Faith to the Churches
infallibility upon Motives confessedly fallible, an assent be not required
beyond all proportion and degree of evidence. First. Who tells you, Mr Dr, that
the Motives are confessedly fallible? The Church never defined so, I with
others expressly say, they are Metaphysically certain, and have infallible
connection with the Divine Revelation. It is true, some Divines hold them
fallible, but it is only an opinion, and therefore too weak to support your
stout expression (confessedly fallible) or to make the contrary opinion
improbable. But suppose them fallible I have notwithstanding showed, how the
act of Faith is most certain and infallible, and shall here for the better
satisfaction of a less learned Reader upon this hint given by the Dr, apply all
I have said above to the Catholic Church. Thus I discourse.

12 God, an eternal Truth, who perfectly comprehend's all things, intuitively
Seeing himself one Essence and Though the Motives to Faith were fallible, Faith
yet stand's firm.
three distinct Persons, reveal's that Verity, and to the end all may assent to
it by Faith, He adorn's his own Oracle the Catholic Church with the Royal
Signs of his Power and wisdom. The Church thus illustrated, speaking in the
name of God, or which is all one, God speaking by Her, proposes that high
Mystery and obliges all to believe it. The Signs or Motives whereby he speaks
to reason (manifest in the Church) make it evidently credible that eternal
Truth speak's, and in order to Faith, are the only exterior rational lights we
have in this present State, from whence Faith takes it rise, and whereupon it
necessarily depend's. But the highest measure of certainty these motives
(considered as rational inducements) can give any, is only, as I say, to make
the Mystery evidently credible, not evidently true, Yet on the other side, when
we prudently reflect upon God's powerful speaking by Signs and Motives, and
withal ponder the weight of his Command which obliges us to assent, not only
to the Credibility of a Mystery, but to its very Truth, a pious will both can,
and is bound to move the understanding to pass, as it were, above that
Credibility, and to believe the Infallible truth of the Revelation, which
revealed truth, by help of other Principles mentioned in the foregoing Chapter,
advances Faith to infallible certainty, and therefore far transcends that
intellectual light rising from the Motives, and also goes beyond the plainest
signification of words Christ ever spoke, because Faith, as Faith, ultimately
relies not upon the bare signification of words, or on the exterior sight of
Miracles, but upon the real Truth of Gods Revelation pointed at by words, and
works, though by such outward Signs not evi^vidently proved true. And thus you
se first, what the obscurity of Faith implies, or wherein it consist's. It
consist's in this, that through Obedience to God's Command, we raise our selves
above the force of all Motives inducing to Faith, and firmly believe upon
another Authority (I mean God's Divine Testimony) that to be infallibly true,
though we neither se the Testimony nor the thing attested, evidently true. You
se. 2. That our Dr's long Tattle of Faith transcending the Motives of
Credibility serves only to amuse an unwary Reader, or rather to tell the
learned, that he shamefully mistakes, and handles one difficulty in place of
another, for according to his promise, he should either have proved that Faith
it self, or the Church is fallible, but all this while he run's astray, and
never meddles with that main Question, contenting himself to impugn, (and most
weakly) a School opinion only.

13 And here by the way I cannot but wonder at our Dr's simplicity who cites
Doctor Holden, saying. That no assent of Divine Faith can have any greater
true and rational certainty, then the assent of the Medium has, by which the
object of Faith is applied to the understanding. First. What if Dr Holden
differ from others in explicating the certainty of Faith, does he therefore
hold it fallible or only morally certain? This follows not. 2. Dr Still:
should here have told us, what is meant by those words: The assent of the
medium by which etc? For if the Catholic Doctor teach, that the Medium now
spoken of, is the Divine Revelation applied by Motives Metaphysically certain,
he may well assert, that Faith, as true and rational (mark the words) can have
no greater certainty then that medium, known by natural discourse, gives, yet
this hinders not that higher certainty grounded on the Revealers Authority
believed, and upon God's command, as is already explained.

14 Dr Still: from his P. 376 to P. 400. besides endless Tautologies all
tending to show Faith unreasonable for want of Motives (already answered) and
much ill language, not worth answering, gives me little to reflect on. Yet his
383 P. must not pass wholly unexamined, where got into a Dungeon he cries out
against the obscure tendency of Faith upon its own object, though he knows, or
should know, that old Maxim. Fides est credere quod non vides. The truth is
grounded upon our Saviors words to S. Thomas. Blessed are those who believe
and have not seen. Its grounded on S. Peter's words. 2. Epist 1. 19. A light
shining in a dark place, upon S. Austin's Doctrine. Epist. 85. Faith has its
eyes wherewith after some manner (quodammodo) All Authors ascribe an obscure
tendency to Faith.
it may se that to be true, which yet it sees not, and the Authority of many
other Fathers. Therefore S. Thomas rightly conclud's. 2. 2. q. 5. a. 2. corp.
That the Intellectual power assents to a matter believed, not because it see's
it, either in it self, or by any resolution made into the first Principles
Seen; but because it is convinced by the Divine Authority to assent to things,
Quae non videt, which it see's not. Hence also Catholic Divines infer, that
the very act of Faith purely considered as Faith, see's not by any evidence the
Truth of what we believe, otherwise to se evidently and to believe, would be
the same thing contrary to Christ words, which annex happiness to believing
without seeing, or clear evidence had of that object yet in darkness, never to
be perfectly dispelled, until we se God in the next life.

15 But says Dr Still. The great things we believe are received upon the
Authority of the Revealer, yet so, that we assert, we have as great evidence
that these things were revealed by God, as the matter is capable of. Here is no
man knows what hudled up in this dark expression. As the matter is capable of.
Let us therefore proceed plainly. You, Sr, believe the Mysterious Trinity
because, as you think, God reveal's it in Scripture. Have you by your act of
Faith (for here we speak not of the previous rational Evidence of Credibility
Evidence, that such a Revelation (which was and is yet God's free act and might
not have been) does now really exist? Have you evidence of the true Sense of
those word's Truths, whereof the Dr has not Evidence
whereby you judge the Trinity is revealed? Have you evidence of their being
words divinely inspired? Have you any thing like evidence of the Mystery
believed? No; All the Miracles which Christ and his Apostles wrought cannot
make these particular truths to appear evident to any in this State, yet
Orthodox Christians believe them Infallibly true by Faith, and therefore you,
Sr, are as deep in a Dungeon as any you ieer at, get out how you can.

16 The rest that follows is nothing but an idle sporting with S. Paul's
Doctrine. Heb. 11. 1. Is it not pretty, says the Dr, because Faith is called an
Evidence, therefore it must be inevident? Because it is called an Argument,
therefore it can use none. What stuff is here? Who ever said that Faith uses
not Arguments? Or called it a Conviction but as the Apostle speaks, of things
not seen? Soon after he has a ^ash at me, and it reaches S. Austin also. I had
said, no merit or thanks in believing, had we evidence of the Mysteries we
believe, and I speak with S. Austin, In Evangel. Joan. Trac. 79. This is the
praise of Faith, if that which is believed, be not seen. For what great thing
is it, if that be believed, which is seen? According to that sentence of our
Lord, when he rebuked his Disciple, saying, because thou have seen me Thomas,
Thou have believed. Blessed are they who have not seen and have believed.

CHAP. VIII.
The Doctor's Discourse from page 400, to P. 416. Considered, and found
weightless.

1 HEre the Dr would fain rescue another Argument taken out of his Account from
the objections I made against it, Reas. and Relig: Disc. 2. C. 2. n. 5. And you
may se him hard put to it for The Dr hard put to his Shifts.
proofs, when to show the Church no way necessary to ground Faith, he run's up
to the woman of Samaria. John 4. to Barbarians, and others, who all received
Divine Revelation and believed without an Infallible Church. In plain English
he would infer, that the Christian Catholic Church, before it was perfectly
founded, or owned as God's Oracle, did not then ground Faith, therefore it
could never do so, after its complete establishment. Is not this an heroical
attempt? Tell me, Mr Dr. what sense have we in this Inference? The Samaritan
woman believed Christ when the Church was not perfectly in being, Therefore S.
Austin when it was an absolute built moral Body, erred much in saying. He would
not believe the Gospel unless the authority of the Catholic Church moved him
to believe it. Which authority once weakened, says the Saint, in the same
place, contra Epist: Fundam. I cannot believe the Gospel. S. Dyonisius and
Damaris. Act. 17. who knew nothing of the Churches beginning at Jerusalem on
whitsunday, hearing S. Paul an Infallible Oracle preach, believed, Ergo
Christians that lived in time of the Nicene Council could not then believe the
Church. What Logic is this? Nay more; in the Dr's, Principles, that Article of
our Creed. I believe the Holy Church stands there to no purpose, because
forsooth, in some extraordinary circumstances and occasions Faith may be had
without knowledge of the Church, of Scripture and of Christ also: For many
Divines hold, that Barbarians by mere contemplating the visible works in
nature, may without the teaching of a living Oracle come to the knowledge of
one God as a Rewarder, and have Faith available to Salvation. Now here is the
Dr's erroneous Principle, that which in some circumstances serves to beget
Faith, may ever serve, and in all occasions.

2 The unsoundness, or rather Nonsense whereof, I will demonstrate against Mr
Dr. The ancient Christians had true Faith before the Canon of Scripture was
extant. Now that holy Book being published and received all over, our Dr
ground's his Faith upon it, only Ancient Christians had true Faith, before
scripture was written.
as its understood by every man's discerning faculty, what therefore once was
no rule nor ground of Faith (because not in being) afterward becomes a ground
when it is known and published. Just thus we discourse of the Church. When the
woman of Samaria and some Barbarians believed, the Church was not founded, nor
known or owned by all as Gods Oracle, but afterward the foundation of it being
perfectly laid, and Pastors and Doctors appointed by Christ to teach the world,
it was owned for God's Oracle, and then brought with it an obligation upon all
to hear and believe it.

3 The reason hereof, more amply laid forth in my last Treatise, is taken from
the express constitution of Christ, who erected the Church as a most facile,
clear, and living Rule of Faith. This great Master assures all, that whoever
hear's the Church; hear's him. That Faith comes by hearing, and therefore
Pastors and Doctors are appointed to teach to the Consummation of Saints, unto
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of Christ's Mystical body etc.
Wherefore Baronus in his Apodixis. Tract: 9. puncto. 2. ingenuously professes.
That the Testimony of the present Church is a condition necessarily required to
believe the authority of the Scripture, because Faith comes by hearing. Hence I
argue. A law made by Christ is to be observed, the ordinary means appointed by
the Lawgiver Himself for the grounding of Faith, ought in no case to be
neglected. But Christ has obliged all who believe, to rely on the Christian
Church ever since She was made an Oracle known to the world, as is largely
proved Reas. and Religion, through the whole Second Discourse, therefore though
by accident or in some very unusual circumstance, men have had Faith without
any knowledge either of Scripture, or Church, Yet now after the Churches
complete establishment, and Her long continuance to exclude her Authority, and
believe upon any other ground would be so great folly and rashness, that God
may justly deny his supernatural Grace to such unadvised Believers, who
therefore would not have Faith to Salvation.

4 Pray you tell me, should a Barbarian that never heard of Church or
Scripture, yet may probably believe in God, as a Rewarder of Good, by a mere
contemplation of the Heavens etc. Should, I say, such an one come to the
knowledge of Christ, of the Scripture, and of the Church, gloriously
illustrated with all her Motives, Can this man, think you, in these new
circumstances of a greater light, neglect all, and believe, that God will
reward good upon the old motive, to wit, the visible beauty or motion of the
Heavens? No; That belief would now be imprudent, and upon that account
unavailable The Dr's grand Principle, proved forceless
to Salvation, What therefore serves to ground Faith in some circumstances,
serves not in all. We have yet another Instance against the Dr, who hold's
there is a Thing in being called the Church of England, where he preaches, and
pretend's to settle his Faith upon Scripture only. Would he like it well,
should some of his Hearers tell him, they build not their Faith upon any
Doctrine, as it is delivered in Scripture, or by the Church of England, or
finally taught by Mr Dr, but purely believe upon the Barbartans Motive, or, as
the Samaritan Woman believed upon our Saviors words, long since spoken. I am
the Messiah? I persuade my self he will not easily approve any such
extravagancy. Yet he must, if he proceed consequently, to his indigested
Discourse, for the Faith of that Samaritan woman and Barbarians also was truly
Divine, and why may not his People believe as they did independently of all
Scripture, and the Church of Englands Doctrine, as he would now have us to
believe independently of the Catholic Churches Testimony? For here is his
Principle, or he speak's Nonsense. What was once sufficient to propound or
ground Faith, may be ever sufficient, and in all circumstances.

5 One may reply. That Samaritan and Barbarians likewise, believed upon God's
word not then written, but spoken, which afterward became the Doctrine of
Scripture. Very right, and so say I, they believed upon that Doctrine which
afterward was, is, and ever will be taught by the Church, but as then there was
no written Scripture. So there was no Church founded to propose or ground Faith
upon. And thus the Proponent of Faith may vary, though the ultimate Motive or
formal object of it, which is Gods Revelation never changes. The variety of an
Infallible Oracle, varies not the Formal object of Faith.

6 By what is here noted you se, how pitifully the Dr abuses himself and
Reader, P 4^7. I had said. n. 7. That none can make the Roman Catholic Church
in all circumstances the only sure foundation of Faith, upon this Principle
chiefly, that Faith in general requires no more, but only to rely on God the
first Verity speaking by one or more lawfully sent to teach, who prove their
Mission, and make the Doctrine proposed evidently Credible. A fair concession,
replies the Dr, which plainly destroy's the necessity of the The Dr abuses the
Reader and grossly mistakes.
Churches Infallibility in order to Faith. For, if no more be necessary in
order to Faith, but to rely upon God speaking by this or that Oracle, how comes
the Infallible Testimony of the Church to be in in any Age necessary to Faith?
A fair Concession on my part, Mr Dr, but a foul mistake on yours. For, have not
I all along proved (though you Answer nothing) that the Church is one of the
Infallible Oracles whereby God speaks, as immediately and infallibly, as ever he
spoke by Prophet or Apostle? And must not you admit two or three Infallible
Oracles? The Apostles who taught Christianity before the writing of Scripture
were Infallible Oracles, Scripture it self, completely finished and set forth,
say you, is another, and I hope you will not deny but that S. John the
Evangelist, who lived a considerable time after the whole Canon was Signed,
kept still his Apostolical authority, and remained Infallible.

7 Observe now, Gentle Reader. Does the Dr destroy the necessity of the
Scriptures An Argument ad hominem.
infallible Testimony, because he own's the Apostles Oral teaching Infallible?
No. How then do we destroy the Churches Infallibility in saying, that Faith in
General, only requires to rely upon the first Verity speaking by this, or that
Oracle? For, if two or three distinct Oracles subvert not the Dr's Faith built
upon Scripture, how can more Oracles then one, overthrow mine built on the
Church? The Question therefore in this place is not, whether the Churches
Testimony be Infallible, but precisely thus much, whether the Dr's Inference
have any thing like reason in it? Viz. Faith relies on God speaking by this or
that Oracle, Ergo it cannot rely on God speaking by the Church. The inference
plainly appears Nonsense unless the Churches Testimony be first proved
fallible. Now should the whole A modest offer made to the Dr.
contest come to the Churches Infallibility, after all I have said of it
(whereunto the Dr never yet replied word) I am most willing and ready, to
discuss again this particular Controversy with him in a Treatise apart, upon
all the Principles Christian Religion can afford, Scripture, Church, Fathers,
and manifest Reason. Is not this a fair modest offer?

8 What follows in the Dr upon this subject is more than simple. God, says
he, spoke by Christ and his Apostles as Oracles, by whom his word is declared
to us, Therefore nothing can be necessary to Faith, but to rely on the first
Truth speaking by them. Mark here an improbable Supposition made use of for a
proof, as if, forsooth, every one by casting an eye upon Scripture after some
diligence, could exactly declare, what Christ and his Apostles taught; whereas
I have told the Dr over and over, and it is the grand Principle The Dr's
improbable Supposition, refuted.
I rely on, that none can in this present State say absolutely, what Doctrine
those first great Oracles delivered, even in the Fundamentals of Faith; none
can know the true sense of the words registered in Scripture, or assert, that
they were Divinely inspired without the Infallible Testimony of the Church. I
say Infallible, For if She Teaches so fallibly, that her Doctrine may be false,
much better were it, I think, that She never speak, or define at all. Thus you
have in brief my Principle, further explained in the two last Treatises,
whereof the Dr has taken no notice hitherto, and the reason most certainly is,
because he knows not what to answer.

9 The very most that goes before or follows in the Dr on this subject,
besides much ill language, is a mere rehearsal of what his Account contains,
and as he repeat's his old Objections, so I need to do no more, but only to
return my Answers, given Reas. and Relig: cited above, beginning from. n. 8.
and. 9. He demanded in his Account, and here has the same. With what Faith did
the Disciples of Christ at the time of his suffering, believe the Divine
Authority of the old Testament? I answered. Supposing a total subversion of the
Jewish Church (not to examine now the difference between the Infallibility of
the Synagogue and our Christian Church) The Disciples had our Blessed Lord
present most able to ascertain them, that he came not to cancel any Divine
revealed Truth in the old Scripture, (for that was impossible) but to fulfill
the ancient Prophesies, and to establish a new law of Grace, far more perfect
than the ceremonial Law had been, and that upon his sole Authority, the
Disciples believed the verities of the old Testament. Admit therefore, that the
high Priests and Elders had all erred in consenting to our Saviors death, this
only follows, as I answered. n. 9. that their Privilege of not erring, lasted
only to Christ's coming, as, S. Luke 16. 16. testifies, Lex and Prophetae
usque ad Ioannem, which is to say, Christ's sacred Kingdom being then at hand,
and to remain to the worlds end, the Prophets ceased to prophesy of His
appearing in flesh, and had no longer that Infallible gift. Answearable
hereunto one might assert, were it needful, that the High Priests infallible
power in judging, failed also at that time, though the Dr will have a heard
task to prove, that Caiphas's Judgment was erroneous, in case he ponder well
S. John's words, c. 11. 50. You know nothing, neither do you what he repeat's to
little purpose has been Solved.
consider that it is expedient for us, that one man die for the people, and that
the whole nation perish not. And this he said not of himself, but being the
High Priest of that year he Prophesied, That Jesus should die for the Nation and
not only for the Nation etc. Observe well. It was expedient that Christ should
die, and though a wicked man spoke the words, yet the Spirit of truth which
guided his tongue (for he spoke not of himself) erred not. And this proves,
that God often preserves truth as well by an unworthy Prelate, as by one really
worthy where Order and Office is to be regarded, and not the dignity or
Indignity of the person. Now whether all the subordinate Judges of the
Sanhedrin were infallible, is a new question not pertinent to the matter in
hand. It is more satisfaction then I owe the Dr to show that the Supreme Judge
of the Sanhedrin (who ever presided over the rest) much less the whole Church
of the Jews erred not. Witness S. Joseph of Arimathaea, Nicodemus, and
innumerable others, dispersed all Jury over, who all were faithful and free
from error.

10 Concerning the other Question hinted at, None I think can doubt, but that
the High Priests in all grand Judicatures were infallible, which Privilege
Moses certainly enjoyed, and Amarias also 2. Paralip. 19. 11. Moses induced by
Iethro his Counsel. Exodus 18. 13, made Choice of some others to Judge in causes
of lesser importance, reserving greater matters to himself. Number. 11. 16. God
commanded Moses to call together seventy of the Elders in Israel for his
assistance, appointed to bear the burden with him, and at their election had
the Spirit of Prophesy. After Moses death, the Prophets, Iosue, Samuel, David,
Elias, Eliseus etc succeeded, and these certainly were Infallible. But there is
no need of staying longer upon this point, being, as I said, not pertinent to
our present Enquiry relating to the Infallibility of our Christian Church.

11 The Dr P. 408. err's not a little, while he supposes the Infallibility of
the Roman Church to be lodged in the Supreme Ecclesiastical Judges, and no
where else, To this I answered directly. Reas. and Relig: Disc. 3. C. 12. n. 14.
(much wonder it is the Dr's eyes saw it not) and said, when we resolve Faith
into the Churches Infallible Authority, we understand by the Church, the whole
diffused body of Orthodox Christians made manifest by Supernatural Motives and
not in the first place, the Representative in General Councils: For, that more
explicit Belief had of General Councils connaturally presupposes (when a
right Analysis is made) the other general Truth assented to. Viz. This
manifested Society of Christians is God's own Church, and the only way to
Salvation. Hence all Catholics avouch that the whole Catholic Body consisting
of Pastors to teach, and Hearers to learn, cannot totally err, or swerve from
truth, whereunto properly belong those promises of the Gospel. Hell gates shall
not prevail against the Church. The spirit of truth abides with Her for ever.
She is the Pillar and ground of Truth etc.

12 The Dr err's again in his next An other Error of the Dr.
page, where he demand's why the concurrent Testimony of all Christians may not
afford as sufficient a ground to believe the books of the new Testament,
without an Ecclesiastical Senate, as those Jews (who no more believed Christ
Infallible, than the Sanhedrin did) might have a sufficient ground to believe,
that the Prophesies came not in old time by the will of God? This I take to be
the sense of the Dr's Querie, which after his manner he spin's out to a tedious
length. I answer, though the Jews had sufficient ground to believe, that those
ancient Prophesies were not from man, but God, yet the concurrent Testimony of
Christians, in the Dr's Principles, is no certain ground to believe the
Authority of the books of the new Testament. First because, all that Testimony
with him is fallible, and may be false, and if the Jews The Churches
Tradition, is infallible.
had no surer Ground to believe the old Prophesies, they could not assent to
them by Divine Faith. In our Catholic Principles there is no difficulty at
all, because we hold the Tradition of the Church infallible. Yet as I noted in
the last Treatise. the first consent of Christians owning these books Divine,
presupposed them taken as Divine upon the Authority of an Infallible Oracle,
and first made them not accepted as Divine, for no man will say Scripture is
first owned as a book Divinely inspired by the Holy Ghost, because Christians
Say so, but contrary wise, therefore they say so, and agree in that truth,
because God antecedently to the universal consent assured all by an Infallible
Oracle, that they were of Divine Inspiration.

13 P. 410. we have fearful Doings about a man of clouts, where the Dr sadly
complain's, that I fall unmercifully to work with this man of Clouts (He means
himself) that I throw him first down and trample upon him, then I set him up
again, to make him capable of more valor being shown upon him, then I kick him
afresh and beat him of on side, then on the other, and so terribly triumph over
him, that the poor man of Clouts blesses himself, that he is not made of flesh
and bones, for if he had it might have The Dr's more than rediculous Complaints.
cost him some aches and wounds? What, in the name of God, put the Dr into this
strange trembling fit? Will not every one that read's these Threnes, judge that
I have dealt most rudely with a Doctor, and deem my crime horrid, one surely of
the first magnitude, to be washed away with tears and sorrow? Please to hear
it. Marry, I said, Disc. 2. c. 3. n. 9 (and the Dr cites my words) That I
verily thought Mr Still: mistook one objection for an other? And is this all?
Not one syllable more, I assure you, that can give offense, unless he be angry
with me for not calling him Doctor when I knew nothing of his Doctorship.

14 P. 411. He ask's, how those believed Infallibly who only heard of Christ's
Miracles, but saw them not? I answered. n. 15. Every immediate Conveyer or
Propounder of Christ's Doctrine needs not to be Infallible, though before those
Hearers, whether Barbartans or others believe, Every one that proposes faith
need's not to be infallible.
an Infallible Oracle must be known and relied on. Se more hereof. n. 16. for I
am weary in following such weightless stuff, yet in the next page you have more
of it, where he blames me as one senseless, because I say. n. 12. that fewer
Motives may serve to induce young Beginners, seldom molested with difficulties
against Faith, witness S. Austin cited above. Ceteram turbam etc, than will
convince the more learned, who often struggle to captivate their understanding
to our high Christian Mysteries. And is not this exactly verifyed in Luther,
Calvin, and innumerable others, who when Beginners easily submitted to all the
Church teaches, yet afterward when more learned, they found (unless they tell
the world loud lies) Motives to dissuade them from their first Faith. Such men
therefore seduced by fallacious Arguments, or rather by their own malice,
should have been better grounded in that one Principle whereon all Christian
Doctrine wholly depend's, the Infallibility of Christ's true Church.

15 P. 414. I meet with a jeer, because I hold Protes: without Princ: Disc. 1.
c. 2. n. 3. That every Bishop or Pastor, though not personally infallible, yet
when he is lawfully sent to teach, and speak's in the name of God and the
Church, considered as a member conjoined with the Infallible Church, may be
said to teach infallibly. An admirable speculation replies the Dr and, so says
he, may every one in the streets be infallible, not as considered in himself,
but as a member conjoined with truth, A conjunction with God's word implies
Union with the Church.
or every Sectary as a member conjoined with God's word. Reflect, Mr Dr is
every one we meet in the streets, a Bishop or Pastor commissioned to teach
infallibly Christ's Verities, of such Pastors I speak, and not of your street
men? Or, can a Sectary be a member conjoined with Gods word? It is impossible,
for to say, Sectary, is to suppose him separated from God's word, which
therefore destroies your Imagined infallible conjunction, and makes your
Speculation not admirable, but ridiculous. Again, and here is a solution to the
Argument (more amply laid forth Disc. 3. c. 3. n. 17. 19. and before that c. 2.
n. 12). A conjunction with truth or Gods word, necessarily implies in this
present State, a conjunction with the Church, for without the Testimony of this
Oracle previously assented to, we have no infallible assurance that such books
are divinely inspired, or what the sense of them is in all controverted
passages, therefore to suppose an Infallible conjunction with truth, or God's
word independently of Church Authority, is to suppose light taken from
darkness; or the last Resolvent of Faith in order to us, not to ground it at
all. But says the Dr, the Question is whether such a Prelate or Pastor may be
divided from God's infallible Another difficulty Solved.
truth? If he can, what security has any one to rely upon him, upon such a
conditional Infallibility, whereof he can have no assurance? I answer, the
common received Doctrine of the Church being known, and divulged in every
Catechism, it is easily known when a Renegado, such an one as the Bishop of
Spalato was, abandon's the Church. In case of any rational mistrust or doubt
(because wolves sometimes appear like lambs) Prudence direct's timorous
Consciences to advise with their Pastors, or others, more learned then
themselves.

16 P. 415. The Dr applaudes his good fortune in meeting with an Adversary,
that mistakes his so well explicated Rational Evidence of Christian Religion,
Of the Dr's vain applauding himself.
and a long talk follows of hewers of difficulties, and water-drawers, of the
Seraphims feathers, and S. Laurenc'es Gridiron, to what purpose I know not. My
hope is before this next Chapter be ended to make it manifest, that the Dr
neither understand's what is meant by rational Evidence, nor has any thing like
it, for Protestant Religion.

CHAP. IX.
Dr Stilling: pretended Evidence for Christian Religion proved nothing like
Evidence. His Evidence taken from Sense in the Mystery of the holy Eucharist
demonstrated Senseless. How vainly he endeavour's to prove by Miracles related
in Scripture the Truth of the Doctrine there registered. A word of his Tradition,
and many other errors.

1 THe Dr P. 416, goes about to explain what is meant by his rational Evidence
of Christian Religion, and ground's it upon the unquestionable assurance which
we have of matters of fact, and the Miracles wrought by Christ, as a great part
of this rational Evidence, which is destroyed by our Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. Soon after he complain's of our silent passing over these
things, the Schools having found no answers to such Arguments. What will The
Dr's unworthy proceeding,
not this man say in points remote from us, when in a plain matter of fact, he
beguiles his Reader with most loud untruths? Let any one peruse my last
Treatise. Disc. 1. c. 9. n. 11. 12. In that Discourse of a Heathen with a
Christian, he will find the first difficulty largely handled, and solved, where
I say, the Dr either believes our Saviors unparallaled Miracles, because
Scripture relates them, and then he supposes Scripture to be Divine or inspired
by the Holy Ghost, which the Heathen denies, and therefore wishes that Divine
inspiration to be proved by Arguments extrinsical to the Doctrine delivered in
Scripture. Or, contrariwise, he proves those Miracles to have been, upon the
Fallible report of men liable to error (the Dr own's no Tradition Infallible)
and this advances not his cause at all, for do not the Turk's speak as much of
Mahomets Miracles, upon fallible and perhaps false reports also? Thus the
Heathen argues, and rationally too, not yet knowing what Religion to embrace.
Here in a word you have the substance of all I then said, and I think my
Argument thus delivered convinces. Whoever proves Christian Religion to be
assuredly true by Motives as obscure as the very Doctrine of Christian Religion
is, either evinces nothing, or makes a vicious An Argument proposed.
Circle; But thus the Dr proceeds, whose rational Evidence, or unquestionable
assurance of Christian Religion is proved by matters of fact, Miracles I mean,
wrought by Christ, which Miracles, are as obscure to a Heathen, and as much
objects of Faith to Christians, as the very Doctrine of Christ is, recorded in
Scripture, Therefore he proves nothing. Se more hereof. n. 12. cited.

2 The other piece of the Dr's rational Evidence taken from Sense which he The
Drs Argument taken from the Holy Eucharist, both here and formely, Solved.
thinks the Doctrine of Transubstantiation destroies, I then reflected on, and
fully answered. Reas. and R^lig: c. 12. n. 3. where I say the immediate object
of Sense, remain's after consecration unchangeable, as before. It is true,
reason upon the suggestion of sense might well conclude, that the substance of
bread is there also, were there not another Stronger Principle then sense which
overawes us, Christ's own words, This is my body: which cause reason to submit.
Thus S. Chrisostom. S. Cyril of Jerusalem with innumerable ancient Fathers,
cited in that Chapter, yielded up their reason, notwithstanding that strong
insinuation of sense to the Contrary. And must not the Dr do so also, had he
either seen our Lord Jesus a little Infant in Bethlem, or those Angels that
appeared to Lot. Genesis 19? He would certainly have judged upon the suggestion
of what he saw, that Christ our Lord was only man, and not God, and that those
Angels were mortal men, and not Angels, yet had he then known by Divine
Revelation. that Christ was truly God, and that those Angels were only men in
appearance, as the Eucharist is seemingly bread, would he not, think ye,
forthwith have rejected that fallacious suggestion of his sight, and firmly
assented to the Divine Revelation? Nay more, does not the Dr tell us in his
Account P. 574. that we are not to look on bread and wine as naked Signs but as
Signa efficacia, and that there is a real Presence of Christ, in and with,
those signs to the Souls of the Believers? This unexplicated Presence of Christ
in, and with bread (be it what you will) is as much contrary to Sense, as
Christ's real Presence is, under the accidents of bread, I prove my assertion.
These outward Accidents of bread either essentially exclude the presence of all
other things from being there, or permit that God may by his omnipotent power
put under them annother Substance. In case they be essentially incompatible
with any other Substance but bread, how dare D^ Still? tell us so asseverantly,
that there is* in and with bread to the souls of Believers, a real presence of
Christ? such Souls I suppose believe not mere phansies. Now if the Accidents
essentially exclude not another substance, I hope Christ's sacred body may be
as well present with them as that real presence is, which the Dr assert's. O!
but we Catholics destroy the substance of bread. That is not at all pertinent
to Protestants boggle not at the possibility of the change.
our present purpose, neither does the truth hereof belong to the judgment of
sense, but only to Gods omnipotent power, For here is the only difficulty,
whether God by his absolute power can conceil the real presence of our Saviors
sacred body under the Accidents of bread? The Devil more skilful in natural
things then the Dr, persuaded himself. Matt: 4. that our Savior could turn
stones into bread. Why therefore may not we believe upon the greatest
Authority, I mean God's own express word, that he changed bread into flesh? The
learnedest Protestants that ever writ boggle not at the possibility of this
change, but only Question the matter of fact, whether God has done, as we
believe? Wherein most certainly we have the upper hand. if plain Scripture, the
general consent of Fathers, and the Authority of all Orthodox Churches cited in
the last Treatise, may plead our cause, and be admitted as sound Principles
against the error of a few Sectaries. Thus much premised we go on, and will
examine more of the Dr's strange Discourse laid forth in, his Account. Part. 1.
c. 5. P. 118. It is worth some reflection, though I think never Dr rambled on
like him.

3 The whole substance comes to this. Sense is sometimes deceived, or to speak
properly, reason upon the suggestion of sense err's: Ergo, it may always err
and be deceived, in its proper object. Or thus: Those of Sodom judged Angels
appearing like men, to be really men, and not Angels, Ergo, they might
rationally think that all they met with in the Streets, were Angels concealed
under the outward shape of men, Why so? Because, forsooth, after that one
Illusion, they were in reason never to make use of their senses afterward upon
any other object for fear of the like deceit. Herein lies the whole strength
of the Dr's weak talk. If says he, what I se and all others se to be bread, be
not really bread, by The whole Strength of the Dr's weak discourse
what means can our faculties difference truth from falsehood? I answer most
easily. For although it be a truth, that, that which appears bread in the Holy
Eucharist be not really bread, yet it is a mere dream to infer from thence,
that every mountain I cast my eyes upon, is not really a Mountain, but in
appearance only, and consequently in the Dr's judgment a falsehood, for what
Consequence is this? God wrought a Miraculous change upon bread, therefore He
does the like all the world over, and perhaps changes whole Castles, whole
Towns, yea the whole Ocean into other substances; at least there is no security
to the contrary, and therefore we may all justly question whether we inhabit
real Houses, and doubt whether the fair City of London be raised to the great
splendor it has upon real Materials, as wood and stones, but rather upon such
Materials, in appearance. A mad discourse if ever any was, which more ruin's
all the Cities in the world, then the last dismal fire destroyed noble London.

4 Mark well, Courteous Reader, the force of my Argument, I do not by What is
to be noted in my Argument.
what is hitherto said go about to prove the Conversion of bread into Christ's
sacred body (that is cleared upon other grounds) but only proceed upon a
Supposition, and assert, if, our Savior wrought that Conversion and changed
bread into his body, The Dr's Discourse is worse then Nonsense, who out of one
Miraculous change (where he thinks our senses are beguiled) will force upon us
an illusion so universal, that no man hereafter ought to trust his eyes, and
taste, when he eats his Diner. Herein lies his gross mistake, which yet to his
no little disgrace, he run's on with, in the following Instances.

5 Tell me, says he, what assurance could The Dr's Instances.
the Apostles have of the Resurrection of Christ's individual body from the
grave, but the judgment of Sense? Or, had S. Thomas believed
Transubstantiation, might he not have thought our Savior some invisible Spirit
hid under those external accidents of his body, because, Hoc est corpus meum
had told him, and the other Disciples, that the external accidents might
remain, where the substance is changed? I pass by his Catacresis, judgment of
sense, for sense makes no Judgment, and say, had the Disciples been so
childish as to have argued like the Dr our wise Savior would have soon
vanquished that senceless plea and told them. My good Disciples, I assured you
at my last supper, that the bread I took into my hands, I changed into my body
(this must be supposed, or Dr Still: Argument becomes forceles) but did I ever
yet tell you, that the body you now behold with your Eyes is only a Spectre, or
an apparition of my body? No? upon what ground then, or by what Authority, can
you rationally infer out of my working one miracle upon bread, that How Christ
might have rebuked his Disciples, had they pleaded like the Dr.
I must do the like now upon my own body risen from the dead? You have none.
Therefore rely boldly on your senses and reason also, and judge me to be the
same Individual. Savior I was before. For there is no Principle natural or
revealed which contradict's this belief, or that enjoynes you to deny your
Senses either in this, or any other sensible object. But for the change of
bread into my body, you have my express words, the world hereafter will profess
that truth all over Christianity, my Church shall maintain it, the best
Christians upon earth believe it, Innumerable Martyrs shall die for it,
undeniable Miracles confirm it, and the most learned Doctors that ever lived,
shall leave this my Doctrine upon Record to the utter confusion of all
Heretics. The Dr may demand upon what ground can I imagine that our Savior
would have argued thus against his Disciples? I answer, my ground is
incomparably more sure, than any the Dr can give, or endeavor to persuade by,
that the Apostles were ever so sottish as to have thought of his ridiculous
Objection, For all I say here are Truths owned over Christendom and worthy to
be spoken by out Savior, but his Objection never wise or Orthodox man
seriously proposed, before himself.

6 What follows in the Dr is no more but one Tautologie after another, The
Dr's Tautologies.
Or the same thing (already casheired) said too often over. When, says he, the
assurance of Christian Religion came from the judgment of the Senses of those
who were Eyewitnesses of the Miracles, and the Resurrection of Christ, if the
Senses of men may be so grossly deceived in the proper objects of them in the
case of Transubstantiation, what assurance could they have who were
Eyewitnesses of them? A long period with many falsities, to no purpose. I have
answered to what here import's, that though our senses be deceived in the case
of Transubstantiation (which is not true) yet we have as much certainty in
every other thing we se or and weak way of arguing
feel, as the Dr has when he sees or feels the pulpit he preaches in, Unless
this Sequel be allowed of: My eyes are once deceived (if yet so) ergo, they
must always be deceived. Or, a Iugler can make me se what is not, ergo, I
never se what is. Again says he. The Drs repeated Objections
Take away the certainty of the judgment of sense, you destroy all certainty
in Religion. I have answered. We neither take away the Object of sense, nor
like well his miscalled judgment of sense, for sense has still its own proper
object, though were it otherwise in this Mystery, his Inference of all
certainty destroyed has no Sense in it. 3. Says the Dr. I must by virtue of
your Churches Infallibility believe something to be true, which if it be true,
there can be no certainty at all of the truth of Christian Religion. This is
only the some thing needlessly repeated, already answered. And so is that which
some others do object. If the sense of seeing be deceived, so likewise may the
sense of hearing, and consequently none can have assurance of what either
Christ spoke, or the Church teaches. Who can read this stuff with patience? Yet
it is gravely set forth in Sermons as most weighty, and convincing, and which
is worse, thought worthy to appear in Print.

7 The Solution of all in a word is. Our senses in this Mystery are not
deceived, nor so much beguiled as the eye is, when we se a straight stick
crooked in the water, for here the Medium makes that to appear crooked which is
not, there in the Eucharist, the immediate object of sense is seen as before,
without the least Illusion. Yet grant, which is not true, a deception here, it
is a folly above expression to infer that our senses are beguiled in every
other object set before our eyes, clearly solved.
and this the Dr must prove, or he evinces nothing. Thus much noted, I
challenge and charge the Dr to discover in his next Answer any thing like a
fallacy in my whole Discourse. But when will this be done think ye? Then I say
(and not sooner) when the Dr makes this Consequence good. If Christ changed
bread, retaining the outward semblance of bread into his own body; we may
prudently judge, that he also changed those stones the Devil showed him. Matt:
4. into good bakers bread, though outwardly they still appeared stones. The
first change is grounded upon as great Authority as any Mystery of Faith is,
(none excepted) For the second, we have nothing but fancy only. Now if after
all I have said, the Dr as his usual If the Dr tell his old stories over again,
he will be called a Bungler.
custom has been, silently passes by my reasons hitherto alleged, and only
tells his old stories over again of our senses being deceived etc. I shall
retort his own words upon him, and conclude, that his School find's no answer
to my Arguments.

8 Another grand error of this Dr is, that he attributes more to the Evidence
of sense in order to its proper object (a visible Miracle for example) than can
be allowed. The Sense of seeing (take this for an Instance, the like is of
feeling hearing etc) is only terminated upon the outward appearance of things,
and, as it penetrat's not the substance of the bread, so neither see's it the
inward life or motion of the Soul in a mortal body. Whence it follows, though
we grant that Sense is never beguiled, as to its proper object, yet it often
gives occasion of deceit in other matters, wholly out of the reach of sense.
You shall se what I here hint at by one Instance. Suppose the Dr saw the Devil,
that often transform's himself into an Angel of light doing his feats, to
delude the senses with a false Miracle, or, if he denies Devils, he must grant
that power to Antichrist, who will show many seeming wonders. Suppose this be
one, that a man in outward appearance dead to all senses by Antichrists Charms,
stand's up again, and moves as others do. I ask, how will the Dr who gives so
much credit to his eyes and senses distinguish by Sense only between the true
resuscitation of Iairus daughter Luke. 8. 55. and this counter feit Miracle of
Antichrist? In his Principles he cannot difference them, if guided by the
Evidence of sense and all that reason Can discover by Sense only.

9 Hence to take off the Dr's, error, as to the Blessed Sacrament, we
discourse further. He Judges what he see's in The Dr by virtue of his own
Principle, must own Antichrist's Miracles, for true Miracles.
a consecrated Host to be truly bread, because his eyes and senses tell him it
is bread. These the Dr thinks give in stronger Evidence for its being bread,
than any proof to the contrary, can persuade, that it is not bread. Yield this
(and the Dr yields all) He is obliged to own this seeming Miracle of Antichrist
for a true Miracle, because his eyes and senses will have it true, I prove it?
The exterior Evidence in both Cases is the very Same, for as sense see's and
feel's this man to be like one truly dead, though he is not dead, So it also
see's and fee'ls this wafer after Consecration to be like true bread, though it
be not bread, and reason, as I now said, purely led on by the conduct of sense
judges alike in both cases, therefore if the Dr Conform's his Judgment to the
persuasion of his senses in the one, and truly hold's a consecrated host to be
bread, he cannot but upon the same Evidence Judge, that Antichrist's Miracle is
a true Miracle. No disparity can be given. O! but Scripture so often
forewarning us of Antichrist's false Miracles, much abates, yea wholly
withdrawes every sound Christian from believing them true. Is it possible? Can
Scripture let in so much light upon us? Can it make us to deny what our eyes
see, and fingers feel, to be true? Why therefore cannot the clearest words that
Christ ever Spoke. This is my body My flesh is meat indeed. My blood is drink
indeed, force us to deny the weak suggestion of our Senses called by the Dr,
the Strongest Evidence? Why should not those Sacred words move us Submissively
to confess, that as no real Miracle lies under that outward guise of
Antichrist's What plain Scripture forces on us to believe in the blessed
Sacrament.
apparent wonder, (Scripture draws us to own this truth) So no real bread lies
under the outward appearance or visible forms of bread and wine, or if Scripture
work's so powerfully upon us as not to believe that to be bread which to our
Senses looks like bread, where in is Our offense greater than the Dr's, who
believes that to be no true Miracle which to our Senses looks like a true one?
In a word the Dr must either quit his so much cried up Evidence taken from
Sense, or will be forced to grant (which is horrid) that Antichrist Shall work
as true Miracles as ever Christ wrought.

10 Again, how can the Dr Assert that Christ's Miracles wrought before the
writing of Scripture, were done to confirm all the Doctrine registered by S.
Paul, and the other Disciples afterward? Nay, how can he prove they were
wrought to confirm the truth of our Saviors own Doctrine without giving some
further proof, then the outward sight of a Miracle, is? Hence I said the Dr
erred, when he told us that the assurance of Christian Religion came from the
judgment of the senses of those who were Eyewitnesses of the Miracles, and
the Resurrection of Christ. First no Eyewitnesses saw our Savior actually
rising from the dead (but afterward) yet had they seen him in that instant, can
the Dr judge that the assurance of the Apostles Faith came from that sight?
Does he or any ground Faith upon the sight of those who beheld Christ's
Miracles, while the very best Eyewitnesses believed not, because they saw
them, but upon this strong Motive, that Christ told them he was sent from God
to teach eternal truth, and that now risen he was the same Savior, who had
been dead. Gods Infallible word therefore (rightly called Divine Revelation,
not seen by any mortal eye) grounded the Apostles Divine Faith relies not upon
the sight of a Miracle.
Faith, and so it likewises does all true Christian Faith in the world to this
day. Now if the Dr tell us, when he says the assurance of Christian Religion
came from the judgment of sense, his meaning only was, that the sight of those
Miracles were Inducements to believe Christ's revealed Doctrine, and made that
(not evidently seen) evidently credible, He first speaks improperly in calling
those visible matters of fact the Foundations of Faith (Account P. 119), And.
2. destroys the certainty of Christian Doctrine, by endeavoring to prove it
immediately true, before he evinces it evidently credible: And this he does by
introducing a new set of Motives (different from those of the Catholic Church)
which both Jews and Gentiles scorn, and in reallity neither evidence the Truth
to such men, nor the Credibility of Christian Religion, much less have any
reference to the Thing he calls Protestancy, as will appear afterward.

11 To make my Assertion good, turn, courteous Reader, to the Doctors Account.
Part. 1. c. 7. P. 204, where he offer's to resolve the Faith of Protestants,
though he never meddl's with the Novelty, as I have largely proved, Protest:
without Princ. Disc. 1. c. 9. In this place I am to show, that his Discourse
tend's to the ruin of true Christian Religion also, Supposing, what he will
have with all might and main Supposed, that there is no Infallible Church.

12 There are, says he, three Questions to be resolved in the resolution of
Faith. First if I be asked, on what grounds I believe the things to be true,
which the Dr's discourse de^^^ed in (...) own ^ords.
are contained in Scripture? My answer must be from the greatest evidence of
truth, which things of that nature are capable of. If therefore the persons who
are supposed to have writ those things, were such who were fully acquainted
with what they writ of, and cannot be suspected of any design to deceive men by
their writings, and if I be certain that these which go under the name of their
writings are undoubtedly theirs, I have sufficient grounds to believe the truth
of them. He add's more. These writers cannot be suspected of ignorance, for
they wrote these things when the story was new, and some of them had been
conversant with the person and actions of him, whom they writ of. That they
could have no intent to deceive, appears from their simplicity and Candor
both of their actions and writings, from their contempt of the world, and
exposing themselves to the greatest hazards to bear witness to them. Finally,
that these writings have been unanimously received by Christians and never
doubted of by Jews His pretended rational evidence for the first act of faith.
or Heathen Philosopher. Thus the Dr plead's for the evidence of the first act
of Faith, whereby he believes those things true which are Doctrine more at
large, not in to leave it unexamined as he usually does mine, but to show the
unreasonableness of it, while he makes all along a bare Supposition his best
and only proof. Or speak thus and you fully express all he says. Some body
wrote the things contained in Scripture, Ergo all that appears there, is true,
because written.

13 To prove by reason that the things contained in Scripture are true, he
first begins with Ifs. If the persons who are supposed to have written such
things were fully acquainted with what they wrote of. If they cannot be
suspected of any design to deceive men. If is be certain that such uvritings
are theirs etc. Observe, I beseech you: These conditional Propositions carry no
other weight with them, but thus much only, if what is supposed True, be true,
it is true, and we ought to assent to it. Just as if one should say; if Peter
be a man of his word, I may believe evidenced null, and forceless.
him, but as that conditional proves not Peter honest, no more do these
Assertions of the Dr being only conditional, prove any thing true without a
Minor to this sense. But these things are so, which Minor is wanting. The Dr
think's he proves his Assertions upon these grounds; That the writers of
Scripture cannot be suspected of Ignorance, having had long conversation with
him they wrote of. Their simplicity and candor in writing gives evidence they
intended no deceit, with all the rest that follows. I answer, these are
nothing like rational proofs, but mere unproved Suppositions, whereunto neither
Jews nor Gentiles give credit. I evince this demonstratively. Put the book of
holy Scripture into the hands of a Heathen Philosopher, who never heard of
Christ, of the Church, or of any other Motive for Christian Religion, but only
takes so much as the Dr here proposes, and what the Scripture it self barely
relates. Would this Philosopher, think ye, after his pondering the Dr's
Discourse and reading Scripture, forthwith acquiesse and say all is true, he
reads? He were worse then besotted did he so. If prudent he would tell you, he
had jointly perused with Scripture the Turks Alcaron, and as he found strange
wonders written of Christ in the one book, so also he met with great matters
recounted of Mahomet in the other, for which the Turks pretend to have
universal tradition, but whether Scripture or the Alcaron speaks truth, whether
such men, as the Dr mentions related exactly the Miracles of Christ, and his
true Doctrine with those Miracles, the Philosopher knows not, nor shall ever
know, without a further proof taken from the testimony of some other Infallible
Oracle, which makes the truths in Scripture evidently credible, and then
proposes all, as Divine and infallible Verities.

14 The ultimate reason hereof is most convincing. All matters contained in
Scripture, whether Miracles or The reason of their nullity, said forth,
Doctrine, are not ex terminis any Self evidence, nor can they give by
themselves, so much as a great moral certainty of their Truth, or Credibility.
Therefore they must be proved either true or evidently Credible by another
Certain Oracle, or can never draw belief from any. I am sure S. Austin, who
discoursed more profoundly, than the Dr ever did, judged So, when he told the
Manichaes, He would not believe the Gospel unless the Authority of the Church
moved him to believe it, and upon this firm ground all must believe, or believe
nothing. The Dr's whole discourse proves only this conditional truth, that if
the Primitive Christians had reason to believe the Doctrine of Christ, upon the
inducement of his Miracles, they did well to believe, but that such Miracles
were wrought he shows not, save only by Scripture it self, hitherto neither
proved True, nor Divine. I say proved. For no Christian doubt's of the truths
there contained, though all justly question whether the Dr makes them to appear
Truths, by a bare telling us of some Contents in that book, which neither Jew
nor Gentil, nor indeed any can believe, unless more be said than the Dr bring's
to light.

15 In a word, here lies the whole error. He makes the Christian Doctrine
Wherein the Dr's error lies?
couched in Scripture to prove it self, and draws his rational Evidence of
Credibility from the Mysteries believed. Observe well. He believes the
Resurrection of Christ from the dead (for this is an Article of Faith) can he,
I beseech you, make the Resurrection it self, as believed, the rational Motive
of believing it, while after all his discourse, we are yet to seek for a proof
of that very Scriptures Truth, and Divinity also, whereby the Resurrection is
attested?

16 The Dr may reply, his evidence is not taken from the Mysteries of Faith,
Apos^ reply (...) seen, and prevented.
and from our Saviors Miracles, (the like is of Apostolical wonders) as they
are believed, but from the Humane consent of the Primitive Christians, who
either saw or heard of such matters of fact wrought by Christ and his Apostles,
which common consent passing among so many grave and pious men, made them in
those days evidently Credible, and Morally certain though we abstract from all
Divine Revelation in Scripture, and the Churches Infallible Authority. I answer
first, if the Dr run's this way, his whole discourse fastidiously spun out
against the Miracles of the Roman Catholic Church, falls to nothing; for, if
the common humane consent of the ancient Christians (Supposed neither Devine
Revelation nor infallible) raised The common consent of the ancient Christians
and modern, for Miracles paralleled
our Saviors Miracles to Moral certainty, or evident Credibility, Then, why
should not the like common humane Consent of Christians Now, make the Miracles
owned in the Roman Catholic Church, morally certain, or evidently credible?
And I speak of Miracles approved by the Church, not of every forged tale, or
pretended false wonder, which were not wanting in the Primitive times. If
therefore the Dr say, that all since the Apostles days have been grossly
deluded in recounting the Miracles wrought in the Catholic Church, both Jews
and Gentiles will shrewdly pester him, and avouch as boldly, that those
Primitive Christians, over Credulous, what Jews may object.
(like papists in these days) were no less beguiled in their crying up
Apostolical Miracles. What say you to this Mr Dr? The parity taken from the
primitive times and ours. I shall urge more fully hereafter, and tell the Dr,
he shall long sweat at it, before he solves what I here object, if, which is
ever to be noted, we stand only upon a common humane consent of men called
Christians, and abstract from the Authority of an Infallible Church.

17 I answer. 2. The enquiry here made, concern's not only the bare truth of
these matters of fact recorded in Scripture, but implies more, for we ask how
what is here chiefly enquired?
these matters of fact are rationally proved truths written by the Assistance
of the Holy Ghost, or how, (when supposed wrought sixteen Ages since), they are
now conveyed and applied to us, as Truths of so high a nature? No common
consent of Christians, merely humane and long since past, can give Sufficient
certainty hereof; sufficient, I say, to ground Divine Faith. Wherefore seeing
Scripture evidences not it is own truths, nor any reflection made upon Scripture
can clear these doubts, an infallible living Oracle manifested by supernatural
Signs must speak, and tell us, that these matters of fact were written, not
like other things in humane History (which are liable to error) but by the
special direction and inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

18 Hence we proceed to the second Question. If says the Dr, I be asked why I
The Dr's second question proposed.
believe the Doctrine contained in those books to be Divine? I answer. 1. That
in the Age, when the Doctrine was delivered, there was sufficient reason to
believe it Divine. He goes on. Supposing then, that we already believe upon the
former answer, that if Christ did such unparalleld Miracles, and rose from the
dead, they who heard his Doctrine, had reason to believe it to be of God. He
mean's Divine and revealed Doctrine, for all Doctrine of God, or from God, is not
in our Sense now, Divine or revealed Doctrine. Thus much said, He asserts. 2. If
they, the ancient Christians, had reason then, we have so now. Viz. to believe
upon our Saviors unparalleld Miracles. From these matters of fact and
Apostolical wonders, the Dr takes his rational Evidence, and conveigh's it to
us by Tradition, our exceptions made against his evidence
which supplies the want of our Senses, as to what Christ did and spoke. I
shall presently insist more largely. n. 26. upon his Tradition. Here I am to
show, that his Evidence in order to Christians now living, is nothing like
rational Evidence, if (and this he requires) we exclude the Testimony of an
Infallible Church.

19 To propose plainly what I would say, and to give the Dr the fairest play
imaginable, I gratis admit, all the Miracles and matters of fact recorded in
the Gospel to be most true, though hitherto not proved true by the Dr, but then
ask, what use will he make of them? He may answer, he proves by these Miracles
the Doctrine of Christ to be true. Admit this also. I demand further, and here
lies the main business that concern's us at present, whether the Doctor can
assure any by virtue of where the main difficulty is?
those Miracles, who at this day, among so many dissenting Christians in points
of Faith most fundamental, believe and profess Christ's true Doctrine? For his
rational Evidence if it deserve the Title of rational, must drive hither at
last, or its worth nothing to Christians now living, that is, he must show by
these long since wrought Miracles, whether Arians, Pelagians, Protestants, or
Catholics have a right belief of Christ's Doctrine, for most certainly all of
them believe not the true Doctrine delivered by Christ? I say it is impossible
to make this out, unless the strangest Consequence that ever man heard of be
good, and it is thus. Christ rose from the dead. He commanded the sea and winds,
and they obeyed his voice, He gave life to dead Lazarus etc. Ergo the Arians,
for example, profess Christ's true Doctrine, and Protestants not: Or
Contrariwise, Protestants believe right, and the Arians are in a wrong Faith?
Unless this Inference, which is worse than Nonsense, pass current, the Doctors
pretended rational Evidence taken from those ancient matters of fact, is the
most fruitless, and most discomfortable Evidence that ever wise man pitched
upon, whereof more presently. n. 27. Note in the mean while, he may perhaps
(and no more but perhaps) tell us by his the Dr's rational Evidence
demonstrated ^seless, to Christians now living
Evidence, that Christ's Doctrine in it self is true, but shall never thereupon
assure us, who among so many Dissenters in Necessaries to Salvation, believes
or professes that true Doctrine. He may tell us that horrid debates arise
amongst the learned of different Religions, but shall never tell us, how they
can be composed or ended by a bare owning the truth of Christ's Miracles, which
are carried up and down by a common humane consent of Christians, though they
have none to attest them Infallibly true, in this present State.

20 Please now to consider, how differently we Catholics proceed in this
matter, and satisfy both Jews and Gentiles. We own all that Scripture contain's
whether Miracles or Doctrine, true and Divine. To evince this, we lead you not
to a dead book, or to matters of fact far off, but to an ever living Oracle,
distinct from that book, called the Holy Catholic Church, which proves
herself by her nearer visible matters of fact, (signal marks, and undoubted
Miracles) as rationally a true Oracle, whereby God speak's to the world, as
ever any Apostle did. From this glorious, signalized, and long standing Church,
we take our rational Evidence and know, if the Primitive Christians took theirs
right from the Apostolical wonders, we no way Inferior, keep parallel with
them, while we rationally rely upon our clear manifested Oracle. Moreover, we
prove that this Church which has power from God to teach, and engages her
whole Authority to teach Truth, shows herself by real Signs and Miraculous
effects, the greatest Oracle now under God, appointed to instruct the world. It
is She, if Controversies arise concerning Faith, that composes all. She assures
us that the verities in Scripture, written by the special assistance of the
Holy Ghost, are Divine. She applies and conveigh's these ancient truths to us.
She tells us now, How differently we proceed from the Dr in our rational
Evidence.
and Infallibly, what Christ's Doctrine (long since made evidently Credible by
his own most glorious Miracles) is. She finally ascertain's every one without
doubt and hesitancy, who they are that profess this revealed Doctrine. And thus
relying upon a rational evidenced Church, we Show our selves rational men, and
void of fear set our hearts at rest, while the Dr by a bare relation of our
Saviors Miracles, now remote from us, proves not one of these particulars, but
will, forsooth, evince the Doctrine in Scripture to be Divine upon a mere
unproved Supposition, that such matters of fact once were, which yet cannot be
evinced true (sufficient as I said to ground Faith) much less Divine, without
the Churches Testimony, whereby full assurance is given to all in this present
State, that both Doctrine and Miracles are true and Divine.

21 The Dr therefore, should in the first place have proved the Divinity of
Christ's Doctrine, and from thence he might have inferred it is Truth, but to
evince it Divine to Christians now, upon what the Dr should aim^ at, but
perform's not.
a mere unproved Supposition. Viz. That such matters of fact are true, is a
break-neck to his Discourse, and an unaproachable way of ever coming to the
Conclusion he intend's, because his aim must be, or he does nothing, to show
by his Evidence, what Society of Christians now living, believes and professes;
the true Doctrine of Christ; or how Chrst's true Society may be made discernable
by those ancient Miracles from others, that teach damnable Doctrine. Herein he
fail's, and shall fail, while an Infallible Church is rejected.

22 These Considerations clearly laid down, no less clearly evince the Dr's
resolution of Faith to be frivolous, and his rational Evidence, unreasonable,
for tell me not by his Evidence, what Society of Christians are now right in
Faith, prove me not, that Scripture was written by Divine assistance, Show me
not, that the truths related there, are Truths revealed by Almighty God, the
whole Doctrine of that book, and all the Miracles in it, signify nothing.

23 Again, those ancient Miracles though supposed true, are far from giving any
undubitable assurance by their Sight alone without further light, that such
was, and yet is the genuin and pure Sense of God's word, for how many thousands
are there now in the world, who willingly own all the Miracles wrought by
Christ, and yet are at implacable discord concerning the true meaning of what
our Savior and his Apostles taught, which strifes cannot be ended by a bare
owning those Miracles true, but by the Infallible Decision of an ever living
manifested Church. I say manifested by Miracles and other weighty Motives, that
laid before man's rational Power, led it on to believe in Christ, and his
Church, for these two Articles go together, and are proposed in the Creed, as
necessary believeable Verities. I believe in Jesus Christ. I believe the Holy
Catholic Church. As therefore to believe all that Christ taught, confessedly
required the light of glorious Motives, whereby his Doctrine Christ was
manifested by rational Motives and so is the Church.
was made Credible to reason so also to believe what the Church teaches,
requires the like light, or an answerable evident Credibility, grounded on
convincing and rational Motives. I desired the Dr Reas: and Relig: Disc: 3. c.
16. n. 28. to consider, how cold and faint Christian Faith would have grown in
the hearts of men before this day, had all Church Motives failed or ceased,
soon after the Apostles preaching: Had no more Conversions been wrought, no
more Martyrs dyed for God's truth, no more contempt of the world been evidenced
in thousands and thousands, and finally, had no other Miracles been don in
after Ages, but such only, as the Scripture relates? It is therefore open
impiety in the Dr to slight all Church Motives and her Miracles, calling them a
grand Salade too often served up. It is worse then Perverness, to tell us as he
does in his last book. P. 665. That the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles
being confirmed by Miracles wrought by them, there can be no The Continuation
of Miracles, proved necessary.
such necessity in succeeding Ages to confirm the same Doctrine by Miracles. I
have answered this very Objection. Reas. and Relig: Disc: 2. c. 7. and showed
the Continuation of Miracles in the Church both useful and necessary, not only
because our Savior fore told they should be done. John. 12, but upon this
account also, that the Conversion of Infidels to Christ, was wrought as well in
the Ages after the Apostles, as when those blessed men preached to the world.
If therefore, the first Apostolical Miracles were necessary to convince
unbelieving Jews and Gentiles Then, it is plain ungodliness to deem them
fruitless Now, when God is pleased to work them by Missioners lawfully sent to
convert as Barbarous Nations, as ever S. Paul preached to.

24 Again, Miracles most evidently have been wrought, and very frequently, The
end of God's Concurring with his servants to work Miracles.
I ask for what end did God concur with his Servants to do them? No other
reason can with probability fall into men's minds but this, That an infinite
Power and wisdom intended thereby to make his Church glorious, and to induce
the most obdurate hearts to believe her Doctrine. The Dr yet seems not
satisfied, for he thinks the conveyance of the Apostolical Miracles being
wrought for the benefit of succeeding Ages, may well serve the turn in all
after Times without more. I wish this man were sent with his Bible to some
Barbarians in America, who never perhaps heard of Christ or Scripture, and only
read them such Miracles as Scripture relates, without working any himself, as
S. Xaverius and other Missioners have done. How many think ye would the Dr draw
to Christ, if he told his Hearers, that all the certainty men have of those
ancient Miracles and Christ's Doctrine comes from fallible Tradition, which may
be false? My thought is, he would convert this way very few, or rather none at
all. Let others judge as they please. Now because the main ground whereon he
relies is his much driven in, conveyance by Tradition, we will bestow a little
pains upon it, and show, if ever man lost himself in a Labyrinth, it is Dr
Stillingfleet.

Of the Dr's error in conveying to us by Tradition, what Christ did, and spoke.
25 THe Substance of the Dr's Discourse (Account. P. 205) is thus. Tradition to
us does only supply the want of our senses, as to what Christ did, and spoke,
it being a perpetuated sensation, and of the same use to us now, as if we had
been actually present with Christ, and seen his Miracles, or heard his Doctrine,
when he delivered it. Soon after, It is apparent that the use of the senses to
those The substance of the Drs Discourse laid down in his own words.
who saw Christ's Miracles, and heard his Doctrine, was not to give any
Credibility to either of them, but only to be the means of conveying them those
things, which might induce them to believe. The same is Tradition now to us, it
does not in it self make the Doctrine more credible, but supplies the use of
our senses in a certain conveyance of those things which were Motives to
believe them. Hence he inferr's, That the motives to the primitive Christians
and to us are the same, only the manner of conveyance, differ's. 2. He
inferr's, as it was not then necessary for those who saw our Saviors Miracles
wrought for the confirmation of his Doctrine, to have the inward Testimony of
the Spirit, or any external Infallible Testimony of a Church, to assure them
that those Miracles were really done by Christ, but God left them to the
judgment of sense, so proportionably, neither of these two are now necessary
for the resolution of Faith, but God instead of sense, leaves us to the
evidence of Tradition. Thus the Dr, where you se his whole labor spent in
vain, and a gross mistake with it, for he think's the main difficulty lies in
the conveyance of the things written in Scripture to this Age, whereas the
real difficulty is, to prove that there ever were any He waves the real
difficulty
such things true, and written by Divine inspiration, as he supposes to be
conveyed. Unless this particular be first rationally evinced, the Turks will
dare to argue as the Dr does. In Mahomet's time there was reason to believe
Mahomets Miracles and wonders, Ergo, there is reason to believe them now,
because they are conveyed down by Tradition. And thus the followers of every
false Sectarie may make any Religion true. But here is not all.

26 Mark I beseech you, how pitifully the Dr shuffles. He own's a tradition
which conveigh's unto us what Christ did and spoke. That is, we may No man is
wiser by the Dr's lame Tradition.
know by his fallible tradition received among Christians, that our Savior
wrought such Miracles, and spoke such words, for example, I and my Father are
one. The word is made flesh. This is my body etc. But how is any man wiser for
that? How is our knowledge or faith improved by such a maimed or half perfect
Tradition? While no man can certainly tell us, what the true meaning of those
sacred words is. No man can determine the debates which arise among Christians
(the Arians and you) that draw plain Contradictions out of these words, now
cited. Such a conveyance or tradition as could end these long strifes, would be
to your purpose and comfort, Mr Dr, but you have none of it, because you slight
the Tradition and Authority of an Infallible Church. Though therefore you tell
us twenty times over, you believe all truths expressed in Scripture, yet while
you cannot assure us upon tradition, or any other sound Principle, what those
necessary truths are, which Faith in necessaries is determinately to pitch
upon, you only trifle away your time, and cheat your Reader, in seeming to
discover great How, the Dr Cheat's his Reader.
matters, whereas in real truth you speak not one word to the purpose. If, to
solve the difficulty here briefly touched, you run up to your own discerning
faculty, permit the Arian to keep you company and blame him not, if he trust to
his discerning faculty quite contrary to yours. Se more hereof above, Chap. 4.
n. 10. Thus much premised.

27 To answer the Dr I say first. Fallible Tradition which may be false Our
Answer to the Dr.
(the Dr own's none Infallible) gives not so great certainty of Miracles
Supposed true in Scripture, as Eyesight did to those who beheld them. The
reason is. Fallible Tradition in the Dr's Principles easily alters in time, and
may tell one Story for another, whereof more presently. If therefore that
Tradition conveyed by hearing altered, as I shall show, most shamefully (and if
fallible no wonder at the change) what certainty have Fallible tradition worth
little in Divine matters
we now in this present Age, either of the Miracles, or of the Doctrine recorded
in Scripture by virtue of it? Or how can the Dr parallel the certainty of a
Miracle conveyed down by fallible Tradition, with the sight of it? This must
needs be a lame Parallel. For when I se a Miracle I need not to prove the
outward appearance of it evidently seen, but when that appearance passes down
Age after Age upon Hearsay, or a faultering Tradition which may change the
Story from what it once was, I must either prove that Tradition true, or cannot
prudently rely on it, chiefly in this present case, while we dispute against
Jews and Gentiles, who utterly deny those Miracles to have ever been truly
wrought by Christ. The ancient Jews, all know, said Christ cast out Devils by
the help of Beelzebub, and these modern men of the Synagogue calumniate as
boldly to this day.

28 I say. 2. Those ancient Miracles (if says a Jew, ever any such were)
together with the Doctrine, which is thought to be proved either true or
evidently credible by such wonders, can be no more certain now, than the
fallible Tradition is, which conveighs them to us. But this Tradition gives no
man so much as moral certainty either of the Miracles or Doctrine: I prove the
Minor. That The reason why worthless in the Dr's Principles.
ancient Tradition, say Sectaries, notoriously changed not long after the
Apostles days, when a universal deluge of errors spread it self the whole
Christian world over, and the efficacy of Christ's true Doctrine together with
its old Tradition, was blotted out of men's memory; when the Roman Catholic The
Dr charges this Idolatry upon the Roman Church.
Church once confessedly Orthodox, unluckily began Her universal Apostasy, and
professed open Idolatry; when the Arians denied the Mystery of the Incarnation
and Trinity; Others, the two Wills in Christ, others his Sacred Humanity,
others, the Resurrection of the dead, others the necessity of Divine Grace, and
others finally professed yet more horrid Doctrins, In so much, that the whole
Christian word, (part of it one way, part another) erred most grossly in the
very fundamentals of Faith. In those dismal days say I, when all Christian
Societies nameable, and the Roman Church with them became so infatuated as to
change the first received truths taught by Christ and his Apostles, the ancient
true Tradition could not but change and fail also, therefore at this day
Tradition is worthless and unualvable, because no man can know upon any sure
Principle, what it anciently was.

29 The Dr may reply. All called Christians own the Bible and the Miracles
there related of Christ and his Apostles, which are sufficient to prove Christ's
Doctrine true, so far at least Tradition never failed. Small Comfort, God
knows, to have Tradition of the Scriptures bare letter (which yet is not had
in our Sectaries Principles. Se Reas: and Relig: Disc. 1. c. 6. n. 2.) If the
Christian world long since, cheated out of their ancient Faith, bequeathed to
posterity a false Doctrine in Lieu of that which The Arians and all heretics
lay as great claim to Christ's Miracles, as the Dr or any other does.
Christ and his Apostles taught, and with that, a false Tradition also.
Moreover, were those Miracles with their Tradition proved most true, the Arians
will as well lay claim to them for a proof their Doctrine, as the Dr can do for
that Religion he professes, and the like may all others pretend (if called
Christians) though of a quite different belief in the very Essentials of Faith,
unless this consequence utterly false be good. Christ our Lord wrought such and
such Miracles, Ergo, Protestancy is a better Religion then Arianism;
Pelagianism is better then Nestorianism; and so of the rest. The Dr therefore
must either make this out, that Christ and his Apostles wrought their Miracles
to confirm all the erroneous Sects in the world, or he speaks nothing to the
purpose, when he tells us in his Account. What the Dr is obliged to clear?
P. 205. That the Motives of Faith both to them (the ancient Christians) and to
us, are the same, only the manner of conveyance is different, those Primitive
Believers Saw them, we hear of them by Tradition. In saying this he either
thinks, that such Motives prove the truth of all Religions called Christian,
which is horridly false, or only prove the true Christian Religion among so
many dissenting Sects. Grant this, and we are in as much darkness after the
supposed Truth of these Miracles and the Dr's long discourse, as we were
before, and can never know by his Motives only, which is the true Religion. I
earnestly desire the Dr would please to solve this one difficulty, which I
judge cannot be Solved.

30 By all hitherto clearly laid down, we se. 1. The Dr's rational Evidence so
much talked of, brought to nothing but empty words, for his whole proofs are
mere unproved Suppositions. He endeavors to evince by Miracles internal to
Scripture, the Divinity of the book, which is to say, one part of Scripture
proves another, before the whole book is proved upon any certain Authority to
be God's word, or written by the Holy Ghost. From hence. 2. the necessity of an
Infallible evidenced Church is necessarily inferred, The necessity of an
Infallible Church, evinced from our discourse.
which only bring's us out of the Labyrinth wherein the Dr is lost. This Church
as I said, proves by her infallible and never interrupted Tradition, that
Scripture is God's word; She, and She only, ascertain's all, that the Contents
in Scripture are Divinely inspired, (and finally when difficulties arise
concerning the Sense in controverted passages, relating to Necessaries,
composes all strifes (otherwise endless) and bring's all to a perfect unity in
Faith.

31 I say lastly. Could the Dr evince, that the book of Scripture contain's
true Doctrine, could he show the Doctrine Not one Protestant Tenet proved by
Scripture.
of it to be, as it truly is, Divinely inspired, he yet has not one clear
Sentence in the whole Bible (understood according to the obvious sense of the
words) which proves so much as one Tenet of Protestant Religion, as Protestancy
is distinguished from Popery, and the Doctrine of all known condemned Heretics.
The proof of this Assertion is largely laid forth. Reas. and Relig: Disc: 1. c.
20. from. n. 4. to the end of that Chapter, and because I really judge
Protestancy utterly ruined upon the reasons there alleged, I petition Dr Still:
to review that short Discourse, and if I judge amiss, to unbeguile me by a
plain Answer, showing wherein my Arguments are fallacious.

32 I except in that place against his empty Title called A rational Account of
the grounds of Protestants Religion, and prove as I think demonstratively, that
if you cast out of Protestancy all it is Negative Articles which the Dr
confesses are no Essentials, the remainder will either be what the Catholic
Church teaches, and therefore not peculiar to Protestancy, or the Doctrine of
some one or other condemned Heretic: In so much, that in the whole Essence of
Protestancy, you will not find one Truth revealed by Almighty God, necessary
for Salvation, or ever taught by any Orthodox Church. And Nor one Necessary for
Salva, tion found in Protestancy.
herein it differ's not only from Catholic Religion, but, as I take it, from
all ancient Heresies, for both Arians and Pelagians (the like is of the rest)
thought their particular Doctrins revealed by Almighty God, and necessary to
Salvation, Otherwise they had been worse than besotted, to abandon the
Catholic Tenants for opinions merely, or Positions not necessary to Salvation.
Se more of this subject. Disc. 3. c. 18. n. 8.

CHAP. X.
The Church proved Infallible before She interpret's Scripture. The reason
hereof. The Doctors gross error in charging a Circle on us, in the Resolution
of Faith. What a vicious Circle implies, and how it differ's from a rational
Regress in Discourse.

1 THe rest that follows in the Dr from. P. 423. is all along mere Confusion,
or a horrid jumbling in a speculative matter concerning the resolution of
Faith, and the notion of a vicious Circle, which he truly understand's not, but
wonder nothing, you can expect no better from half Scholars in speculative
learning, if I make not what I here assert manifest, blame me boldly.

2 To rescue my Doctrine from Blunderers, (and the Dr, if I ever met with any,
is one) I am forced to set down plainly part of it, That done, you shall se how
remote the Dr is from meddling with it. The most he would except against, you
have at large. Reas: and Relig. Disc. 3. c. 5. n. 5. where I answer an
Objection proposed in his Account, P. 127. And assert. Seeing Scripture
evidences not it self to be divinely inspired, some other Infallible Oracle,
distinct from Scripture, necessarily ascertain's that The Church not first
proved Infallible by Scripture
Truth, and this is the Church, which as rationally proves herself by Signs
and Miracles an Oracle whereby God speaks independently of Scripture, as ever
any Apostle proved himself to be so, before Scripture was written. Hence I
inferred, that the Church was ever, and is yet in a General way believed
infallible by Her self, and for Her self, upon this ground, that God speaks by
Her as his own Oracle, and then concluded, that She is not in the first place
proved infallible by Scripture. I say in a General way, for thus the Apostles
believed our Savior to be the true Messiah, before they received from him a
full Account of many other particular Christian Verities, learned after that
General acknowledgement.

3 Thus much and more, amply declared in the place now cited, comes Dr Still:
in his last book. P. 424. with his old Tautologies, and asks again, as if
nothing had been said, why we believe the Churches Infallibility, and verily
think's, we have no other way to make out Her Infallibility, but only by
Scripture? Is not this worse then jumbling? Reflect good Reader. I show that
the Church in the first place is proved infallible without recourse at all had
to Scripture (for so She was proved infallible before Scriptures were written)
and here he outfaces me with empty words, saying I cannot prove the Church
infallible but by Scripture only? In lieu of this ridiculous Reply. He should
have refuted my reasons, and this is one. No man can ascertain any that
Scripture is divinely inspired, or render the true sense of it relating to
Necessaries for Salvation, but one only infallible Church. Therefore the Church
which only can give certainty of these truths, must necessarily be first owned
infallible before we recurr It is Senceless to prove the Church by Scripture,
before Scripture be Proved God's word.
to Scripture, for it is more than Senceless to prove by Scripture the Churches
Infallibility, or any other Article of Christian Faith, before we have absolute
Assurance that the Book whereby we argue is Gods word, and know what its
meaning is in a hundred difficult passages, But thus much is only known by
Church Authority, as is amply proved in the place now cited.

4 This reason the Dr shamefully waves with a jeer, and tell's me. P. 405. that
this first act of Faith terminated upon Church Authority has nothing to rely
on but the fallible Motives of Credibility, and Consequently cannot be Divine
Faith for want of an Infallible Testimony. Gross ignorance produced this
Answer, for have not I proved through my whole last Treatise, that God as
immediately speak's to us now by his Church, as ever he did by Prophet, or
Apostle? And if God speak by it, there is no want of an Infallible Testimony.
I challenge the Dr to answer my Arguments upon this subject hitherto never
taken notice of, neither shall he hereafter reply without apparent shuffling
(to use his words) and running away from the main difficulty, here treated. How
often have I told him that Divine Faith relies not upon the Motives of
Credibility (though these as inducements lead to it) but upon God's speaking by
the Church, as is now declared?

5 Having thus cleared the first act of Faith from all danger of a Circle,
because it ultimately rest's upon God's speaking by the Church, made by it self
immediately credible without recourse to Scripture, yet not known to be Divine
or God's infallible word. I add moreover. N, 9. If we speak of another
distinct, consequent, and more explicit act of Faith, whereby we believe the
Churches Infallibility, evidenced null, and forceless.
when this Oracle declares the Scriptures true Sense which proves her
Infallible, there is no difficulty at all, because this interpretation of
Scripture brought to its last Principle, is ultimately resolved into, and
therefore again believed upon Scripture and the Churches Infallible exposition
together, for thus jointly taken, they ground Faith and not like two disparate
Principles, as if we first believed the Scriptures sense independently of the
Churches interpretation, and then again believed the Churches exposition to be
infallible because the sense of Scripture, (known without any dependence on
Church Authority) says She is Infallible. Our good Dr set's down these words
more at large, and desires the Reader to try his faculty upon them, what
tolerable sense he can make of them? I answer, more learned faculties in
Speculative matters then the Doctor's is, have made sense of them, and that is
enough to ward off his weak blow of contempt. Now I am to discover his
fallacious, and more then simple way of Arguing against me.

6 The whole difficulty is brought at last to the true decision of this
Question. Whether one Infallible Oracle, while it explicates the darker Sense
of another The difficulty concerning a vicious Circle proposed.
likewise Infallble, cannot be believed for it self without a vicious Circle?
One or two Instances will clear my meaning. The Prophet Joel. 2. 28. long
before S. Peter lived, Prophesyed of the effusion of God's divine Spirit upon
all flesh, which words dark in themselves, that great Apostle Acts. 2. 16.
interpret's as spoken of the pouring out of Gods Spirit upon the Apostles in
the feast of Pentecost. This is that, says S. Peter, which was said, or
foretold by the Prophet Joel. Observe well. S. Peter was proved an Infallible
Oracle before he interpreted this Passage of an Infallible Prophet, so is the
Church proved Infallible before She interpret's any words in Scripture. S.
Peter used or exercised his Power of interpreting infallibly, not first proved
infallible by his Interpretation, but upon other grounds, wholly independent of
that Sense he gives to the Prophet; So is the Church first proved infallible
independently of all, and every Interpretation She gives of Scripture. Finally,
as that darker Sense of the Prophet, made clear by the Apostles Infallible
Interpretation, indivisibly concurred to the Faith of the Primitive Christians,
so also the darker Sense of Scripture cleared by the Churches interpretation,
indivisibly concur's to the Faith of Believers now.

7 Ponder well the force of this Instance, and you will soon se through the
Dr's trivial Objections. I say in a word. An Instance worth reflection.
Had S. Peter proved himself in the first place Infallible by the Sense of that
Scripture he then interpreted, the Circle would have been Manifest, because the
thing proved, which is the infallible explication of Joel, is assumed again or
first made use of, to prove S. Peter and his explication infallible. But when
the Apostles Infallibility in every Doctrine of Faith, stood firm upon other
grounds, though he had never written Scripture, nor interpreted any Prophet,
that man must be quicker sighted than Aristotle who find's a Circle in it. This
is our case as to the Church. She is, in a general way supposed and proved
infallible in every Catholic Doctrine, independently of this or that particular
taught by her, one particular is the true Interpretation of Scripture (more
rightly called the exercise and use of her infallible Assistance then the proof
The use of the Churches power destroies not ^^er power.
of it) but evinces not herself in the first place to be infallible, because
She interpret's for that is antecedently proved upon other grounds, therefore
unless the use of Her power wherewith She is endued to interpret infallibly,
destroy that power, it is impossible to catch her in a Circle, while she
interpret's.

8 Thus much premised. You shall se the Dr's Objection melt like wax before the
fire. Judge Reader, says he. P. The Dr's own words.
428 whether here be not a plain Circle. Because they believe the Church
infallible, because the true sense of Scripture says she is so, and again they
believe, this to be the infallible sense of Scripture, because the infallible
Church says so. Judge Reader, say I, whether one plain distinction overthrowes
not this feeble fallacy, and thus it is. We first believe the Church
infallible, because the true Sense of Scripture says she is infallible, I deny
it; for that first act of Faith is not at all founded on Scripture: We believe
the Church infallible by a second more distinct and explicit Faith, indivisibly
fixed on Scripture and the Churches Interpretation together, I grant that most
willingly. Now this second act of Faith must, if we make a right Analysis, be
at last resolved into this other general Truth. What ever God speak's by the
Church is certain and infallible, which general Truth stand's firm without
recourse to Scripture at all. The reason is. Whatever Argument proved the
Church God's infallible Oracle in all She taught, before Scripture was written,
proves Her also without depending on Scripture, the same Infallible Oracle
still.

9 The other part following in the Dr's discourse, is wholly as lame. We
believe again, this to be the Infallible Sense of Scripture because the
Infallible Church says so. I answer we believe so indeed, but by a second more
explicit act of Faith, which The Dr's absurd fallacy, unravelled.
supposes the Church proved infallible antecedently to her Interpretation,
where there is no shadow of a Circle, for if the Church be owned infallible in
every matter of Christian Faith, thus much only follows, that when She
interpret's, the same God that once spoke obscurely in Scripture, declares his
meaning more clearly by his own Oracle, the Church.

10 One example where you shall have the Dr's circle as round as a hoop, will
yet give more light. Imagine those words of the Apostle 1. Tim. 3. 15. The
Church is the Pillar and ground of Truth, to be, as Sectaries will have them,
obscure, or not openly significant for the Churches Infallibility. Suppose
again, that S. Paul, or any other infallible Apostle had delivered in clearer
terms the true Sense of them; nay, suppose, he had told us the true meaning of
those words. The Pillar and ground of truth, is just so as Catholics now
believe. Could Mr Dr, or any man living have found a vicious Circle here, had
S. Paul been owned and proved an Infallible Teacher, independently of his
clearer interpretation. It is impossible, while we believe S. Paul speaking
obscurely, for S. Paul delivering the Sense of his own words more clearly.

11 Now, Sr, look upon your own pretty Circle. We believe, say you the The D's
Circle retorted upon himself.
Church to be infallible, because the true sense of Scripture says so. And you
believe the Church to be the pillar and ground of truth, because the true sense
of S. Paul's words explicated by Apostolical Authority, says so. Moreover Say
you, We believe this to be the Infallible Sense of Scripture because the
Infallible Church says so, and could not you, Sr, have believed such a Sense
of the words now cited, had S. Paul delivered it, because either he, or some
other infallible Apostle, said so? This is only to assert in plainer Terms,
that the darker sense written in Scripture by one Infallible Oracle, can be
cleared by the Interpretation of the very same, or any other Infallible Oracle,
which lead's no man into the least danger of a vicious Circle.

12 Pray tell me, Mr Dr, when you in your Account interpret our Saviors words.
This is my body: according to the Sense you judge true, do you entangle your
Reader in a vicious Circle? By your new way of Arguing it is plain you do: For
those who read or hear your interpretation assent to it as true, because the
true Sense of Scripture, says so: And again they believe this to be the true
Sense of Scripture, because you say so. Your Interpretation has some influence
upon the assent of those that believe it, (be it Condition, Cause, or what you
will) otherwise it signifies nothing, but And yet made more Clear.
stand's like an useless cipher in your book. This granted, your Circle is
manifestly vieious, for you run in a round from your supposed true
interpretation of Scripture, to the true Sense of Scripture, and back again,
from the true Sense of Scripture to your supposed true Interpretation. Mark
well. Your Interpretation is proved or believed true by the true sense of
Scripture, (here is your only ground) and the true Sense of Scripture, is again
proved or believed true by your supposed true explication. Hence it follows,
that either your interpretation is not according to the true Sense of Scripture
(God forbid say you) or that the true Sense of Scripture, correspond's not to
your supposed true explication, or finally this must be granted, that you run
round in a Circle, and prove the one by the other

13 Perhaps to avoid a Circle it will be said, you prove not your
Interpretation true by the true sense of Scripture but evince that upon other
grounds distinct from Scripture, Viz. by the Authority of Fathers, your often
alleged sense and reason, and God knows what. Is it so indeed? Dare you, Sr,
most shamefully quit the only main prop you rely on, which is Scripture, when
you stand most in need of it (whereof more presently) and yet charge on me a
vicious Circle, while I believe the true Sense of Scripture because an
infallible Church declares that Sense? Cannot I more rationally, would I seek
Subterfugies, evince the Infallibility of the Church by other proofs, drawn
from Fathers, Church authority, and reason, and plead as you do to avoid a
Circle, were it necessary? But I like no such Shuffling. I positively assert,
the Sense of Scripture is therefore proved and believed true, because the
Infallible Church says so, though if questioned further, I must bring in my
reason why I believe this Oracle Infallible, yet the immediate ground of my
belief is the Churches Interpretation, given upon Christ's words now cited, and
I rest upon her Authority by Faith, though this Interpretation be not the first
ground, why I believe her Infallible, but that other more general received
Truth, that proves Her Gods own Oracle in all she delivers as matter of Faith,
which general Truth (observe it well) is most rationally evinced without any
recourse to, or dependence on Scripture And this is only to say that a Divine
Oracle first proved Infallible, can interpret Scripture without danger of a
vicious Circle.

14 What I here assert is undeniable, for had any Apostle explained those words
in the Gospel. I and my Father are one, answerable to the Sense now believed in
the Church. Viz. That Christ our Lord is the eternal Son of God, consubstantial
with his Father, could not the primitive Christians have as firmly fixed their
belief upon those words, Infallibly interpreted, as the Disciples fixed their
Belief upon our Saviors Interpretation, when Luke. 8. 9. he fully explained
the Sense of that Parable concerning the Sower and Seed? These and the like
Interpretations are believeable matters of Faith upon this Principle, that
every Interpreter (whether Christ or Apostle) was supposed and proved
Infallible independently of that Sense they gave to God's sacred words, and so
is the Church, as is already declared.

15 The Dr's Confusion and whole mistake lies here, that he has not yet got
perfectly into his head the right notion of a vicious Circle, and therefore P.
428. wishes I had told him the Secret, I will do it briefly, and then make his
error more known.

16 A vicious Circle, Mr Dr, ever implies two Propositions, or in a Circular
What a Vicious Circle implies?
discourse, two Syllogisms. Here we will insist upon Propositions, being more
plain and easy, then to proceed by long Syllogisms. Know therefore, when any
first Proposition is assumed to prove the second, and this second is made use
of, without further light, to prove the first again, or that very thing which
is asserted by the first, the Circle is notoriously vicious. For example. One
endeavors to prove man to have Free Will, because he is endowed with an
intellectual Faculty, then return's again, and proves him intellectual, because
he has Free Will; the second Proposition implies a Circle, because the thing
proved, which is Liberty or Free will, not otherwise evinced but by man's being
intellectual, is made use of to prove that Power, and so in effect Liberty or
Free Will, becomes a Medium to prove it self by.

17 Observe well. This vicious consequence whereby man seems evinced a free
Agent or endowed with liberty, takes all the force it has from the Antecedent
of his being intellectual, and wholly relies on that Medium. If therefore (as
it here falls out) that Consequence whereby Liberty is asserted, without any
more light, or further proof, be again assumed as the only Medium to prove man
intellectual; Liberty or Free Will by its proving man intellectual, proves it
self, and thus, hic and nune, is both Antecedent, and Consequent; Antecedent,
as it is the Medium to prove man Intellectual, and Consequent, as it is the
thing proved by Intellectuality, which flaw is ever manifest in all vicious
Circles, as Aristotle notes well. Lib. 1. Post. cap. 3.

18 Now on the other side, should I take this Consequence concerning Liberty,
which is deduced from the Antecedent of man's being intellectual; Should I prove
that Consequence upon other grounds, either by Authority, or manifest
experience, because we se men freely eschew Evil and embrace Good; should I
from thence infer that he is Intellectual, the Inference now guarded, by other
proofs, barely subsist's not upon the strength of its Antecedent, but is a
Verity known aliunde and therefore is rightly called, Regressus utilis, a
rational, profitable Regress, free from The difference between a Circle, and a
profitable way of Arguing.
all vicious Circulation. For as Philosophers teach, grounding their discourse
upon Aristotle now cited, A vicious Circle is a Regress or going back, ab eodem
ad Idem, and per eandem viam, from the same thing to the same again, and by the
same way, as appears in the Instance proposed, where the Antecedent assuming
Intellectual, proves Liberty, and Liberty not known, as I said, upon any other
proof but by that Medium, Intellestual, return's again and by the very same
way, proves Intellectuallity. This is to say, the Consequence as known by the
Antecedent, offer's to prove at once both it self, and the Antecedent together.
Had Dr St: well reflected upon what is here noted, he might easily have spared
his lost labor spent upon a vicious Circle, and it is a wonder be wanted
reflection, because Sextus Empiricus cited by him in the short discourse he has
of that he calls a Diallel gives every one light enough to se what the Dr, it
seems, saw not, though Sextus be none of the clearest Authors.

19 Thus much premised, we proceed to the matter now in hand, and Assert. If
any one should in the first place, either believe or prove the Sense of
Scripture, to be true by the Churches Interpretation, (not otherwise believed
Infallible or proved true but barely by her Interpretation) and should again
go about to prove her Interpretation true, by nothing but her own
Interpretation, which explains that true Sense; the Circle would be manifest,
because the true Sense of Scripture interpreted by the Church, is again assumed
An application made to the matter now in hand.
as the only Medium to prove her Interpretation true: which way of Arguing,
essentially implies a vicious Regress, from the very same thing to the same
thing again, and by the very same way, But, if I first prove the Churches
Infallibility in all She teaches upon other Grounds without any recourse at
all, either to the words or Sense of Scripture (as is showed above) and from
thence both prove and believe her Interpretation to be infallibly true, that
man who holds this way of Arguing Circular, knows no more what a Circle is
than Doctor Stillingfleet. A little touch upon the Dr's weak Objections, will
yet give more clarity.

20 Is not that a Circle, says he, P. 428. when the Argument made use to prove
another The Dr's Objections answered
thing by, must it self be proved by that very thing which it is made use of to
prove? Very good, Sr, these general Terms hurt no body; to your Application
therefore in the next page. The thing to be proved, Say you, is the Churches
Infallibility, the Argument to prove it by, is the Infallible Sense of
Scripture. Answ. I flatly deny, the first proof of the Churches Infallibility,
to be the Infallible Sense of Scripture, for the first Argument is taken from
that general Truth, whereby She is owned and proved God's Infallible Oracle in
every thing She teaches concerning Faith; and this independently of Scripture.
Here I say more. It is impossible to prove her first Infallible by the Sense
she gives of Scripture, because that Sense is not known before She interpret's,
and no body goes about to prove any thing by mere insignificant Characters,
without their Sense. Can the Dr who hold's the Church Fallible, and must if he
ever evince that prove it by Scripture, probably take his Proof from Scripture
not senced? It is plain Dotage to do so. He goes on. But if the Infallible
Sense of Scripture can be proved by nothing but by the^ Churches infallible
Interpretation, then it is plain that is assumed as an Argument to prove
Infallibility by, which cannot be otherwise known, than by this Infallibility.
What To argue from Scripture not Senced, is Nonsense.
Infallibility does the Dr speak of in these last ambiguous words? If he say,
we prove the Infallible Sense of Scripture by the Churches infallible
Interpretation, I grant it. Jf contrariwise, he thinks we prove in the first
place the Churches Infallibility by her own infallible Interpretation of
Scripture, he err's grossly, as is already made manifest, and therefore proves
nothing.

21 In a word either the Sense of Scripture is known by the Churches
Interpretation, or is clear by it self. If known upon the Churches
Interpretation, the Sense is one and the same with that of the Scripture, for
these two Oracles can never clash, or differ. If known by it self, as it is in
many Passages relating to manners, no more is required, but that the Church
ascertain us of the Scriptures Divine Inspiration; So that still we depend upon
the Church; always for the assurance of Scripture being Divine, or from God,
and in the greatest Mysteries of Faith we rely on it also, for the true Sense.

22 A second objection. It is a little strange, that there should be no
difficulty at all in believing the Churches Infallibility upon the Sense of
those Scriptures, whose Sense could not infallibly be known without the
Supposal of that Infallibility which is proved by them. Answ. Its more than a
little strange, that the Dr cannot distinguish between the first general act of
Faith whereby the Church is believed Infallible (without depending on
Scripture) and a second more explicit and Consequent act, which wholly relies
upon Her interpretation and Scripture together. It is also strange, if God
pleases to speak obscurely, as he certainly does, in many Passages of Holy
Writ, that another Infallible Oracle cannot tell us with he mean's, without Two
Strange Mistakes in the Dr.
a vicious Circle. The Substance of all he objects here, only amount's to thus
much. We prove or believe the Churches Infallibility upon the Sense of those
Scriptures, whose sense cannot be infallibly known without the supposal of that
Infallibility. If he mean's (as he must) by supposal, and that Infallibility,
the Churches Infallibility, I have answered, the Church is not only supposed
but proved also infallible before Scripture was written, and before She ever
went about to interpret that Divine Book.

23 A third Objection is the like Tautologie over again, and therefore requires
no other, but the same Solution. If says he, the Infallible sense of Scripture
be resolved into, and believed upon the same infallible Authority of the
Church, then I still enquire how this infallible Authority of the Church comes
to be proved by this exposition of Scripture, the Infallibility of which, does
suppose the thing to be proved. Viz. the Churches Infallibility? To what
purpose Should we lose time? Have not I answered, that the Churches
Infallibility stand's firm upon other grounds before Scripture be either owned
Divine, or the Sense of its difficult passages can be known? Have not I
moreover said, that, that general Truth of the Churches Infallibility must
necessarily be proved and supposed antecedently to the belief of this or that
particular Interpretation? For who can fix his Faith upon the exposition of any
Divine Oracle, without being first ascertained, it is God, that speak's by it?
The Instances given above, most clearly evince, what is here asserted. Please
to make use either of our Saviors interpreting his own Parable. Luke 8.
concerning the Sower and seed, or of S. Peter's exposition given to the Prophet
Joel. They are one and the same in order to my present Intent. We prove or
believe that to be the true Sense of our Saviors Parable, because eternal
Truth interpreted it so, but do we again first prove or believe him to be
eternal Truth, because he then delivered the true Sense of that Parable to his
Disciples? No. For by this lame way of arguing we should prove, the Sense of
the Parable to be true upon our Savior Interpretation, and again prove him a
true Interpreter, because he interpreted. Mark well the Dr's confusion. We
Catholics says he, believe the Church to be infallible because the true The
Dr's Confused Doctrine, Clearly driven back upon himself.
Sense of Scripture says she is so. And you, Sr, believe our Saviors
Interpretation upon that Parable to be true (that Parable is now Scripture)
because our Savior interpreted it so. Again. we believe this to be the
Infallible sense of Scripture because the Infallible Church says so. And you,
Mr Dr, believe this to be the Infallible Sense of that Parable, because Christ,
said so. Here, Sr, you have your own Circle in express Terms. Judge whether it
stand's not something awry. What must be done then to get out of this
Confusion? All must answer. Though we believe our Saviors Interpretation by an
Infallible act of Faith, yet we first prove him not infallible because he
interprets, but suppose his Infallibility made out and proved upon other
grounds, independently of his explication. And this is our Answer also as to
the Church, whereof enough is said already, and more than ever the Dr will, or
can Answer.

24 P. 430. the Doctor once more run's on with the same Tautologie, and because
I said, the Scripture and Churches interpretation indivisibly Concur to that
latter act of Faith whereby we believe the Sense of Scripture explained by the
Church, he tells me, This indivisible concurrence Seems to him an odd piece of
Mystical Divinity. I Answer no great matter for that, as odd as it is, he must
own it, if he believes S. Peter's infallible Interpretation upon the Prophet, or
the exposition given to the Royal Prophets Testimony. Psalm. 131. 11. Foreseing,
says the Apostle, His Tautologies and ill words.
he spoke of Christ's Resurrection. Acts. 2. 31. Se more of this indivisible
concurrence, Reas: and Relig: Disc: 3. c. 11. n. 10. The rest our Dr has to
his page 433. is either the like Tautologie. We prove the Churches
Infallibility by the Infallible Sense of Scripture, and the infallible Sense of
Scripture by the Churches Infallibility; Or most uncivil language, or finally,
a foul ending with a gross mistake, for he thinks our Faith rest's upon no
Infallible Authority, because we have none to rely on, but Motives Confessedly
fallible. It is a perverse error already refuted.

25 To end this Controversy about a vicious Circle, wherein the Dr. P. 431.
account's me a Conjurer, and one that speak's things which neither he, nor any
one else can understand, I have right, me thinks to enquire by what means, or
upon what grounded Motive can the Dr come to a certainty of the Scriptures true
Sense? In proposing this Question I might easily retaliate, and tell him:
Though he Conjure, cheat, and shuffle his whole life long, he shall never yet
clear this one difficulty without recourse to an Infallible Church. The proof
of my Assertion stand's sure upon this most undoubted principle. The true Sense
of A difficulty proposed and the Dr is desired to Answer.
Scripture in many passages (relating to Necessaries for Salvation) is no
Selfeevidence, nor can it be certainly known by that endless Search, or misspent
industry of private men, as appears by those many most opposite, and plain
contradictory Interpretations which the learned of different Religions give to
these and the like Expressions in God's word. I and my Father are one. The word
is made flesh. There are three that give Testimony in Heaven etc. Not one of
these Passages, though pondered and compared with other Texts in Holy Writ,
does Evidence its own true Sense, Therefore the means whereby it is discovered,
or the Oracle which infallibly ascertain's it, must necessarily be both
distinct from the dark words, now cited, and also more clear, and plainly
significant, than the yet concealed Sense is, we seek for. Now further. Neither
Calvin's private Spirit, nor the Dr's rational Evidence, nor Tradition without,
nor Grace within (as Bishop Lawd speaks in the Dr's Account P. 186. n. 15) nor
finally any other Medium (which is not Scripture) can infallibly declare this
Sense, as is largely proved both in this Treatise, and the last. Therefore an
Infallible Church must either do God and man this good Service, and certainly
tell us, what Scripture Speak's in these Necessaries for Salvation; Or the true
meaning of God's Word, will be just like Some useless airy nicity (not worth
knowing) still matter of debate ever disputable, but never known. Thus much
said in answer to the Dr's Speculative part, we pass in the next Discourse to
a serious view of his long Drollery, and simple exceptions made against the
glorious Miracles wrought in the Roman Catholic Church, and Shall God willing
evince, that in this Treatise where he thought to triumph most, he is foiled,
and has disgraced none, but himself.

An end of the first Part.
A DISCOVRSE, CONCERNING MIRACLES WROUGHT in the Roman CATHOLIC CHVRCH, in
vindication of their Truth against Doctor Stillingfleets unjust Cavils. WHERE,
The Miraculous Translation of the Holy House OF LORETO is Asserted, and proved,
an undeniable Verity.

BY E. W.

The second Part.

ANTWERP, Printed by MICHAEL CNOBBAERT, at the Sign of. S. Peter in the Year.
1674.

Dr Stillingfleet in his second Discourse. Chap. 3. P. 434, makes an Enquiry
into the Miracles of the Roman Church: I follow him as he goes along, and lay
open the ill Success our Inquifitive man has had in his Search, which will, I
hope, appear to every one, after a full view taken of what is proposed in the
ensuing Treatise. Peruse, and judge Courteous Reader.

CHAP. I.
How I formerly argued in behalf of our Churches Miracles. The Dr in his
Enquiry waves my Arguments. Of the difference between Christ's Miracles, and
those wrought by the Apostles, and in the Church. What is meant by Church
Miracles. Of the Cheats which run through the Drs whole Enquiry.

1. THough little might Suffice to refute the Dr's strange, rambling, and
unprincipled Discourse; yet because the weightiness of this matter concerning
Miracles, worthily deserves a larger Examination, we shall, God willing, bestow
more pains upon it, in another small distinct Treatise; in this, we chiefly
insist upon plain matters of fact. Now if you desire to know how I argued
against the Dr for the truth of our Church Miracles. Reason and Religion. Disc:
2. C. 7. 8. you Shall have it very briefly.

2. I first urged C. 7. n. 7. our Saviors Miracles in the Church foretold by
our Savior.
own Prophesy. John. 14. 12. I say unto you. He that believes in me, the works
which I do, he shall do, and greater works then these shall he do. which Truth,
even Calvin and other Sectaries upon this Passage (far more rational than the
Dr) apply not to the Apostles only, nor to every believing Christian, but
assert it belong's to the whole Body of the Church. This Prophesy without doubt
contained a truth, and we see it with our eyes evidently fulfilled, not only in
the Conversion of whole Nations to Christ, justly accounted Miraculous by S.
Austin (far more in number then those our Savior Converted) but also, in other
Signal wonders wrought by God's Servants in this only Catholic Church.

3 To this Authority, frequently urged by Catholic Authors, our Dr answer's
nothing, but as his manner is quarrel's, because I parallel Church Miracles and
our Saviors together, and seems to think I difference them not at all, though
I with every one most willingly grant, that Christ Jesus showed himself, the
greatest Our Saviors Singular prerogatives in working Miracles.
Thaumaturgus the world yet beheld, and far surpassed all Angels and men,
whether Patriarks, Propnets, or Apostles, in working Miracles. His singular
Prerogative first appeared in this (so Faith teaches) that the wonders he
wrought were done by his own Power and Virtue, as S. Cyril upon the. 6. of Luke
ponder's, without borrowing assistance from any power above him, for as God, he
had no Superior; wherefore calling the Disciples together. Matt: 10. He
empowered them, powerless of themselves, to do wonders, to cast out Devils and
cure the infirm. 2. As S. Thomas notes. 22. Quest 178. a. 1. The Grace of
working Miracles was no Constant and permanent Gift imparted to any, save only
to our Savior, who by virtue of his Hypostatical union could do wonders, when
and as often as he pleased. A third singular Prerogative peculiar to Christ,
arose from his being Lord of the whole world, and therefore wrought wonders all
Nature over. As supreme Master, he commanded a new Star to shine over him at
his birth, and at his death darkened the lights of Heaven, with a word of his
mouth he made the figtree barren, and commanded the winds and sea to obey him.
In his Sacred Passion he split the rocks, rent the veil of the Temple, moved
the earth, as if all nature had trembled, to behold the God of Nature dye.

4. Observe now I beseech you, when we say Church Miracles answer in number and
worth to those of our Savior, we are far from ascribing the singular
Prerogatives These prerogatives more particularly, Specifyea.
already mentioned to either man or Angel, save only to the Word Incarnate.
Neither go we about to persuade, that the Miracles which Christ wrought and
rationally proved, he was one immediately sent from God to redeem the word, John
11. 42, were ever done in the like manner, or Circumstances by any. For as he
was first in Power and Excellence, so also he showed himself the first most
Victorious Conqueror over Sin and infidelity, vanquishing by his glorious
wonders without violent hands, Judaism and Gentilism. Again, herein he has
preeminence above Mortals, that all the Miracles wrought by his Servants,
whether Apostles or others, may be rightly called Christ's Miracles, not only
because done in his Name, but upon this account also, that they are wrought by
his Power. For if as S. Austin teaches, when one Baptizes Christ also Baptizes
with him, upon the same reason we may justly say, when a Miracle is wrought by
a holy Person, Christ our Lord by the Power and virtue he gives, works it with
him, and therefore is not only the most powerful Thaumaturgus, but effectually
shows it in concurring with all, that do these wonders.

5. Notwithstanding, to verify the Prediction of greater Wonders, we say, That
far more, and of the like quality with those of our Saviors, have for the good
of mankind, temporal and spiritual, been wrought in the Church, which is
evident: For more blind Our Assertion of greater wonders, proved
have seen, more lame have walked, more deaf heard, more dead have risen again,
more poor have received the Gospel in the latter Ages of the Church, than
before, when Christ and his Apostles preached; These mentioned in the Gospel.
Matthew: 11. 4. I insisted upon, and are without dispute greater in the Church,
witness that one Miracle of Nations Conversion of Nations, greater,
receiving the Gospel. Neither can the Dr gainsay my Assertion, but by denying
all humane Faith and plain matters of fact, recorded by such as have written
largely of this subject. One of the last Authors is the Erudite Silvester Petra
Sancta, in his two learned Tomes called, Thaumasia verae Religionis. Printed
Anno 1643 and 1646. where the Miracles of the old and new Testament are
paralleld, and the Churches continued Miracles, most amply set down with their
undeniable Proofs. But of this subject more hereafter. Now to my second
Argument.

6 I argued. 2. n. 9. If Miracles, Gods The Necessity of Miracles, laid forth.
own Seals and Characters, were at the first preaching of the Gospel rational
and necessary Inducements for men to believe Christ's Doctrine, as also to
distinguish the Orthodox Church from the Conventicles of Jews and Heretics,
There is the like necessity of their Continuance in after Ages. The reason
hereof is thus given. n. 11. The Conversion of Infidels to Christ was not
wrought by the Apostles only, or all at once, but successively in the ensuing
Ages, when other Infidels rose up as barbarous, as uncivilized, and Ignorant of
Christ's Doctrine as the former converted by the Apostles had been, if therefore
Miracles were wholly Necessary, when those first blessed men preached, How come
they now to be unnecessary, when these latter Infidels are preached to, and
gained to Christ? These never made so happy a change because they heard Truths
barely taught, but were convinced upon this strong Motive, that very many
frequently saw our Christian Verities Confirmed by Signs and wonders from
Heaven. Se this reason further urged. n. 12, though silently passed over by Mr
Dr.

7. Chap: 8. I show how efficacious Church miracles have been in after Ages,
and moreover prove, that those who deny them strive against God, and do their
utmost Of what efficacy Miracles are.
to render the Conversion of Jews and Infidels, not only difficult but
impossible, and I speak of such Miracles as have been wrought by the Professors
of the Roman Catholic Church, ever reputed Orthodox from the Apostles time. In
confirmation whereof, I produce first S. Irenaeus Adversus Haereticos. Lib. 2.
C. 57. Some, says he, cast out Devils, others foretell things to come, others
by laying their hands on the Sick cure them. Now also, as we said, the dead
have also risen, and lived with us for many years. In his. 6. Chapter, he
assures us, that this Grace of working Miracles belong's only to the Catholic
Church, and says, Heretics never restored sight to the blind, nor strength to
the lame, nor wrought any such true Miracles in confirmation of their Gospel. I
produced also S. Basil speaking of that worthy Bishop of Neocaesarea S.
Gregory, deservedly called Thaumaturgus, who removed a Mountain from the place
it was in, and none ever yet doubted or questioned the admirable works of this
Ancient Fathers most plain for Miracles wrought in the Church
glorious Saint. S. Athanasius and S. Hierome amply relate the Miracles of S.
Hilarion, as Severus Sulpitius does the wonders of S. Martin Bishop of Tours in
France. And the same S. Hierome. Lib. adversas Vigilan: c. 4. says, that the
Signs and wonders wrought in the Temples of Martyrs prove highly beneficial
both to Believers, and the Increduious. S. Ambrose Epist: 85 was an Eyewitness
of strange Miracles done by the Relics of S. Gervasius and Protasius, for
proof whereof he appeal's to the sense and judgment of those who saw them. You
have known, says he, nay you have seen many dispossessed of Devils, many when
they touched the Garments of Saints, freed from their Infirmities. S. Austin.
Lib: 22 de Civitat: c. 8. is most copious in relating the Miracles wrought by
the glorious Martyr S. Stephen; And Lib: contra Epist. Fundam. cap. 4. 5.
assert's that the true Church of Christ, is proved and demonstrated S. Austins
judgment.
by Miracles.

8 These most evident Testimonies which evince glorious Miracles to have been
wrought in the Church distinct from those registered in Holy Writ, our wise Dr
takes little notice of, though I clearly laid them before his eyes with a
further enlargement on every particular, and expected an Answer, But in lieu of
this he blames me, be cause I show our Saviors Prediction of more numerous and
greater Miracles exactly fulfilled. I could wish he had perused better S.
Chrisostom's whole Book against the Pagans. Tomo 5. where speaking of S.
Babylas Martyr, he shows that our Savior's Prophecy was verifyed, What the Dr
Cavil's as.
not only in the cures wrought by S. Peter's shadow and S. Paul's garments, but
moreover by the Relics and Monuments of Saints, namely S. Babylas, and from
thence infer's that Christ is God, who did such wonders by his Servants. But
all this signifies nothing to the Dr, though Christ our Lord expressly says,
that his Saints should do greater things; than himself had done.

9. Afterward I referred the Dr to our Venerable Bede, both learned and
virtuous, for the undoubted Miracles of S. Cuthbert, and many others in
England; then n. 6. I appealed to S. Bernard, who I hope may pass for an honest
man in his relation of S. Malachies life. He had, says S. Bernard, the Gift of
Prophesy, cured the sick, changed men's minds to the better, and Not a word to
S. Bernard, returned by the Dr.
raised the dead to life. Again. Here I also introduced S. Bernards own
Miracles, with the wonders of two other glorious Saints, S. Dominick and the
Seraphical S. Francis, against whom the Dr spitt's a little venom, but hurts
neither. Next to be brief (for I cannot here transcribe that whole 8 chapter) I
touched upon the undubitable Miracles wrought in several places of Christendom,
Loreto, Compostella, Montaigue etc. And finally concluded n. 18. with that
admirable known cure wrought by Blessed Nor of the Miracles most evidently
wrought as Montague.
S. Xaverius upon F. Marcellus Mastrilli in the City of Naples; as also. c. 9.
with another evident Miracle at Zaragosa in Spain, both done in our Memory. And
though in my last Treatise I urged the Dr to return an answer to these two
known matters of fact, divulged the whole world over, yet his heart failed to
meddle seriously with either, and replies nothing but what is to his shame, as
will appear afterward.

10 Now before I come to weigh the Dr's weak Arguments, I will plainly discover
some chief enormous frauds and intolerable cheats (one may rightly call them
poysonable Ingredients) which he contrary to Conscience has cast into his
whole Treatise, with intention to beguile an unwary Reader.

11 One palpable cheat is, that he never A long stories, of the Drs frauds, and
open Ch^^^ts.
distinguishes between the received Miracles of the Church, and those which
particular men relate, whereof some are only probable, others dubious, and
others false: These he differences not, but makes all fish that comes to his
net. A Story told by James Finaughty, or Golganus, weigh's as much with him as
the most Authentic Miracle recorded by S. Irenaeus, or S. Austin. Hence when
he touches upon a less certain Miracle, he often closes his discourse with
this nauseous repetition. And what is this comparable to the works of Christ
and his Apostles?

12 By Church Miracles, I first understand such as the most ancient Fathers
have left upon record, never Questioned, never called into doubt by any. These
are innumerable, some few and clear ones, I set down. Reas: and Relig: already
cited, but the Dr in a surly humor What is meant by Church Miracles.
galled with their Evidence, silently passes by them, not knowing what to
reply. 2. I understand by Church Miracles such as in latter Ages have been
approved by the Sea Apostolic, chiefly at the Canonization of Saints, whereof
witnesses have been produced upon oath, and all imaginable Sincerity, (or
Severity rather) used to avoid Impostures, and to make truth openly known.
These and the forenamed Miracles our Dr unworthily account's as unvalvable, as
every feigned story he rakes out of this or that private Author. Though John an
Oaks, or Hasenmullerus tell it, all with him passes for a Church Miracle.

13. A second cheat run's through his whole ill contrived discourse, which is
to persuade the Reader, that the most learned and Holy Fathers of God's Church,
who plainly assert Miracles to have been wrought by the choicest Servants in
it, are open Impostors, and manifest Another unworthy Cheat.
Liars. The Sequel follows inevitably, for if the Dr's Arguments have any
force, they evince (or prove nothing) that never since the Apostles days, the
Church had one true Miracle wrought in it. Therefore not only the Church,
notwithstanding Her great care in the examination of Miracles, but the Fathers
also that produce innumerable, are plain Impostor's and unexcusable Liars. Let
us se, how the Reader will relish this desperate and Heathenish Proposition.
Yet worse follows, and it is, that Antichrist's Signs and wonders may most
justly be preferred before any true Miracle registered by the Fathers, for this
false Prophet will exhibit Miracles specious in appearance (though false)
Christ's Church, says this Doctor, Never showed any really true. No. All are
Fourbs, Lies, Fictions, Impostures, and what not?

14 A third cheat lies in a strange art he uses, very suitable to Arheistical
humors, who believe nothing, and it is thus. To disparage these wonderful
works of God, he fail's in his main enterprise, observe it well. He rejects all
Church Miracles as fourbs. Ought not the Dr, I beseech you, to exchange
Principles with us, A third Cheat, in denying all, and proving nothing.
and prove what he denies by as great Authority as we allege for the contrary
Affirmative, of their being undoubted Truths? This the Godly man never
attempts, but be cause he will have Miracles appear ridiculous, he thinks his
spiteful jeering at them proof enough to decry all, as incredible, despicable,
and contemptible. Jeers fit well men of his humor, who hold fast to what they
see and feel, loath to trouble their brains with more, but jeers Shall not
serve his turn, and therefore I shall ever urge him when we plead for Miracles
by unexceptionable Witnesses, to prove them false, or to grant the fact
attested.

15 A fourth Cheat undermin's the most connatural way of conveying truth either
absent, or past to man's understanding, and is called Humane Faith, which has
great weight, when A fourth Cheat under(...) all Humane Faith.
no just exception comes against it, but the Foolhardy spirit of unbelieving
Heathens, and Heretics. Our Savior's own Miracles before the writing of
Scripture were thus conveyed to many who saw them not, and judged prudently
Credible upon Humane Authority. This Principle grounded in nature and approved
by Christ, the Dr wholly invalidates, for though our Cyrills, our Basils, our
Austins, our Bernards, Bedes, and innumerable others recount indubitable
Miracles, though they point at the time when, and the place where, they were
wrought, though they tell you such and such Eyewitnesses saw them; such Cures
were done by the Relics of Saints, yet Impostors they are for their pains,
and guilty of that enormous Sin of impudently deceiving the world. Pray you
consider. Would not those poor Shepherds think ye, present at our Saviors
birth have gained Credit, had they told the Inhabitants near Bethlem what they
Saw and heard that night? And shall not the word of S. Ambrose, or S. Austin be
taken, while both recount Miracles seen with their own eyes? Did that blind man
cured by our Savior John. 9. persuade the Jews upon his own and Parents
Testimony, that he was their Son, and born blind? And shall not a far greater
number of Eyewitnesses that knew John Clement born What force Humane Faith has?
monstrously lame, and whole multitudes saw him in an Instant Miraculously
cured in our Ladies Chapel at Montaigue, work upon the Dr's, dull Incredulity
and induce him to believe upon humane faith this most strange and evident
wonder, obtained by the Intercession of the Mother of God? It happened in July.
Anno 1603 in the Presence, as I said, of many Eyewitnesses, and forthwith
became public in Print and Pulpit. Sundry of the Gentlemen who attended the
Earl of Hereford at that time An Evidens clear Miracle, wrought as Montague,
Lord Ambassador from England, saw and conferred with the Party, and received
Satisfaction both from him, and other public Testimonies, given of the Cure.
Thus Brereley Protest: Apolog: speak's. Tract 2. c. 3. Sect. 7. Subd: 5. Page
(with me) 544. And the learned Iustus Lipsius then living at Lovain not far
from Montaigu, relates most largely the whole Story in his Book entitled. Diva
Sichimiensis, sive Aspricollis. Antwerp print 1605. C. 45.

16 Now because I only gave a glance at this Miracle, Reas. and Relig. Disc. 2.
c. 8. n. 17 whereof the Dr takes no notice, I will here very briefly set down
the Substance as Lipsius relates it. Erat, says he, Bruxellae etc. There was
at Beuxells John Clement, Son to James Clement, Upon John Clement, amply
related by Lipsius
born lame, weak, and of a monstrous misshapen body, his legs and feet
contracted were turned upward, so that his knees and thighs joined close to
his breast and belly: That lump of his body gathered round like a Ball made the
poor Patient, unfit to stand, lie down, or walk, and for that reason always
sat, forced by the help of his hands and two Crutches to push himself forward,
whereupon the People who daily gave this John relief, usually called him in
their vulgar language. Hansken in it schotelken, Little John in a dish. In this
afflicted condition, often hearing of the great Miracles wrought at Montague he
hoped to find help and comfort in that holy place, whither he was carried in a
wagon, and having confessed his Sins, performed his Penance, The whole manner
of the cure, declared.
and received the Blessed Sacrament, feeling him self full of pain, he
endeavored to creep out of the Church for a little refreshment of Air, but
could not stir, Whether he would or no, he was forced to remain that whole day
in the same place. Evening coming on, Solemn Lauds were sung, and this
Patient, as he sat before the high Altar felt him self lifted up from the
ground, when behold, his contracted and wrested feet, wholly loose, were
stretched out, then also the doublet wherein his body was bound, burst assunder,
and he in a moment stood bolt up. Other clothes being brought, his strength and
vigor more and more increased, his small dried legs, were then filled with
flesh and blood, And which is another wonder, a wound in his head, which he had
received 15. days before, yet wide open, shut it self close together in that
very time, he was cured. This whole multitudes What Judgment the bost
physilians made of it.
saw, This at his return to Lovain and Bruxells he related, when People ran out
to see and meet him etc. I have, says Lipsius, heard the most expert
Physicians of no easy Faith exclaim, and openly profess, that this cure was
wrought by the powerful hand of God, above the force of nature.

17 Please now, couteous Reader, to parallel this Miracle with that of the
blind man in the Gospel, and ask what disparity can the Dr give between them,
or what exceptions can he make to this latter strange wonder? Will he say, John
Clement was a Counterfeit? It Is Impudence. Hundred and hundreds knew him in
this miserable condition twenty years together after his Mothers death, who as
Lipsius notes, ventre exsecto, dyed at his birth? Caeso
Will he say, those many Eyewitnesses who beheld him cured in a moment of
time, were All Exceptions made against the Miracle wrought on John Clement, are
evidently improbable.
unsufficient to make the fact Credible, afterward attested and examined by
public Authority? More saw this wonder wrought upon the lame, then that other
upon the blind cured by our Savior. Will he say, there was never such a man
born lame, much less such a man cured as John Clement, but that all are Liars
and Cheats who tell the Story? More justly might the Jews have said, there was
never such a man blind as christ restored sight to, for they saw not that cure
wrought, yet believed it, upon the man's own word and his Parents, and
therefore advised him, to glorify God for the favor done, though their
obstinacy would not ascribe the Miracle to Christ. O! but here is a disparity.
Scripture recount's the one Miracle; not the other. A most simple reply. We now
insist upon humane Authority, and ask (which is ever to be noted) whether upon
that ground, the latter Miracle be not made more credible then the first, and
here we are told, the one is believed by Faith, because God says so, and not
the other. All the Miracles Christ wrought were presupposed true before the
vvriting of Scripture, and not first true, because they are registered in that
Book.

18 This humane Faith utterly ruined by our Dr, the Erudite Lipsius plead's by,
and presses home. cap. 1. Vbi estis, qui paulo vetustiora elevatis etc. Where
are you who extenuat and undervalve ancient Miracles? Ecce nova novitia, behold
new ones done in This Miracle as Montague proclaimed all over.
the Eyes of us all, and heard with our cares, renowned and solemnized by the
frequent concourse and applause of People with great benefit to Nations. Quae
fides potest esse in rebus humani si haec non est? What faith can there be
amongst men, if these things gain not credit? And therefore he says in his
Preface. Those deserve not to be called men that boggle at, or doubt of such
illustrious wonders, yet a Ieer, a Pish, and Flurt of our Dr's finger seems
forcible enough to discredit these admirable, and no less manifest Testimonies
of God's power, publicly showed to the world.

19 More Cheats and fallacies of this Dr will better appear in the ensuing
Discourse. Here A fifth Cheat.
is one more, and gross enough. He never refutes the known and certain Miracles
of the Church, but now laugh's at one less certain, now at another related, as
I said by private Authors, prudently judged over credulous in writing matters
upon Hearsay. These support not our cause, for we plead, as S. Austin did by
Miracles, Multitudine, and magnitudine, conspicuous, undeniable, and thus our
Savior Argues. John 15. 24. The works which I have By what Miracles, we
argue.
done (not one work) no other has done. Acts. 2, Many wonders and Signs were.
wrought by the Apostles in Jerusalem. What, if false or doubtful Scriptures
have been forged under the Apostles names, as manifest happened in the
Primitive times, must we therefore reject the true Scriptures already received?
Yet this fallacy or cheat, is a main Prop to the very most of our Dr's rambling
discourse, as shall be shown afterward.

20 A Second Cheat is, that when a Miracle appears strange or ridiculous to the
Dr's fancy, A sixth Cheat grounded upon the Strangeness of Miracles.
he slights it as counterfeit, turn's it off with a Iibe, and well instruct's
Atheists and Heathens to deride the Miracles related in Scripture. For what can
be more ridiculous to an Atheist then to read of Moses his horned face? Of
Balaams Ass speaking? Of Samsons destroying a thousand men with the Jawbone of
an Ass, or of water issuing out of one tooth in that Jawbone, to quench the
wearied man's thirst after his fighting? These and many more a Heathen Scorn's
as highly as Miracles recorded in Scripture, more ridiculous to Atheists, than
Church Miracles.
the Dr does our most certain Church Miracles. But thanks be to God, the Church
and her Miracles are not like the walls of Jericho overthrown with loud
Braying, or the empty sound of a Dr's broken Trumpet. No. Christ's Sacred
Doctrine, witness the Apostles though a Scandal to the Jews and a foolery to
the Gentiles, yet stand's invincible against all Opposers. and so will the
Church and her Miracles continue glorious to the end of Ages, maugre the
attempt of Her weak Adversaries. Thus much premised we will in the next place
consider the Dr's exceptions against Miracles, and ward off a few Cavils,
Arguments drawn from Authority or reason I find not any, worth answering.

CHAP II.
Of the Dr's proceeding against me. What he supposes, destroies it self.
What weight Church Miracles have? None of wit or judgment ever contradicted
them. How the Dr juggles in appealing to Apostolical Miracles. The Miraculous
Translation of the sacred house of Loreto, manifestly proved against the Dr's
weak and unworthy Cavils.

1. AFter the Dr had set down some parcels of my Discourse, and chiefly
excepted against my comparing Church Miracles with those wrought by Christ and
his Apostles, he thinks an Atheist would desire no more advantage against
Christian Religion, then to have it granted, that those Primitive Miracles were
no other than such, as are wrought in the Roman Catholic Church. I answer The
Dr either here supposes, the Church never to have had one true Miracle in it,
and upon that Supposition it is madness to talk of paralleling Apostolical
Miracles believed by Faith, with Miracles never in being. For who can parallel
fourbs, and fancied wonders, with Apostolical Miracles, really wrought? Or
Contrariwise, He supposes true Miracles, as curing the lame, dispossessing
Devils, and raising the dead to have manifestly illustrated the Church! Grant
this, What ought to be supposed, for a right Parallel.
and he is obliged to give a disparity between the Primitive wonders, and these
latter in the Church. This I always urged, but the Dr leaves it unanswered.

2. Again, he persuades himself of great advantage given to Atheists (who as
much slight the Apostolical Miracles as those of the Church) I see no such
matter, and therefore Say contrary, and have proved it. If Church Miracles be
rejected, the plainest Evidence of Credibility fail's, and if Christian
Religion be made thus bare and naked of glorious Marks, Atheisin get's so much
ground, that neither Christ nor his Miracles can gain belief of any; For,
undermine the Church, and that is done, How all faith is ruined.
if you rob her of her Miracles and other Motives, Scripture it self, and the
very wonders of Christ lose credit, and go to wrack also, because the
certainty we have of These, relies upon Church Authority, utterly discredited,
when as the Dr, would have it, you expose her without Luster, and thereby make
her contemptible to Jews, who anciently had true The Dr's Athcism.
Miracles amongst them, and ridiculous to Gentiles. Here is your Atheism, good
Mr Doctor.

3. In the following page. 439. He enquires after the credibility of the
ancient Miracles and the latter of the Church, and tells us two things are
agreed on to make up sufficient credibility in a Testimony. Viz. The knowledge
and fidelity of the persons who deliver it, If they speak nothing but what they
were witnesses of, and never gave suspicion of fraud and deceit, and offered
the highest ways of proof concerning their fidelity, then it is an
unreasonable thing to disbelieve them. This says he, is the case of those, who
recorded our Saviors, and his Apostles Miracles etc. Hear now my reply. But S.
Irenaeus, S. Ambrose, S. Austin and the other Fathers already cited, were such
certain witnesses, and never gave any suspicion of fraud; Their Authority,
great Sanctity and worth, was Proof enough of their own fidelity. Therefore the
Dr's Consequence hold's good for all the Miracles, these blessed men The Drs
Consequence returned upon himself.
have attested. Viz. It is an unreasonable thing not to believe them. In the
next place, the Dr juggles in appealing to those who recorded our Saviors
Miracles, for either he look's upon these wonders, as they are matters of Faith
because recorded in Scripture, and that is nothing to our present purpose: Or,
consider's them as seen or heard, by Humane faith, before the Evangelists wrote
them. Here we come close to the Dr and assert, that not only the Miracles which
S. Ambrose and S. Austin saw, but the latter also in the Church, namely, the
Miraculous cure of F. Mastrilli in Naples; of the young man who had his leg
restored by the Intercession of our Blessed Lady at Zaragosa, of John
Clement's Miracles of undoubted Credit.
stupendous cure, seen and attested by innumerable witnesses, are upon humane
Faith most certain. Of These, and the like openly known works of God we speak,
manifestly clear from all impostures, and say they were never disproved by any,
Friend or Enemy. Let therefore the Dr either plainly discredit such, or
hereafter desist from impugning known Miracles.

4 He goes on. P. 440. The greatest number of Miracles in the Roman Church have
been believed upon the credit of fables and uncertain reports. Mark first a
shuffling. The greatest number, says he. Speak out Dr. Are any true, or, are
all false? If these three only now mentioned, be true (as hundreds more are)
and all the Spite in Hell shall never prove one of them false, there is enough
to stop your mouth with. Again, says he. The Miracles in the Roman Church have
been believed upon uncertain reports. Miracles approved by the Church never
doubted of by prudent men.
That is, some over Credulous have believed so, as many anciently upon
uncertain reports believed false Gospels, for true ones. What Is this to our
purpose? The only difficulty is, whether those we call Church Miracles, I mean
such as have been strictly examined upon oath by the Prelates of the Church,
and after examination approved (we have innumerable of these) can be evinced
counterfeit, or forged? It is a flat Calumny to account these fabulous. The Dr
adds. The greatest number of those who delivered the Miracles in the Roman
Church have been contradicted by men of greater Authority than themselves. I
answer the Church herself has contradicted many fabulous Miracles, with great
punishment laid on the Impostors, and therefore strictly command's her Prelates
to use all diligence in the Examination of Miracles, before they be approved.
Of these we speak, and know the Dr err's grossly, in saying such approved
Miracles have been contradicted by men of great Authority. What man in his wits
ever contradicted the Miracles seen by S. Ambrose and S. Austin or the visible
boiling up of S. Ianuaries blood, manifest to thousand and thousand
Eyewitnesses? Or, not to entertain the Reader with an endless repetition of
most certain known Miracles upon record, who can without impudence boggle at
the Miracle of S. Xaverius wrought upon F. Mastrilli, or call into doubt, that
other cure at Zaragosa,? These and innumerable more of the like quality, we
urge and boldly assert, the Dr shall never speak a probable word against them.

5. What follows in the Dr. P. 441. is above all expression simple. None of
these persons, says he, ever laid down their lives to attest A Simple
Objection.
the truth of any of their Miracles. Very wisely objected! Did the blind man
cured by our Savior. John. 9. lay down his life to attest the truth of the
Miracle wrought upon him? Did S. Peter, S. Paul, or any Apostle offer
themselves to death, or dye, for a proof of their Miracles? No. They lost their
lives to attest the truth of the Gospel, which God pleased to confirm by
Miracles, and so thousands and thousands Witnesses have done to attest the
truths taught by the Roman Catholic Church, after innumerable Spectators had
seen Miracles and solemnelly sworn, that what they had seen, was true. Is not
this proof enough (matter of damnation if perjured) to gain belief from wise
and prudent men?

6. Next we are to attend the Dr, who tells us he is going on Pilgrimate to our
Lady at Loreto, to view the Authentic Monuments and Miracles wrought there. He
had done more wisely had he kept at home, or pretended a pilgrimage to the man
in the Moon, (some think men are there), though its hard to get so high, And in
the Dr's Principles, its wholly as difficult, to find out any Miraculous
Chapel at Loreto, yet he in all have is posting thither to pull that Chapel
down, which in his judgment neither is, nor ever was in being. Of this we are
to speak more largely.

The Miraculous Translation of the Chapel of Loreto, defended against the
Doctor. Authorities for the Translation, Produced.
7. TO proceed clearly. First its evident that a little House or Chapel, has
stood at Loreto without Prop, support, or reparation well nigh the space of
four hundred years, and its much, that an old house, as the Dr Scornfully
calls it, should remain so long unchangeable, and have no material Foundations
to stand upon. 2. Its evident, that this Chapel was never first built at
Loreto by any hands, for grant this, the report of its Evidences for the
Chapels Translation.
being translated thither, would have been blasted, thought a cheat, and made
ridiculous the whole world over. All would have said. in such a year, by such a
Benefactor, this Chapel was erected as appears upon record, and some eyes who
saw it built there, would have left a memory of it to Posterity, which Of the
great veneration given to the Chapel.
would soon have taken off all respect and veneration to the place. Whereas,
the contrary is evident, Popes, Princes, Prelates, Great ones and wise, rich
and poor, Christians and Turks, highly reverence and honor the place, and
therefore have enriched it with many noble Donaries. Were all these men think
ye worse then besotted, when they parted with their Goods to honor a few bare
stones which a company of Briklayers about Loreto, some time or other, heaped
together, and made a house of? Again, who ever built a house or Chapel without
material Foundations? This Sacred Chapel has none, but stand's upon it is own
weight without Support and so also it stood in Dalmatia. 3. This 3. volume is
contained in his 2. Tome.
As Silvester Petra Sancta Observes. Volum: 3. Thaumasiae, under the Title.
Miracula perpetua. Cap. 3. P. 30. Though the Stones of this Chapel in color
and figure appear like Brick, yet in real truth they are true Stones as has
been tried, and of such a nature, as The stones of the Chapel, not found in
Europe.
are not to be found in Picenum (now called Marca Anconitana) nor in all Italy,
nor in any part of Europe. From whence this Author infer's that the house was
miraculously translated, and not built by Workmen at Loreto. These Arguments
which I hold unanswerable the Dr takes no notice of, but iogg's on in his
pilgrimage, how and in what manner, we shall presently discover.

8 In the mean while, please to hear briefly the story of this Chapels
Miraculous Translation. Horatius Torsellinus relates it at large in five books.
Silvester Petra Sancta now cited, more compendiously, Canisius, Cardinal
Baronius, Bzovius, and others write of it.

9. This Holy house, where the Angel saluted the Blessed Virgin, and Christ our
Lord S. Hierome and S. Paula visited this Chapel.
had his education with his sacred Mother, and S. Joseph, stood first in
Nazareth. S. Herome. lib. 8. c. 30. and Epist. ad Eustoch. 27. who visited the
place with S. Paula, a noble Roman Lady, call's it Nutriculam Domini, the
Nurcery of our Savior, and was in great veneration even after the Saracens had
taken Jerusalem. There the generous Commander Tancredus when that most
Christian Heroes, Godfrey of Bullion, had taken Jerusalem, enriched this
Chapel with noble Donaries, then standing in the Church which Helena the
Emperesse had built Who enriched is?
about it. Se Tyrius. lib. 3. belle Sacri. There Iacobus Vitriacus Patriarch of
Jerusalem sometimes said Mass, on the Feast of the Annuntiation. Se Jacobus
Vitr: in Descript Terrae sanctae. Finally, S. Lewis the most Christian King and
9.th of France, after much fufferance in that holy war, would not return from
Palestine S. Lewis prayed devoutly there.
before he had visited this Sacred house which he did with all veneration on
the Anniversary day of our Lady. March. 25. Se Ludovic: Elicon. Sermon: de S.
Ludovic: To relate here how all Palestine was lost, and made subject to Christ's
Enemies would be too long a work, and no way to my present purpose. The Reader
is yet to know, that the Miraculous Transmigration of this house soon followed
the last overthrow given to Palestine, when the King of Egypt conquered by
force Tripoli, and Potlamais, the only Holds left poor Christians in Syria.
This happened in the Month of April Anno 1291. Se. Joan: Villan. lib. 7. a
known Historian.

10. The next Month after, and the same year, VII. Idus Ma^as, The house was
Miraculously When, the house was by Miracle translated?
carried by the power of God and his Angels from Nazareth many thousand Italian
Miles to the Country of Ill^^icum, or part of it, Called Dalmatia, and stood
near Tersactum and The place where it first stood, and who saw it.
Flume, two sea Towns on a little Hill, as Hierome Angelita after a diligent
search made into the Annals of Illyricum, amply relates. The People next
morning amazed at the wonder to se a house stand there torn from its
Foundations, took a view of it, circumspectly regarded the height, breadth, and
little furniture within, whereof you have a more ample Description in
Tursellin. lib. 1. c. 3. and Silvester petra Sancta. p. 19. These things much
spread abroad, came to the knowledge of Alexander the Prelate of Tersactum, who
then lay very sick in bed. The virtuous Prelate (dear says Tursellin to God
and man) mighty desirous to se the Wonder, addressed himself by earnest prayer
to the Blessed Virgin, implored her help in order to his speedy recovery, and
was graciously heard. For behold, about midnight the Mother of Mercy enlightened
the chamber where the sick The Translation confirmed by Miracle.
Patient lay, and told him, the house he desired to se was that where she was
born, where the Angel Gabriel brought her the tidings of conceiving by the Holy
Ghost, and where in fine, the Divine word was made flesh. Now, to the end thou
may bear witness of these things (so the Mother of God spoke) and gain
credit in divulging them abroad. Sanus est^. In this very moment be thou quit
of thy long Infirmity, thy health is perfectly restored. This said and done:
The Sacred Virgin disappearing, Alexander, The Miracle manifestly proved.
sound, strong, and full of courage forthwith left his bed, ran to the
Miraculous Chapel, and there with eyes and hands lifted up to Heaven, first
gave God and the Blessed Virgin humble thanks for his cure, and afterward most
Zealously declared to all in the open Streets and high ways, what he had heard
and seen; in so much that the Inhabitants there came Alexander's zeal and
forvour.
flocking about him, and admired to se the Venerable old man, who the day
before lay at deaths door, now lively, and contrary to his gravity run up and
down, and vigorously speak, as if God by a Miracle had spoken in him. Tursellin
for these Things, cites in his margent the Annals of Flume, written by
Hieronymus Angelita, whereof more presently.

11. At this very time when the worthy Prelate Alexander was cured, Nicolas
Frangipanius of a noble Roman Progeny, then Lord of Tersactum and supreme Ruler
of that whole Country, accurately weighing what had passed, resolved at last to
send some choice men to Nazareth with command to enquire, whether this house
yet remained there or no? Alexander, and three more deputed thither, at their
arrival found in the Temple built by. S. Helena Messengers sent to Nazareth,
found by clear signs,
where our Ladies house lately stood, that the little house had been rased from
the foundations, and, as it were, taken thence by force, which manifestly
appeared both by the tracks and marks left there in the Floor, or Pavement,
where it had been, as also by a wide Opening made in the height of S. Helen's
Temple, through which it passed. These four Persons upon their return gave a
full account to the Lord Frangipanius, as also to the Inhabitants, of what they
had seen, attesting that they had measured the Footsteps of the foundation, and
found those exactly answerable to the dimensions of The Chapel removed thence.
this Chapel, and withal recounted what complaints they heard from the people
about Nazareth, for the loss of this great Treasure, which Alexander upon
several occasions publicly preached, and made known all over.

12. Three years and seven months the Chapel remained in Dalmatia, when
behold, toward the middle of December, that is Anno 1294. it passed over the
Adriatic sea, and came to Picenum a part of Italy, and there placed in a wood
belonging to a pious Matrone of Recanati, called Laureta, had from her the name
of Loreto. The Shepherds who kept their watch both day and night, first made a
discovery of Where it was placed afterward?
it by a clear light, that environed the place. All those about Recanati upon
the fame of this wonder, flocked thither, Here the Blind, the Lame, and
innumerable infirm, recovered their sight, limbs, and health, whereat the good
Lady Laureta had as much joy, as the Dalmatians sorrow upon the Chapels
departure. Eight months expired, it left the wood, and went one How discovered?
mile nearer Recanati, where placed on a hill appertaining to two Brothers, it
stayed not full out four months, but by God's special Providence and power,
settled it where it is at present, now called Loreto. If you ask why it changed
Postures so often in so short a compass of time, and enobled so many places
with its Presence, God only, conscious of all truths, knows best. By
conjectures we may guess, that these several Transportations happened, to leave
in the minds of all prudent men an absolute assurance concerning this matter of
Fact, of its being thus translated from place to place.

13. The proofs whereof are evident. First, the forementioned Lord Frangipanius
built at Tersactum, where our Ladies Cell once stood, another Chapel just of
the same bigness with it, called S. Maria a Terascto, and in Memory of it, and
the evident Miracles wrought there while it was in Dalmatia, encompassed his
newly More proofs of the Chapels Translation.
erected Chapel with a very Magnificent Church, like that of S. Helen's in
Nazareth, yet to be seen at this day, with an inscription in Marble thus. Hic
est locus etc. Here is the place where once, that Holy house of our Blessed
Lady stood, and this says Tursellin. lib. 1. cap. 9. many worthy men of great
credit have seen and most sincerely related to me. In Picenum also, where the
house remained in a wood, while That was in being (for now it is cut down) there
appeared demonstrable Signs in the very Plat of ground where the Chapel was,
as Hieronymus Angelita in his History of Loreto dedicated to Pope Clement the
seventh, recount's, and Raphael Riera a worthy known man assured me, says
Tursellin, that he had often seen that lovely pleasant Plat of ground, with
great content Other Evidences.
and devotion, who to preserve a memory of it, enclosed it in a wall just of
the same Longitude and latitude with that of our Ladies chapel. And this, adds
Tursellin, I have seen with my own eyes. Some Tokens, though not so clear of
this Sacred house, yet appear in that Hill of the two Brothers by a heap of
earth cut out of the Hill, and cast up there. Se Tursellin. Cap. 9. Fine.

14. Notwithstanding the manifest proofs already intimated, which show the
Translation of this house to have been Miraculous, yet the Gentry of Picenum in
a General meeting, induced thereunto by those of Recanati, resolved for greater
Security, to have the whole matter examined anew, and therefore upon public
charges, appointed Sixteen choice men, first to Of the Lord Frangipanius his
Monument.
pass over into Dalmatia, and from thence to Palestine, for further
Satisfaction. When these Deputies came to Tersactum, they found a lively memory
among all People of this Sacred house once placed there, and afterward taken
from thence, whereof that Signal and never to be forgotten Monument of honor
still remained, which the Lord Frangipanius had built, to wit, of another
Chapel just like that of our Ladies, encompassed in a larger Church, as is
already observed. From hence these Deputies departed for Nazareth, happily
arrived there, and saw the Foundation of the house rased from the Floor of S.
Helens Church, wherewith it was environed, and a passage open in the vault, as
we have related. Upon the faithful information of these sixteen Messengers
returned to Picenum, the fame of this sacred Cell became more and more
renowned, God confirming the several Translations of it from place to place, by
innumerable Miracles. Yet after all this done, Pope Clement the 7.th to avoid
all forgery, and have Messengers again sent, by Pope Clement.
greater Assurance, sent three prudent men of his own Family first to Dalmatia,
then to Nazareth, with an express Command that they should examine all things
accurately, and set down in their Note-books every particular appartaining to
the measure and form of the translated Chapel. These Messengers came first to
Tersactum, and saw there the Chapel Their journay, and
erected by the Lord Nicolas Frangipanius, and withal heard the pious
complaints of the Inhabitants thereabout, who lamented the loss of that highly
valued treasure taken from them.

15. From Tersactum in Dalmatia, they undertook a further Voyage to Nazareth,
and there in S. Helen's Church found in the Pavement Further Voyage, to
Nazareth.
of it, as is now said, the exact measure of our Ladies Chapel, and all
particulars answerable, to the Relation hitherto given. Besides, to comply with
the Popes command, they enquired of those who lived thereabout, whether any
memory yet remained of the Translation of the house from thence? All
unanimously answered, the memory of that house was undoubted, and yet preserved
amongst them. These three returning, who brought Account given, of their
Journey.
with them some of the Stones left in the foundation of our Ladies Chapel,
gave Pope Clement full Satisfaction, and made the several Translations already
mentioned undoubted.

16. Wherefore that worthy Provost, Petrus Georgius Teremanus, one of great
integrity and prudence, who many years governed Teremanus published his
relation.
the house of Loreto, published in the time of Pope Pius the second, a short,
plain, Relation of this Chapel for the benefit of all Pilgrims, wherein the
Substance of what you have now heard, is comprised, and for a further
Confirmation of all; Two Citizens of Recanati, Paulus Rinalduccius, and
Franciscus Prior, well known most honest and virtuous, attested and deposed
upon oath before the Provost Teremanus, what they had understood concerning the
Transmigration of this house. The first Rinalduccius swore, he had often heard
his Grandfather say, that he saw with his own eyes the house carried over the
sea and placed in the wood at Recanati, whither the old man with others often
repaired for devotion. The second Francis Prior witnessed, that he also had
heard his Grandfather 120. What two sworn Witnesses deposed?
years old, yet perfect in his Senses, openly avouch, that he with others had
frequently gone to visit the Chapel while it stood in the wood, and on the
Hill of the two Brothers, and this also Hieronymus Angelita, the constant
Hieronymus Angelita his Testimony.
Secretary of the City Recanati, in his History of Loreto, has left upon
Record. Now to show you the fidelity of the Provost Teremanus, please to read
the great Commendations given him by Nicolas Astius Bishop of Recanati, one
most eminent for learning and Sanctity, who not only bestowed great Alms
toward the Maintenance of Pilgrims resorting to Loreto, but liberally also
assigned the fruits of many Manors he had for the same end, to that holy place.
You may read the worthy Bishops own words, Teremanus, much praised, by the
Bishop of Recanats.
and the Elogium given of Teremanus in Tursellin. Lib: 1. c. 28. where he is
called a venerable man, one most Devout, Sincere, and faithful.

17. Now if you account all these particulars upon Record fictions, while so
many great Authors, and different Nations, Palestine, Dalmatia, and Italy give
Testimony of them; If you will say, that the four men sent from Dalmatia, those
Sixteen from Picenum, and three from the Court of Rome, either never undertook
such a Journey, or at their return (worse then Devils) betrayed their trust, in
forging abominable lies; If you will say, that as often as the pious Pilgrims
come from Dalmatia to Loreto, who with sighs bemoan the Translation of this
house from them, are besotted; If you will say, many Eyewitnesses that saw at
Tersactum a Chapel The improbabilities the Dr must devour, without one witness
for him.
built by the Lord Frangipanius in memory of this house, had only a Spectre and
no real thing before their eyes; If you will say, that, that worthy Provost
Petrus Georgius Teremanns, who many years had care of this Chapel, was an
Impostor, or an impudent liar; If you will say, those two sworn witnesses
Citizens of Recanati, were perjured persons; If you will say, that a Secretary
of a whole City durst write things, which if false, would with clapping of
hands, have been disdainfully exploded; If you will say, that a most Holy and
wise Bishop acted a fools Part, in giving away his means to uphold a mere
cheat in men's memory, and spend his breath to praise a man who deserved the
Gallows had he so notoriously fooled the world, as the Dr would have us to
believe. If finally, all these Particulars, still upon Record, and preserved by
a never interrupted tradition Age after age in so many Nations, are to be
esteemed fourbs and forged tales, I have done, and must conclude, that humane
faith worth nothing, ought to be thrown of the world, for there is no believing
any thing.

18. Yet one word more to confirm the verity of this Story. First its evident,
such a Chapel stand's now at Loreto frequented by all sort of People, and as I
noted above, it is most clear, that no hands ever laid so many Stones together,
or built it there. The house, however little, did not like a Mushrom A further
Confirmation.
start out of the earth, by night, or in a moment of time. Devils, where the
Immaculate virgin is still honored, placed it not there. What then follows?
But that God by his Omnipotent power transferred it from Country to Country, and
to preserve a Memorial of his Son Christ Jesus, and the Virgin Mother, at last
fixed it where it is now is, to the great joy of all Christians. This reason
alone, I hold so rational and convincing, that the Dr with all his intrigues
and windings, shall never dare to Confute it. Again. The Erudite Silvester
relates upon his certain knowledge two Memorable things for my present purpose.
p. 34. and. 35. Where he tell's us, that he lived at Loreto three whole years,
and there had often discourse with the then Count of Tersactum, called also
Nicolas Frangipanius, Heir and Successor to that other Nicolas, Two memorable
Circumstances, related by Petra Suncta.
who first received the welcome house into his Dominions. This Count says
Silvester, frequently spoke with me of the Chapels Miraculous Transportation,
and once in a pleasant innocent mood told me. that he would by Law accuse the
Italians of rapin for taking from him, and his Ancestors so precious a
Treasure, were it not (added he) that the Angels of a higher Court carried it
away, (with whom I must not contest) and that the Mother of God had right to
place her own House, where she pleased.

19. The other Testimony He relates thus. P. 35. While I was at Loreto, a Noble
Man, though a Sectary came thither, who had often heard from the Calvinists,
that the whole Story of the house of Loreto was a mere fiction. I, said he,
having an ample fortune and desirous to travel, first went to Nazareth, thence
to Tersactum, and at last, as you se, am arrived at Loreto, and have found
after diligent enquiry, that all things wholly agree with the Narration I read
in this place, and ingeniously confessed, Says Petra Sancta, that all is most
true, no ways feigned, devised, or counterfeit. The like assurance, I had,
from his fellovv Travelers, and Servants. Thus Silvester Petra Sancta.

CHAP. III.
The Dr's ridiculous cavils at Teremanus his Table, showed Nonsense. The main
Objection against the Chapels Translation, proposed, and solued. A difficulty
moved Concerning the strange Translation of Protectancy into Germany and
England.

1. NOw me thinks it is high time to return to our Dr who. p 442. Set's down the
Authentic Table of Teremanus hung up at Loreto, wherein the very most, or the
Substance of all hitherto related, is briefly Comprised. It begin's thus. The
Church of our B. Lady at Loreto etc. Will you have more Patience to hear how
the Dr refutes it, then I had in the reading. Is not this (they are his own
words) a very pleasant story to be matched The Dr's ridiculous refu^tation.
in point of Credibility with the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles? What
do these men think in their hearts of Christian Religion, that dare avouch such
ridiculous fictions as these are and impose them on the Credulity of mankind?
What Say you to Dr Still? Does not this wise and profound Answer deserve a
Mitre? Observe well. Many both grave and learned recount the Story, and he with
a huste, not offering at the least proof against them, says its ridiculous.
Witnesses upon Oath deposed that their Ancestors saw the Chapel carried over
the Adriatic sea. It might well, says he, have been a Ship under sail or some
such like thing, and because, he will have it so, it must be ridiculous. What
if the Dr had seen Elias in a fiery Chariot, or the Prophet Habacuc carried
away by the hair of his head into Babylon, would he have judged the one to be a
blazing Comet like a wheelbarrow, and the other a Crow flying through the Air?
The most sage and greatest men in the world highly reverence this sacred
Chapel, but he vviser than all, account's them fools and ridiculous for doing
so. The learned Cardinal Baronius in his Annals, hold's the Miraculous
Translation of this house most certain. Se how rudely the Dr treat's him.
Baronius, says he, should have had more wit, or more honesty, and tells us
afterward. p. 472. He was one whose Zeal carried him no further than the Popes
interest. What Is this but an idle crack of a petty Ministers potgun, The Dr's
Slighting Baronius,
discharged against a most eminent and renowned Person? Should one as inferior
to the Dr, as he is to the Cardinal, publish in Print, that all his scribbling
has been to gain a little vain applause of men, would he think himself civilly
dealt with? God best knows, how much of this is true.

2. Yet we have more of the like blundering. When Canisius gives a fuller
account of this Story, and tells us that the Angels are Ministering Spirits, as
appears by their transporting Habacuc, and Philip. Acts. 7. 40. Our Dr replies
very gravely. As though, says he; Angels could not discharge that Ministry
unless at some time or other, they took away an old house and mounted it into
the Air. Is not this to answer The impertinent Cavils of our Dr, laid forth.
pertinently think ye? Tursellin lib. 1. c. 6. recount's that the trees while
the Chapel passed by, made lowly reverence to it. A jeer refutes all. It
seems, says the Dr, they bovved so lovv, that they could never recover
themselves after. And might he not as well have scorned that stately tree which
reverently bowed to our Savior, witness Sozomenus. lib: 5. Cap. 21, and
Nicephorus Lib: 10. c. 31. But this is the usual trick of our Dr when put hard
to it for an Answer, to what pleases not, he makes short work, look's big, and
laughs at it. Hence he slights those two witnesses Renalduccius, and Francis
Prior, who attested upon oath that their Ancestors had seen the Chapel, and
often visited it, scornfully calling them two Affidavit men, though he has not
one Affidavit man, that ever questioned their Fidelity. Af this strain, he
slights that exact Historian Hteronymus Angelita because, forsooth, he wrote
his Story in Clement the 7th. time, too late as the Dr thinks, and dedicated it
to the Pope. Thus he slights the Authentic Table of the pious Provost
Teremanus with one simple Demand. Was ever so great a Miracle better attested
than this? Reflect Gentle Reader. May this new mode pass Current in refuting
Authors of known integrity by jeers, Ieers and Ironies the Dr's best and only
Authors.
and asking impertment Questions, you may cast all History aside, and let
ranting, flouts, and Ironies have place, Dr Still: tells you it must be so,
having little else to fill his book with, nor so much as one Author to oppose
these Testimonies.

3. In the mean while, perhaps some thing better may occur, but its only the
old rubbish, former Heretics have turned over to furnish the Dr with, and he
ought to thank them for it. Here in a word lies the Chief charge, and in effect
all that can be said. Three Writers, Dantes Aldigerius, Franciscus Petrarchae,
and Ioannes Boccaccius, that prosecuted the Italian History in the fourth
Century, after the year one thousand, never mentioned the Miraculous
translation of this house. And what says our Dr, is it credible that so great
a The only Argument of Heretics. against the Chapels Translation Drawn from
the Silence of Authors.
Miracle should happen in those days without notice taken of it, by such
inquisitive men? Besides. S. Antonin of Florence speaks not a word of it, and
which is more. S. Vincentius Ferrerius. Sermon: de Assump. B. V. positively
assert's, that the Chamber of our Lady was still in Nazareth. And though the
former are negative Testimonies (adds the Dr) yet they cannot be rejected by
us, because we often make use of them as appears by the Story of Pope Joan.
For Baronius says, that the not recording it, or the Silence of so long a time
after, wherein there was just occasion to mention it, was more then a thousand
witnesses to prove the falsity of it. And if silence be a thousand witnesses on
their side, I hope it may be at least five hundred on ours. Thus Mr Dr. And
afterward upon an other An Argument taken out of Baronius speaking of Pope Joan.
occasion. p. 472. harp's much upon the same string, and highly applaud's
Baronius his excellent rule. Viz. What soever is delivered by later Authors
concerning the matters of Antiquity, and is not confirmed by the Authority of
some ancient Writer, is contemned. By this rule in all these matters (says our
Dr) let us stand or fall. Jam content, Mr Dr, and before I soul the difficulty
can easily preacquaint you with another great wonder, never mentioned, never
taken notice of by any Author, but most silently passed over by all ancient
writers, yet you and all Protestants, hold it unquestionably true.

4. In the year 1517. there appeared in Germany a very strange Machine (our Dr
will have it well nigh as old as the Chapel at Loreto) called by some, if not
the whole, at least the best Part of the House of the living God, that is, his
Church, which should (had it been built by Jesus Christ) be more worth then a
little Chapel. Not to keep you longer in Suspense, I mean by this Machine the
whole Essential Fabric A great wonder held by protestants, never mentioned by
ancient Author.
of Protestancy, and beseech you mistake me not, but mark well what I enquire
after? By Protestancy, I do not understand the Common Tenets of Christian
Religion, but the very essentials of this Novelty as it differ's or is
distinguished, by its reformation from that, which some Scornfully call Popery,
and all condemned Heresies, whereof I have treated more largely. Reas: and
Relig: Disc: 1. c. 20. n. 2. Thus much supposed.

5. It is most clear that this fancied Choice part of God's house appeared in
Germany such a year, and from thence (to say nothing of other Transmigrations)
Crossed the sea, and got into England. All this is evident. Now further. But no
ancient Writer ever told the world where this Protestancy had been before
Luther, or from what remote Part of the world it first came, or finally, who
first transported it into Germany, therefore according to the Dr's rule, it
justly deserves contempt. Shall I speak Who conveyed this new Machine of
protestancy into Germany and England?
more plainly? The essential Structure of Protestancy, say Sectaries, was ever
in being from the time of Christ and his Apostles, Three days before Luther it
was not in Germany, yet afterward got thither, we seek for witnesses and would
have this matter of fact plainly attested by some ancient Writer. And is not
the Dr, think ye when pressed thus home, obliged to produce his VVriters and
vvitnesses? One Author as credible as Teremanus, one witness as faithful as
Renalduccius shall content me. You, Mr Dr, make the Essentials of Protestancy
Marvellously ancient. Make this out, Tell us, who were the Professors of it?
Where they lived? Did ever man or Angel bring you the news of this Machin's
Translation from any Part of the world? Were any ever sent in such or such an
Age to Nazareth, Dalmatia, or Italy, that slightly mention it? Writers and
witnesses you have none, deep Silence therefore, and this Silence, and a
destructive Negative, the only grounds of Protestancy.
destructive Negative (No man though most inquisitive ever vvrote of
Protestancy in former Ages) are the best and only Supports of it. We have often
demanded Satisfaction to this particular, yet never had it, nor shall hereafter
have any, whereof I am so Confident that I challenge the Dr to Discuss this one
particular with me in a Treatise apart, and I desire he would consider upon it.

6. It may be he will answer, the Essentials of Protestancy were carried hither
and all the Not one Essential of Protestancy in the whole Bible.
world over with Holy Scripture. I have prevented this Cavil in the place now
cited, and told the Dr, it is impossible to find in the whole Bible so much as
one Essential Tenet of this Religion as it is Protestancy, or called a reformed
Religion, which point I also engage to examine with him, when he pleases. I
answer 2. More numerous and far graver Authors (to say nothing of Church
Authority) contradict this phansied conveyance of Protestancy with Scripture,
than ever opposed the Translation of our Ladies cell from Nazareth. Perhaps the
Dr will Say. The difficulty now agitated concern's not Religion which is a
thing wholly Spiritual, and depend's not on History, as the Translation of a
house does. No good Dr, rub your forhead a little. When you Simply talk of that
ancient Faith from whence the Roman Church once swerved, must not you either
pretend History for your Assertion, and tell us when or in what Age it swerved,
or speak Nonsense? Again. Spiritual things, Religion chiefly, are both real,
and of greatest concern, and ought we not A pure Evasion, rejected
to enquire, how and when they are conveyed to us? Should now a new Sect of
Heretics arise, and set abroad a new Learning like yours, never heard of
before, shall we not demand think ye, as Tertullian did Anciently? Qui estis
vos? Who are you? Vnde? from whence came you? Show your Commission, what
Authority, sent you to preach etc? These Questions we propose to you concerning
the Conveyance of Protestancy into these Parts of the world and you answer
nothing, therefore you must either help out your cause with this Negative. What
Protestants are forced to grant.
No ancient writer ever took notice of it, and so by your own Principle make it
Contemptible; or ingenuously confess the truth. that Luthers mad brains brewed
it, first broached it, and poisoned Posterity with it. You may say. Some
Parallel, this Machine of Protestancy has with the Holy house of Loreto, that
it stand's unsupported, or without any Foundations. If this be Miraculous, or
make for its Credit, I am content, but in passing consider how unlike it is,
upon another Score. The Chapel of Loreto has stood where it is, well nigh
four hundred years, without repair or the alteration of one Stone, but this
unsteedy Church How different the Protestant Church is, from the Chapel at
Loreto.
of Protestancy in the compass of one Age, endlesly tampered with, changes
almost every year, in so much that the old and new Structure of it, are nothing
like one another.

7. Now to the Objection proposed above, I answer. Had none within the compass
of that fourth Century after the year 1000, left a memory of this Chapels
Translation, the Silence of Dantes, Petrach, and Boccace would The Objection
Proposed above, answered.
have had more weight, but when, as Silv: Petr: Sanct: P. 35. notes well, Three
Popes. Benedict the 12, Urban the 6, and Boniface the 9, much about that time
positively maintain the truth of this Miracle, as appears by their Apostolical
letters, the Silence of those others, being merely a Negative Argument,
prejudiceth not the cause at all. One reason of their Silence was the afflicted
and much disturbed State of Italy in those days, caused first by the absence
of popes from Rome, who early in that Age repaired to Avignon and made their
Residence there, full seventy years. Another might arise from that long Schism
of forty years, to say nothing of the ruin and Two reasons of Some Authors
Silence.
destruction which followed in Italy upon the bitter Enmity between those
Guelphi and the Gibellins, well known to the world. These and some other
distractions, as Silvester observes P. 28. much lessened the fame of this
Chapels translation at the beginning, neither can it be any wonder, if three
Writers in that Age (not fully as yet informed of all particulars) silently
passed it over, when besides those Monuments of piety, erected by Count
Frangipanius and the Authority of the Popes now named, we have other witnesses
clear and indubitable for this matter of fact.

CHAP. IV.
More witnesses produced for the Chapels Translation. Whether Baronius proves
Pope Joan to have never been, by a Negative Argument, or Silence merely? Of the
Dr's gross Errors and unworthy dealing.

1. BEsides the Testimonies already alleged for the Translation of this
Chapel, the fame of so great a wonder, always continued in Picenum by a never
interrupted Tradition, where Age after Age Parents taught their Children, and
Masters their Scholars, how, and in what manner the Chapel was Miraculously
transported, and I hope Tradition in such matters may have some weight with our
Dr. 2. A whole book was set forth in Print by the express command of the Bishop
of Recanati, wherein the several Transmigrations of this house are recorded,
Petra Sancta. P. 28. remit's the Reader to the book, though as yet I have not
seen it. 3. Flavius Blondus in his Italia illustrata, treating of Picenum. P.
339. tell's you where the house stand's, call's it Celeberrimum gloriosae
Virginis Sacellum, the most renowned Chapel of the glorious Virgin, and adds
this as a most certain and irrefragable proof for it; that such as by their
Vows and earnest prayers sought assistance at Loreto, have by the Intercession
of God's Sacred Mother most certainly been heard, and obtained many favors
there 1. The Dr cannot let this Testimony pass, without Shuffling, and abusing
the Author. Three frauds I observe in his Answer. First he says, Blondus was
Secretary to Eugenius the 4.th about the year 1450, a good competent time after
the Miracle was said to be wrought, whereas Bellarmine, de Scriptor. Eccles:
testifies that Blondus Continued Three frauds discovered in the Dr.
his Story from Anno. 407. to his own time Anno. 1400. though he lived till the
year 1440, ten years short of the Dr's. 1450, neither was Eugenius alive in
that year 1450. being made Pope Anno 1431 and sat 15 years 11. months and 12
days, and I am sure Blondus (most likely not then living) was no Secretary to
a dead Pope. By all you may see the Dr's pretty clinch. About the year 1450. 2.
He tells us. All Blondus says is only, that there was a famous Chapel of our
Lady at Loreto, as appeared by the many oblations there made. I answer Blondus
as is now noted, has much more, of the Signal great favors, which Favors
obtained by the Intercession of our B. Lady.
pious and devout People obtained from Almighty God by the Intercession of the
Blessed Virgin, but the Dr thought it his wisest course to clap this under
Deck, for fear of Scaring his people with any thing like a Miracle, wrought by
our Lady. The last shuffling the cards is worst of all. Blondus, says the Dr,
speak's of many Oblations made at Loreto, but has not one word of the Chapels
What Blondus evinces
Miraculous translation. I answer, while he assert's that the Chapel stand's
at Loreto, and that God has wrought Miracles there, he jointly affirm's, it
was Miraculously translated thither, upon this convincing reason already laid
down, that no hands ever built it at Loreto. I desire the Dr to enervate this
one proof, which I judge cannot Mantuans Testimony
be well answered.

2. Next we produce the clear Testimony of Baptista Mantuanus, a Religious man
of the Holy Order of Carmelits, a good Divine, and an excellent Poet, who lived
with 30 more of his Order at Loreto, and Comprised the Substance of the whole
story in verse, part whereof I here set down.

Quod cernis Picentia iuxta Littora, delubrum est illud venerabile
Magnae Matris, ab Assyriis, Quod Dij Super
Aequora quondam, Huc manibus vexere suis.
The Sense is. What you here see near the Shore of Picenum is the venerable
Temple of our great Mother the Virgin, which the Angels in time past carried
from Syria to this place, with their own hands. Some quaint pen may perhaps
match this excellent latin with an English verse, If not; let it pass, as How
the Dr dispatches Mantuan.
you have it, in plain prose, while our Dr dispatches Mantuan with a wet
finger. Mantuan, says he, read the Table hanging up in the Chapel, and no
wonder if he found the Story fit for a Poets brain. Very short, and very
pithless.

3. Yet more, to omit Teremanus and Hierom's Angelita's Testimonies, whereof we
have spoken, what can any man in his wits oppose to Leander Albertus one of S.
Dominick's Holy Order, both pious and learned? Read him in his Description of
Italy, Tursellin. Lib: 2. C. 28. gives you his whole relation concerning the
transmigration of the house. And Leander Albertus his Testimony
I think no man ever spoke with greater Zeal and fervor, citing most certain
Records and Monuments of Antiquity. And how think you does our Dr slight this
virtuous man's Authority? Marry, first we are told, he wrote too late, and
secondly, that he seems to rely most upon the Miracles wrought at Loreto. To
the first I answer, and pray you reflect, Had either Petrach or Bocca^cius
(which is not done) made mention of the Chapels translation, might not the Dr
as well have excepted weakly excepted against, by the Dr.
against them, and told us they came too late with their Stories, for both
these wrote well near a hundred year's after its coming to Dalmatia? This Dr,
it seems, will either have matters of fact recorded presently when they
happen, or is resolved to slight them, therefore I am obliged once more to
remind him of his Protestancy, and must demand, whether any Writer ten or
twenty years after Luthers revolt told him, from whence this new Nothing came
into the world? To the 2. d weak Cavil I answer, that the Miracles wrought at
Loreto, do and must suppose the Chapel Miraculously translated thither, If,
which is evident, no mortal hands ever erected it there.

4 Besides these Proofs, the Testimony of those Messengers sent by Clement the
7th to Dalmatia, and Nazareth (The Testimony is still preserved) evidently
convinces the truth of what we now speak: Consider I beseech you, whether it
be likely, or in any mean measure probable, that three Choice men selected out
of the Popes own Family, should be sent by the These three Messengers relation
cannot be doubted of.
express command of the greatest Prelate upon earth, to take full information
of every particular concerning the Chapels Translation, (which was done as you
heard above) and at their return, worse then Rogues, should prove Falsifyers of
Evidences, and fool the Pope with a mere cheat, or Flimflam Story? Here I
appeal to the judgment of every prudent man for a final Sentence, that knows
how severely Popes and Princes also proceed in such matters, and ask the Dr,
whether all the jeers in his boudget, can make the Pope a fool, and these
witnesses disloyal in their relation. We go on. Pope Clement the 8,th having
well pondered all the Evidences in behalf of the Chapels What Clement the
eight Commanded.
Translation visited Loreto, and commanded a Short Epitome of the whole Story
to be engraven in a marble Table, which is as follows.

Christian hospes etc. Christian Pilgrim, Thou that comes hither moved by thy
Pious Devotion behold's here the venerable house of Loreto, renowned the whole
world over by reason of most Divine Mysteries and the glory of Miracles. Here
the Sacred Mother of God was born: Here She was saluted by an Angel: Here the
eternal word was made flesh. This house the Angels first transported

Part 2. c. 4. More VVitnesses Produced, from Palestine into Illyricum near
Tersactum. Anno 1291. in the time of Pope Nicolas the 4.th. Three years after,
when Pope Boniface the 8.th began his Reign, it was carried by the help of
Angels into Picenum and placed near the City Recanati in a wood, where thrice
You have Pope Clements Testimony in Silv: Petra Sancta cited, P. 31.
changing place in the compass of one year, at last it fixed here, now from
this time, three hundred years ago. Since the Neighboring People have admired
the wonder; and the glory of Miracles far and near spread abroad, has gained
great veneration among all Nations. The walls of this house have stood for so
many Ages without any foundations, and yet remain firm and entire. Clement the
7:th decked it round about with a marble vesture. Anno 1525. Clement the 8:th
Commanded this Short inscription of the Chapels Translation to be engraven in
this Stone. Anno 1595.

Subscribed. Antonius Maria Gallus. S. R. E. Cardinalis and Episcopus Auximi,
Sanctae Domus Protector.


5. What think ye, was this most Judicious Pope besotted, when he ordered the
engraving of these words in marble, which would have cost him dear, an eternal
reproach, could any Critic have found the least flaw in the whole A
Consideration for the Reader.
Story? No wise man, much less Popes, wittingly run the hazard of a disgrace
for toys or trifles. Few follow the Shuttle humor of Dr Still: who writes
what comes into his head, right or wrong (all is one) whereof there are
Instances enough in the former Treatise, and you shall have more plenty
hereafter. Now,

6. Because it is full time (after this long, though necessary Digression) to
solve the other part of the objection proposed above, I will here begin with
one foul error of this Dr. He tell's us. P. 451. that S. Vincentius Ferrerius.
(E. The Dr err's in his quotation.
Ws. admirable Saint) says, Sermon. de Assump. B. V. That the Chamber of our
Lady was still in Nazareth. E. W. answer's, and assures Mr Dr, that S.
Vincentius has two Sermons upon the Assumption, and that he has read both in
two several Editions very diligently: The one in an old abbreviated Character,
without the Year of our Lord, the other Antwerp print. Anno 1573. and E. W.
thinks the Dr might have more exactly pointed at the Sermon, but this fault may
appear little, the greater is, that S. Vincentius has not one word in either
Sermon so much as remotely like to what the Dr., imposes on him. But what if.
S. Vincentius had Spoken in Some other Sermon of our Lady as the Dr Cites,
would he not, think ye have either told us, he came too late with his story, or
blamed him as he does S. Antonin, for writing a Rapsody of all sorts of
Miracles? I never saw the like Strain in any man. If Authors write not of
Miracles the Dr Fault's their Silence, if they write, all is Whether Authors
write or write not, the Dr blames them.
a Rapsody. Was there ever Man More like Aod both left and right handed? In
case a right Thrust dispatch you not (which I never yet saw given to any
Argument) a left one must do the deed, and and destroy you.

7. Now one word to Baronius his Rule, and the Dr quotes. Annal. A. D. 853 n.
65. Where you have another Slurr, for the number in my book (and I hold it a
good one) is. N. 88. but the worser fault, is that he abuses Baronius, who n.
87. first refutes the Fable of Pope Joan by Baronius refutes the Fable of Pope
Joan* by positive Proofs.
a solid positive Proof Chiefly taken from the continued Succession of true
Popes, and the unquestionable Authority of Anastasius Bibliothecarius that
lived in the very year, when this She creature is supposed to have sat in S.
Peter's Chair, between Leo the 4.th, and Benedict the 3. Yet Anastasius present
at the Election then The Continued Succession of Popes, and the Authority of
Anastasius.
made, expressly testifyes, that Pope Leo being dead Benedict Six days after,
was Chosen Pope, in so much that no place remained vacant for the Monster Joan.
Now, says Baronius, when Anastasius saw these things, and left all upon
record, and no other Author of that Age, or afterward to the days of Marianus
Scotus contradicted them, the Silence of so long a time (from Anastasius to
Marianus) and of so high a concern, has more force than a thousand witnesses to
blast the whole fable, when so many emergent occasions offered themselves to
declare against it.

8. Here I note two egregious frauds of the Dr, one is, that he makes Silence
only or a Negative Testimony the whole Proof of Baronius, Silence joined to
positive proofs, evinces what Baronius intendu.
whereas it is a Silence which followed upon two Positive proofs: The true
registered succession of Popes, and the Testimony of Anastasius. No man, says
Baronius ever contradicted him, no writer opposed him, and this negative joined
to a positive proof, is a manifest Eviction. Besides, had our Dr read
Bellarmin. lib. 3. de Roman Pontifice c. 24.. Deinde non solus. He might have
found that not only Anastasius, but Ado also, Bishop of Vienne in France who
lived at that very time, Rhegino, Abbas Vrspergensis, Otho Frisingensis and all
More Authors Cited.
other writers, place Benedict the Immediate Successor to Pope Leo: so does
David Blundel the Historian of Amsterdam, in a whole book set forth against the
Fable of Pope Joan, and though he was a Sectary, yet overcome with the evidence
of truth, he demonstratively Shows the whole Story to be a shameful error, a
mere dotage, or madness. First, Blundel produces a whole list of Authors living
in several Nations, who all unanimously place Benedict next to Pope Leo. 2. He
draws a convincing proof from Hincmarus Bishop of Rhems, ordained Bishop.
David Blundels irrefragable Argument.
Anno 845. May the 17. Ten years before this Monster got into that See, for
Joan is supposed by those who are delighted with the Fable to have reigned.
Anno 855. two whole years, five months and four days. So Marianus Scotus
tell's his Tale. Hincmarus lived many a long year after, for he dyed 21.
December. Anno 882, and Anno 866. 25. Augusti wrote to Pope Nicolas, Benedicts
Successor. In these letters he tell's the Pope that some years before, he had
sent Legates upon business to Leo the 4.th but says Hincmarus, my Legates being
advanced in their journey, understood that Leo was dead, notwithstanding they
went on, came to Rome, and found there Pope Benedict to have immediately
succeeded Leo. This Argument, says Blundel, evidently demonstrat's, that no
Pope Joan intervened, or sat between Leo and Benedict, unless you will phansy,
that these Legates being on their way, made a halt of two whole years and 4.
months, before they came to Rome, which is both improbable and ridiculous.

9. By what is said you see, that the Dr merely cheat's when he tell's us. P.
451. that we, The Dr's endeavor to cheat the Reader.
to cast off a matter of fact attested by much better Authors than
Renalduccius, Prior, and Teremanus (He means the story of Pope Joan) use only
Negative Testimonies. I have now proved the Contrary and assert, that neither
Baronius nor any other Historian makes Silence or a Negative Testimony, the
best and only reproof of that fancied story. Let any at leisure peruse the
excellent Writer Florimundus Raemundus upon this Florimundus Raemundus decryes
the Fable.
subject, calling it. The Popular error of Pope Joan, he will find the whole
Matter not only most profoundly discussed, but the gross error, made so horrid
and monstrous; that Sectaries may blush hereafter to mention it. To what the Dr
add's of better Authors, than Renalduccius etc. I will show him presently he
has none comparable, or rather indeed none at all, excepting one pure
Simplician, Martinus Polonus, if yet he be for it.

10. In the mean while take notice of the Dr's second fraud. Baronius. N. 88.
now cited, where he Speaks of great and most weighty occasions offered to decry
this Story, fully mentions them. Photius, says he, that false Bishop, an
implacable Enemy to Popes, thrust out of his Bishopric as one most unworthy
the place, lived the whole time when Joan is supposed to Weighty occasions
fully set down by Baronius,
have been Pope, and though Photius laid to the charge of Popes many lesser
matters, yet he never objected this scandalous fact against them; No more did
his Patron Michael who then governed the Empire in the East, (though set on by
Photius to revile Popes,) ever touch upon the Scandal. All this and more, which
The Dr Waves,
gives much force to Baronius his Argument drawn from Silence, our Dr silently
passes over, and run's away with one piece of his Argument, peevishly
concealing the best strength in it. He might also have taken notice of what
follows in Baronius. n. 89. concerning Leo the 9.th who in his letter to
Michael Bishop of Constantinople plainly tell's him of a constant One Most
remarkable.
naughty report Spread abroad, viz. That some Eunuchs and a woman once had been
Patriarch there. And was it possible think ye, says Baronius, that a most wise
and prudent Pope, should make such an Objection, had the Sea of Rome been ever
tainted with the like foul aspersion? All this our Dr, not daring to speak out,
waves, and keeps close to himself, for fear the world should know truth.

11. Now we enter upon the main point, and will demonstrate two things. The
first: that our Dr has not one Author for Pope Joan, The main Matt^er examined.
comparable to those three undervalued by him, who stand for the Translation of
our Ladies Sacred Chapel. 2. I will show, though he had any Authors yet in his
principle, they are worth nothing.

12. Concerning the first. Two Writers only are cited as the Abettors of Pope
Ioans fable, Marianus Scotus, and Martinus Polonus, Before these, no man ever
mentioned it. But says Baronius. N. 83. Marianus his own Manuscript Marianus
Says not absolutely that Joan was Pope.
assert's not that a woman succeeded Leo, but only frigidly relates the matter
thus. In the year 852, Pope Leo dyed in August, Cui successit Ioannes, qui ut
asseritur fuit mulier, whom John succeeded, who as, is said, was a woman. Then
Baronius add's. As Herold corrupted many other things in Marianus, so here also
he fraudulently changed the Text in the first printed Copy, calls her Joan, and
asseverantly says she was a woman. Again its certain, Marianus err's grossly
in relating Pope Leo's death, that lived two whole years after the Term given
him by this Author. Se Baronius, n. 87. whence it follows, that unless Joan
sat Pope with Leo, she never was Pope. Conformable hereunto Bell: Other
Authors Speak Conformably.
cited above,. Quod autem tell's us, that he who set forth the Metropolis, or
the elaborate Church History of Albertus Krantius at Cologne, Anno 1584,
plainly says, that nothing is found of this She Pope in Marianus his most
ancient Copies. The like Ioannes Molanus, a Doctor of Lovain, testifies of
Sigeberts own Copies, or Molanus his Testimony.
at least judged to be his, which he read in the Monastery of Gemblace where
Sigebert was once a Monk, not a word, says. Molanus, found I in it of any Pope
Joan.

13. Martinus Polonus says Bell: de Script: Eccl: was a simple man, and in
place of true Stories feed's us with mere Fables: Neither does he assert
absolutely that Joan was Pope, but only turn's you off with, a Fertur, its
reported, and therefore relies upon an uncertain rumor. Se Bell. cited..
Tertio, and pray ye call to mind what he has more in his Script: Eccles: where
he How the Fable of Pope Joan, got abroad?
Says, that this whole Fable of Pope Joan, got out of Polonus his Book into
the printed Copies of Marianus and Sigebert, for in their ancient Manuscripts,
it is not at all. It would be here too long a work and not to my present
Purpose, being only to refute the main ground our Dr stand's upon to tell you,
the occasion of this Flimflam Fable (the report of a wo^man being a She
Patriarch at Constantinople first set it on foot) or how those who favor it,
Clash amongst themselves: Some will have her an English woman, others born at
Mentz or at least educated there, others make her a Student at Athens when no
learning was Professed there. Some call her Joan, others Isabel, others Tutia,
others Gilberta, and no man knows what. The Clashing of Authors Concerning
Pope Joan, ridiculous
More light you will have Concerning these particulars in Baronius, and the
erudite Florimundus already cited.

14. I am now to make good my second Assertion against Dr Still: and to give
all the fair play imaginable, let us contrary to manifest truth, suppose, that
Marianus Scotus, Martinus Polonus, Sigebert, Platina, or who you will, related
the story of Pope Joan, I Say all these Authors are no more but insignificant
Ciphers in the Dr's Principles. Observe my reason. He tells us, as you have
heard, that because Dantes, Petrach, and Boccace took no notice of the
Miraculous Translation of our Ladies Chapel, the wonder therefore ought in all
Prudence to be held incredible. Hence I argue. But The Dr convinced by his own
principles.
from the supposed reign of Pope Joan to Marianus Scotus, Sigebert, and
Martinus Polonus, no Writer ever took notice of this She Pope. Ergo the Fable
is also incredible, as will appear by an exact computation of years. Pray you
observe. This she Pope is supposed to have reigned. Anno 855. Marianus Scotus
was born as himself testifies, Anno 1028, dyed Anno 1086, and consequently
lived as Baronius notes. n. 79. at least two hundred and thirty years after
Pope Joan's supposed reign, And what no notice taken of her all this while by
any Author? Not a word by any. Here is a strange Silence. Now if we speak of
Martinus Polonus, he lived four hundred years after, and The vast time that
passed between the supposed reign of Pope Joan and Martinas Polonus.
Sigebert fell not much short of him, Sectaries were much later. What say we
to this Silence. Does our Dr, think ye, speak at all pertinently when to
undervalue the Testimonies of Teremanus, Renalduccins, and Prior, that expressly
Say the Chapel was Miraculously translated, he prefer's Marianus Scotus, and
Martinus Polonus (for he has no Authors more ancient) before them, as much
better witnesses? Though neither dare avouch (but as you have heard faintly and
without Spirit) that Pope Joan ever sat at Rome. What blemish was Polonus much
blemished.
ever cast upon any of these three Authors comparable to the Disgrace laid on
one Polonus, judged by the wisest a witless fellow, a Relator of fables etc? In
so much that Bellarmin says, He would not have placed him amongst the
Ecclesiastical Writers, had not the Magdeburgians and other Heretics cited
him? Again, how enormously is our Dr out of all reasonable discourse, when he
tells us, Blondus and other Authors cited above, came too late with their
Testimonies concerning the Chapels Translation, never reflecting upon Marianus
and Polonus's slowness, who followed much later with their whimsy of Pope Joan?
The one as I said now, two hundred and thirty years after Her Supposed
Popedom; The Dr's Strange Oversight.
and the other at least, four hundred. Where were the Dr's eyes in so great an
Oversight? What can any man judge of him, but that he writes at random without
discretion and judgment? But of Blondus more presently, with a word or two of
the Dr's great insincerity.

15. In the mean while take notice of four simple Questions proposed by the Dr,
which he call's his Scruples. One is; How such a Four of the Dr's Scruples,
Cleared.
chamber should be able to hold without decay, for above a thousand and six
hundred years? I answer, we have clear Evidence of its holding out without
decay in Dalmatia and where it now stand's, for the space well nigh of four
hundred years, and therefore Say, as this latter evident Preservation is
deservedly accounted Miraculous, so the first and longer was, though all that
time it had Foundations to stand upon, and for that reason may seem less
Miraculous. He asks 2. How this house could possibly escape ruin when Authors
say, The wholo Country about Nazareth was destroyed by Traian after the strange
devastation of it made by Vespasian. I answer. The great destruction The sacred
Chapel preserved by divine Providence.
of a whole Country necessarily implies not the Subversion of every little
house in it, though it is most likely, that God by his special Providence
secured the house, dear to our Blessed Lord and his sacred Mother, from the
rage and fury of all those Enemies. He as'ks. 3. How the Church of the
Annuntiation should be removed to Italy, and yet remain at Nazareth by the
constant Tradition of the Eastern parts? Did ever man say and unsay like this
Dr? Just now he will have the house destroyed in the general devastation of a
whole Country, and here the constant Tradition of the Eastern parts, makes it
still to remain at Nazareth. If it The Dr agrees not with himself.
remain still at Nazareth: it was not destroyed, or if destroyed, it remain's
not still there. Again, if it stand there still, the Dr must solve his first
difficulty of its not de^caying, for above Sixteen Ages. What Sense or
coherence have we in this man's writing? But of this egregious Cheat more
presently.

16. He asks. 4. How the measure should be found exactly agreeing by those sent
to examine it, when Thomas de Novaria says, that he lately found out the only
true foundations larger than the Angels Chapel there built? And he places
Thomas de Novaria in his Context with a blind marginal Note. Quaresm:
(abbreviated) Elucid: terrae Sanctae Lib. 7 c. 5. Whereas, His odd way in
quoting Quaresmins.
Franciscus Quaresmius should have been cited as the Principle Author, and
Thomas a Novaria brought in as a witness by Quaresmius, for so he is. But the
Dr thought it best to cast a mist before the eyes of a vulgar Reader for fear
of having his notorious fraud discovered, which I will now lay open.

17. Quaresmius, Tom. 2. Elucidat: terrae Sanctae. lib. 7. cap. 5. Pereg. 3.
page 837. set's down the long relation of Thomas a Novaria, where we are told
first, what difficulties both he and his companion. P. F. Iacobus encountered in
their Pilgrimage to Nazareth, yet by God's good assistance overcame all. Then,
The relation made by Quaresmius,
p. 8^8. Colum. 2. paulo post medium, has these words. Locum igitur Sanctum
ingressi etc. We entered into the holy place at Nazareth, on whose foundations
the house of Loreto once stood, and being led into the dark Cave where the
Sacred Virgin was saluted by the Angel, we reverently adored there, and soon
after began to cleanse the holy Sanctuary, and blessed that old Altar of the
Annuntiation which the long-since living Christians had erected. Much more
follows of great Miracles wrought in that place, and of two Pillars set up by
the ancient Christians, as a Memorial of the Angels Saluting our Lady etc. This
is all Thomas Taken from Thomas a Novaria.
a Novaria has to our present purpose in Quaresmius his 5. Chapter, whereunto
the Dr remit's us, and you see its granted, that the Chapel had stood there
without mentioning its being now at Nazareth, neither have you any word of
those larger foundations in that Chapter, whereof the Dr speak's. Now if he
say, our Ladies house stood indeed once at Nazareth, but afterward was
destroyed; turn to the foregoing. 4th. Chapter in Quaresmius, and you will find
the Dr's whole fraud, or malice rather unmasked, by his own quoted Author
Thomas a Novaria, an Eyewitness of the Evidence.

18. For the better understanding of the whole Story, and the Dr's juggling,
please to note with Quaresmius.. Tertio. That Iacobus a Vandosma, a man most
industrious and accurate, gives assurance, that in the place at Nazareth (from
whence the house of Loreto was carried away) another little Church, called the
Chapel of the Angel, or the Church of the Annuntiation, was built, not just
equal to the The Church of the Annuntiation erected, in the place, where the
house of Loreto once Stood.
old foundations of our Ladies Chamber, but lower, upon the Floor, or Pavement,
and in a straiter Compass. Wherefore, says he, the Chamber next to the dark
cave being taken away by the Ministry of Angels, in place of it, this other
Chapel was erected, having some addition of polisht stones laid by the inward
foundations of the house of Loreto, to support better the whole fabric of the
Angels Chapel, and this the ancient Christians adjoined. Now, says Novaria,
we (Viz. Himself and Jacobus a vandosma) meddled not with the inward
enlargement, but beginning from the old and true foundations of our ladies
Chamber, drew a right line, measured them exactly, and found to our great Joy
this place in Nazareth, per omnia, every way just equal to the The measure of
the old foundations taken, exactly agree etc.
foot of the foundations of the Holy house at Loreto. All things perfectly
answer one another, all things exactly agree between this Chapel at Nazareth,
and the holy house at Loreto. Dempto quod dixi: excepting what I noted of the
inward enlargement, whereby the Angels Chapel, drawn in a little, is not fully
so large as the foundations of the house of Loreto are. These truths says
Novaria we publish upon our certain knowledge, for the comfort of all faithful
People to the end, that no man may hereafter doubt in a matter of so great
Concern.

19. Reflect, courteous Reader in passing, before we return to the Dr, how
earnestly would Novaria and Vandosma have stood for the still quiet owning, so
great a treasure as the Novaria and Vandosma frankly acknowledge the
Translation of the Chapel,
Sacred house of Loreto is (till now,) could they have done it in justice or
conscience? How eagerly would they have pleaded. Olim possideo, Prior possideo.
We here at Nazareth, not you at Loreto, preserve yet in being the Sacred
Chamber, where the Angel saluted the Virgin, and God became man; had either
Tradition, or any Authority boy'd them up, or patronized their cause? But no
such Opposition was made. No. They contented themselves with the Angels
Chapel, which they had under their charge. Anno 1626. and convinced by
Evidence, frankly acknowledged the Translation of the house to Loreto to be
most true, and so likewise does the whole Church of God, (witness Quaresmius.
C. 4. fine) Popes, says he, have granted great Indulgences and Privileges So
likewise does quaresmius
to the Holy house of Loreto, the frequent Concourse of People still honor it,
God most certainly has wrought great Miracles there, and done the like even in
this at Nazareth. And though, says he, the Translation of the house of Loreto
may in some things seem contrary to Sense which is fallacious, yet Sense of
less value, ought to be postposed, and all due respect given to the judgment
of the most wise, who never called the Miraculous Translation into The
Translation never called into question
Question. Among these wise he numbers at the beginning of his. 4.th Chapter,
Canisius, Mantuanus and styles him Lauilatissimum Theologum, a worthy Divine,
Hieronymus Angelita, Secretary to the Common wealth of Recanati, More Authors
quoted
a most diligent and sincere man, witness his whole book of the house of
Loreto. Baronius, Rutilius, Benzonius, and finally Franciscus Alcarotus in
Itinerario terrae Sanctae, besides many more, cited by these Authors.

20. By all now said, you see the Dr's fraudulent The Dr's fraud discovered
and unjust Proceeding, when he asks. How the Church of the Annuntiation at
Nazareth should be removed to Italy, and yet remain still at Nazareth by the
constant Tradition of the Eastern parts? Has this man any Conscience think ye,
when upon a mere cheat he would persuade the Reader, that our Ladies Chapel
was never translated to Italy, and to his eternal discredit, ground's the Cheat
upon a gross error, in not distinguishing between the Church of the
Annuntiation, and the translated Chapel? To take where his cheat lies?
away all shift and evasion. He either makes the Church of the Annuntiation one
and the same with the Chapel of Loreto, or different? If the Same; All
Authors, as you have heard, flatly contradict him, and there is no Tradition
constant or unconstant for that. If, which is most true, they are distinct
Chapels, his Question is no less fraudulent than impertinent, for suppose a
distinction of these two Chapels, the one may well remain at Nazareth, as it
does, and yet no way clash with the Translation of the other to Loreto, as we
have amply proved already. Be it how you will, the Dr is Shamefully out, for if
our Ladies Cell where she was Saluted by the Angel be at Loreto, we have our
intent: and if it still remain at Nazareth, the Dr's Scruples of an old house
lasting so long without decay, and escaping ruin in the The Dr clearly
convinced.
General devastation made by Vespasian, are senceless and signify nothing, but
thus much only, that the Dr writes he knows not what.

21. The second Cheat concern's the commensuration made between the Angels
Chapel, and the ancient foundations of our Ladies Another cheat concerning the
Commensuration made, cleared by Novaria.
Chamber found larger, says the Dr, than the Angels Chapel. We ask here for a
further discovery of his fraud, what he mean's by the Angels Chapel? If he
Speak of the house of Loreto (and this he must mean or nothing) his error is
intolerable, as is now made out. In case he would only Say, that the old
foundations of our Ladies Chapel are larger than the Angels Chapel built upon
them, Thomas a Novaria has given a full account thereof, and told you, that
the Angels Chapel drawn in a little by reason of an addition laid to the old
foundations of our Ladies translated house, Non adaequatur (to use his words)
answer's not exactly, and this makes not at all for the Dr's purpose, yet
clearly lays open his malice or ignorance, if not both together.

22. Ponder now, courteous Reader on the one side the proofs produced for the
Miraculous Translation of the Sacred house of Loreto; weigh well on the other,
how pitifully the Dr fumbles, while he impugn's it. You have not from him so
much as one Argument Arguments alleged for the Chapels Translation, clear,
and urgent.
(excepting a few Negatives) brought against it. You have not one Author
alleged, that call's the Miracle into doubt, and though hereafter he quotes
some Catholic writers, that in his eyes seem to question such and such a
Story, yet in his handling the present Relation of Loreto, he is wholly silent,
and gives you none, but himself, calling it an incredible fiction. Against
these the Dr let us fly a few jeers and dissatisfactory Negatives.
Ponder I say these things well, and you will se how powerfully truth outfaces
falsehood, and must conclude, with Petra Sanctae. P. 39. Those seem not men in
their wits, that boggle at so clear a Miracle? What says this Author? Will
these Heretics upon the Authority of Pliny. L^h. 2. C. 8. believe by humane
faith, that two Mountains near Modena rose up, violently justled one another,
and again returned to their old Postures? Can they believe, because What
wonders Heretics own upon humane Faith.
Authors say it, that some Cities in Syria seated upon Mountains were thrown
six miles off into a Plain and there remained entire without damage, and here
doubt whether God can remove a little house from place to place? In doing so,
they must either Question his Omnipotency and this is madness, or scruple the
fidelity of Authors already produced, which are not inferior, but far more
Credible, than either Pliny, or Theophanes.

CHAP. V.
The Dr's Frivolus Objections against the Miracles wrought at Loreto,
dissolved. A word of his other frauds.

1. TO insist in this place upon the evident known Miracles wrought by the
Intercession of the Blessed Virgin at Loreto, or to mention the Donaries
offered there as Testimonies of gratitude, would be only a Transcription of
what Tursellin, and other writers have amply performed to my hands. In a word.
Our Saviors own Miracles (The blind see, the lame walk, men possessed with
Devils, freed etc.) have Our Saviors own Miracles, Manifest at Loreto.
been manifestly done at Loreto. To relate all or half, would require a
Volume. I must therefore wave them, and remit you to Tursellin for further
Satisfaction, my task being only to encounter the Dr's more than Childish
Caviles against some few, he quarrels with. One related by Tursellin. lib. 2.
c. 18. is briefly thus.

2. A certain Priest of Dalmatia taken by the Turks was urged to renounce his
Religion, but would not, still calling upon Christ and the Sacred Virgin,
whereupon the barbarous Turks threatened to pull out his bowels if he did not
curse them both, which by no threats he would do, but contrariwise made a vow
to our Lady at Loreto, that if he lived he would go thither in Pilgrimage. In
a word, they opened his breast, pulled out his Entrails, put them into his hands
A Miracle Wrought upon a Priest of Dalmatia.
and bid him be gone. The Priest went away, and after many days journey came
to Loreto, showed there his open breast and entrails in his hands to the
Officers of the Chapel, gave thanks to the Virgin Mother, made his confession,
received the Blessed Sacrament, and dyed there. The Entrails were hung up in
the Chapel till they were nigh consumed. You may see the rest of the Story in
Tursellin, now cited. is not this a A visible proof of the Miracle.
Swinging Miracle, says our Dr? Pray you mark what a Swinging answer he
return's to it. To ask, says he, how a man can breath without his lungs, or
live without a heart, or by what vessels the Circulation of blood was
performed, The Dr's simple Exception against it.
were but to gratify Carnal reason too much, and he says well, for just so an
Atheist to gratify Carnal reason, might propose as wise a Question, and ask.
How Moses. Exodus 3. Saw a bush burn without being consumed, for this as much
transcend's the force of Nature, as to se a man breath without his lungs,
therefore says is required, Humane faith in one case, Divine in the other.
Marry, says the Dr (and here is his swinging reply) men must certainly have
great store of faith, or folly rather and impudence, that dare call these
Legends by the name of Authentic Testimonies. Is not this, think ye, a
profound refutation of a Testimony so evident, that Tursellin hold's it a sin
to doubt of it. I say Evident, all circumstances considered, however be it
less, the Dr's answer is childish, which amount's to this. He either will not,
or The Dr and Atheists argue alike.
cannot believe the Story, Ergo it is false? After this strain, should an
Atheist say. I neither will not can believe the Miracles in Scripture, he would
prove as well (that is nothing at all) those Miracles to be false, as the Dr
does this, for all he brings against it, is only his own bare and blunt denial,
and cannot an Atheist be as blunt as he? O! but Scripture Miracles are better
grounded. What then? That help's not the Dr at all, for here we parallel not
the certainty of Scripture Miracles considered in themselves, with others
believed upon Humane What it is, we impugn in the Dr.
faith, but compare this Dr's simple Impugnation with that of Atheists, and say
they are both alike, ridiculous, foolish, and weightless.

3. The Dr goes on. There are very few Persons in the World but at some time or
other of their lives, do meet with extraordinary deliverances, either from
diseases, or other dangers. If any of these had gone to Loreto, and there
acquainted the Panitentiary with it, it had been entered into the Tables and
preserved (as a Tooth-drawer does teeth) for the reputation of the place. I set
down these A flat Calumny.
ungodly words, to show you the virulent humor of this man, who in stead of
proving, rail's, and Calumniat's, for its well known that no Miracles enter the
Tables at Loreto, or any other holy place, but such only as after most rigid
examination are prudently judged, not casual deliverances, but works above the
force of nature. Read Tursellin lib. 3. c. 25. and see how Miraculously a young
woman of Sienna, stark blind, and wholly despaired of by Physicians, recovered
her perfect sight in the Presence of many, while she devoutly prayed to our
Lady in the Chapel of Loreto. Raphael Riera set's down the Miracle, and says
he was present when God did the wonder. Can this, which most deservedly entered
the public Tables, be called one of the Dr's extraordinary Was the blind Man's
Cure in the Gospel accounted only an extraordinary Deliverance?
Deliverances? If so, why was not the blind Man's cure wrought by our Savior.
John the 9. Undervalued by the Jews, and thought only an extraordinary
Deliverance, but no Miracle, because the Spirit of Atheism will have it so.

4. In the next place our Dr fiercely opposes the Miracle wrought upon Pope
Pius the second, an old man broken with Labors, and The Miracle wrought upon
Pope Pius.
besides, much afflicted with a dangerous Cough, and a burning Fever. The good
Pope as Tursellin relates. Lib. 1. c. 26. having offered his Gift of a weighty
golden Chalice to our Lady at Loreto, and made a Vow to visit the place,
implored by earnest prayer, the blessed Virgins favor for his speedy recovery.
No sooner had he done so, says Tursellin, but his Fever in a moment went off,
the troublesome cough left him, his weak and feeble limbs worn away with a long
Infirmity regained Strength, and this very suddenly. Pius therefore willing to
comply with his vow, undertook his journey toward The Pope suddenly Cured.
Ancona, and Loreto, and the nearer he drew to Loreto, the better he found
himself in health, being there strong and well able, he performed his promise,
and from thence went to Ancona, where (old as he was) he stayed in the
Summerheats expecting the Commander of the Venetian Navy, but at last wearied
out with delay and age together, relapsed into his Fever, and there dyed. Here
our Dr begins to flutter. Call you this a Miracle? I know not, says he, what
kind of Miracles the Lady of Loreto works, I am sure Christ and his Apostles
never wrought such. You err grossly Mr Dr, Christ our Lord, Luke the. The like
Miracle wrought by our Savior.
4. 38. Presently cured Simons wives Mother sick of a burning Fever, who
Presently arose and ministered to them. And thus Pope Pius, forthwith, in a
moment recovered health. But says the Dr. Away the Pope goes for Ancona and
there dies of his fever, and is dying of a disease a Miraculous Cure? Here he
cheat's egregiously, because a very considerable time passed between the Popes
recovery and his death, as is clearly gathered from Tursellins whole Naration,
therefore, How the Dr Cheat's.
unless the Dr would have an old decayed man to live always, I know not what
he would say. Again, suppose that an accident caused by the heats at Ancona,
and a wearisom expecting Soldiers there had taken away the Popes life sooner,
can this impair the clear evidence of the Miracle done? Pray you imagine, that
some extraordinary heat had bereaved Lazarus of life a whole Month after he
rose from the dead, or, that one by chance had put out the eyes of the blind
Man, cured by our Savior; would either the one or the other Cross Casvality
have made Christ's Miracles less famous, void, or The Cheat made manifest by
two Instances.
uneffectual? Yet thus the Dr discourses while he says a Miracle is a perfect
work, and that dying of a disease is not Miraculous, never reflecting on the
respite of time, or the unexpected Accident which intervened between the Popes
Cure, and his death. These circumstances (and it was for the Dr's purpose to
embellish the cheat) he silently passes over, and too nimbly tell's us. Away
the Pope goes for Ancona, and there dies of his Fever.

5. The Dr having done with Pope Pius, unluckily falls into another foul
error, and The reasons alleged by Tursellin, why some Authors omitted to
mention the Translation.
wrong's Tursellin very much. Tursellin Lib: 1. c. 26. Gives three reasons why
S. Vincentius, S. Antonin, and the ancient Italian Writers omitted to mention
the Chapels Translation. First, S. Vincentius lived in Spain the time of a
troublesome Schism, what wonder therefore if the rumor of the Translation got
not thither? 2. S. Antonin and the other more ancient Historians had their
Country entangled in a fearful Civil war, which might well obstruct the certain
knowledge of it; as to them. 3. Says Tursellin, none perhaps of the ancient
writers mentioned the Translation, because as yet it was not approved, or
confirmed by the Popes Authority. The wonder therefore of a house carried from
one Part of the world to another being so uncouth and strange, they prudently
waved it, least they should seem to utter vain and incredible things. But
Blondus notwithstanding, almost as ancient a Writer as S. Blondus produced by
Tursellin,
Vincent and S. Antonin, and one that always waited on the Pope, gave as you
have heard above, an Excellent Testimony, and asserts the Miracle as most
undoubted. It is true, before the wonderful cure wrought upon Pope Pius, the
House had not the renown, which it gained afterward by that illustrious Miracle
the whole world over. This is briefly the substance of what Tursellin has.

6. Now mark how fraudulently the Dr deal's with him, First, he wholly waves
the main reasons alleged by Tursellin concerning the Silence of the Italian
Writers and then seek's advantage from the little fame Loreto had, before the
Miracle wrought upon Pope Pius, The Dr waves Tursellin's main reasons.
which, says he, is the reason Tursellin gives, why Vincentius, Antoninus, and
the other Italian VVriters take no notice of it. It may pass for one reason,
Mr Dr, but neither is it the only, or the Chiefest; for the difficulty of
Schism respectively to Spain, the Intestine war raised in Italy, and the want
of approbation from the Sea Apostolic in those days, are Tursellin's main
grounds, all waved by you. Yet worse follows. Those, says the Dr, who did
take notice of it as Blondus, yet do not mention the Translation, least they
should seem to utter vain and incredible things. A very Substantial reason I
confess. Thus the Dr. A very Cheat say I Reflect Reader, would not any man who
read's these lines in the Dr, take it for granted, that Blondus with others
omitted to mention the Chapels Translation, for fear of publishing vain and
incredible things? Yet Tursellins words bear a quite contrary Sense, and
relate not at all to Blondus, but oppose his Testimony, plainly speaking of the
Miraculous house, to the Silence The Dr forces upon Tursellins words, a Sense
quite contrary to (...) meaning.
of ancient Authors, that said nothing of it, for the reasons already
mentioned. Tursellins words are these. At Blondus illorum fere aqualis etc. But
Blondus almost equal to the other gave an illustrious Testimony of it. Now our
Dr pervert's the whole Sense in making the word At, or but, in this place to
signifiy, As. Read Tursellin, and the Dr's fraud will manifestly appear.
Perhaps He may say Blondus in express terms speak's not of the Chapels
Translation, least he should seem to utter an incredible thing. Suppose this
were in it self true, as it is most false, the Dr yet cannot by this Shift
clear himself from juggling, or ever make it out that Blondus Said so.

7. What follows next in the Dr, is nothing but Raillery or rather a whole
List of Raillery and Calumnies.
unproved Calumnies told one after another, as of Miracles growing very
frequent, of Peoples Superstition and Credulity, of the abuse of Priests, who
make their Tables by the confident affirmation of persons that tell Stories of
Miracles. And thus in all likelihood, says the Dr, Riera the Poenitentiary was
abused.

8. In passing take notice of his childish Proof. In all likelihood. So in all
likelihood the Jew, whom our Blessed Lady freed out of Prison was a forged
tale. Tursellin relates the true Story. Lib: 4. c. 12. and therefore I wave it.
But no doubt, says the Dr, the Venetian Courtesan was a person of great
credit, who The Dr derides the sad Condition of a poor afflicted Poenitent.
having spent many year's in that trade, came to Loreto full of a strange
Miracle. The Dr scornfully derides this poor Penitent's afflicted condition,
but Tursellin lib: 3. c. 27 if you attend to all circumstances, makes it
undoubted.

9. Briefly. The young woman born in Sicily, led it is true, a lewd life at
Venice, but weary of it, at last became very poenitent, and turned what she had
into Jewels and ready money The Story of this young woman, briefly related.
with intention to see her own Country again, yet in the way purposed to visit
Loreto there to bewail her whole life, and to make a general Confession. She
took with her for a Guide one thought trusty, but it proved otherwise, for the
perfidious Man when they came to the wood of Ravenna robbed her of all the
wealth she had, cut her throat, desperataly wounded her, ran away, and left the
poor Creature desolate Swimming in her own blood. In How the was wounded by a
perfidious Guide.
this sad condition she often implored the help of the Blessed Virgin, who
presently appearing, cured her wounds, and filled her Soul with heavenly
comfort. Now while she was devoutly on her knees giving thanks to Almighty And
miraculously cured.
God, and singing praises to the blessed Virgin for the cure wrought on her
mangled body, Providence so ordered that some Muletters passed by, who finding
her all bloody in her undermost linen wear (all the Rogue had left her) cast
upon the half naked creature a course Coverlet, set her on a Mule, and carried
her to Ancona, where she begged some poor clothes and from thence went joyfully
to Loreto. Coming thither, She first confessed and complied with her vow, then
made a relation of the whole danger past, and gained credit by showing the
marks of her wounds, chiefly that about her neck, like a Ievvel or shinning
Neclace 2. by her virtuous and devout life at Loreto, for she preferred that
holy Place before The Marks of her wounds, and innocent life, proofs of the
Miracle.
her own Country and lived there many year's, exciting others by her Innocent
and most laudable example to Piety, and devotion. The rest you have in
Tursellin:

10. The Dr goes about to refute this Story by proposing a ridiculous Question.
Was not, says he, the Blessed virgin very kind to a Courtesan? He might with
the like ungodly Spirit have proposed as wise a Question, and asked whether our
Savior was not as kind to the woman taken in Adultery. John. 8. 3. to whom he
said, Go and sin no more? And this very effect of sinning no more after our
Lady had A Serious answer, to the Dr's ungracious ^eer.
wrought the Cure, really showed it self in this poenitent Convertite, who
lived ever after innocently, and free from all blemish of impurity. What
follows in the Dr is not worth refuting. First, he excepts against the single
Testimony of this woman, insufficient to make the Miracle credible, whereas
Tursellin gives for further Proofs the marks of her wound which could not be
feigned, and her virtuous innocent life perseverantly held on without change,
to her dying day. These are pregnant Circumstances. Yet is it not possible,
says our Dr, to suppose that the Priests for the reputation of their house,
may help out a lame Miracle with an advantageous Circumstance or two? Dr look
to it. Far sweeter and more advantageous Circumstances How the Dr argues by
unproved Suppositions.
have drawn you to Cheer the world as you have done, not by relating Miracles
(for you have none) but by writing manifest untruths laid open before your
eyes. These Priests (hitherto of unstained Credit) you could never yet tax of
one falsehood, but by unproved Suppositions, which overthrow all the Miracles in
Scripture. Come close if you dare to the point, and show me but one lame
Miracle recorded by these Priests, A fair Offer made to the Dr.
and in lieu of that, I do hereby engage to demonstrate no lame but twenty
swinging, gross, and palpable untruth's in your Books. Is not this plain
dealing?

11 Much worse follows in our Dr, who after a long tattle of rich Jewels and
silver Shrines presented to our Ladies Chapel, talk's of vast endowments which
may tempt men to strain a little in such trifles as a few circumstances are. I
answer, it is very true, that S. Andrews Church in Holborn is not so enriched
with Jewels, Chalices, or shrines as our Ladies at Loreto, but, Sr, know, these
are immovable treasures belonging to the sacred house no ways His Cavil of
vast endowments, retorted.
appropriable or beneficial to particular Priests, more than to look on them.
Concerning the Cavil of vast endowments, I dare boldly avouch, that Dr Still:
draws vaster Incomes from his Cure and Prebendship, than any three Priests get
to themselves at Loreto. And may not such Revenues think ye tempt the Dr to
strain far, and help him on, to publish the open untruths found in his
writings, when to use his own words, there is such a reward for lying? Believe
it men need not to propose Cassius his Question, Cui bono. For the Dr will tell
you, he has got well by his Trade. If he be not a loser at last, he has better
luck than many a poor Priest, at Loreto.

12. Having thus briefly showed the Dr The Dr justly blameable in what he
wrongfully accuses others.
justly blameable in that he wrongfully accuses others, I am, as I said, in the
next place after his talk of Shrines and Jewels to contest a little with him
about his bitter Invectives against Tables hanging upon walls, wherein
Miraculous Cures are expressed to the end, Pilgrims may be better informed of
Gods wonderful works done by the Intercession of our blessed Lady, and other
Saints, now happy in Heaven. Can any one Imagine, says he, if all the Miracles
of Christ and his Apostles had been done in this manner, and the Testimony of
them only taken from Tables hanging upon walls, that ever Christianity would
have prevailed upon the Ingenuous part of Mankind? I stand amazed at the
strange procedure of this His simple exception against Tables hanging on walls,
exasperated man. What can he mean by these empty words. If the Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles had been done in this manner. The manner is clear,
Christ's Miracles were first really wrought, take for an Instance the raising of
Lazarus from the dead, and tell me, if either of his Sisters, Mary or Martha,
had written the whole Story in a Table, and hanged it Retorted, and Showed a
trifling toy.
upon a wall in their Castle, whether that would have prejudiced in the least
our Saviors Miracle, or proved an offense to any? No certainly. Our offense is
no more, We prove Miracles to have been truly wrought at Loreto (first seen by
Ey-witnesses) and to preserve a memory of them Some (after rigid examination,
and approbation given by the Prelat's of the Church) are appointed to express
the work's of God in Tables? It is hard to find any thing amiss here. Unless
the Dr will have all Tables Cashiered and be angry with God, for writing the
ten Commandments in Tables of Stone, or rail at Moses who coming from the
Mountain. Exodus 31. 15. carried the two Tables of the Testimony in his hands
written on both Sides. There is yet more of this weightless stuff. The Miracles
of Christ and his Apostles, says the Dr, were not taken from any What Tables
serve for?
Tables hanging upon walls, but were wrought in the view of his Enemies etc. I
answer, neither is the Original Testimony of Miracles done at Loreto, taken
from any written Tables; these serve only for a Memorial of what God has done,
the primary Evidence is taken from those Ey-witnesses (long since perhaps dead
and gone) who saw them wrought. And must not all discourse thus of the Miracles
related in Scripture? Scripture it is well known, gives no Evidence of its own
Miracles, but supposes them truly done, and makes them to us matters of Divine
Faith: So these Tables lay not before Tables give not the first Evidence of
Miracles.
you the Primary Evidence of the Miracles there related, (for that is truly
supposed) but make them credible upon humane faith.

13. To the Dr's second Cavil of Christ's Miracles being publicly wrought in
the sight of enemies, I may well say, thanks be to God. that our Savior has
now more friends, than he had at his first preaching to the world. Believe An
other cheat refuted
it, Miracles wrought in the Church evidently seen by both friends and Enemies,
have gained many, Witness that strange wonder done at Zaragosa in Spain, of S.
Januaries blood boiling up, and the Evident cure wrought upon John Clement. Now
if any of these prodigious things contrary to the common Miracles publicly
wrought in the Church.
course of nature, had been written in public Tables, as they are yet
preserved upon Record, would, that think ye, have impaired their Credit or made
them less Miraculous? It is a plain degree of madness to Judge So.

14. We have in the next place a Swinging Objection. They, says the Dr, who
attested the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles did not sit to receive
Presents, or to tell tales, as he thinks those at Loreto do. One word, Mr Dr.
We read. Act. 4. 35. That after the Apostles had given Testimony of our
Saviors Miraculous The Apostle? received presents.
Resurrection, very many sold what they had, and laid all down at the Apostles
feet, so Joseph, called Barnabas sold a piece of land, and brought the money to
the Apostles. Did not those blessed men receive Presents for pious uses? Please
now to Consider. All that belongs to the house of Loreto, is either reduced to
the temporal means given by Pious Christians for the necessary maintenance of
those who serve the Chapel, and do you not know says the Apostle. 1. Cor. 9.
13. That they who minister in the Holy place, eat the things that are of the
holy place: and they that serve the Altar participate with the Altar etc. Now
if Dr Still: except against such Donations, he is to quit Donaries offered at
Loreto, of two Sorts,
the Rents of S. Andrew and his Prebendship too, for these Originally came from
the charitable Liberality of the like devout Christians, who cast their wealth
at the Apostles feet, though (God knows) they never intended that such men as
the Dr is, should enjoy them. Or. 2. both laudable,
He Cavils at the Donaries presented to our Lady at Loreto, and these, whether
votive Oblations for the attaining favors, confidently hoped; or grateful
acknowledgements of favors received, though they add nothing to the Priests
Temporals, yet are praise worthy and approved by Antiquity. Read the ancient
and Learned Theodoret. Tom. 4. Paris print. 1642 Sermo: 8. de Martyribus p.
605, where speaking of the glorious, and well adorned Temples of the Martyrs,
he says. I, and others often meet there together, and we sing praises to and
approved by Antiquity, witness Theoderet.
Almighty God. Those that enjoy perfect health beg a continuance of it, the
infirm or diseased sue by their prayers for health. Women barren, petition to
become Mothers, and when their request is granted, they pray that the Children
may be preserved from danger, yet we go not to these Martyrs as Gods, but pray
to them as Intercessors etc. But how does Theoderet show that those who ask
with Faith and confidence, obtain what they petition for? He answers. (...)
etc. The Donaries offered by good People openly witness that many have been
cured, whereof some hang up little pictures of Eyes, others of feet, others of
hands, made of gold and silver, and these Images presented by such Little
Images of feet and hands, offered in the Temples of Martyrs.
as have recovered health, though little, are acceptable to God, and
testimonies of the favors received. Now if larger gifts have been offered at
Loreto, they yet come short of the Primitive Christians Zeal, who laid down all
they had before the Apostles feet.

15. Our Dr. P. 461. Still vexed at the hanging up of Tables, tell's us, it is
a practice taken from Heathens, among whom nothing was more usual, than to set
up votive Tables in the Temples of their Gods. I answer. If the Dr will have
the Tables at Loreto taken down, because it Seems a Heathenish custom to keep
them there, He ought to pull down S. Andrews Church in Holborn, and publicly
dissuade the whole Nation from building any more Steeple houses, for fear of
doing A ridiculous Objection.
what the Heathens did. Here, Sr, is the whole force of your Argument (which to
me appears nonsense) Se how it run's without legs. Christians in somethings do,
and ever will do, as the Heathens did, That is, they eat, drink, and sleep,
they make Churches and frequent them, they hang up their Tables (I have seen
some in Canterbury Church) as you not long Since hung up the Table of the Ten
Commandments in your Churches. Ergo, Heathens and Christians in Some things do
the same.
both you and we are Heathens, and with as good Logic proved Geese, because a
Goos goes upon two legs, and so do all men, whether Heathens, or not. It is
your very Argument easily put in form, Mr Dr. O! but the Heathens set up their
votive Tables in the Temples of those Gods they were addicted to, some to
Neptune in case of escape from Shipwreck, others to Isis and Aesculapius in
case of recovery from dangerous diseases, and the same custom faith Lambin
upon Horace, continues still, only in stead of the Heathen Gods, we do it to
the Virgin Mary, or some Saint. And is not this a vast disparity? Observe well.
The Heathens make their votive Tables or A vast disparity between the practice
of Heathens and Catholics,
prayed to wicked dead wretches, whom they falsely called Gods. We pray to the
Blessed Virgin most certainly in Heaven, and likewise to other Saints now
glorious in Bliss, and say they are not the supreme God, but Creatures made by
his Omnipotent power. Ergo (and mark the nonsense, or dull Consequence) we do
as Pagans do, though most opposite to them in our Proceeding.

16. It is here needless to insist longer upon this particular, seeing Dr. T. G.
in his late learned Treatise. Catholics no Idolaters. Part. 3. c. 1. has
stoutly foiled the Dr, and given a plain disparity between Catholics honor
relating to Saints, and the Heathens worship toward their Inferior Deities.
All I am to take Laid out lately by a Worthy Doctor.
notice of in this place, is the impertinent simplicity of Dr Still. Who
bring's in a whole drove of Poets, Virgil, Ovid, Tibullus etc. Mentioning what
Lambin upon Horace had observed. But to what purpose, unless it be to show his
skill in Poetry, I cannot Imagine, yet well remember that when Baptista
Mantuanus, an excellent Poet, a Christian, a good Divine, and a Religious Man,
was cited above to authorize the Translation of our Ladies Chapel, the Dr
discarded him with a flurt of his finger. No wonder, says he, if Mantuan found
the story fit for a Poets brain to work upon. And here, Dr Stillingfleets
unworthy Proceeding.
Heathens, and profane Poets, are with great gravity Vshered in, to
Countenance Lambins loud lie: Viz. That we honor the Blessed Virgin just as
the Heathens did their false supposed Gods. In this occasion it seems the Poets
brains were sanctified, and had very fit matter to work upon.

17 A main Objection remain's yet untouched, and is taken from a remarkable
Testimony of Diodorus Siculus given of Isis in Fgipt. Biblioth. Histor. Lib. 1.
p. 22. This Isis had great skill in Physic, A vain Fable related by the Dr of
Isis,
and being advanced to Immortality took great content in the cure of men, to
whom she often appeared in their sleep, (as says the Dr, it is in very many of
those of Loreto) and showed great readiness to help them, The evidence whereof,
is not taken from the Fables of the Greeks, but is proved by matter of fact,
for the whole world bear's witness to it, by the honor given her. In a word
she cured many given over by Physicians, the blind and lame have been healed by
her, and which is more, says Diodorus (the Dr wisely leaves it out) this
Goddess invented a strange Medcine able to make men immortal, nay, she restored
life to dead Horus, the last King of Egypt, and if you desire to hear what Isis
said of herself, turn to the next Page in Diodorus. I, said she, am Queen of
this whole Country. The law established by me no man shall break. All a long
Dotage and Madness.
I am the Eldest daughter of the great God Saturn. I am both wife and daughter
to King Osiris. I am she that first invented all kind of grain and Corn. I am
the that daily rises in the Dog Star. These Fopperies and a hundred more you
have related of a Heathen, and written by a Heathen, our wise Dr tells gravely,
as a remarkable Story against the honor given to our Blessed Lady, and bid's.
E. W. Produce more Authentic Stories than these are.

18. What can the Dr drive at think ye? Will he persuade the Reader that Isis
(the like is of Ceres and the Statue of Hercules cited afterward) in real truth
wrought such Miracles? Did she who believed not in one true God, effectually
raise the dead to life? Did She restore sight to How the Dr is urged, if he own
these pretended Heathenich Miracles, true.
the blind, and health to the lame? Grant this; The Dr highly disparages our
Saviors own Miracles and takes from them life and Vigor, in a word all
Credibility. Observe my reason. Had the Dr been present when Christ raised
Lazarus to life, or cured the blind man in the Gospel, might he not have
slighted those wonders, and said that the Goddess Isis had done as much as
these came to, for she restored life to King Horus a long time dead, as the
Egiptians recount upon undeniable Authentic Testimonies says the Dr. She also
cured many blind and The Doctrine of Christ, and Isis, quite Contrary.
lame, if therefore her Miracles are true, might not the Dr have Said, y ours,
o Lord signify nothing to me, while you preach a quite Contrary Doctrine to Isis
and confirm it, as you tell us in the Gospel, by works which no other (least of
all Heathens) had ever done, and here we show you by a remarkable Testimony,
that Isis, Ceres, and Hercules did before you came into the world, works as
great as yours. How shall we discern between the true and the counterfeit
wonders? Or shall we say all are alike true, or all alike Counterfeit?

19. On the other side, if the Dr Quotes not this remarkable Testimony to prove
the truth of these Heathenish Miracles, but hold's all mere If the Dr, as he
must, account them Fooleries, they are pure Impertinences.
fictions. To what purpose has his Testimony place here, or upon what account
is it so remarkable? For, if we may truly suppose, that the Infidel Isis never
raised a dead man to life, or cured the blind and lame, it is senceles to infer
from thence, that God by the Intercession of our Lady never wrought any such
Miracles, when to Confront the Dr, we produce (as he desires) undeniable
Evidence, and appeal not only to Miracles wrought at Loreto, which as you have
heard he turn's off with jeers, but more over, lay before his eyes those two
late Miracles most manifestly wrought upon John Clement at Montaigu, and that
other done at Zaragosa. I am forced often to remind the Reader of these
Miracles, because its a shame to se how unworthily the Dr in his whole ensuing
discourse (like one that would fain bite, but dares not) here and there
twitches at them, but at last vanquished Miracles wrought by our B. Lady, most
Certain,
with Evidence and quite dashed out of Countenance, Silently sit's down and
fairs nothing. Queen Christina of Sweden Proceeded otherwise, when being at
Bruxells she heard much of the Latter Miracle, and treating with the Gouvernour
there, Count Feuntsaldaria, asked whether his Excellence could procure her an
Authentic Testimony of it from Zaragosa? The Count answered, he both could and
would procure it from the Bishop of the place, and if need were from the
Magistrate also, and, as I am certainly informed, did so. Whereupon the Queen
received great satisfaction, prudently judging it a thing morally impossible,
that the whole Kingdom of Spain (to say nothing of other Nations) should be led
by the nose, to own that as a true Miracle, which And held as Certain the whole
world over.
our Dr must say was Legerdemain, or a juggling trick of the Spanish Clergy,
and of all those witnesses that swore to it. But of this subject more
hereafter, when we examine, whether Heathens and Heretics ever wrought true
Miracles. And. 2. show, how the Miracles of Christ and the Church may be
discerned from the Counterfeit wonders of God's Enemies. Thus much concerning
the Translation of the holy house at Loreto, judge, Courteous Reader, whether
we have not found the Dr Shamefully out of the way, in his Pilgrimage thither,
and we Shall, I assure you, find him as very a Stragler in his further Travels
to Compostella etc. when we Prosecute the remainder of his Enquiry, which, God
willing, I intend to perform at better Leisure. In the mean, what you have now
set down, may well give the Dr a Present entertainment, and it is more, I
believe, than he Can answer.


