Numb. 26. Mercurius Publicus: COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence;
WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For
Information of the People. Published by Order of the late Council of State.
From Thursday June 21. to Thursday June 28. 1660.
Wednesday June 20. 1660.
YEsterday the Baron of Pelnitz, the Master of the Horse, Chamberlain and
Colonel of the Regiment of the Guards of his Electoral Highness of
Brandenbourgh, and his Extraordinary Envoy to his Majesty, had Audience at
VVhitehal. The Master of the Ceremonies went to fetch him from his House, with
two rich Coaches, each with six Horses, and so conducted him to VVhitehal;
being brought up stairs, the Vice Chamberlain conducted him through a gallery
full on both sides of Gentlemen, unto the Presence Chamber door, where the Earl
of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain, conducted him to his Majesty, who staid
expecting him there. His Majesty was bare during the whole audience: his Speech
was pretty long, containing a congratulation upon the happy restoration of his
Majesty, and the expression of his (...) Highnesses joy for the same. His
Majesty returned a very obliging answer, suitable to the affection that ^lector
has showed unto him in former times, being the first foreign Minister with
Credentials to his Majesty that made a public address. The Audience being
ended, the Lord Chamberlain conducted him back through the said Gallery to the
stairs head, the Vice Chamberlain to the Coach, and the Master of the
Ceremonies, with another Gentleman, and the two Coaches brought him home again,
an honor we have not heard of conferred before on any foreign Envoy, by a King
of England, and now done to show the high sentiments his Majesty has of the
Electors former kindness to him.

Monday, June 18. 1660.
A Letter from Lieutenant Col. Yardly, to M. Thomas Asht^n, Chaplain to the
English in Jersey, was communicated to his Excellency General Monck, containing
the sole unity of his Majesty's Proclamation there, by his order a sta^ely
Sc^ffold was erected in the market place of S. Hillaries Town, where were
present all the English Officers and Soldiers, and the Hon^rable Sir Philip
Cartaret, and the chief of the Gentry, the Proclamation was in English and
French, after each followed volleys of shot, and loud acclamations of God save
King CHARLES the Second; at night the air was lighted with bonfires, and the
Island thundered with the great Guns, at least a hundred shots were made from
them in that small place, consisting but of twelve Parishes, the like rejoicing
was never known there in any ones memory now living; it is disputable whether
the English or the Islanders were more cordial, or saw more signs of
thankfulness, but it is out of controversy, that his Majesty has not more
loyal Subjects in his Dominions, their obedience being confirmed by the
presence of his Majesty among them after his Fathers death of blessed memory,
and his own miraculous deliverance at Worcester fight, which so increased their
courage, that Iersey was the last place lost from his Majesty, being kept by
the faithful and courageous Sir George Cartaret, until his Majesty sent him an
Express out of France to surrender it.

Thursday June 21.
Upon a report from the Committee of Privileges and Elections concerning the
Return of the Election for Scarborough.

Resolved, That M. Tompson is duly Elected to serve as a Member in Parliament
for that place.

M. Luke Robinson being chosen for that place, and by former order discharged
from sitting in the House, it was ordered that a new Writ issue for the
electing of a new Burgress to serve in his stead.

Upon report concerning the Election of the Borough of Northampton.

Resolved, That Sir John Norris and M. Rainsford, are duly elected for that
place.

M. Carew, one of the Tryers of the late King, being brought up, and delivered
to the Speaker, and by him committed to the Sergeant at Arms, the House
approved of his commitment.

M. Speaker acquainted the House, that the Lord Monson came with his Keeper
from the Fleet, and surrendered himself to him according to his Majesty's
Proclamation; whom the Speaker finding to to be a Prisoner upon Execution,
remanded back to the Fleet, which the House approved of.

M. Speaker acquainted the House, that Major General Ludlow had rendered
himself: whereupon it was ordered, that he be committed to the Sergeant at Arms.

The House referred it to a Committee, to state the Accounts of all such who
have provided Necessaries in order to his Majesty's Reception; and to give
Warrants for their satisfaction out of the 20000 l. charged upon the Bill of
Assessement for that purpose.

Upon Report of amendments to the Bill for confirming of Privileges of
Parliament and the fundamental Laws, they were agreed unto, and the Bill
ordered to be engrossed.

The Bill for Pole Money was read the second time, and ordered to be committed
to a grand Committee of the House, and that the House be in a grand Committee
to morrow morning for that purpose.

London.
This day the several Aldermen and other Citizens of London, waited upon their
Highnesses, the Duke of York and Duke of Gloucester, to desire them to honor
the City with their company at Dinner at Guild Hall, on the day his Majesty had
appointed to dine with them; going to the House of Lords, thence to the House
of Commons, whom they also invited the same day: who were pleased to accept of
the Invitation, and return their thanks for the Cities respect to them.

Westminster, Thursday June 21. 1660.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons new asse^^led in Parliament, That one
Subsidy called Tonnage and one other Subsidy called Poundage, and those other
Duties called or known by the name of New-Impost, shall continue to be paid
after the Rates, Rules and Proportions by which they are now due and payab^^,
and upon the same Goods and Merchandises whereupon the same are now levied and
collected, until the 24th of July, which shall be in the year of our Lord,
1660; before which time, one Act is intended to be passed for the Settlement
and Regulation thereof.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, That the
Imposition of Excise shall continue to be paid after the Rates, Rules, and
Proportions by which the same is now due and payable, and upon the same Goods
and Merchandises, whereupon the same are now levied and collected, until the
twenty fourth of July, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred and sixty, before which time, one Act is intended to be passed for the
Settlement and Regulation thereof.

Friday, June 22. At the House of Lords.
The House of Lords having received a Message from the House of Commons to
desire their concurrence in ordering 10000l. part of the 20000l. formerly
conferred by the Parliament on the Lord General Monck. to be paid out of the
Ordinance of Assessment for 70000l. per mensem, their Lordships agreed
thereunto.

At the House of Commons.
Upon Report made of Amendments to the Bill of General Pardon and Oblivion, the
Amendments were agreed unto and the Bill Ordered to be engross^d. The Bill is
to extend to the 24th. of June, 1660.

Resolved, That Mr. Burton be one of the twenty excepted out of the General Act
of Indemnity and Oblivion to suffer such pains, penalties, etc. and now in the
Custody of the Sergeant, have liberty to attend his occasions, upon security
given to the Sergeant at Arms to be forth coming when he shall require him
thereunto.

The Bill for settling Judicial Proceedings was ordered to be read to morrow
morning.

The ^ule Resolved to be in a Grand Committee at three of the clock in the
afternoon, which was done accordingly.

Saturday, June 23.
A Petition of Lancelot Emmet and others was read and referred to a Committee.

Ordered, That the House be in a Grand Committee on Monday next at three of the
clock in the afternoon to consider of a Bill touching the Court of Wards.

Ordered, That the Committee who are to consider of Ministers Livings do meet
this afternoon, and so de die in diem, and that they speedily report the same.

Resolved, That the House be in a Grand Committee on Monday next to consider of
Poll-money.

Upon Report made upon examination of the Account of Richard Blackwell, John
Sparrow, and Humphry Blake, that there was due to the State from them for
Arrears of Prize-Goods, from the year 1649. to the year 1652. 41495.5 s. 3 d..
It was Ordered,

That it be referred to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, to take speedy
course for the calling of the said Richard Blackwel, John Sparrow, and Humphry
Blake, to an account in the Exchequer, and that they be proceeded against.

The Bill for satisfaction of Purchases was read, and ordered to be read again.

The House resolved, That the Queens Majesty shall be restored to the
Possession of these Houses, Manors and Lands following, being part of her
Majesty's Jointure, and purchased by such Persons whose Estates are liable to
forfeiture, viz.

Manor of Old-Court, purchased by M. Edwards.

Manor of Richmond, with House and Materials, puchased by Sir Gregory Norton.

Egghant purchased by Captain John Blackwel.

Manor of Ampthil, and Manor of Milbrooke, purchased by Col. Okey.

Manor of Somersham, with the Chase and Pa^k, Manor of Crowland, Part Manor
of Spalding, purchased by Col. Wauton, and Adrian Scroop.

Part of the Manor of Eastham, purchased by M. Blackwel.

Manor of West-Walton, and Manor of Trington, purchased by Ed. Whaley.

Honor and Manor of Eye, purchased by M. Dendy.

Non-such great Park and Materials, purchased by Col. Pride.

Non-such House and Park, purchased bp Col. Lambert.

Resolved That Sommerset House and Greenwich, be likewise forthwith restored to
the possession of her Majesty, and that all Arrears of rent be paid unto her
Majesty, unto such persons as her Majesty shall be pleased to appoint to
receive the same.

Ordered, That the House be in a Grand Committee on Monday (...) Poll-money.

Whitehall
On Friday, the Right Honorable the Earl of Winc^else^, with s^^e other
^^^tlemen, presented an Address to his Sacred Majesty, sub^^^^^ by (...)
Nobility and Gentry of Kent, wherein they express their great joy (...)
Majestie^ ^ration to his people; as also their constant loyalty and heart^
affection to his Majesty. His Majesty was pleased to (...) them tha^ (...)
Journey through that C^^^ty he had sufficient evidence of the (...) of the
Pe^p^e; and (...) of his Gracious favor to them upon any occasion that (...).

The same night his Majesty, with his two R^yal B^o^^^s, and several of (...)
N^bility, were highly entertained a^ Supper by the Lo^^ Lu^^l^y.

Saturday being appointed by his Majesty to ^^uch such as were troubled with
the Evil, a great company of p^or affl^cted Crea^ures were (...) together,
(...) Chairs and F^askets, and being appointed by his Majesty (...) to the
Banqu^ting-house, his Majesty sat in a Chair of Sta^^, where he st^ok'd (...)
we (...) to him, and then put about each of their N^cks a white R^bb^n with an
A^^^^ o^ Gold on it. In this manner his Majesty stroak'^ abov^ 6^^ and such was
his (...) p^^ience and tenderness to the poor affl^cted Creatures (...) took up
a (...) long time, His Majesty being never weary of well-doing, was pleased to
make enqui^y w^ether there were any more that had not yet been touched. After
Prayers were ended, the Duke of Buckingham brought a Towel, and the Earl o^
Pembrook a Baso^ and Ever, who after they had made their obeisance to his
Majesty, kneeled down till his Majesty had washed.

Westminster.
On Satarday, several Gentlemen of the Long Robe were made Sergeants of the
Coi^e. They came out of the Common P^eas Treasu^y, in^o Westminster Hall, and
stood over against the Common Pl^as Court, Sergeant Glanvil, and Sergeant
Littleton, brought them to the Bar according to the usual form, the Wa^den of
the Fleet, and U^her of the Exchequer walking before them. The names of these
made Serjeant^ are, Sir Tho. Widderington, Serj. Brown, Serj. Gly^, Serj.
Earl, Serj. Bernars* Serj. Hales. Serj. Twisden, Serj. Maynard, Serj.
New^igate, Serj. Windham, Serj. Fountain, Serj. Syse, Serj Archer, Serj. Waller.

Venice, May 2^. 1660.
After so many several Reports of the Enterprise of Generalissimo Morosini, we
hear by Letters from him to the Senate, that having retired his Forces from
about Negroponte, the Fort whereof would have kept too long his Army, he has
upon a sudden fallen upon the Isle of S^atto, not ab^ve 20 miles distance from
the other, and before the Enemies could recover themselves, did so vigorously
assault the Castle, that notwithstanding the resi^tance of those within, he
took it two days after, wherein he found 70 Pieces of Ordnance, with Prov^sions
for a month for his whole Army. Thus his design was to demolish it, that he
might hereafter so much the more easily get the Contributions of that Isle. We
hear from Constantinople that the Grand Signior is yet at Andrinople, where he
does remain by the advice of the Divan, to hasten the march of the Forces
designed against Prince Ragotski. That the first Vizier is returned thither
from Belgrade, hoping the change of air will much contribute to the recovering
of his health* and that the Grand Signor never missed a day without giving him
a visit, and asking his advice upon his affairs. In the mean while, having need
of all his Forces, upon an enquiry into the state of his Militia in pay, he
has found 120000 F^ot and 40000 Horse, besides his ordinary Guards, which are
above 10000 men, with 50 Galleys, 12 Mahones, 30 great ships and many small
ones. The Letters say further that the said Grand Signor seemed to be very much
troubled for the Peace between France and Spain, not doubting but that his
Empire, which uses to take advantage of the division among the Christian
Princes, will suffer by their reunion. And indeed, besides the 4 Galleys of
the Pope, the 7 of Maltha, and the 3 of the Great Duke of Tuscany, which have
been seen about Corfeu and Zante, going to join with our Fleet, we hear that
the French ships, carrying Forces thither, were not very far. We hear by a Ship
come from the said Isle of Zante, that three French private Men of War, under
the Commissions of Maltha, having lately fallen in the Seas of Rhodes, upon a
Sultana going from Alexandria toward Constantinople, as a Convoy to some
Saicks, took the third Sultana, and two of the Saicks, having killed two
hundred Turks, who defended themselves very resolutely for five hours
together. That Prize, valued above 400000 Crowns, has been carried to Maltha.

St. John de Luz, 14 June, 1660.
Besides the particulars mentioned in my last, concerning the last Ceremonies
of the Kings Marriage, I have these following to add, that you might have a
perfect account of that extraordinary occasion. The Church of this place having
been prepared before with all possible pomp for such an august solemnity, all
the Court repaired thither about Noon, by a Bridge made purposely from the
Queen Mothers lodgings to the said Church, whereof both sides were guarded by a
double File of the French and Switzers Guards. The Kings Musketeers on
Horseback, were in the middle of the place before the Kings House, all in new
and rich Cassecks. The Company of the Archers of the Grand Provost of the
King's Household went before, then that of the 100 Switzers, the Kings Footmen,
the Pages of the great and small Stables in great number; those of his
Majesty's Bedchamber, all in new and magnificent Liveries, and several
Grandees in black Clothes, with Cloaks lined with Golden Stuffs, and laces
black mingled with imbroidery of Gold. Then came alone Cardinal Mazarine, 12
Gentlemen of the Ordnance, round about him. After him came the King richly
apparelled, and marching in great Majesty between the Marquis of Peguillen and
the Marquis of Humieres, and two Gentlemen of his Chamber on each side. The
Marquis de Charost, Captain of the Guards followed him, with two of the said
Guards. Then came the Queen with her retinue, after the manner expressed in my
last. The Queen Mother came after, very joyful of the occasion of the ceremony
of that day, to which she contributed most of all. She was led by her Knight of
Honor, and one of her Gentlem^n Ushers, the Countess of Flex her Lady of
Honor carrying her Train. Mademoiselle followed, having her Train carried by
M. de Mancini. The Ladies and Maids of the two Queens closed the march, being
followed by the Queen Mothers Guards: Abundance of Trumpets were blowing all
the while. The Ceremonies of the Church you had in my former Letters, as also
the particulars of that days Ceremonies at home.

The next day, their Majesty's went to the Recollects Church to their
Devotions, and about night went to take the air by the seaside. The same day,
the Cardinal Mazarine had another conference in the Isle with Don Louis de Aro,
about the remaining differences of some of the Allies. The 12. the Popes
Nuntio, the Ambassadors of Venice, the Resident of Genoa, the Envoy of their
Royal Highnesses of S^voy, and the Deputies of the Parliament and Chamber of
Accounts of Pau^, being conducted by Mr. de Chabenas-Bonnevil, had Audience of
their Majesty's. Mr. Akakia has brought hither the Treaty of Peace between
Swedeland and Poland, to be ratified by the King, as Mediator between those
two Crowns. To morrow their Majesty's are to depart from hence for Bayonne;
from whence the next day to Aix, and from thence through the little Lands to
Bourdeaux.

Marseille the 15 of June 1660.
The 9 instant two Galleys coming from Italy came to our Isles, carrying into
Spain the Prince Ludovisio. They went from thence the 13 following; and the
same day the Duke of Mercoeur came hither from Aix to hasten the work of our
Citadel, having sent hither before above 300 new workmen.

Amsterdam the 17 of June 1660.
The 14 instant the Princess Royal, and the Prince of Orange her son came
hither, and were received by our Inhabitants; of whom 3 Companies under their
arms and richly apparelled, the foot of our ordinary Guard, and all our Young
men were gone out to meet them, and brought them in with a great Co^tage of
Coaches, and 18 Chariots of Triumph prepared for their reception. All our great
Guns were shot off, and answered by the Artillery of above 150 ships in our
Port: since that time there has been nothing here but Feastings and
rejoycings, either public or private, whereof the most considerable
Inhabitants of the Neighboring towns, who came hither purposely, have been
partakers. The Peace between Sueden and Denmark is confirmed; all Europe
seeming now to have shaken off the War to embrace the Peace this Province
following their example has already consented to an accommodation with Portugal.

Paris the 26 of June 1660.
Yesterday the Te Deum was sung here in the Church of our Lady for the happy
accomplishment of the Kings Marriage. The Chancellor with the whole Council of
the King, the Parliament, the Chamber of Accounts and the Court of Aids having
been summoned to be there by the Kings order, delivered them by M. du Pin, Aid
of the Ceremonies, were present thereunto, with the body of the Officers of
this City, and an infinite number of persons of Quality. At night the Bonfires
were made every where in our streets, and all our windoes were full of lights,
and our Cannon spoke our joy by break of day. We hear that the Court arrived at
Bayonne the 15 instant, and was to go the next day for Bourdeaux. The 22 the
Prince arrived here from Bourdeaux, where he has left the Court. He has been
but three days upon the way.

Stockholm the 26 of May 1660.
Nothing is ye^ concluded in the Treaty with the Grand Duke of Muscovy: the
chief of our Embassy to him, the Lord Beng Horn is returned hither some five
days since to take new Orders of the young King; and we hear that likewise the
Russian Commissioners are gone to their Master upon the same account: but we
hear the said Grand Duke will not hearken to restore such places as he has
lately taken in Liffeland, although he has heard of the conclusion of the
Treaty between this ^rown and Poland. On our side we are resolved never to
yield unto that, nor relinquish our right to those places. The Ambassador of
the said Duke that was here, has been dismissed presently upon the advice
hereof, he being thought to be only here as an honorable Spy. 30 Ba^ks are
here ready to transport our Army to Nerve upon the Borders of Mosco^y, to be
ready in case of a breach, which is thought to be like to ensue upon this
between this Crown and that Duke.

Advertisements of Books newly Printed and Published.
A Chronicle of the Kings of England, from the time of the Roman^ Government,
unto the Death of King James. Containing all Passage^ of State and Church; with
all other Observations proper for a Ch^onicle* F^^thfully collected out of
Authors An^ient and Modern^ and digested into a new Method. By Sir Richard
Baker, Knight. Whereunto i^ (...) added in this third Edition, The Reign of
King CHARLES the First, with a continuation of the Chronicle, to the end of the
year MDCLVIII.

Christ All in All. O^ several significant similit^des by which the Lord Jesus
Christ is described in the Holy Scriptures. Being the substance of many Sermons
preached by that Faithful and Useful Servant of Christ, Ralph Robinson,
Pastor of Mary Toolnoth, London. The second Edition corrected and enlarged in
Quarto.

Both sold by Tho. ^illiams at the Bible in Little-Brittain, without
Alders-gate.

Honor Redivivus; Or, An Analysis of Honor and Armory.

By Matthew Carter E^quire.

Poems, viz, 1. A Panegyric to the King. 2. Songs and Sonnets. 3. The Blind
Lady, a Comedy. 4. The Fourth Book of Virgil. 5. Statius his Achillets, with
Annotations. 6. A Panegyric to General Monck. By the Honorable Sir Robert
Howard.

A Panegyric to the King. By his Majesty's most Humble, most Loyal, and most
Obedient Subject and Servant, Thomas Higgons.

Ast^ae^ Redux, A Poem on the ha^py Restoration and return of his Sacred,
Majesty CHARLES the Second. By John D^den.

Ode, upon the Blessed Resto^ation and Return of His Sacred Majesty CHARLES the
Second. By A. Cowley.

A Poem upon His Sacred Majesty's most happy return to his Dominions. By
William Dave^ant.

All six sold by Henry ^erringman at the sign of the Anchor on the lower walk
in the New Exchange.

ANALYSIS: The Loosing of S. Peter's Bonds; setting f^^th the true Sense and
Solution of the Covenant in point of Conscience, so far as it relates to the
Government of the Church by Ep^scopacy. By John Gauden, D. D. Sold by A^^rew
Crook at the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard.

There is newly come forth a very seasonable and useful piece of Primit^v^
D^^c^^^n^ in the Feasts and Fast of the Church of England; consisting of Prof^,
Poems, Prayers and Sculptures on the several Occasions; dedicated to the King:
By Edward Spark B. D. And are to be sold ready bound or in Quires, by Octavian
Pullen at the Rose, or Tho* D^^ver at the Bisho^s head in S. Paul's Churchyard;
as also by Edward Ecclestone right against the Red Cross in Sea^coal lane, and
by John Homersh^m in Jerusalem Court on Flee^stree^; the said books being five
shillings in quires and but 500 of them.

Advertisements of Books newly printed and published.
Englands Season for Reformation of Life: A Sermon Preached at St. Pa^^ Church
on the Sunday next following His Majesty's Restoration. By Tho. Pier^^ Rector
of Brington.

An ^r^ar^^al ^nquiry into the Nature of Sin, in answer to Mr. Hickman; with a
Postcript to^ch^ng some late dealings of Mr. Baxter, by the same Author.

Both sold by Timo^hy Garth wait at the North door of S. Paul's.

Beams of former Light, discovering how evil it is to impose doubtful and
disputable ^orms or Practices upon Ministers, especially under the penalty of
Ejestion for Non conformity unto the same; as also something about Catech^zing.
By Mr. Philip Ny^. Sold by Adoniram Byfield, at the three Bibles in Cornh^l,
next Popes head Alley.

Le Prince D'Amour: Or the Prince of Love; with a Collection of several
Ingenuous Poems and Songs: By the Wits of the Age. Sold by William L^^k at the
Crown in Fleetstreet, betwixt the two Temple Gates.

Advertisements.
A Smooth Black Dog, less then a Greyhound, with white under his breast,
belonging to the Kings Majesty, was taken from Whitehall, the eighteenth day of
this instant June, or there about. If any one can give notice to John Else one
of his Majesty's Servants, or to his Majesty's Back-stairs, shall be well
rewarded for their labor.

A Brown bay Mare, blind of one eye, stolen from Weston in the Thistles, in the
County of Warwick, on the 17 of June instant. Give notice to Mr. John Andrews
at the White horse in Dairy-Lane, or to the Swan at Shipton upon Stower, and
receive a good rewa^d.

June 13. Stolen out of Pasture near Stratford by Bow, A Bay Nag, with a
frizled tail, no ^hite, peeled in the Face, the hair being off, trots and
paces, thirteen handful high six years old. Also a ^hite gray Nag, t^ors all,
clorded about one eye, about twelve handful high, nine year old. If any one
can give notice at the sign of the Cross-Keys in Holborn, or at the Post house
in London, shall be well rewarded for their pains.

Monday, June 25. 1660. Resolved by the Commons assembled in Parliament,
THat no person whatsoever do presume at his peril to Print any Votes or
Proceedings of this House, without the special leave and order of the House,

W. Jessop Clerk of the Commons Horse of Parliament.

Hamborough June 12. 1660.
In consequence of the peace between the two Northern Kings, the prisoners of
War at Gluckstrade have been released by order of the King of Denmark; and
among other the Prince of Anhalt, and the Lieutenant General Horn, who are
since arrived here. By Letters from Coppenhagen of the 5 instant, we hear That
the Suedes are gone from the Leagure before that City, from whence two ships
had been sent to the I Will of Falster to ship them away. The Lord Hannibal
Seestede, and the Lord Slinglandt are sent into Suedland; the first from the
King of Denmark, and the second from the States General of the United
Provinces; not only to condole the death of the late King of Sueden, but also
to congratulate the coming of the present King to the Crown. The Suedish Army
lies still in Zealand, expecting the orders from the Suedish Court for their
next employment. The allied forces in Jutland and Holstein do still lie there,
and nothing is yet given out of their marching away. The Peace has been
published in the Dukedom of Bremen.

From Edinburgh, June 19.
Out of the affection I have for you, I have with every convenience acquainted
you with what passes here worthy of your knowledge or observation, and at this
time especially, I have made bold to borrow a few minutes from the public
Solemnities, to give you that in brief which we are celebrating with that
splendour and affection and unfeign^d tokens of joy, that the like has not been
seen before in this Nation; for great and wonderful is the Lords work of
deliverance in that day when we expected to be overturned with confusion, and
covered with desolation.

The Magistrates of this City and our Presbytery, being most sensible of the
great mercy received, did appoint this the day of their public Thanksgiving to
God for his signal love and kindness showed to them, in investing our most
gracious Sovereign with his Thrones of England and Ireland, and for restoring
him to his Government over this his ancient Nation, that for twenty hundred
years has flourished under the Scepter of his Royal Ancestors. And have given
notice of this their resolution to all the Burghs and P^e^byte^ies of Scotland,
desiring their concurrence, that as their Cause is, so their joy may be
universal: Our Ministers in their Sermons with so much fervency and passionate
expressions delivered what great kindness the Lord had for us, in restoring to
us our good King, that it has not been observed that at any time their
E^^^^tations have been entertained with such attention, and so plentiful
tears, by their Audito^y. The English Officers of State and War observed the
Thanksgiving with no less joy and devotion after Sermon, and after we had all
dined together, we all marched from the Council-house to the Cross, in this
order, The Town Council in their Gowns, with their trumpets sounding before
them, went first, then two Bailies before the English Commissioners and
Officers, and two behind them went next* The Provost all alone before the Scots
Nobility and Gentry that are in Town, and two Bailies with the Dean of Gild and
Thesaurer followed after. Their Guards, near six hundred Citizens in comely
apparel, armed with Swords and Partisans, the Cross was covered with Artificial
Vines laden with Grapes, both good Cla^et wines plentifully springing out from
all its Channels. On its heads a Baccus bestradling a Hogshead with two or
three Satyrs, did with their mimick g^stures and jests entertain the beholders.
A little below the Cross, within a Rail was errected a Scaffold six foot high,
on which was placed a large Table covered with a rich Banquet served up in
glass, and representing diverse forms and devices as his Majesty's Arms, the
Arms of the City; and diverse Exotic Trees were raised, laden with their
Leaves and Fruits, etc. The Table being surrounded with above one hundred
persons of Eminency. The Music and breaking of Glasses were seconded by three
general Vollies of the Horse and Foot, who received as handsome answer from
the great Guns of the Castle, Ci^adel and ships in the Road; and all were
ec^hoed by joyful Acclamations of the people.

After this the forces drew off, affording the civilities of view to the
people, amongst whom the dishes and banquet were hurled, and so arose and
marched down to the Piazzo of the Palace of Holyrod house, first the
Commissioners, nex^ the Mayor General wi^h his Army, and after them the City
Magistrates with their guards; whence after the Masket had saluted them there
with diverse vollios, and had ^^ceived a retu^n from the great guns of the
Castle citadal and sea, as formerly they marched back again quite thorough the
City up to the Cast^e-hill, from w^e^^e every one part returned to spend the
rest of the evening with their friends in mirth and mutual joy and
entertainments. But now begin in the Bells and the Fireworks, therefore I must
be gone to assist in the dances of our Magistrates and Ci^izen about the
Bonefires, and on my knees to remember ^he health of my Sovereign and his loyal
kindred, and the prosperity of his Excellency and all those Heroes and No^^les
who have been instrum^ntal, or do rejoice with us in this our great deliverance
and happiness.

D^e Sabbati, Junii 23. 1660.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That all the Tyths, Gleb^s, and
other Profits of, or belonging to the Rectory of A. B. in the County of D. C.
and other Ecclesiastical Living or Benefice of A. B. who has been Sequ^stred
or Ejected without due course of Law, in or since the time of the late War, be
by Authority hereof stayed and secured, in the hands of the Churchwarden, or
Over-^eers to the Poor of the said Parish, until the Title of the said
^equestred A. B. and the present Possessor thereof shall be determined by the
further Order of Parliament, or Eviction by due course of Law.

Jo. Brown Clerie: Parliamentorum Whitehal

Whitehall.
His Sacred Majesty, but of a sense of the high deserts of Col. John Covert u^
Glaug^am, in the county of Suffex, (who formerly served in the Army of his ^^^e
Majesty of ever blessed memory with much courage and fidelity, and (...) since
that, notwithstanding the cruelty of his enemies, and their persecuting of him
for continuing his allegiance to his present Majesty, still remained unshaken
in his resolutions to perform his duty, for which he was by Oliver Cromwell
imprisoned in the Tower) was graciously pleased first to Knight him, and then
give him a Patent for Baroner.

His Majesty conferred the honor of Knighthood on William Poult^ty, a person
that ever had a great civility for all that were for the Royal cause, and a
loyal heart for his Majesty's service.

Col. Roger Mostyn is made Gentleman of the privy chamber to his Majesty to
enjoy all privileges, etc.

On Monday, the right honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury presented to his
Majesty an Address of the Nobility and Gentry of the County of Worcester
enti^u^ed.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The humble Address of the Nobility and
Gentry in the County of Worcester.

The Address was subscribed, Tho. Windsor, Tho. Coventry, Will. Russell, and
above fifty others. His Majesty returned them his hearty thanks, telling them,
He was well assured of their Loyalty and affection, and should ever have a good
esteem of them.

One Pain, formerly a Messenger of Oliver Cromwell, is secured; there being
information against him, That he was the Executioner of that Execrable m^^der
of his late Majesty.

On Monday Sergeant Atkins, a person of known integrity and great learning in
the Law, sat Baron of the Exchequer.

It being prohibited by the House of Commons, upon the miscarriage and abuses
of some idle Pamphletters, That any of the Votes of that House should be
printed without special Order, the Reader is desired to excuse us, if in
obedien^e to them we cannot yet give him so full satisfaction.

Books from the Office of Intelligence having formerly given you an account
that Mr. Scot, one of the late pretended High Count of Justice for trial of his
late Majesty was brought to Westminster; I must confess, though enquired of by
many, I could not give satisfaction therein, being tender to gainsay any thing
I did not well know, especially in a matter concerning Mr. Scot, with whom that
Pamphl^^ter formerly kept such constant intelligence; till meeting with a near
relation of his, I was informed that he was at Brussels, where he had tended
himself to Sir Henry de V^^, till his Majesty's pleasure should be further
known concerning him; laying himself now at last at the feet of his Majesty's
mercy as his only security.

From Ireland we are certified, that there are yet some unquiet spirits amongst
them, which do endeavor to bring that Nation again into confusion, as may
appear by a Letter lately taken, of dangerous consequence; the intent of it is
to stir^^ to a new War. But being by providence so early found out, their Plot
is doubtless quite spoiled. For such is the prodence and valor of the persons
entrusted with the management of affairs in that Nation, that we need not fear,
had they headed, much less now the Design^s discovered.

London, Printed by J: Macock, and Tho. Newcomb, 1660.


