FOUR. SPEECHES MADE BY Sr. EDWARD DEERING in the high Court of PARLIAMENT.

Concerning the Archbishop and diverse other Grievances.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Coals, 1641.

(...) sufferer (as all good men are) under the gene^ oblique of a P^itan, as
with other things wa^ admirable delivered by that silver Trumpet at the Bar,
the Pursivant watched his door, and devides him and his Cure asunder to both
their griefs, for it is not with him as perhaps with some that set the
Pursivant at work, glad of an excuse to be out of the Pulpit, it is his
delight to preach. About a week since I went over to Lambeth to move that
great Bishop (too great indeed) to take this danger from off this Minister and
recall the Pursivant; And withal did undertake for Mr. Wilson (for so is your
Petitioner called) that he should answer his accuses in any of the Kings
Courts at Westminster: The Bishop made me this answer in His verbis, I am
sure that he will not absent from his cure a twelvemonth together, and then I
doubt not but once in a year we shall have him. This was all that I could
obtain, but I hope (by the help of this House) before this year of threats
be run out, his Grace will either have more Grace or no Grace at all. For our
griefs are manifold and do ^ill a mighty and vast circumference, yet so that
from every part, our lives of sorrow do lead unto him and point at him, as the
Center from whence our miseries do grow.

Let the Petition be read, and let us enter upon the Work.

The second speech.
Mr. Speaker.
YOu have many private particular petitions, give me leave by word of mouth to
interpose one more general, which thus you may receive: Gods true religion is
violently invaded by two seeming enemies, but in deed they are like Herod and
P^late, ^ast friends for the destruction of Truth: I mean the Papists for the
one part, and out Prelati^g faction for the other; between these two in their
several progress, I observe the concurrence of some few paralells, sit (as I
conceive) to be represented to this honorable House.

First, with the Papists there is a severe Inquisition, and with us (as it is
used) there is a bitter High Commission both these (...) are Judges in their
own case: yet herein their Inquisi^ are better then our High Commissioners,
they (for ought that I ever heard) do not ((...) in (...)) punish for deli^
and offenders such as (...) and (...) according as it is established by the
Laws of the Land where they live.

But with us, how many poor distressed Ministers? nay how many scores of them
in a few years past have been suspended, degraded and excommunicated? not
guilty of the breach of any established Laws: The Petitions of many are here
with us, more are coming, all their prayers are in heaven for redress: down
therefore with these Money Changers; They do confess commutation of Penance,
and I may therefore justly call them so.

Secondly, with the Papists there is a Misterious Artifiice, I mean their
Index Expurgatorius, whereby they clip the tongues of such witnesses whose
evidence they do not like: To these I parralell our late Imprimators Lycensers
for the Press, so handled, that truth is suppressed and Popish Pamphlets fly
abroad Cum privelegio, witness the audatious Libells against true Religion,
written by Cossens, Dowe, Heylin, (...), Meade, Shalford, Swan, Roberts, and
many more, I name no Bishops but I add, etc.

Nay they are already grown so bold in this new trade, that the most learned
Laborers of our ancient and best Devines, must be new corrected and defaced
with a Deliniatur, by the supersillious pen of my Lords young Chaplain, fit
perhaps for the Tecknicall Arts, but unfit to hold the Chair for Divinity.

But herein the Roman (...) is (...) then our English Lycences, they thereby
do prove the current of their own established Doctrines, a point of wisdom;
but with us our Innovators by this Artifice do alter our settled Doctrines, nay
they do subinduce points repugnant and contrary: and this I do affirm upon
my self to prove.

One Parralell I have more, and that is this: Amongst the Papists there is one
acknowledged Pope, supreme in honor over all, and in power, from whose
Judgment there is no appeal: I confess M. Speaker. I cannot altogether match
a Pope with a Pope, yet one of the ancient Titles of our English Pri^, was
Alteri^ (...) Pope, but thus far I can go (ex ^re (...)) it is in Print; he
pleades fair for a Patriarchall; and for such a one whose Judgment (he
beforehand pro^th) ought to be final, and then I am sure it ought to be
unerring; put these two together, and you shall find that the final
determination of a Patriarch, will want very little of a Pope, and then we may
say, (...): he pleads Popeship, under the name of a Patriarch, and I much
(...) the end and top of his Patriarch^ (...) may be as that of ^dinall Poole
his Predecessor; who would have two heads, one Cap^t Reg^le, the other Cap^
(...), it proud parralell to set up the My^ above the Crown.

But herein I shall be free and (...), if one there must be, be it a Pope, be
it a Patriarch, this I resolve upon for mine own choy^, (...) Pr^t a fu^ine, I
had rather serve one (...) as Tyber, then to have him come to (...) the Thame^,
(...) Pope at Rom^ will do me less^ (...), then a Patriarch may do at Lambeth.

I have done, and for this third parralell, I submit it to the wisdom and
(...) of this grave Committee for Religion: (...): (...) I do ground my Motion
upon the former (...), and it is this in brief.

That you would be pleased (...) Committee of 4. 6. 8. (...) the (...) and to
i^power them for the discovery of the (...) numbers of oppressed ministers,
under the Bishops tyrany for these ten years (...) pas^, we (...) the
complain^s of some, but more (...) are patient and will not complain^, (...)
fearful and (...) no^, many dea^, and many beyond the Seas and cannot
complain.

And in the second place, (...) Committee may examine the (...), what (...) by
bad license, have been corrup^ issued (...). And what good books have been
(like good Ministers) silenced, ^lipped or (...).

The work I conceive will not b^ (...), but will quickly return into your
hands ^ull of weight. (...) this is (...)

The third Speech.
Mr. Speaker.
THIS, Morning is designed for the consideration of the late Cannons, and the
former; and of that which the Clergy have miscalled a benevolence, I shall for
the present, only touch the first of them, and that is the Roman: V^lites, who
did use to begin the Battle: so shall I but (...), and s^rmish, whi^ the
maine Battle is setting forwards.

The Pop^, (...) they say; has a triple Crown answerable thereunto, and to
support it, he pretends to have a threefold Law.

1. The first that is (...) Episcopacy by Divine Right: and this he would have
you think to be the Crown next his head, which does circle and secure his
power our Bishops have in an unlucky time entered their Plea, and presented
their (...) to this Crown Episcopacy* by Divine Right.

2. The second is Ius humanum Constantii d^notivum, the gift of Indulgent
Prin^s temporal power; this Law belongs to his middle or second Crown, this
is already pleaded for, by our Prelates in Print.

3. These two Crowns being already obtained, The POPE claims and makes the
third himself, and sets it highest upon the top: This Crown also has its
Law, and that is Ius Canonicum: This Cannon Law is of more use unto his
Popeship (if once admitted) then both the other.

Just so our Prelates from the pretended divinity of their Episcopacy, and from
the temp^all power, granted them by our Princes, would now obtrude a new Cannon
Law upon us: They have charged the Cannons to the ^ull, and never fearing they
would re^ into a (...), they have rammed a prodig^ us and ungodly Oath into
them: the illegallity and invalidity of these Cannons, is manifested by one
short question, (v^s.) what do you ca^ the meeting wherein they were made?

Mr. Speaker, who can frame an argument aright, unless he can tell against
what he is to argue?

Would you confute the Convocation-house, they were a holy Synod, they were
Comissioners? will you dispute their (...)? they will mingle all power together
and perhaps answer, they were something else, that we neither knew nor
imagined; unless they would unriddle themselves, and own what they were, we
may prosecute non concludent Arguments.

Mr. Speaker, I have conferred with some of the Founders of those Cannons, but
I profess here, that I (...) never meet with any one of that Assembly, who
could well answer to that first question of the Catechism, What is your name?
Alas, they were parted before they knew what they west, when they were together.

The sum of all the several answers that I have received, do altogether
amount unto this: They were a Convocationall, Synodicall Assembly of
Commissioners: Indeed a threefold Chamera, a Monster to our Laws, a Cerberus
to our Religion. A strange Commission, where no Commissioners name is to be
found! A strange Convocation that (...) when the Parliament was dead. A strange
holy Synod, when the one part never saw nor conferred with the other.

But indeed, there needed no conference, if it be true of these Cannons which I
read of the former, Quis nescit, Canones Lambetha formari priusquam in Synodo
ventilentur?

Well Mr. Speaker, they have Innovated upon us; we may say, it is Lex talionis
to Innovate upon them, and so I hope we shortly shall (...)

In the mean time, my humble ^otion is (...) every member of that Assembly,
who voted (...) Cannons, may come severally to the (...) this House, with a
Book of Cannons in his hand, and there unless he can answer that Catechism
question, as I called it, better then I expect (...) can, conceptis verbis, in
such express I (...) as this Honorable House shall then (...) shall abjure his
own Issue, and be commanded to give fire to his own Cannons.

And this (...) I take to be Just.

FINIS.
The fourth Speech.
Mr. SPEAKER.
YEsterday we did regulate the most important business before us: and gave
them motion, so that our great and weighty affairs, are now on their feet in
their progress, iourning on toward their several periods, where some I hope
will find their latest home.

Yet among all these I observe one, a very maine one, to sleep sine die: give
me leave to awaken it; it is a business of an immense weight, and worth; such
as deserves our best care, and most severe circumspection. I mean the Grand
Petition long since given in by many thousand Citizens against the dominering
Clergy.

Wherein (for my part) although I cannot approve of all that is presented unto
you, yet I do clearly profess, that a great part of it, nay the greatest
part thereof, is so well grounded, that my heart goes cheerfully along
therewith.

It seems that my Country (for which I have the honor to serve) is of the
same mind, and least you should think that all faults are included within the
walls of Troy, they will show you Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra.


The same grievances which the City groans under, are provincial unto us,
and I much fear they are National among us all.

The pride, the avarice, the ambition and oppression, by our ruling Clergy is
Epidemicall, it has infected them all. There is not any, or scarce any of them
who is not practical in their own great cause in hand, which they impiously
do mis-call, the Piety of the times, but in truth, so wrong a Piety, that I am
bold to say, In facinus iurasse putes. --


Here in this Petition is the disease represented, here is the cure entreated.

The number of your Petitioners is considerable, being above five and twenty
hundred names, and would have been four times as many, if that were thought
material.

The matter in the Petition is of high import: But your Petitioners themselves
are all of them quiet and silent at their own houses, humbly expecting and
praying the resolution of this great Senate, upon these their earnest and
thrice hearty desires.

Here is no noise, no numbers at your door: they will be neither your trouble
nor your jealousy; for I do^ not know of any one of them this day in the
town: so much they do a^e in the justice of their Petition, and in the
goodness of this house.

If now you want any of them here to make avowance of their Petition, (...) am
their servant. I do appear for them and for my self, and am ready to avow
this Petition in their names, and in my own.

Nothing doubting, but fully confident, that I may justly say of the present
usage of the Hierarchy in the Church of England, as once the Pope (Pope Adrian
as I remember) said of the Clergy in his time: A vertice c^pitis ^d plan^am
pedis, nibil est sanum in toto ordine ecclesiastic^.

I beseech you read the Petition, regard us, and relieve us.

FINIS.
THE. SPEECHES OF Sr. EDWARD DEERING in the high Court of PARLIAMENT.

Concerning the Archbishop and diverse other Grievances.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1641.


