decorative border DIEV ET MON DRIOT ARISE FOR IT IS DAY.

A memorial of such Princes, as since the time of King Richard the second,
have been unfortunate in the Realm of England.

LONDINI In aedibus Johannis Waylandi, cum priuilegio per Septennium.

The copy of the queen's Majesty's letters Patentes.
MAry by the grace of God, Queen of England France and Ireland, defendour of
the faith, and in earth of the Church of England, and also of Ireland, the
supreme head. To ye Prynters of books, and book sellers, and to al other out
Officers, Minysters, and Subjects these our letters patentes hearing or seeing,
gretyng. Know ye that we of our especial grace and meare mocion: have given
and granted, and by these presents do give and grant full power, license,
authority, and Privilege unto our well-beloved Subject John Wayland, Citezeyn
and Scriuenour of London. That he and his Assigns only, and none other person
or persons shall from hensforth have authority, and liberty to prynt al and
every such usual Primers or Manual of prayers by whatsoever other title y^ same
shall or may be called, which by us our heirs, successors, or by our clergy by
our assent shall be auctorised, set forth, and devised for to be used of all our
loving Subjects thoroughout all our Realms, and domynyons, duringe the full
time and term of seven years next ensuing the date of these our letters
Patentes. And farther that it shall not be lawful for any manner of other person*
or persons of out said Subjects, to Prynt or to procure to be imprinted, any
Prymers or Manual of prayers by whatsoever title the same shall or may be
called, or set forth, during the said term, nor any book, or books, which
the said John Waylande or his Assigns at his or their costs and charges
shall first Prynte, or set forth during the said term of seven years next
ensuing the printing of the same book or books, upon pain of forfature, and
confiscacion of the same Prymers, Manual or prayers, and books, ^o thuse of
us and our successors. Wherefore we w^ll and command all you our Printers,
and other our Subjects that ye nor any of you, do presume, procure, or attempt
to print or setfurth any manner Prymers, Manual of prayers, book or books,
which the said John Wayland or his assigns shall first Print during the time of
this our Privilege, and license, upon pain of forfature and confiscacion of
the same Prymers, Manual of prayers, and books, as aforsaide. And as ye tender
our pleasure, and will avoid the contrary. In witness whereof we have caused
these our letters to be made patentes. Wytnes our self at Westminster the
four and twentieth day of Octobre, in the first year of our reign.

Per bre^ de priuato sigillo et de data predicta.
Here follows the Table of this present Book, called the fall of Princes,
and Princesses. etc. Which book is divided in to nine books, and every book
contains diverse chapters, as here after follows: And first of the first
book, which contains xxiiii. Chapiters
THe Prologue of John Lidgate Monk of Bury, translatoure of this book. The
first Chapter of the first book shows how Adam and Eve for their
inobedience, were put out of Paradyse: and how they standinge naked before
Bochas, desired him to put their woeful fall first in remembrance: And how
they and their ofsprynge lived in sorrow and wretchedness: with a Lenuoye. The
first chapter. How Nembroth builded the tower of Babylone, to save him self
from Noes stood, which for his pride and presumpcion, was put from his
magnifycence, and his tower with sudden leuyn smytten down. The second
chapter. An exclamacio^ of John Bochas against proud fo^ke, showing how God
may them and their pride abate, when (...) shall please him: and by diverse
means and ways them punysh and chastise: With a lenuoy. The third chapter.
How many years were between Adam and Nembroth, and between Nembroth and
Cadmus, and of diverse other kings. The fourth chapter. Of Ogiges king of
Thebes, leaf.vii. Of a great flode in Tessaly. leaf.vii. Of goodly Jsys wife
to Apys king of Argyue, and how he was slain by his brother Diffeus. The fyft
chapter. Of Grisiton that eat his members for hungre. With a Lenuoy. the sixth
chapter. How Jupiter rauyshed Europa, the daughter of king Agenor, and how
Cadmus was sent to seek her in to diverse countries: With a Lenuoy of the
translatour. The seventh chapter. A goodlye process of Oetes king of Colchos,
of Jason and Medea, of Theseus, Sylla, of Nisus, and of diverse other: With a
Lenuoy. The eight Chapter, Of mighty Jabyn king of Canaan, of Queen Jocasta,
and how Thebes was dystroyed: With a Lenuoy. The.ix. chap. How Atreus king of
Messene wrought against his brother Thiestes, and how he stewe his children,
dismembered them in pieces, and made the said Thiestes to eat of their flesh
and drink of their blood. The tenth chapter. How Atreus accused him self of
murder, and his brother of auoutry, don with Europa the queen: With a Lenuoy:
The xi. chapter. Of duke Theseus, and of Ariadne that saved his life in a cave,
and how he like a forsworn man for soke her, and wedded fair Phedra, which
afterward slew her self: a Lenuoy. The.xii. chapter. How Bochas blames them
that gives hasty credence to liers and flatterers: With a Lenuoy. The.xiii.
chapter. Of queen Althea, and how Hercules by women was brought to confusion:
With a Lenuoy. The.xiiii. chapter. A process of Narcissus, Byblis, Myrra and
diverse other, their infortunes to Bochas complaynyng, and how Narcissus,
Byblis, and Myrra dyed at myschefe. with a Lenuoy. The fyftene chapter. Of
Priamus king of Troy: and how the monk of Burye, translatoure of this book,
wrote a book of the siege of Troy called Troy book. the sixtene chapter, Here
Bochas authoure of this book, writes again the Surquedous pride of them that
trust to much in their riches. The seuentene chapter. Here also John Bochas
puts a great praise and commendacyon of suretye that stands in pouerte:
With a Lenuoy. The eyghtene chapter. Of mighty Sampson, which told all his
counsel to Dalyda, whereby he was disceyued: With a Lenuoy. The nyntene
chapter. A chapter of Bochas dis^^yuynge the malice that is in Women. The
twentye chapter. Thexcuse of Bochas for his writing against mysgouerned women,
in manner of a Lenuoy. The. xxi, chapter Of mighty Pyrrus that slew Pollycene,
which for his pride and auoutrye died in pouerte, and at the last was slain
by Horestes. The.xxiii. chapter Of Machayre and of his suster Canace.
The.xxiiii. chapter. The letter of complaynte written by Canace to her brother
Machayre. With a Lenuoy. The.xxv. chapter.
Thus ends the Table with the Chapiters of the first book, and here follows
the table of the second book which contains.xxxi. chapters.
THe Prologue of the translatour. The fryste Chapter of the second book
declares how Saul King of Jerusalem borne of low degree, as long as he
loved God, and dradde him, and was obedient to his laws, and ruled by good
counsel, had many great victories: But at the last for his pride,
presumpcion, and great disobey saunce, lost his crown, and was slain by
Philistees* with a Lenuoy of the translatoure. A commendacion of Bochas, upon
the virtue of Obedyence. Look the leaf.xli. How king Roboam, for gyuynge
faith to young counsel lost the benevolence of his people, and at the last
dyed a fool: With a lenuoy. The second chapter A chapter discryuinge, how
Princes being hedes of their commontees, should have noble chiualry and true
Judges to govern the commons. The third chap. How Mucius Sceuola slew an
innocente instead of king Porcenna, that laid siege to Rome. The fourth
chapter. How Lucrece oppressed by Tarquine slew her self. The fyfth chapter.
How Rome was governed after the death of Lucrece, and how Virginia was by her
father slain: with a Lenuoy. The sixte chapter. How Jeroboam king of
Israel, for ydolatry and disobedience, came to a myscheuous end. The seventh
chapter. How zareas king of Ethyope was slain in battle. The eight
chapter, How Nadab king of Jerusalem lost both scepter and crown. The ninth
chap. How the vengeable prince zambrias set a tower on fire and burnt him
self. The tenth chapter, Of king Achab and Iesabel his wife. The leuenth
chapter, How the queen Athalia for her tyranny was slain. The.xii. chapter
How Dydo Queen of Cartage slew her self for the conseruacion of her
chastity: With a Lenuoy. The.xiii. chapter A Lenuoy dyrecte to wydowes, of the
translatour. look the leaf.l. How the vycious Sardanapalus king of Assirie,
brent him self and his tresoure. The fourtene chapter. A commendacion of John
Bochas of virtuous business, rehersyng the names of diverse founders of
scyences in reprefe of ydelnesse: With a Lenuoy. The fyftene Chapter. How
Amazias in Judah king, for his pride and presumpcion was venquis^hed in
battle, and after slain. The sixtene chapter. How Osias succeadynge king
next in Judah, was smytten with lepre. The seuentene chapter. An exortacion for
Princes to take heed that they do not again the commandments of God. The
eyghtene chapter. How king Ozeas was taken by king Salmanaser, and dyed in
prison. The. xix chapter. How Senacheryb king of Assyrie was slain. The
twenty chapter. How king Sedechyas for false forswearing was made blind, and
slain in prison: with a Lenuoy. The.xxi. chapter How king Astiages labored
to disheryte Cyrus, but God would not suffer him in his malice to prevail:
with a Le^uoy. The two and twenty chapter. How Canda^us king of Lyde was made
cockold. The three and twenty chap. How all thing that king Mydas touched was
turned to gold, and yet at the last he dyed in mysery and wretchedness. The
four and twenty chapter. Of Balthazar king of Babylone, and how Daniell
expowned Mane, Techell, Phares. The five and twenty chapter, How Cresus and
Balthazar were ve^quished by Cyrus and how the son of Cresus was slain at the
huntyng of a wild boore. The.xxvi. chapter. How the cruel tyrant Cirus
delyted ever in slaughter and sheding of blood, and so ended: With a Lenuoy.
The.xxvii. chapter. How Amilius for couetise slew his brother, and how Remus
and Romulus were noryshed by a she Wolf. The eighte and twenty chapter. How
Mecius king of Albanoys, for because he was false of his oath and promise, was
drawn all in pieces. The nine and twenty chapter. How all Princes should be
true of their oaths and promise, in avoiding all doubleness and discepcion.
The.xxx. cha. Of king Hostilius the first that ware purple color, was
consumed with fyrie leuyn: with a Lenuoy. The.xxxi. chapter.
Thus ends the table with the Chapters of the second book* and here follows
the table of the third book, which contains.xxvii. Chapters.
The Prologue of the translatour. The first chapter of the third book
^reteth: how Andalus doctor of Astronomy shows that princes should not at
wite their constella^ion nor fortune, of their unhappy falling, but their own
demerites and vicious living. Look leaf.lxv. A disputacion between Fortune and
glad pouerte. Look leaf.lxv. How king Hostilius for worshypping of false
gods, was consumed with fyrie leuyn. The first chapter. How Anchus king of
Rome was murdered by Lucinyo, by the assente of his wife. The.ii. chapter. How
Lucinio that murdered Anchus was after murdered him self: with a Lenuoy. The
third chapter. How after the offense done to Lucrece by Tarquin, there was
never king crowned in Rome. The fourth chapter. The grievous complaynt of
Lucrece for her oppressyon. The fyfth chapter A complaynt of Bochas upon
Luxury of Princes, as by ensample of many diverse mischaunces declares: with
a Lenuoy. Look leaf.lxxi. How Cambyses, assentyng to the murdre of his brother
Mergus, at y^ last slew him self: and how Oropastes occupied the crown of
Perce by unjust tytell, and how he was slain. The sixte chapter. How Dary
obtaynyng the kingdom of Perce by sleyghte, ended with shame. The seventh
chapter. How Corolyan was by Romans exiled, and of the war he made against
them, and how when he besieged them they sent out his mother and his wife,
with other to treat for a peace, which they optayned: and how he was after
exiled again and slain. The.viii. chapter. How Melciades Duke of Athenes,
with a small nombre venquished six hundred thousand Perciens, and after by his
commens (that aye of custom desires change of Princes) was chayned in
prison, and so dyed: With a Lenuoy. The.ix. chapter. How Xerxses king of
Perce, for his rauin and couetyse was dysmembred in small pieces: with a Lenuoy.
The.x. chap. How Artabanus murdered king Xerxses, and how he was after murdered
him self. The leuenth chapter, Of duke Palantes, and the Spartenoies that
warred on them of Messene for ^auyshyng of their maidens. The twelfth chapter.
How Ceson Quincius out of Rome was exyled* and howt Graccus Cloellyus prince
of Equoyes was take prisoner. The.xiii. chapter. Bochas reherseth the tyranny
of Appyus and falsnesse of Judges: With a Lenuoy. The fourtene chapter. Bochas
again the untruth of Judges. Look the leaf.lxxxi. An exclamacion of Bochas
against the extorcion of the officers of Rome. The fyftene Chapter. How
Alcibyades was exiled, and after brent in his bed. The sixtene chapter An
exclamacyon of John Bochas, upon the death of Alcibiades: with a Lenuoy. The
seuentene chapter. Bochas writes again the desires of worldly people.
The.xviii. chapter. Bochas speaking again ydelnesse, reherseth how some men
have pleasure in one Science and some in another. The. xix chapter. How
Malleus Duke of Cartage, for his oppression and tyranny was hewn to pieces:
with a Lenuoy. The.xx. chapter. How the substance of the hooste of Hymilcho
duke of Cartage, as they went to conquer Cecile, dyed of the Pestilence, and
how he was after slain him self. The.xxi. chapter. How Heynon Duke of
Cartage was dismembered: with a Lenuoy. The two and twenty chapter. The author
against couitous people look the leaf.lxxxvii. How Euagoras king of Cypre was
by Artaxerses outrayed and put from his kingdom. The.xxiii. cha. How Theon
king of Egypt was by Artaxerses driven from his kingdom, and how he fled
in to Arabye. The four and twenty chapter. How Amyntas of Macedone king,
had by Erudice his wife, Alysandre* Pet dica, and Philyppe, who were after
slain The.xxv. Chapter, How the proud tyraunte haman was hanged, and the
Innocents preserved. The.xxvi. chapter Of the two brethern, Artaxerses and
Cyrus, and how Artaxerses slew his children and Concubynes, and how they
ended: with a Lenuoy. The.xxvii. chapit.
Thus ends the Table with the chapiters of the third book, and here follows
the table of the fourth book which contains xxvi. chapiters.
The Table of the fourth book.
THe prologue of the translatour. The first chapter of the fourth book
declares: how Marcus Manlius wroughte for Rome town, and how at the last
for all his labor he was by the commons cast in to Tybre and so drowned. How
Bochas writes in part against such as can not be content with suffysaunce
but usurp to high dignyties, with a Lenuoy. The second chapter. How
Nectanabus king of Egypt, was by Xerxses constrained to slye his kingdom.
The third chap. How Pausanias Duke of Lacedemo^, was exyled by them of
Athenes. The.iiii. chapter. How Helyarchus the tyrant, for extorcion and
oppression, was slain by the knight Leonydes. The fyfth chapter. How the
vycious Dyonis king of Cycyle slew his brethren and kynrede, and how he was
exiled and died at myschefe with a Lenuoy. The sixth chapter. The author again
presumptuous people and princes holding the^ self as gods The seventh
chapter. How king Pollicrate for extorcion and tyranny was hanged, till
every joint fyl from other. The eight chapter How the tyraunte Alexandre slew
his Philosopher Calistenes with diverse other, for saying troth: with a
Lenuoy. The nynth chapter. How Alexander king of Pyrothe, aduenturynge to
pass the floude of Acheronte, was slain therein, by them that he trusted most.
The tenth chap. How Dary king of Perce and Mede, was outrayed by Alexander
king of Macedon: with a Lenuoy. The leuenth chapter. A chapter of Bochas,
wherein he remembers the bataylles and losses of realms of antiquite, with
the falling of diverse nobles. The.xii. chap. How Eumenydes was twice outraied
by Antigonus, and at last dyed in prison, With a Lenuoy. The.xiii. chapter.
How Queen Olimpiades, for she delyted in vices, in murdre, and in vengeance,
dyed at mischefe: With a Lenuoy. The fourtene chapter. How Agathocles of low
birth borne attaygned unto royal dygnyte, and how he ended in pouerte and
wretchedness: With a Lenuoy. The fiftene chapter. How Cassander slew the
wife of Alexander and Hercules her son, and how Antipater slew his mother,
and of diverse other murders. The sixtene chapter. Of two prefectes, Perdicas
and Amyntas. The.xvii. cha. How Sa^drocottus borne of low degree, cherished
robbours and thieves. The xviii. ca. How Seleuchus the mighty prince was
slain by the great Tholome king of Egypt. The xix. chap. How the two sons of
Queen Arcynoe were by their mothers traitourously slain, and she exyled, with
a Lenuoy. The.xx. Chapter. How Ceramius of Macedoyne king that murdered his
cosyns, was slain in battle by them of France. The xxi. cha. How the prince
Belgius was disco^fited and brought to naught. The.xxii. chap. How duke Bre^^us
delytyng to rob and steal mischiuouslye ended: with a Lenuoy. The xxiii.
chap. How Pyrrus king of Pyrothe list not live in peace, but through pride
and presumpcion in war, came to mischaunce. The xxiiii. Chapter. How the
tyrau^t Aristotimus by treacherous workynge, set aside the right line, and how
he was crowned king of Epirothes and after slain. The.xxv. chap. How Queen
Arcinoe for her aduoutrye done with Demetrius husband of Beronices, ended in
sorrow. The.xxvi. ca.
Thus ends the table with the Chapters of the fourth book, and here follows
the table of the fifth book, which contains.xxxiii. Chapters.
The table of the fyfth book.
IN the first Chapter of the fifth book Bochas writes against them that
delight in beautye and semelynesse, calling to purpose how a man borne in
Tuscan, which excelled in beautye and fayrenesse: and for he would not give
occasion to other to sin, disfigured his visage and body, with many a
grievous wound and spotte, with a Lenuoy. How the two brethren Seleuchus and
Antiochus each of them desirynge to excel other, fill at discord, and so
ended in mischefe. The second chap. How the noble Queen Laodomya was slain
in the Temple, and of the vengeance that was take upon him that slew her. The
third chapter. How Cleomenes king of Macedone was slain with his wife and
children. The fourth chapter. Of king Nero, Cornely and Hanybal. The fyfth
Chapter. Of the duke zantipas that was cast into the sea. The sixth chapter.
How Marcus Regulus of his frewyll dyed for the common weal: with a Lenuoy.
The seventh chapter. How Tholome king of Egypt called Philopater slew his
father and mother, and his wife, and how he spent his time in lecherye, and of
his mischeuous end. The eight Chapter. How Brithomarus and Viridomarus dukes
of France, after great battayles were by Romans slain. The.ix. ca. How
Syphax the king of Numedy was taken and how he died in prison. The tenth
Chapter. How Nabyn having no tytell of right but by tyranny, took on him to be
king of Macedone, and how he was slain. The eleventh chapter. Bochas
reherseth the mortal wars that has been between the Romans and
Affricans. The. twelth cap. How king Perseus was by the Romans outrayed and
after take. The.xiii. cap. How the people of Achaia with their chief city
called Cori^the, by Romans was distroyed. The fourtene chapter. How the
great Antiochus vsyng riote and vicious living, by Marcus Actilius was
outrayed and dyed sodayulye, with a Lenuoy. The fiftene chapter. How Jeronimus
king of Cyracuse was slain, and how Scipio Affrican that labored for the
common weal of Romans was exiled by them, and so died. The sixtene chapter.
How Scipio Asyan lord of Asye, that labored ever for the common weal was at
last murdered. The seuentene chap. How duke Philopomenes was take, put in
prison and after drank poison and so died. The eyghtene chapter. Of the third
Scipion Nasica that ever wrought much for the commonty, with a Lenuoy.
The.xix. chapter How duke Ha^ball after many victorious deeds slew him self
with poison: with a Lenuoy. The twenty chapter. How Prusias king of Bith^ye
that betrayed Hanibal would have dish erited his son and heir, went a
beggynge in strange lands. The.xxi. chapter. How Perses of Macedone king,
that empoysoned his brother was by Emilyus outrayed and dyed in prison. The
xxii. ca. How Amonyus a prince of Antioche, delytynge in pyllage and robberye
with other vicious living, sted in woman's clothyng, after taken and slain.
The xxiii. cap. How Andriscus of low birth borne, having no title became king
of Macedone, was taken, and died in prison. The xxiiii. ca. How Alisander
Ballas king of Surry for extorcion, pride, and unkindness, dyed at mischefe:
with a Lenuoy. The xxv. chap. Bochas against the rebellions and sedicions in
Rome between Tribunes and the commons. The.xxvi. chapter. How the wife of
^asdrubal brent her self and her children. The.xxvii. chapter. Of Machabeus
Jonathas taken by the king of Surry. The xxviii. ca. How Demetrius the second
lost at the last his head. The.xxix. cha. How zebenna king of Surry by
intrusion entering had a mischeuous ending. The.xxx. Chapter. How Bitynctus
king of Auergnoyes, by the Romans was taken and died in prison. The.xxxi.
chapter. How the tyrant Euergetes wedded queen Cleopatra, and how he slew
her son, exiled his wife, and wedded her daughter. The.xxxii. chapter. How
Jugurtha by intrusion was king of Numidy, slew the ryghtfull heirs, and how
he was after drowned him self: with a Lenuoy. The.xxxiii. chap.
Thus ends the table with the chapters of the fifth book, and here follows
the table of the syxt book, which contains seuentene chapters.
BOchas sitting in his study all alone writes a great process, how Fortune
like a monstrous image having an C^ha^des, appeared unto him and spoke, and
Bochas unto her: making between them many great arguments and reasons of
Fortunes chances. Leaf.cxxxiiii. In ye first chapter of the syxt book, Fortune
rehearses her conditions unto Bochas, she wynge him how she has many one
enhaunsed for a time, and anon after she has them suddenly overthrown. How
Gayus Marius of low birth borne, came to hie estate, which blent with
couetyse, after many great batayls dyed at mischefe. The second chap. How
king Mithridate abode seven year in wilderness, and had great tourmentes
both on sea and land, by his blood brought to vttraunce, and how he slew him
self with a sword: with a Lenuoye. How Eucradites king of Sithie, was slain
by Demetrius, and after his carrayne cast to hounds. The.iiii. chapter. How
Herodes king of Parthoys warred with the Romans, which after his son and
heir was slain, made his bastard son king, that anon after slew his
father. The fifth chapter. How Fimbria a consul of Rome slew him self. The
syxt chapter. Of Albinius that was slain with stones. The seventh chapter.
How Adrian borne of low degree falslye usurped to be king of Rome, which with
his churles was after brent. The eyghte chapter. How Sinthonius king of Trace
y^ all coueited, all forwent, and died in pouerte. The.ix. chapter. Bochas in
brief sentence makes a description of the kingdom of Trace, and pasleth over
lyghtlye unto the accomplishment of his book. The tenth chapter. How after
many great conquestes of duke Pompey, there began great war between him
and Julius, and how there were three hundred thousand slain, and at the last
the head of Pompey smyt of: with a Lenuoy. The.xi. chapter. How the noble
Julius Caesar brent the vessel of Tholome, sloughe Achyllas, that would have
murdered him, and after his great victoryes, he him self was slain with
bodkyns by Brutus Cassius. The twelfth chapter. How y^ last Scipion co^sulere
of Rome, for he would not live in seruage of Julius, roue him self to the
heart: with a Lenuoye. The thirtene chapter. How Octauian succeeded next, and
how the murdrers of Julius dyed at mischefe. The fourtene chapter. How Tullius
was two times exiled, and at last slain by Pompilius. The fyftene chapter. A
chapter again ianglers and diffamers of rethorike. The sixtene chap. How
Sextus warred again Triumuir, and of the death of great Anthony and
Cleopatras. The seuententh chap.
Thus ends the table with the Chapters of the syxte book* and here follows
the table of the seventh book, which contains xi. chapters.
OF Antony son and heir to the great Antony, and of Cesarius, Julia,
Agrippa, Cassius, and Galbus. The first chapter. How the tyrant Herodes slew
his wife and children and afterward him self died at michefe: with a Lenuoy.
The ii. chap. Of Antipas exiled by Octauian, and of Archelaus son of Herodes
the second. The third Chapter. Of the strife between Calligula, Tiberius and
Messalyne. The third chap. Of the most vicious and cruel tyrant Nero that
slew Peter and Paul, and last of all him self: with a Lenuoy. The fyfth
Chapter. How Eleazarus a Jewe borne, for extorcion and robbery was brought into
prison and there ended. The six chapt. How the head of Galba was smitten of,
filled full of gold, and offered at the sepulture of Nero. The seventh chapter.
How Occho and Vitellius for glotony, lechery, ribaudy, and tyranny, ended
mischeuously. The eight chapter. Bochas complayneth again the foul vice of
glotony. The nynth chap. A chapter diseriuyng the golden world, that is to
say, when temperaunce had the governance: with a Lenuoy. The x. chap. How the
kindred of Jacob was distroied, Christ borne and crucified, Jerusale^ distroyed:
and xi. hundred.M. slain by sword, hungre, fire, and pestilence. The xi.
chapter.
Thus ends the table with the chapters of y^ seventh book, and here follows
the table of the eyghte book, which contains xxvii. chapters.
The table of the eight book.
THe Prologne of the translatour. The first chapter of the eight book
expounds how the proud tyrant Domician emperor of Rome, and many other
emperors and nobles for their great outrage and wretchedness ended
mischeuouslye. How Gallyen son of Valerian was slain. The second chapter.
How Quintilius was murdered by women. The third chapter. Of Aurelian in
Denmark borne. The fourth chapter. How Probus discomfited the Romans, and
after was slain. The fyfth chap. How Clarus and his two sons were
mischeued. The syxt chapter. How the noble Queen zenobia fought with Aurelian,
and how she was take. The seventh chapter. How Galerius oppressed martyrs and
christ's faith, and of his mischeuous end. The eight chapter. How Maxence the
emperor enemy to Christ's faith, ended mischeuouslye. The nynth chapter. How
Lucinius enemy to Christ's faith was slain. The tenth chapter. Of Constantine
and Crispus, and how Dalmacius was slain. The eleventh ca. Of the brethren
Constaunce and Constancius and how Magnencius and Decius murdered them selves.
The twelfth chapter How Constantine baptized by Siluester, was cured of his
lepry. The xiii. chap. How Julian Apostata enemy to Christ's faith, by false
illusion was chosen emperor and after slain. The fourtenth Chapter. How the
emperor Valence slew holy hermites, shed thristen blood, distoyed churches,
and after was brent him self. The fiftene chapter. Of king Amasicius and how
Gracian and Theodosy distroyed temples of false gods, and how Gracian was
put to flight. The syxtene chapter. A goodly process how Theodosy with
prayer and small number gate the victory of a great number. The seuentene
chapter. How knights and gentle men chase Alerike king, and how the commons
chase Radagassus which had a mischeuous end. The eyghtene chapter. How Ruffyn
chamberlayne with Theodosy usurped to be Emperor, and for his presumpsion
condemned by Honorius, and his head smyt of. The xix. chapter. How Stillicon
and other of like condition ended mischeuously. The xx. chap. A goodly process
of ye aucthor why Rome was destroyed, and for the same or like cause were
diverse other realms distroyed. The xxi. Chapter. How the kings Trabstila and
B^surus were brought unto subjection and made tributaries to Theodorike, The
xxii. cha. How Philitheus lost his kingdom. The xxiii. Chapter. How Symacke
and Boes his son in law were banished, and after judged to die. The.xxiiii.
chapter. Of king Arthur and his conquestes, and of the commodities of
England, and how he was disceyued by his cosyn Mordrede: with a Lenuoy. The
xxv. chapter. An exclamacion of Bochas again folks y^ be unkind to their
kynred. Fo.xvii. Of Gisiuill king of Venandre and of three other kings: and how
they were distroyed. The xxvi. chapter. How Albuinus was murdered by his wife
Rosamonde, and how she for her abominable dealing and vicious life was
slain also. The xxvii. chapter.
Thus ends the table with the chapters of the eight book, and here follows
the table of the nynth book, which contains.xxxviii. chapters.
The table of the nynth book.
THe first chapter of the ninth book shows, how the Emperor Mauricius his
wife and his children were slain at Calcidony. Of Machomet the false prophet,
and how he being drunk, was devoured among swyne. The second chapter. How
Brounchylde a queen of France slew her kynne, and brought the land in
division, and after was hanged and hewn in small pieces: with a Lenuoy. The iii.
chap. Bochas marueyleth of the great malice and cruelte of Brunchylde.
Fol.xxviii. How Eraclius the Emperor sustained heresy, fill into dropsye and
sickness incurable, and so died. The fourth chapter. How Constantine the
son of Eraclius for supportyng of errors and heresies was murdered in a stewe
by his own knights. The fyfth chapter. How Gisulphus was slain, and how
his wife for her vicious living ended mischeuously. The syxt chapter. Of
Justinian ye false extorcioner, which was exiled by Patrician, and after that
his nose cut fro his head, and both his eyes put out. The seventh chapter. How
Philip the emperor dyed at mischefe. The eight chapter. How Anastase was
compelled to leave the empire and live in pouerte. The ix. cap. How the head of
Lupus king of Lombardy was smyt of by Grymbaldus. The tenth chapter. How the
head of Alexius was smyt of by Compe^^on. The eleventh chapter. How Ariperton
was drowned with his richesse. The twelfth chapter. How Dedyre by pope Andrian
and Charles of France was put to flight and dyed at mischefe. The. The.xiii.
chapter. Of Pope John a woman, and how she was put down* The fourtenth
Chapter. Bochas counsayleth princes to remember on Arnolde. Fol.xxvi. Of
Charles of Lorayne that was confounded for hungre. The fyftene Chapter. How
king Salamon whilom king of Hungry was put to flight. The.xvi. ca. How Petro
king of Hungry was slain. The.xvii. chapter. How Diogenes the emperor was
taken, and his eyes put out. The.xviii. chap. How Robert duke of Normandy
fought with the turks, and should have had the crown of Jerusalem, and how
he dyed at mischefe. The.xix. Chapter. How Joceline prince of Rages for pride,
sloth, and lecherye, died in pouerte. The twenty chapter. How the Emperor
Andronicus slew all that were of the noble blood, cheryshed vicious people,
and how he was after hanged: with a Lenuoy. The.xxi. chapter. Of Jsacius made
blind, and take at mischefe. The.xxii. chapter. Of Henry the eldest son of
Frederike the second, mischeued by his father. The. xxiii chapter. A
commendacion of Bochas to such as be kind to their kinsfolk. Fol.xxx. How
Manfroye king of Poile was slain The.xxiiii. chapter. How Ences king of
Sardiny dyed in prison. The.xxv. chapter. Of a another Frederike that was slain
by the judgment of his brother. The.xxvi. chapter. How Manimettus and Argones
dyed at mischefe. The.xxvii. chapter. How Charles king of Jerusalem and Cicyle
for his avarice and aduoutrye dyed at mischefe: with a Lenuoy. The.xxviii.
chapter Of Hugoline Earl of Pise slain in prison The.xxix. Chapter. How Pope
Boniface the eight was take by the lynage of Columpnes, and how he eat his
hands and died in prison. The thyrty chapter. How the order of templers was
founded, and Jaques with other of the order burnt. The xxxi. Chapter. Bochas
commends Theodorus with other two Philosophers for their great patience.
The.xxxii. Chapter. Bochas here commends humilite. Folli.xxxiii. How
Philippe le Bele of France was slain with a wild Bore, and of his three
sons and their wedding. The.xxxiii. chapt. How duke Gaulter of Florence for
his tyranny, lecherye, and couetyse, ended in mischefe. The.xxxiiii. chapter.
Of Philipot Cathenoise born of low birth which came to high estate, and after
how she her son and her daughter were brent. The xxxv. chapter. How king
Sauses was slain by his cosyn, which was brother to the king of Arragon.
The.xxxvi. chapter. How Jews king of Jerusalem and Cicyle was put down.
The.xxxvii. chapter. How king John of France was take prisoner at Poyters by
prince Edward, and brought into England: with a Lenuoy. The xxxviii. chapter.
Bochas reherseth how Fortune has made many high estates vnwarelye descend
Fol.xxxviii. The words of the translatoure wherewith he ends his book.
Thus ends the table with the chapters of the ninth and last book, and here
after follows the prologue of the translatour.
The Prologue of John Lydgate monk of Burye, translatoure of this work.
HE that sumtime did his diligence,
The book of Bochas, in French to translate
Out of latin, he called was Laure^ce:
The time remembered truly and the date
Is when king John through his mortal fate
Was prisoner brought unto this region,
Than he began first on this translation.
In his Prologue affirmyng of reason,
That artifirers having exercise,
May change and turn by good discresion
Shapes and forms, and newly them devise:
Make and unmake in many a sundry wise,
As Potters which to that craft entende
Break and renew their vessels to amend.
Thus men of craft may of due right
That been inuentife and have experience,
Fantasien in their inward sight
Devices new through their excellence.
Expert masters have thereto license
Fro good to better, for to change a thing:
And semblably these clerks in writing.
Thing that was made of auctors the^ beforn
They may of new find and fantasy:
Out of old chafe try out full fair corn,
Make it more fresh and iusty to the eye.
Their subtle wit their labor apply,
With their colors agreeable of hue,
To make old things for to seem new.
Before provided that no presumption
In their changing have none authority,
And that mekenes have domination
Over false Envy, that she not present be:
But that their ground with perfect charity
Conveyed be to their advantage,
Truly roted amidde their courage.
Thus Laurence from him envy excluded,
Though to forne him translated was this book
Within him self* be fully has concluded
Upon that labor when he cast his look,
He would amend it: but first he forsook
Presumption, and took him to mekenes,
In his prologue as he does express.
In which process like as I am learned,
He in his time, of cunnyng did excel:
In their language he was required
Of estates which began him compel,
(Among them hold of rethorike the well)
To vnderfong this labor: they him prey
And their request lowly he did obey.
Full well he felt the labor was notable,
The fall of nobles with every circumstance
From their lordships dreadful and unstable
How they fill, to put in remembrance:
Therein to show Fortunes variaunce,
That other might as in a myrrour se,
In worldly worship may no surety be.
By example, as there is no Rose
Sprigyng in garden but there be sum thorn
Nether fayrer blossom the^ nature list dispose
The^ may their beuty as me^ has seen toforn
With bitter winds be from the branches born
Ne none so high in his estate contune
Fle from the waiting and danger of Fortune.
Wherefore Bochas for a memorial,
Considering the great dignities
Of worldly princes and their power royal,
Great emperors, estates, and degrees,
How Fortune has cast them from their sees,
Namely such as could them self not know,
Full suddenly to make them lie full low.
This the said aucthour wise and right sad,
Has gadered out with Rethorykes sweet,
In diverse books, which that he has radde
Of philosophers and an old Poet,
And busied him both in cold and heat
Out to compile and write as he fond
The fall of nobles in many diverse land.
Upon whose book in his translation,
The said Laurence rehearceth in certain:
And holds this in his opinion,
Such language as open is and plain
Is more accepted (as it is often seen)
The^ strange terms which be not understand
Namely to folks, y^ dwell upon the la^d.
He says also that his entencion
Is to amend, correct, and declare,
Not to condemn of no presumption,
But to report plainly, and not to spare
Things touched shortly, of the story bare,
Under a style brief and compendious,
Them to prolonge when they ben virtuous.
For a story which is not plainly told,
But construed under words few,
For lack of truth where they be new or old
Men by report can not the matter show.
These oaks great be not down yhewe
First at a stroke, but by long process:
Ne long stories a word may not express.
For which plainly this noble translatour
Cast of purpose these stories for to write,
And for to do his diligent labor
As they fill in order to endite,
That men after might them self delight
The adventures so as they fill in deed,
Of sundry princes to behold and read.
And have a manner contemplacion
That things al where fortune may attain,
Be transitorye of condition:
For she of kind is hasty and sudden,
Contrarious her course for to restrain,
Of wilfulness she is variable,
When men most trust, the^ is she most chau^geable.
And for her change, and for her doublenes
This Bochas bids y^ men should enclyne
To set their hearts void of unstableness,
Upon things which that been divine,
Where as joy perpetually does shine
Without eclipsyng, in that heavenly see
Void of all clouds of mutabilitye.
Among these Bochas writes of swetenes,
And of matters that lusty ben and glade,
And sometime he writes of wretchedness,
And how fortune can flower and after fade:
Joy under cloud, prosperity in the shade,
Enterchangyng of every manner thing
Which y^ men feel here, in this world ^^uyng.
And in his process who so list behold,
Of all estates of high and low degree,
And of princes both young and old
Fro the beginning which in this world have be
Lykyng in joy or in aduersitye,
Fro the first descended he adowne
Of their fortune by plain description.
Of the most noble he ne spares none,
But sets them in order cereously:
Begins at Ida^, and ends at king John,
Their auentures rehearsyng by and by.
Of this king John concludyng finally,
How y^ he was for all his great puissaunce,
Of price Edward take prisoner in France
This said Bochas aucthour of this book,
Which of stories had great intelligence,
Some he left and some also he took:
Such as he left was of no negligence,
Supposyng and demyng of credence,
All the stories whythe that commune be
Other know them also as well as he.
And lest that folk would have had disdain
Things common for to put in memory,
Therefore Bochas thought it were but vain:
And to his name more increase of glory
To remember no cronicle ne historye,
But tho that were for their merit notable,
Aucthorised famous and commendable.
In his labor having a delight
That the matter greatly might avail,
Do pleasaunce to the commen profit
Of noble stories to make a rehearsail,
Shewig a myrror how al ye world shall fail
And how Fortune for all their hye renown
Has upon Princes jurisdiction.
The which thing in full sober wise
He considered in his inward intent:
In his reason began to aduertyse,
Seeing of Princes the blind intent,
With worldly worship how y^ they be blent
As they should ever their estates keep,
And as Fortune were ylayed to sleep.
And as they had of Fortune the maistry,
Her enchaunted with their pocions
By some new craft of sorcery,
Or by power of incantacions:
To make stable their dominations
With iron chains, for to last long,
Locked to rocks with adamantes strong.
Supposyng in their surquedy,
Their estates should be durable.
But Fortune can frowardly deny,
And plainly preue that they be changeable,
And fro princes when they be most stable
Fortune full fast for all their great estate,
Unawarely chau^geth and says to the^ che(...)
For lords some in their magnificence,
Of royal power, set of God tyght naught:
They not conceive his long patience,
Neither peyse his power in their thought:
But in their hearts if it were well sought
How he is meke, and pacient to abide,
They would of reason their pomp lay aside
But for their tariyng and their negligence,
That they to him will not return again,
Yet of his mercy and his benevolence
Without vengeance, rigor, or disdain
As a meke father, in all his works plain
Assayeth his yard of castigation,
So for to bring them to correction.
Some he can full fatherly chastise
Where he loves, by punishynge of sickness:
And of his mercy in many anotherwise,
By adversity of worldely distres.
And he not asks for his kindenes
Of high ne low, who so can aduert,
None other treasure but a man's heart.
And as mine aucthour list to comprehend,
This John Bochas by great authority,
It is alms to correct and amend
The vycious folk of every comminaltie:
And by examples which that notable be
Of Princes old that sumtime did fall,
The lower people from their error call.
By small whelps as sum clerks write,
Chastised is the mighty fierce Lion:
And when y^ swerd of vengeance does bite
Upon princes for their transgression,
The common people in their opinion
For very dread, tremble, adowne, and quake,
And by such means their vices forsake.
And such also as have been defouled
In their vices by long continuance,
Or in their sins lie ymouled,
By good examples may cum good repentance
Who so repents the lord will him auau^ce,
And him accept in low and high estate,
The meke preserve, and punyshe the obstinate.
This said matter touching such things,
Mine aucthor Bochas herafter shall declare
By example of princes and of mighty kings,
What was their fine, and not the truth spare.
And though my style naked ^e, and bare
In Rethorike, mine aucthour to ensue,
Yet fro the truth shall I not re^^we.
But on the substance by good leiser abide,
After mine aucthor like as I may attain:
And for a part set eloquence aside,
And in this book bewepen and complain
The assault of Fortune, froward and sodayn:
How she ou princes has kyd her ve^geau^ce,
And of her malice, the deadly mortal chance
But O, alas, who shall be my muse?
Or unto whom shall I for help call?
Calliope my calling will refuse,
And on Pernaso her worthy susters all:
They will their sugar temper with no gall,
For their swetenes and lusty fresh singyng
Full far discordeth from matter co^playning.
My master Chaucer with his fresh co^medies
Is dead alas, chief Poet of Brytayne,
That sumtime made full piteous tragedies,
The fall of Princes he did also complain,
As he that was of making sovereign:
Who^ all this land of right ought prefarre,
Since of our langage he was y^ lode star.
Senec in Rome through his hye prudence,
Wrote Tragedies of great morality:
And Tullius chief well of eloquence,
Made in his time many a fresh ditty:
Fraunces Petra^eke of Florence that city^
Made a book (as I can aduert)
Of two Fortunes, wilful and pervert.
And against both wrote the remedies:
In books twain made a division,
Among rehearsyng many fresh stories.
The first book is thus conveyed down:
A dialoge between gladness and reason,
The second by me well to witness,
Made between reason and worldly heaviness.
The matter is wondets delectable,
Though woe with joy have an entresse:
And John Bochas wrote matters lamentable
The fall of princes where he does express,
How for their joy they fyl in great distress
All these writers through their hye renown
Great worship did unto their nation.
And semblably as I have told toforne,
My ma^^et Chaucer did his business:
And in his days has him so well borne,
Out of out tongue to avoid al rudenes:
And to reforine it with colors of swetenes.
Wherefore let us give him laud and glory,
And put his name with Poets in memory.
Of whose labor to make mention,
Where of right he should commended be,
In youth he made a translation
Of a book which called is Trophe
In Lumbard tongue, as men may read and se:
And in our vulgar long or that he dyed,
Gave it to name of Troylus and Creseyde.
Which for to read lovers them delight,
They have therein so great devotion:
And this Poet also him self to quite,
Of Boecius book the consolation
Made in his time an old translation:
And to his son that called was Lowys
He made a treatise full noble and of great prise.
Upon that labor in full notable form,
Set them in order with their divisions,
Men's wits to accomply she and conform
To understand by full expert reasons,
By domifiyng of sundry mancions:
The rote out sought at the ascendent,
To forne or he gave any judgment.
He wrote also full many a day agone,
Dant in English, him self so does express:
The piteous story of Ceix and Alcion:
And the death also of Blaunche the duches:
And notably did his business
By great auise his wits to dispose,
To translate the Romaynt of the Rose.
Thus in virtue he set all his intent,
Idleness and vices for to fle:
Of fowls also he wrote the parliament,
Therein remembering of royal Eagles three,
How in their choice they felt aduersitye,
To fore nature proffered the battle,
Each for his party if it would avail.
He did also his diligence and pain
In our vulgar to translate, and endite
Or^gene upon the Maudelayn:
And of the Lyona book he did write.
Of Annelida and of false Arcite,
He made a complaynt doleful and piteous,
And of the broche which that Vulcanus
At Thebes wrought, full diverse of nature.
Ouide writes: who so thereof had a sight,
For high desire he should not endure
But he it had, never be glad ne light:
And if he had it once in his might,
Like as my master says and writes in deed,
It to conserve he should ever live in dred
This poet wrote at the request of the queen
A legende of perfect holiness,
Of good women to find out nyntene,
That did excel in bounty and fayrenesse:
But for his labor and his business
Was importable his wits to encomber,
In all this world to find so great a number
He made the book of Caunterbury tales
When the pylgryms rode on pilgrymage,
Through out Kent by hills and by vales,
And the stories all told in their passage,
Endityng them full well in our language:
Some of knyghthode, and some of gentleness,
And some of love, and some of perfitenes,
And some also of great mortality,
Some of disport, co^cludyng great sentence:
In prose he wrote the tale of Mellebe,
And of his wife, that called was Prudence:
And of Grisildes perfect patience:
And how the monk of stories new and old
Pyteous tragedies by the way told.
This said Poet my master in his days,
Made and compiled many a fresh dittie,
Complaynts, ballades, rou^dels, vyrelayes
Full delectable to hear and to se:
For which men should of right and equity
Sith he in englysh in making was the best
Pray unto god, to give his soul good rest.
And these Poets that I make of mention,
Were by old time had in great deyntye:
With kings and princes in every regyon
Greatly preferred, after their degree.
For lords had pleasaunce for to se,
To study among, and cast their lokes
At good leisure upon wise books.
For in the time of Caesar Julius,
When the triumph he wan in Rome town
He enter would the schole of Tullius,
And hear his lecture of great affection:
And notwithstanding his conquest and renown
Unto books he gave great attendaunce,
And in stories had great joy and pleasaunce.
Also in this land I dare affirm a thing:
There is a prince full mighty of puissaunre,
A kings son, and uncle to the king
Henry the syxt which now is in France,
And is lieutenaunt, and has the governance
Of our Brytayne, through whose discrecion
He has conserved us in this region:
During his time of full high prudence
Peace and quiet han sustained right:
That notwithstanding his noble providence,
He is in deed proved a good knight,
Eyed as Argus with reason and forsight,
Of high lecture: I dare of him tell,
And truly deem that he does excel
In understanding, all other of his age.
And has joy with clerks to commune,
And no man is more expert in langage,
Stable in study, always he does contune,
Setting aside all chances of fortune:
And where he loves (if I shall not tarry)
withouten cause, full loathe he is to vary.
Duke of Gloucester men this prince call.
And not withsta^dyng his estate and dignity,
His courage never does appall
To study in books of antiquity:
Therein he has so great felicity,
Virtuously him self to occupye,
Of vycious slouthe, he has the maistry.
And with his prudence and his manhede
Truth to sustain, he favor sets aside:
And holy church mainteynyng in deed,
That in this land no herityke dare abide.
A very support, uphold, and also gyde:
Spares none, but makes him self strong
To punish all tho that do the church wrong.
Thus is he manly and also wise,
Chosen of God to be his own knight,
And of one thing, he has a singular prise,
That heritike dare none come in his sight:
In Christ's faith he stands so hole upright
Of holy church defense and champion,
To chastise all tho that do thereto treason.
And to do pleasaunce to our Lord Jesu,
He studieth ever to have intelligence.
Readyng of books, brings in virtue,
Vices excludyng, with sloth and negligence,
Makes a Prince to have experience
To know him self in many soundry wise,
Where he trespaceth his error to chastise.
And among books, plainly this is the case,
This said prince considered of reason
The noble book of this John Bochas
Was according in his opinion
Of great noblesse and reputation:
And unto princes greatly necessary
To give example how this world does vary.
And for these causes as in his intent
To show the untrust of all worldly thing,
He gave to me in commandment
(As him seemed it was right well sittyng)
That I should after my small cunnyng
This book translate, him to do pleasaunce:
To show the chaung of worldly variaunce.
And with support of his magnificence,
Under the wings of his correction,
Though that I lack of eloquence,
I shall proceed in this translation:
Fro me auoydyng all presumption,
Lowly submittyng every hour and space,
My rude language to my lords grace.
And as I have one thing well in mind,
He bade I should in especial
Follow mine aucthour, written as I find
And for no favor be not partial.
Thus I mean, to speak in general:
And none estate singulerly deprave,
But the sentence of mine aucthour save.
All this conceived. I began my style dress,
Thought I would in my matter proceed:
And for the matter obreyed heaviness,
Of fresh colors I took no manner head.
But my process plainly for to lead:
As me seemed it was to me most mete,
To set apart Rethorykes sweet.
Ditties of mournyng and complaynyng
Do not pertayne unto Caliope,
Neither to the muses that on Pernaso sing,
Which be remembered in numbers thrice three:
And unto matters of adversity
With their sugared aureat lycoure,
They be not willing to do favor.
But of disdain me setting far a back,
To hinder me of that I would endite,
Having no colors but only white and blake
To the tragedies which I shall write:
And for I can my self no better aquyte,
Under the support of all that shall it read
Upon Bochas right thus I will proceed.
Finis.
How Adam and Eve for their Inobedience were put out of Paradise, and lived in
sorrow and woe, they and their ofspringe: And how they standing naked before
Bochas, desired him to put their woeful fall first in remembrance.

The first Chapter.
When John Bocas considered had and sought
The woeful fall of mighty conquerours,
A remembrance entered in his thought,
Rekenyng the number, of our predecessors:
And first to mind came the progenitors
Of all man kind, far yrun in age,
And toward him holdyng their passage.
And as him thought in his in ward sight,
In their coming full pitiously trembling,
Quaking for age, and for lack of might,
Their feblenesse by signs out showing:
And one of them first at his coming,
Our father Adam suddenly abrayde,
And to mine auctour even thus he said:
Cosyn Bochas I wol well that thou lere
That art so busy to search over all,
Ofinfortune the manner to enquere,
Her sudden change turning as a ball
Of ^^thly princes from their estate rial,
It is most syttyng or we a sondre twyn,
At us twain the process to begin.
Consider first the lord in his auyse,
When he us made unto his likeness:
He put us both in to paradise,
There to have lived in parfite stablenesse:
Till the Serpent did his business,
Of false envy, to make us lose our grace,
Perpetually to exyle us fro that place.
And wha^ Jhon Bochas naked the^ beheld,
Without the hand, fourmed of nature,
Of slime of the earth in Damascene the field
God made them above each creature.
And for they should perpetually endure,
By discrecion for a prerogatife,
He endued them with a soul of life.
Parfite of age as men of.xxx. year:
Put them after in possession
Of Paradise, a place most entere,
And of delites a chosen mansion:
Where Adam made an imposion
To fysh and to foul, and to these beasts al,
Of very reason what men should them call.
Out of a rybbe while that Adam did sleep,
Eve was draw full fair of her visage,
Al suddenly, or that he took keep:
After to him joined in marriage
For his disport, and his auantage,
So as the lord first wives did ordeyne
Either for help, or increase of pain.
God unto them gave the soueraintie
Of Paradyse, and dominacion,
A place fulfilled of all felicitye,
The fruits be all in their subjection,
Save that of one was made excepcion:
Which god forbad (the Bible can deuyse)
That they should it touch in no wise.
All delices in that heavenly place
God gave to them, and put in their keeping,
To use them every hour and space
To their most ease, as was to them lyking:
Blomes, blossoms their fayrnes ay keeping
And the fruits always of one freshness,
For witer storms might do the^ no duresse.
The soil enbrouded full of sa^er flowers,
There wedes wycke had none interesse:
For god and kind with freshness of colors
And with their tapites and motles of gladness,
Had made yt place habu^dant with at swetnes,
And fresh Flora which is of flowers queen,
Her lyuerey made of a perpetu^al grene.
The trees raught almost to the heaven,
Which cast about a full pleasant shade,
That storm, ne rain, thu^dre, wind, ne leuine,
No power had their leaves for to fade:
For ever they were ylyke fresh and glade:
And when they list they might se
In mids of ye garden of life y^ holesume tree
Which virtue had against all malady,
Folk to preserve in youth in their freshnes:
Who eat thereof should never dye,
But live ever in joy and gladness:
And neither feel trouble nor sickness,
But in that place have always hertes ease,
And suffisaunce of all y^ might them please.
Ever endure and never fall in age:
For which it was called the tree of life.
But when Adam was fallen in dotage,
And against god began to hold strife,
Throuh excitynge of her that was his wife,
And wylfully yaue her to assent
To break the precepte and the commandment
Of god the lord, through wylful negligence
To approach the tree that bare the name
The tree of connyng and also of science:
For of the fruit who that did attame
He sothly should (the Bible says the same)
Of good and evil have co^nyng in his thought,
where as toforne of evil he knew right noght
Thus had they first of evil, experience:
Which as toforne they knew no wickedness.
Presumpcion and inobedience
Brought the^ out of joy into wretchedness.
For before time (mine author bears witness)
Health and goodness were called very life,
Evil named sickness, first rote of our strife.
In Paradyse mine auctour says certain,
The tyuers were so Orient and so fine,
Like quicsiluer boylyng up they pleyen:
And in their ronnyng very chrystallyne:
Which from a well heavenly and deuyne
In their vpspryngyng and aueylyng down,
Of al pleasaunce gave so sweet a sown
That it would rauysh a man's courage.
Whose baumy color endewed all the place:
And with the freshnes and course of his passage,
The wholesome air hertes did embrace:
There was such plenty of plesau^ce and of grace,
That every spice, herb, grain, and rote,
Were foa^den growyng in that gardein sote,
And there was a delectable soun
Of song of brydes in their ermony:
The air was clean from all corrupcion,
For therein engendered was no malady.
There was all mirth, there was al melody,
Of joy and bliss sovereign suffisaunce,
With all that may to hertes do pleasaunce.
And of clerks like as it is told,
In their books as they determine,
Thoe in his sphere the sun manifold,
Was of more virtue and more clear did shine
Than it does now in his mighty line.
The moon whyter with her beams clear,
And every sterre bryghter did appear.
Every thing was there more virtuous
Than they be now, who can behold and se,
For in yt place there was nothing noyous,
But perfect gladness knit unto surete,
Perpetuell peace joy and prosperity:
And in that bliss to make more strong,
To their comfort god spoke to them among
Of his goodness he bare them company:
Showed unto them his gracious presence,
Angels also their state to magnifye,
Among, to serve them, did their dilygence,
In diverse offices with humble reverence:
And nature wrought for the nones
Of ryall purpill and rich stones,
Tissues of gold and other ornaments
For to enuiron their bodily beauty:
Shaping to them such manner garnime^tes
As angels use in their felicite.
Naked they were fairest on to se,
For while they stood in state of innocence,
They had of clothing none experience.
And of their bliss to make mention,
And of their joys that were celestial,
There may be made no comparison
Of no joy which is temporal,
Which should have be lasting and immortal
Ever to have lived in mirth and gladness,
Save ageyn reason of very wilfulness
They banished the^ self out of that blisful life
When Adam gave credence to a snake,
And wretchedly began trust on his wife,
Which began the apple of the serpent take,
And plesantly did a present make
Unto Adam, as she that first began
Death to deuyse, and poison unto man.
But as their joy was incomparable,
Greatest their lordship of all erthly thing,
So their fall was to them importable.
For he that was all other surmountyng,
In Paradise reignynge as a king,
Was it not a dedelye mortal pain,
Fro thilke place to have a fall sudden*
For thilke sorrow surmounteth al sorrow
Which next follows felicite:
No woe more grievous at even ne at morrow,
As is in deed sodeyne aduersite,
Which comes unawarely after prosperity.
Ne nothing may more hertes disauaunce,
Than of old joy new remembrance.
Takes ensample of Adam and of Eve,
Makes of them a myrroure in your mind,
Whether of reason it did the^ greatly grieve
For to be put, alas, so far behind?
Out of that bliss they and all their kind,
Chaungyng the state of immortalite
And became subget to death and pouerte.
Their sodeyn change and unware mischefe,
And their unhappy transmutacion
It was to them full uncouth and vnlefe
For to depart fro thilke manlion,
That was so full of delectacion:
Fro such delites suddenly to go
Into this world which is so full of woe.
There is delight, and here sorrow and care,
There is joy, and here is heuinesse,
There is plenty, and here is evil fare,
There is health, and here is great sickness:
Here troble ay me^ged with unsure gladness,
There is ay bliss and eternal glory,
And here is mirth, but false and transitory.
Alas, how they were blinded in their sight
Through vaynglory and false ambicion.
They went wrong they looked not a right:
False couetyse was their confucion,
Wherthrough they lost the dominacion
Of Paradise, and was both poor and thrall,
Their fredome lost and became mortal.
Unto god they would have be semblable,
Like unto him good and yuell to know:
And in their trust for they were not stable,
From their estate they were brought full low.
And thus the sede was first ysowe,
The rote planted of disobeysau^ce,
Which brought out lineage to sorrow and mischau^ce.
Thus came in first through inobedience,
As by a gate, pouertye and need:
And at their back follows indigence,
Sorrow, sickness, malady, and dread,
Exile, banyshynge, and servitude in deed:
Which caused man long to contune
Under the lordshyp and danger of fortune.
Thus came in also malady, and death,
To dispoyle mankind of his beautye:
Long syckenesse, and pestilence that slethe
By soden stroke, which ye no man may fly.
For unto Adam and his posterity
Death was annexed by succession,
For his offense, and so conveyed down
For man to man in every manner age.
For who so list know, sin brought in shame,
Man to be feeble and faint in his passage.
And by process to wexe halte and lame:
Unto Adam this was an uncouth game,
To be constrained in sych apparayle
In bareyne earth to seek his vitayle.
In hungre and thurst here he had his life,
With sweet and labor and tribulacions:
Endured also many a mortal styfe
Of hot and cold, right strong passions
Of elements sudden mutacions,
Wind, hayle and rain, fearful falling
And unware strokes of thu^der and lyghtning.
They stood also in damage and in dread
Of cruel beasts, Tygres, and lions,
And of wild beres who so takes head,
And in great fear of these fell dragons:
The assaut of dragons and of Scorpions.
For thilke beasts, that toforne were mild,
After their sinnyng full ragy were and wild.
And where they stood first in sikernes
Of joy and bliss, ever in one lasting:
Out of their rest they fill in vnsurenesse,
In sorrow, and sighing, and dolours co^plaining.
And fro their iyen continually weping,
The bitter tears day by day distill,
In this desert, for wanting of their will.
And wheder were they sorrowful or feign,
Long time after their desolacion,
When they found Abell their own son slain
By cruel Cayne to his confusion*
The same Cayne as made is mencyon,
After that time wild was and vagabound,
Til blind Lameth yafe hi^ his dethes wou^d.
Adam nor Eve before that ylke time
Had never seen no feast funeral.
It was of change to them a new prime,
For to behold a thing disnatural:
Brethern of one womb by hatered eternal,
The one of hate so far him self divide,
Of false malice to be an homicyde.
And it was routh when that they stood
For to behold their son al deed,
Laid on the grond, and bathed in his blod,
And all the soil where he lay was read:
That when Adam and Eve took head
It was to them full great aduersite,
The new slaughter to behold and se.
And ever among their sighs hard and sore,
The bitter weping and sorrows to auau^ce,
Or they were ware their heeres woxe hoar,
And age began their beauty disauaunce.
Their youth also by full great displesaunce,
Began to appal or they it could aspye,
By cruel constreynt and force of malady.
And of youth fallen was their flour,
By the process of many hundred years:
And by the duresse of great labor,
They wexe unlusty, and ugly of their cheres.
Of age and death these ben the dangers,
To say checkmate in nature it is couth,
Unto beauty and grene lusty youth.
For when the years fully passed be
Of flouring age, lasting a season,
By process (at eye men may se)
Beauty declineth, his blossoms fall adoune,
And littel and littel by succession
Comes crooked elde, unawarely in crepynge,
With his potent full porely manassing.
Thus to our father that called was Adam
Of creatures fairest of al feire,
After great travail by process in he came,
And began unawarely ascend upon the steyre
With his potent, and cast him to repeyre
With Atropose which before shall gone,
For to attwin his lives threde anon.
And in Ebron was made his sepulture:
There after was bilded a mighty great cite,
By whose story and record of nature
I may conclude who list to se,
That never man had liberte
Sithen that Adam our lord began disobey,
Against death, but that he must obey.
In co^plaining mine author Jhon Bochas
Full pitiously, in his aduertence,
Bewepeth, wayleth, and often says alas,
In apple there was so great offense,
That for a taste of inobedience
Adam, alas, should have so great a fall,
So suddenly to die and be mortal.
Which example ought enough suffice,
In all this world though there were no mo:
To exemplify to folks that been wise,
How this world is a throwfare full of woe.
Like false Fortune y^ turns to and fro,
To make folks wha^ they most clearly shine
In their estates, unawarely to decline.
For though that they their hedes lift a lofte,
High as Phoebus shines in his sphere,
Think them self (as it falls often)
Their renown recheth above ye stars clear
And how they surmount every sphere,
Their trust corrupt has a sudden fall,
For to declare you they ben mortal.
O worldly folk aduert and yene intent,
What vengeance and what punicion
God shall take in his judgment
For your trespass and your transgression,
Which break his precepts again al reason:
Ye have forgotten how with his precious blod
You for to save he died upon the Roode.
For if Adam for his disobeisaunce
Was by the lord as him list ordain,
Made first, and formed with every circu^sta^ce,
Of creatures to be most sovereign,
If that he was enbraced in the chain
Of servitude, with children ouersene,
what shall I than of other folks sein^
That live here in this deserte of sorrow*
In this exise, of plesance desolate*
And in this world both euin and morrow
Of hertely joy stonte disconsolate*
All destitute and also unfortunate,
And forpossed with woe and worldly troble,
Ever variable and full of chaunges double.
Ye not entende but to false couetise,
To fraud, berret, and extorcion:
Again god in many diverse wise,
Again your neighbor by false collusion,
To do him wrong and oppression:
And worst of al, ye retche not by syn
To slay your soul, worldly good to win.
And if it fall your power to be but small
To accomplish your avarice in deed,
Your sinful will assenteth over al,
Thing to desire of which ye may not speed:
And thus false lust does your bridel led,
Trust in having so sore you does assail,
Falsely afered the world should you fail.
And if god benign and debonayre
With his yard of castigacion
Chastises you but easily and fair,
Ye grudge against his correction:
Nothing auerting in your discrecion,
How god not bad us (who can take heed)
For to strive ne wrastel in deed.
Neither our strength, ne our might to appli
Upon the beast monstrous and savage,
which called is the Chimere of Licy,
Specially when he is in his rage:
which monstre had to his auantage
Heed of a lion as books determine,
Womb of a got, and tail serpentyne,
Which was outrayed of Bellyferon,
As old poets make mention:
Neither god bad not that men should gone
In to Colchos to conquer with Jason
The Flees of gold, which in that region
With fiery bulls of metal made of bras,
And by a dragon full straightly kept was.
God bad us not our contreys for to let,
To vnderfonge things that been impossible:
The Mynotaur for to slay in Crete,
Half man half bull if it be credible:
Which was a monster hateful and odible.
Su^time brought forth in books ye may se
By Mynos wife, called Pasyphae.
Whose story techeth, if thou list to here,
This ugly beast and monstrous
Through Ariadne the kings daughter dear
Was sumtime slain by duke Theseus,
Within a cave made by Dedalus.
God bids us plainly for his sake,
So great emprise for to undertake.
He byddeth us not to be so recheles
In perilous deeds that been marciall,
Us to ieoparde, as did Hercules,
Which by the bidding in especial
Of Euristeus the mighty king royal:
Lords of Athe^s to make their honor shine,
Learned of arms the famous discipline.
Of these precepts if we have a sight,
And remembered of his high bounte,
He us commands things that be light,
For to accomplish with all humilite:
From our courage to avoid all vanite,
And from our hertes to exclude ydelnesse
And this false change of al worldly gladness.
For unto a man that perfect is and stable
(By good reason mine auctor does well preue)
There is nothing more fair ne agreeable,
Than finally his vicious life to leave.
On very god rightfully to believe:
Him love and worship above al erthly things
This passes victory of Emperors and kings.
The Lord bids also who so can discern,
Of entere love to do our labor
In this life here, so our life shall govern,
To father and mother that we do due honor,
And in their need to do them socour:
And in all virtue our friends to comfort,
And to our power in grace them supporte.
For in this world is nothing more perfect
Neither tacco^plish thing of more plesance,
Than a man for to have delight
In little good to have suffisaunce:
And to be content in his governance,
Avoid avarice, and think ever among
To his neighbor that he do no wrong.
Not to covet his goods in no wise:
Him self govern like to his estate,
Not to excede, but fly and also despise
All manner love which is disordinate:
Him self preserve from contecke and debate.
And specially to esche we it is good
Slaughter, and murdre, and sheding of blood.
Fly from his syn, and hate for to lie:
O fold offenses among have repentance.
And to esche we all scorn and malory:
Against vices do alms and penance.
And to have most souerainly pleasaunce
To sewe the paths of our Lord Jesu,
True examplayre of grace and virtue.
Which for our sake, and our redemption,
And for our love, was nailed on a tree:
Suffered pain and cruel passion,
And nothing asks of high and low degree,
Recompensed ayenwarde for to be,
But that we set all holy our ententes
For to fulfill his commandments.
And of his grace here in this mortal life,
As we precell of wisdom and reason,
And of his gift have a prerogatife
Tofore all beasts by discrecion,
Therefore let us of hole intencion
As we of reason, beasts far excede
Let us be before the^ in word, example, and deed.
Ground our self first upon humilite,
Our pompous eyes mekely to unclose:
Enclyne our hearts and so conceive and se,
All worldly wealth shall fade as a rose:
And of meke heart let us our self dispose
By this tragedy to have knowledgynge
Of our mischefe how rote and beginning
Was the vice of inobedience,
Surquidy, and false disobeisaunce,
As mine anctour has showed in sentence.
Emprinteth it well in your remembrance,
Be ware the serpent with disceiuance,
The flesh, the world, your enemies all three,
Through their traynes ye not disceiued be.
Your best shilde to make resistance
Against their power, sothly is mekenes:
Your haburion most mighty of defense
The fendes power to venquish and oppress,
It is to remember devoutly with lownes
How mekely Christ to pay our taunsum,
Suffered on cross death and passion.
Thereby men may that prudent ben and wise,
The joys claim which been eternal:
And enter again into Paradise
Fro whens Adam by pride had a fall.
To which place above celestial,
O Christ Jesu so bring us to that glory
Which by thy death had the victory.
Lenuoye.
SOdeine departinge out of this felicity,
Into misery and mortal heuinesse,
Unware depriuynge out of prosperitye,
Change of gladness into wretchedness,
Long languishynge in woe and bitterness,
Continuell sorrow, dred, dole, and pestilence,
Were first brought in by inobedience.
Adam and Eve lost their liberty,
Their fraunchise, and their blessedness:
Put in exyle and captiuitye
To live in woe, labor, and pensifnes,
Through false desire and pompous wilfulnes
To the serpent when they gave credence,
The lord mistrustyng through inobedience.
But O alas, where as they were free,
Of joy eternal stood in sekernes,
They were to blind alas it was pity
To leave their rest, and live in wetines,
All their ofsprynge to bring in dystresse,
Drawing fro God his due reverence
Through false consenting to inobedience.
Wherefore ye princes auysely does se
(As this tragedye in manner bears witness)
Where as wants in any comonalte
Subjection, for lacking of mekenes,
And with poor, pride has an enteresse:
There follows after through froward insolence,
Among the people false inobedie^ce.
And noble princes which have the souereinte
To govern the people in right wysenesse,
Like as ye cherishe them in peace and unite,
Or frowardly distroy them or oppress:
So ayenwarde their corages well dress
Lowly to obey to your magnificence,
Or disobey by inobedience.
Che.ii. Chapter.
How Nembroth bylt the tower of Babylon to save him fro Noyes stood, which
for his pride was put fro his magnificence, and his tower with sudden leuyn
smytten down.

Mine auctour Bochas lightly oueryode
The vengeaunces, and myscheues huge
Which y^ God took with Noyes flode
When he sent an universal deluge:
Against which there was no refuge,
Save.viii. persons in that mortal woe
Which in a ship were saved, and no mo.
Wherefore mine auctour lightly ouergoth,
Makes of that age no special mention,
But passes over from Adam to Nembroth,
Considering how in that deedly chance,
The lord for syn took so great vengeance,
That by wryttynge of stories, no victory
Of high ne low was left to memory.
For there was laft cronicle none ne book,
After, that made mention
Of none auctour, who so list to look:
For all was brought to destruction
By a deluge, without any excepcion.
For which mine auctour tra^sported his style,
And of that time list nothing compyle.
He found no matter whereon he might found,
Nor set his foot by none authority,
Neither no truth his purpose on to ground,
Of old writing that he could se:
For which him thought of necessity
The surplusage of all that time let,
And after Adam with Nembroth for to mete.
And certes like as Bochas in his book
Remembers first of Adam the story,
So next in order he the story took
To speak of Nembroth, and his surquedye:
Which here first (as books specifye)
After the flode his waves began aswage,
Was made a lord, to govern in that age.
For when the flode began to decrece,
And God his vengeance began to molifye,
Withdraw his hand, the water tho began cese^
Upon the mounteynes high of Ermonye,
The ship began rest, the Bible can not lie.
And in that age called the second,
Lynage of man began first to habounde.
To increase again and to multiplye,
And by dyscent in books ye may se
Specified the genelogye:
How that one Chus cosyn to Noe,
A man that time of great auctorritie,
Unto this Nembroth, the storye does assure
The father was as by ingendrure.
This Nembroth was mighty, large, and long,
Excelling other as of his stature,
Surquedous, hardy, and right strong,
And in his time great labor might endure:
And in his force to much he did assure,
And yet was none on water ne on land
Which durst his power presume to withstand.
And his noblesse more to magnify,
In worldly worship by report of his glory,
He was called chief prince of venery,
Desirous ever to have the victory
Of beasts wild: to be put in memory,
And have a price among these champions.
Tigres to daunt, eke boores and Lions,
There was no beast in wodes so savage,
That durst against him make resistance:
His furious ire so mortal was on rage:
The earth quoke for fear of his presence:
Till at the last in his aduertence,
As a prince deuoyed of all grace,
Against god he began to compace.
He made a manner coniuracion
This froward Gyaunt, and a conspiracy,
Took his counseyl by false collusion,
His might, his power, for to multiply:
And his estate for to glorifye,
Thought he would of his intent not fail,
God, and heaven, proudly to assail.
That namely God which governs al,
He thought he would proudely take on hand,
Against deluges if any come shall,
Of providence, plainly them withstand:
Him self to assure, and make a place on land
That should him keep, and be to a defense
Both against god and waters violence.
And that they might accomplish their intent,
Like their desire they did their labor:
Took their counseil al by one assent,
Chose Nembroth their duke and gouernoure
Them to convey, and do them socour:
To be their gyde to forne, as they were ware,
Toward a country called Sinear,
In compass wise round about yclosed
With a great stood, named Eufrates:
Their strong folly which they have purposed,
For to fulfill they were not rechelesse,
This is to say, they put them self in prese
So high a toure for to edifye,
which should surmou^t above the sterry sky.
That they should grieved be no more,
With no deluge brought to destruction:
Neither that no waters may the^ grieve sore,
This was the fine of their intencion.
And of that tower a mighty strong dongion
Against God and flodes themself to assure,
The hight and largeness both of a measure.
Thus in Nembroth encrese began the name,
And in the peoples reputacion
Of gold, and richesse, he had so great a fame,
They called him God in their opinion:
Most eurous, most mighty of renown.
The world also hole under his obeisaunce.
As God and lord he took the governance.
Under whose might the people began proceed,
He as a lord having inspection,
Percinge the bowelles of the earth in deed,
To make mighty their foundation:
And of false glory and vain false ambicion,
This proud Nembroth in his appetite,
To se them worche has full great delight.
His joy was and his inward gladness,
To behold so great a company
Persen the earth by so great depenesse,
To make the ground strong by masonry,
The work upward for to fortifye
With many a stone, huge and large of weight,
They have it raised up into y^ air on height.
And finally, by mediacion
Of this great work, Ne^broth was famous,
Taking in heart great consolacion
That by report he was so glorious:
Of so great might, and port so pompous,
That he was so mighty, rich and strong,
To rease a tower so high, so large, and long.
For to this day touching the great might
Of this tower which Babell men it call,
Men fro far may have thereof a sight,
It surmounteth other toures all:
Of which work, thus it is befall,
Of serpents and many a great dragon,
It is now called chief habitacion.
That no man dare as they it se
For wicked air, and for corrupcion,
By a great space and in a great country,
Approach no nere ye meruaylous dongion:
So venomous was that mansion
And so horible, that no man dare approach,
Like to a mountain builded on a roche.
And as men say that had thereto repair,
This tower attaineth unto the sterres clear,
And transcendeth the region of the eire,
The stones and the siment were made of such matter
And the ioyninge so steadfast and entier,
Though fire and water both did it assail,
Little or naught their power should avail.
It was made so mighty to endure,
So well assured by disposicion,
That in this world no living creature
Saw never none like in comparison,
Whose reryng up was chief occasion,
And the riches of the masonrye
Were through Ne^broth of pride and surquedy.
Demed proudely as in his auise,
He transcended all other in noblesse:
Thought him self most mighty and wise,
Fellow to God as in lykenes.
But God that can all worldly pride oppress
And make princes eclypsen in their glory,
Such as trust in things transitory,
The same lord of his eternal might,
This tower which Nembroth list to edifye,
He made with thunder and leuyn light,
Thereof to fall a full great party:
The boystous wyndes and the ragy sky,
And gods power on that other side,
Began thus abate a percell of his pride.
And in descent, and falling of the stones,
Of the werkemen full many a man was deed,
And oppressed, their back broken and bones,
The masonry with their blood was reed:
Yet proud Ne^broth that of all this was head,
With all these signs his lord list not know,
For which his pomp was after brought fullowe
But in his error proceeds forth of new,
Thought he would get him self a name.
Of melancoly can change look and hew,
And began also to attempt and atame
For to increase and magnify his fame,
A new tower to edify again,
Like as God had been blind and nothing seen.
He would have raught up to the sterres seven
By thasse^t of them that can him first cou^sail,
Robbed god, and from him raught the heaven:
But who presumes the lord above tassayle,
It were no reason that he should avail.
Princes may well against him cry loud,
But his power may clipse with no cloud.
For in the mids of his great emprises
This proud Nembroth making his maso^s
For to compass and cast their devises,
Geometries in their divisions,
But God that has his aspections
Seeing thententes of every erthly man,
As he that is most mighty, and best can
Against their malice make resistance,
Their worldly power, their dominacion,
Of his vengeable and most magnificence,
He can chastise, and over whelme down
The pride of princes in every region:
By ensample of Nembroth as ye shall here,
Whose pomp raught above the sterres clear.
For when his workmen stood at auantage,
And most were busy to his intencion,
And before that time spoke al on langage,
All suddenly by transmutacion,
There was of tounges made a division:
That in their workynge as they can obrayde*
No man wist what that other said.
And it is like according with reason,
So as change was made of their langages,
So of their hertes was made division,
Both of their will, and of their corrages:
And in ascendynge of their workynge stages,
There was such chan^ge of brother unto brother
Like strangers none knew thente^t of other.
Mine auctour troweth that this adversity
Was for their gilt caused by vegaunce,
Or else God of tyght and equity
Disposed has in his ordinance,
To be among them so great a variaunce,
That through ye world they should themself divide
And fro Nembroth disceuer, and not abide.
They began anon among themself disdeyne
To accept this Nembroth for their king,
And among forsooth there was not twain,
One of another that had clear knowing,
Ne of their speech knew the plain meaning:
For which y^ country of Senaar they forsook,
And each of them a sundry country took.
They departed and made no longer space,
Following the fortune of their division:
And began to chese the^ a new dwellinge place
In the parties of many a region.
And thus Nembroth was priued and put down,
And of Babel the mighty famous toure,
He was called no longer possessour.
For against the pride of this Nembroth
Froward fortune began her course to vary,
And God also was in manner worth,
Of surquedie that he was so contrary:
And for the place was wild and solitarye
Of this Senaar, and furious savage.
Nembroth began to feeble and fall in great age.
And yet some books of him specifye,
He waxte froward of his condition,
And was first ground of ydolatrie,
And fynder up of false religion:
Causynge people to have an opinion
Gods to worship in Panimes wise,
Founder of rightes, and of false sacrifyce.
Toward Perce chese his dwelling place,
The which country is in the Orient,
That his lordshyp should stretch a great space
He bounded him into the Occident:
For Perce land has his extent
Toward the parties of the Reed see.
And this land Perce who so list to se
As books old remember and put in mind,
How that Perce costeth inuiron
Septemtrion, and the great Inde,
And many another mighty region:
Where Nembroth had first dominacion.
Which extends as books specifye,
Out of Mede into Germanye.
But in lordeshippes as mine auctour says,
Without that virtue be their true guide,
In them there is surau^ce none ne fayeth.
Thing that passes may no while abide.
Wherefore Bochas in a spyte of pride,
And in rebukynge of al folks proud,
Making his co^playnt cries to the^ full loud.
The.iii. Chapter.
An exclamacio^ of Bochas against al proud men, showing how God may them and
their pride abate when him best list, by many diverse means and ways punyshe
and chaslyce.

ME al proud, most ryal in your flowers,
Which that most trust to reygne long,
Dresseth up your roches and your towers,
And against God make your self strong:
And let your power proudly vnderfonge,
Your self with pride for to magnifye,
Against the heuin to hold the champartye:
Buyld up your castles, reyse them up tyghte,
Of Adamantes with iron strong ybounde,
With square stones, large and huge of hight,
Reyse up your walls most mighty and profou^d
And shit your du^geo^s with mighty chenes round,
Let men of arms (who ever wake or sleep)
Night and day your watch so straightly keep
As god ne man in your opinions
Your fortresses might not assail,
Your Castles, ne your strong dungeons,
Stuffed with men and plenty of vytayle,
Like to stand ever and never for to fail:
As god not might against your false puissau^ce.
Wha^ ever him list of right to do vengeance.
Set before your eyes that been blind
The monstrous work of great Babilone:
The pride of Ne^broth that was put behind,
Maugre his might, and his tower smyt down:
For all the craft of werkemen and mason
Distroied was with a sudden leuin,
To avenge his pride sent a down fro heuin.
For though your strengthes so assured be
That none engyne may thereto attain,
Gunne ne Bumberdes by no subtilte,
Shot of arowblast, ne touch of dundayne,
Yet god that is lord and sovereign
Which lyche deserts can both spyl and save,
May confound it with an earth quaue.
Mine auctour asks what castle or tower
May be so strong made in any wise,
But that by mean of some false traytoure,
Or by some way that he can deuyse,
It may be lost, or sold for couetise:
And delivered for all the strong bonds,
Into the power of their enemies hands,
Or by some other sudden adventure.
Castles and cities and many a rich town,
Have be lost, they might not them assure
For to resist against false trayson:
Sum have be lost also by rebellion
And all these means the truth to begin,
Is but punishynge which god sent for syn.
God has a thousand hands to chastyse,
A thousand darts of punicion,
A thousand bows made in diverse wise,
I thousand arowblastes bent in his do^geo^,
Ordained echeon for castigacion:
But where he finds mekenes and repentance,
Mercy is maistresse of his ordinance.
Ye that been wise considers how the rote
Of vices al is pride, ye may well se:
Pulls him down, and puts underfoot,
And takes your counceyl of humility:
And if ye list to stand in surete,
Byldeth in heart for more sekernesse
A tower of virtues, grounded on meekness.
Whose masonry is of no costage,
Of virtues ground and sovereign:
Blastes of wyndes and of weders rage,
Neither no tempest hasty ne sudden,
Pomp ne blast, though they do their pain,
This virtue meekness for to undermine,
They be to feeble to make her to enclyne.
For where meekness is grounded verily,
Though he sometime feel aduersite,
He passes over, and suffers patiently,
And venquisheth all manner enmytie.
The assaute also and the contrariosite
Of infortune and of worldly trouble,
And of victory conquereth a Palm double.
And tho mekenes amiddes the flodes flow
Of worldly mischefe and persecucion,
While patience in her bote does row
Tho froward waves toss her up and down,
A calm shall follow of consolacion:
When stern winds their blastes have laid low
The name of meekness shall show and be well know:
She may be troubled, but overcome never:
And for a time she may suffer werre,
But at the end she vanquisheth ever,
On land and see whether she be nere or far,
To the hau^^ of life she was the lode sterre,
I take record of the humilite,
Of Mary so blessed mote she be.
The rote of mekenes floureth up so fair
Whose beauty dredeth no tribulacions,
In somer ne winter her flowers not apayre,
And her fruit lasts in all manner seasons:
Pride may assail with his bostful sownes,
And finally for her increase of glory,
With humblenes she wynneth the victory.
Lenuoye.
Ofolkes all that this tragedies read,
Haueth to me kenes among your aduertence
Of proud Nembroth also takes head,
How that he fell from his magnificence,
Only for he by sturdy violence,
List of malice the mighty lord assail.
But in such case what might his pride auayli
Noble princes which this world do possede,
Ye that be famous of wisdom and science,
And have so many subjects that you dread,
In governance under your excellence:
Let your power with mekenes so dispense,
That false pride oppress not the poreyle,
Which to your nobles so much may avail.
Pride of Nembroth did the brydel led,
Which him conuayed with great insolence:
Pride apertayneth nothing to manhede,
Save in arms to show his presence:
Wherefore honor, laud, and reverence
Be to mekenes, that has the gouernaile
Of al virtues, which man may most avail.
The.iiii. Chapter.
How many years was betwixt Adam and Nembroth, and bitwixte Nembroth and
Cadmus, and of other kings.

THese old poets with their sawes sweet,
Full covertly in their verses do feign
How old Saturn was su^timne king of Crete,
And of custom did his busy pain,
And of his goodness list to ordain
That he should as of his nature
Echon devour, as by his ingendrue.
In this matter shortly to soiorne,
To understand of poets the process,
They mean plainly that this word Saturn
Does in it self nothing but Time express:
And Philosophers bear also wytnes,
That as in tune forth every thing is brought,
So time ayenward brings al to naught.
Clerks also record in their wrytinge
Under support as I dare rehearse,
How that fire wastes every thing:
And iron herd does neshe things perce.
If ought abides y^ they may not transuerce,
Yet comes time and by continuance,
It al consumes with his sharp lance.
His sharp toth of consumpcion
In still wise does his busy cure
For to aneantise in conclusion
Al thing that is brought forth by nature.
By long abydyng ye may the^ not assure:
For old things devoured men may se,
Far out of mind, as they never had be.
Who can or may remember in any wise,
The glorious prowess of these princes old*
Or the noblesse of Philosophers wise*
Or of poets their feyning to unfold*
Process of years, alas (as I you told)
Devoured has their name and their noblesse,
Derked their renoune by foryetfulnesse.
Thus of their names is left no memory,
Time with his rasour has done so great vengeance,
Shaven away the honor and glory
Of many noble, full mighty of puissaunce:
That there is left now no remembrance
Of princes, poets, ne Philosophers.
For when y^ death nailed them in their cofers
Came time upon, and by process of years,
Their memory has dusked and their mind:
And reuolucion of the heavenly spheres,
By often turnyng, their glory has left behind.
Thus every thing which subget is to kind,
Is in this life without more advantage,
wasted with time and process of long age.
In the first time from Adam to Noe
Prudent listers which list in books to read,
Found of fortune no mutabilite:
Neither of her change they took the no head.
But from Adam there rekened ben in deed
Unto Nembroth by turnynge of the heaven
A thousand years.vii. hundred and eleven.
In which space who that considers well,
There ben no things written in especial
Digne of memory, ne spoken of never a del,
which that been notable ne historial:
But fro the time Nembroth had a fall,
Unto Cadmus the years to contain,
They were a.M. iiii. hundred and fourtene.
Touching this Cadmus as Bochas list endite,
It is rehearsed b^ Rethoriens
How one Vexores in books as they write,
was made first a king of the Egipciens,
when Philosophers and nigromanciens
Began first tabou^de their renoune tauau^ce,
Nachor y^ time having y^ governance
Of the Ebrues, as made is mention.
After Nembroth by true rehersayle,
Three hundred year by computacion,
Four score and.xii. which time it is no fail
That Vexores began wars and great bataile
Of volunt against strange nations,
And to conquer Cities, borowes, and towns
By force only, without title of right:
He wan al Egypt to increase his name,
But for all that who list to have a sight,
There is now left no report of his fame,
Save Bochas writes how he first did attame
His mighty conquest of intencion,
That the glory and the high renoune
Ascriued were unto his worthynes:
And the residue and surplusage
Of gold and treasure of good and of richesse,
Turn should to common advantage
Of al his people, that every manner age
Report might it was to him more nerre
Above singularite, his common to prefer.
Also Tanais of Cithie first king,
When Sarneke was duke and sovereign
Over the Jews, by record of writynge
Two hundred year.xl. also and twain
After Ne^broth, this Tanais began ordain
A mighty power and a strong battle,
Them of Cithye proudly to assail.
Conqueryng from thens unto the isle
Called Ponte, in a full cruel wise:
And though his lordship lasted but a while
All that he wan was for couetise.
And as Bochas does of this folk devise,
Process of years for all their great puissaunce,
Has put their names out of remembrance.
Zoroastes also for all his great might
Of Bactrians king and possessoure,
Lord of Trace, and a full mighty knight,
Of all his deeds and his great labor,
Of his conquest, ne of his great honor,
Is nothing left of writing us beforne,
Save yt he lough the hour yt he was borne.
He began full sone for to be merry
With sudden laughter at his nativity:
And worthy Ninus, that was king of Assiry
Expowned his laughter to great felicity.
The which Ninus wan many a fair country,
And day by day his power began increase,
For which he would not of his conquest cease.
For this is the manner of these conquerours,
When they have had in arms victory,
Do their might, their pain, and their labors
With new emprises to be put in memory:
For their courage surprised with vain glory,
Can not be still content in their estate,
Till their Parady say to them checkmate.
Fortune of arms (in books ye may read)
With a false laughter on folks does smyle:
She froward ever ere they can take heed,
Of nature will falsely them begyle:
Conquest by war lasts but a while,
For who by death does sturdy vyolence,
God will by death his vengeance recompense.
This worthy Ninus began mightily prevail,
Against zoroastes of whom I spoke tofore:
For he with him fought last in battle,
In which Ninus has him so well ybore
That zoroastes has the field ylore.
And he was aucthour as books specify
Of false Magyke, and Nygromancy.
He fond the nature of every element,
Their kindly workyng, and their mutacions:
The course of stars, and of the firmamente,
Their influences, their dispositions,
Their aspectes and their conjunctions:
Wrote in pillars devised of metal,
The seven sciences called liberal.
Also in pillars of Brycke full hard ybake,
There were up set, long, large and huge,
He began also write them and undertake,
To make them sure as for their refuge:
That they should by floude, ne deluge
Defaced ben as of their scripture,
But in their grauyng perpetual endure.
But though zoroastes these crafts out fond,
Full little ornought it might to him avail:
And though he were a good knight of his ho^d,
He was of Ninus slain in batrayle,
Lost his realm, and royal apparayl:
And Ninus dyed within a little throw,
But in what wise, the story is not know.
Also Moydes king of Sodom,
I find of him no memory by writing,
Save in a story as men may read and se,
He and his people were freell in living:
But he that was of Assiriens king,
Through false Fortune that can so often vary
To Babylon made them tributary.
We have seen and read also,
The vengeance and the pestilence
Done in Egypt to king Pharao:
For that he made a manner resistance
Against God, of wilful insolence.
Therefore his people upon a day and he,
Were drent echone in mids of the sea.
The people of God led by Moses,
Without trouble of any manner wawe,
Went echone in quiet and in peace:
And Pharao as he began after draw
Them to pursue, by a full mortal law,
In his pursuit forward was atteynt,
Among the waves with his host and dreynt.
In Exodi ben these mencions,
Ceriouslye put in remembrance.
The. xii, plages and persecutions
In Egypt done, by full great vengeance,
And of their treasour and their great substance
They were dispoyled by Ebrues (it is told)
Of their vessels, of silver, and of gold.
Out of Egypt full great treasure they ladde,
Such as the^ thought might most the^ avail:
And Pharao I find that he had
Two hundred chares enarmed for battle,
Them to pursue and proudly to assail:
And fifty thousand in whom was no lack
Of men of arms, following on horseback.
Two.C. thousand of fotemen him about,
And of Egypt all his chyualrye:
And Pharao with all his great route,
Began Israel pursue of envy.
But for his pride and false surquedy,
He and his people were drowned euerychone
Of all his number was left not one.
His froward heart against God indurate,
Fulfilled of malice and obstinacy,
And in his purpose proud and obstinate:
These foul vices or he could them espy
From his glory and his regally,
He was down (though he tofore was crouned)
Amidde the sea among his people drowned.
Of Ogiges king of Thebes.
ANother Prince called Ogygus,
King of Thebes as books determine:
And fou^der was, thus Bochas tells us
Of a city called Eleusyne.
Which stout in Greece, whose power to decline
There fill a floude in that regyoun
Which ouerflowed many a royal town.
And in Cithia that did most damage,
Time of Jacob patriarch notable:
And this deluge with his waves rage
Slew lords many, and princes honorable.
For dame Fortune is so deceiuable,
That she sumtime when she list disdain,
Can folk assail with a floude sudden.
This floude also where it did assail,
Wasted corns both croppe and rote:
Caused also scarcity of vytayle,
That many a man felt full vnsote.
The pore not wist where to find bote,
For their princes supprised were with dread,
Through lack of vitayle in that great need.
Of a great floude in Tessaly.
ANother floude there was in Tessaly,
In the time when king Amphyon
Held the ceptre and the regaly
Upon Thebes, the mighty strong town,
Beside the kingdom of Babylon:
The same time this floude fell doubtless,
When Gods people was led by Moses.
With this floude the land had been devoured
Of Tessaly, and of all that region,
But on Pernaso the people were succored,
And on the Roches that stood enuyron,
Found there refuge to their salvation
And great succor, til the floudes rage
Began to decrease, withdraw and assuage.
In old stories also ye may se,
When Cecrops had first possession
Of Athens, the mighty strong city,
An heat there fell in that region,
By influence that descends down
From the bodies above celestial,
Which likely was for to devour all.
And this heat engendered with the son,
In diverse countries both in length and bread
Has his course so mightily begone,
That many folk fell in great dread:
Ryuers, wells, who so list take heed
Consumed were and dried up echone,
The heat called the enbracyng of Pheton.
The.v. Chapter.
Of goodly Isis wife to Apys king of Argyue, slain by his brother Dyffeus.

WE have read in stories here toforne,
How that Isis to Egypt took her flight
Out of Crete, the true daughter borne,
Of Promotheus, a full manly knight:
And Isis in every man's sight
So fresh, so goodly, wedded by her live,
To worthy Apys that was king of Argyue.
The which Isis excellent of beauty,
After time her father was ygraue,
She was put for more suretye
With her uncle that should keep and save
This said ma^de y^ no man should her have:
And her uncle (in Ouide ye may se)
Like as he wrote* was called Epymethe.
And flourynge up in her tender age
This said Isis so pleasant was and mete,
Of semelines, of look, and vysage,
That Jupiter the mighty king of Crete,
Was enuyronned with her for to mete:
And she excited of feminitie,
Inclined her heart unto his deity.
And for she was of her intent so clean,
Obeiyng hun in most lowly wise,
Of Argiuois he made her to be queen
Because that she was smit in couetise,
Against Argus a war she began devise,
And for he was unwieldy of his age,
Her to with stand he found none advantage.
But yet Fortune began upon her frown,
And king Argus through his subtiltye,
With his counsel so prudently began rowne,
That she was take by full great cruelty:
And her soldiers were also made to fly,
And by Argus, there gained no ransom,
She fettred was and put in strong prison.
But her son God Mercurius,
Right fresh, right lusty, and full of hardines,
And of his earthly joy so glorious,
Against Argus began his power dress:
And so entirely did his business,
That Argus was slain in conclusion,
And after Isis delivered fro prison.
Of her sleyghtes afterward not feynt,
She took a ship and to Egypt went:
In which ship there was a cow depeynt.
And Theores whom Jupiter also sent,
Is gone with her both of one intent,
To join a marriage after anon right
Between her and Apys, a prince full of might.
She was right wise above other creatures,
Secret of cunnyng, well expert in science.
She taught first letters and fygures
To Egyptians, by plain experience:
Gave them cunnyng and intelligence
To till the land, taught the laborers
To sow their grain, and multiply by peers.
And in Egypt her fame and her renown
Began day by day, wext her worthiness,
Hold of cunnyng and of reputation
By sign showed not only in princess.
But she was hold among them a Goddess:
And with worshyps which were divine,
And sacrifices to her they did enclyne.
But to declare plainly at a word,
In mids of all her great prosperity,
Mighty Apis her husband and her lord,
Prince of Egypt and lord of that country,
Son of Jupiter and of Niobe,
Which Niobe by long discendyng
The daughter was of Phoroneus y^ king.
And Phoroneus first the law found
To which all Crete stand under obeysau^ce
And the statutes of that mighty land
Were ystablished by his ordinance.
But for to write the unhappy chance
Of king Apys that is remembered,
He slain was: and pyteously dismembered.
By his brother called Tyffeus,
Sumwhat of hatred, but more for couetise:
For Tyffeus was only desitous
To rejoice in full mortal wise,
The mighty kingdom as ye have herd devise,
Of Argiuois to have possession,
Preferred by murder and false succession.
And when that Isis found her lord so dead,
Of intent that he were magnified:
First of wisdom she began take heed,
Ordained a mean that he were deified
High among Gods to be stellified:
In Egypt temples made to be stalled,
And God Serapis, after he was called.
The.vi. Chapter.
Of Grysiton that his members eat for honger.

WHat shall I write of case horrible
Of Grisiton, with ho^ger so constrained
That his life was to him self odible
In Thessaly with indigence payned,
And pyteously his fame was disteyned
When he sold his daughter in seruage,
Liriope which was but young of age.
By exchange of God to puruey the^ vytayle,
Of very need, he was so woe begone:
He had nothing y^ might his thirst avail,
Ne stau^ch his ho^ger, but gnawyng on a bone
Wherefore he ate his members one by one,
A prince, alas, was it not great pity,
To se him dye in such adversity*
We had also read full many a day tofore,
The great banishment and persecution
Of Argiuois: how king Gelanor^
Was cruelly put from his region,
And his lieges of indignacion
In his place they set one Danaus,
Son and also heir to the God Belus.
The people of malice did him so encomber,
To increase his sorrow and his adversity:
And fyfty daughters he had also in number,
And Edippus his brother also pardy
Had fiftye sons (the stories ye may se)
At wene the which in surety of ho^de
In marriage there was made a bond.
Under the which compassed was treason,
Covertly, though they did it hide.
But if ye list have clear inspection
Of this story upon every side,
Read the legende of Cupide
Which that Chaucer in order as they stood,
Compyled of women that were called good.
Touching the story of king Pandion
And of his goodly fair daughters twain,
How Thereus false of condition
Them to deceive did his busy pain:
They both named of beauty sovereign,
Goodly Progne, and young Philomene,
Both innoc^utes of intent full clean.
Their piteous fall in open to express,
It were to me but a presumption,
Sith that Chaucer did his business
In his legende as made is mention,
Their martyrdom and their passion
For to rehearse them, did his busy pain
Is chief Poet called of Brytayne.
Of good women a book he did write,
The number vncomplete fully of ninetene:
And there the story plainly he did endite,
Of Thereus, of Progne, and Philomene,
Where ye may se their legende, thus I mean:
Do them worship and forth their life show
For a clear myrror because there be but few.
I will pass over, and speak of the^ no more,
And unto Cadmus forth my style dress:
In my writing, yet it greueth me sore.
Touching women of fayeth or stablenes
Blessed be God I find none excess,
And for there be so few as thinks me.
The good should be had in more deyntie.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedy bears to you witness,
How Saturnus by disposition
Maliciously of his frowardnes,
Causes of Juno full great infection:
She of nature conueyeth the nature down:
The air infect which no man may succor
Comes death anon, and al thing does devour
Time from Adam mine auctour does express
Down to Nemrothe by computation,
His style conveyed by great auisenes,
From zoroastes to king Pharaon:
Of two deluges he makes mention.
In Tessaly the vengeance began labor,
And in Achaia Thebes to devour.
Ye have of heates heard the excess:
Of princes, pryncesses, full great destruction,
Of Egistus the great wretchedness,
The fury of Thereus the woe of Pandion,
Of the two sisters the confusion,
And how their fate began upon them loure,
Their felicity unawarely to devour.
Princes princesses your eyes do up dress,
I mean the eyes of your discresion,
Se of this world y^ change the doublenes,
The great vnsurenes, the variacion,
And aduert for all your great renown
Fortuns dewes wha^ they most swetely shour
Than is she falsest, your glory to devour.
The.vii. Chapter.
How Jupiter ravished Europa, and how Cad mus was sent to seek her in diverse
regions.

THe rehearsal of many an old poet,
By descent the line conveyed down:
Next Saturnus the mighty king of Crete,
Jove was crowned by succession:
As next his heir by procreacion
After his father the land to enherite,
Raygning in Crete, as poets list to write.
One of the lineage as I you told beforne
Of the Gods, most sovereign and entere:
And though he were of blood so high yborne
He chose Europe for to be his fere.
And down descended from his heavenly spear,
As he that was for all his deity,
Surprysed in heart with her great beauty.
And she was daughter to a mighty king,
Called Agenor by line all descent,
Whose mighty kigdom and ryal fair dwelling
Was in Phenice toward the orient,
And to Araby his land was adjacent:
Far by south as ye may read and se,
Toward the parties of the red sea.
But Jupiter when he did aduert
Of Europa the great semelinesse,
He thought he was wounded to the heart,
Unto the death, beholding her fayrenes.
And for his co^straynt and his mortal distress
Seeing she was so fair in his sight,
He ravished her of very force and might.
But Agenor her own father dear,
Began on this case, full piteously complain,
When she, alas, most goodly and entere,
Was him biraft which doubled al his pain.
Recure was none, though he did pleyne,
Till he remembryng on his regaly,
Thought he would send to aspy
His son Cadmus her to recure ayene,
For to search her in many a region:
Where so his labor were fructuous or vain,
His father set him a fell condition,
Not to return by none occasion,
And thereupon made him to be bound,
Till y^ he had the kings daughter found.
He took his shyps by great auisenes,
And began to sail in many a strange see:
Did his labor and his business:
With many a worthy that were with him preue:
But when that he of reason did se
There was no mean for which that he was sent
For to acco^plishe the fine of his intent,
With glad heart deuoyde of grutchyng,
Seeing the case froward and contrary,
Humble of his cheer took his exilinge:
And of manhood list not him self despair,
But with his meyne knightly began repair
Toward Greece, and piteously there to land,
Of Appollo for to understand
To what party that he might draw,
He prayed God to wyshe him or read,
Some token show or some manner saw,
Into what I Will that he might him speed:
Or that he would graciously him lead
Where as he might build a city
That were according to him and to his meynie
And to Appollo he did sacrifice,
And made to him his oblation:
The God requiryng goodly to devise,
To what land or to what region,
For his dwelling and habitacion
He should draw withouten more obstacle,
For him and his to make his habitacle.
And Cadmus thus before Appollo stood,
Knelyng among with full great reverence:
And in the temple of Delphos still abode
With humble entendaunce and devout diligence,
Mekely besechyng by word or by sum sentence
That Appollo would to him unclose
To what party he should him self dispose.
This was his answer in conclusion,
As the statue to him did express:
To go and search countries enuyron,
And till he found, do his business
A bulle, that were excellent of fayrenes:
Which by precept of Appollos law,
Had never aforne in yoke ydrawe.
And where that ever sekyng that he fond,
A bull stand still in his pasture,
Appollo bade upon that same lord
Where as he sees this sight of adventure,
That he should do his busy cure
To build a city, he and his folks all,
And Boecia after the Bulle it call.
And wha^ that Cadmus y^ precept understood
And in searchyng did his business,
He found a place where a bulle stood
Feadyng him self, which as by likeness
Was a place full pleasant of largess:
Where as he stynt, he began a city raise,
Which the poets greatly commend and praise.
And y^ his buildyng might the more avail,
All the foreyns that did about him dwell,
Full like a knight, by force and by battle
Out of that country he did them expel:
Raysynge a city which that did excel.
And as Ouide also records the same,
Unto this day of Thebes bears the name.
And he was not only glorified
For rearyng up of this great city,
But he was also magnified
For his manhood, and his magnanimity:
And most commended if ye list to se,
For the surmountyng and famous excellence,
Which that he had in wisdom and science.
For as mine aucthour, of him list indite,
Through his noble prudent puruey aunce,
He taught fygures, and letters for to write:
And made laws of full great ordinance,
Among the Greeks, and set a governance
Their vycious life by virtue to restrain,
And who outraied, was punished with the pain
And of intent to increase his lynage,
And his city also for to multiply,
He took a wife that was but young of age,
And she was called as books specify,
Hermyone: and touching her alye,
Though that she were borne of royal blood,
She was also both ioly, fair, and good.
And this was done as writes mine auctour,
After the death of worthy Iosue:
Sothonyell being successor,
Having the leadyng and the soueraintie
Of Israel, when Thebes the city
Was founded first in the days old,
By king Cadmus, tofore as I you told.
Four daughters he had by his live,
Full fair echone and goodly on to se:
And their names to rehearse blyue,
Semele was the eldest, and next Acthonie
The third in order was called Inoe
And Agane was youngest of them all,
Of the which daughters thus it is befall.
They were echone of port and of manner,
Full well favored in every man's sight,
Right womanly, and heavenly of their chere,
And for their beauty their father anon right
As it was sittyng, with all his full might
Like their estates, birthe, and also their age,
Made the^ be wedded, and joined in marriage,
To worthy princes, his lineage to auaunce.
And they increased by procreation,
Whereof the king had full great pleasaunce:
And great reioysyng in his opinion,
To save his line by generation,
With his neuewes and cosyns of alye,
Fro day to day, to wax and multiply.
And this increased his felicity,
When he considered verily in deed
The rich buildynge of his royal city,
And Fortune did his bridle lead
To great riches, in books as I read,
To great nobles, having great residence,
In his city of most magnificence.
His daughter Semele record of mine auctor,
Though she descended were of the blood ryal,
To Jupiter she was paramoure:
And by his power supercelestiall,
She conceived in especial
(As poets of her list to endite)
Him that is god of grapes read and white.
Called Bachus: which has the governance
Of wynes all and the regaly:
Whereof after was take full great vengeance,
For when Juno did first espy
Of Jupiter the great auoutrye,
Of great hatred and enuyous desire,
She made Semele to be brent with sodayn fire
By discendyng of a sudden leuine:
And on Semele the vengeance down went,
Fro Juno ielous, cleped queen of heaven,
To wreke her wrath purposely ysent.
And fore the flame consumed was and spent
There was of her left no remembrance,
But of the end the woeful mortal chance.
Also Actheon the son of Acthonie,
To great mischefes and infortunes borne
Whose father called was Criste,
Come of the kindred that I you told toforne
With cruel hounds alas he was to torn:
For that he saw, as books of him tell
Dyana naked, bath her in a well.
And as Poets remember at the lest,
When the ladies of Thebes the city,
Held of Bachus solemnly the feast,
The younger sister called Agane,
Daughter to Cadmus, alas it was pity
Against her own son dear,
She was so wode and mortal of her cheer
Murderyng him in full cruel wise
In her rage: she was so furious
For he lough at the sacrifyce
In Thebes done by women to Bachus.
The which son was called Pantheus,
Whom that she slew with a sharp dart,
In her wodenes, as she him found apart.
These great mischeues fell in the live
Of king Cadmus through his unhappy chance
Fortune his noblesse began undermine,
And thought she would his glory disauaunce
All worldly gladness is meddled with greuaunce.
Experience in Cadmus ye may se,
So importable was his adversity.
For while he sat most highest in his glory,
No part clipsed of his prosperity,
His bright renown and his royal memory,
In realms spredde, and many a far con^trey,
He most wealfull in his high see,
Set with his lineage most high in noblesse,
Than came Fortune the false enchaunteresse.
Of wilfulness and found occasion
Against Cadmus, and made his renown dull:
Of his kynred by false collusion,
She began away the bryghtest feathers pull.
And when his shining was waxt up to y^ full
After the change of fortunes law,
His glory began discrece and withdraw.
It was more grievous to his dignity.
A sudden fall from his high noblesse,
Than if that he had never be
Set in the state of his great worthiness:
For the furious mortal heaviness
Of his kindred without any more,
Would have grieved a poor man full sore.
And among his sorrows euerychone,
To rehearse plainly as it was,
I dare affirm how that there was one
Most horrible and dreadful in such a caas:
For Cadmus son called Athamas,
His son in law, through false melancoly,
Fell sodaynely into a frenesy.
Of whom the wife was called Inoe,
Cadmus daughter as ye have heard express
Which through the co^straynt of his infirmity
In his rage and furious wodenes,
Thought that his wife was a lioness,
And in his wild ymaginations
That his two children were also two lions.
And upon them full loud he began to cry,
Toward his wife in haste he came anon:
And from her arms there was no remedy,
The child he rent, and on a craggy stone
He began to brast it and break it every bone.
The which child Bochas writes thus
Full tender and young called was Learchus.
And all this woeful and sudden adventure,
Of this rage when that she took head,
As most sorrowful of any creature
Her other child she hent anon for dread,
For of succor she knew no better speed,
So as she might began haste out of his sight.
But welaway, as she took her to flight
Her husband came after pursuyng
Like a wood Lion in his cruelty,
Down from a hill which was dependyng
She and her child fell into the sea,
Was it not ruthe, was it not pitye,
A kings daughter, her lord i Thebes crouned
He to be wood, and she for fear drowned*
Lo here the fine of Cadmus every deal:
His children slain, and his allies all,
And he him self from fortunes whele
When he wened lest, full suddenly is fall.
His little sugar tempred with much gall:
For among all his mortal peynes,
His liege men of Thebes citezynes
Made against him conspiration,
Put him in exile, and his wife also:
His sons and daughters brought to destruction
And to the increase of his mortal woe,
He and his wife compelled both two
For very pouerte and very indigence
In their last age to purchase their dispense.
Thus of Cadmus the sorrows to discriue,
And his mischief to put in remembrance:
He banished was twice by his live,
First by his fathers cruel ordinance
Of his sister to make enquiraunce:
And alder last in his unwieldy age
He was compelled to hold his passage
Out of Thebes, his wife and he alone,
In sorrow weeping to accomplish their days
Into Illery together they be gone:
Their patience put at fell assayes,
Whose bitterness felt none alaies,
Also of their end, and unhappy fate,
Ne of their death, I find none other date.
Save that Ouide makes mention,
And John Bochas the poet excellent
Say that two brethren, zethus and Amphion
Out of Thebes by one assent,
Have this Cadmus into exile sent,
His wife also: after their high noblesse,
To end their life in sorrow and wretchedness.
But the Gods of mercy and pitye,
Wha^ they the^ saw by fortune thus cast down,
From their estates into great poverty,
Having of them full great compassion,
They made of them a transformacion,
Of both twain, them yeuyng a likeness
Of serpents, to live in wyldernes.
Lenuoye.
OWhat estate may him self assure,
For to conserve his life in sikernes?
What worldly joy may here long endure?
Or where shall men find now stablenes,
Sith kings and princes from their high nobles
(Record of Cadmus) ben suddenly brought low
And from the whele of fortune overthrow?
Who may sustain the pyteous adventure
Of this tragedy, by writing to express?
It is like to the chaunte plure
Beginning with joy, endyng in wretchedness.
All worldly bliss is meinte with bitterness.
The sodayn chau^g thereof may no man know
For who sytteth highest is sonest overthrow.
Was in this world yet never creature,
(Reken up princes for all their high noblesse)
But fortune could enclyne them to her lure:
And them enperishe through her frowardnes.
Wherefore ye lords, with all your great riches,
Beware before or ye dance in the row,
Of such as fortune has from her whele throw.
The.viii. Chapter.
A process of Oetes king of Colchos, Jason, Medea, Theseus, Scilla, Nisus, and
other mo.

When John Bochas was most diligent
To consider the successions
Of lynages, withal his intent
In his writing and discriptions,
To compyle the generations
Of many noble famous of estate,
I mean of such as were unfortunate,
In his serchyng he found not out a few
That were unhappy found in their living:
To his presence anon there began him show
A multitude, full piteously weeping:
Among which full dolefully playnyng,
Came forth Oetes, and has co^playnt begu^ne,
King of Colchos, and son unto the sun.
For of Phoebus which is bright and clear,
Poets write that he was son and heir,
Because he was so mighty of power,
So fresh, so lusty, so manly and right fair:
But of fortune he fell in great despair,
Cursyng his fate, and his destayne
When Jason first entered his country again
By Pelleus sent from Tessaly,
There to accomplish by diligent labor
The great emprises through his chiualry,
(If God and fortune list do to him favor)
That they might win the excellent treasour
This is to mean, that he were so bold,
The ram to assail which bare y^ flece of gold.
This Jason through counsel of Medee,
By sorcery and incantacion,
The bulle slough horrible for to se,
And vainquished the venomous dragon,
The king dispoyled of his possession,
Accomplished with carectis and figures
Of Colchos the dreadful adventures.
And afterward when he his purpose had,
He left Oetes in full great despair:
And Medea forth with him he lad,
And her brother, which was the kings heir.
But as I find how in his repair
Out of Colchos when they began remue
King Oetes after them began sue,
Upon Jason avenged for to be,
Without tariyng he followed proudly:
The which thing when Jason did se,
This Medea began shape a remedy:
She took her brother and slew him cruelly,
And him disme^bred as books make mind,
And piecemele in a field behind
She began him cast all bespreint with blood.
Whereof his father when he had a sight,
Full pale of chere still in the field he stood,
While she and Jason took them unto flight,
I trow that time the most woeful wight
That was on live, when he did know
His child dismembered and abroad ysowe.
Which cause was, alas, and welaway
That he so stout as man disconsolate,
While that Jason fro Colches went away:
And Medea most unfortunate,
Was rote and ground of this mortal debate,
For who saw ever, or read of such another,
To save a stranger list to slay her brother?
Forsook her father, her country and kindred,
The land emperished through her robbery,
Of her worship took none other head,
Love has her brought in such a fantasy.
And while that she abode in Tessaly,
And with Jason did there soiourne,
She made Eson to youth return.
A yard she took that was dry and old,
And with her herbs and commi^tions,
She made it boil, in Ouide it is told:
And by charectes and incantacious,
And with the craft of her coniurations,
The yard began to bud and blossom new,
And to bear fruit and leaves fresh of hew.
And semblably with her confections,
His old humors the has deputed clean:
And with her lusty fresh pocions,
His empty skin tremblyng and right lean
Pale and wanne that no blood was seen,
But as it were a deadly creature,
All this has she transformed by nature.
Made him lusty, and fresh of his courage,
Glad of heart, lively of cheer and sight,
Right well chered, and clear of his vysage,
Wonders deliver both of force and might:
In all his members as weldy and as light
As ever he was, in the same estate
By craft of Medee he was lo alterate.
After all this, against king Pelleus
She began to malign, uncle unto Jason,
And of envy she proceadeth thus:
The kings daughters she draws to her ano^
Them counsaylyng that they should gone
Unto their father, and plainly unto him said,
If he desired to be young again,
Full restored his force to recure,
And therwithall in lusty age flower,
She behight to do her busy cure,
Like his desire to help and socoure:
And in this matter so crafty labor
Finally stand in the same case,
To be made young as his brother was.
Touching which thing for more evidence,
This Medea has to the daughters told
Of intent to give the more credence,
She bade the^ take a ram y^ was right old
And with a knyfe for to be so bold
To slay the beast before them there he stood,
And in a vessel draw out the old blood.
Fullye affirmyng like as it were true,
That he should be a lamb again.
For she by craft would his blood remue
In such wise by euidens plain,
That of elde no token should be seyne,
In all his members as lusty and entere
As was a lamb eyned of one year.
And here upon in such sleyghty wise,
She began a process of full false treason:
The sisters made upon the lamb to practice,
Drew out his blood, like her enteneton:
And she by craft of false illusion,
Blent their eyes by apparaunce in vain,
The old Ram to seem a lamb again.
Thus Medea by her sleyght compassyng
Of envy, and venomous hatred,
Excited has the sisters in workynge,
Against their father mortally to proceed:
with sharp knives they made their father blede
Amiddes the heart, throughout every vain,
Supposyng the sely sisters twain
That Pelleus renewed should be
To youth again, of force and of substance,
But finally by treason of Medee,
He lost his life, such was his woeful chance:
She this wrought only for vengeance,
As rote and ground of this cruel deed,
Against the nature of all womanhede.
Supposyng in her opinion,
That the death greatly should please
Of Pellius, unto her lord Jason,
Through great increase set his heart at ease:
But it rebounded unto his disease,
That finally Jason her forsook,
For her offense, and he his way took
Into Corynth to the king Creon,
Whose daughter Creusa for her great beauty
Was afterward wedded to Jason:
But wha^ this wedding was known to Mede
Cast she would thereon avenged be:
Began to conspyre of malice and envy,
And through her magyke and her forcery
In full great haste began to ordain
A little coffer, only of intent:
And by her young fair sons twain,
With other jewels she has it sent
Unto Creusa making a present,
Which of malice she list to dispose:
That when Creusa the coffer did unclose
The fire brast out a full large space,
Brent Creusa by full great vyolence:
Set a fire plainly all the place,
By enchauntment there was no resistance.
All went a fire that was in her presence,
By vengeance did full great damage.
But when Jason this fire saw in his rage,
And considered the malice of Medee,
Thought he would do execution,
For to punish the great iniquity,
Against him compassed of treason:
For she of vengeance against all reason
After that Creusa consumed was and brent,
Her own sounes whylom that she sent
Without ruth or womanly pitye
She falsely murdered: the children that she bare
(Like a stepmother avenged for to be)
Cut their throtes, or that they were ware,
Against nature, there was none other spare:
But for hatred she had unto Jason,
After this murder she fled away anon,
So escapyng his indignation.
By craft of magike she went at liberty
To Athens, and in that region
She wedded was unto the king Ege:
Not long after a son by him had she,
The which child, mine auctour tells thus,
After Medea, called was Medus.
After whose name the famous region
Ynamed was, which called is Mede.
But following ever her old condition,
This Medea void of shame and dread,
Compassed has of wilful false hatred
That Theseus the son of king Ege,
With new poison shall devoured be.
But Theseus full like a manly knight
In repayryng home to his country,
Of high prudence aspied anon right
The mortal vengeance, the great cruelty,
Of this stepmother, which of enmity
Concluded has in her entencion
Him to destroy unawarely, with poison.
Her heart of malice, cruel, and horrible
As she that was with treason ever alied,
When that she saw her purpose most odible,
By king Egeus fully was aspied,
She has her heart and wits new applied
As in their books poets have compiled,
Again to Jason to be reconciled.
She fled away for fear of Theseus.
Lest he would done on her vengeance:
And finally as writes Ouidius,
And moral Seneke concludes in sentaunce
In his tragedies making remembrance
How Medea, like as poets said,
Unto Jason restored was again.
Touching the end of their furious discord
Poets make thereof no mention,
Neither tell no mean how they fill accord,
But if it were by incantation:
Which so well could turn up so down
Sundry things of love and of hatred,
And in Bochas of her no more I read.
Save when she had fulfilled her purpose,
Mine aucthour tells that Jason and Mede
Restored have again unto Colchos
Her father Oetes, and from his poverty
Brought him again into his royal see:
And to his crown by force they him restore,
Touching his end, of him find I no more.
Thus his fortune has turned to and fro,
First like a king having full great riches:
After living in poverty and woe,
Sythen restored to his worthiness.
Thus ever sorrow is meint with gladness,
(Who can aduert) in all worldly thing,
Record of Mynos the noble worthy king,
To whom I must now my style dress,
Following the traces of Bochasius.
The wiche Mynos, as Ovid does express,
Touching his birth he writes plainly thus
That he was manly, wise, and virtuous:
Son by descent of Jupiter the great,
And of Europa, borne to be heir of Crete.
And of his person wonders delitable,
Full renowined of wisdom, and science,
By diverse titles of laud commendable,
Of birth, of blood, of knighthode and prudence,
For by his study and entyre diligence,
He found first laws grounded on reason,
Whereby of Crete the famous region
Governed was, and set in stablenes,
All injuries and wrongs to reform
Made statutes, extorcions to repress:
Of right wisenes they took the first form.
And that each man should him conform
Like their degrees, subject and sovereign:
That no man had a matter to complain.
He made his lieges to live in quiet,
Clear shinyng in his royal noblesse,
With sword and scepter, sittyng in his sete:
And while he floured in his worthiness,
He took a wife of excellent fayrenes,
Daughter to Phoebus, in Bochas ye may se,
And she was called fair Pasiphae.
And her father by record of writing,
In his time was holden full famous:
Of the isle of Rhodes he was lord and king,
And in his days of port full glorious,
Right proud in arms and victorious,
Taking witness of Methamorphoseos,
His daughter had three children by Mynos.
The first a son called Androge,
And afterward full fair daughters twain,
Right goodly and womanly on to se:
But like as fortune did for them ordain,
They felt them selves in trouble and in pain,
The one called Ariadne, and Phedra the other,
Following their fate it might be none other.
Androgeus by king Mynos was sent
For he should profit in clergy,
To Athens, of virtuous intent
There to study in philosophy:
And for he began to increase and multiply,
And pass all other by study in learning,
And to excel his fellows in cunnyng,
They of envy and false malice, alas,
Made against him a conspiration:
And from a pinnacle sacred to Pallas.
Of full great height they made him tu^ble down
For which injury, Bochas makes mention,
His father Mynos avenged for to be,
Laid a great power about the city.
He cast him fully y^ no man should him let,
But that he would do cruelly vengeance:
And round about so sore he them beset,
With men of arms and with his ordinance,
That finallye he brought them to vttraunce.
And them constrained within a little space,
Their life, their death, submitten to his grace.
But while they made against him resistance,
Supposyng his power to withstand,
Nisus that was king of Megarence,
Against Mynos their party took on hand:
And often times as ye shall understand,
When king Mynos did the city assail,
Nisus within with mighty apparayle
Upon the walls stood in his defense,
When that Mynos full like a manly knight,
Fought without, with sturdy vyolence:
Like Mars him self in steel armed bright.
Whereof when Scilla once had a sight,
Daughter to Nysus aduertyng his prowes,
Anon for love she fell in great distress.
She was supprised with his high noblesse:
His manly force expert many fold,
Set Scilla in great heaviness,
For love of Mynos in Poets it is told,
Made her heart presume and be bold,
First her life to put in ieopardy
Her fathers life, the city, the clergy.
From her heart love has set aside.
Against nature, her blood and her kynred,
And all frendshyp from her began divide:
And of her worship she took no manner head.
Love made her cruel against all womanhede,
First her heart so sore set a fire,
Her fathers death falsely to conspyre.
For king Mynos being a straungere
Was so emprynted in her opinion,
Of creatures there stood none so nere,
And for his sake by full false treason,
She compassed the destruction
First of her father, and than of the city.
So strange a thing alas how might it be,
That a woman of years young and tender,
Could ymagen so marvelous a thing?
But it falls that creatures slender,
Under face of angelike lokynge,
Ben very wolves outward in workynge,
Also under color of their port feminine,
Some ben found very serpentyne.
Lambs in she wyng, shadowed with mekenes,
Cruel as Tygres, who does to them offense:
Of humble chere pretending a likeness,
But woe, alas what harm does appearance?
What damage does counterfaite innocence?
Under a mantell shroude of womanhede,
When feigned falsenes does the bridle led?
For this Scilla the kings daughter dear,
In whom he set his whole affection,
His hearts joy, his pleasaunce most entere,
His worldly bliss, his consolation,
But she all turned to his confusion.
Not like a daughter, but like a sorceresse,
His death compassed the story bears witness.
Her father had a fatal here that shone
Bryghter then gold, in which he did assure,
Manly to fight against his mortal fone:
For in his head while it did endure,
He should vainquishe and recure,
And through his knighthode to his encrese of glory
In every quarrel win the victory.
But wha^ king Nysus her father lay a sleep,
Upon a night parcel before day,
Full secretly or that he took keep,
The here of gold this Scilla cut away:
And unto Mynos armed where he lay,
She him presented through her ordinance,
Of false intent him for to do pleasaunce.
But in this matter like as writes Ouyde
Methamorphoseos, who so takes head,
Her father sleping, she knelyng by his side
Took a sharp knife without fear or dread,
While he lay naked, she carft a two his head:
And stale away of full false intent,
And to king Mynos ye head she does present.
And in her coming to his presence,
Her fathers head when she before him laid,
Nothing ashamed of her great offense,
Unto Mynos thus she did obrayed,
And with bold chere even thus she said:
My lord (quod she) with support of your grace,
Yeueth to my tale, leisure, time and space.
Certes my lord, love has excyted me
And constrained to this cruel deed,
To slay my father, destroy my city,
To forget my worship, forsake womanhead:
And made me hardy to make my father blede
Things horrible thus have I undertake,
For to accomplish, only for your sake.
My self disherited for love of your person,
Called in my country a false traytoresse:
Disconsolate, stale away alone,
Of new diffamed, and named a maistresse
Of false murder: I bring a great witness,
My fathers head and his deadly vysage,
Against nature to further your voyage.
Wherefore I pray that ye list advertise,
And consider like a gentle knight,
How I for love toward your great empryse
And to great furtheryng also of your right
Have first my father deprived of his might,
Raft him his life, dispoyled his riches,
To do pleasaunce to your high nobles.
And nothing ask I unto my guerden,
Neither to my reward that may avail,
But that I might have full possession
Of your person most worthy in battle:
For there is no treasure y^ might counteruayle
To my desire, as that you would in deed
Goodly accept me and my womanhede.
Ye may me save and spyll with a word,
Make most glad, and most dolorous:
I not require of you my sovereign lord
But that ye would be to me gracious.
For blood, and kin, and my fathers house,
All left behind, if ye list aduert,
And vndeparted give to you my heart.
Which to your highness ought enough suffice,
All thing considered in your royal estate:
Conceived also how in uncouth wise
For your love I stand desolate,
Save of your mercy full disconsolate:
Here is all and some, your love I bye so sore
But ye do grace, I can say you no more.
And when she had her tale told knelyng,
With a manner of pretense of womanhede,
Of all her treason a point not co^celyng:
The king astonished of her horrible deed,
By great advise peysed and took head,
It was not sittyng to prince nor to king
To do favor to so froward a thing.
With troubled heart and with a face pale,
His look up cast, said: God forbede
That ever in Cronicle, in story, or in tale,
That any man should of Mynos read
How he supported so venomous a deed:
Favor a woman, alas, and well away,
Which slough her father, when he in bed lay*
But for your hateful and unkind rage,
I pray the gods echone, and Saturn,
For to take vengeance on your false outrage
Every where, whither ye do return:
And every place where as ye soiourne.
Land and sea shortly to express,
They ben enfect with your cursednesse.
Your own mouth your outrage does accuse,
And your acts ben so abominable
That your gifts fully I do refuse:
They ben so froward, and so reprouable,
That your person disnaturell and unstable,
Within my court it were a thing not fair,
That ye should abide, or have repair.
Ye be so hateful on every side
And contrarious of condition,
I pray Cellus which oferth is gide,
And to Neptunus I make this orison,
As far as stretches their dominacion,
Under the bound of their regaly,
A dwellinge place that they to you deny.
When Minos had his answer thus devised,
On reason grounded and equite:
And Scilla saw how she was despised,
Knew no party, passage, ne country,
To find socour whether she might fly.
But dispeired like a traitouresse,
Toward the sea anon she began her dress
To enter the water plainly if she might,
For very shame her self for to shroude:
And when the gods thereof had a sight,
They turned her, as they y^ might and could
In to a quail, for to sing loud.
Her father Nisus they did also transmewe
In to a sparhauke the quail to pursue.
This was the end of Nisus and Scille.
And afterward of Athenes the town,
Was yielded up to stand at the will
Of king Minos: with this condition
Every year, by reuolucion,
They of the city should not delay
Nine of their children for a tribute pay.
This was by Minos the imposicion
Upon Athenes, and of very dread
They obeyed, as made is mention,
And their children year by year they led
In to Crete, the Minotaur to feed:
Unto this monstre ordained for repast,
Which at their coming devoured were in have.
But or that I forther do proceed
In this matter, I will do my cure
To declare if ye list to take heed,
Of this monstre to tell the engendrure,
Uncouth to hear and against nature:
For by the writynge of Ouidius,
This ugly beast was engendered thus.
In Methamorphoseos the manner ye may se.
Minos had a bulle of great fayrenes,
White as milk, and the queen Pasiphae
Loved him so hot, the story bears wytnes:
And Dedalus did his business,
By subtell craft, and made his gynnes so
That against kind with her he had to do.
And conceived a beast monstrous,
That was departed, half bull, half man:
And as the poet by writing techeth us,
Of al Minotaures thus the name began.
And Dedalus not long after, when
This mo^stre was by the queen forth brought,
This subtle workma^ has an house ywroght
Called Laberinthus, diverse and uncouth,
Full of wrynkels and of straungenes,
Ugly to know which is north or south,
Or to what part a man should him dress:
Folks were there blent with furious derknes.
Who that entered, his return was in veyn,
Without a clewe for to resort ageyn.
Of Minotaurus this was the habitacle,
Like a prison made for turmentry:
For dampened folk a paynefull tabernacle,
For all that lay there in ieoperdy,
The monstre must devour them, and defy.
And specially was ordained this turment,
For all that were down from Athenes sent.
But in this matter some folk vary,
And afferme how that queen Pasiphae
Of king Minos loved a secretarye,
Called Taurus, in Bochas ye may se:
And thus the king for all his ryalte
Disceiued was: for who may any while
Him self preserve, where women list begile^
For by this Taurus, Bochas bears witness,
Queen Pasiphae had a child full fair.
Minos not knowing by no likeness,
But the child was borne to be his heir.
His trust was good, he fell in no despair:
For some husbands, as poets have co^piled,
Which most assure, rathest ben begiled.
Innocents can not deem amys,
Namely of wives that been found true:
Clerks may write, but doutles thus it is,
Of their nature they love nothings new,
Steadfast of heart, they change not their hew.
Hawks best preued su^time a chek can make,
Yet for a fault, the foul is not forsake.
Of this matter write I will no more:
But aye the tribute and seruage of the town
Proceeds forth, they co^streyned were so sore,
Like as their lot turned up and down:
For there was made none excepcion
Of high ne low, neither sour ne sweet,
But as it fell, they were sent into Crete.
The statute was so inly rigorous,
They took their sort as it came about:
Till at the last it fell on Theseus,
That he might go forth among the route,
King Egeus son, being in great dout
Touchig his life, which might not be socored,
But that he must with other be devoured.
Which Theseus for his worthynesse,
And of his knighthode for his great encrese,
Through manly force and for his prowes,
Sometime was called the second Hercules:
Among Amasones he put him self in prese,
Wedded Ipolita, as books specifye,
The hardy queen called of Feminye.
And afterward to Thebes he is gone,
Help the ladies in especial,
Which that co^pleined upon the king Creon,
Which the^ distroubled, like their estate rial
To hold and halowe the festes funeral
Of their lords, queen's, and princesses,
Of wifely truth to she we their kyndnesses.
For when this duke the manner had seen,
And of Creon the great iniquite,
To the ladies he made deliver ayene
The lords bones, of ruth and of pity:
Yet in his youth out of this cite,
He was delivered by statute full odible
To be devoured of this beast horrible.
He gothe to prison for all his semelynesse,
As the statute felly did ordeyne:
But of ruth and tender gentylnes
Him to preserve from that deedly pain
Of king Minos ye goodly daughters twain
Ariadne shope a remedy,
And feire Phedra, that he should not dye.
Through their help he has y^ mo^stre slain,
That was dredful and ugly for to se:
By them he escaped, whereof he was full feign,
Led them with him toward his country:
And by the way deuoyde of all pity,
Ariadne full falsely he has forsake,
Against his suraunce, and Phedra he has take.
In mids the sea he left her in an isle,
Toward no party she knew no declyne:
She wepeth, she cries, alas the hard while,
For of her fate this was the mortal fine:
That for pite, Bachus the god of wine
Took her to wife, whose croune of stones fine
Does now in heaven with.ix. sterres shine.
Thus of Theseus ye may behold and se
To Ariadne the great unsteadfastness.
The great untruth, the mutabilite,
The broke assurance, and the new fanglenes:
But sely women keep their stedfastnes.
Ever vnfouled, save sumtyme of their kind,
They must the^ puruey when men be unkind.
Of Theseus I can no more now said,
In this matter to make of him memory:
But to king Minos I will resort again,
To tell how fortune ever false and transitory,
In what points defaced has his glory,
First of each one, Bochas does specifye,
Of Pasiphae the foul aduoutry,
Which was his wife, and stood well his grace.
To his pleasaunce she was most sovereign,
But a cloud of a small trespare
Made her lord at her disdain:
But he of wisdom bare preuily his pain.
For in such case, this is my sentence,
Let prudent husbands take them to patience.
On other things Mynos began also complain,
Having in heart thereof full great greuau^ce:
That he so lost his fair daughters twain,
And Minotaurus slain with mischaunce.
Also to him it was a great greuaunce
That Theseus was gone at liberte,
And from all tribute delivered his cite.
It grieved him also in countinaunce and there
That Theseus Ariadne forsook:
It liked him also not the manner
Unto his wife that he Phedra took.
And yet this Phedra, like as says my book,
Had two sons by this Theseus,
First Demophoon and next Antiochus.
Also Theseus after began him draw,
Toward Cecile, in steel armed clean:
With Peritheus, in arms his felawe
For to rauyshe Proserpina the queen:
But of intent Phedra full unclean,
Loved her stepsonn, called Ipolitus,
But for he was to her dangerous
And to her lust froward and contrary,
In his apport not goodly ne benign,
Of her false intent anon she began to vary,
Against him full felly to malign:
And to her prince of many token and sign
Of womanhede, she began him accuse,
Her auoutry falsely to excuse.
Who says that women can not ymagyne
In their deffence tales untrue,
To their desire if men list not enclyne,
Neither on their feyned false woe to tue*
Anon they can compass things new,
Fyshe and find out of their entencion,
A covert cloud to shadow their traison.
She has accused young Ipolitus
Of false auoutrye in his tender age:
Told and affirmed to duke Theseus,
With full bold chere, and full plain visage,
How he purposed for to do outrage,
Only by force her beauty to oppress,
Her lord beseching, to reform and dress
The great iniquity done to his wife
While he was abse^t, for thing y^ bare charge.
Wives of tales sometime ben inuentife
To suffer their tongues falsely flyen at large,
But folks ye list of damage the^ discharge,
Of such accusyng ne take they none head,
Till the truth be tried out in deed.
I mean nothing of wives that been good,
Neither of women ye flouren in innocence:
For god forbede and the holy roode,
But men should do due reverence
To their noblesse and their excellence:
Declare their bounte, and their virtue show,
And the^ cherishe, because there be but few.
Touching the accusing against Ipolitus,
Though if so were that it was falls in deed,
Yet he for shame and fere of Theseus
As in the story ye may behold and read,
In his heart he caught a manner dread
That he alas this sely young knight,
Fled and withdrewe hi out of his fathers sight.
His indignacion plainly for to eschew
Though by desert, in him there was no lack:
Of hasty dread as he began remewe
Or in a chare, or on horse back,
His horse afraid, there fell a sodeine wrack:
Down from a roch pendaunt as ye shall lere,
He and his chare were drowned both in fere.
Thus unguilty in his most lusty youth,
He was conveyed to his destruction:
The sclander conspired as it is well couth
By false Phedra: but in conclusion,
The sclander turned to her confusion.
For when she wist Ipolitus was deed
Through her defaut, anon for shame and dread
She took a sword full sharp ygrounde,
And there with all she raft her heart a tweine.
Lo how yt ve^geau^ce woll ever again rebou^de,
On them that falsely do their busy peine
To sclaunder folk: for like as they ordeine
With their diffames other folks to wit,
God at last their malice can aquite.
But some books of Phedra do record
That she ashamed and confuse of this deed,
Hing her self up full high with a cord:
Lo how false sclaunder can quite folks mede.
Wherefore I counsel every man take heed
In such matters as stand uncertain,
From hasty langage his tongue to refrain.
Among these stories woeful for to read,
All besprent with tears in his face,
Full suddenly Jhon Bochas began take heed
In mids the prease zisara came to place:
And how that fortune began also to manace
This proud duke, full mighty and notable,
Of king Jabyn called the great constable,
Of his host, leder and governor:
To Israel very mortal fo.
With people he rode like a conqueror,
And where that ever his meyny did go,
The earth quoke, people dredde him so:
Fled fro his face where as he came a far,
Nine hundred waynes he had for the wet,
Strongly inarmed with hokes made like sithes*
Who ye approached to mayme and to wound:
For this tirant of custom oftsithes
Had great delight the Jews to confound,
And all tho that his sword has found,
King Jabyn bad, prince of Canaan,
In Israel to spare child ne man.
This zisara was sent to be their scourge
By gods suffraunce their sins to chastise,
Their old offenses to punish and to purge,
As a flagell many sundry wise,
But when of reason they began better devise,
And for their trespaces to fall in repentance,
God began with draw the hand of his vengeance.
For in their mischefe they began their lord to know
Feeling the prick of his punicion:
And mercy than has unbent the bow
Of his fell ire and castigacion,
To God they made their inuocacion,
And he them herd in their mortal dread,
In Judicum the storye ye may read.
How in the while that this zisara
Shope him of new the Jews to oppress,
In their defense god sent them Delbora,
I prophetess, the story bears witness,
To give the^ counseil, their armeis to dress:
And by the spirit of her prophecy,
For to wythstande the great tyranny
Of zisara, which was descended down
With a great host into the field repeired:
But Delbora of high discrecion,
When that she saw the Jews dispeired,
And for to fight their corrages sore apeired,
She made them first devoutly in that dread
To cry to god to help them in their need.
She was their judge and their gouernes
Chief of their counsel, and of custom she
Causes dependinge of great auysenes,
That stood in dout, by dome of equity,
She tried them out under a palm tree*
And was not hasty no matter to determyne,
Till she the parties aforedyd examyne.
And when that she herd of the coming
Of zisara with full great puissaunce,
That was constable of that mighty king,
Called Jabyn, with al his ordinance,
Upon Jews for to do vengeance:
This Delbora began prudently entende,
The Jews party, by wisdom to defend.
She bad Barach, her husband, anon right,
Of Nemptalym.x. M. with him take,
Against zisara to fight for their right,
And that he should a great enarme take.
But he for dread this journey began forsake,
And durst not against him tho werrey
But she were present, and list him to convey.
Well well quod she, sith it stands so
That of wantrust ye have a manner dread,
I will my self gladly with you go,
You to support in this great need:
But trusts fully as ye shall find in deed,
That a woman, with laud, honor, and glory
Shall fro you win the price of this victory.
It followed after sothly as she said:
Auisely she made her ordinance.
And the chief charge on her self she laid,
As princess of Jews governance.
And prudently began her self auaunce,
With god conveyed and support of his grace,
With zisara to mete in the face.
And specially touching this viage,
God took away the spirit and the might
Fro zisara, his force and his courage,
That he was fearful to enter into fight:
Kept his chare, and took him to flight.
Knowing no place in suertie to abide,
Till that Jaell a woman did him hide
Within her tente, and al most deed for dread,
Under a mantell, desirous for to drink,
She gave him milk: the sleep fyl in his heed.
And while that he for heuines began wynke,
And sadly slept, she began her to bethynke:
Thought she would for zisara so shape,
That with his life, he should not escape.
She took a nail that was sharp and long,
And covertly began her self auaunce:
With a mighty hamer round and strong.
She drove y^ nail, lo this was her be^geau^ce,
Through his heed: se here the soden chance
On tirantes that trust on Fortune,
Which will not suffer them long to contune
In their false usurped tyranny,
To hold people in long subieccion.
She can them blandyshe with her flatery,
Under a color of false colluspon:
And with a sudden transmutacion,
Fortune them can that poor folk trouble,
Reuerse their pride, with her face double.
What should I lengre in this matter tarry*
Though that lordshyp be mighty and famous,
Let zisara be your examplary,
It not endures but it be virtuous.
Conquest, victory, though they be glorious
Unto the world, if virtue be behind
Men not rejoice to have their name in mide.
For Fortune through her frowardnes,
Has kings put out of their regions:
And she has also through her doublenes*
Dystroyed lynages with their successions*
Made not she sometime her translacions
Of the kingdom called Argiuois,
To be transported to Lacidemonois*
The same time when zisara the proud
Began gods people to put under foot,
Fames trumpe blewe his name up loud,
With sacred sownes semynge wondre sote:
But al his pride was rent up by the rote,
When his glory was outward most shyning.
But who may trust in any worldly thing*
Folk have before seen the valuacion
By remembrance of antiquity,
Of mighty Troy, and of I lion,
After distroyed by Greeks that cite:
To us declarynge the mutabilite
Offalse fortune, whose favor lasts no while
Showing ever truest, when she wol begile.
So variable she is in her delites,
Her whele untrusty and frowardly meuyng,
Record I take of the Madianites,
Their unware fall full dolefully pleynynge.
Which showed them self pitiously weeping
To Jhon Bochas, as he in writynge sought,
How y^ fortune against their princes wrought,
Which that governed the land of Madian*
Trustinge of pride in their great puissaunce,
Against Jews a war they began,
Purposinge to bring them to utterance.
But god that holds of war the balaunce,
And can of princes oppress the vein glory,
Yeueth where him list conquest and victory:
Not to great no^bre, nor to great multitude,
But to that party where he sees the right.
His dredful hand, shortly to conclude,
So holds up by grace, and yeueth light
The higher hand where he cast his sight,
List his power and his favor show,
Be it to many, orb it unto few.
The wrong party gladly has a fall,
Though there be Millions, many ^^o theran:
I take witness of Jerobaall,
Which is also called Gedian,
That with three.C. fought against the fan
Of Israel, the Bible can deuyse,
When he to God had done his sacrifice,
Showing to him a thing meruaylous:
When the fleece with silver dew full shene
Was spreint and wet, the storye tells thus,
And round about the soil and all the grene
Was found dry, and no drop seen:
In token only, this duke, this knightly man,
Should have the victory of all Madian.
This Gedeon took with him but a few,
Three hundred chase, which lapped the river.
God unto him such tokens did show,
And evidences before that were full clear,
That he should be of right good there:
And on no party his adversaries dread,
For another prowes, neither manhede.
Where god above holds champerty,
Their may against him be made no defense*
Force, strength, wisdom, nor cheualry,
Against his might, are feeble of resistance:
This was well preued in experience,
When three.C. with Gedeon in nombre,
So many thousands by grace did enco^bre.
This said people divided in to three,
With their trumpettes upon ye derke night,
By Gedeon that had the soueraynte,
With void pottes and laumpes therein light,
And thus arrayed they entered in to fight:
But unto them this token was first know,
When Gedeon his trumpe did blow.
They blewe echon and loud began to cry:
Brake their pottes, and shewted anon right,
As the story does plainly specifye,
Their laumpes showed with a full soden light:
Whereof their enemies astoinied in their sight,
Were so troubled upon every side,
That in the field they durst not abide.
The cry was this of them euerychon:
Thank to ye lord most noble and glorious,
Pryse to the sword of mighty Gedeon,
Which us has caused to be victorious:
Made our enemies most malicious,
Through influence only of his grace,
For very fear to fly before our face.
Thus can the lord of his magnificence,
The meke exalte, and the proud oppress:
Like as he fyndeth in hertes difference
So of his power he can his domes dress.
Mercy aye meint with his rightwysenes:
His judgments with long delay differred.
And or he punish pytie is aye preferred.
Lenuoye.
Mighty Princes, remember that your power
Is transitory, and no while abiding:
As this tragedy has rehearsed here,
By evidences notable ensuynge.
And by example in substance wytnessyng,
That all ty^antes (plainly to termpue)
Mo^e from t^eir state suddenly declyne.
Phoebus the fresh in his mydday sphere
His beams bryghtest and hotest out spredyng,
But cloudy skies often approach nere
To eclipse his light with their unware coming:
None erthly joy is here long abidynge,
Record of Tyta^, which stondmele does shine,
Yet toward night his stremes down decline.
When that fortune is fairest of her chere,
By appearance, and most blandishyng,
Than is she fallest each season of the year
Her soden change now up, now down turni^g:
The nighti^gale in May does freshly sing,
But a back winter can somer undermine,
And all his freshnes suddenly declyne.
All erthly bliss depends in a were,
In a balaunce vneuynly hanging.
Of princes and pri^cesses most sovereign and entere
In this tragedy conceyueth by redynge,
How that estates by unware chaunginge,
Sometime full worthy, their lives did fine,
Wha^ from their noblesse they were made to declyne.
Of mighty Iabyn king of Canaan of queen Iocasta, and how Thebes was
distroyed.

The.ix. Chapter.
Now must I write the great sobeyn fall
Of mighty Iabyn, for his iniquite*
Which unto Jews was enmye full mortal,
With scepter and crown reigning in Canane,
And upon Affrike had the souerainte,
Rebel to god, and list not him obey,
But ever ready his people to werrey,
The lord above seeing his tyranny,
Forbear his hand with full long suffrau^ce:
And was not hasty of his obstinacy,
Like his desert for to do vengeance.
But ever this Iabyn by continuance
Endured forth in his cursidnesse,
Till the sword of gods righwisenes
Was whet against this tira^t, to chastise
And to repress his rebellion:
From his kingdom (the story does devise)
In mids of his pride he was pulled down
To exemplify that such dominacion
As is found wilful truth to over cast,
God will not suffer in power long to last.
For this Iabyn was found always froward,
Of high disdain list not the lord know:
Therefore his power drew always bacward,
And his empire was after ybrought full low.
His riall fame fortune has overthrow,
His name eclipsed yt sumtime shone full clear,
Of great Cison, beside the ruiere.
Of queen Iocasta Bochas does also endite,
Princess of Thebes, a mighty great city:
Of her vnhappes he dolefully does write,
Imagining how he did her se
To him appear in great aduersite.
Like a woman that would in tears reine,
For that fortune began at her so disdeine.
And though she were defaced of figure,
There showed in her a manner majesty
Of quenely honor, plainly to discure
Her infortuns, and her infelictte,
And to declare plainly how that she
Of all princesses which stood in estate
Was her self the most unfortunate.
Which gave to Bochas full great occasion
When he saw her pitous apparayle,
For to make a lamentacion
Of uncouth sorrows, which did her assail
With a tragedy to weep and to wayle
Her importable and strange dedely strife,
Which that she had during all her life.
He write of her a story large and plain.
And of her birth first he does diffyne:
And affyrmeth in his book certain,
She was descended of a noble line.
In flouryng age also when she did shine,
She wedded was for her great beauty,
Unto the king of Thebes the city,
Which in his time was called Layus.
And when her womb by process did arise,
The king was glad and also desirous,
The childs fate to know in some wise:
And thought he would go do sacrifice
Unto Appollo, to have knowlegynge toforne
Touching his child, when that it was borne.
What should follow in conclusion
He was desirous and hasty for to se,
First by heavenly disposicion,
And by the favor if it would be
Of Appollos mighty deite:
To have answer among his wits al,
Of his child what fate should befall.
His answer though it were contrary
To his desire, yet was it thus in deed:
Appollo told him, and list no longer tarry,
That this child should verily in deed
Slay his father, and make his sides blede:
And with his hands, there was none other wey
But on his sword he must needs deye.
The king was heavy and trist on this sentence,
Sorouful of heart, god wot, and nothing feign:
And cast before through his providence,
That his son should in all have be slain:
And that he would not an hour delayne
After his birth, but bad his men to gone
Into a forest, and slay the child anon.
Like his byddyng the ministers did in deed,
Taking the child, tender, and young of age,
And into a forest with them they began it led,
To be devoured of beasts most savage:
The mother, alas, almost fell into rage
Seeing her child so inly fair of face
Shall thus be deed, and did no trespace.
Little wondre though she felt smert:
To al women I report me,
And unto mothers that been tender of heart,
In this matter fuges for to be:
Was it not ruth, was it not pite,
That a princess, a queen, alas,
Should know her child devoured in such caas*
After this birth Layus took good keep,
Without mercy, respite, or delay,
That unto one which kept his sheep
This young child vpou a certain day,
Shall be delivered, in all the have he may:
To this intent it might not be socoured,
But that it should of beasts be dettoured.
This said sheperde goth forth anon right,
The child beholding benign of look and face,
Thought in heart and in his inward light,
He should do to god a great trespace
To slay this child, wherefore he did him grace:
Took first a knife and did his busy pain,
Throughout his fete to make holes twain.
Took a small rod of a young osier,
Perced the fete, alas it was pite,
Bond him fast, and by good leiser
The young child he henge upon a tree,
Of intent that he ne should not be
Through wild beasts cruel and savage,
All suddenly devoured in their rage.
Upon the tree while he henge thus bound,
Of adventure by some occasion,
A strange sheperd has the child yfound,
Which of ruth and pity took him down:
Bare with him home in to his town,
Made his wife for to do her pain,
To foster the child with her breasts twain.
And when he was brought forth and recured,
And full made hole of his wounds sore,
This young child which all this has endured
When he in age began to were more,
And that nature began him to restore,
The said sheperde that loved him best of all,
After his hurtes, Edippus did him call.
For Edippus is no more to saine,
Who that conceyueth the exposicion,
But fete yperced throughout both twain,
In that langage, as made is mention.
And to Meropa wife of king Polibion
The shepeherde of full humble intent,
Began the child full lowly to present.
And for she was barreyne of nature,
She and the king of one affection,
Took Edippus both in to their cure,
As son and heir by adopcion,
To reign in Corinth by succession:
The king, the queen, and of Corinth the country,
Had the child in so great cheerte.
Let men considre in their discrecion,
Sudden change of every manner thing.
This child sent out for his destruction,
And now provided for to be a king:
And through fortune, aye double in working,
He that was refuse to beasts most savage,
Is now received to knyghtly heritage.
Destitute he was of his kynrede,
Forsake, and abject of blood, and of alie,
In te^dre youth his fete were made to blede,
Henge on a tree, and began for help cry:
But god that can in mischefe magnifye,
And reconfort folk disconsolate,
Has made this child now thus fortunate.
And has provided to be a kings heir,
Him that stood of death in adventure.
Fortune can show herself both foul and fair,
Folks brought low, full well again recure:
And such as patiently can endure,
And list not grudge against their chastisyng,
God out of myschefe can suddenly them bring.
But when Edippus was grow up to age,
Like a young prince encresynge in noblesse,
Lusty and strong, and fresh of his courage,
Of adventure it fell so in sothnesse,
Outher by strife, or by some frowardnes,
Or by sum conteke he had knowledgynge,
How he was not son unto the king
As by disce^t, but a far fortaine.
Whereupon full sore he began to muse,
And for to know, and be put in certain,
Thought he would some manner practike use:
And to the king he began him self excuse,
For a time to wythdrawe his presence,
Tyil he might knew by some experience,
Or by sum sign how the matter stood.
Thought he would do his diligence
To know his father, and also of what blood,
He was descended, and have some evidence
Touching troth how it stood in sentence:
And her upon to be certified,
Toward Appollo fast he has him hyed.
Which in Cirta worshypped was that time,
And gave answer through his beite,
To tolke that came at even and at prime,
Of every doubt and ambiguyte:
And there Edippus falling upon his kne,
After his offering, had answer anoue,
That toward Greece he should gone
Unto a mountain, that Phocis bare ye name:
And there he should of his kynred here.
Also like his fate, the answer was the same,
He should slay his own father dear,
And after that to Thebes draw him nere,
Wedde his mother of very ignorance,
Called Iocasta, through his unhappy chan^ce.
He list no longer tarry ne abide,
This said Edippus, but forth goes he:
And on his way he began anon to ride,
Tyi he the mount of Phocis did se,
Under the which stood a great country,
Called Cetoyens, which that time certain
Werreyed them that were on the mountain.
His father Layus through his chiualry,
With Citoyens is entered into battle.
And Edippus came with the party
Of the hill, armed in plate and mayle.
And as they began each other to assail,
Among the prese at the encountrynge,
Of adventure, Edippus flewe the king,
Unknown to him that he his father was,
Having thereof no suspection:
Passed his way platly this is the case,
And also unknown he came to the town
Of mighty Thebes, where for his hie renoun,
He was received with full great reverence,
Because that he slough in their defense
Sphinx the serpent horible for to se,
Sometime ordained by incantacions
For to distroy the town and the country,
By his compassed slightly questions
Sloughe man and child in all the regions,
Such as not could by wisdom or reason,
Make of his problem plain exposicion.
Who so passed by, he could him not excuse,
But the serpent would him felly assail:
With a problem make him for to muse,
Called of some men an uncouth deuinayle.
Which for to expowne who that did assail,
There was none help neither other remedy,
By the statute, but that he must dye.
And for all folk have not knowledgyng
Of this demand, what it was in deed,
I will reherce it here in my writing
Compendiously, that men may it read.
First this serpent (who that list take heed)
Was monstrous, and spoke against nature:
And if it fill that any creature
Man or woman, should forth by pass,
High or low of all that region,
As I said erst there was none other grace,
But if he made an exposicion
Of this serpents froward question,
He must dye, and make no defense:
The which demand was thus in sentence.
The serpent asked: what thing may that be,
Beast or foul when it is forth brought,
That has no power to stand, go, nor flee:
And afterward, if it be well ysought,
Goth first on four, or else gothe he naught,
After by precesse, on three, and than on twain,
And eft again, as nature does ordain,
He goth on three, and efte on four again,
Also kyndly right nature disposes it so,
And in a while it follows in certain,
To the matter which that he came fro,
He must of kind resort again thereto?
And who can not the meaning clearly se,
He of this serpent shall devoured be.
Which Edippus full sobre in his intent,
Not to rekell, or to hasty of langage,
But in his heart with great auy sement,
And full demure of look and of vysage,
Considred first this perilous fell passage:
Saw well tofore that it was no iape,
And full provided y^ no word should escape.
At good leysar, with hole mind and memory,
Seeing the ernest of this mortal emprise,
His life depending bitwixe death and victory,
This (quod he) plainly to deuyse,
Is first a child which may not suffyce
When it is borne (the truth is al day seen)
Without help him self to sustene.
After on four he naturally does crepe,
For impotence and grene tenderness,
Norices can tell that do them keep:
But afterward up he does him dress,
With his two fete: the third to express,
Is hand, or benche, or support of some wall,
To hold him up, lest he catch a fall.
And afterward, encresyng of his might,
To great age when he does attain,
Of his nature than he goth vpryght,
Mightily upon his legs twain:
Than comes age his power to restrain,
Crooked and lame like as men may se,
With a staff, or potent, to make up his legs three,
But when feblenesse or syckenes do assail,
On hands and fete he must bow and lout:
For croche, or potentes, may not than avail,
When lusty youth is banished and shet out.
Than eft again, hereof may be no dout,
With four fete to earth he does return,
Fro whe^s he came, there still to soiourne.
All came fro earth, and all to the earth shall,
Against nature may be no protection,
Worldly estates echone they be mortal,
There may no treasour make redemption.
Who clymeth hiest, his fall is lowest down.
A mean estate is best, who could it know,
Between hye presumynge, and bowing to low.
For who sit highest, stand in ieopardye,
Under danger of fortune, like for to fall:
Mischefe and pouerte as for their party,
Ben lowest brought among these people al.
Some folk taste sugre, and sum taste call.
Solomon therefore myrrour of sapience,
Between great riches and great indigence,
Asked a mean, called suffysance:
To hold him content of co^petent dispense,
Not to rejoice of to great haboundaunce,
And ever in pouerte to send him patience,.
Sobre with his plenty, in scarsnesse non offense,
As of grutching: but bitwene joy and smart.
Thank god of all, and ever be glad of heart.
Earth is the end of every manner man,
For the rich with great possession,
Dies as soon (as I reherce can)
As does the poor in tribulacion.
For death ne makes no division,
By syngler favor, but bitwene both ylich,
Of the poorest, and of him that is most rich.
This said problem concluded in this case,
Which y^ serpent began sleighly to propose,
That when a child is first borne, alas,
^ynde to his dethwarde anon does (...) dispose.
Each day a journey, there is none other gloss,
Experience can tech in every age
How this world is here but a pilgrimage.
This said Edippus first in Thebes borne,
Sent to a forest deuou^ed for to be,
Found and brought forth as ye have herd toforne,
And after drawing home to his country,
Slough his father, so unfortunate was he:
Of froward happes followynge al his live,
As this tragedy his fortune shall discriue.
But for that he through his hye prudence,
Unto the serpent declared every dele,
He slough him after, by knightly vyolence,
More by wisdom, than by armure or stele:
Stace of Thebes can tell you this full well.
Which was one cause if ye list to seen,
Wh^^through Edippus, wedded has y^ queen
Called Iocasta, princess of that country:
His own mother, unknown to them both.
And though she were right fair upon to se,
With this marriage y^ gods wereful wroth,
For their aliaunce nature began to loath:
That a mother as ye shall understand,
Should her son take to be her husband.
There was therein no conuenience
To be supported by kind, ne by reason,
But if it so be the heavenly influence
Disposed it by the inclinacion
Of some false froward constellacion,
Caused by Saturn, or Mars the froward star,
To engendre debate, or some mortal war.
In this matter plainly thus I deem,
Of no connyng, but of opinion:
Though he were crowned with scepter and diadem
To reign in Thebes the strong mighty town,
That some aspect came fro heaven adoun,
Unfortunate, froward, and full of rage,
Which again kind joined the marriage.
He crowned was by assent of all the town,
Flouryng a season by soueraynte of piece:
And while he held the possession,
Sons and daughters he had doubtless.
The first son called Ethiocles,
Polynices called was that other,
(As says Bochas) the second brother.
Also he had goodly daughters twain,
The eldest called was ^ntigone,
The second named was Imeyne:
And both they were right fair unto se,
The queen Iocasta might no gladder be
Than to remember when they wexe in age,
Her gods had encresed their lineage.
It was her joy and her felicity,
To se her children, that were so inly fair:
But after joy there comes aduersite,
And hope assured wanhope does often appayre*
Co^trarious trust will gladly their repair
Where false wenyng in heart is conceived,
Through ignorance, which has many disceiued
What thing in earth is more disceyuable,
Than when a man supposes verily
In prosperity for to stand stable,
And from his joy is remeued suddenly*
For where fortune is found to hasty,
To trise folk, she is grievous to endure:
For sudden chaunges be hateful to nature.
Unware woe that comes on gladness,
Is unto hertes right passinge encombreous:
And who has felt his part of wealfulnesse
Sorrow suynge on, is to him odious.
And worst of al, and most contrarious
Is when estates highest of renoun,
Ben from their noblesse, suddenly brought down.
There is no glory which that shyneth here,
That false fortune can so magnify,
But when his laud brightest is and clear,
She can eclips it with some cloudy s^^e
Of unware sorrow, only of envy:
Sees of Edippus an open evidence,
Which by his life had experience
Of high noblesse: and therwyth also,
Part importable of great aduersite:
His joy ever meynt with full mortal woe.
For while he reigned in Thebes the city*
And Iocasta with full great ^o^alte,
Within the country there fyl a pestilence,
The people infectyng with his violence.
Through all the land, and all the region,
In every age, but most grievously
On them echone that were of that town,
The infection spread most specially:
And of vengeance the swerd most rigorously,
Day by day began to byte and ^a^ue,
Of each estate causyng folk to sterue.
Thus began to increase the mortalite:
That every man stood in ieopardy
Of their lives throughout the country,
So importable was their malady,
That ye might hear the people clepe and cry,
Dispeyred so were they of their lines,
Void of all socour, and of their preservatives.
They sought herbs, and spices in their cofers,
And began to seek for help and other socours:
The cause enquiringe of prudent philosofers,
And of their most expert diuinours,
Why that the gods with so sharp shours
Of pestilence, and in so cruel wise
List them, alas, so mortally chastyse.
But among all, in soth this is the case,
There was found one full prudent and wise,
A prophet, called Tiresias,
Of prophecy having a sovereign prise:
Which affirmed, and said in this wise,
As unto him was showed by miracle,
Phoebus him self declarynge the oracle:
Cause of this syckenes and these maladies,
As the gods plainly have disposed,
(And Senecke writes also in his tragedies)
Though the cause be secret and yclosed:
Unto the time there be a king deposed,
Which slew his father and raft him his life,
And has also take his mother to his wife,
Till this be done, and execute in deed,
There may be made no redemption:
But pestilence shall multiply and sprede
Ever more and more, through that region.
Till unto the time that he be put a down
Fro his crown, which not long agone
His father slough, among his mortal fone,
And has his mother wedded also,
Against law and against al right:
Till vengeance upon that crime be do,
There shall be war, pestylence, and fight,
Sorrow, and strife, and every manner wight
Of veugeaunce his neighbor shall hate,
Brother with brother, and blood with blood debate.
This is al and some, there may be no socour.
Which brought the people in great heauynes,
For Tiresias the great diuinour,
By propher^ told them thus express:
And at the last by tokens and witness,
Men understood, by signs out showing,
This pestilence was brought in by the king.
And though the people gave no credence
To Tiresias ne to his prophecy,
The queen Iocasta caught au evidence,
And in her heart a full great fantasy,
Specially when she did epsy
Of Edippus the fete that were wounded,
How this tumor was on troth ygrounded.
Because also there was a diuinour
Which told tofore, that Edippus should be
To Layus of Thebes successor
Whereby the king, the queen, and the ryte,
Fyl in great trouble and great aduersite,
Well more than I by writing can report,
For there was nothing yt might the^ reco^fort.
Full often in the day Iocasta began to swoune,
And king Edippus to sobbe, cry and weep,
In salt tears as they them would drown:
Death cra^pishing in to their heart began crepe,
A day co^plainyng, a night they may not sleep,
Cursynge the hour of their natiuyte,
That they should live that day for to se.
Their mortal chance, their dedly adventure,
Their fortune also which began on the^ froun,
Inpacient, and doleful to endure,
Their froward fate, with their lokes broun:
The king foryre cast away his crown,
And began to ^ace, for co^straint of his pain,
Out of his heed his woeful eyes twain.
Day and night he cried after death,
Hateful to come in any man's sight:
Most desirous to yield up the breath,
Woeful in heart to come in any light,
Coorbed for sorrow, feeble to stand upright,
And specially in his deedly distres,
For dread and shame he dared in derkenes.
The cruel constr^int of his most grenance
Was, that his sons had him in dispyte:
Which began his sorrow greatly to auance,
For him to scorn was set all their delight,
Was never none that stood in worse plyte,
For thus lyeng and destitute of chere,
Unto the gods he made his prayere:
Beseching the^ with a full doleful heart,
Upon his woe to have sum compassion:
And that they would for to avenge his ^inert,
Bitwene his sons make a division,
Each to bring other to destruction.
This was his prayer in substance,
That each on other may take vengeance.
In years few, for their unkindness,
They herd his prayer as ye have herd devise:
The brethren two through their cursidnes,
Each began other mortally despise,
For lack of grace, and for false couetyse:
Each for his party desirous in deed
Tofore other to reign and succeed.
And thus these brethren most unfortunate,
Bitwene them self fill at discencion:
And finally, this unkindly debate
Brought al Thebes to distruccion.
Yet was there made first a conuencion
By enterchangi^g y^ each should reign a year,
The the other absent to play, and come no nere.
This concluded by their both assent
And by accord of that region,
Polynices rode forth and was absent,
Ethiocles took first possession:
But when the ye re by reuolucion
Was come about, he false of his intent,
Unto the accord denied to assent.
This was a cause of their both strives:
Polynices was thus put out of his right,
Till Adrastus that king was of Argyues,
which through al Greece gretest was of might,
Sent unto Thebes, Tideus a knight,
His son in law, to treat of this matter,
And the cause finally to lere:
Where through the king called Ethiocles,
Would condiscende of truth and of reason,
To stynt war, and to cherishe piece:
After the accord and composicion
Up to deliver Thebes that mighty town,
Unto his brother, which abse^t was without,
Now that his year was fully come about.
But he was false, and frowardly began vary,
Ethiocles from his conuenci^n:
For which Adrastus no longer would tarry
When Tideus had made relacion,
But called anon throughout his region
All the worthy, both nere and far,
Against Thebes for to begin a war.
For this cause like as ye shall lere,
Polynices to force his party
Ywedded had the kings daughter dear
I mean of Adrastus, flower of chyualry,
When Tideus did him certifye
Touching the answer of Ethiocles,
And of his truth, how he was recheles,
False of his promise, and cursedly forsworn.
For to his truth none aduertence had he,
Neither to the accord yt was made beforne
Touching y^ deliuerau^ce of Thebes the city:
But who that list the storye clearly se
Of these two brethren, and their discencion,
And how Adrastus lay to fore the town,
And how Tideus through his high prowes,
Fought by the way going on message:
And how of Greece all the worthiness,
With king Adrastus went in this viage,
And of the mischefe that fill in that passage
For lack of water, till that I siphile
Norishe of Ligurgus so fair upon to se,
Taught Tideus to find out a river,
She that did in fayrnesse so excel:
Ne how the serpent most ugly of his chere,
Of ^ig Ligurgus y^ child slough at the well:
Neither how Amphiorax fill down to hell,
All to declare me seemed was no need,
For in the siege of Thebes ye may it read
The storye hole: and made there is mention
Of either part, their puissau^ce, and their might
And how Adrastus lay tofore the town,
And how they inette every day in fight.
And how Tideus the famous knight
So re^omed in acts marcial,
Was slain, alas as he fought on the wall.
And how the brethren met among the prese,
Like two Tigres or lions that were wode,
With sharp speres, this is doutlesse,
Eueryche of them shed others heart blood:
This was the fine, and thus with the^ itstode,
Save at their feestes called funeral,
There fell a marueyle which I tell shall.
When they were brent in to ashes deed,
Of their envy there fill a full great wonder
Among the brondes and the coals read,
High in the air the smokes went a sunder,
The one to one party, and that other yonder.
To declare the storye, me list not feign,
The great hatered y^ was bitwixt hem twayn.
Thus for their ire, and false discention,
All the lords and all the chiualrye,
Were slain of Greece, and also of the town,
And rote of all (mine aucthour list not lie)
Was false alyaunce, and fraternall envy:
And chief ground with all the surplusage,
Who search aright, was unkindly marriage.
The queen Iocasta felt her part of pain,
To se her chylder each of them slay other:
Her son, her lord, blind on his eyes twain
Which to his sons was father and also brother,
Fortune would it should be none other.
Also Parchas sisters which be in number three,
Spanne so the threde at their nativity.
Also when Iocasta stood thus disconsolate,
And saw of Thebes the subversion,
The country destroyed, and made desolate,
The gentle blood shed of that region:
Without comfort or consolacion,
Thought she might be no more appeyred,
But of all hope fully lo dispayred.
Trist and heavy, pensyfe, and spoke no word,
Her sorrows old and new she began aduert,
Took the sword of him that was her lord,
with which Edippus smot Layus to the heart:
She to ^inyshe all her pains smarte
And fro the body her soul to divide,
Ro^e her self throughout every side.
She weary was of her woeful life,
Seeing of Fortune the great frowardnes,
How her diffame and slander was so rife,
And of Edippus the great wretchedness.
Also of her sons the great unkindness,
All these things weyed on her so sore,
That for distress she list to live no more.
Bochas writes concerning her fayrenes,
Constraynt of sorrow caused it to fade:
The famous light also of her noblesse
And all the clearenes of her days glade,
With unware harms, she was so over lade,
Of very anguyshe that she her self did hate,
So inly contrary disposed was her fate.
Thus death deuoureth with his bitter gall
Joy and sorrow, avoid of all mercy:
And with his dart he makes down to fall
Rich and pore, them markyng suddenly.
His unware stroke smites indifferently,
From him refusyng favor and all mede,
Of all estates he takes so little head.
Better is to dye than live in wretchedness,
Better is to dye than ever live in pain,
Better is an end than deadly heaviness,
Better is to dye than ever in woe remain:
And where y^ mischefe does folk to complain
By woeful co^straynt of long co^tinuaunce,
Better it is to dye tha^ live in such greuau^ce.
Takes ensample hereof and a priefe,
Of king Edyppus that was so long ago,
Of queen Iocasta that felt so great mischief,
And of their children remember also,
Which ever lived, in envy, sorrow and woe.
Fortune, alas, during all their days,
Was so froward to them at all assayes.
Touching Edippus process find I none,
What end he made in conclusion:
Save Bochas writ how that king Creon,
Cosen and heir by succession,
Exiled him chayned far out of the town.
Where he endured mischefe, sorrow, and dread
Till Attropos vntwyned his lives threde.
Lenuoy.
IN this tragedy three things ye may se:
The pride of Iabin and false presumption
Of queen Iocasta the great adversity,
Of king Edippus the inclinacion
To vices all: and the division
Of the two brethren, plainly us to assure
Kingdoms divided may no while endure.
Omne regnum in se diuisum desolabitur.
For who saw ever kingdom or country
Stand in quiet of possession,
But if there were, right, peace, and equity,
And just accord without discention,
Void of untruth and false collusion*
Plainly declaryng by ensample and scripture
Kingdoms divided may no while endure.
Sees here example of Thebes the city,
And how that noble mighty region
Through their froward false duplicitie,
With war were brought to destruction,
Their promise broken, and their covert treason,
Showed by their harms ipossible to recure,
Kingdoms divided may no while endure.
Princes, princesses which have the soueraintie
Over the people, and domination,
Ifye list long live in felicity,
Cherishe your subjects, do none extorcion.
And advertise, of wisdom and reason,
As this tragedy does to you discure,
Kingdoms divided may no while endure.
The.x. Chapter.
How Atreus king of Messene wrought against his brother Thiestes, slew his three
children, dismembered them in pieces and made Thiestes to eat of their flesh,
and drink of their blood.

BOchas the Poet auctour of this book
Him purposyng to gather and compile
Diverse stories, anon his pen he took:
Him remembryng within a little while,
In this chapitle began direct his style
To write the story, hye and compendious,
A forne all other, of duke Theseus
Lord of Athens, a famous great city,
Right strong and mighty on every side.
But at his back Bochas did one se,
Which cried loud, and bade he should abide:
Bochas (quod he) fro the me list not hide
My woeful case, ne in no wise spare,
My piteous complaynt to the to declare.
I am Thiestes besprent all with weeping,
Drowned in tears as thou may well se:
Sometime son of the mighty king
Pelops, and borne also parde
Of queen Hippodamea excellent of beautye.
And for thou art desirous to endite
Of people unhappy and their woe to write,
My will is this anon that thou proceed.
Turn thy style, and take thy pen bliue,
Leave Theseus and take of him none head,
But first my tragedy that thou discryue:
For I suppose that in all thy live,
That thou saw never a thing more dolorous
More unhappy, froward, ne more piteous
Than is, alas, my mortal adventure:
Incomperable, the sorrow surmounting
Of queen Iocasta, most woeful creature,
Or of Edippus his fate ever complaynyng
For my complaynt has none endyng
But lasts ever, and bears me witness,
No woe resembles unto my heaviness.
And with y^ word John Bochas still stood*
Full soberly to give him audience:
And in the place demurely abode.
To hear the substance of his mortal offense,
Which thus began to show the sentence.
O John (quod he) I pray the take good head
My woe to write, that men may it read.
Alas, my brother rote of unkindness,
Atreus called of reason, sours and well,
And finder out of treason and falsenes,
(For all other in fraud he does precell)
Whose covert hate is more than I can tell,
I supposyng of very innocence
In him no malice, disceite, nor none offense,
But as brother should a brother trust,
I trusted him, of heart, will, and, thought:
By appearance none other cause I wist,
For in his person I supposed naught
That ever he culd so false a thig have wroght
But who may sooner another man deceive,
Than he in whom no malice men conceive*
I demed of him as of my true brother,
Wenyng he had faithful ben to me:
I saw no sign, ne I knew none other,
In him suposynge no duplicitie.
But woe alas, how might it ever be,
Or who did ever in any story find,
Blood unto blood to be so unkind?
I will pass over to tell the worthiness,
Touching the estates of our progenitors,
Of our kynred, and the great noblesse,
I tell nothing nether of our predecessors,
Ne of my youth, how passed ben the flowers:
I leave all this, and unto mind call
The wretchedness that I am in fall.
My brother found a false occasion
Against me, and began a cause feyne
To banish me out of our region:
And began at me of hatred to disdain,
Upon me affirmyng in certain
In our kingdom which called is Missene,
I should have lien by his wife the queen.
This he compassed full falsely of malice,
Him self well knowing that it was not so:
Ever found unkind and misauise,
Not like my brother, but like my deadly ^o.
And to increase great percell of my woe,
By long process in his entencion,
He ^^^^gined my destruction.
And his chief cause was false couetise
Touching this thing which he did fame
And yet this kingdom truly to devise,
Should have be^ departed between us twain
But against truth he did so ordain,
Me to exyle out of that region,
Him self alone to have possession.
Yet in his heart he cast an other wile,
To my undoing and desolation,
To the place whence he did me exile
Under a shadow of false collusion,
To make a mane^ reuocation:
Of brotherhead showing a pretense,
Me to restore again to his presence.
To be accepted as a brother should:
With full accord still with him to abide,
All miuries of which before I told,
On either party forget and set aside.
That nothing after should our love divide,
But of one will and one entencion,
Lead all our life without division.
Whereof the people were full glad and light,
Throughout Missene that mighty region.
At my resortyng found I every wight
Ready of heart and whole affection
Me to receive into that noble town.
And none so ready by signs out showing,
To make me chere in sothe as was the king.
There is no damage in comparison,
That may be lykened by no resemblaunce
To feigned truth and simulation,
When fraud is hyd with a fair countenance,
Pretending truth outward by deceyuaunce,
And underneath of most false intent,
Of doubleness dares the serpent.
As under flowers is shrouded the dragon,
For to betray by sudden vyolence,
Such folk as have no suspection,
But truly mean in their pure innocence,
Till they be caught dispurueyed of defense:
Or as a fish with bayte of false pleasaunce,
The hoke not seen is brought to mischaunce:
Thus semblably at my home coming,
I was received with every circumstaunce:
Like as half heir and brother to the king.
And he pretending as by countenance,
That he had so inly great pleasaunce
Of my repair, of truth he told so
For reioysyng that he said he would go
Unto his gods to do some obseruaunce
For this accord, and humble sacrifice:
Made his ministers with faithful attendaunce
To wait on me in all their best wise.
It needs not to tell ne devise
Neither by writing in books sor to set,
Half the joy he made when we met.
First how friendly he did me embrace,
Of hearty gladness within his arms twain*
And how for joy the tears on his face
Full entirely began distyll and rain:
That for my party he could not me restrain,
But that I must of frendshyp fraternall,
Weep as did he, in his estate royal.
The wily wolf that cast him to deuou^
The sely lamb which can no defense,
Ne none help him self to succor,
So feeble he is to make resistance,
Which demeth truth of false appearance,
What wonder is it the fraud not conceived
Though such lambs unawarely be disceiued?
Though that roses at midsomer be full sote,
Yet underneath is hyd a full sharp spyne:
Some fresh flowers have a full bitter rote,
And lothsom galle can sugar undermine,
In dredful storms y^ sun among does shine
And under a shadow of feigned frendlyheade
There is no frendshyp so perilous to dread.
Thus reme^bryng the faithful words stable
Of my brother showed unto me
At our metyng the kissyng amiable,
The assured couenauntes of our fraternity,
But often time men may behold and se
That lilies grown among these nettles thick
And ^^oure delice in mids these wedes wicke.
Thus while I rested in the kings house,
Nothing aduertyng his deadly cruelty,
His old hatred was so venomous,
And so odible to destroy me:
Him self to avenge he took my children three,
And sikerly is it not a wonder,
He cut their throtes with a knife asunder.
For he thought that it did him good
Them to dismember into pieces small:
And in a dessell for to gather their blood
While they say still and looked on him pale.
This was his deed in a desert vale
Within a cave that no man should espy,
Treason conspired of his false tyranny.
This was the substance of his sacrifice,
To slay my childer, and make their hearts blede.
I trow the Gods thereof did agrise,
Of his false offrynge when they took head.
He did their members after roast and sede,
And with this vyande most abominable
He made me to be served at the table.
In covert cruses (also thus it stood)
To stau^ch mi thirst through his cruel ve^gea^ce
He made me unknow drink their blood.
Was not this thing to gods displeasaunce?
Yes I dare say, for by demonstraunce,
Upon this deed without more obstacle,
The sun in heaven showed a miracle:
Which sore agrysed might not behold
With his beams thereon to cast his sight,
For displeasau^ce his clearenes began wtholde
And for vengeance to withdraw his light,
The day turnyng for horror into night,
When he shone bryghtest in his midday spear,
Shrouded his face and would not appear.
But I alas upon this case horrible
That could not ymagyn ne think,
On any matter that was so odible,
Eat their flesh, their blood also did drink:
Which so sore does to mine heart synke,
That I may not touching this adventure
The circumstaunce for constraint discure.
It needs me not to make rehearsayle
Touching mine exyle, of all manner things,
Of diverse sorrows that me did assail,
My woeful sighs, ne my grievous wepings:
Ne upon nights my dolorous wakinges.
My pouert, nether how I stood in dread,
To lose my life, whereof Bochas take heed.
And remember all the circumstaunces,
If ever thou saw of high or low degree,
More contrary or more unhappy chauntes,
Than thou have heard remembered here of me
Wey in balaunce my sorrows, let me se
If any sorrow or mischefe vnrecured,
May counterpayse to that I have endured?
Mine infortunes I found them aye so fell
Without favor and succoure, dispurueyed.
My brother on me was ever so cruel,
That I full often desiered to have died:
For to this day my spirit has been conveyed
With sorrow and woe deuoyde of all refuge,
Wherefore I pray the, O Bochas be my judge.
And in thy writing leave me not behind,
Nether in thy book that thou not disdain,
Among tho folk that thou have me in mind,
Which yt for sorrow, weep, wayle, and plain:
And thus Thiestes rehearsyng all his pain,
Like as he would him self in pieces rende,
Made unto Bochas of his tale an end.
The.xi. Chapter.
How Atreus excuses him self of murder, and of his brothers aduoutry done
with Europa queen.

ATreus came after with a full pale chere
And of envy full dead in his vysage,
Unto Bochas began to approach nere,
Like as he had be fallen in a rage,
And furiously abrayde in his langage,
How may this be that like a man were wode
Thiestes has his venym sow abroad?
And like a rybaude falsely me accused?
Notwithstanding that I full clearly se
Mine infortunes which may not be refused,
So sore alas they work against me.
And though Thiestes false and untrue be,
And unto the Bochas with a face pale
Against me has forged here a tale.
Which in effect shall be found untrue,
If I have time my complaynt to declare:
For I purpose to tell a tale new
Fro point to point, and for no man spare,
How he was ground and rote of all my care,
And over, like as it is befall,
Reherce the beginning of my sorrows all.
Sometime when I reigned in Missene,
Of age lusty flouryng in my freshenes,
With my wife Europa that was queen,
Most reuomed that time of fayrenes,
Thiestes than as ground of all falsenes,
As a traitor his time did espy,
Through his false fraud and flattery,
Compassed a mean within my city,
By sleighty wyles that were incomparable,
To corrupt my wives chastity,
My bed defoulyng a thing intolerable,
And to the Gods very abominable:
Vsyng the queen to his fleshely pleasaunce,
Till unto the time that in continuance
She by him had sons two or three,
Echone brought forth in false aduoutry:
Demyng none other but they had be
Mine own children, till that I did espy
How this swyne through his false lechery
This Thiestes, after Europa
Lay with his daughter called Pelopeia.
And by process forth a child she brought
Called Egistus which when he came to age
As says Bochas much treason wrought:
For by his malice and his great outrage,
Destroyed was all whole the lynage
Of Tantalus, which by his living
In Frygia raygned as lord and king.
But this Egistus of whom I spoke toforne
Falsely begotten (mine auctour says ye same)
Of Pelopeia, anon as he was borne,
To hyde the slander, and also the fame,
Of Thiestes, and also to save his name,
When he was but a day of age,
He was out cast to beasts savage
To be devoured: the story is well couthe.
A melche got God list for him provide,
To foster him in his tender youth.
He night and day liynge by her side,
Within the forest thus he did abide:
Unto the time he began grow in age,
Than to the court he holds his passage.
Wherefore (O Bochas) of heart I pray the,
Which of these stories is most terrible
Of Edippus, Iocasta, or of me*
Tell on anon if it be possible,
Which of these sorrows is most penible?
Of the Thebane brethren full of woe and tene,
Or of us twain brethren of Missene?
I am aknowe as for my party,
Of vengeance I did a cruel deed:
I slough his children of malice and envy,
And tosted them when they were dead,
Only because, if thou list take heed.
That he begat the^, as rote of all this strife,
Upon Europa which that was my wife.
Such hateful things each man should loathe,
Which apparteyneth to murder and treson:
Thus may I say we be unhappy both.
He first by trespace of fornication,
Done by the queen within my region:
And I slaundred on that other side,
Of hasty vengeance to be an homicyde.
My bed he defouled by his aduoutry,
To God and man a thing most detestable:
And I of malice and false melancholy,
Slough his childer, and served the^ at the table.
Thus enterchaunging if it be commendable,
Each was desirous through our unhappy chance
Upon other to do vengeance.
Our great hatred most odious found of all,
Our crueil deeds wrought on either side,
Senecke reherceth them in especial
In his tragedies, and there he does divide
Our complayntes, our malice, and our pride
Our fatal end in sorrow and mischefe fined,
When Attropos our lives threde vntwyned.
When John Bochas fully had espied
Of these two brethren the accusations,
And how they had maliciously replied,
Each against other in their discentions,
He began duly to hear their mocions:
Put up his pen, and wrote not more a word,
Of their fury, ne of their false discord.
Lenuoy.
THis tragedy shows a figure,
A manner of image and also likeness.
How contrary it is unto nature,
Blood unto blood to show unkindness:
This woeful story can well bear witness,
All such debates ben as ye shall find,
Hateful to God and contrary unto kind.
For there is no more dreadful adventure
Than in kynred to find frowardnes,
Neither no damage more perilous tendure,
Than in fre^dshyp when there is strau^genes:
A manner party by example I dare express.
To se the tree debate against the rynde,
To God right hateful, and contrary to kind.
Every beast, and every creature
Loves his se^blable of kind right I guess:
And wha^ in one truth does tway hearts assure
Vndeparted of very perfitenes,
It were a vycious froward cursednes*
Their love to vnknytte, to lose, or unbind,
Hateful to God, and contrary unto kind.
Princes, pryncesses, do your busy cure,
From you to avoid, strife, fraud, and doublenes:
Remember you upon the unhappy cure
Of these two brethren, and their wretchedness,
And of their both malicious wilfulnes,
And of their strife, have this well in mind:
To God right hateful, and contrary to kind.
The.xii. Chapter.
Of duke Thesius and Ariadne that saved his life in a cave, and how he like a
forsworn man forsook her, and wedded fair Phedra, which after slew her self.

A Thenes when it was in his flowers,
Was called nourish of philosophers wise
Princess of poets and expert orators,
Su^me of all sciences as clerks can devise,
Whence all cunnyng most clearly did arise:
Named of Greece the lantern and the light,
Which through al earth shed his bemes bright
With noble titles which ben out of number
In every coast his renome did shine:
The fame thereof was clipsed with none vmber,
All other schools it did so enlumine,
For in that city plamely to determine,
Of the.vii. arts, as from one head did spring
As out of rivers, streams of all cunuyng.
These sciences were called liberal,
Only of fredome, fraunchise, and liberty,
For of a stock that were proved thrall,
There should no branch study in that city:
But the ilke blood that were found free,
Both by descent, and liniall high noblesse,
There to scholey should have entresse.
This city was sacred to Mynerue,
For their wisdom and their sapience:
Of Mercury the feasts they observe,
For rethorike and for eloquence.
And mighty Mars gave them influence
With glad aspectes, their party to amend,
Nobles of knighthode, their clergy to defend
This town was nobled by title of other things
And most glorious rekened in that age,
By succession of dukes and of kings,
Among which, duke Thesius by lynage
Son of Egistus, full fresh in his courage,
Excellyng all of prudence and manhede
That ever did the crown there possede.
For to that city through his noblesse.
In their defense, such trust, such affiaunce,
He gave to them by his expert prowes,
Of his triumphs so great abundance:
And specially their renome to auaunce,
He made them free their truage to let,
Against Mynos the mighty king of Crete.
For by his force (the story is well couthe)
Them to franchise and all that region,
The Mynotaur he slough in tender youth.
And afterward he of devotion,
To acquit him self like a champion,
Thereof made solemn sacrifice,
To Jupiter in most humble wise.
And of a Theater called Maraton,
Duke Theseus had the victory,
After he went to Colchos with Jason,
Chief of counsel, as made is memory.
And by process to augment his glory,
With Hercules his brother to conucy,
Against Amasones he went to warrey.
Conquered them, his manhood was well seen,
His force, his noblesse, in that mortal strife:
And after that Ipolita the queen
This Theseus took unto his wife.
And for his brother he ieoparded his life,
Duke Perithous, when he did undertake
The Centaures to outray for his sake.
This Centaures poets specifye,
And Seruius makes mention,
How they were sumtyme engendered on a sky
When first their father called Ixion
Was enamored full many a day agone,
Upon Juno, because she was so fair,
Gouernesse, and goddess of the air.
This Ixion was her secretary.
And for her fayrenes and excellent beauty,
Loved her hot: albeit she was contrary
To his desire, Bochas read and ye may se:
Him to delude, he writes how that she
Her self transformed, as she y^ might and could,
Into the likeness of an heavenly cloud.
This Ixion plainly supposyng
It was her self: and even thus he wrought
The cloud embracyng without more tatiynge,
Of his folly the goddess there he sought.
And with their medlyng forth they brought
The Centaures, these beasts matuelous,
Which of nature ben found monstrous.
Half man, half horse, departed thus in twain
And wonderful by their description,
Of false malice did them self ordain,
On Pirithous to make enuasion:
And him to put out of possession
Of his wife called Ipodamen,
And her to rauishe maugry all his men.
There were of the^ an hundred in number,
Swift as the wind in their course runnyng
Which of malice cast them to encumber,
Duke Pirithous the day of his weddyng:
And to rauysh his wife at their coming,
If for his party there were no defense
Against their power to make resistance.
But Theseus list not to delay,
Pirithous his brother to defend:
First the Centaures knyghtly he did outray,
So mortally, they durst not him offend,
After the conquest to hell they did descend,
Duke Pirithoe: and worthy Theseus,
Maugry the danger of cruel Cerberus.
There they ravished in their mortal tene
Through their knyghthode, if ye list to lere,
Despite of Pluto, Proserpina the queen
Which of Jupiter was the daughter dear.
And Pirithous found first the manner
Of wilful force through his high renoun,
Realms to conquer, and hold in possession.
But by writing sothly of Duyde,
He plainly tells how duke Theseus
Arested was in hell, and must abide,
By the force of cruel Cerberus.
And Pluto was to him contrarious,
Till Pirithous to find a relees,
The case declared unto Hercules.
Which of his knighthode a remedy found:
To help his friend did his busy pain,
First by his prowes Cerberus he bound
At hell gates with a treble chain.
And of his manhood he did so ordain,
Duke Theseus from danger to discharge,
Maugry of Pluto for to go at large.
They were in arms brethren both twain,
Loved as brethren both in war and pees,
That neither could unto other frayne:
Their life to ieopard, and put the^ self in prees
And both as brethren were called Hercules,
To signify (Poets can well tell)
This name in conquest all other does excel.
By old time they that were pereles
For their nobles in diverse regions,
All they for manhood were named Hercules.
Such as were noysed for famous champions
Tygres to daunt, eke boares, and lions:
And renoumed among them euerychone,
Bechas affirms that Theseus was one.
First (as I said) by his knyghtly travail
When Athens stood in division,
Among them selves by war and battle,
By his wisdom and his discrecion,
To set accord within that noble town
Them that were exiled and stood in no certain
He of his knyghthode made the^ resort again.
He gave the^ laws whereby they should the^ gye
Noble statutes founded of reason:
Set among them so prudent policy
In their living, that no discention
Should arise by none occasion,
Among them selves in hye or low estate,
Prouidyng ever that there were no debate.
Thus began the city increase and multiplye,
To wax famous of wisdom and richesse:
There sprung the well first of Philosophy,
There first of knyghthode rose the hye nobles
By Theseus, Bochas bears wytnes,
Thus things two like as it is found,
Clergy and law did there first abound.
For to set the city in quiet
He made peace through all that region:
And of knyghthode he manly did mete
The cruel tyrant that called was Creon.
Maugre him made restitucion
Of lords bones that were at Thebes slain,
To the ladies, whereof they were full feign.
Thus through Greece his renome spradde,
His knyghtly fame began to multiply:
And long in joy thus his life he ladde,
While that Fortune list him magnify.
But aye her joy is meynt with some envy,
For she froward list no more soiourne
With Theseus, but began her to face turn
Away fro him: wexe peruerce and froward,
Of his glory, ungoodly began to doubul,
Down from her whele, she made go backward
Of his good name she began the feathers pull,
When his noblesse was highest at full,
I mean the full of his felicitye,
There followed an ebb of great adversity.
And moreover her frowardly to aquite,
His vnhaps rehearsyng one by one,
One the first, as Bochas list to endite,
Was when he lay in Crete among his fone:
And out of prison should into Greece gone,
Repayryng homeward and him self wtdrawe,
The Mynotaur when he had yslawe.
The first empryse that he undertook,
Was when he escaped the importable pain,
Of Mynotaurs, like as says my book:
And with him had the kings daughters twain
That he of malice falsely list disdain:
Against ^ryadne which did him save
From the death, when he lay in the cave,
Should have been slain had not his socour be
In his repair he took thereof no head:
He left her alone in great aduersitye,
Within an isle, in mischefe, sorrow and dread.
And fair Phedra with him he did led,
Wedded her like a forsworn man,
Thus with untruth his mischefe first began.
How Phedra quither, y^ story is well know:
In his absence, Bochas writes thus,
When that she within a little throw
Loved against kind, her son Ipolitus.
But he to her was contrarious,
Would not assent to so foul a deed,
For shame he fled, and percel also for dread.
To his father she him did accuse,
As ye toforne have the story seen:
And for he did her company refuse,
He went away and came never again.
For ye have heard how that he was slain,
Within a chare through his unhappy chance:
And how Phedra through vengeance,
Slough her self, against all womanhede,
Here in this book tofore as I you told.
Of which thing when Thesius took head,
Thought it was ve^geaunce for his offense old:
For he not quit him like as he was behold,
To Ariadne which should have be his wife,
By whose succor he escaped with his life.
This infortune and this unhappy chance
Was to his nobles full contrarious,
The death also was to him a vengeance,
Of his son called Ipolitus:
For sorrow of whom this duke Theseus
With salt tears sore began to plain,
And held the exequies of the ilke twain.
I trow also it did him sore grieve,
Duke Pirotheus when he saw dead.
Slain with a beast, and might not releue,
Of kig Orchus hou^d which had a treble head
Whose teeth hortible of his blood were read:
Which infortune when he began behold,
Unto the death he felt his heart cold.
And for to reken the great wretchedness,
The unhappy chances y^ fell him in his life,
Among all his other great distresses,
Was none so mortal and so full of strife,
As was when he gave credence to his wife,
Phedra called, which of intencion
Compassed untruly an accusation
Upon Ipolytus, of hatred and envy,
Because he would not do so great offense,
As for to assent to her lechery:
Therefore of death he felt the vyolence.
And for his father to sone gave credence,
Bochas forbade husbands all their lives,
Without prefe, not leave to sone their wives.
Neither be to hasty tales for to leave
Of flaterers, in chamber ne at the table:
Forgers of lesyngs my auctor does well preue
To abide with lords that they be not able,
Here on he makes a chapitle notable,
And of his writing this was the cause why,
That princes should examyne each party.
Of wisdom also, and of discrecion,
Without a prefe not be parciall,
For to a prince it is confusion,
If between parties he be not found egall:
Caused many one for to have a fall*
God suffers such not long to contune
Withdraw their grace, and hinders their fortu^e
Thus Theseus for his hastines
His hap, his grace, discreased day by day.
The fame appalled of his worthiness,
And froward fortune also in a wait lay
For his defautes, to hinder him if she may,
Cast she would his nobles disauaunce:
And than his kingdom by disobeysaunce.
From him wtdrawe honor and reverence,
Full frowardlye through all his region
They of Athens by cruel vyolence,
Fill against him in rebellion:
That he was feign to fly out of that town,
Thus has fortune darked the bryghtnes
Of all his nobles, and cast him in distress.
Thus was the end by great contrarioustie,
Of Theseus, after his days glade,
When the fresh flower of old felicity
Fortune adverse made them for to fade.
Each thing must bow when it is ouerlade,
Worship and honor when they brightest shine
with unware chaunges than rathest do declyne.
Lenuoy.
THe unsure gladness, the joy transitory,
The unstable surenes, the transmutatio^s,
The clowdy brightness, the false eclipsed glory
Of earthly princes, which have possessions,
Monarchies and dominacions,
Their sudden change declares to us all
Their sweet sugar is meynt with bitter gall.
This blind goddess in her consistory,
With her pleasaunce medleth discentions:
After triumphs, conquest, and victory,
Reueth from kings their scepters and crowns
Troubles the people with false rebellions,
Se these dukes which from the whele be fall
Al worldly sugar is meynt with bitter gall.
This tragedy makes memory
Of dukes twain, and of their hye renounes,
And of their love write a great history,
And how they conquered diverse regions:
Governed cities, countries, and also towns,
Till fortune their prowes did appall,
To show their sugar was meint with bitter gal.
Princes, pryncesses, se how deceptory,
Ben all these worldly reuolutions:
And how fortune in her reclinatory,
With her treacle tempreth false poisons.
So marvelous ben her confections,
Of frowardnes she will what so befall,
Ever with her sugar of custom temper gall.
The.xiii. Chapter.
Here Bochas writes against them that gives hastye credence to liars and
flatterers.

IN this chapter Bochas in sentence,
Repreueth and blames not only princes,
But all them that lightly gives crede^ce
To every tale and fable which is
Reported unto them for sothfastnesse:
And list nothing do as it were due,
To prove the truth were it false or true.
All though so be in every manner age
Folks ben diverse of conditions,
To turn, plye, and change in their courage
To outher party with sudden mocions,
And for to bow by transmutations
With every wind as the unstable leaves,
Which hang on trees, in forestes and in greues.
But of al chau^ges y^ change is most to dread
And most fearful is that variaunce,
Wha^ that princes which may the people led,
Ben found unstable in their governance:
For their nobles and their hye puissaunce
Assures them by a manner of form,
What ever the^ list to accomplish and perform
To common profit they most may aueyle,
When they ben ruled by wisdom and reason
And to the people they may most disaueyle,
When they lack wit and discrecion.
Thus between twain in every region
The people draws, who that can discern,
To good or badde as princes them govern.
They may not be to hasty, ne to sudden,
But do all thing by good aduisement:
Keep the^ fro tongues yt parted be in twain,
Not be to hasty to give no judgment:
And of folks when they ben absent,
Lieue no tales* neither give no credence,
Till that the party may come to evidence.
Sumtime has happed that slow credence
Has in some be found full noyons,
But hasty credence I dare say in sentence,
A thousand fold is more perilous:
For unadvised all haste is odious.
For haste full often for lack of reason,
Of much people has been destruction.
There is no damage that men can purpose
More to be dradde nor more lamentable
Than a prince his ears to unclose
To every tale and every fable:
It is a token their hearts be not stable,
When they to flatterers their ears do apply
Namely to such that can well forge and lie.
Folk ben diverse, some false, some true,
In diverse studies done their business:
Some can study, and find out tales new,
And some for lucre can maintain falsenes,
And hold up quarrels against right wisenes.
Pretending truth under a false intent,
To hinder folks which ben innocent.
Men to suppose it were a great folly
That folks should in their opinion
Speak or pronounce all on one party,
Or hold one way in their intencion:
For semblably as there is a division
Of courages, of hye or low degree,
So is there truly a great diversity
In rehearsal, or report of a thing.
For to his party each man is favorable,
Some man can say well in all his rehearsyng
Some man is double, and some disceauable:
Some men say true, and some be variable,
Wherefore a prince of right as it does seem,
Should well examen before that he deem.
For there is none more dreadful pestilence,
Than a tongue that can flatter and fage:
For with his cursed crabbed vyrulence,
He enfecteth folk of every age.
Woe to tongues froward of their langage,
And woe to tongues, false, furious, and wode,
Which of no person never can say good.
Bochas rehearses, it is right well sittyng
That every man other do commend,
And say the best always in reportyng:
For in well saying no man may offend,
Where men say well god will his grace send.
After as men be, me^ must their praise vpraise
Like their merits allow them or disprayse.
But where a thing is utterly unknow,
Let no man there be hasty of sentence:
For ryghtfull judges sittyng on a row
Of their wisdom and of their hye prudence,
Will of troth have first some evidence.
(I mean such as governed be by grace)
Or any dome forth of their lips pace.
A prince should assemble things twain
Within him self, full prudently:
Shut up the domes between locks twain,
One of the soul: to reason for that party
Prudence chosen, and right for the body.
And between them both or he give sentence,
To counsel call truth and good conscience.
First to consider with every circumstaunce,
And diligently do thereon his labor,
Of discrecion to take the balaunce:
And first wey out who is the accusour,
And whether that he for falsenes or favor,
In his process list to proceed,
Hereof a prince must of right take heed.
He must also consider by and by
What he is, that to him is accused,
And whether the accusour, be friend or enemy
Or whether he shall be accept or refused.
In his acts this must before be mused.
And whether he be by report of his name,
A man well noysed, or slaundred by diffame.
If Thesius thus had been auysed,
And considered of reason the manner:
He had not so hastily devised
His sons death, like as ye shall leare.
For if there had assembled be in fere,
In his person, prudence and reason,
He should have seen in his descrecion.
By knowlegyng of long experience,
Of his wife the great unsteadfastness:
Which through her false compassed eloquence
Was ready ever to bring folk to distress.
And in his writing Bochas bears witness,
Of their nature women can flatter and fage,
And be sumtyme to copious of their langage.
Also of wisdom, duke Thesius
Should have considred before in his intent,
How that his son called Jpolytus,
Of all uncleanness was found ever innocent:
And how that he by custom made his went
Into forestes during his young age,
To hunt at beasts, which that were savage.
Rennyng on foot, as ye shall understand,
On hills and valeys, to eschew idleness
Mother of vices, with his bow in hand,
Diana to serve of huntyng chief goddess:
Sumtime to hawk he did his business,
Also unto fishyng greatly he was applied,
So that his youth was never unoccupied.
Thus he lived in woods solitary,
And of Venus despised the service:
Among women he would never tarry,
Their fellowship he did always despise,
For he demed by sentence of the wise,
Who touches pytche by a say men may se,
It fails not he shall defouled be.
Jpolitus saw well this thing before,
Kept him at large from such contagiositie
His grene youth he would not have it lore,
To be defouled for lack of chastity.
For he lived ever in virginity,
And never did (Bochas will not vary)
Nothing that was unto God contrary.
Thus of intent he kept his body clean,
During his life both in thought and deed:
Whose mother was Jpolita, the queen
Of Amasones, in Ouide ye may read.
But woe alas that Theseus took head,
For a tale of Phedra full of gyle,
Without gilte his son so to exyle.
After whose death some Poets said,
How that Dyana for his chastity,
Restored him unto life again
By Esculapius, and gave him lybertye
In her forestes to hunt and to go fre:
For which restoryng (as write Ouidius)
As twyse a man men call him Virbius.
But Bochas here I not what he does mean,
Makes in his book an exclamation,
Against women, that pity is to seen:
Says how their life, and their generation,
Ben of their nature double of condition.
And calls them also, diverse and unstable,
Beasts resemblyng, that been insaciable.
He means of women borne in Crete,
And nothing of them y^ dwell in this country.
For women here all doublenes they let,
And have no tatche of mutabilitie:
They love no chaunges, ne no duplicitie.
For their husbands in causes small or great,
Whatsoever they say, they can not cou^terplete
Blessed be god that them has made so meke,
So humble and fearful of their conditions:
For though men would cause and matter seek
Against their patience, to find occasions,
They have refused all contradictions.
And the^ submitted through their governance,
Only to mekenes and womanly suffraunce.
I speak not of one, I speak of euerychone
That been professed unto lowlines,
They may have mouths, but la^gage have they none
All true husbands can bear hereof witness.
For wedded men, I dare full well express,
That have assayed, and had experience,
Best can record, of wifely patience.
For as it longs to men to be sturdy,
And sumwhat froward as of their nature:
Right so can women suffer patiently,
And all wrongs womanly endure.
Men should attempt no manner creature.
And namely women, their mekenes to preue,
Which may well suffer, if no man them grieve.
Every thing resorteth to his kind,
(As Bochas writes) sumtyme of the year:
And who sercheth by process he shall find,
That truth and virtue may never fade of there:
For rightwisenes will always shine clear.
Truth and falsnes in what they have to done,
They may no while assemble in one person.
Fear and flattery they ben contrary,
They may together hold no long soiour:
Neither simplesse which that can not vary,
May never accord with a baratour.
Neither innorence with a lesyngour,
Neither chastity can not her self apply,
Her to conform unto no rybaudry.
Each thing has a proper disposition,
By the ordinance set in their courage:
And each man follows his condition,
As of the stock the fruit has the tarrage.
Pilgrymes may go full far in their passage
But I dare say how far that ever they go,
They bear some tarrage of y^ they came fro.
Bochas makes an introduction
In this chapter, of high noblesse
That princes have in their possession:
And by a manner laughyng does express,
How for toset them in great sykernesse
They have servants upon them abidynge,
And men of arms day and night awaytyng
That no man may enter but he have license.
The froward porters standing at the gate,
Put men abacke by sturdy vyolence:
It were full hard against them to debate.
Their watches kept early and also late,
Them to assure on nyghtes when they sleep,
The cha^berlains their doors straightly keep.
Men assigned their meats to assay,
To taste their wynes lest there were treason,
Such mortal dread these lords do affray,
So is their surenes meynt with suspection:
Who feadeth him glaoly that fears poison*
But pore folk franchised from such dread,
Such as god does send, with myrthe they feed.
But Poets that write tragedies,
Their complaynyng is all of hye estates:
Rehearsyng ever their piteous ieopardyes,
Their sudden chau^ges, and their woeful fates,
Their deuisyons, and their mortal debates.
And ever conclude, their dities who so canrede,
High estates stand aye most in dread.
Ground and rote of all this mortal trouble,
As Bochas writes and bears witness,
Ben these liars with their tongues double,
Them self aye forsyng truth to oppress:
With whom flattery is a chief maistresse,
And worst of all, to their dreadful sentence,
Is when princes be hasty of credence.
Hasty credence is root of all error,
A froward stepmother of all good counsel:
Ground of great hindering, a dredefull disceyuour,
Fair of face with a perilous tail.
Gladly concluding with full great disauayle.
Next neighbor unto repentance,
To all that trust and have in her pleasaunce.
Lenuoy.
Princes, pricesses consider how in every age
Folks ben diverse of their condition:
To ply and turn and change in their courage,
Yet is there none to mine opinion,
So dreadful change ne transmutation,
As change of princes, to give judgment,
Or hasty credence without auisement.
It is well found a passing great damage,
Known and expert in every region,
Though a tale have a fair vysage,
It may enclude full great deception,
Hide under sugar ga^e and fell poison,
With a fresh face of double entendem cut:
Yet give no credence without auisement.
Let folks beware of their laugage,
Keep their tongues from oblocution:
To hinder or hurt by no manner outrage,
Preserve their lyppes from all detraction,
From champarty, and contradiction,
Lest that fraud were found in their intent,
Ne give no credence without auisement.
Princes princesses of noble and high parage,
Which have lordshyp and do nination,
Void them aside that can flatter and fage:
Fro tongues that have a terrage of ^reason,
Stop your ears, from their bitter soun,
Be circumspect, not hastye but prudent,
And give no credence without auisement.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
Of queen Althea, and how Hercules by women was brought to confusion.

WHa^ Bochas had showed his sentence
And declared his opinion
Against the^ y^ were hasty of crede^ce,
He began anon to make a digression
Fro that matter: and of entencion
To search out mo his purpose to contune,
That were down cast and hyndred by fortune.
And as him thought he saw a company
Of many worthy which did appear:
And among all first he did espy,
Queen Althea, as she began nygh him nere,
All be wept her face, and also her chere,
With salt tears that pitye was to seen,
Which some time was of Cale^dony queen.
She was the daughter of king Thestius,
Wedded to Oene of Calsidony king,
Of cheer and face appearing full piteous,
Her here to torn, and frowardly liyng:
And in token also of complaining,
As writes Bochas, whereof he took head,
Black was her habit, and torn was her wede
A son she had Melliager he hight,
In earth was there none fayrer to se:
Right well favored in every man's sight,
And as I find, at his natiuite
Present were the fatal susters three,
With their rocks, and began to spyn fast,
And took a brond, and in the fire it cast:
And in that hour this was their langage:
Touching this child we full accorded be,
And have disposed also, the term of his age
The space concluded of his destyne,
As long time who so list to se,
Till this brond among the coals reed,
Be full consumed into ashes dead.
But when Althea espied their intent,
And conceived the fine of their sentence:
She rose up, and the brond she hent
Out of the fire with full great diligence.
Quenched anon the fyres violence,
The dome of Parche she began thus disobey,
The brond reseruinge under lock and key.
Touching the father of this Melliager,
Oeneus, of him thus I read,
How that he sought nighe and far
Gods and goddesses, whose list take heed,
In hope only for to have great mede.
For to them al, poets thus deuyse,
Save to Diana he did sacrifyce.
Whereof she caught an indignacion:
Cast she would on him avenged be.
Sent a Boore in to his region,
Full savage and full of cruelte.
Which devoured the fruit of many a tree,
And distroyed his corns and his vynes,
That such scarsnesse of vitayles and of wynes
Was in his land upon every side,
That the people of necessite,
Compelled were among to provide
Some mean or way to save their country:
And at the last they condiscended be
That Melliager lusty of his courage,
Should chose with him folks fresh and young of age
This dredeful Boore mightily to enchace.
And forth they went echon deuoyde of dread,
With round speres they began him to manace
But Melliager made first his sides blede,
And with a sword than smote of his head.
Whereof the country was glad and feign,
And in this wise the tuskye bore was slain.
Some books tell of this huntyng,
That a lady which was borne in Irge,
Called Athalanta daughter to the king,
To slay this Boore took on her the charge.
And with an arowe made his wou^des large,
Also in Ouide, like as it is found,
Because that she gave the first wound,
Melliager anon for a memory,
As he that was her own chosen knight,
Gave her the heed in token of this victory.
But his two uncles against al skyl and tyghte,
Raft her the head of very force and might:
Having dispite that she in her auyse,
Of this victory should bear away the price.
With which injury. Melliager was wroth,
Against them proudly began disdain:
Pulled out a sword and upon the^ goes,
And through his manhood slew his uncles twain:
And after yt did his busy pain
To take the heed, and with humble intent
To Athalanta again to be present.
One of his uncles was called Flexippus
A manly knight but young of age,
That other brother named Theseus.
But when their suster herd of that outrage,
How they were slain, she began in her visage
Wexe deed and pale, alas, for her blood:
When she espied the cause how it stood.
She had no matter god wot to be feign,
Queen Althea to stand and behold,
Her brethren twain of her son slain
At the huntyng, of which tofore I told.
First things twain she began peise and unfold,
Of her brethren the love and nigh kynted,
And of her son the hasty cruel deed.
And remembering she casts in balaunce
Of hertely woe that she did endure,
Thought if she did upon their death vengeance
To slay her son it were against nature:
Thus in a war long time she did endure,
Her deedly sorrow peysyng every dell,
Wheder she shall be tender or eruel.
Thus tender I mean, her son for to spare,
Or punish the death of her brether twain.
Thus confortlesse al destitute and bare,
In languishing she endured forth her pain:
And temedy can she none ordain,
Save feign she would avenge her if she may,
But than came forth nature and said nay.
It was her son, against all kyndly right
Of whom she cast avenged for to be:
To women al an ugly strange syghte,
That a mother deuoyde of all pity,
Should slay her child so merciles parde.
Nay not so, nature will not assent,
For if she did full sore she should repent.
But O, alas, al fatal purueyance
Keeps his course, as some clerks said:
But the writing of doctors in substance,
And these diuynes reply there again,
And affirm the opinion is in vain,
Of them that trust in fate or desteny,
For God above has the soueraintie.
And of fortune the power may restrain,
To save and spyl like as folk deserve:
Against his will they may nothing ordain,
Of necessite what course that they conserve.
But this matter al holy I reserve
Unto divines, to determyne and conclude,
Which not partayneth unto folks rude.
But Althea of Calcidony queen,
Began sore muse and henge in balaunce:
Her brethren deed when she did them seen,
Than was she meued anon to do vengean^ce
Upon her son, by full great displeasance.
But as poets list for to compile,
Nature her made wtdrawe her hand, a while.
Thus between ire and affection,
She held her long of every party stable:
Till that she caught in her opinion
A soden rancor which made her be vengeable.
And hasty worth, which is not commendable,
Against her son made her with her hand
Out of her chest to take the fatal brande,
and suddenly she cast it in the fire,
And wexed cruel against all womanhede,
To execute her venomous desire.
The fatal bronde among the coals read
Consumed was into ashes deed,
And furiously in her melancoly,
The vengeance done, she thus began to cry.
O ye Parce froward susters three
Which of Joue keep the library,
And of children at their natiuite
Awayte the sentence which may not vary,
Wherso it be wylful or contrary,
Upon his domes always taking head,
How that ye shall dispose the fatal threde,
Thou Cloto take thy rock on hand,
And Lachesis after does begin,
By great auise, who so can understand,
The threde of length to draw and to spyn.
But when the spirit shall from the body twin,
Thou Atropos do thy busy pain,
Full frowardly to part the thread in twain.
I may well plain in such perdicion,
Not for a day, but woe alas for ever:
Ye have vntwyned and made division,
Of my two brethren, and caused the^ disceuer,
That here on live I shall se them never:
And I of haste, alas why did I so?
Tauenge their death have slain my son also.
O ye daughters of Cerberus the fell,
Whose ugly mother was the black night,
Al your kyndred and lineage live in hell,
And for to aue^ge the wrong and great vuryght
Which I have accomplished in your sight,
I will with you perpetually complain,
Like my desert, tendure sorrow and pain.
And while she began with her self thus strive
Upon her sorrows that were endless:
She made a sword through her heart to riue,
Of her self she was here recheles.
And Bochas after among all the prese,
Saw as him thought with a full hidious chere,
Deed of visage, Hercules appear.
Whose father was Jupiter the great,
His mother daughter of Amphitrion,
Called Alcumena sumtyme borne in Crete.
And as poets reherce one by one,
So excellent was there never none
To speak of conquest, of victory and fame,
Here in this world that had so great a name.
Dredful of look he was and right terible,
His berde also black which hing low down:
And al his here as bristles were horible,
His robe also full maruaylous of facion,
Was of the skin of a fierce lion,
Which from his back of very force he rent:
Within a forest a lone when he went.
In his hand he bare a mase of stele,
Which to behold was wonder long and huge,
By appearance as Bochas felt well.
Demed of reason a ryghtful judge,
That Hercules had to his refuge,
Wisdom with force, for to increase his fame,
As beasts wild for to make them tame.
And unto Bochas he began loud cry:
Take right good head for it is no fable,
I for my merits to speak of chiualry
And noble triumphs, am most commendable:
To be preferred most worthy and most able.
Which have accomplished all that may excel,
Through high prowes yt any tongue can tell.
Also of my birth in heuyn full yore ago,
Fully conceived my constellacion:
Mighty Jupiter said unto Juno,
On such a day in such a region,
One shall be borne most mighty of renoun,
Noblest of nobles both in war and pees,
Of whom the name shall be Hercules.
The which dome when Juno understood,
Of Jupiter conceyuing the intent,
And knew my fate should be so good,
To Lucina her messanger she sent:
But some says how her self down went,
To this goddess, goddess of childing,
And her besought to grant her her asking.
That she would from Hercules translate
The influence of his natiuyte,
Help to rescue his name and his fate,
And grant it holy to young Euristee.
And that Lucina present would be
The same hour by Jupiter provided,
It to possede all hole and undivided.
Thus to the mother of this Euristee,
Juno the gods granted her favor:
Thereby disposyng that he should be,
Mighty of puissaunce like an emperor.
But of his nobles the conquest and labor,
And of his manhood the prowes and pursuit,
By Hercules was fully execute.
This Hercules had the travail,
And Euristeus bare away the name.
Also Hercules fought in plate and mayle,
And high emprises proudly did attame,
But the report of his noble fame
To Euristeus fully was ascriued,
Thus of his thank was Hercules deprived.
Full often in arms some man does well,
And often causes that the field is won,
And another that did never a dele,
The price out spredeth like as shines y^ son.
And often it happens he that has best ron,
Does not the spear like his desert possede,
Where false favor gives every man his mede
Fame in her palice has tru^pes mo than one,
Some of gold that gives a fresh soun:
Some man has laud and deserves none,
And some have be full worthy of renoun
Nothing preferred by commendacion.
As by report of states hye and low,
So frowardly Fame her trumpe has blow.
Touching arms, the pore ne the rich
Be not of hertes echone corragious:
Neither al men may not be yliche,
Neither of their name egal ne gracious.
And though the pore have been victorious,
Of adventure to do full well some day,
Other have pinched to take his thank away.
On sleeth the dear with an hoked arowe,
Whose part is none yet of the venison:
One beteth the y^ bush another has y^ sparow
And all the birds in his possession.
One draws his nets in rivers up and down,
With sundry baytes cast out line and hoke,
And has no part of all that ever he took.
An evidence hereof ye may se
Full notable to be put in memory,
Of Hercules and of Euriste:
For Hercules gate aye the victory,
And Euristeus received has the glory.
Thus the palm departed was in twain,
That one reioysed, that other bare ye pain.
Euristeus was prince of Athene,
Son and heir by dyscent of line,
Unto the king that called was Stellene
Under whose might as Bochas does determine
Hercules through knightly disciplyne,
Proved so most manly and most wise,
That from al other he bare away the prise.
But woe alas that ever it should fall,
So manly a knight so worthy and notable,
That any spotte should his price appall,
Or cause his courage for to be unstable.
Which is a thing doleful and lamentable,
From his knighthode as a thing strange,
That ever a woman should his heart change.
I will excuse them because their nature
Is to change hertes and corrages:
Against their nature no force may endure,
For their flatery and sugared fair langages,
Like Sirens full fresh of their visages,
For to change of princes the noblesse,
Mo than Hercules can bear hereof witness.
Thus Hercules astonished and ashamed,
Unto Bochas showed his presence:
Said, alas my knighthode is diffamed
By a full false amorous pestilence.
So sore constrained by mortal vtolence,
Whereby alas my manhood was applied,
By sleye of women oppressed and maistried
To take their habit and cloth me in their wede,
To shere my berde, and farce my vysage
With oyntmentes against al manhede,
To make it souple, and change my langage:
And to complain more of mine outrage,
Upon my fyngers five twyse told,
I had ringes richely wrought of gold.
Thus was my courage changed femynine,
For love of one called Iolee:
Of conditions though she were serpentyne,
Me thought she was fairest unto se,
That all my joy was with her to be.
And that none should aperceiue my trespace,
I changed both habit look and face,
And was a woman outward in appearance,
Of intent to have more liberte
To use my lusts, and have experience
Of appetites, which that unlawful be:
Whereof the sclaundre reboundeth upon me.
That I dare say my outrageous trespace
Does al my knyghthode and prowes difface.
Whereof Bochas, I pray the take good head,
For to discriue in terms plain and clear,
Mine infortune like as it was in deed:
That when other conceive the manner
Of mine vnhappes, contagious for to here,
They may by example of me do their pain,
From vicious life their hertes to restrain.
For these folles that al wisdom despise,
And be contrary to bertuous discipline,
May give example to folks that been wise
And ben to them a lantern of doctrine,
Vices to eschew, and prudently declyne
Fro fleshely lusts: for it is taught in schools,
That wyseme^ al day ben ytaught by foles.
When Bochas had conceived the pleynt
Of Hercules in his appering,
And how his nobles by women was ataint,
Through his disordinate living:
He thought anon him remembringe,
It had be ruthe for to put in mind
His vires all, and virtues left behind.
Considered also it was impartinent
Either by la^gage to write against al right,
Any thing that should in sentment
The fame amenuse of so noble a knight,
Or to discrese in any man's sight
His glorious prowes, since poets for his werres
Reise his renome, so high above the sterres.
For he was both knight and Philosopher,
And for his strength called a giant:
For commen profit he began promptly profer.
Of manly courage give thereto full grant,
To enter in to Egypt to slay the giaunt
Called Busyris, who of full false intent
Slew al strangers that through his kingdu^ went
For under a color of liberalite,
Unto his palys gladly he would call
Strangers echone y^ came through his cu^tre,
And solemly receive the^ one and al:
And like a king, both in chamber and hal
Make them such chere in all manner thing
As apperteyned to a worthy king.
But while his gestes lay a night to sleep,
This false tirant in full cruel wise,
Murdered them ethone or they took keep:
And after that, this was also his gise,
With their blood to make a sacrifice
To Jupiter god of that country,
Of hole intent to please his deite.
That in his kingdom of fruits and grain,
The land encresed by great habundaunce:
Down from heuin he would send the^ rain,
This mean he made and this cheuisaunce.
To murdre and slay he had so great plesau^ce,
For of al thing him thought it did him good
To murdre his gestes, and to shede their blod
Wha^ this murdre of Busiris was couth,
That no strangers might pass his la^d i pees:
This manly knight yet flowryng in youth,
This noble, famous, this worthy Hercules,
Among other he put him self in prees:
And like a gest outward in showing.
Came to the palys of Busiris the king.
Rebuked him of his great outrage
Done to his gestes, by cruel violence.
And for to make pesible that passage,
And for to avenge y^ his importable offense,
And of his murdre to make a recompense,
This Hercules slew Busiris in deed,
And took the blood which he did blede,
Offered it up Jupiter to please,
For this victory him to magnifye.
And al Egypt thus was set in ease,
Their lands and fruits began also multiply,
Their grain encresed about on each party,
And to habounde by influence of rain,
Which before time of vitayle was barayne.
Another giaunt called Antheus,
King of Libye and governed all the land,
Whom Hercules most strong and coragious,
Su^time outraid, and slew him with his hand.
For as they wrastled by experience he fand,
Touching the earth this giant (it is true)
His force, his might, did always renew.
But when Hercules the manner did espy,
How his strength renewed again so often:
Theragaynst he shope a remedy,
Hye in the air he peysed him up a lofte,
And with strokes hard and nothing soft,
Back and bone so sore he did embrace,
That he fill deed tofore him in the place.
But some books of this giant tell,
Within his kingdom who did him assail,
He would of new his chiualry compel
Efte again to mete him in battle:
And in this wise full selde he did fail
To aforce of new as ye shall understand,
His strength, his might, all enemis to with stand.
But Hercules of hye discrecion,
The field on him manly to recure,
Had him by sleyght out of his region:
And as they met there of adventure,
The said Anthens might not endure,
But was disconfited by Hercules anon,
Maugre his might, and his men echone.
After this conquest Hercules is gone
For exercise, his prowes for to use
Against the mighty strong Gereon,
King of Spain, of Melleager, and Ebuse,
The which tiraunt might him not excuse,
That all his labor as poets list compyle,
Was from these realms his people to exile.
His tyranny might not long endure,
For Hercules that noble worthy knight,
Made upon him a great disconfiture,
And slough the tyrant as they met in fight:
And after that through his great might,
Of high prowes and magnanimyte,
Sloughe Cerberus with his heads three.
The famous bull of the land of Crete
Which that distroyed all that region,
He sloughe also when that they did mete:
And in Nemea he slough a feirse lion.
And for a record of his high renoun,
Of manly force his skyn away he took,
And to his body a cote thereof he shope.
To his enemis to show him more dredeful,
Therefore he ware that hidious garment.
And for he was in arms never found dull,
But ylike fresh ever in his intent,
In to a mountain anon he made his went,
Called Erimanthus: and there in his passage,
He slew a boar most wild and most savage.
Beside a river called Styphalus,
Of furious birds he slew a great nombre,
Within the kingdom of king Pheneus,
All the country they did encombre:
For with their shadow and co^tagious vmbre
On sede, on fruits, where ever they alight,
Al was devoured in every man's sight.
Upon the mountain called Auentyne,
Which is not far from Rome the city,
There is a wode, as cronicles determyne,
Right fresh of light and goodly on to se:
And Hercules passing by that country,
Fro Spaynward passing by Itayle,
Cachus the giant did him there assail.
While Hercules among the leaves grene
Laid him to sleep by sudden adventure,
And his beasts, against the son shine
While that he slepte, went in their pasture,
Came Cachus forth full hidious of stature,
Thought he would these beasts with him have
Stale them echone, and hyd the^ in a cave.
And like a thief he made them go backward
That no man should y^ traces of them know:
Neither of their passage have no regard,
For by their tails he led them on a row,
In to his cave which that stood full low.
And for they were of excellent fayrnes,
To keep them close he did his business.
Out of his sleep when Hercules awoke,
And parceyued his oxen were away
He rose up and cast about his look,
Began to aspye in all the have he may
To what party the traces of them lay:
And while he stood thus musyng in the shade,
He herd the lowyng that his oxen made.
And by their lowing he began anon aproche
Toward the part where they were kept close,
Fond the cave under a mighty roche:
And proud Cachus which had the^ in depose,
Against Hercules he sturdely arose,
But for all that he might him self not save,
For he him sloughe at thentring of the cave.
And thus his beasts he has again recured,
That sempte before inrecuperable.
After the mountain byforce he has assured,
Which for briga^tes before was full doutable.
But by his knyghthod it was made habitable,
That men might for dread of any foe
When ever they would freely come and go.
Touching his conquest upon Feminye,
Against Amasones with Theseus he went:
The queen Ipolyta through his chiualry,
For his pray anon to him he hent.
And Ipolita of full true intent
Gave unto him in token of victory,
A girdel of gold to have her in memory.
After to Affrike he went a full great pace,
Only of purpose the gardin for to se,
Which apperteyned to king Athlas
That brother was to the king Promothee:
In astrology full well expert was he,
And of this gardyn of which I have told,
The rich branches and apples were of gold,
Through magike made by great auisement,
Full streyte kept and closed enuyron,
And y watched with a fell serpent,
That no man entered that rich mancion.
But Hercules most mighty of renoun,
The serpent slough through his ma^ly pursuit,
And fro the gradeyn he bare away the fruit.
This said Athlas as books specify,
And poets also of him endite,
He was conning in astronomy,
And therein did full greatly him delight:
And many a book he made and did write
With great labor and great diligence,
In his time upon that science,
The which were more precious than gold,
And more rich in his opinion:
But Hercules in soth as it is told,
Gate all the books through his hie renoun:
Bare them by force out of that region,
And to Greece like a conqueror,
With him he brought the^ for a great treasour.
Of Trace he slough the giant outrageous
That sumtime was called Diomede,
Which murdered all that came to his house,
And with their flesh his horse he did feed.
And through his wit labor and manhede
Of Achelous, which was a great wondre,
He made the stremes for to depart a sondre.
And by his wisdom did the^ so divide,
In two parties disceueringe his passage:
For before no man might abide
Of his course the furious fell outrage.
For in countries it did so great damage,
Turning upward there was non other bote,
Where ever it flowed of trees, crop and rote.
A great emprise he did also undertake
When that the mess hidious and horible
Arrived up of Archadies the lake,
Called Learn the beasts full odible,
Which with their teeth and mouths terrible
Fruit, grain, and corn did mortally devour.
But Hercules the country to sucour,
Came like a knight their malice for to let,
And by his prudence destroyed the^ euerichon:
With in the lake the worms up he shet,
Save among all behind was left one.
And against him this Hercules anon,
Of knighthod raught so great advantage,
That to the country he did no more damage.
Thus all that ever may rehearsed ^e,
Touching knighthode, prowes, or prudence,
Or glorious fame, or long felicity,
This knyghtly man had most excellence,
And in arms longest experience:
And for his triumphs and acts marciall,
He set up pillars for a memorial.
Which remembered his conquest most notable
And his deeds by grauyng did express,
Beyond which no land is habitable,
So far abroad spread his noblesse.
But as the sun leaves his bryghtnes
Sumtime when he is fresshest in his sphere,
With unware clouds that suddenly appear:
Semblably the nobles and the glory
Of Hercules in this unstable life,
Eclipsed was, and shadowed his memory
By Dianyra, that sumtyme was his wife:
For by her fraud came in the mortal strife,
As ye shall hear the manner and the caas,
Whereby that he lost his life, alas.
Yet for her sake this most manly man,
Fought as I find in singular battle
With Acheloes son of the Occian,
Like as Poets make rehearsayle:
And as each other proudly did assail,
This Hercules of knyghthode sovereign,
Sent from his head one of his horns twain
Of king Oene she was the daughter dear,
To Hercules joined by marriage:
And as they came to a great riuere,
With sturdy waves where was no passage,
Nessus the gyaunt ugly of vysage,
To Hercules proffered his service,
And full falsely against him began deuyse.
Made his promise to Hercules in deed
To put his life in great adventure,
Over the streme Dianyra to l^de,
Because he was large of his stature.
And for she was a right fair creature
When they passed and came to land,
Nessus falsely would upon the str^nd
Have know her fleshly, like as write Ouide.
Hercules having thereof a sight,
As he abode upon that otherside,
And for to avenge him of his great unright,
^ake his how and ^ent it a^one right*
And with an arrowe fyled sharp and ground
Gave to Nessus his deadly fatal ^^unde.
Like a condyte gusshed out the blood
And when he saw that he must dye,
To Dianyra before him there she stood,
With all his heart he her began pray,
That in one thing his lust she would obey:
To take his shert and be not retcheles
With blood distayned, and send it Hercules.
There through with him to be reconsiled:
And she to him anon the shert has sent,
Through whose venim, alas he was begiled,
For what by touching and by enchauntment,
His flesh and bones were all to brent,
And among his deadly pains all,
Into a rage he suddenly is fall.
And as a beast furiously he ran
On valeys and hills among craggy stones,
Semblably as does a woodeman.
Pulled up trees and rotes all at ones,
Brake beasts horns, and al to gnew her bones
Was it not pity that a knight so good,
Should among bestes run savage and wood?
Thus overwhelmed was all his worthiness,
And to de^iyne went his prosperity.
Cause and root of al his wretchedness,
Was for that he set all his felicity,
To trust so much the mutabilitie,
Of these women, which early and soon
Of their nature brayed upon the moon.
Alas, alas, all nobles and prudence,
Prowes of nature, force, and chyualry,
Forsyght of wisdom, discrecion, and science,
Virtuous study profityng in clergy,
And the clear shynyng of Philosophy,
Has through false lusts here be manaced,
By sleyght of women, darked and defaced.
O Hercules I feel my pen quake,
Mine ynke full filled with bitter tears salt,
This piteons tragedy to write for thy sake,
Whom all Poets glorifye and exalt:
But fraud of women made thy renome halt,
And froward muses thy triu^phes all to ^end,
For to discryue alas thy fatal end.
Lenuoy.
THe sole ve(...) sauory p^yso^,
The dredful^ ioy^, the dolorous pleasau^ce
The (...), the furious (...),
Faith dispay^^d, (...)*
Virtue exilyng where lust has governance,
Through false luxury diffasen all nobles,
As this tragedy can bear full well witness.
Where froward Venus has domination
And blind Cupide his subjects does auaunce
And wilful lust through indiscrecion
Is chosen judge to hold the balaunce,
Their choice unlawful has through ill chance
Derked of princes the famous nobles,
As this tragedy bears full well witness.
O thou Hercules for all thy high renoun,
For all thy conquest, and knyghtly suffisaunce,
Thou were by women brought to confusion,
And by their fraud thy renoumed puissau^ce,
Disclaundred was and brought to mischaunce
I were ashamed to write it or express,
Except this tragedy can bear well witness.
Princes princesses, of high discretion,
This thing imprinte in your remembrance
Of others falling, make your protection
You to preserve through prudent purueiau^ce:
Before provided that your perseueraunce
Be not perturbed by no false sorceresse,
As this tragedy of other bears witness.
The.xv. Chapter.
A process of Narcissus, Byblis, Myrra, and of other their infortunes to
Bochas complaynyng.

NArcissus, Byblis, and Myrra all three,
Tofore Bochas pyteously did appear
Their infortunes their infelicitie,
To him complaynyng with a deadly cheer:
And of their coming to tell the manner,
Narcissus with sorrow and dole attaynt,
Began first to declare his complaynt.
He was the son of Cephisus the flode,
And his mother called Lyriope:
And by descent borne of gentle blood:
Of creatures fairest on to se.
And as I find at his nativity,
Tyresias by spirit of prophecy,
Touching his fate thus began specify.
The gods have provided for him a space
To live in earth, and so long endure
Till that he know and se his own face:
And for his sake full many a seruitu^e,
By ordinance of god and of nature,
When they him se shall feel full great pain,
If they in love his grace may not attain.
But he shall be contrary and dangerous
And of his port full of strangeness:
And in his heart right inly surquidous,
By the occasion of his native fayrenes.
And presumyng of his semelinesse,
No woman so fresh ne so fair of face
That able were to stand in his grace.
And for the excellence of his great beantye,
He purposed him in his tender age
Never in his life wedded for to be,
He thought him self so fair of vysage:
For which he cast through his great outrage
Against all lusts of love to disdain,
To hunt at beasts alone, and be slain.
And in this while that he kept him so,
In the forest and in wyldernes,
A water goddess, that called was Ecco,
Loved him full hot for his fairenes:
And sikerly did her business,
To follow his steps right as any line,
To her desires to make him to enclyne.
He heard her well but he saw her naught,
Whereof astonished anon he began to enquere,
As he that was amarueyled in his thought,
Said even thus: is any wight now here?
And she answered the same in her manner.
What ever he said (as longs to Ecco)
Without abode she said the same him to.
Come nere (quod he) and began to call.
Come nere (quod she) my joy and my pleasau^ce.
He looked about among the rocks all,
And saw nothing beside ne in distaunce
But she abrayed and declared her greuaunce
And to him said: mine own heart dear,
Ne be not strange but let us dwell in fere.
Nay nay (quod he) I will nothing obey
To your desires, for short conclusion:
Well lever I had plainly for to dey
Than ye should have of me possession,
We be nothing of one opinion.
I here you well though I no figure se,
Go forth your way ye speak no more with me.
And she ashamed fled her way anon,
As she that might of him no socour have:
But dispayred this Ecco is forth gone,
And hid her self in an ugly cave,
Among the rocks is buried in her grave:
And though so be yt men her voice may hear
After that time she never durst appear.
Thus Narcissus through danger and disdeine
Upon the lady did cruel vengeance,
But when the Gods his cruelty had sei^e
Toward him fill a great greuaunce:
Of his vnmercy they had displeasaunce,
And right as he merciles was found,
So with vnmercy he caught his deadly wound.
For all danger displeases to Venus
And all disdain is loathsome to Cupide:
For who to love is contrarious,
The god of love will quite him on some side,
His dreadful arrows so mortally deuyde,
To hurt and mayme all that be retchlesse,
And in her service found merciless.
And for Narcissus was not merciable
Toward Ecco, for his great beautye,
But in his port was found vntretable,
Cupyde thought he would avenged be,
As he that her prayer heard of pity:
Causyng Narcissus to feel and have his part,
Of Venus brande and of her fiery darte.
And on a day when he in wilderness,
Had after beasts run in huntyng,
And for long labor can fall in werines,
He was desirous to have some refreshyng,
And wonders thurstlewe after traueylyng
Might not endure longer there to dwell,
And at the last he found a cristall well,
Right fresh springyng and wonder agreeable,
The water lusty and delectable of sight:
And for his thirst was to him importable,
Upon the brynkes he fell down right,
And by reflection in mids of ye water bright
Him thought he saw a passing fair image,
To him appear, most angelyke of vysage.
He was enamoured with the semelinesse,
And desierous thereof to stand in grace,
And yet it was not but a lykelinesse,
And but a shadow reflectyng of his face,
The which of feruence amorously tembrace
This Narcissus with a piteous complaynt,
Start into the well and so him self dreynt.
And thus his beauty, alas, was laid low,
His semelines put full far abacke:
Thus when he began first him self know
And seen his vysage in which was no lack,
Presumptuous pride caused all to wrack:
For who to much does of him self presume
His own vsurpyng will sonest him consume.
And finally as these old Poets tell,
This Narcissus without more succor,
After that he was drowned at the well,
The heavenly gods did him so favor,
They turned him into a full fresh flower,
A water lilly, which does remedy
In hot accesses as books specify.
After that Narcissus was at the well dreynt,
And to John Bochas declared had his woe,
Biblis appeared with tears all be spreint,
And toward him a great pase began she go:
And her brother Camnus came also.
And of one womb as gemelles twain,
But she tofore her fate began complain.
She in her love was not virtuous
For against God and kinds ordinance,
She loved her brother named Camnus:
And when he saw her froward governance
He unto her gave none attendaunce,
Though she of sleyght to acco^plysh her intent,
In secret wise a pistle to him sent.
She said it was an impossible thing
Without his grace her self to save,
And but he were to her assentyng,
She else plainly may not health have.
But only death and afterward her grave:
Thus in her writing to him she did attame,
And to be covert she ne wrote no name.
But when this pistle came to his presence,
Virtuously thereat he began disdain:
And gave thereto no manner aduertence,
Neither took no head of her furious pain,
But suffered her eternally to plain.
Till that she was, as Ovid can well tell
With often weeping transformed to a well.
Next came Myrra with face full piteous,
Which that sumtime loved against nature
Her own father called Cynarus,
For whose sake great pain she did endure.
For she ^e durst her sorrow not discure,
Till her noryshe by signs did espy,
The heartily constraynt of her malady.
For her nourice of which I have told,
Conceived has by open evidence,
As she knows both of new and old,
In such matters all hole the experience,
That through long labor and great diligence
Diverse ways and means out she sought,
To her fathers bed that she Myrra brought.
With whom she had her lust and pleasaunce,
For she unknow lay with him all night:
He was deceived by dronklewe ignorance,
And on the morrow long or any light
She stale away, and went out of his sight
With her noryce which kept her long close,
Till unto the time that her womb arose.
But her father that was of Cypre king,
Which as I told was called Cynarus,
When he the truth espied of this thing,
That by his daughter he was deceived thus,
She waxt to him loath some and odious:
Fled from his sight, so sore she was aferde,
And he pursued after with his sword.
In Araby the hot mighty land,
King Cynarus has his daughter found:
And cruelly began enhaunce his hand,
With his sword to give her a wound:
But the gods of mercy most habound,
Has fro the death made her to go fre,
And through their power tra^formed to a tree.
Which after her bears yet the name,
Called Myrra, as she was in her life.
Out of which, aucthours say the same,
Distilleth a gome a great preseruatife:
And of nature a full good defensife,
To keep bodies from putrefaction,
And them franchise from all corruption.
By influence of the sun beams
Myrre is engendered by distyllyng of his kind
With round dropes against Phoebus streams,
And down discendeth through the hard rind,
And through the riftes also I find
The said Myrra has a child forth brought,
In all this world if it were sought,
Was none so fair formed by nature.
For of his beauty he was pereles
And as Poets record by scripture,
He called was the fair Adonydes.
And to his worship and his great encrees,
For he of fairenes bare away the flower,
Venus him chase to be her paramour.
The which Goddess gave to him in charge,
That he should in his tender age,
In forestes while he went at large,
Hunt at no beasts which were savage.
But he contrary to his disauauntage,
Through wilfulness, I can say no more,
Was slain unawarely of a Tuskye boar.
At the which he felly did enchace,
But of folly in vain was his labor,
For he lay slain full pale of chere and face:
Whom Venus turned to a full fresh stoure,
Which was as blood of purple the color,
A budde of gold with goodlye leaves glade
Set in y^ mids whose beauty may not fade.
And when Myrra from Bochas was wtdraw
And declared her great adversity:
And of her fate told the mortal law,
Came Orpheus full ugly unto se,
Son of Appollo and of Calyope,
And appeared with a full doleful face,
Sumtime brought forth and yborne in Trace.
Full renoumed in arms and in science,
Famous in music and melody:
And full notable also in eloquence,
And for his soote sugared armony
Beasts and fowls as poets specify
Wodes and floudes of their course most strong,
Stynte of course, to harken his sote song.
An harp he had of Mercurius,
With the which Erudice he wanne:
And to Bachus as write Ouidius,
Sacrifices solemnly he began.
And unto hell for his wife he ran,
Her to recure with sote touches sharp,
Which he made upon his heavenly harp.
But when that he this labor on him took,
I law was made which that bound him for^
That if he backward cast his look,
He should her lose and se her neuermore.
But it is said sythen gone full yore:
There may no law lovers well constrayne,
So importable is their deadly pain.
If some husbands had stand in the caas
To have lost their wives for a look sudden,
^hey would have suffered and not said alas,
^ut patiently endured all their pain:
and thanked god y^ broken was the chain,
which has so long them in prison bound,
that they by grace had such a way found.
^olye in prison it is a full great charge,
and to be stocked under key and lock:
^t is meryer a man to go at large,
^han with yrons to be nailed to a block*
But there is a bond that called is wedlock
^ettryng husbands so sore that it is wonder
which with a file may not be broke asunder.
But Orpheus father of hermony,
Thought Erudice y^ was his wife so fair,
For her sake he felt that he must dye,
Because that he when he made his repair,
Of her in troth nothing embraced but air
Thus he lost her there is no more to said,
And for the co^straynt of his grievous pain
At his heart her partyng sat so sore,
The grene memory the tender remembrance,
That he would never wine no more,
So fair he was escaped his penance.
For wedlock is a life of much pleasaunce,
But who has ones infarnall pains seen,
Will never after come in the snare I wene.
This Orpheus gave counsel full notable,
To husbands that have endured pain,
To such as ben prudent and tretable,
One hell is dredful, but more dredful is twain
And who is ones bound in a chain
And may escape out of danger blyue,
If he eft resort God let him never thrive.
Upon this sentence women were vengeable,
And to his writing full contrarious
Said his counsel was not commendable,
At the feast they hallowed to Bachus,
They fill echone upon this Orpheus:
And for all his rethoryke sweet,
They slough alas this laureate poet.
And of his harp if ye list to hear,
The God Appollo made a translation,
Among the images of the stars clear:
Whereof men may have clear inspection.
But fortune to his confusion
Denied him froward of her nature,
When he was slain fredome of sepulture.
Next Orpheus there did appear also
Of Amasons worthy queen's twain:
Merpesia and her sister Lampedo,
Which in conquest did their busy pain,
And great worship in arms did attain:
Namyng them selves by writing nere and far
Daughters to Mars which is god of war.
Merpesia rode out in regions,
And conquered full many a great city,
For couetise of great possessions,
To increase her lordshyp if it would be:
And her sister kept surely their country,
Of all enemies so that there was no doubt,
While Merpesia rode with her host about.
But while she was in conquest most famous*
And her enemies proudly did assail,
Fortune anon wart contrarious,
And caused that she was slain in battle.
Lo what conquest or victory may avail,
When that fortune does at them disdayn,
Se here ensample by these queen's twain.
Lenuoy.
THis tragedy remembers things five:
Of Narcissus the excellent beauty,
And of Biblis does also discriue,
The great luxury and dishonestye,
Myrra diffamed, turned to a tree,
To exemplify that lechery and pride,
Ben from all virtue set full far aside.
How Orpheus endured in his live,
Joye entermedled with aduersitye:
In his youth when he did wyue
He felt in wedlock full great felicity:
His worldly bliss meynt with duplicitie,
As fortune her chaunges can deuyde,
Which from all virtue be set full far aside.
Merpesia for her list to strive,
With wylfull wars to increase her country,
But her pomp was ouerturned blyue,
When in battle unawarely slain was shet
For of all war death is the fine pardee.
So furious Mars can for her folk provide,
Which from all virtue ben set far aside.
Ye mighty princes let wit and reason drive
Your high nobles to consider and se,
How fortune estates can depryue,
And plonge the^ down from their prosperity,
Pride and luxury I counsel that you fly,
Falce avarice ne let not be your gyde:
Which from all virtue is clean set aside.
The.xvi. Chapter.
Of Priamus king of Troy: and how the monk of Bury translatoure of this book
wrote a book of the siege of Troy called Troy book.

AFter these complayntes and lame^tacions
Which that Bochas did in his book co^pile
Meddled among with transmutations
Set in Ouide by full sovereign style:
When he on them had mused a long while
Seen the manner both of forowe and joy,
He began to remember of Priamus of Troy.
First of his birth, and of his kynrede,
How among kings he was most famous:
And as poets record of him in deed,
He descended of worthy Dardanus,
Which as his line declares unto us,
From Jupiter was lynially come down,
Unto his father called Laomedoun.
Of old Troy this Laomedon was king,
Destroyed by Greeks he and his country.
After whom this Priamus raynyng,
Made there again a mighty strong city:
Where he full long in full great royalty
With wife and childer most worthy of renoun,
With scepter and crown held the possessioun.
Governed his city in peace and rightwisnes,
And Fortune was to him favorable:
For of all Asie the treasour and riches,
He did assemble this king most honorable.
And in arms, he was so commendable,
That through the world as far as me^ gone.
Of high nobles the ronoume of him shone.
This Priamus had children many one,
Worthy princes, and of full great might:
But Hector was among them euerychone
Called of prowes the lantern and the light.
For there was never borne a better knight,
Troylus in knyghthode so manly was found,
That he was named Hector the second.
But I should rehearse the manhede
Of king Pryam, and of his sons all,
And how his city besieged was in deed,
And all the story to remembrance call,
Between him and Greeks how it is befall,
The circumstaunces rehearsyng up and down
To set in order the first occasion
Of the siege why it was first laid
By Hercules, and also by Jason,
The manner whole in Troy book is said,
Rudely endited of my translation:
Following upon the destruction
Called the second, which by accomptes cler^
Fully endured the space of ten year.
For as me seems the labor were in vain,
Truly also I not to what intent
That I should write it new again,
For I had once in commandment
By him that was most noble and excellent,
Of kings all for to undertake,
It to translate and write it for his sake.
And if ye list to wete whom I mean
Henry the fifte most mighty of puyssaunce,
Gave me the charge of intent full clean,
Thing of old time to put in remembrance*
The same Henry for knyghtly suffisaunce,
Worthy for manhood, teken kings all,
With nine worthies for to have a stall.
To holy church he was chief defensoure,
In all such causes Christ's chosen knight:
To destroy heritykes he set all his labor,
Loved all virtues and to sustain right,
Through his nobles, his manhood, and might:
Was diligent and did his busy pain,
To have set peace between realms twain.
A mean in sothe England and France,
His purpose was to have had a peace final:
Sought out means with many a circumstan^ce
As well by treaty, as acts marciall,
Thereon ieoparded life, goods and all.
But woe, alas, against death is no boon,
This land may say he dyed all to soon.
For among kings he was one of the best,
So all his deeds conveyed were by grace:
I pray to God so give his soul good rest,
With saints in heaven a dwelling place.
For here with us to little was the space
That he abode, of whom the remembrance,
Shall never dye in England ne in France.
This worthy king gave to me in charge
In Englysh tongue to make a translation
Out of latin within a volume large,
How long the greeks lay tofore the town:
And how that Paris first at Cytheron,
In Venus temple sleighly did his pain
There to rauysh the fair queen Heleyne
In which book the process ye may se,
To him how she was wedded in the town:
And of the siege laid unto the cite
By Menelay and king Agamennon.
And many another full worthy of renoun
On either party which that in battle
Fro day to day each other did assail.
Whereto should I tell or what should I write,
The death of Hector or of Achylles?
Or whereto should I of new endite
How worthy Troilus was slain in y^ prese?
The end of Paris or of Pallamides,
Or the slaughter of manly Deyphebus,
Or how his brother called Hellenus
Told before how it was great folly
That Paris should wed queen Heleyne.
And how Cassandra in her prophecy,
On this wedding fore began complain,
And for the constreint of her hertely pain,
How she wexe mad, and ran about the town.
Till she was caught and shet up into prison.
All this matter ye may behold in deed,
Set by and by within Troy book:
And how Creseide loved Dyomede,
When worthy Troylus she wilfully forsook.
Of her nature a quarrel thus she took,
To assay both, if need were also to feyne
To take the third, and leave the^ both tweyne.
I pass over and tell of it no more,
Ne by what means the greeks wan y^ town,
How Eneas neither how Anthenore
Against king Priam co^spired false traison:
Neither how Vlixes gate Paladion.
The death of Priam ne of Eccuba the queen,
Ne how Pyrrus flewe pong Pollicene.
Neither here to write it is not mine intent,
Repeyre of greeks home in to their country,
After the cite at Iiyon was brent:
Neither of their mischefe they had on the sea.
Neither how Vlixes found Penolope,
A true wife though he were long her fro,
Through al Greece I can read of no mo.
Of these matters thus I make an eude,
What fill of greeks after their viage,
To Troy book tho folk I send,
Which have desire to se the surplusage:
How greeks made first their passage
Toward Troy, besiegynge the cite,
Bid the storye ye get no more of me.
The.xvii. Chapter.
Here speaks Bochas the author of this book, against the surquedous pride of
them that trust in richesse, saying these words unto them.

ME proud folks that set your affiau^ce
In strength, beauty, or in hye nobles,
If ye consider fortunes variaunce,
And could a myrrour before your eyes dress,
Of king Pryam and of his great richesse,
To se how he and his children all
From their noblesse suddenly ben fall,
Hector of knighthode called sours and well,
Sad and demure, and famous of prudence,
Paris also in beauty did excel,
And Helenus in perfyt providence.
Troylus in arms had great experience,
Also Deyphebus preued manly on his fone,
Yet in y^ war they were slain euerychone.
Had not this king also as I can devise,
By noble Heccuba which that was y^ queen*
A daughter called Cassandra the wise,
Her young suster fair Pollicene?
Alas alas what may all such pride mean.
For albeit their renome spronge full far,
Yet are these women devoured in the war.
Was he not mighty and strong in all things,
And had also of his aliaunce,
Right worthy princes and many rych kings,
And nighe al Asie under his obeisaunce?
Hold in his time most famous of puissance,
Most renomed of richesse and tresours,
Till that fortune with her sharp shoures
When that he satte highest on his whele,
This blind gods began him to assail:
Her froward malice he felt it full well,
His gold, his treasure, first it began to fail,
And darken began his roial apparayle.
By which example at proud men mayse,
The untrue trust, the mutabilite.
Which in this world is seen and found alday.
In mids of states in their magnificence,
Ebb after floude makes no delay:
But hait her course, there is no resistance,
The tide abides not for no violence.
Each man y^ stands of chau^ges here in dout
Must take his turn as it comes about.
Let Priam be to you a clear myrrour,
Ye proud folks that set your affiaunce,
In such glory, which fades as a flour,
And has of beauty here none attendaunce.
The world to you cast a full bitter chance:
For when ye wene sit highest at full,
Than will she sonest your bright feders pull.
Ye have warnynges for to take heed
By ensample of other, clear and right visible,
How worldly bliss is meddled al with dread,
And if your wits and reasons be sencible,
Thing seen at the eye is not incredible.
And all this doctrine is to you in vein
If in your time ye have no chaunges seen.
Wherefore Bochas unto your avail,
Full prudently put you at this issue:
First of al he gives you this counsel,
To leave your byces and take you to virtue.
And set your trust al wholly in Jesut
For he may best in mischief help at need
Of worldly chaunges that ye the^ not dread.
The.xviii. Chapter.
Here also Jhon Bochas puts a great praysynge and commendacion of suerty
that stands in poverty under these words in sentence.

THese great lordshyppes, these great dignities,
Chief thing annexed unto y^ regaly
When they sytte highest in their sees,
And round about stante the chiualry,
Dread enters in with paryl and envy
And unware change, which none may know
When fortune will make them lout low.
They may well keep a stately household,
With a vain trust their power should ever last,
Clad in their ma^tell of purpul and of gold,
And on the whele of fortune clyme up fast,
Like as she might never down them cast.
But aye the clymbinge highest at all,
Alas the sorer is their unhappy fall.
The fall of Priam and of Agamemnon,
Ought of right more to be complained,
When that fortune had pulled them down,
And of malice has at them disdayned,
Than if they never to worship had attained:
But their falling was the more grievous,
Because tofore they were so glorious.
O thou pouert, meke, humble, and debonayre,
Which that kepest the laws of nature,
For sudden chaunges thou will not dispaite
So art thou franchised from fortunes lure:
All her assautes thou lowly do endure,
That she may have no jurisdiction,
To enterupt thy possession.
Thou set little by all worldly richesse*
Nor by his treasours which been transitory:
Thou scornest the^ that their sheltro^s dress
Toward batayls, for conquest and victory:
Thou dispysest al shininge of vein glory.
Laud of triumphs which conquerers have sought
with al her pillage, you setst the^ at noght.
Thou dispreisest al superfluitee.
None infortune may change thy courage:
And the ships that sail by the sea
With merchandise among the flodes rage,
Their auentures and perilous passage,
Life, body, goods, al put in adventure,
Only for lucre, great richesse to recure.
Of al such thing thou take little head,
Nor of the people that manners do purchase:
Nor of pleders which for lucre and mede,
Meyntayne quarrels, and questes do enbrace.
Thou the^ beholdest with a full still face,
Their subtle working sought out for ye nones
And suddenly depart from al atones.
Thou can in litell also have suffisaunce,
And art content with full small dispense,
For thy richesse, and thine haboundaunce,
Without grutchyng is humble patience.
If any man do to the offense,
Thou forgettest, and can forgive,
To the suffyseth so thou may live.
The starred heuin is thy couerture,
In somer season under the leaves grene:
Thou make thy dwellinge and do thy self assure,
Again great heates of the son shene:
Content with fruits, and water crystal clean:
To staunche thy hunger, and thy thurstes sore,
After the season, and carest for no more.
Pouert eke lies the cold wynters night
Wrapped in straw, without co^pleyning:
Without dread, he goes glad and light,
And tofore thieves full merely does sing.
She gothe also without patisyng,
Fro land to land among poor and rich,
For friend and foe to him be both ylich.
Moral Senecke records by writing,
Richest of things is glad pouerte:
Ever of one chere void of al grutching,
Both in joy and in aduersite:
Through all the world last her liberte,
And her franchise stant in so great ease,
That of fredom no man will her displese.
She is norice of study and of doctrine,
In virtuous labor does her diligence:
And of science which that been divine,
She is called mother by clerks in sentence:
Of philosophers most had in reverence.
Fortune and she so far a sonder vary,
That each to other of custom is contrary,
Her erthly joy is for to live in peace.
Hates tumulte, noise, and disturbaunce:
For her disciple called zenocrates,
In wylful pouert set holy his plesaunce.
Sober of his port, through whose attemperau^ce,
Full many a man by his teching,
Were brought to virtue fro vicious lyuinge.
His diete was so mesurable,
And deuoyde of superfluite,
That his courage he kept fyrme and stable,
Fro fleshely lusts he was so attempre:
Reason maistred his sensualite,
Desires unlawful for to set aside,
During his life pouert was his gide.
His abidyng and his conversation
Was in places that were solitary,
Among trees and wells he bylte him a do^gio^,
With multitude he hated for to tarry:
For pouert was his secretary,
Sober of his chere and stable of his intent,
And in Athenes first to schole he went.
He was so mighty of authorite,
Rightwysnesse, and justice to observe,
That rightful iuges his sentence took at gre:
He could his mouth and tongue so preserve,
That in the temple ones of Mi^erue
Without oath unto his sentence,
To that he said the iuges gave credence.
He asked was among great audience,
Why he was soleine of his daliaunce:
His answer was that never for scylence
Through litel speking he felt no greuance.
Speech unadvised causes repentance:
And recheles tongues for lack of refreyninge,
To many a man has be great hinderinge.
Diogenes true heir and next alied
To wylful pouert, by just enheritaunce,
For all richesse he plainly has defied:
To him it was so great encomberaunce,
With worldly treasour to have aliaunce.
His dwelling made within a litell tun,
Which turned about with concourse of the sun.
Him self refreshig with hete of Phoebus bemes,
For he was content god wot with full lite:
King Alexander that conquered al realms
Came ridyng down and began him self delight,
This philosopher to se and visyte.
Him self soquestred sole from all the prees,
And came alone to see Diogenes.
Proffered unto him great riches and treasoure,
Badde him ask what thing that he would,
That might him please or do to him succor:
But of all that he nothing ne told,
But prayed him full lowly that he should
Not draw from him that thing again al right
Which for to give lay not in his might.
What thing is that quod Alexander again,
I have by conquest al erthly tresour wun?
The philosopher said he spoke in vain,
Thou have (quod he) no lordship of the sun,
Thy shadow lets his bemes fro my tun:
And since thou have no power of his light,
I pray the hertely forbarre me not his sight.
Though Alexander was mighty of puissance,
And all the world had in his demeyne,
Yet was his reason under the obeysaunce
Of fleshly lusts, fettred in a cheine:
For in his person will was souereyne,
His reason bridled by sensualite,
Troublyng the fredome of right and equite.
For where that will has dominacion
In a prince, which should sustain right,
And parcial favor oppresses his reason,
And trouthes titel is bornedoun with might,
And equal doom has lost his clear light,
Though for a season they sit in hie cheyres,
Their fame shall fade within a few years.
In this make I comparison,
Between Alexander and Diogenes:
That one endured but a short season,
For that he loved war more than pees.
And for that other was not recheles,
But held him content with gifts of nature,
Unto great age his pouert did endure.
Alexander was slain with poysone,
In his triumphs when he did excel:
But in a tun that lay full low down,
Diogenes drank water of the well.
And of their end their difference to tell,
Alexander with covetous was blent,
The philosopher with litel was content.
Blessed be pouert that may endure long,
Maugre the fraud and danger of fortune:
Where as kings and emperors strong,
In their estate no while may contune,
And al virtues rekened in common,
Twene indigence and great habundaunce,
Is a good mean content with suffisaunce.
For with great plentye men be not assured,
After their lust always to live in ease:
And though y^ me^ great tresure have recured,
With their riches they feel many disease.
Lords have not al thing that may the^ please,
But hertely joy philosophers express,
Is grettest tresour twene pouert and riches.
For this chapter shows a figure,
A manner likeness, and demonstracion,
How Diogenes longer did endure,
Than mighty Priam, or king Laomedon.
So to exemplifye in conclusion,
There is more trust in virtuous symplesse,
Than in presumynge of vicious false riches.
For the auoutry of Paris and Heleine,
Brought al Troy to distruccion:
Pride and luxury were also means tweine,
Why greeks laid a siege to the town,
And finally cause of their confusion.
To either party loss of many a man,
The ground conceived why first that war ga^.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedy piteous and lamentable.
Full dolorous to write and to express.
That worthy Priam of kings most notable,
Was fall in pouert for all his great richesse:
Fro kyngly honor in to wretchedness:
From scepter and croune, and from his regaly,
To mischief brought through false auoutry*
Was not fortune froward and disceuable,
For to suffer by her doubleness,
And by her course which ever is variable,
That worthy Hector flour of al prowess,
Should unwarily most famous of noblesse,
Be slain, alas chief stock of chiualry,
For a quarrel of false auoutry?
Agamemnon accounted incomparable
Among greeks, for troth and rightwysnesse,
To govern most glorious and able,
Within his paleis, the storye bears wines,
His wife Clitimnistra through her cursednes,
Assented was to murdre him of envy,
For the occasion of false auoutry.
Ye noble princes conceive how chaungeable
Is worldly honor, through unsteadfastness,
Since of king Priam the glory was unstable?
Fix in your mind this matter does impresse,
And your corages knightly does vpdresse:
Again al tytles holds champarty,
Which appertains to false auoutry.
The.xix. Chapter.
Of mighty Sampson which told his counsel to Dalyda, whereby he was
disceiued.

WHo was more stronger tha^ Sampson?
None more deliver, y^ bible bears witness:
Without weapen he slough a fierce lion,
And for his enemies to him did express
His uncouth problem anon he began him dress
Again Philistines, and slough of the^ thirty,
To pay his promise spoiled them by and by.
His problem was (the text thus rehersyng
After the letter) in very sothfastnesse,
There came out mete of a thing etynge,
And fro the strong there went out swetnes.
But his wife of froward doublenes,
Which ever wrought to his disauayle,
Of worthy Sampson told the counsel.
What is more strong than is a lion?
Or more sweet than honey in tastyng?
But women have this condition,
Of secret things when they have knowleging
They bolne inward their hertes aye freting
Outher they must dye or discure,
So britel of custom is their nature.
This was the case, the lion that was deed,
Again the son gapynge lay up right:
Aswarme of been entered in his heed,
Of whom there came honey anon right,
And when Sampson thereof had a sight,
He fautasied in his opinion,
Full secretly this proposicion,
As ye have herd, and began it forth purpose,
That philistines to him it should expowne:
Under a pain the troth to him unclose.
But with his wife they privily began rown,
And she on Sa^pson began co^pleyn and frown,
And faymngly so long upon him weep,
That he coud not his counsel fro her keep.
Which when she knew made no taryeng,
But plain and hole she began it to declare:
Such double trust is in their weeping,
To keep their tongues women can not spare.
Such weeping wives yuell mote they fare,
And al husbands I pray god give the^ sorrow,
That tell their counsel at even or morrow.
She told the^ hole she told it the^ not half,
And Sampson than began upon the^ smyle:
If ye not had herd it in my calfe,
Ye should not have found it a great while.
Who may be sure where women list begyle?
Though books Sa^pson of strength so co^me^de,
Yet durst he not against his wife offend.
This mighty Sampson did also his pain
Three hundred foxes ones that he found,
He took their tails, knit the^ twayn and twain,
And amyd euerich he set a fire bronde.
And as they ran in Phylistines land,
So furiously up and down they went,
That they their fruits and their vynes brent.
Eke by trayson when he was ones bound,
With strong cords (as he lay a sleep)
There.iii. M. which that Sampson found,
To have murdered him or he took keep,
He brake his bonds and up anon he lepe:
Of an ass he caught a chaule bone,
And a thousand he slough of them anon.
He began to faint, and had a sudden lust
For to drink, faded face and chere:
And god sent him to stau^che with his thurst,
From the asses to the water crystal clear,
Which that spra^ge out large like a ryuere:
Refreshed his spirit which before began dull,
Till that he had of water drunk his full.
After he went to Gasam the city,
Among his enemies that were of great might
To his plesaunce where he did se,
A full fair woman, lay with her al night,
And on the morrow long or it was light,
Maugre the watch on his sholders square,
The gates strong up to an hyl he bare.
And in a valey which called was Soret,
Full hot he loved Dalyda the fair:
On whom his heart was full sure set,
She could her feign so meke and debonayre.
Make him such chere when hi list repeyre,
But I dare call her Dalida the double,
Chief rote and ca^use of al his mortal trouble.
He never drank wynes white ne reed,
Of Nazarees such is the governance:
Rasour, ne shere, touched never his heed,
For in long growyng stands their plesaunce.
And this Sampson most mighty of substance,
Had al his force by influence of heuyn,
By heeres weryng y^ were in nombre seuyn.
It was full secre in every man's sight,
Among people told for an uncouth thing,
Whereof Sampson had so great might,
Outward showing by force of his working:
But Dalida with her false flattering,
Would never stynt enquiring ever among,
Till y^ ^he knew whereby he was so strong.
She like a serpent daryng under flours,
Or like a worm that wroteth in a tree,
Or like an addre of many fold colors,
Right true apperinge and fair upon to se,
For shrouded was her mutabilite,
With lowliheed and a fair pretense,
Of true menynge under false appearance.
He meant troth and she was variable,
He was faithful and she was vntre we:
He was sted fast and she was v^ stable,
His trust aye one, she loved things new,
She weared colors of many diverse hew.
Instead of blewe which sted fast is and clean,
She loved cha^nges of many diverse grene.
But to purpose for to condiscende,
When she of Sampson knew all the priuite,
Her falsheed shortly for to comprehend,
She made him sleep full soft on her kne,
And a sharp rasour after that took she,
Shofe of his heeres large and of great length
Whereby alas he lost all his strength.
Damage in earth is none so grievous,
As an enemy which that is secree:
Nor pestilence none so perilous,
As falsnesse where it is priuee,
And specially in feminitee.
For if their wives be found variable,
Where shall husbands find other stable?
Thus Sa^pson was by Dalida disceiued,
She could so well flatter, forge, and feign:
Which Philistines when they have conceived,
Unawarely bound him in a mighty cheyne,
Cast him in prison, put out his eyes twain,
And of dispite after as I find,
At their quernes made him for to grynde.
They made a feast stately and solemn,
When they had all this traison wrought:
And to rebuke him, scorn him, and condemn,
Blind Sampson was before them brought*
Which grieved him full fore in his thought,
Cast he did privily in his mind,
Cauenge his blyndnesse some manner way to find.
And when he had thus be thought him long,
He made a child him privily to lead,
To two posts, large, square, and strong,
Enbraced them, or any man took hedet
And began to shake the without fear or drede^
So sturdely among his fone al,
That the temple is upon them fall.
Thus he was avenged on his fone,
Which that falsely did agaynt him strive:
Slough in his dyeng, god wot many one,
More than he did ever before in his live.
And he was also, the date to discriue
In Israel (the Bible is mine auctour)
Twenty year their judge and governor.
Lenuoye.
^Hys tragedy gives an evidence,
To whom me^ shall their cou^seil (...) dyscure:
For recheles tongues for lack of prudence,
Have do great harm to many a creature,
When harm is done full hard it is to recu(...)
Beware by Sa^pso^ your counsel well to ke(...)
Let Dalida complain, cry and weep.
Whilom Sampson for manhood and pruden(...)
Israel had in governance and cure,
Daunted Lions through his magnifyeence*
Made on a thousand a disconfiture:
But his most perilous adventure,
Was when he lay with Dalida to sleep,
Which falsely could complain, cry and weep.
Ye noble princes conceive the sentence
Of this story remembered in scripture,
How that Sampson of wylful negligence
Was shaven and shorn, diffaced his fygure^
Keep your co^^eytes under couerture,
Suffer no nightworme within your co(...) ^cr^^
Though Dalida compain, cry and weep.
The.xx. Chapter.
A chapter of Bochas discriuyng the malice of women.

Mine aucthour Bocas reioysed in bylyue,
I dare not say whether it was commendable,
Of these women the malice to dyscryue,
Generally, and writ (it is no fable)
Of theys nature how they ^en variable,
And how their malice best by euidente
Is kno^w to them that have experience.
They can aforce them al day men mayse,
By sp^guler fredom and dominacion,
Ou^r^en to have soueraynte,
And kept them low under subjection:
And sor^ labor in the^ opinion^
By subtyl ^ra^^ that thing to return.
Which is to them denied of nature.
Bochas affirms and hold it for no tale.
If they want freshnes of color,
And have their face Jawne, swerte, and pale,
Anon they do their diligent labor
In such anede to help and do socour,
Their riueled skyn abroad to draw and strain,
Forward frou^ces to make the^ smoth and plain.
If no redness in their chekes be,
Nor no lilyes dilectable and white,
Than they take tencrease their beauty,
Such oyntements as may most delight.
Where kind fails the surplusage to aquite
They can by craft so for them self dispose,
Show rednes, though there be no rose.
And for to show their face fair and bryghte,
With hot spices and oyntementes sote,
They can by craft counterfete a right:
Take in such case many an wholesome rote.
Where kind fails conning can do bote.
If their breasts up to hye them dress,
They ca^ full well the^ bossynge down repress.
And if they be to soft or to tender,
They have connyng to make them hard and round:
Their corsnes they can eke make slendre,
With poynant sauces y^ ben in phisike fon^de,
Their subtel wits in sleightes so habound,
Thing y^ is crooked or wrong in ma^s sight,
To make it seem as it went up right.
They have strictories too make their skyn to shine
Wrought subtly of go^mes and of glaire,
Crafty lies to dye their here cytryne,
Distilled waters to make them seem fair.
Fumigacions to rectify the air,
Stomagers and fresh confections,
To repress false exhalacions.
Of al these things Bochas has most dispite,
When these veckes far iron in age,
Within them self have vain glory and delight,
For to be fair and paynt their visage:
Like as a paintour on an old image
Lays his colors rich and fresh of hew,
Worm frete storkes for to make seem new.
Their slak skyn by craft abroad is streined,
Like an orange from the galey brought:
Rich relikes about their neck is cheined,
Gold upon gold we perle and stones wrought.
And ye their color outward apeire naught
with wind or sun which should the^ stein or fade,
For unkind heates they vsen Citrinade.
What should I write their uncouth desiers,
Sumtyme froward su^tyme debonayre?
Imageninge sundry fresh attiers,
Contrived of new many thousand pair.
Diverse deuiles to make them seem fair:
In their apport by counterfayte lykenes
For to resemble Venus the goddess.
Of one devise they hold them not apayde,
They must each day have a strange wede:
If any be better than other arrayed,
Of froward grutchynge they feel their heart blede.
For eueryche thinks verily in deed
A morrow prieng in a myrrour bright,
For to be fairest in her own sight.
They can their eyes and their lokes dress
To draw folks by sleightes to their lure,
And some while by their frowardnes
And feigned danger they can of men recure
What ever they list, such is their adventure:
Against whose sleightes force nor prudence
May not avail to make resistance.
With constraint weeping, and forged flatery,
Subtle speech, ferced with plesaunce,
And many false dissimuled malady
Though i^ their hertes they feel no greuau^ce,
And with their covert sobre daliaunce,
Though underneath the double serpent dare,
Full many one they have brought i^ their snare.
O swetnes full of mortality,
Serpentyne with a pleasant visage,
Unstable joy full of aduersite,
O most chaungeable of heart and of courage,
In thy desires having this advantage,
What ever thou list to daunt and oppress,
Such is thy frau^ches, Bocas bears witness.
Of nature they can in many wise,
Of mighty gyantes the power well aslake*
What wit of man can compass or devise,
Their sleighty wyles dare well undertake,
And if them list thereon an end make:
Fro this conceit who so that discord^
A thousand stories the reders can accord.
Remembering first how Hercules strong*
Was brought by women to his destruction:
The queen Clitimnistra did also great wrong
To murder her lord king Agamemnon.
Dalyda also betrayed Sampson,
Amphiorax sanke deep down in to hell,
Because his wife his counsel did out tell.
It needs not make mention
Though Phillis died through impacience,
Of long abidinge of her Demophoon,
Nor how that Nisus king of Magarence
Was by his daughters cursed violence
Unawarely murdered, in Ouide it is told,
Wha^ from his head she stale y^ hear of gold.
Bochas reherseth of wives many one,
Which in their werkinge were full co^trarius:
But among all he writes there was one.
Queen of Assirye and wife to king Ninus,
And by descent daughter to Neptunus,
Semitamis called in her days,
Which of all men would make assa^^s.
She nouther spared stranger ne kynred,
Her own son was not set aside:
But with him had knowledgyng in deed,
Of which the sclau^der went about full wide,
For with one man she could not abide,
Such a false lust was upon her fall,
In her courage to have a do wythal.
And truly it does my wit appal,
Of this matter to make rehersaile:
It is no reason to atwyte women al
Though one or two whylom did fail,
It sits not nor it may not avail
Them to rebuke that perfect ben and good,
Far out of joint though some other stood.
The rich Rubye nor the Sapphire Inde
Be not appayred of their fresh beauty,
Though among stones me^ cou^terfetes find:
And semblably though some women be
Not well governed after their degree,
It not diffa^eth nor does no violence,
To them that never did in their life offense.
The white lillye nor the wholesome rose
Nor violettes sprede on banks thick,
Their swetnes which outward they unclose
Is not appeyred with no weeds wycke.
And though y^ breres and many a crooked stick
Grow in gardens among the flowers fair,
They may the virtue of herbs not apayre.
And (I dare say) that women virtuous
Ben in the virtue (of price) more commendable
Than there be some rekened vicious,
And of their living found also stable.
Good women ought not be partable
Of their trespass, nor their wicked deed,
But more commended for their womanhed.
What is appayred of Hester the mekenes,
Though y^ Scilla was sturdy and vengeable?
Nor of Alceste the perfect stedfastnes
Is not eclipsed, but more acceptable,
Though Clitimnistra was found variable:
Like as wha^ clouds their blaknes do decline
Phoebus with his beams does more clear shine.
Full many one have clean ben al their live,
Vndefouled kept their virginity:
And some could against al vices strive,
Them to conserve in perfect chastity,
Deuoyde of chaung and mutabilitie.
Though su^e other have there again trespased*
The laud of them is not therewith diffased.
And who ever of malice list accuse
These sely women touching variaunce,
Let them remember and in their wits muse
Men be not ay stable in their constaunce:
In this world there is no perseueraunce,
Change is ay found in men and women both
On outher party be they never so wroth.
No man should the virtuous at wite
Instead of him that did the trespace,
Nor for a thief a true man iudite,
Nor for the gylty an Innocent manace:
Good and wicked abide in every place,
Their price, their lack, let them be reserved,
To outher party as they have deserved.
Though Jhon Bochas in his opinion
Against women list a process make,
They that been good of condition
Should against it no manner quarrel take
But lightly, pass and their sleues shake:
For again good he nothing made
Who can conceive theffect of this balade.
The.xxi. Chapter.
The excuse of Bochas for his writing against misgouerned women, in sted of a
Lenuoy.

YE women all that shall behold and see,
This chapter, and the process read,
Ye that been good found in your degree,
And virtuous both in thought and deed,
What Bochas says take ye no head:
For his writing if it be discerned,
Is not again them that be well governed.
For though it fall that one two or three
Have done amiss, as thereof god forbed,
That other women which stable and faithful be,
Should be atwited of their vngoodlyhede:
But more commended for their womanhed.
For this scripture if it be concerned,
Is again them that be not well governed.
A galled horse (the soth if ye list se)
Who touches hi boweth his back for dread,
And who is know untrue in his country,
Shrinketh his horns wha^ me^ speak of falshede,
But good women have full litel need
To grutch or frown when ye truth is learned,
Though there be so^e yt be not well governed.
Of Dalida and queen Pasiphae
Though doublenes did their bridell led,
Yet of Lucrece and Penolope,
The noble fame abroad does shine and sprede:
Out of good corn me^ may the darnel wede,
Women rebuke in their defautes querned,
And not touch them that be well governed.
The.xxii. Chapter.
Of mighty Pyrrus that sloughe Pollicene, which for his pride and auoutry dyed
in pouerte, slain at the last by Horestes.

BOchas musing in his remembrance,
And considering in his fantasy,
The unsure trust of worldely variaunce,
Of men and women the change and the folly:
The same time he saw a company
Of mighty princes full pitously weeping,
To him appear their fortune complaining.
Among other that put them self in pr^ase,
Of mighty Pirrus first he had a tight:
That was the son of worthy Achilles,
Among Greeks the most famous knight,
Most commended of manhood and of might.
Son and next heir as books specifye,
Of Pelleus king of Thessalie.
This Achilles full manly of his heart
Hurt of Hector and his wound grene,
Slough Hector after or he did aduert:
The which Achilles for love of Pollicene,
By compassing of Heccuba the queen,
Under treaty this greeks champion,
Was slain of Paris within Troy town.
Whose death to avenge, Pyrrus in his tene
Furiously with face deed and pale,
Slough afterward the said Pollicene,
And dismembered her on pieces small:
Which for to hear is a piteous tale,
That a knight so vengeable was in deed,
To slay a maid quakynge in her dread.
He could for Ire on her no mercy have,
But with his sword most furious and wode,
Merciles upon his fathers grave,
Like a tiraunt he shed her chaste blood:
The deed horrible diffaced his knighthode,
That to this day the sclaunder and diffame,
By new report reboundeth on his name.
Poets say, and specially Ouide
Writes when Greeks fro Troy should sail.
How their ships by an anchor did ride,
Of their purpose which long did the^ fail:
But in this while he makes re hersayle,
Out of the earth manacynge of chere,
Of Achilles an image did appear.
To greeks said with a deedly face:
I feel well mine honor and my glory,
And my nobles full lightly forth does pace
Unkind people, out of your memory.
Which by me had your conquest and vyctory,
Your deuoyre does Pollicene to take,
And on my grave a sacrifice to make.
With her blood, look ye spare naught
To spring it about my sepulture:
Thus blood for blood with vengeance shall be bought,
And for my death the death she must endure.
And hole the manner of this adventure,
And how she dyed, in her maydenhead,
Methamorphoseos y^ process ye may read.
In hasty vengeance set was al his joy,
with thurst vnstau^ched Troyan blood to shede,
He slough Priam the worthy king of Troy:
And into Greece with him he did led
Andromada, the story ye may read,
Weded her, and after in certain,
By him she had worthy sons twain.
But in repayryng home to his country,
As Eolus did his ships drive,
I find he was a pirat of the se:
And into Greece when he did aryue,
Fortune unawarely began again him strive,
Forsook his wife let her live alone,
Took another called Hermione
Which was that time in marriage
To Horestes son of Agamemnon:
And he alas of loves wylful rage,
Took her by force to his possession.
But of auoutry follows this guerdo^,
Sudden death, pouerte, or shame,
Open disclau^der, great mischefe or diffame.
Eke in his time this Pirrus as I read,
Fill into mischefe and great pouerte:
And with such meyny as he did led,
He was a rouer, and robbed on the sea.
And as poets rehearse, ye may se,
Of such robbyng by sclau^der and diffame,
This word Pirate of Pirrus took y^ name.
And as the storye after does devise,
The said Horestes began sykerly espy,
Where that Pyrrus did sacrifyce
Tofore Appollo, that god to magnify:
Full unawarely Horestes of envy,
Took a sharp sherde or Pyrrus coud aduert
Where that he stood and rofe him to the heart.
This was the fine of Pyrrus in substance,
For all his pride and great presumcion:
Of false auoutry follows this vengeance,
Loss of some membre, pouerte, or prison.
Or hateful sclaundre by some occasion,
Or sudden death, shortly in sentence,
Complete in Pyrrus, by full clear euydence.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
Of Machayre and of his suster Canace.

AFter this Pyrrus came Canace the fair,
Tears dystyllynge fro her eyes twain:
And her brother that called was
Machaire.
And both they pitiously began plain
That fortune began at them so disdain,
Hyndryng their fate by woeful adventure,
Touchig their love which was again nature.
He was her brother and her love also,
As the story plainly does declare:
And in a bed they lay eke both two,
Reason was none why they would spare.
But love that causes woe and eke welfare,
Began again kind so straungely deuyse,
That he her womb made suddenly to rise.
And finally mine author bears wytnes,
A child she had by her own brother,
Which excelled in favor and fayrenes,
For like to him of beauty was none other,
But of their love so gyded was the rother,
That Caribdis twene winds full contrayre,
Has Canace distroied, and Machayre.
For when their father the manner did epsy,
Of their workyng which was so horible,
For ire almost he fell in frensy,
Which for to appese was an impossible:
For the matter was froward and odible,
For which plainly deuoyde of al pite,
Upon their trespass he would avenged be.
The cause known the father anon right,
Cast for their death of rigor to provide:
For which Machaire fled out of his sight
And from his face his presence began to hide.
But woe alas his suster must abide,
Merciless for their hateful trespase,
And suffer death there was none other grace.
First her father a sharp sword to her sent,
In token of death for a remembrance,
And when she wist plainly what he meant,
And conceived his rigorous ordinance:
Whyth whole purpose to obey his plesaunce,
She grutched not, but lowly of intent,
Like a meke daughter to his desire assent.
But or she dyed she cast for to write
A little letter to her brother dear,
A deedly complaynt to show and endite,
With pale fate and a mortal there.
The salt tears from her eyes clear,
With pitous sobbing fet fro her herts brinke,
Distillyng down to te^pre with her ynke.
The.xxv. Chapter.
The letter of complaynt of Canace, to her brother Machayre.

OVt of her sown when she abreyde,
Knowing no mean but death in her distres,
Too her brother full pytouslye she said
Cause of my sorrow, rote of my heaviness,
That whilo^ was chief sours of my gladness,
Wha^ both our joys by will were so disposed,
Under one key our herts to be unclosed.
Whilom thou were supporte and sykernes,
Chief reioysyng of my worldly plesaunce:
But now thou art ground of my sickness,
Well of wanhope, and my deedly penance:
Which have of sorrow grettest habu^dau^ce
That ever yet had any creature,
Which must for love the death, alas, endure,
Thou were whylo^ my bliss and al my trust,
Sovereign confort, my sorrows to appese:
Spring and well of all my hertes lust,
And now alas chief rote of my disease.
But if my death might do the any ease,
O brother mine in remembrance of twain,
Death shall to me be pleasure and no pain.
My cruel father most vnmerciable,
Ordained has (it needs must be so)
In his rigor he is so vntretable,
Al merciless he will that it be do,
That we algate shall dye both two:
But I am glad since it may be none other,
Thou art escaped my best beloved brother.
This is mine end I may it not astert,
O brother mine there is no more to say,
Lowly besechinge the with all my hole heart,
For to remember specially I prey,
If it befall my litel son to dey,
That y^ may after some mind on us have,
Suffer us both to be buried in one grave.
I hold hi streitly atwene my arms twain,
Thou and nature laid on me this charge:
He gyltlesse with me mast suffer pain,
And since thou art at fredom and at large,
Let kyndnes our love not so discharge,
But have a mind where ever that thou be
Ones a day upon my child and me.
On the and me depends the trespare,
Touching our gylt and our great offense:
But welawaye most angelyke of face,
Our child young in his pure innocence,
Shall against right suffer dethes violence.
Tender of lymmes, god wot full giltlesse,
The goodly fair y^ lies here spechlesse.
A mouth he has, but words has he none,
Can not complain, alas, for none outrage,
Nor grutcheth not, but lies here alone
Still as a lamb most meke of his visage:
What heart of stele could do to him damage,
Or suffer him dye beholding the mauere,
And look benign of his two eyne clear?
O thou my father to cruel is thy wreche,
Harder of heart, than any tigre or lion:
To slay a child that lies without speech,
Void of all mercy and remission,
And on his mother haste no compassion.
His youth considered with lyppes soft as silk
Which at my breast lies and souketh milk.
Is any sorrow remembered by writing
Unto my sorouful sighs comparable?
Or was there ever creature living
That felt of dole a thing more lamentable?
For confortlesse and vnrecurable
Are thilke heaped sorrows full of rage,
Which have with woe oppressed my corrage.
Reken all my mischeues, in especial
And on my mischefe remember and have mind:
My lord my father is my enemy mortal,
Experience yn^ugh thereof I find.
For in his pursuit he has left behind,
In distruccion of the my child and me,
Al ruth, al mercy, and fatherly pite.
And the my brother avoided from his sight,
Which in no wise his grace may attain:
Alas that rigor, ve^geaunce and cruel right,
Should above mercy be lady sovereign.
But cruelty does at me so disdain,
That thou my brother my child and also I
Shall dye exyled, alas from all mercy.
My father whylom by many a sundry sign
Was my socour and supportacion,
To the and me most gracious and benign,
Our worldly gladness our consolacion:
But love and fortune has turned vpsodoun
Our grace, alas, our welfare and our fame,
Hard to recure so sclaundred is our name.
Spot of diffaming is hard to wash away,
When noise abroad do folk manace:
To hinder a man their may be no delay,
For hateful fame flies far in short space?
But of us twain there is none other grace,
Save only death, and after death, alas,
Eternal sclaunder, of us thus stant the caas.
Who^ shall we blame or who^ shall we atwite,
Our great offense since we may it not hyde?
For our excuse reports to respyte
Mean is there none except the God Cupide:
And though he would for us provide,
In this matter to be our chief refuge,
Poets say he is blind to be a judge.
He is depaynt like a blind archere,
To mark aryght failing discrecion:
Holding no measure nouther fer nor nere,
But like fortunes disposicion,
Al upon hap void of al reason.
As a blind archer with arrows sharp ygrou^d,
Of adventure yeueth many a mortal wound.
At the and me he wrongly did mark,
Felly to hinder our fatal auentures.
As far as Phoebus shyneth in his arc,
To make us refuse to al creatures,
Called us twain unto the woeful lures
Of diffame, which will depart never,
By new report the noise encresyng ever.
Odious fame with swift wings flies,
But al good fame envy does restrain:
Each man of other the defautes sees,
Yet on his own no man will complain.
But all the world out cries on us twain.
Whose hateful ire by us may not be quemed.
For I must dye my father has so demed.
Now farwell brother, to me it does suffice
To dye alone for our both sake:
And in my most faithful humbly wise,
Unto my dethward though I trimble and quake,
Of the for ever now my leave I take.
And ones a year forget not but take heed,
My fatal day this letter for to read.
So shall you have of me some remembrance,
My name emprinted in thy kalendere,
By rehersayle of my deedly greuance:
Wear black that day and make a doleful chere.
And when thou come and shall aproch nere
My sepulture, I pray the not disdain
Upon my grave some tears for to rain.
Writing her letter wrapped all in dread,
In her right hand her pen began to quake:
And a sharp sword to make her heart blede,
In her lift hand her father has her take.
And her most sorrow was for her childs sake
Upon whose face in her barme slepyng,
Full many a tear she wept in complaining.
After al this, so as she stood and quoke,
Her child beholdig amyd her pains smert:
Without abode the sharp sword she took,
And roue her self even to the heart.
Her child fill down which might not astert,
Having no help to soccour him nor save,
But in her blood him self began to bathe.
And than her father most cruel of intent,
Badde that the child should anon be take,
Of cruel hounds in haste for to be rent,
And be devoured for his mothers sake:
Of this tragedy thus an end I make,
The process of which men may read and se
Concludes on mischefe and furious cruelty.
Remembrynge first as made is mention,
How that Pyrrus delited him in deed
When Troy was brought to destruction,
With cruel sword Troyan blood to shede.
But of such slaughter se here the cruel mede.
As right requires by unware violence,
Blood shed for blood is final recompense.
Lenuoye.
When surquedy oppressed has pity,
And mekenes is with tyranny bore down
Again all right, then hasty cruelty
To be vengeable makes no delation,
What follows thereof by good aspection,
Se an example how Pyrrus in his tene
Of hateful ire slough young Pollicene.
King Eolus to outrageous was parde,
And to vengeable in his entencion:
Against his children, Machaire, and Canace,
So importable was his punicion,
Of haste proceadyng to their destruction.
Worse in his ire as it was well seen,
Than cruel Pyrrus which slew Policene.
Noble princes, prudent and attempre,
Defer vengeance of high discrecion:
Till your ire sum what as waged be,
Do never of doom none execusion.
For hate and rancour perturben the reason
Of hasty judges, more of intent unclean,
Than cruel Pyrrus which slew Policene.
Thus ends the first Book.
TO some folk, parcase it would seem
Touchig y^ chau^ges and mutabilities,
By me rehearsed yt they might deem
Of fortunes strange adversities,
To princes showed, down pulled from their sees
These tragedies ought enough suffice,
In complaynyng which ye have heard devise
The story piteous, the process lamentable,
Void of joy, all gladness and pleasaunce,
A thing to grievous and to importable,
Where as no mirth is meddled with greuau^ce:
All upon complaynt stands the alyaunce,
Most when fortune, who y^ her course knew
Changes old joys into sorrows new.
For unto him that never wist of woe,
Remembrance of his old gladness
When his welfare and pleasaunce is go,
And never before knew of heaviness,
Such unware chau^g such uncouth wretchedness
Causes in prices through new dedly trouble
After their falling their sorrows to be double.
Old examples of princes that have fall,
Their remebraunce of new brought to mind
May be a myrror to estates all,
How they in virtue shall remedies find,
To eschew vices of such as were made blind:
From sodayn falling the selves to preserve,
Long to co^tune and thank of god deserve.
The fall of one is a clear lantern
To teach another what he shall eschew:
Peril of one, is (who so can discern)
Schole and doctrine from peril to remue.
As men deserve such guerdon must sue:
In vice nor virtue no man may God deceive
Like their deserts their mede they receive.
Who follows virtue lengest does persevere,
Be it in riches, be it in pouertye:
Light of troth his clerenes keeps ever,
Again the assautes of all adversity.
Virtue is cause of long prosperity.
And when princes from virtue down decline,
Their fame is shrouded under y^ cliptike line
For false fortune which turns as a ball,
Of unware chau^ges though men her atwite
It is not she that yaue princes the fall,
But vycious living plainly to endyte:
Though God above full often them respyte,
Long abides and does his grace send,
To this intent they should their life amend.
For their welfare and their abidyng long,
Who aduertiseth, depends not on chance:
Good life and virtue makes the^ to be strong,
And them assures in long perseueraunce.
Virtue on fortune makes a defiaunce,
That fortune has no domination,
Where noble princes be governed by reason.
But such as list not corrected be,
By example of other for vycious governance:
And fro their vices list not for to fly,
If they be troubled in their high puissaunce,
They arette it to fortunes variaunce,
Touching the gyltes that they did use
Their demerites full falsely excuse.
Virtue conserueth princes in their glory,
And confirms their dominations:
And vices put their prince out of memory,
For their trespaces and their transgressions
And in all such sudden mutacions
They can no refute nor no better succoure,
But again fortune to make their clamor.
Make an out cry of her doubleness,
As no gylt were in their own deed:
Thus untruly they call her a goddess,
Which little or naught may help at such a need
But if they had god in love and dread,
Trusted his lordshyp, in heart, will, and thought
They should fortune plainly set at naught.
Evidence full expert and palpable,
Tofore rehearsed told of diverse ages:
Worldly glory is vain and full unstable,
With disceytes double of their vysages,
Showing to princes firm of their corages,
By these ensamples how and in what wise,
By others falling they shall the^ self chastise.
Signs showed and tokens in heaven,
Diverse cometys, and constellations,
Dreadful thunder fearful fiery leaven,
Rumors in earth, and great discencions,
Disobey saunce in sundry regyons,
Shown examples (full well affirm I date)
To mighty princes the^ biddyng to beware
Their life to amend or the lord do smite,
Through negligence or it be to late.
And or y^ swerd of vengeance kerue or byte
Anto virtues their vycious life translate:
Cherishyng right against all wrong debate,
With dread of God make them self strong,
Than in no doubt they shall endure long.
Who is not ware by others chastisyng,
Other by him shall chastised be:
Hard is the heart whithe for no writing,
For no doctrine, nor none authority,
For none examples, will from his vices fly.
To indurat is his froward intent,
Which will not suffer his hardness to relent.
The round drops of the smothe rain,
Which that discende and fall from aloft,
On stones hard (at the eye it is seyne)
Perceth their hardness, with their falling often
All be in touching water is but soft,
The persyng caused by force nor puissaunce,
But of failyng by long continuance.
Semblably of right I dare rehearse,
Often readyng in books fructuous,
The hearts should of prudent princes perce,
Soke in their mind and make them virtuous,
To eschew all thing that is vycious.
For what avails the examples y^ they read,
To their readyng if contrary be the deed*
Cunnyng and deed who ran comprehend,
In clear conceits they ben things twain,
And if cunnyng do the deed amend,
Than at wene the^ is made a mighty chain,
A noble thing and right sovereign.
For than of cunnyng the labor is well spent
When deed follows, and both ben of assent.
Thus John Bochas procedyng in his book,
Which in number is called the second:
Began for to write and his purpose took,
To set in stories such as he found,
Of intent all vices to confound
By examples which he did express.
And at the beginning of his business
Mighty Saul to him did appear,
King of Israel piteously weeping.
Deadly of face and with an hydous cheer,
His voice ybroke by manifold sobbyng:
And to mine aucthout his sorrow co^playnyng,
Requiryng him together when they met,
First in his book his woeful fate to set.
Anon after I of entencion,
With pen in hand fast began me speed
As I could in my translation,
In this labor further to proceed:
My lord came forth by and began to take heed
This mighty prince right manly and right wi^e
Gave me charge in his prudent auyse,
That I should in every tragedy
After the process made mention:
At the end set a remedy,
With a Lenuoy, conveyed by reason:
And after that with humble affection
To noble princes lowly it dyrect,
By others falling them selves to correct.
And I obeyed his biddyng and pleasaunce,
Under support of his magnificence,
As I could, I began my pen advance,
All be I was barrayne of eloquence,
Following mine auctor in substance and sentence.
For it suffiseth plainly unto me
So that my lord my making take in gre.
Finis.
How Saul king of Israel borne of low degree as long as he dradde God and
was obediente to him, and ruled by good counsel, made many disconfitures: but
at the last for his pride, presumption, and great disobedience, he lost his
crown, and was stayne by Philistines.

The first Chapter.
THis said Saul of whom I spoke toforne,
Full well compacte, and large of his stature,
Of the line of Beniamyn eke borne,
His father Cis was called in scripture:
Whose asses whilom left their pasture,
Space of three days Saul had the^ sought,
Lost his labor, and found them naught.
For they were gone out so far on stray,
So disceuered, he ne could them mete:
Till that a child him suyng all the way,
Yaue him counsel his labor for to let,
And that he should go to the Prophet,
Which was full famous hold in Israel,
Of whom the name was called Samuel.
Which made Saul in his house to dyne,
Received him of great affection:
And by precept and ordinance deuyne,
Samuel made no prolongation,
But shed the holy sacred unction,
Upon the head of Saul down knelyng,
And full devoutly of Israel made him king
Of Gods people to have governance,
With scepter and crown and whole the regaly.
And his noblesse more mighty to advance,
With mekenes to rule his monarchy,
God gave to him a spirit of prophety,
Which was great glory to his magnificence
Of future things to have prescience.
And while yt he was meke and humble in deed,
Void of pride, and false presumption,
And prudent counsel with him did led,
Him to govern by good discretion,
He found quiet through all his region:
No forayne enmy durst him to werrey,
While he the lord mekely did obey.
No enemy might again him recure,
Through none e^prises, but sore did him dread:
Made many great disconfiture
Through his force, knyghthode, and ma^head
On Philistynes, and daunted eke in deed
Two mighty kings, the one of Ammonites,
And another that governed the Moabites.
He was found strong and eke victorious,
The Palestines bringyng to mischaunce,
Against Ydumeans so mighty and famous,
Through his mighty prudent governance,
That he their pride brought to mischaunce,
Outrayed them of wisdom and manheade,
Primo regum as ye may plainly read.
He was the son called of one year,
In Israel when his raygne began:
Stable of heart, and benygne of chere,
Froward nor sturdy to no manner man.
All that while love of the people he wan,
The time I mean while he was just and stable
And in his works not found variable.
But wha^ that pride began his heart enhau^ce
Wilfulnes and false melancoly
Outrayed reason, to have the governance
Of his old famous policy:
And had forgotten in his fantasy
To know the lord and mekely sue his law,
God from his crown his grace began wdrawe
The unkind worm of foryetfulnes,
In his heart had mined through the wall:
When to God for his kyndenes,
He gave no laud nor no thank at all,
Which had him raised unto estate royal
From poredegre, among all his kynne alone,
Of singular favor to set him in his trone.
What thig in heart may be more froward thought
Than is sudden false presumption,
Of a wretch that came up of naught,
To give him lordshyp and domination*
And for to make a plain comparison,
Men should of reason dread a lion less,
Than the rudenes of a crowned ass.
What thing to god is more abominable,
Than pride vpraysed out of pouertee?
And nothing gladly is found more vengeable,
Than are wretches set in high degree:
For from his stock kind may not fly,
Each thing resorteth how far ever it go,
To the nature which that it came fro.
Fruit and apples take their tarrage
Where they first grew, of the same tree,
And semblably each kynred and lynage,
Ones a year it will none other be,
By token and sign at the eye as men may se,
Draws communely in every creature,
Sum tetche to follow after his nature.
I write not this in rebuke of pouert,
But for such only as that it deserve.
God of his might as men be well expert,
May them in virtue increase and conserve,
From all mischefe a poor man preserve,
Raise hem on heygh to dominacions,
Through high noblesse of their conditions.
By influence God may his grace shede,
Where he finds cause: only by mekenes
A poor man to raise him up in deed,
Unto the estate of virtuous nobles,
For out of virtue comes all gentleness.
In pore and rich make none exception,
But them commend like their condition.
A poor man which that is virtuous,
And dreadeth god in his poverty,
Each thing eschuyng that is vycious,
And to his power does troth and equity,
I dare right well say what ever that he be,
Puttyng no rebuke unto his kinrede,
But call him gentle verily in deed.
But king Saul was contrarious,
Disobeysaunte found in his workyng:
When God made him to be vyctorious
On Amalech, where Agag was king,
Him commanded to spare no manner thing,
Man nor woman beast nor child succoure,
But y^ his sword should all thing devour.
But Saul wrought all in other wise,
Each thing reseruyng y^ was fair to sight,
And of intent to make a sacrifice,
After his vyctory he shope him anon right:
Fattest beasts he chase and has them dight,
Toward the fire to make his offryng,
And fro death he spared Agag the king.
He was reproved afterward of Samuel,
To gods biddyng for he was contrayre,
As abject to raygne in Israel,
That all good hope in him began despair.
His grace, his might, began pale and appayre,
His prophecy after has him failed,
And with a fiende he was also traueiled.
Thus from her whele fortune cast him down,
Aualed him from his royal se:
And God also took away the crown,
Both from him and his posterity,
And set up David for his humility.
Lo how the lord his domes can divide,
To enhaunce mekenes and to abate pride.
Saul endured in his frensy,
A wicked sprite so sore him did assail.
Unto David ever he had envy,
That he was hardy to enter in battle,
With a staff slynge, void of plate and mayle
Slough Golyas without fear or dread,
Pulled out his sword and smot of his head.
At their repayryng home out of the field,
When David had slain this Goly,
Young maidens when they beheld,
The great vyctory, they in their armony,
In laud of David thus began sing and cry:
Saul has slain a thousand with his might
David ten thousand, that lusty young knight.
Saul disdayned and said frowardly,
They granted have a thousand to my name
And to the son here of Isai,
Yaue ten thousand to increase his fame,
Which is to me a rebuke and a shame*
Whereupon this Saul frete with ire,
Of young David began the death conspyre.
In his heart he had a fantasy,
Of their syngyng when that he took head,
Dempt it was a manner prophesy,
That David preferred should be in deed,
And to the crown after him succeed:
Thought his childer as he began divine,
Should be deprived of the royal line.
Thus day by day Saul ways sought,
To slay David plainly if he might:
All be it so that he no malice thought,
But ever kept him lowly in his sight.
Therefore good ever and grace on him alyght,
For aye the lord of his magnificence,
Again tyrants preserves innocents.
And as the bible plainly does us lere,
This David had in his tender age,
For his nobles the kings daughters dear,
Called Mychol joined by marriage:
And when that Saul fyli in any rage,
David anon to aswage his wodenes,
Touched his harp and brought him in gladness
Saul full often began David to enchase,
And warrey throughout all his lands:
Through deserts him pursue and manace,
Of intent to have shet him up in bonds,
Or to slay him if he come in his hondes,
But finally god through his ordinance,
Preserved his knight from al manner mischa^ce
Saul full often was brought to mischefe,
Yet aye from death David did him save:
And hereof this was a special prefe,
When David cut his garment in the cave,
And mo tokens if ye list to have,
Another time David also kept,
The life of Saul when he lay and slept.
The case was this, as they were hosteyng,
Not far a sunder Saul lay on sleep,
All his people about him sleapyng,
And unpurveyed like a stock of sheep:
Of which thing David took good keep,
Down descended, and made no delay,
Came to the tent where king Saul lay.
The spete of Saul standing at his heed,
David took it, and went his was anon:
Of his coming there was no man took head,
For Saul slept and his men echone.
And when that he up to the hill was gone,
Toward Saul again he cast his look,
Made a noise that all his knights woke.
First to Abner prince of his chyualry,
David said these words in sentence*
Abner (quod he) thou have done great folly,
This day showed a great negligence,
To suffer of Saul the magnificence
In peril stand, and none head take,
About his person to make his knights wa^^.
Thou art to blame for thy retchelesue^^e,
To leave the king stand in so great a dread,
In sleep to have more savor and sweetness,
Than of his life to take heed.
Such negligence requires for his mede,
Death and turment by rightful judgment,
About a prince when folk be negligent.
And thou list to se an evidence,
How that his life stood in ieopardy:
Se here his spear and give thereto credence
How unprovided ye were on your party,
Saul nor thou ye may it not deny
Your life, your death, your power, your puissa^ce
This day god put whole in my governance.
But me to acquit of pure innocence,
As every man should unto his king,
And to declare in me was none offense,
Against his nobles in will nor in workyng,
As God wot that knows every thing,
That I never by no conspiracy,
Wrought nor compassed again his regaly.
LO here example of perfect patience,
Again malice to show kyndenes:
Where Sauie showed his mortal vyolence
David acquit him with suffraunce and goodness,
The tyra^t vainquished by his prudent mekenes
Men again troth may well a warregyn,
But at the end the palm he does aye win.
For of this story if that ye take heed,
Saul is fall for his frowardnes,
Into mischefe, and into sudden dread,
For Philistynes the bible bears witness,
With a great power began thiderwards dress,
Upon king Saul avenged for to be,
Their tents pight beside Gelboe.
Whereof king Saul astonished in his heart,
Had lost his spryte of knyghtly hardines:
And specially when he did aduert,
Prophet was none his harms to redress,
Of future things troth to express
In Israel, which cast him in great dread,
Because that time Samuel was deed.
For Saul had cast out all diuynes,
From Israel, and each diuineresse:
Notwithstanding the palestynes
Were risse again his power to oppress:
And he ne knew no manner sorceresse,
Of whom he might any counsel take,
And he of god that time was forsake.
In this wise he stood disconsolate,
Counsel of God nor prophet knew he none
But as a man most unfortunate,
Ungraciously he sped him forth anon,
And secretelye this Saul is forth gone,
To a woman that should him read and wisse,
In Israel called a phytonesse.
Which is a name as clerks written all,
And office who that takes head,
Souls of men again to clepe and call,
I mean such that tofore were dead,
Which is a thing strange for to read,
That women should, who so list to lere,
Make souls of dead men to appear.
Uncouth and strange is their opinion,
And to my wit a manner impossible:
Not according me seems to reason,
Nor like a thing which that is credible,
That a soul of nature invisible,
Might appear or show visibly,
Unto the eyes which that been bodily.
But or that I any further flyt,
Lest I were hold to presumptuous,
To divines this matter I commit,
And wise clerks that been virtuous,
In their wits subtle and curious,
To conclude as it does them seem,
In this matter a troth for to deem.
Whether it was the soul of Samuel
Or other spirit that she did call,
Which that told the king of Israel,
Of the battle that should after fall,
His adventure and his mischefes all:
And of his death he told also in deed,
And how David should after him succeed.
Because only of his disobeysaunce,
As it is written, and for his retchlesnes,
On Amalech for he took not vengeance,
Thus the spirit bare to him wytnes.
Whereof Saul fill in great heaviness,
Knowing no mean to escape out of this dout,
But take his fortune as it comes about.
Told him also his enemies were so wroth,
The Philistines beside Gelboe,
In that battle he and his children both,
Should dye that day of necessity:
His chyualry shall discomfited be,
Of his raygne there is no longer date,
For god from him his kingdom will translate
And thus Saul returned is again,
His meyny after brought to disconfiture,
And when he saw all his people slain*
And how there was no mean to recure:
In that deadly woeful adventure,
He bad his squier take his sword as blyue,
And through the heart that he should him ryue.
That his enemies which were uncircumcised
Should have no power, in story it is found,
To have upon him as they have devised,
To give him his last fatal wound,
His high noblesse at mischefe to confound.
But his squyre for fear of god and dread,
Would not assent to do so foul a deed.
To slay his lord he greatly was aferde,
A thing hateful in every man's sight.
But Saul took the pomell of his sword,
And in the ground full deep anon it pyght,
And in all haste possible that he might,
Made the point in his furious pain,
To perce his heart and part it even in twain.
The Philistynes anon as he was dead,
Spoiled him of his royal armure:
Dismembered him, and smote of his head,
And in token of their disconfiture,
Took the spoils with all their busy cure,
And thereof made in all their best intent,
To Astaroth of pride a great present.
Thus was Saul slain in sentence,
Of Philistynes upon Gelboe,
Forsake of God for inobedience,
Abject also from his royal see:
And thus for lacking of humilitye,
Of god he was forever set aside,
Lo here the end of surquedy and pride.
Lenuoy.
Have mind of Saul which to estate ryal
From low degree was called for mekenes,
But presu^ption made him have a fall,
Of God abject for his frowardnes,
Lost his ^rowne the bible bears wytnes,
And cause was for his disobeysaunce,
To gods biddyng he yaue none attendaunce.
God not asks no more of man at all
But whole heart without doublenes,
For all the gifts which in especial,
He yaue to man of his goodness:
But he chastises all unkindness,
Such as ben rebel for to do pleasaunce,
And to his biddyng give none attendaunce.
Noble princes virtue most pryncipall
You to conserve in your high noblesse,
Is to imprynt in your memorial,
Faith, and equity, all wrongs to redress:
To sustain troth and ryghtwysnesse,
And tofore God hold euenly the balaunce,
And to his biddyng give al your attendau^ce.
Acommendation of Obedience.
Virtue of virtues most of excellence,
Which y^ have most souerain suffisau^ce,
Is the virtue of true obedience,
Which set all thing in ryghtfull governance,
For ne were not this prudent ordinance,
Some to obey and above to gye,
Destroyed were all worldly policy.
Where that virtue and high discrecion
Avoided have from them all wylfulnes,
By titles only of dominacion
Truly lenyng upon rightwisnes,
Wrong and errors justly to redress,
Of troth I may right well affirm and say,
The people mekely their biddyng should obey.
This noble virtue of faithful obeysaunce,
Established upon humility,
Which includes no double variaunce,
In ail regions and in each country,
Causes welfare, joy, and prosperity:
And as virtue chief and sovereign,
All vycious ryote it plainly does restrain,
Obedience eke as men may se
Falsenes exileth and all rebellion,
For by temperaunce, right, and equitye,
Stant the welfare of every region,
For the mekenes and low subjection,
Of comonties, hold up the regalies,
Of lordshyppes and of all monarchies.
And no doubt when lorshyps of intent,
Busy ben the sovereign lord to queme,
To their subjects do right judgment,
In conscience as right and reason deem,
Than shall their crown and dyademe,
Upon their head persevere and freshly shine,
And make subjects to their biddyng incline.
Thus obeysaunce plainly at a word,
In such as have lordshyp and souerayntie,
Done of intent to their sovereign lord,
Shall cause them raygne in long prosperity,
And their subjects of humility,
For their noble famous governance,
Aye to be ready under their obeysaunce.
For who y^ serves the lord of lords all,
And has the people in his subjection,
God will keep him that he shall not fall,
Long preserve his domination,
But agaynwarde when wisdom and reason
Ben ouermastred with sensuality,
Farewell the flowers of their felicitye.
Obedience blunteth the sharpenes,
Of cruel swords in tyrants hands,
And mekenes appeaseth the felnes,
Of hasty ve^geaunce, breketh on two y^ bo^ds:
Eke patience set quiet in lands,
And where these three contune in comonties,
Long peace perseuereth ^ kyngdoms and cities
Obedience does also restrain,
Conspyrations and false collusions,
When she stant vnparted, not at wayne,
There is no dread of no discencions:
For she combineth the true opinions,
In the hearts of people, full well before provided
Under princes to stand whole undivided.
Where princes be meke, humble, and debonayre
Toward God of whole affection,
Their subjects be gladly not contrayre,
In their service, by no rebellion:
For there is found no division,
But head and members each for his party,
Be so governed by prudent policy.
Contrariously Saul was put down,
Abject of God for his obstinacy,
Put from his scepter, his crown, his region,
Of Israel lost all the monarchy,
For he list not make his alye,
Of frowardnes and wylfull negligence.
This noble virtue called obedience.
For as it longs in kingdoms and cities,
Under a keye of true benevolence
Princes and kings to govern their sees:
So apperteyneth due reverence
To their subjects, by obedience
To obey their lords as they be of degree
By title of right in every comontee.
For obeysaunce if it be discerned,
(With Argus eyes, who that takes head)
As right requires is not well governed
When the members presume again the head:
Of governance there is no perfect speed,
From unity they go a froward wey,
When subjects their princes disobey.
The.ii. Chapter.
How king Roboam for geuyng fayeth to young counsel, lost the benevolence of
his people, and died a fool.

Unto Bochas in order next there came
With full great dole and lamentacion,
The young king called Roboam,
Son and next heir to Solomon,
Entryng by title of just succession:
Besought mine aucthour to make of his folly,
And of his falling a piteous tragedy.
First when he entered into his region,
Twelve tribes gouernyng in deed,
Ruled him self by will and no reason,
Kept his subjects plainly as I read,
Not under love, but under froward dread:
Of old wise (to his great disauaile)
He despised the doctrine and counsel.
He demeaned (as it was well couth)
His scepter, his crown and his regaly,
By such folk as floured in their youth,
Could of custom their wits well apply
To blind him falsely with their flattery:
Which is a stepmother called in substance,
To all virtue and all good governance.
Alas, it is great dole and great pity
That flattery should have so great favor:
Which blinds princes that they may not se,
Misteth the eyes of every governor,
That they can not know their own error.
False honey shed aye on their sentence,
A fool is he that yeueth to them credence.
They may be called the deuyls tabourers,
With froward sownes ears to fulfill:
Or of Sireues the perilous bo^elers,
Which gall and honey down distyll.
Whose drinks ben both amerous and ill,
And as clerks well devise cunne,
Worse than the drynkes of Sirenes tuune.
Ears of princes full well they can enoynt
With the soft oil of adulation,
And their terms most subtylly appoint,
Each thing concludyng with false deception:
Aye blandishyng with amerous poison,
And finally as the Poet says,
Their faith of custom conciudeth with vnfayth.
Flouryng in words though there be no scute,
Double of heart, pleasant of langage,
Of true meaning void and destitute,
In mustring outward preted a fair vysage:
Who trusts them finds small aduau^tage
By apparaunce and glorious fresh showing
Princes deceauing and many a worthy king
Roboam can bear full well witness,
From him auoydyng folks that were true,
How he was hindered by flattery and falsenes
By them that could forge out tales new:
Whose counsel after sore did him rue,
And with their feigned false suggestion,
Greatly abridged his domination.
He dempt him self of more aucthoritye,
Of folly, youth, and of presumption,
Than was his father in great royalty,
And this pompous false opinion
Came into his concept by adulation:
For flatterers bare to him witness,
How he excelled his fathers high nobles.
He did great rigor and oppression
Upon his people as it was well preued:
And to find some mitigation,
They in matters which yt have them grieved,
Of their tributes for to be releued,
Besought he would relese the^ in their need,
But all for naught he took thereof no head.
All old counsel from him he set aside,
And refused their doctrine and their lore:
And by false counsel of folks full of pride*
His pore lieges he oppressed sore.
And ten kynredes anon without more,
For tyranny and misgouernaunce,
From him withdrough the troth and lygeau^ce
Thus of the king conceived the rygour,
The people anon of indignacion
Stoned Adoram, which was collectour
Of the tributes in all his region,
From him departing by rebellion:
Whereof astonished, to avenge his unright,
Into Jerusalem took anon his flight.
And when they were parted from Roboam,
The ten kynredes by division,
Chase them a king called Jeroboam:
And Roboam within his royal town,
To be avenged of their rebellion,
And for to do on them cruel justice,
An hundred thousand he made anon to rise.
With Jeroboam he cast him for to mete,
And all at ones set in ieopardy:
But Sameas the prophet bade him let,
And fro the war withdraw his party.
And more the quarrel for to iustifye,
Of his peoples froward departing,
It was gods will done for a punishyng.
Touching the surplus of his governance,
His royal buyldyng of many a fair city,
His great rich famous suffisaunce,
Of wine and oil having great plenty,
And how his empire increased years three,
Eke how that time he ryghtfull was in deed,
In Josephus his story ye may read.
Of his children borne in right line,
Eyghtene wives (as made is mention)
I find he had, and many a concubyne:
Sons and daughters by procreation,
And how his riches and great possession,
That time increased as it is well know,
To god above while that he bare him low.
But as mine auctour makes rehearsaile,
In his increase and augmentacion,
Mekenes in heart in him began waste and fail,
And pride entered with false presumption,
Virtue despisyng and all religion,
After whose vices as says the same book,
Wicked examples of him the people took.
After the manners where they be good or ill,
Used of princes in diverse regions,
The people is ready to use and fulfill,
Fully the traces of their conditions:
For lords may in their subiections,
So as them list who so can take heed,
To vice or virtue their subjects led.
Thus Roboam for his transgressions
In Josephus as it is devised,
And for his froward false opinions,
Only for he all virtue has despised,
Of God he was rightfully chastised,
In Jerusalem his chief royal town,
Of his enemies besieged enuyroun.
The king of Egypt a siege about him laid,
With so great people yt socour was there none:
All be it so that Roboam abrayed,
And prayed to god to deliver hun from his sone
To avoid of mercy his enemies euerichoue
But god list not grant his prayere,
But him chastised like as ye shall here.
First his city and his royal town
Delivered was, he knew no better succor,
Under a feigned false composicioun:
For at their entryng void of all favor,
Keeping no covenant took all the treasoure
Within the temple, having no pitye,
But ladde it home to Egypt their country.
And to rehearse it is a great dole,
How Roboam as Josephus does declare,
Was inly proud and therwithal a foul,
And of all wisdom destitute and bare,
Vnmerciable his people for to spare,
Hatyng good counsel, and so in his regaly,
Raygnyng a fool, and so I let him dye.
Lenuoy.
PHilosophers conclude and devise,
In their books of good experience,
That counsaylours, sad, expert, and wise,
True of their word, stable of their sentence,
Hasty nor retchles for no vyolence,
Keep and preserve (the troth I dare attame)
Noblesse of princes fro mischefe and dyffame.
Hasty youth and rancour in contrarywyse,
Which have to will all their aduertence,
Except them selves all other men despise
Through their unbridled furious insolence,
Nothing aquainted with wisdom nor prudence,
Bring ayenward whereof they be to blame,
Puttyng his nobles in mischefe and diffame.
King Roboam against right and justice,
To young foles yaue faith and most credence
Cruelly his subjects to chastyce:
Which put his people from his benevolence,
Threw ten kynredes from his obedience,
Which was to him by record full great shame
Puttyng his nobles in mischefe and diffame.
Noble princes do wisely advertise
In perseueryng of your magnificence,
Of old expert, not blent with couetise,
Take your counsel and do them reverence,
Eyed as Argus in their high providence,
Which conserve by report of good name,
Noblesse of princes from mischefe and diffame.
The.iii. Chapter.
The office and retinue of a King.

What erthly thing is more deceiuable
The^ of princes the po^pe and vainglory*
Which wene to stand in their estates stable,
As they the world had conquered by vyctory,
And suddenly be put out of memory,
Their fame clouded, alas, and their nobles
With a dark shadow of foryetfulnes.
Whereof comes the famous clear shinyng
Of emperous in their consistories?
Or whereof comes their laud in reportynge,
Save that clarks have written their histories.
Or where be now conquestes transitories,
Or their triu^phes where should men the^ find
And writers their prowes put in mind.
Reken up al, and first the worthy nine,
In high nobles which had never peers,
The marciall acts which clearly did shine,
Their fame up borne, above all the nine sters
With loud soundes of famous clarioners,
Their glorious palms if they be well paysed,
By low labors of commons was first raised
Make a likeness of these great images,
Curiously corue out by entayle,
Head, arms, body, and their fresh vysages,
Without fete or legs may not avail,
To stand vpryght, or needs they must fail:
And semblably, subjects in commontees,
Raise up the nobles of princes in their sees.
As head and members in images be of stone,
Other on stock by compass undivided,
And by proporcion their fetures euerychone,
Set in true order as nature has provided:
So y^ all errors through craft be circu^cided
The head highest by custom as men know,
The body amidde, the fete beneth low.
Mighty princes for their high renoun,
As most worthy shall occupy the head,
With wit, memory, and eyes of reason,
To keep their members from mischefe and dread,
Like their degrees take of them good head,
With clear foresyght of a prudent thought,
Their fete preserve that they err naught.
There must be hands and arms of defense,
Which shall the image manly keep and gye
From all assautes of forayne vyolence,
Which shall be named noblest of chiualry:
Their true office justly to magnify,
Sustain the church, and make the^ self strong
To se y^ widows and mayde^s have no wrong.
Prudent judges as it is skyll and right,
To punish wrong and surfets to redress
In this image shall occupy the sight:
For love or hate by dome of rightwisenes,
For friend or fo, his judgments dress,
So egally the laws to sustain,
In their works that none error be seyne.
Amidde this image there is a body set,
An aggregate of people and degrees,
By perfect peace and unity yknet,
By the estates that govern commonties:
As mayres, prouostes, and burgeis in cities,
Merchants also which seek sundry lands
With other crafts which live by their hands.
And as a body which stant in health,
Feleth no grefe of no froward humors,
So every co^monte continues in great wealth
Which is demeaned with prudent governors
That can appese debates and errors,
The people keep from all controversy,
Causyng the welfare to increase and multiply.
This body must have a soul of life,
To quick the me^bres with gostlye mocions:
Which shall be made of folk co^templatyfe,
The church committed to their possessions.
Which by their holy conuersacions,
And good example should as sterres shine,
By grace and virtue the people tenlumyne.
Upon the light of their conditions,
Of this body depends the welfare:
For in their teaching and predicacions
They should troth to high and low declare.
And in their office for no dread ne spare
Vices correct like as they are hold,
Sith they ben heerdes of Christ's fold.
Following upon, of intent full clean
Laborers as ye have herd devised,
Shall this body bear up and sustene,
As fete and legs which may not be despised:
For true labor is justly auctorised.
And ne were the plough vpholde^ by travail.
Of kings, and princes, farewell all gouernayle.
Thus first, if princes governed be by right,
And knights suffer ye people to have no wrong,
And troth in judges show out his light,
And forth in cities with love he draw a long,
And holy church in virtue be made strong,
And in his labor ye plough ne fail naught,
Than by proporcio^ this image is wrought.
This matter hole for to exemplyfy,
King Roboam for a false oppression,
And for his wilful froward tyranny,
Lost a great party of his region:
Wherefore let princes considre of reason,
God set the people for lords auantage,
And not to be oppressed with seruage.
Upon some princes Bochas does complain,
Such as have a custom and manner
Again their subjects ungoodly to disdain,
And of pride to show them froward chere,
Counsayleth them to remember and lere,
As this chapitre does finally devise,
First out of labor al lorshyp did arise.
The.iiii. Chapter.
How Mucius Sceuola sloughe an innocent instead of king Porcenna, that laid
siege to Rome.

When king Porcenna with his chiualrye
Again Romans a werre first began,
The town besiegynge on each party
With great puyssaunce brought out of Tus^an,
In the city there was a knightly man,
Mucius Sceuola, which cast in their distres,
To break y^ sege thorough his high prowes.
Let arm him self clean in plate and mayle,
For comune profit to auaunce his corrage,
King Porcenna proudly to assail:
A time provided to his advantage,
Through the siege to make his passage,
And finally at his in coming,
Jeoparte his person for to slay the king.
But like as tells us Tytus Liuius,
Where Porcenna satte in his royal see,
This senatoure, this manly Mucius
Saw a prince of great auctoritee,
The king resembling, clad in one liueree:
Atwene dece^nyng no manner variaunce,
Slough that prince of very ignorance.
But when he knew that he did fail
To slay Procenna enemy to the town,
And saw he had lost al his travail,
He made a pitouse lamentacion,
Because he did execucion
Of ignorance again his own intent,
To spare a tirant, and slay an innocent.
For which he was with him self full worth,
That he was found so negligent in deed:
And with his hand unto a fire he goth,
Made it brenne bright as any glede,
Both nerfe and bone and his flesh to shede,
His hand co^suming on pieces, here and yondre,
And from his arm made it part a sondre.
And as the storye declares unto us,
This manly man this noble senator,
Before time was called Mucius,
Which for y^ common profit did great labor:
And for the uncouth hasty fell rigor,
Done to him self, the Romans al
Sceuola they did him after call.
As much to say by langage of that land,
Who take a right the exposicion,
As a man which is without an hand:
And after him by succession,
All his ofsprynge borne in the town,
In remembrance for to encrese his fame,
Of Sceuola bare after him the name.
By this example and many other mo,
If men list her corrages to awake,
They should se what peril and what woe
For common profit men have undertake:
And whylom Brutus for Lucrecis sake
Tarquin chaced for his transgression,
And kings all out of Rome town.
Touching Lucrece example of wifely troth,
How young Tarquin her falsely did oppress,
And after y^ which was to great a routh,
How she her self slough for heaviness,
It needs not rehearse the process:
Since y^ Chaucer chief poet of Bretaine,
Wrote of her life a legende sovereign.
Rehersynge there among other things
Each circumstaunce and each occasion,
Why Romans exiled first their kings,
Never to reign after in their town.
As old cronicles make mention:
Remembering also the unkind great outrage,
By Eneas done to Dido of Cartage.
Eke other stories which he wrote in his live
Full notably with every cyrcu^staunce:
And their fates pitiously did discriue,
Like as they fill, put them in remembrance.
Wherefore if I should my pen auance,
After his making to put them in memory,
Men would deem it presu^pcion and vein glory.
For as a sterre in presence of the sun,
Lesyth his freshnes and his clear light:
So my rudeness under skies dunne,
Dares full low and has lost his sight,
To be compared again y^ beams bright
Of this poet, wherefore it were but vain,
Thing said by him to write it new again.
The.v. Chapter.
How Lucrece oppressed by Tarquin slough her self.

BUT at Lucrece stynte I will a while,
It were pytie her storye for to hide,
Or slouthe the pen of my rude style,
But for her sake al matters set a side:
Also my lord bad I should abide,
By good auice at layser to translate,
The doleful process of her pitouse fate.
Following the traces of Collucius,
Which wrote of her a declamacion,
Most lamentable, most doleful, and most pitous,
Where he discriueth the dolorouse treason,
Of her constrained false oppression:
Wrought and compassed, by unware vyolence,
The light untroubled of her clear conscience.
Her father whilom called Spurius
Her worthy husband named Collatyn,
Which by the luxury and treason odious
And viciouse outrage of Sextus proud Tarquin,
Oppressed was and brought to her fine,
Whose deedly sorrow in english for to make,
Of pitouse ruth my pen I feel quake.
This said Tarquin this yuel auised knight,
This slau^dred man most hateful for his deed,
Came like a thief alas upon a night,
With naked sword when no man took head,
Upon Lucrece she quakyng in her dread,
Lyeng a bed far from her folks al,
And knew no refuge, for help for to call.
He manasyng in his froward intent,
On her beholding with a furiouse chere,
That with his sword but she would assente,
Her and a boy he would preint yfere.
Such one as was most ugly of manner
Most unlikely of person and of fame,
Thus he her thrat for to slander her name.
But his intent when she did feel,
And saw no mean of her woeful chance,
The morrow after she list nothing concele,
Told her husband holy the governance,
Him requirynge for to do vengeance
Upon this crime, said like a true wife,
She would her heart perce with knyfe.
In this matter this was her fantasy,
Better was to dye than to live in shame:
And less ill to put in ieopardy
Her mortal body, than her good fame.
When honor dies farewell a man's name.
Better it were out of this life disceiuer,
Than slandrous fame to sley a man for ever.
But to that purpose her husband said nay,
Her father also was thereto contrary:
Making a promise without more delay,
To do vengeance how they will not tarry.
To her declaring with reasons debonary,
Under these words troth and right co^serued,
To slay her self she has nothing deserved.
For suddenly and also vnauised
As a fool is trapped in the snare,
By unware fraud upon the practiced,
Thou were disceiued plainly to declare:
Having this conceyte, hard is to repair
The name of the^ which falsely be diffamed,
When wrong report y^ renome has shamed.
Touching thy person I dare affirm and seyn,
That it were a manner impossible,
And like a thing which never yet was seen,
That thy worship was found corruptyble.
But steadfast aye and indiuysible,
Vnparted, virtuous, and made strong,
And now desirous to avenge thy wrong.
On thy injury we shall avenged be,
Considred first the deedly heuines,
Which thou suffredest by great aduersite,
When y^ auoutrour thy beauty did oppres:
And reioysyng by a false gladness,
Maugre thy will as a thief by night,
The encombred of very force and might.
But if thou would leave all thy mourning,
And restrain thy unportable woe,
Soon should you se an egall punyshyng
Upon thy most froward mortal foe:
To warn all other they shall no more do so,
In chastisynge of false auoutry,
The and thy renome of right to magnify.
What was diffasyng to thy true intent,
Though his youth unbridled went at large?
So for to aforce a sely innocent,
Whose wyckednes ought to bear the charge.
And we of right thy conscience dyscharge
The joy unlawful of his false plesaunce,
With double palm thine honor does auance.
Conceive and se, O thou mine Lucrece,
How that reason and good discrecion,
Should thy trouble and thy mourning cece
Of right, restrain thy opinion,
So rechelesly to do punicion
With knife in hand, to slay thy self, alas
For others gylt and dyddest no trespass.
Let be Lucrece, let be all thy dole,
Cease thy complaynt and thy woe restrain,
Should I fro the live alone al sole,
And thy death perpetually complain*
To put thy father in importable pain:
Of our welfare be not so rechelesse,
To dye and leave our children motherlesse.
Of prudence eke thou ought for to se
And aduertyse only of reason,
Though of force thy body corrupt be,
Thy soul inward and thine entencion
Fraunchysed ben from al corrupcion:
Offense is none, consider in thine intent,
But will and heart give thereto full consent.
Thou were naked in thy bed, lyenge
Alone, unware, slepynge and void of might,
Suspeciouslesse al of his coming,
That time namely because y^ it was night:
A fearful woman, and he a manly knight,
Al be it so vnknightly was his deed,
With naked sword to assail thy womanhead.
He might thy body by force well oppress,
By sleyghty ways that he had sought:
But well wot I for all his sturdinesse,
He might never have mastry of thy thought.
The body yielded the heart yielded him naught.
Ye were twain, you feeble and he right strong,
Thy troth afforced, he werker of the wrong.
Where might you have greater price or laud
All right considred, troth and equite?
First cou^terpeysed his force and sleighty fraud,
Than to parseuer in feminite,
With thought enhaunced and infragilitie
Of womanheade, to have an heart stable,
What thige in the might be more co^medable:
It is well know you were of heart aye one,
To all false lusts contrary in governance:
More like an image kerued out of stone,
Than like a woman fleshely of plesaunce
The tirant found thee in chere and countenance.
Which ever after by womanly victory,
Shall Be ascriued to thine increase of glory.
Thy father Brutus has the well excused,
My self also, thy blood and thy kynrede:
On this matter let no more be mused,
To sley thy self or do thy sides blede.
Certes Lucrece thou have full litell need,
It were great wrong by all our judgment,
To spare a tirant and slay an innocent.
Thy life to murdre to some it would seem
Thou were gylty, where as thou art clean:
Diverse wits diversely will deem,
Report thing thou none dyddest mean.
For which thou shall patiently sustene,
Till thy chaste wifely innocence
May se him punished for his violence.
Folk will not deem a person innocent,
Which wilfully when he is not cuipable,
Yeldeth him self to death by judgment,
And never was a fore of no gyit partable:
His own doom upon him self vengeable,
Causes people, tho their report be naught,
To deem a thing y^ never was ywrought.
To be avenged upon thine own life
In excusing of thy deedly fame,
To show thou art a true wedded wife,
wenyng by death to get the a name,
In this devise thou art greatly to blame:
Where you yet know thy honor clearly shine,
To give the people matter to deuyne.
And with that word Lucrece did abrayde,
Full deedly both of look and chere,
To them again even thus she said:
Let be husband, let be my father dear,
Speak no more to me of this matere,
Lest men dempt in hindryng of my name,
Idred death more than false dyffame,
Your counsel is I shall my life conserve,
To sorrow and sclaunder, but no gladness:
But less ill it is at an hour to sterue,
Than ever languish in sorrow and heuines.
Death makes an end of al worldly distres,
And it was said sith full yore ago,
Better is to die than ever to live in woe.
When that worship in any creature
Is stain and deed by slau^drous report,
Better is of death the dredful pain endure,
Than by false noise aye to live in disco^fort:
Where new and new diffame has his resort,
Never dies but quickens by y^ outrage,
Of hateful tongues and venomous langage.
Do your deuer to halowe and make stable,
The chaste chambres of wifely governance:
For in this case if ye be variable,
On false auoutry for to do vengeance,
There shall follow everlasting remembrance
How true spousaile as ye have herd devised
In your city is broke and not chastifed.
If ye be found in such a case negligent
To punish auoutry of right as your charge:
Through your sloth as ye were of assent,
Luxury vubridled shall ren abroad at large,
Who shall than your conscience discharge,
Or what woman stand in sickernes,
Of Lucrece afforced the clennes?
O dear husband what joy should it be
To thine estate in any manner place,
Like as thy wife to cherishe me
Or in thine arms me goodly to enbrace?
The gilt horrible considred and trespace,
By Tarquyn don alas, and welaway,
Which i my person may never be wast away.
And father mine how should thou me call
After this day thine own daughter dear;
Which alas refuse of women all That to thy plesaunce was whilom most entere,
Within thy house when I did lere,
By clear example of manifold doctrine,
All that pertained to virtuous discipline,
Which I have lost now in my days old,
Dispaired it to recure again.
Mine own children I dare not the behold,
Because the womb in that they have layne,
Diffouled is, and pollute in certain:
Which was tofore in chastity conserved,
Chastise the auoutrer as he has deserved.
And for my part, to speak in words few,
Longer to live I have no fantasy,
For where should I out my face show,
Or dare appear in any company,
Since a derke spot of false auoutry,
Shall evermore whether it be false or true,
In to mine hindering y^ sclaundre to renew:
Lust afforced has a false appetite
Offrelte, included in nature:
Maugre the will there follows a delight
As some folks say, in every creature,
Good fame lost full hard is to recure.
And since I may my harms not redress,
To you in open my gilt I will confess.
Al be I was again my will oppressed,
There was a manner constrained lust in deed,
Which for no power might not be redressed,
For feblenesse I stand in so great dread,
For which offense death shall be my mede:
Since lever I have with some edge tole
To slay my self, than live in slander and dole.
O father mine spare and have pity,
And dear husband rue on mine offense,
Gods and goddesses called of chastity,
To my trespace grant an indulgence:
For of my gylt to make a recompense,
Where that Venus gate in me a vau^tage,
Death shall redress and chastise mine outrage.
For if I should make a delay
To perse my breast with sharpnes of a knyfe,
Men would deem and say fro day to day,
To make my sclau^der more open and more rife,
How that I was more tender of my life,
Tha^ of my worship, which is to great a shame,
To love my life more than my good name.
In this matter no witness is so good,
To put away all false suspection,
As with a knife to shed my heart blood,
I might not make a better purgacion,
To al folk that have discrecion,
Than finally by my death to excuse,
The gylt horible of which men me accuse.
Go forth my soul pure and immortal,
Chief wytnes of mine innocence,
Tofore tho judges which ben infernal
First Mynos king to deem my conscience,
With Radamanthus to give a sentence
Like my deserts that it might be seen,
In wifely troth how that I was clean.
Thou erthly body which through thy fairnes
Were to auoutry full great occasion,
Of thy blood shede out the rednes,
And by thy sides let it rail down:
Stere and exite the people of this town,
To do their deuer within a little while,
For love of Tarquyn al kings to exile.
And first I pray my husband most entere,
Of this vengeance to make no delay:
With help and socour of my father dear,
To punyshe y^ auoutrer in all haste ye may.
Let him take his wages and his pay
Like as ye se, and plainly now conceive,
For his offense the death I do receive.
And suddenly or they might aduerte
She took a knyfe, and with great violence
Through the breast even to the heart
She made it glyde, there was no resistance:
Full pale and deed fyl down in their presence,
And by occasion of this piteous deed,
Tarquyn exyled and holy his kynrede.
For which cause by record of writing,
Was there never in Rome the cite
After that day no man crowned king,
As in cronicles ye may behold and se:
Thus for luxury, and their cruelte,
Their tyranny, and false extorcion,
They were exiled out of Rome town.
The.vi. Chapter.
How Rome was after governed, and Virginea by her father slain.

Governed after by other officers
As is remembered in Titus Liuius,
Called Decemuiri of diverse croniclers:
Among which there was one Appius
A Judge untrue, proud, and luxurious,
Which through y^ city the story bears witness,
Behated was for his great falsenes.
And ones it fill as he cast his look
Upon a maid most inly fair of sight,
A false desire within his heart he took
Her to dysuse, again al skyl and right:
And she was daughter to a worthy knight,
Full manly found in his deeds al,
And Vyrginius y^ Romans did him call.
Whose goodly daughter ye story does us lere,
Was after him for his noble fame,
Virginia called most goodly and entere,
And for this cause she bare the same name.
But Appius to greatly was to blame,
Which has conspired through his great falsnes
If y^ he might, her beauty to oppress.
This Judge untrue both in thought and deed,
Of law vnrightful, sought out occasion,
Made a sergiaunt of his to proceed
Again this maid to take an accion,
Claimed her his servant by false collusion:
And this done was by Appius, of intent,
That he on her might give a judgment.
And by this mean in his false delight,
Thought he might her beauty best disuse,
So to accomplish his fleshly appetite,
She being feeble the accion to refuse:
Whereupon her father began to muse,
Fully conceived of Appius the manner,
In her defense wrought as ye shall here.
When Appius had yeuen his judgment
Again this maid which before him stood,
Her manly father most knighty of intent
Took her apart as he thought it good,
And with a knyfe shed her heart blood:
Dempt it better to slay her in clennes,
Than the tirant her beauty should oppress.
Thus hole conserved was her virginite,
And vndefouled was her maydenhede:
For Vyrgynius to keep her honest,
Spared nothing to make her sides blede.
But Appius for this horrible deed,
And Decemuiri through his unhappy chance
Had in that city never after governance.
As the story also makes mention,
Appius ashamed of this deed,
Slough him self fetred in prison,
Of a false judge lo here the final mede.
And tho Tribuni in Rome began succeed,
Twene right and wrong truly to discern,
And romayne laws justly to govern.
Men may here se as in a myrour clear,
Estates changed for their great offenses:
And by some poor person singulere
Princes put down from their magnificences,
Which not co^sidred in their great excelle^ces,
How god ordeineth his yerde in so^dry wise,
The poor su^while the pompous to chastise.
Here on to show example anon right,
Marked in story for a notable thing,
Pausanias of Greece a manly knight,
Of Macedony slough Philip the King:
At a table where he was sitting
Atwene Alexandre and Olimpiades,
His wrong to avenge amyddes all the prees.
Eke Salmator a knight of low degree
For wrongs done in especial
Of manly force grounded on equite
Slough of Cartage the Prince Hasdrubal
Which brother was unto duke Haniball,
Beside a river as they met in battle,
Called Metaure which renneth in Itaile.
Wherefore ye princes if ye list long endure
Be right well ware be ye never so strong,
In your lordshyppes not to much assure,
Or of surquedy the porayle to do wrong.
In your discrecion conceyuing ever among,
Greatest dread is that may your state assay^,
When subjection does the people fail.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedy declares in party
What myschefe follows of extorcion,
Eke of spousbrech and of auoutry,
By Tarquyn dove through false extorcion,
Unto Lucrece within Rome town:
Kings exyled for such misgouernayle,
And false outrages done to the porayle.
Eke Appius of wylful tyranny
Again Virginia took an accion,
Through a false lust of froward lechery,
Blent and fer derked his memory and reason:
Which was chief cause and occasion
Why the estate of dizhom did fail,
Through false outrage done to the porayle.
King Philyp lost scepter and regally,
Of Macedone the famous regyon:
Unawarely slain amyd his chiualry,
Sittyng at the table with in his chief dongeon.
And greatest cause of his falling down,
Was when fortune his pride did assail,
For false outrages done to the porayle.
Duke Hasdrubal whom books magnify
Up to the heuyn for his high renoun,
Whose triumphs raught up to the sky,
And had al Cartage in his subjection:
Yet was he slain unawarely by treason,
By a servant, lo what it does avail
Treason purposed before in the porayle.
Noble princes your reason do apply
Which over the people have dominacion,
So prudently to govern them and gye,
That love and dread by true affectyon,
Preserve their hearts from false rebellion^
Sith to you nothing may more prevail,
Than true subjection expert in porayle.
The.vii. Chapter.
How Jeroboham king of Israel for Idolatry and disobedience came to a
myscheuous end.

Next these stories in Bochas as I find,
There did appear unto his presence,
Kings six, him praying to have mind
Upon their fall by unware violence,
From their estates of royal excellence.
And to fore al I find that there came,
Of al Israel king Jeroboam.
Unto mine aucthour he began to declare,
His deedly complaynt with a pale face:
His great mischeues and his yuel fare,
And how he fyl down from his kyngly place,
Through vnhappes which did him enbrace,
And as this story plainly has devised,
For his offenses how he was chastised.
An Idolater he was as it is told,
Raised up auters of very force and might,
Set thereupon two calfes of pure gold,
Did them worship again al skyl and right:
Gave euel example in the peoples sight,
When he did with fumes and ensence,
To false ydols undue reverence.
Fro the temple he made the people gone,
Priests ordained after his own gise,
Forsook the trybe of Leuy and Aaron,
And upon Bethel his offryng began deuyse:
And while he did unlawful sacrifice,
God that well knew of him the false intent,
From Jerusalem a prophet to him sent.
Which him rebuked of his misgouernau^ce,
And began the parels to him specifye:
Told him before for to do vengeance,
Of David king there should come one Josye,
Which should his priests that falsely coud lie,
Manly distroy and slay them al at ones,
And into ashes bren them flesh and bones.
And in token of their destruction,
The prophet told among them al,
How his auters should bow down,
And his ydols from their stage fall.
Whom that foles their gods falsely call
Which have no power to help in no manner,
For they may neither se, feel, nor here.
After this prophet Jadan had told
These said signs plainly to the king,
His auter fyl on pieces many fold:
And ouerturned backewarde his offering:
For which the king furiously loking,
Put forth his hand the story makes mind
Bad his men the prophet take and bind.
And as he his arm raught out on length
Had no power it to wythdrawe again,
Wext unwieldy, contract, and lost his strength,
And when the king these tokens has seyne*
And how ye prophet spoke no word in vein
Greatly astoyned could say no more,
But prayed Jadan his arm to restore.
And by his prayer and mediacion
Of his arm, after this vengeance,
There was anon made restitucion,
And of his pain feleth aleyaunce.
For which the king with full great instau^t
Required him to be so graciouse,
That day to abide and dyne in his house.
But the prophet would not assent
Nouther with him to eat nor to drink:
Took his ass and forth anon he went,
On whose departing y^ king began sore think
And fantasies began in his heart synke,
Specially when he took head,
Of all these tokens how they were true in deed.
God ^ad Jadan in this great emprise
To Jeroboham first when he was sent,
Eat nor drink in no manner wise,
In that city, while he was present:
But a another prophet of intent
Full old and slygh on that other side,
Compelled has this Jadan to abide.
Him aforsyng by false collusion
To resort again unto the city:
And to make no contradiction
With him to dyne of fraternitye,
To him affyrmynge it may none other be,
For god sent him as to his friend and brother,
To abide with him and plainly with none other.
Of frendlyhede and true affection
Within his house to show his presence,
For a repast and refection
This is gods will and fully his sentence,
To whose words y^ prophet yaue credence,
And as they sat at dinner both in fere,
God unto Jadan said in this manner.
For the brekyng of my commandment,
Thy great offense and thy transgression,
That thou have be so wylfull negligent,
Thou shall endure this punicion:
Be al to torn and rent of a lion,
And in thy country thou shall not recure,
With prophets to have thy sepulture.
Of which thing this Jadan nothing feign,
Began to depart with full heavy thought:
Of a lion amyd of the way slain,
But his ass harmed was right naught.
A full great marvel if it be well sought,
The lion syttyng as in their diffence,
And kept them both from al violence.
Al these tokens might not convert
Jeroboam fro his iniquity,
Gods warnyng him list not to aduerte,
Nor by his prophet corrected for to be.
Wherefore god would that he should se
Vengeance follow as it did in deed,
Both upon him and his kynred.
A son he had which fyl in great sickness,
Called Abia the book does specify,
For which the king bad the queen her dress,
To go disgised without company,
Unto a prophet which called was Achy.
Him to require truly for to sey
Whether the child should live or dey.
And in his inward sight co^templatife,
God showed him by clear inspection,
Of Jeroboam how she was the wife,
For all her sleyghty transformacion:
For nouther fallas nor false decepcion
May be of god but it be parceyued,
For he ^e his prophets may not be deceived.
She came to him in strange wede,
At the entryng he called her by her name:
Come forth (quod he) for it is no need
To hide thy self as it were for shame.
For the troth truly to attame,
God has yeuen me fully knowledging,
What thou shall answer and say to the king.
Say plainly to him, and mark in thy thought,
In thy repair these words rehersyng:
Sith god has made thee and raised up of naught
From a servant to reign as a king,
Fro David's kyn most worthy reigning,
Parted the kingdom and yeuen it unto the,
And thou unkind thereof can nothing se,
His great goodness is out of remembrance,
Fully forgeten of thy froward pride,
In false gods put thine affiaunce
God above falsely set aside,
Wherefore from the anon he shall deuyde,
The kingdom hole without more delay,
And fro thy line the crown take away.
And for thou have to thy confusion
Thy faith unfaithful to false gods take,
Wrongly refused thy religion
Of god above, and plainly him forsake,
This is the end which y^ thou shall make:
Thee and thy kyn no man may socour,
Flesh, skyn, and bone, hounds shall devour.
And at thy entering home to the cite,
Thy son and his thou shall find him deed:
Of al his kin though there were none but he
Found very good, take thereof good head.
Of which answer y^ queen fill in great dread
Entryng the city in especial,
Her child was deed and lay cold by the wall.
Of this warning the king took none head,
But made him ready with full great aparayle,
Forty thousand with him he did led,
Of manly men armed in plate and maile,
With king Abias for to have a battle.
The which Abias that was of Juda king,
Unto his people said at their metynge:
O noble knights have one thing in memory,
No man venquisheth platly to conclude
With great people, nor gets victory
With nombres heaped nor great multitude:
False ydolaters god will them delude.
Not suffer his servant that been true and sad,
Of miscreauntes to be ouerlad.
Triumph is none found of new or old,
In these Idols of stone nor silver shene,
Nor in Calves of metal made, or gold,
Give to that party which untruly mean.
And sith y^ god knows our quarrel clean,
There is no hope, force none nor might,
With them y^ ground their cause against right
Hope of victory stands upon right wisnes,
Of them yt cast their sinful life to amend:
And list forsake wrong and al falsnes,
And with hole heart unto the lord entende,
Which shall this day his grace to you send,
Our true cause truly to termyne.
And thus Abias began his tale fine.
His priests began their tru^pes for to blow,
And king Abias through his high renoun,
Gave to his people both to high and low
Full manly comfort and consolacion,
And fyfty thousand by computacion
Were slain y^ day which full proudly came,
Upon the party of king Jeroboam.
And all the party of Jeroboam,
And all that were of his line borne,
After this battle unto mischefe came,
When they were slain with hou^des al to torn
As the prophet had the^ told beforne:
But for the king took thereof no head,
With soden vengeance god quit his mede.
The.viii. Chapter.
How zaras king of Ethyope was slain in battle.

AFter him to Bochas did appear
Next in order plainly as I find,
One zaras with a soroufull chere,
And he was king of Ethyope and Jude:
Whose eyes were almost with weeping blind,
Prayeng mine auctour his unhappy chance,
With other woeful to put in remembrance.
And that he would record by scripture
His sudden fall and dolorous distress,
And his diffamous hateful discomfiture,
With the dispoylynge of his great richesse:
And how king Asaph through his high nobles,
And his people as he did the^ assail,
Has him venquished and slain in battle.
The.ix. Chapter.
How Adab king of Jerusalem lost scepter and crown.

OF Israel than came the wooful^ king,
Called Adab full pytously weeping,
Unto Bocas his complaint rehersing:
How king Basa by subtle false werkyng,
With slaughter caused his falling,
When fortune began falsely frown,
And took unjustly from him scepter and crown.
The.x. Chapter.
How the vengeable prince zambrias set a toure on fire and burnt him self.

NExt came za^brias a prince ve^geable,
Which slough king Helam by false treason,
That was found also full unstable:
For this zambrias of entencion,
Has murdered him within the chief dongeon,
Of his castle with a full great route,
As he unawarely laid a siege about.
But Amarin a prince of full great might,
Came in to Tharse a famous great city,
And cast him plainly like a worthy knight,
On this zambrias avenged for to be,
Him to distroy without mercy or pity:
But in a toure as zambrias went,
Set it a fire and so him self brent.
The.xi. Chapter.
Of king Achab and Jezabel his wife.

WIth sighs sore and wepig importable
Came king Achab unto Bochas,
Whose hertelie sorrow was incomparable,
And complaining full often said alas:
Besechyng him to write his woeful case,
Compile his falling and the fate yfere,
Of Athalia his own daughter dear.
To god above most contrarious
This Achab was in all his governance,
And had a wife cruel and lecherous,
Called Jesabel, which set al her plesaunce
On gods prophets for to do vengeance.
In the bible their malice men may se,
And Idolaters they were both he and she.
God for their trespaces as it was well seyne,
Before showed by true prophecy,
Sent three year neither dew ne reyne
Upon the earth their grain to multiplye:
Till eft again by prayer of Helye,
Wholesome waters from heuin began descend,
Which gave the^ cause their life to amend.
But his wife that cursed Jesabel,
To each thing hateful which was divine,
An hundred prophets she slough in Israel,
Unto Baal for they would not inclyne:
And she also slough Naboth for his vine,
Through whose outrage and false oppression,
Achab was brought to his confusion.
Of his enemies outrayed in bataile,
With a sharp arow caught his fatal wound,
Tyi al his blood by bledyng did fail,
About his chare with many drops round:
That the words were full true found
Of Helias, which told him as it stood,
That hungry hounds should lycke his blod.
In a city than called Israel
Down from a toure joined to a wall,
The said queen called Jesabel,
Was over cast and had a deadlye fall:
Touching these mischeues for she was cause of all,
Beware ye princes remembering all your lives,
To eschew false counsel yeue^ by your wives.
The.xii. Chapter.
How queen Athalia for her tyranny was slain.

NExt to Achab in order did sue,
Athalia with doleful countenance
Bocas besechyng, as him thought due
Her sudden fall to put in remembrance.
Sours and chief rote of sorrow and mischance.
Is vsurpacio^ and false couetise,
Like as her story herafter shall deuyse.
She was vpreised by favor in three things,
For father, brother, and also her husband
Were in her time echone crowned kings,
With scepter and sword as ye shall understand.
Many emprises in their days took on hand,
And how fortune their highness did assail,
I cast shortly to make rehersayle.
She fyl of fortune in the unhappy bounds,
First when her father was with an arow deed,
His blod vplicked with cruel hu^gry hounds,
About his chare rennyng down full read:
His body pale lay who that took head,
Like a carreyne naked and dispoyled,
With foul black earth amyd the field ysoyled.
Cause of another unhappy heaviness
And of her deedly desolacion,
Was the people felly did them dress
Of Arabye in their rebellion,
Again her husband, of entencion
To rob his treasour to their advantage,
And take his richesse by outrageous pillage.
Some of his meyny they put in prison,
There was against the^ made no defense:
Spared another city, borough, ne town,
Slough man and child through sturdy violence:
Her lord enfect with sudden pestilence,
Conceived fully by his malady,
There was no gain but he must need dye.
After his death most wretched and odible,
His body corrupt, his bowelles fyl down:
Of his carayne the stench was so horible
The air enfect about him enuyron,
With so great horror and putrefaction,
That no man might abide nor endure,
To bring his body unto sepulture.
Her third unhap whereof she was full feign,
That fortune list her efte assail,
Made her uncle king Joram to be slain
With an arow, as he fled in battle:
She supposyng greatly it should avail,
Like a woman most furious and wode,
She of king David slough al ye rial blood.
Her purpose was to govern all the realm
Alone her self to have dominacion,
To reign in Juda and Jerusalem
This Athalia by usurpation:
And for that cause in her entencion,
With mortal sword she made tho fine
That were disce^ded from David down by line.
Except one Joas she left not one a live.
Child of a year, son of king Och^sy,
Whom Josaketh the story do the disctiue
Of very pity caught a fantasy
The child to save that he shall not dye,
From the malice of Athalia
And she was wife to bishop Joiada.
She and this bishop with hole heart and entere,
Kept this child in full secret wise,
Within the temple the space of seven year:
And in the seventh the storye does devise,
Joiada took on him this emprise,
Young Joas upon a certain day,
By just title to crown him if he may.
His messangers he sends out anon,
Of princes, tribunes, began a counsel call,
Of priests eke and levites euerychone:
And when he had discured to them al
Hole his intent, thus it is befall
Sworn and assented as it was sytting,
That young Joas shall be crowned king.
For by promise which y^ is divine
(Quod Joiada) if ye take heed,
God has behested to David and his line,
And assured unto his kynred
In Jerusalem how they shall succeed:
And though Joas be young and te^dre of might,
He to the crown has never the less right.
In this matter I will not that ye sleep,
But to show your true diligence,
On four parties the temple for to keep,
That no man enter by no violence:
And in the mids by royal excellence,
(Quod this bishop) no man shall us let,
On Joas head a crown for to set.
And when each thing was brought to point
His high estate to increase and magnify,
The people anon when he was anoint,
Viuat rex they began to cry.
And when Athalia began this thing espy,
For very ire and the sudden wonder,
Of melancoly her clothes cut asonder,
Ran to the temple, and began make a fray,
With her meyny and to cry aloude,
Bad them go sle and make no delay
The young king, in all the have they could.
Her venym hid under a couerte cloud,
Al at ones her purpose to recure,
By sudden malice she began ye day dyscure.
The temple was kept, enter had she none,
People ordained awaytyng for the nones:
And or she might any further gone,
Clenly armed the Centuriones
The cruel queen assailed al at ones.
And of her malice to write a short tale,
They slough her after at Cedron in the vale.
Lo here the end of murdre and tyranny,
Lo here the end of usurpation,
Lo here the end of false conspiracy,
Lo here y^ end of false presumcion:
Borne rightful heirs wrongly to put them down,
O noble princes though god make you strong,
To ryghtful heirs beware ye do no wrong,
Lenuoye.
THese tragedies to estates and degrees,
Fully declares the decepcions
Of fortunes false mutabilitees,
Showed in provinces cities and eke touns:
Princes unawarely lost their possessions,
Which for their sins in diverse wise,
Had of god warnyng, and list not for to rise.
Mighty princes cast down from their sees,
Lost their lives and their regions,
Unawarely throw from their felicitees:
Jeroboam for his oppressions,
And for his froward false oblacions
Done to Idols, his story does deuyse,
Had of god warning, and list not for to rise.
Achab also had great adversities,
Through false counsel and exhortacions
Of Iezabel rote of iniquities,
Did to his people great extorcions:
She slough prophets, gods champions,
Both he and she most cursed in their gyse,
Had of god warnyng, and list not for to rise.
Athalia with her duplicitees,
And conspired false intrusions,
Slouh David's sede to enter their dignitees,
And possede their dominacions:
But for her hateful false collusions,
Unawarely slain for her great couetise,
Had of god warnyng, and list not for to rise.
Princes remember in your prosperitees,
And se before in your discrecions:
Wrong clyming up of states or degrees,
Outher by murdre or by false treasons,
Asks a fall for their final guerdons.
Namely of them that the lord despise,
And for his warnyng list not for to rise.
The.xiii. Chapter.
How Dydo queen of Cartage slough her self for conseruacion of her chastity.

Now must I put my rude style in prees,
To queen Dido making my passage:
Her Lord Siche was priest to Hercules,
Her father Belus fall in great age,
King of Tire and she queen of Carthage:
And it is red in books that been true,
How first in Tire was found purple hew.
Chadmus found first letters for to write,
Gave them to Greeks, as made is mention,
Whose brother Fenix as clerks eke endite,
Found first the color of vermilion:
And of Cartage the famous mighty town,
This said Dido, her story does expres,
How she was queen and founderesse.
But her husband was chief lord and fire,
Called Sicheus full famous of renoun,
Of this noble city called Tire,
Had great treasour and great possession:
And for envy king Pigmalion
Brother to Dido this Siche slough in deed,
Of false intent his richesse to possede.
Dido this slaughter took grievously to heart,
Sore complaining this unhappy chance:
Cast she would if she might asterte,
Fly out of Tire and her life auaunce,
With all the treasour and the haboundaunce,
Behind left, when her lord was deed,
Her ships entryng went away for dread.
She knew and dread the gredy avarice
Of her brother king Pigmalion,
And how that hateful vnstauncheable vice
Was ground, and rote, and chief occasion,
Why y^ her lord was slain in that town:
For whom she cried full often well away,
Whose death was cause why she fled away.
She had also this opinion,
Which caused most her hertly heuinesse:
That since her brother Pigmalion
Had slain her lord for his great riches,
If she abode that he would him dress,
Parcel for malice, parcel for couetyse,
To have treasour some treason to practice.
And for to eschew his malice and treason,
For her navy she makes ordinance,
By the auise of them in whom as by reason,
She should of right set her affiaunce:
And they full ready her to do plesaunce,
By one assent for nothing would fail,
With fair Dydo out of that land to sail.
In Cypres first was her aryuaile:
And the^e she found by the river side,
Of young maidens with full rych apparayle,
Sixty and ten in the same tide,
Which in the temple of Venus did abide,
After the custom as I can report,
Of Cypriens, strangers to disporte.
And in their most faithful humble wise
After the ryghtes of Cypre the country,
Unto Venus each day do sacrifice,
Them to conserve in their virginite:
During their life to live in chastitye,
Never to be joined in marriage,
And with queen Dydo they went to Cartage.
In their passage fill a great myrracle
As Seruius makes mention,
For Dydo took of Juno this oracle,
Outher by apparyng or by aduision,
Of Cartage to bylde that mighty town:
And at reverence of that great goddess,
She to the parties fast began her dress
The said city stately for to found.
And her werkemen as they the earth sought
An oxes head of adventure they found,
And to queen Dido anon the head brought,
Meninge whereof to search out they thought:
And her clerks in their deumayle,
Told it was token of seruage and travail.
For which she list not to build in that place,
But remeued as she ought of right,
And fro thence but a litel space,
A soil she found full dylectable of sight:
And as her werkmen with their full might,
The ground began search or they took head,
The story tells they found an horse head.
And by expownyng of her deuinours,
Found this beast might greatly avail
Unto princes and mighty conquerours,
Necessary in werre and battle:
And for no wight her noblesse should assail,
Cartage she builded of so great excellence,
Again al enemies to stand at diffence.
Some books declare and specify,
Dydo did as much land purchase,
As a skyn in round might occupy
Of an ox, thereon to buyld a place:
The ground compassed took a large space,
Which strongly builded thus it is befall,
After the skyn men Byrsa did it call.
And when this city mightily was walled,
After a skyn wrought by good curray,
The name took, Carta it was called:
Lether of Birsa plainly this is no nay.
Took eke his name during many a day,
Carta and Birsa knit in their langage,
As much to say, as this word Carthage.
And in Affryke stant this teritory,
Where she builded this city dilectable:
Founded it in laud and memory
Of mighty Juno, the goddess honorable.
The city walled with towers strong and stable,
Time of king David, amidde the fourth age,
As I said erst, called it Cartage.
With great worship she raygned in y^ town
Ever of purpose to live in chastity,
And round about floured her renown,
Of her prudence and her honestye:
Till the report of her famous beautye,
Came to the ears, which gladly will not hide
Of a king that dwelled there beside.
Of Musytans he was lord and sire,
As poets plainly list decryue,
Which in his heart greatly began desire,
The queen Dido by her assent to wiue,
Unto her grace if he might aryue:
But for she had auowed chastity,
She never cast married to be.
The king supprised with love in his courage.
For her wisdom, and her great bountee,
Sent for the princes of Carthage,
On this matter to have a treatee:
To condiscende if it might be,
Like his desire in all their best intent,
Do their deuoyre to make her consent.
With his request he began them eke manace,
If he failed of his entencion,
Like his desire to stand in her grace,
Said he would be enemy to their town:
To ordain by force for their destruction,
Not fully sober, nor fully in a rage,
This was to them plainly his langage.
But for they knew her great stedfastnes
And her heart very immutable,
They were aferde any word to express,
Lest their answer were not acceptable,
To his highness, for he was not treatable,
Eke in their conceyt they began also record,
To his desire the queen would not accord.
With good advice an answer they puruey,
To his purpose in party favorable,
Aferde he would their noble town werrey,
Or of disdain upon them be vengeable:
But queen Dydo in her intent aye stable,
Cast she would whatsoever they her told,
Her chaste auowe faithfully to hold.
She set aside of this cruel king
His fell manaces, and his words great,
And to her princes for their consentyng,
Which stood in fear of y^ he did them threate,
She unto them yaue a manner heat:
For they were bold to attempt or attame,
To treat of matter rebounding to her shame
Nay rather dye (quod she) than assent
To his desires, which thing god forbede:
Or fro the tenter of my chaste intent
For to remeue other in thought or deed,
Which were disclaunder to all womanhead,
To condiscende for any manacyng,
To break a vow for pleasaunce of a king
Touching manaces made to the city
For to destroy it with his great might,
Without cause or title of equity
To ground him a quarrel again right,
Only for he is blinded of his sight,
With froward lust my chaste auowe to assail
Be right well sure how he thereof shall fail.
If ye were bold and manly of courage,
For common profit your city to defend,
And to wtstande his vycious outrage,
To treat with him ye would not condiscende:
But mine intent platly to comprehend,
Whether it be to you joy or displeasaunce,
In my promise shall be no variaunce.
My lord Sicheus which, alas, is dead
Unto the world, who list aduert,
Trust verily for manacyng nor dread
That he shall never dye in mine heart:
Nor he shall never mine auowe pervert,
Thus auysed while that I stand fre,
Queen of Cartage to govern this city.
Mine hasty answer I pray you not disdain
But that ye list to give me liberty,
With your support that I may attain,
To have a space granted unto me:
This is to mean, the space of months three,
My lords will to accomplish of intent,
Which whilome made in his testament.
Under couloure to her advantage,
She took this space, books specify:
That she might her city of Cartage,
The mean time strongly fortify,
Again her enemies, that for no sluggardy
Of them that would her high estate confound
Unpurveyed her city not be found.
When three months passed were and gone,
She after would for hartly pleasaunce,
With sundry ryghtes many mo than one,
To all her gods do some obseruaunce:
For a special singular remembrance
Of him that was (as ye shall understand)
Whilom her lord and best beloved husband.
And more to exalt her glory and his honor,
Held his exequtes by due reverence
Of all Cartage in the highest tower,
With brenning fire, fumes, and incence,
Her princes all being in presence,
To which she began declare in complaynyng,
Her deadly sorrow, down from her tower loking
Farewell my friends, farewell for evermore,
Unto my lord my husband I must gone,
To him I mean y^ was my lord of yore,
For of husbands god wot I have but one:
Praiyng you to report euerichone,
After my death Dydo of Cartage
Joined was but ones in marriage.
Say to the king which you manaced,
My chaste beauty that he would assail,
Go tell him how that I am passed,
And of his purpose how that he shall fail.
His manacyng shall not him avail,
And say how Dydo dyed for the nones,
For she not would be wedded more the^ ones.
Lever I have my life now to lose,
Rather than soil my wydowes chastity:
Let him go further some other to chose,
For in such case he shall not speed of me.
And with the treasure of mine honesty,
Which I have truly observed all my live,
I will depart out of this world now blyue.
And into fire that brent clear and bright,
She ran in haste, there is no more to said:
Save with a knyfe in every man's sight,
Full suddenly she rofe her heart in twain,
Whose piteous death the city began complain,
Sore weeping for wonder and for ruthe,
In a woman to find so great a truth.
After her death they did their business,
To hold and halowe a feast funeral:
Worshipped her like a chaste goddess,
And her commended inespeciall
To heavenly gods, and gods infernal,
And wydowes all in their clothes blake,
At this feast wept for her sake.
Touching Dydo let there be no strife,
Though that she be accused of Ouide:
After Bochas I wrote her chaste life,
And the contrary I have set aside.
For me thought it was better to abide
On her goodness, than thing rehearse in deed
Which might resowne again her womanhede
To Eneas though she were favorable,
To Itayle making his passage,
All that she did was commendable,
Him to receive coming by Cartage:
Tho some folk were large of their langage,
Amiss to expoune, by report, or to express,
Thing done to him only of gentleness.
There shall for me be made no rehearsayle,
But as I find written in Bochas:
For to say well may much more avail
Than froward speech in many diverse case.
But all Cartage often said, alas,
Her death co^playnyng throughout their city
Which slew her self to observe her chastitye.
Lenuoy.
OF air Dydo most stable in thy constan^ce
Queen of Cartage myrror of hie nobles
Reigning in glory and virtuous habundau^ce,
Called in thy time chief sours of gentilnes,
In whom was never found doublenes,
Aye of one heart, and so thou did fine,
With light of troth al wydowes to enlumin
Chaste and unchanged in thy perseueraunce,
And immutable found in goodness,
Which never thoughtest upon variaunce,
Force and prudence wardeins of thy fayrenes,
I have no langage thy virtues to express:
By new report so clearly they shine,
With light of troth al widows to enlumine.
O lode star of all good governance,
All vycious lusts by wisdom to repress,
Thy grene youth flouryng with all pleasau^ce
Thou did it bridle with virtuous sobernes:
Dyane demeaned so chastely thy clennesse,
While thou were sole plainly to termyne,
With light of truth al wydowes to enlumyne
Thy famous bounty to put in remembrance,
Thou slew thy self of innocent pureness,
Lest thy surenes were hanged in balaunce,
Of such that cast them thy chastity to oppres:
Death was inoughe to bear thereof witness,
Causyng thy beauty to all clennes enclyne,
With light of virtue al widows to enlumine
Lenuoy, dyrect to wydowes of the translatoure.
O Noble matrons which have suffisau^ce,
Of womanhead your wits to vpdresse
How that fortune list to turn her chance,
Be not to retchlesse of sudden hastines:
But ay provide in your stablenes,
That no such folly enter in your courage,
To follow Dydo that was queen of Cartage
With her manners have none acquayntaunce,
Put out of mind such sottyshe wilfulnes,
To slay your self were a great penance,
God of his grace defend you and bless,
And preserve your variant brotlenes,
That your troth fall in none outrage,
To follow Dido y^ was queen of Cartage.
With covert color and sober countenance,
Of faithful meaning pretends a likeness,
Counterfayteth in speech and dalyaunce,
All thing that sowneth into stedfastnes,
Of prudence by great auisenes,
Your self restrayneth young and old of age,
To follow Dydo that was queen of Cartage.
Let all your port be void of displeasaunce,
To get friends do your business,
And be never without purueyaunce,
So shall ye best increase in riches:
In one alone may be no sykernes,
To your heart be diverse of langage,
Contrary to Dydo yt was queen of Cartage.
Hold your servants under obeysaunce,
Let them never have fredome nor largenes,
But under danger do their obseruaunce:
Daunt their pride, them bridle with lownes,
And when the serpent of newefanglenes,
Assayleth you, do your advantage,
Contrary to Dydo y^ was queen of Cartage.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
How vycious Sardanapalus king of Assirie brent him self and his treasure.

OF Assirie to reken kings all,
Which had that land under subjection,
Last of all was Sardanapall,
Most feminyne of condition:
Wherefore fortune has him cast down
And complaynyng most ugly of manner,
Next after Dydo to Bochas did appear.
To vycious lust his life he did enclyne,
Among Assyriens when he his reign began:
Of false usage he was so feminine,
That among women upon the rock he span,
In their habit disgysed from a man,
And of froward fleshly insolence,
Of all men he fled the presence.
First this king chase to be his gyde
Mother of vices called ydlenes,
Which of custom each virtue set aside,
In each court where she is maistresse,
Of sorrow and mischefe is the first foundresse,
Which caused only this Sardanapall
That to all goodness his wits did appall.
He found up first ryote and dronkennes,
Called a father of lust and lechery:
Hateful of heart he was to sobernes,
Cherishyng surfetes, watch, and glotony:
Called in his time a prince of baudry,
Found reresuppers and fetherbeddes soft,
Drink late, and change his wines often.
The air of meats and of baudy cokes,
Which of custom all day roast and sede,
Sauoure of spittes, ladels, and flesh hokes
He loved well, and took of them great head:
And folk that drank more than it was need
Smelling of wine for their great excess,
With them to abide was holly his gladness.
He thought also it did him good
To have about him without skyll and right
Boystous bochers all bespreint with blood,
And watery fishers abode aye in his sight:
Their coats poudred with scales silver bright,
Dempt their odor during all his life,
Was to his courage best preseruatyfe.
For there was no herb, spice, grass, ne rote,
To him so lusty as was the bordelhouse:
Nor gardeyn none so wholesome nor so sote,
To his pleasaunce, nor so delicious,
As the presence of folk lecherous:
And ever glad to speak of rybaudry,
And folk cheryshe that could flatter and lie.
Till at the last God of very right
Displeased was with his conditions,
Because he was in every man's sight
So feminyne in his affections,
And wholly yaue his inclinations
During his life to every vycious thing,
Terrible to hear and namely of a king.
But as Bochas list to put in mind,
When Arbactus a prince of great renown,
Saw of this king the fleshely lust blind,
Made with the people of that region
Against him a coniuration,
And to him sent for his misgouernaunce,
Of high disdain a full plain defyaunce.
Bade him beware, and proudly to him told
That he him cast his vicious life to assail,
And in all haste also that he would
Within a field mete him in battle:
Whereof astonished his heart began to fail,
Where among women he sat making gaudes
No wight about but flatterers and baudes.
And up he rose and began him self auaunce,
No company with him but servants ryotous,
Took the field without governance,
No men of arms but folks vycious:
Whose adversary called Arbactus,
Made him proudly the field to forsake,
And like a cowarde his castle to take.
And for his heart frowardly began fail
Not like a knight, but like a loseniour,
His rich pierrey, his royal apparayle,
His gold, his jewels, his vessel, and treasure,
Was brought before him down fro a toure
And of his palace, and yaue his men in charge
Of cole and faggot to make a fire large:
In which he cast his treasoure and jewels,
More like a beast than a manly man,
And amyd his riches, stones, and vessels,
Into the fire furiously he ran:
This triumph Sardanapalus wanne,
Which fire consumed for his final mede,
Brent to ashes among the coals read.
Tofore his death bade men should write
Upon his grave, the book does specify,
With letters large this reason for to endite:
My cursed life, my froward glotony,
Mine ydlenes, mine hateful lechery
Has caused me with many false desire,
My last days to be consumpt with fire.
This epitaphe on his grave he set,
To show how he in all his live
Busyed ever to hinder and to let
All manner virtue, and theragayne to strive,
Who follows his trace is not like to thrive:
For which ye princes se for your avail,
Vengeance aye follows vices at the tail.
The.xv. Chapter.
A commendation of Bochas, rehersing the virtuous names of fou^ders of diverse
sciences and cunnynges in reprefe of ydlenes.

THere were other that list to provide,
False fleshly lusts, and dissolutions,
Ryote, outrage, froward disdain and pride
Vices to enhaunce in their affections
With many unlawful crooked conditions,
Reason avoiding as I rehearse shall,
Them selves delityng for to be bestiall.
Two manner folks to put in remembrance,
Of vice and virtue to put in a difference:
The good always has set their pleasaunce,
In virtuous labor to do their diligence,
And vycious people in sloth and negligence,
And the report of both is reserved,
With laud or lack as they have deserved.
Men must of right the virtuous prefer,
And truly praise labor and business:
And again ward disprayse folk that err,
Which have no joy but in ydlenes.
And to compate by manner of witness*
Virtuous folk, I will to mind call,
In rebukyng of king Sardanapall.
THe old wise called Pitagoras,
By sound of ha^mers, auctours certifye,
Example took, and chief master was
That found out musyke and melody:
Yet of Tuball some books specify,
That he by stroke of smyths where they stood
Found first out musyke tofore Noes floude.
And Josephus remembers by scripture,
That this Tuball could forge well,
First ymagined making of armure,
With instruments of iron and of stele,
And their temprures he found out every dele
Lucius Tarquyn in story as I find,
Found chains first folk to fetter and bind.
The children of Seth, in story ye may se,
Flouryng in virtue by long successions,
For to do profit to their posterity,
And first the craft of heavenly mocions,
Found of sundry stars the reuolucions,
Bequeth their cunnyng of great advantage,
To them that after came of their lineage.
For their virtue god gave them great cu^nyng
Touching natures both of earth and heaven:
And it remembered sothly by writing,
To lasten aye for water or for leven.
Generations there were of them seven,
Which for virtue without war or strife,
Traueyled in cu^nyng, during all their life.
And for that Adam did prophecy,
Twice the world destroyed should be,
With water ones, and stand in ieopardy,
Next with fire, which no man might flee:
But Seths children that all this did see,
Made two pyllers where men might grave,
From fire and water the charects for to save.
That one was made of tyles hard ybake,
Fro touch of fire to save the scripture:
Of hard marble they did another make,
Against water strongly to endure,
To save of letters the prynt and the figure.
For their cunnyng before began so provide,
Again fire and water perpetually to abide.
They dempt their cunnyng had been in vein,
But folk with them had been partable,
And for their labor should after be seyne,
They it remembered by writing full notable,
And tofore god a thing full commendable,
To them that follow by scripture and writing
Or that men dye depart their cunnyng.
For by old time folk diverse crafts found,
In sundry wise for occupacion,
Virtue to cherishe, vices to confound,
Their wit they set and their entencien,
To put their labor in execution,
And to outrage, this is very troth,
Fro man's life negligence and sloth.
Old Enoke full famous of virtue
During the age, found first of euerich one
Through his prudence, letters of Hebrew,
And in a pillar they were kept of stone,
Till that the floude of Noe was gone:
And after him Came was the second,
By whom mo of Hebrew letters was found.
And Cathacrismus the first was that fande,
Letters also, as of that langage,
But letters written by Gods own hand,
Moses first took, most bright of his vysage,
Upon Syna as he held his passage.
Which of carectes and names in sentence,
From other writing had a difference.
Eke afterward as other books tell,
And saint Hierome rehearses in his style,
Under the empire of zorobabell,
Esdras of Hebrew began letters first compyle:
And Abraham long erst a great while
The first was in books men may se,
That found letters of Ciria and Calde.
Isys in Egypt found diversity
Of sundry letters parted into twain,
First for priests and for the comontie,
Vulgar letters she did also ordain,
And Fenices did their busy pain
Letters of Greek to find in their intent,
Which that Cadmus first into Greece sent.
Which in number fully were seuentene.
When of Troy ended was the battle,
Pallamides their langage to sustene,
Put three thereto which greatly did avail.
Pitagoras for prudent gouernaile,
Found first out y, a figure to discern,
The life here short and the life that is eterne.
First latin letters of our a. b.c.
Carmentes found of full high prudence,
Great Omerus in Isidor ye may see,
Found among Greeks craft of eloquence:
First in Rome by sovereign excellence,
Of Rethoryke Tullius found the stoures,
Plea and defense of subtle orators.
Callicrates a grauer most notable,
Of white yuore did his business,
His hand, his eye, so just were and so stable,
Of an ampt to grave out the likeness,
Upon the ground as nature does him dress.
This craft he found, as Sardanapall
Found ydlenes mother of vices all.
Of a scriueyn Bochas makes mention,
How in a scrowe of little quantitye,
Wrote of all Croy the destruction,
Following Omerus by great subtiltye.
Which is had among greeks in great dainty
Because he was found in his writing,
So compendious the story rehearsyng.
Archimides made a chare also,
And a small ship with all the apparayle,
So that a Be might close them both two
Under his wings, which is a great marvel
And nothing seen of all the whole entayle.
This craft he found of virtuous business,
To eschew the vice of froward ydlenes.
Pan god of kind with his pypes seven
Of recorders, found first the melodyes
Of Mercury that sit so hye in heaven,
First in his harp found sugared armonies.
Holsom wines through fined from their lies
Bacchus found first on vines heavy lade,
Licour of lycours, courages for to glade.
Perdry by compass found tryangle and line,
And Euclyd first found Geometrye:
And Phoebus found the craft of medicine,
Al^umasar found astronomy,
And Mynerua began chares first to gye.
Jason first sailed, in story it is told,
Toward Colchos to win the flece of gold.
Ceres the goddess found first tylth of land,
D^onysius triumphs transitory:
And Bellona by force first out fond,
Conquest by knighthode, and in the field victory
And Martis son as put is in memory,
Called Etholus found speres sharp and kene,
To run in war in plates bright and shene.
Eke Aristeus found out the usage
Of milk and cruddes, and of honey sote,
Piroydes for great advantage
Fro flyntes smote fire daryng in the rote.
And Pallas which yt may to cold do bote
Found out weauyng this is very sothe,
Through yet prudence of all manner clothe.
And fido found first out the science
Of measures and of proporcions,
And for merchants did his diligence
To find balaunces by just divisions,
To avoid all fraud in cities and in towns,
On nouther party, plainly to compyle,
Of true weight that there were no gyle.
Compare in order clearly all these things,
Found of old time by diligent travail,
To the pleasaunce of princes and kings,
To show how much cunnyng may avail:
And wey again ward ye froward aquitayle,
Contrariously how Sardanapall,
Found ydlenes mother of vices all.
Let princes all hereof take heed,
What avails virtuous business:
And what damage the reuerse does in deed*
Vycious life, slouthe, and ydlenes.
And these examples let them eke empress
Amyd their heart, and how Sardanapall,
Found ydlenes, mother of vices all.
Lenuoy.
NOble princes here ye may well se,
As in a myrrour of full clear evidence,
By many examples more than two or three,
What harm follows of sloth and negligence
Deep imprintyng in your aduertence,
How great hindering does wilful frowardnes
To your estate through vycyous ydlenes.
When reason fails, and sensualitye
Holds the bridle of lecherous insolence,
And sobernes has lost his liberty,
And to false lust is done the reverence:
And vice of virtue has an appearance,
Misleadeth princes of wilful retchlesnes,
To great error of froward ydlenes.
The.xvi. Chapter.
How Amazias in Judah king, for pride and presumption was vainquished in
battle, and after slain.

IN his study as Bochas sat musyng,
With many an uncouth solemn fantasy,
To him appeared many a mighty king,
And tofore all came worthy Amazie:
His son also that called was Ozie,
Of David's blood descended as I read,
Each after other in Juda to succeed.
First Amazias complained on fortune
Causing his grcuous great adversities,
The traytoresse called in commune,
These kings twain castyng from their sees:
Whose ouerturnyng from their dignities,
Unware falling, dreadful and terrible,
Ben ceriously remembered in the bible.
Their end men may there read and se,
How fortune their fates did entrete:
Wherefore to eschew and fly prolixitie
Of tedious thing, in this process to let,
And in substance to glea^e out the great
Of their falling, I purpose not to spare,
Compendiously the causes to declare.
This Amazias having governance
By ^ust title of succession*
The scepter of Judah with all y^ whole puissau^ce
Full peasably held in his possession:
Till that pride and false presumption,
Most frowardly did his heart embrace,
Which all at ones made him lose his grace.
In heart he had a manner vain glory,
Because that god made him to prevail
In his conquest, and to have victory
Amale^hites to vaynquyshe in battle,
Eke Gabanites as he them did assail:
Purposyng after if he might,
With Israelites of pride for to fight.
Unto king Joas of Israel he sent
Him co^maundyng to obey his bidding,
And be like subject as were in their intent
His predecessors in all manner thing,
Whilom to David the noble worthy king,
This was his sonde to Joas plat and plain,
Which by a proble^ thus wrote to him again.
THe ugly thistle of the vales low,
Proudly presumyng above his degree,
To make his pride openly be know,
Sent his message to the Cedre tree,
That his son might wedded be
To his daughter, although in substance
Atwene them two was a great dis^ordauu^e
But of the forest the beasts sauagyne
In their courages had thereof disdeyne,
All of assent fyersely did enclyne,
The thystle leaves abroad upon the pleyne:
That there was nether lease nor prick seyne
This was the proble^ which Joas by writing
Sent in a pistle to Amazie the king.
But Josephus in his origynall,
The said epistle as he does express
Says of the vale how the powder small
Of pride sent to the high Cypress,
That his daughter of excellent fayrenes,
Unto his son plainly to discryue,
Might be delivered and have her to wyue.
But a fell beast which beside stood,
Of cruel ire and indignacion,
With fete disdaynyng ye powder cast abroad,
High in the apre about him enuyron:
The which ensample conceived of reason
Who that attempteth to clymbe high aloft,
With unware change his fall is full vnsoft.
Atwene the Cedre of trees so royal,
And a sharp thystle is no conuenience:
Nor twene a cypress estately found at all,
And loathsome powder is a great difference.
For royal blood should have no assistence
To be joined nor ^^yt in marriage,
With such as be^ brought forth of low parage
The Cedre is strong and mighty of substance,
In his vpgrowynge right as any line:
And tho the thystle have spots of pleasau^ce,
He has eke pryckes small as any spyne.
And both natures plainly to termine,
The Cedre of kind who looks well about,
To no thystle should his branches loute.
^olesome of odoure is the fair Cypress,
As books tell and virtuous of kind:
Dust and powder plainly to express,
Troubles the air and makes folks blind
For which in spousayle convenient to find,
Let estates of their birth honorable,
Void al rascaly and wedde their semblable
But Amazias would not beware
For no warnyng nor for no prophecy,
But still in heart great hatred bare
Again king Joas, of malice and envy.
Into a field brought all his chyualry,
Gadred them out both nere and far,
Against gods will on him to gyn a war.
And king Joas full like a worthy knight,
Into the field fast began him speed:
And all the knights of Juda anon right,
With stroke of vengeance with a sudden dread,
To bid them fly god wot it was no need:
And Amazias for all his great pride,
Stood destitute, and no man by his side.
With him was none left of all his meynie,
So god and Joas against him wrought:
Of Jerusalem entered the city,
And Amazie of force with him he brought.
And in the temple the treasure out he sought,
Gold and silver and wholly their riches,
And to Samaria home he began him dress.
And Amazias he let out of prison
After all this, and suffered him go fre,
To his mischefe and his confusion,
And he was delivered from his captivity:
For slain he was in Lachis the city,
Among his friends by dissimulation,
His death conspyred under full false treason,
The.xvii. Chapter.
How upon Ozias succeadyng king next in Judah god took vengeance and smote him
with leprie.

AFter in Juda the mighty region,
Next Amazias Ozias began succeed,
Wonder manlye and famous of renoun,
In all his works full provident in deed:
And of his knighthode vaiquished as I read
The Palestines, for all their great puissau^ce,
With all Ambie he brought unto vttraunce.
Builded towns and many a strong city,
And unto Egypt he his bonds set,
Made castles besides the red see,
And in his conquest whom that ever he met,
Of manly pride he would let:
I mean all tho that were his adversaries,
To his lordshyp to make them tributaries.
He did his labor also to repare,
Jerusalem after his ruin,
The walls reared which on y^ soil lay bare
Made new towers right as any line,
Fanes of gold their turretes to enlumine,
And to force them, let workmen undertake,
Square bastiles and bulwarks to make.
He delited to make fresh gardeynes,
Diverse grain and herbs for to know:
Reioysed to plant sundry vynes,
To graffe trees and seeds for to sow.
And strange fruits makes the^ grow arow
And with him had his enemies to encumber,
Three hundred thousand manly men in number.
His noble fame began to sprede wide,
And greatly dread for his prowes:
Wherthrough his heart corrupted with pride,
Because only of his great riches,
And frowardly he did his business
For to malign in estate royal,
Against the lord which is immortal.
To god above he began wax obstynate,
That by process full small he did win:
And savor caught in his royal estate,
To follow his father in unthrifty sin,
That grace and virtue from him did twynne,
In most shinyng of his magnificence,
Fortune proudly assailed his excellence.
Cast she would within a little while,
His surquedy and froward pride assail:
And full unawarely deceive him and begyle,
To make his power to appall and fail:
When that this king took on the apparayle
Of a bishop of very frowardnes,
And to the temple proudly began him dress,
Being in purpose on a solemn day,
To take his way up to the hye alter,
Falsely vsurpyng whosoever said nay,
To sacrifyce holdyng the censere,
Tofore the alter that shone of gold so clear,
For which offense (the bible says the same)
Azarias the bishop did him blame.
Began withstand him in the face anon,
Fourscore priests being in presence
Of the kynred descended of Aaron,
Which forbade him and made resistance,
That with his hand he should put incence
Upon the altar against gods law,
Him chargyng boldly his presence to wtdraw
But of despite he made them hold their pees,
In pain of death began them manace:
And suddenly among all the prees,
An earthquaue fill in the same place,
And therwithall in the kings face,
Of the sun there smote a beam so bright,
That all his face was scorched with the light.
He wared a leper foul and right horible,
For his offense as god list ordain:
To every man of look he was terrible,
And but few his mischief began complain.
And a great hill ye same hour carft on twain
Not far aside from the town without,
Cities destroying that stood round about.
On king Ozie god took this vengeance,
For all his lordship and his magnificence,
To punish his pride and froward puissau^ce
And brought him low for his great offense,
For his person was put out of presence,
Perpetually as holy writ can tell,
Far from all people with lepers for to dwell.
His flesh was troubled with diverse passions,
For his sickness avoided the city,
In cry and sorrow and lamentacions,
His lise he lad in great adversity:
And so he dyed in sorrow and poverty.
Simply buried for all his great might,
Within an ylande that stood far out of sight
The.xviii. Chapter.
In exhortation to Princes to be advised to do against Gods precepts.

LEt princes all in their providence,
Be right well ware any thing to attame
Which unto God should be offense,
Lest that the fine conclude to their shame.
Let them think for all their noble fame,
But they repent god of his justice,
Their froward pride unawarely will chastise
Let them beware of malice to presume
Again his church to do o^^encion,
For god of right all tyrants will consume,
In full short time for their presumption:
Which will not suffer their dominacion
To enterrupt for all their great might,
Nor break the frau^ches of holy church right.
To prudent princes which can discern,
Let king Ozias considryng his offense,
Be in your mind a myrrour and lantern,
To holy church to do due reverence,
And conce^ue in their magnificence,
God will of right be they never so s^^^ng,
Chastyce their malice though he ^yde long.
The.xix. Chapter.
How king Oseas was taken by king Salmanazer and dyed in prison.

THere was another that called was Osce,
Which whilom raygned as I affirm dare
In Israel, whom fortune by envy,
Made him be take or he was ware,
Besyeged about of king Salmanas are:
And into Assirie under his danger,
The bible tells he was a prisoner.
His cities and towns brought to destruction
And all his people under long seruage,
Were take and kept in strong Babylon,
Suffered there great pain and damage:
And in prison by furious outrage
This said Oseas in chains bound sore,
For sorrow dyed of him write I no more.
The.xx. Chapter.
How Senacheryb king of Assirie slew him self.

WIth these forsayde woeful kings three,
Senacheryb of Assirye king,
Came to Bochas most vglye to se,
Full piteously his fate complaynyng:
And specially his unware chaungyng
He began bewail oppressed in his thought,
From hye nobles how he came to naught.
His renown sprade through many a reme,
And all people began him magnifye:
A siege he laid unto Jerusalem,
In the time of king Sedechye.
But in his most froward surquedy,
Gods angel tofore the city,
An hundred.M. slough of his meyny.
And the more to make him aferde,
Amyd of his people the self same night
Gods angel shoue away his berde
With a sharp sword that shone full bright:
Left his siege and took him unto flight,
And in a temple his gods worshyppynge,
Slough him self as he sat knelyng.
The.xxi. Chapter.
How king Sedechy as for false for swearyng was slain, and made blind in
prison.

TOuching y^ co^playnt of king Sedechy
And of his sorrows to show y^ manner,
Holy write does clearly specify:
Wherefore it were but vain to tell them here,
For there men the process may plainly lere,
How Joachim king of Jerusalem,
His own brother was led out of his reame.
Whereof in heart he felt full great sore
This Sedechias as it is there found,
Because the king Nabugodonosor
His brother held strong in prison bound,
Fully in purpose the Jews to confound:
For this tyrant had in that mortal strife,
His bothers children in prison and his wife.
And yet this tyrant in his tyranny,
This favor did in his fell rage
Unto this most woeful Sedechy,
To suffer him rain in his great age:
From year to year to pay him a truage
By faith and oath* and composition,
Raised of his people and brought to Babylon
Yet Sedechias in especial
By a manner of false felicity,
Him self reioysed in his see royal
To occupy that noble dignity:
And so forgate the great adversity
Of his brother, and other friends all,
Touching the mischefe that they were in fall.
Of pride he fell into presumption,
When he remembered his brother and his lynage,
Considered how fro king Solomon
He was descended by title of heritage,
Began disdain to pay his truage,
And to malign in heart he was so wroth,
And falsely brake his assurance and his oath.
He had a manner indignacion,
Which he caught of old remembrance
How time passed to king Solomon
By his manly prudent governance,
Kings about for a recognisaunce
Paid trybute, and durst it not wythsay,
Fro year to year his nobles to obey.
Which thing remembered of king Sedechi^,
As he wext great and strong in puissaunce,
Of hye disdain his tribute began deny,
Set aside his faith and assurance,
So that his oath stood in no substance:
For he against the king of Babylon,
Presumptuously fill in rebellion.
And his kingdom to strength and fortify,
Thought he would to his advantage
The king of Egypt have on his party:
Of pride he fell into so great outrage
That he no more would pay his truage,
But finally such ways he has sought,
That of his oath little he ne rought.
But woe alas it is a doleful thing
To be remembered in hye or low degree,
That any prince or any worthy king
Should false his oath or untrue be,
Or that men should such variaunce se
In their courages which ben so hye borne,
For any cause falsely to be forsworn.
By report it does their fame trouble,
Infortuneth and clipseth their nobles,
When a prince is of his heste double,
And charge not of wilful rechlesnes,
Al be his promise conclude on doublenes,
Though god awhile suffer them and respite.
At unset hour their falsenes he will quyte.
His warnyng often he sent to them before
Because they lackt prudent policy,
Record I take of Nabugodonosor,
Which came unware on king Sedechye,
For he his tribute began falsely him deny:
With all his power as it did abrayed,
To Jerusalem a mighty siege laid.
They within constrained were of need
The king him self, there was no better defense
With man's flesh his people for to feed,
While the Caldeys by mighty vyolence
Of very force without resistance,
On false forswearyng for to take wreke,
Their mighty towers and their walls break.
To slay and kill they list none to spare,
Who soever they met or came in their ^ight:
Sedechias left the town all bare,
But take he was as he him took to flight,
In chains bound and fettred anon right,
In whose presence tencrease his pains anon
His young children were slain euerichone.
His wives most woeful in their cheres,
Which in their time goodly were and fair,
Delivered were in hands of straungeres,
And more, alas, to put him in despair,
Into his kingdom never to have repair,
With sharp tongues it was to great a pain
Out of his head was rent his eyes twain.
Of Jerusalem his city was brent,
Plain to the ground into ashes deed.
His great riches his treasour wholly sent
To Babylon, with stones blewe and read,
Vessels of gold which richest were in deed,
Without mercy or remission,
Caldeis took to their possession.
And thus in sorrow and in wretchedness
He dyed alas fettred in prison,
Lo here the end of perjury and falsenes,
Lo how fortune can turn up so down
Of mortal men the condition:
Now richest shynyng in hye prosperity,
With unware change to hateful poverty.
Now men lift up to royal dignities,
Now hye aloft by fulsum abundance,
But what avails to sit in royal sees,
To folk that have therein none assurance*
Namely when fortune holds the balaunce,
Which aye of custom unto hye estates,
Has a false joy to show her checkmates.
Record I take of princes more then one,
Their woeful fates hangyng in ieopardy,
Remembered late, and among each one
The woeful fall of king Amazie:
His son eke lepre which called was Ozie,
And last of all how in Babylon,
King Sedechias dyed in prison.
Lenuoy.
NOble princes consider the fallas
Of fortunes froward flattery,
Since her disceits in many diverse caas
How she first mocked manly Amazy,
Which slain was for his surquedy,
To give you warning by example ye may read
Wha^ ye sit highest your fall is most to dread.
And as it is remembered in Bochas,
Eke in the Bible, of king Ozie,
In his time how famous that he was
Both of riches and of chyualry,
Punished with lepre books specify,
For his presuming, reme^bryng this in deed
When ye sit highest your fall is most to dread
All worldly glory flies ^ence a pas
I take wytnes of king Sedechye,
For false forsweryng he slain was, alas,
Made blind in prison the story can not lie:
Thus shows fortune through her froward envy
To you princes if ye list take heed,
Wha^ ye sit highest your fall is most to dread.
The.xxii. Chapter.
How king Astiages labored to disherite Cyrus, but god suffered his malice not
to prevail.

AFter these kings one followed in y^ prees
And to Bochas his co^plat^t can discure,
He was called the great Astiages,
Which told in order his uncouth adventure:
Lord of Asye, as books us assure,
And had of treasure during all his life,
Above all kings a prerogatyfe.
Most fortunate in all his gouernayle,
Felt of fortune none adversity,
Save an heir male nothing did him fail:
For he most gloriously sat in his se,
Of worldly wealth he lacked no plente,
Except only as clerks on him write,
He had no son his kingdom to enherite.
Which to his wealth was great distres,
Least succession failed in his line:
A daughter had he called Mundanes,
Out of whose womb as books determyne,
He dreampt on a night how he saw a vine,
In his auysyon with him so it stood,
Over all Asye his branches spread abroad.
He had also a revelation
Slepyng a night after his soupere,
Though he not knew the exposicion,
He thought he saw a cristallyn ryuere,
With lustye waters as any Beryll clear,
Out of her womb with his stremes fresh,
The soil of Asye make tender and neshe.
Touching this river and this lusty vine,
To him showed in his auysion,
Within him self he could not termyne
Thereof to find no clear conclusion:
Without some manner exposicion,
To him declared by folks in sentence,
Which of such dreams had experience.
To him he called his astronomers,
His philosophers, and his deuynours,
That knew the meaning of the nine spheres,
Images of stars, their houses and their towers
And such as were expert expositours:
And they were assembled euerychone,
Touching his dreme they corded all in one.
To tell him troth they were not retchles,
Said his daughter from who^ there came a vine
She that by name was called Mundanes,
Should have discendyng from her line,
Whose noble fame through Asia should shine:
Which should put through his renoun,
Him by force of arms out of his region.
This was his fate he might it not refuse,
The heavenly course but it did fail:
Whereupon he sore began to muse,
Such fantasies did his heart assail.
Fill in great doubt of their diuy^ayle,
Thought he would make purueyaunce,
For to withstand gods ordinance.
Full hard it is to make resistance
Again thing ordained when god will that it be,
And namely there where as influence,
Of heaven above has shape a destiny.
Some men record that no man may it fle,
The dome of this where it hold or flyt,
To astronomers all wholly I commit.
This said king of whom I spoke but late,
Cast he would for his advantage
The ordinance reuerse, and the fate,
Of the heaven with all the surplusage:
And give his daughter as in marriage,
To sum unworthy pore unfortunate,
That never were likely to rise to hie estate.
And in this wise king Astyages
Married his daughter as in his intent,
To one unworthy called Cambyses:
Demyng thereby by short auisement,
Within him self that he was right prudent:
Wening y^ nobles came by descent of blood,
And not by grace, nor as the heaven stood.
In his reason was not comprehended,
How Socrates master of Platon,
Of full low bed by birthe was descended,
And not to enherite kingdom nor regyon:
But for to have fully possession
Of moral virtue and philosophy,
During his life his wit he did apply.
He sought countries for wisdom and science
And secret cu^nyng to search he did his pain:
And he found out through his diligence,
This philosopher as books assertayne,
To joy reserved outher to pain,
By grace of god which is eternal,
How men's souls be found aye immortal.
The great Appollo in books it is found,
Gave judgment of equity and right
That Socrates in virtue most habounde,
And most preferred in every man's sight,
Was called of wisdom the lantern and light
And wisest named at even and at prime,
Of philosophers that were in his time.
The poet also called Euripedes,
Most honorable named in that age,
All be his mother of life was retchles,
And contagious through vycious outrage,
Yet was this poet for all his vile lynage,
Most virtuous found at all assayes,
Of all poets that were in his days.
Called in his time a great tragician,
Because he wrote many tragedyes:
And would of troth spare no manner man,
But them rebuke in his poetries.
Touching the vices of fleshly fantasies,
Co^playn in princes their deeds most horrible
And each thing punyshe that was odible.
Another called clarke Domosthenes,
The most subtle rethorician,
And most inuentyfe among all the prees,
That ever was sithe the world began:
Al be of birth he was a poor man,
Yet had he most sovereign excellence,
Among philosophers of speech and eloquence
By which example me seems doubtless,
That royal blood nor hye lynage
To men's birth yeueth but small encres,
Nor unto virtue but little advantage:
For hye nobles takes not his courage
Of rich, nor pore, nor states sovereign,
But of his grace as god list ordain.
Wherefore of folly king Astiages
Contrariously again al gentry,
Bad that his daughter called Mundanes,
First when folk with child her did espy,
For to accomplish his froward fantasy,
When it was borne charging above althing,
Of Ar^^anie to bear it to the ky^^e
Which in that time was called Harpagus,
And as I find he did in virtue flower:
And spyte had, the story tells thus,
That beasts should the litel child deuou^:
But god that may in mischefe best socoure,
To keep the child was not recheles,
Against the malice of king Astyages,
Which had commanded of malice and hatred,
How that this child grene and tender of age,
By Harpagus should be cast in deed,
To be devoured of beasts most savage:
But for he dread to do so great outrage,
To his shepeherde, himself to stand at large,
The child to slay he fully yaue the charge.
This heerdman al be that he was loath
To execute this woeful adventure,
In to a forest forth with the child he goes,
And gave to beasts that little creature:
Whom to foster by grace against nature,
A wild bytche her whelps there forsook,
And to her pappes the litel child she took.
And with her milk she made him sup and dine,
And busy was for him to enchace
Wyld fowls, and beasts sauagyne,
That none ne durst nyghe to that place:
Lo, how that god dispose can his grace,
Innocents fro mischefe to preserve,
Again false envy which would make them sterue.
O blood unkind found in kynred,
For couetise O blood disnatural,
Of false malice O blood full of hatred,
To murdre a child borne of the stock royal:
Where man's reason is turned beastiall,
Falsy transfourmed unto cruelte,
To slay a child, where beasts have pity.
The sely herd has told his wife the case,
And she anon of pitye did arise:
With her husband went a full great pase,
In to the forest, beholding all the gyse,
As here to fore ye have herd deuyse.
Seeing the child with lips tender and soft,
The bytches pappes how he sokte full often.
The said heerde called Sparagos,
His wife also of whom tofore I told,
This young child took in their depose:
And in her arms ^he softly began it fold,
And he full goodly her face began behold.
And on his manner the same while,
In chyldly wise on her began to smite.
The childs laughter when she did aduert,
With all her hole faithful diligence
She began to cherishe it, and with al her heart
She yaue it soke with full great reverence,
All be the bytche made resistance,
Complayninge stood fully at a bay,
The little child when she saw led away.
Full pitiously she began to houle and cry,
At their departing, dolefully complain:
And after them full fast began to hye,
The child to let she felt so great a pain.
Lo, how that god of mercy can ordain,
A cruel beast such sorrow for to make,
And so to mourn for a chyldes sake.
But every thing y^ god will have preserved,
May not fail to stand in si^ernesse,
His secret domes ben to him self reserved
There can no man expowne the^ as I guess:
For he shope first that this sheperdesse
Of Sparagos the true pore wife,
For to be mean to save the childs life.
Home to her house the child she led anon,
And it to fostre did her business:
Of other salary god wot knew she none,
Save that her heart thereto did her dress.
And more entierly ye story bears witness
She tendered him, and with more busy cure,
Than him y^ was her child borne of nature.
And as the story plainly does express,
This young child as he wext in age,
Fro day to day increased in noblesse,
Like for to be right manly of courage:
Cyrus he was called in that langage,
To say in latin plainly in substa^^c^,
A man yborne to great enheritaunce.
And when the renown of his excellence,
By long process and of his great encres,
Came by report unto the audience
Of his ayel the great ^stiages,
And how the king was found rechles
Called Harpagus, for to do vengeance
On young Cirus, he fill in displesaunce.
This is to mean Astiages was wroth
That Harpagus was found merciable
Cyrus to save, and for that he was loathe
Against all right for to be vengeable:
To slay a child a thing not commendable,
Demyng of troth in his conscience,
God was not paid to murdre innocence.
Astiages cast him to be wreke
On Harpagus by false collusion,
Because that his bidding he did break,
And was contrary to his entencion
Cyrus to slay again all reason:
And for that cause Astiages I read,
Of Harpagus let sley the child in deed.
This is to say by false compassyng,
And covert murder wrought by Astiages,
The son was slain of Harpagus the king
And after roasted, alas, full causeles,
And sith presented among all the prees
Tofore his father, a thing most lamentable,
With Astiages as he sat at the table.
But when this king called Harpagus,
Conceived has this murdre most terrible,
And how his son and heir was slain thus,
In his ire most furious and odible
In all the have that it was possible
He is repaired home to his household,
And all the case to Cyrus he has told.
And how his son was slain for his sake,
In the most hateful odious cruelte.
Exciting him with him to undertake
On this false murdre avenged for to be,
To him declaringe of troth and equite,
How he was borne by descent in deed,
As right heir to reign in Perce and Mede.
To him declaryng the story by and by
First of the dreme of Astiages,
And how that he by fraud full falsely
Made his daughter called Mundanes,
Porely to be wedded unto Cambises,
Which was his mother, and how in tedre age
He was out cast to beasts full fauage*
By a shepherde and sheperdesse
Fostred he was in great pouerte,
And brought from beasts out of wyldernes,
Because god would he saved should be:
For thilke lord which every thing may se,
When that he has a thing before disposed
Needs it must fall and may not be deposed.
This said Cirus at his natiuite,
Ordained was by reuolucion
Of the heavenly spheres in number thrice three,
So stood that time his constellacion,
That he should have the dominacion,
Over al Asye by influence deuyne,
Before fygured by spredyng of the vine.
What may y^ fraud of sleyghty folk avail,
Innocents to put out of their right?
Though troth be hyd among the poraile
Hard brought forth and dare nor show light,
Yet god will ordain that the beams bright
Shall some one day show out his clerenes,
Maugre al tho that would his title oppress.
For this Cirus as clerks of him write,
Was by the title of his mothers side,
Borne to be king al Asye to enherite,
Al be his ayel from him would it divide:
But god that can for troth best provide,
Has for Cirus by process so ordained,
That he of Asye the lordship has attained.
Cirus y^ time was grown up well of length,
Well proporcioned of members and stature,
Wonder deliver and passing of great strength,
Strange emprises proudly to endure,
And to ieoparte and put in adventure
His own person, the fame was of him so,
Was none more lykely where men had ado.
And by the counsel of king Harpagus,
When this Cirus was well woxe in age,
With Perciens proud and surquedous,
And Archanites cruel of courage,
For to recure his ryghtful heritage,
Began with Cyrus armed with plate and mayle
With Astiages to hold battle.
And he agaynewarde began to take heed,
And with him took many a worthy knight,
With all the puissaunce of the land of Mede,
Has take the field the same day forth right,
To disherite Cyrus of his right:
But god and troth was atwene the^ twain
Egal judge, their quarrel to darayne.
The field ordained and splaied their baneres,
On either party full proudly on they set:
At thassemblyng like lions of their cheres,
In the face as they freshly met
With round spears sharp ground and whet
Till y^ Cirus of grace more than nombre.
Of his ayel the party did encombre.
This mighty Cirus this young champion,
Throughout y^ field began such slaughter make
With his knights as he went up and down,
That as the death, his fomen him forsake:
Astiages under his baner take,
The field ve^quished for all his veynglorye,
To show that right has always the victory.
A man of malice may a thing purpose
By a manner froward providence,
But god above can graciously dispose
Again such malice, to make resistance.
Men for a while may suffer violence,
And wrongs great, where so yt they wend,
But troth always venquisheth at the end.
Astiages found full soth his dream,
Though he again it made purueyaunce,
To have deprived Cirus of his reame,
He was disceyued of his ordinance:
For where that god through his puisaunce
List for heirs justly to provide,
Sleyght of man in such case is set aside.
Maugre the might of Astiages,
Cyrus on him made a discomfiture,
And al Asye reioysed eke in pees,
Of very right as was his adventure:
And by just title he did also recure
The land of Mede, like as was his fate,
And in to Perce he did it hole translate.
Again his ayel he was not vengeable,
Which had wrought to his destruction:
But was to him benygne and merciable,
And granted him of hole affection
The fourth part of the region
Of Archany, of which before I told,
Him to sustain in his days old.
For king Cyrus would not in his live
Suffer his ayel, of very gentylnes,
That men should him finally deprive
Of kingly honor, for none unkindness:
To give ensample to princes in sothnes,
Though god in earth have yeuen the^ might,
They should aye mercy meddle with the right.
Lenuoye.
NOble princes your ears do incline
And considre in your discrecions,
How dreams showed by influence deuyne,
Be not like sweuenes, but like auysions,
Or resemble to reuelacions:
Which though me^ would disturb and make fail
God will not suffer their malice to prevail,
Astiages dempt he saw a vine
Showed of troth and none illusions,
From his daughters womb right as line
Spread in Asye over the regions,
But to dish exite by false collusyons
Young Cirus the king did his travail,
But god not suffered his malice to prevail.
Princes remember that in honor shine
Upon this story in your entencions,
And be well willed where god list forther a line
Outher to riches or dominacions:
To fauer them to their promocions,
Be not contrary in your acquitaile
Sith god will suffer no malice to prevail.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
How Candalus king of Lyde was made cokolde and after slain.

WHile Jhon Bochas cast his look aside,
In his study as he sat writing,
To his presence came the king of Lyde
Called Candalus, full pitiously playninge:
With slate tears full lowly besechinge,
That he would to swage his greuaunce,
His deedly sorrow put in remembrance.
His complaint was most of unkindness,
For false deceit against al skill and right,
That where his trust was most of ge^tilnes
He mocked was, for all his great might:
For of his house there was a certain knight
Gyges called, thing shameful to be told,
To speak plain english, made him cokolde.
Alas I was not auised well beforne,
Vnkonnyngly to speak such langage,
I should have said how y^ he had a^ horn,
Or sought some term with a fair vysage,
To excuse my rudeness of this great outrage:
And in some land Cornodo men do the^ call,
And some affirm y^ such folk have no gal.
Thus was y^ case, when phoebus shone shene
The somer season in his assencion,
When sote branches were clad in new grene,
Heat importable had dominacion:
When that the queen for recreacion
Unprovided that no man did her keep,
Upon her bed lay naked for to sleep.
And as clerks of her beauty write,
There was on live no fayrer creature,
Nor more excellyng like as they endite,
Of semelynes her story does assure,
Called for beauty cosyn to nature:
And worthy eke, if I shall not feign,
To be compared to Grisilde or Elayne.
Kind in her forge list nothing to err,
When she her wrought by great auysenesse,
To make of beauty the very lode sterre,
And give her beauty, favor and semelinesse:
But for nature had so great business,
To form a woman yt was so fresh of hue,
She had forget for to make her true.
Her eyes were very celestial,
Her here vntressed like phoebus in his sphere,
A thing resembling that were immortal,
So augelyke she was of look and chere,
An examplary of port, and manner,
There was no lack save nature through her sloth,
Had left behind to give her faith and troth.
And on a day as she lay sleping
Naked on bed most goodly to sight,
Full unawarely came Candalus the king
In to the cambre, where Titan shone bright,
And showed her beauty to his own knight:
Of intent he should bear wytnes,
How she excelled al other in fayrenes.
And when Giges began in order se
Of this queen the great excellence,
He was enamoured upon her beauty:
All the while he stood there in presence,
Began ymagyn a treason in silence,
To slay his lord without long tariyng,
Win the queen, and after reign as king.
This was the end doleful and pytous,
To be remembered hateful and terrible,
Of this noble worthy Candalus,
For of his trust to much he was credible
Unto Gyges, that traitor was odible,
And yet more folysh whereby he lost his life,
Outward to show the beauty of his wife.
Though she were fair and goodly on to se
There was no trust nor no syckernes,
For other had as good part as he,
Gyges could bear thereof wytnes:
Alas a queen or any great princess
Assent should her fame for to trouble,
But if nature excuse them to be double.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
How what thing king Mydas touched was gold, yet died he in mysery and
wretchedness.

But whosoever was therewith loath or feign,
Giges was after crouned king of Lide
When that his Lord was by treason slain
Of him, the surplus Bochas set a side:
And in his study as he did abide,
There came of Frigie Mydas the rich king,
Told mine auctour his complaynt weping.
For there was never by conquest nor labor
No king before that had more richesse,
Nor more plenty of gold nor of treasour:
At whose birth poets thus express,
About his cradel amptes began hem dress
While he slept, and began about him layne,
A full great number of pured whete grain.
Whereupon most expert diuinours
As they took head in their attendaunce,
Such as were best expositours
Said it was a token of haboundaunce,
To have of riches al manner suffisaunce:
And concludyng plainly began to tell,
How he al other in treasour should excel.
Poets of him wrote that were full old,
Bachus gave him, the mighty god of wine,
What he touched shall turn in to gold
As good as that which came out of the mine,
At al assayes to be as pure and fine:
This request, as writes Ouidius,
Was unto Midas granted of Bachus.
He thought gold might him most avail,
What he handled was gold with touching:
But when hunger his stomach began assail,
His bread, his mete, was gold in showing,
And when he began to fail of his fedynge,
And found of gold no recure to escape,
Besought Bachus some remedy to shape.
Bachus bad him go bathe in a riuere,
To wash away the color aureate,
Where yet is showed the goldy grauel clear.
Which example declares to each estate
That gold alone makes men not fortunate,
For what may gold or treasour there avail,
Where men in hungre find no vytaile?
Or what is worth gold, perle or stones red, bred
Grene Emeraudes, or sapirs Inde,
When men enfamyned have no greyne, nor
Nor in such mischefe vitayle may none find,
For to foster their nature and their kind?
A barley lofe in such a distress
More might avail, than al worldly riches.
This knew Mydas and was expert in deed,
Though he of gold had so great plenty
That with metal he might him self not feed:
Which caused him of necessity
To considre and clearly for to se,
That bread more vaileth for fostri^g of nature,
Than al riches that men may here recure.
For which this king began hate al richesse,
Gold and treasour he had eke in disdain:
Left his crown and his royal noblesse,
And chase to keep sheep upon a plain:
All worldly worship was to him but vain
Of melancoly, and froward poverty
Ended his life in great aduersitye.
For of ire and impacience,
Finally thus with him it stood,
Furiously in his great indigence,
As writes Bochas how he drank the blood
Of a bull sauagine and wode,
With love enchaufed: made no delays
Most be stially ended thus his days.
The.xxv. Chapter.
Of Balthazar King of Babylone, and how Daniell expowned Mane Techell Phares.

NExt to Bocas or that he was ware,
As he sat writing with full great labor,
Of Babylon came great Balthazar,
To declare his sorrow and his langour,
Which had misused full falsely the tresour
And the vessels brought from Jerusalem,
Into Babilone, chief city of his reme.
For at a souper with his lords al,
When of the vessels he drank mighty wines,
And solemply sat in his roial stal,
And round about al his concubines,
Philosophers, magiciens, and diuynes,
There came an hand, the bible does assure,
And on the wall began write this scripture.
Mane, techel, phares, written in his sight,
Though he the mening conceived never a dele:
Which on the wall showed fair and bright,
For whose sentence auailed none appele:
But the prophet holy Daniel
Fully expowned to Balthazar the king,
The mystery of this derke writing.
This word Mane plainly and not to tarry
In latin tongue betokens in sustance,
The days counted and rekened, the numbrarye
Of thy reigning and of thy great substance.
And Techell sowneth a wayenge in balau^ce,
In token thy power and kingdom by me^ure,
God has paysed, they shall no while endure.
Phares also betokens a breakyng,
In roman tongue, in to pieces small:
For thy power and froward rebellynge,
Shall from the hie be brought in to the vale.
This is holy writ and no fained tale,
For when princes will not their life redress,
God will unawarely their surquedy repress.
Thou were by tokens warned long before,
By many examples, the story ye may read,
By the falling of Nabugodonosore,
And thou thereof took full litel head
The lord to thank, and have his name in dread:
For which thou shall within a litel throw,
Lose scepter and crown and be brought full low.
Let princes al this story have in mind,
And for them self notably provide,
And namely tho that been to god unkind,
Their concubynes for to set a side:
And make virtue for to be their gyde.
Void lechery and false presumpcion,
Which has brought so many to destruction,
Nabugodonosor had repentance,
And was restored to his possessions,
But god of right took suddenly vengeance.
On Balthazar, for his trausgressions:
Wherefore ye princes dispose your reasons
After your merits, to have god merciable,
For your demerites do find him ve^geable.
Against holy church take no quarrels,
But advertise in your inward sight:
For Balthazar that drank of tho vessels,
Stale fro the temple of very force and might,
He lost lorshyp and life upon a night,
So that the kingdom of Assirieus
Translated was to Medes and Percie^s.
The.xxvi. Chapter.
Home Cresus and Balthazar were vanquyshed by Cyrus, and the son of Cresus
slain at the hunting of a bore.

NExt to Ihon Bocas within a throw,
Writing of princes many a pitous fate,
He saw king Cresus with other on the row,
Lowly besechyng his falling to translate:
And how fortune again him began debate,
And of his mischefe doleful for to read,
For to discriue, anon he began proceed.
For as it is remembered in writing,
As god and kind list for him ordain,
Of Lide he was governor and king,
And lordshyp had (the storye can not feign)
Of many kingdoms more than one or twain:
Fame in that time so did him magnify,
That he was called flower of al chiualry.
And he was also in his time found
The most expert in werre and in battle,
And of richesse was the most habounde
And most excellynge in conquest to prevail:
Plenty of people, with royal apparayle,
And with all this to his great advantage,
Number of children tenblysse his lynage.
In the most highest of his royal see,
And at was well and nothing stood amiss,
Yet to amenuse his felicite,
A dreme he had, and truly that was this:
How that his son which called was Athis
Was take from him, and by mortal outrage
Slain suddenly in his tender age.
This woeful dreme did him great distres,
And put his heart in great despair,
Standing in fear and great heaviness,
Because his child, render, young, and fair
Which that was borne for to be his heir
Should causeless in such myschefe die,
So as his dream before did specifye.
Of this process to declare more
How Cresus dreme fulfilled was in deed,
From Olimpus there came a wild bore,
Most furious and sauagine of dread,
With fomy tuskes which fast began him speed,
Down discendyng and no where list abide,
Till that he came in to the laud of Lyde.
And began distroy their fruits and their vines,
Where ever he came in any manner place,
Brake the nets and the strong lines
Of the hunters that did at him enchace:
But under supporte of the kings grace
His son of whom I spoke tofore,
Gate him license to hunt at this bore.
His father Cresus demynge of this ease,
There was no cause of dread in no manner,
Though his son were present at the chase
With other hunters such game for to lere,
But aye fortune with her double there,
Is ready ever by some fatal train,
At such disportes some mischefe to ordain.
For one there was which had governance
Upon this child to wait and to se,
Chasyng y^ bore to save him fro myschau^ce
From al damage and aduersite,
With many lusty folk of that country,
With horns, hou^des, and sharp speres ground,
Sekyng the bore till they had him found.
And as they began fiersly the bore enchace,
He that was charged to be the chyldes gyde
As with his spear he began the bore manace,
The head not entered but forth began to glyde,
And on the child which that stood beside
The stroke a light, and or he did auerte
The speres head rofe him through the heart.
But of this child when y^ death was couth,
Told and reported holy the manner,
How he was slain in his tender youth,
Borne to be heir unto his father dear,
Cresus for sorrow changed look and chere:
And for constraint of dole in his vysage,
He resembled a very dead image.
But every sorrow by long continuance
At the last it sumwhat must aswage,
For there is none so furious greuance
Nor so mortal importable rage,
But long process yeueth him auantage:
I mean thus, there is none so great a sorrow,
But it might cese outher eve or morrow.
Philosophers concluden and discern
And by their reasons recorden by scripture,
Thing vyolent may not be eterne,
Not in one point abides none adventure,
Nor a sorrow may not always endure:
For stou^demele through fortunes variaunce,
There follows joy after great greuaunce.
The sorrow of Cresus tho it were intolerable
And at his heart the greuaunce sat so sore,
Sith that his dole was irrecuperable,
And mean was none his harms to restore,
Bochas writes of his woe no more:
But of his fall how he fill in deed,
To tell the manner forth he does proceed.
And for a while he set his style aside,
And his process in party he forbear,
To speak of Cresus that was king of Lyde
And began resort to write of Balthazar:
Again rehersynge or that he was ware,
How mighty Cirus of woeful adventure
Made on him proudly a discomfiture,
And as it is put in remembrance
Of Balthazar to hold up the party,
Cresus with him had made an aliaunce,
With all his puissaunce and al his chyualry:
His life, his treasoure, to put in ieoparty,
Sworn in arms as brother unto brother,
By Cirus ve^quyshed the one after the other
Both their mischefe no longer was delayed,
Al be that Cresus faught long in his defense,
He finally by Cyrus was outrayed,
And deprived by knyghtly vyolence,
Take in the field there was no resistance,
And rigorouslye to his confusion,
With mighty fetters cast in dark prison.
And more to increase his great aduersite,
A son of his tender and young of age,
That was dumb from his natiuite,
And never spoke word in no manner la^gage,
Cyrus commanding by furious outrage
That Cresus should by vengeable cruelte,
By a knight of Perce in prison headed be,
And with his sword as he began manace,
Cresus to have slain without al reverence,
The dombe child there present in the place
Which never had spoken, thus said in audience:
Withdraw thy stroke, and do no violence,
Unto my lord thy fame so to confound,
To slay a king that lies in prison bound.
The knight astonished has his stroke forborne
Greatly abashed in that dark habitacle,
Which herd a child that never spoke toforne
Against his sword to make au obstacle,
Ran and told this marvelous miracle
To mighty Cirus, with every circu^stau^ce,
Hopyng thereby to atempre his greuau^ce.
But where as tyrauntes be set on cruelte,
Their crooked malice full hard is to appese:
So indurate is their iniquite
That al in vengeance is set their hertes ese,
Them self reioysinge to se folk in disease,
Like as they were in their froward danger,
Clearly fraunchised fro god and his power.
This cruel Cirus most vengeable of desire,
To execute his fell intent in deed,
Let make in haste of fagottes a great fire,
And began the^ kyndle with many coals read,
And made Cresus quakyng in his dread,
For to be take where as he lay full low,
And bad men should in to the fire him throw.
But Jupiter which has his vengeance seyn,
How cruel Cirus with malice was attaynt,
From heaven sent a tempest and a reine,
That suddenly y^ horrible fire was quaynt:
Woeful Cresus with dredful fire made faint,
Escaped is his furious mortal pain,
God and fortune for him list so ordain.
This adventure in manner marvelous,
The heart of Cirus began somewhat tenbrace,
And caused him for to be pitous
Again Cresus, and granted him his grate,
To occupye while he has life and space,
The land of Lyde, except only this thing
He should not after be called king.
And thus of Lyde the king did fine,
Which took his beginyng of one Ardisius,
And endured the space of kings nine,
Look who so will the books tell thus:
Hereof no more but forth unto Cirus,
I will proceed with al my busy cure,
For to translate his woeful adventure.
The.xxvii. Chapter.
How the cruel tyrant Cirus delited ever in slaughter and shedynge of blood,
and so ended.

Heir by descent to great Astiages,
Poorly brought forth as is made mention,
And had al Asie to his great encres,
Holdyng that reign by just succession,
In long quyete without rebellion,
Till time he thought in full froward wise,
The world was small to staunch his couetise.
He had an etyke most contagious,
Fretyng upon him for desire of good,
A dropsy hateful and furious,
Of froward rage that made his heart wood,
A woluyshe thurst to shede man's blood,
Which ouerth warted by false melancoly,
His royal courage, in to tyranny.
But when he presumptuously did entende
To rob and reave folk through his pyllage,
God and fortune made him to discende
Full suddenly from his royal stage,
Demyng of pride it was a great advantage,
To win lands of very force and might,
Tho in his conquest were no title of right.
To will he yaue holy the soueraynte,
And advertised nothing to reason:
But preferred his sensualite
To have lordshyp and dominacion
Above sad troth and discrecion,
Which causes princes from their estate roial,
Or they be ware to have a sudden fall.
For the lordshyp of al Asia
Might not suffice to Cirus gredinesse,
But thought he would conquer Cithia,
And there werre to increase his riches,
Though he no title had of right wysnesse,
Save false lust whereof me^ should have ruth.
That will in princes should oppress truth.
First his Cirus al princes did excel
Both in conquest, victory, and battle,
Of gold and treasure, as books of him tell,
Kyngdoms to win he did most prevail:
And yet two vices did his heart assail,
First couetise ever to increase in good,
With a desire to shede men's blood.
With two vices he brenned ever in one
That never might from his heart twyn,
Made a great army toward Septe^trion,
And cast him proudly to set on and begin
Cithia the mighty land to win:
Queen Thomiris there reigninge as I find
Whose kingdom joins to Ethiope in Inde.
Toward the party which is oriental,
The sea of Surry flows full plentuous,
Down to the sea called occidentall,
And southwarde renneth to Caucasus:
And folk of Cithie that been laborious
Which till the land has not to their living,
But only fruits which from therth spring.
The land of Cithie is rich for the nones,
For greyne and fruit a land full couenable,
Rich of gold perle and precious stones,
Right comodious and wonder dilectable:
But a great party is not habitable,
The people dredful to bylde their mancions,
For fear of death because of the gryffons.
The noble fame nor the high renoun
Was not far know nor ysprad about
Of Thomiris queen of that region,
Nor of her noblesse within nor without,
Till that king Cirus with a full great route,
In to Cithia began him proudly dress,
The hardy queen to spoil of her richesse.
But she her fame more to magnify,
Began in great haste with full rich apparayle
Full prudently assemble her chyualry:
And took a field, if he would her assail
Ready with him to have a battle,
And of her meyny like as says my book,
Unto her son the third part she took.
And yaue him charge in the same place,
Him self that day to aquite like a knight,
And for to mete Cirus in the face
And nothing dread with him for to fight:
But when king Cirus of him had a sight,
Cast him that day the young prince oppress,
Rather by wyles than manhod or prowess.
First he let stuff his large pauilions
With great plenty of drinks dilectable,
Diverse meats and confections,
Round about upon every table,
And in his meaning passing disceyuable,
Like as he had in manner dredful be,
Took al his host and began anon to fle.
This young prince of meaning innocent,
Nothing demyng, as by supposayle,
But y^ Cirus was with his meyny went,
And sled for fear he durst him not assail:
And when he found such plente of vytayle,
He and his knights through misgouernau^ce,
To eat and drink set al their plesaunce.
They had of knyghthode lost the disciplyne,
Forsook Mars and put him out of sight,
And to Bachus their heads began enclyne:
Gorge upon gorge till it drough to night,
And proud Cirus came on the^ anonryght,
With all his host they out of their armure,
On beastial folk made a discomfiture.
Cruel Cirus left none alive,
Of high nor low made none excepcion:
They were to feeble again his might to strive,
For chief cause of their destruction
Was dro^kennesse, which voydeth al reason,
And wise men rehercen in sentence,
Where folk be dronken there is no resistance.
And when this slaughter by relacion
Reported was, and brought to the presence
Of Thomiris queen of that region,
Unto her heart it did full great offense:
But of ire and great impacience
Seeing her son slain in tender age,
For sorrow almost she fill in to a rage.
But for all her woeful deedly pain,
She showed no token of feminite:
But of prudence her weping began restrain,
And cast her plainly avenged for to be
Upon king Cirus, and on his cruelte,
Sent out meyny to espyen his passage,
If she him find might at advantage.
And with her meyny ga^ feyne a manner flight,
Up to the mountayns dredful and terrible,
And Cirus after began haste him anon right,
In hope to take her if it were possible:
Among which hills more than it is credible
Ben craggy roches most hideous of entayle,
Perilous of passage, and void of al vitayle.
And Cirus there fyl in great danger,
Al unpurveyed of drogemen or of gyde:
To fostre his people vitaile was none there,
Erryng as beasts upon every side.
And they of Cithie began for him so provide,
Whereof their queen god wot was full feign,
At great mischefe yt al his men were slain.
None of al was taken to raunson,
Nor he him self escaped not her bounds,
Such wait was laid to their destruction,
And he through perced with mortal wounds,
On pieces rent as bears ben with hou^des,
The queen co^mau^ding wha^ he lay thus torn
To her presence his body to be borne.
First she has charged to smite of his head,
When she has thus the victory of him won:
And in a bath that was all blood red,
She began it throw within a litel tonne:
And of dispite right thus she has begone
Most tirauntly in her woeful rage,
To dead Cirus to have this langage:
O thou Cirus that whylom were so wode,
And so thrustlewe in thy tyranny,
Again nature so to shede man's blood,
So woluyshe was thine hateful dropsy,
That mercy none might it modefye,
Thine etyke joined gredy and unstable,
With thrust of slaughter aye to be vengeable.
It is an horror in manner for to think,
So great a prince rebuked for to be
Of a woman, man's blood to drink,
For to disclaundre his roial majesty,
But gladly ever vengeable cruelte
Of right requires with unware violence,
Blod shede for blood justly to recompense.
Of mighty Cirus the imperial noblesse
Was by a woman ve^quyshed and borne down,
God made her chastise his furious wodnes,
And for toppresse his famous high renoun:
For where vengeance has dominacion,
In worldly princes, plainly to deuyse
With unware stroke god can the^ chastise.
The End of Cirus can bear full well record,
How god with stands folk y^ ben vengeable,
Lordshyp and mercy when they ben at discord,
Right will not suffer their state to be stable:
And for this Cirus was so vnmerciable,
He with vnmercy punished was in deed,
Death quyt for death, lo here his final mede.
In slaughter and blood he did greatly delight
For in tho twain was his repast in deed,
He found no mercy his ve^geaunce to respyte
Where he found matter any blood to shede,
Such joy he had by death to se folk blede*
And for the sight did him so much good,
His fatal end was for to swym in blood.
Lo here thexequies of this mighty king,
Lo here the end of his estate royal,
There were no flames nor brondes shinynge
To bren his body with fires funeral,
Nor obseruaunces nor offringes marciall,
Nor tomb of gold with stones rych and fine,
Was none ordained to make with his shrine.
Epitaphie there was none red nor song
By no poet with their poetries,
Nor of his triu^phes there was no bell ronge,
Nor no wepers with sobbing tragedies:
None attendaunce but of his enemies,
Which of hatred in their cruel rage,
Cast out his carayne to beasts most savage.
Lo here of Cirus the final adventure,
Which of al Asie was whylom emperor,
Now lies he abject without sepulture,
Of high nor low he found no better favor:
Lo here the fine of al worldly labor,
Namely of tiraunts which list not god dread,
But set their lust to slaughter and blodeshede.
Lenuoye.
Right noble princes considre in your syghte
The fine of Cirus pitous and lamentable
How god punishes of equity and right
Tirauntes echone cruel and vengeable:
For in his sight it is abominable
That a prince, as philosophers write,
In slaughter of men should him self delight.
This said Cirus was a full manly knight
In beginning right famous and notable,
Nature yaue him semelinesse and might,
For in conquest was none seen more able,
Till tyranny the serpent disceyuable
Merciles his courage did atwite,
In slaughter of men when him began delight.
Wherefore ye princes remember day and night,
Tafforce your nobles and make it pardurable,
To get you favor and love of every wight,
Which shall your states co^serue and keep stable:
For there is conquest none so honorable
In governaunce, as vengeance to respite,
Mercy preferring in slaughter not delight.
The.xv. Chapter.
How Amilius for couetyse slough his brother, and Remus and Rumulus nourished
by a wolfes.

AFter king Cirus Bochas did espy
Two worthy brethern with faces pitous,
Borne by descent to reign in Albanye,
Both of one father the story tells us:
The one of them called Amulius
And to remember the name of that other,
Numitor ycalled was his brother
They had a fader which named was Prochas,
King of y^ land the story does devise,
After whose death plainly this is the case,
Amulius for false couetise,
His brother slough in full cruel wise,
That he unjustly by false tyranny
Might have the kingdom alone of Albany.
This Albany by description
Like as Bochas affirms in certain,
Is a city not far fro Rome town,
Set on an hyl beside a large pleine:
The building stately, rych and well beseine,
Strong walls with many a high toure,
And Ascanius was first thereof foundour.
Which called was in his foundation,
Albania for the great whytnes,
There kings after by succession
Named Albanois princes of great nobles,
And by descent the story bears wytnes
From king Prochas record on books old,
Came these.ii. brethren Rea their suster told.
Numitor slain as made is mention
The kingdom occupied by Amulius,
And Rea entered in to religion,
For to be wympled in that holy house,
Sacred to Vesta with virgyns glorious,
There for to abide and be contemplatife,
With other maidens during al her life.
And this was done while she was young of age,
By her brother, of false entencion,
That she should have no manner heritage
Nor claim no title in that region,
Of her kynred by none occasion:
But stand professed in virginitye
To fore Vesta, and live in chastity.
Yet not withstanding her virginal clennesse,
She has conceived by natural miracle:
Began to increase in her holiness,
Whose womb arose, in ki^de was no obstacle,
Again such bolnyng avails no triacle:
But the gods for her so did ordain,
That she at ones had sons twain.
The temple of Vesta stood in wilderness,
Where Rea had holy the governance
Of priestly honor done to the goddess,
With many strange uncouth obseruau^ce:
But by her brothers mortal ordinance,
Her young sons might not be socoured,
But cast out to beasts to be devoured.
But a she wolf which whelped had late,
To give the^ soke did her business,
By god ordained or by some heavenly fate,
The^ to conserve fro death in their distres:
For holy write plainly bears wytnes,
God can defend as it is well couth,
Children from mischefe in their tender youth.
But in this while this said Amulius,
That was their uncle, as made is mention,
Again his suster froward and furious,
Made her be shyt in a full derke prison:
And there complaynyng the destruction
Of her two children borne to her reprefe,
For very sorrow dyed at great myschefe.
These said children deuoyde of al refuse
Beside a river lay pitiously crying,
From al socoure naked and destitute,
Except a wolves upon them waityng
At whose womb full style they lay soukyng,
Unto nature a thing contrarious,
Children to souke on beasts ravenous.
But he that is lord of every creature
Right as him list can both save and spyl,
And beasts which ben rage of their nature
He can aduert, and make them lie full still,
Tigres and lions obedient at his will:
The same lord has made a fell w^l^esse
Unto twey children her bigges for to dress.
And while this wolves had the^ in depose,
There came an herd called Faustulus,
Beheld their soukyng and saw the^ lie full close,
Which sheperde was of king Amulius:
Caught up these children the story tells thus
And brought the^ forth with great diligence,
Unto his wife that called was Laurence.
And she for love did her busy pain,
Them to fostre, till they came of age,
Gave them souke of her breasts swayne,
Fro day to day of heart and hole courage:
And they were called as in that langage,
After the storye that one of them Remus,
And the second was named Romulus.
Of which brethern brefely to termyne,
The town of Rome took original:
Of false disclaundre first began that line,
The rote out sought full vicious found at all,
Clearly remembered for a memorial
Their beginning grew of such inco^tinence,
As clerks call Incestus in sentence.
Incestus is a thing not fair nor good
After that books well devise conne,
As trespassyng with kyn or with blood
Or froward medlyng with her that is a nonne:
And thus the line of Rome was begone,
For slaughter, murder, and false robbry
Was chief beginning of al their auncetry.
Of Couetyse they took their advantage,
Lyggers of ways and robbers openly,
Murdrers also of their own lineage,
And strong thieves gate to their company,
Spoiled al tho that past them forby,
Under shadow of kepinge their beastayle,
Al manner people they proudly did assail.
To ^lee merchants they had no conscience,
And for to murdre folk of every age,
Women to oppress of force and vyolence,
In all that country this was their usage:
Where they abode there was no sure passage.
And these two brethern like as it is found,
Fond first y^ manner of spears sharp groude.
Aspeare in greek called is quiris,
And for that cause the said Romulus,
As books say, and sothely so it is
He afterward was called Quirinus.
Which with his brother y^ called was Remus,
Was in all thing confederate and partable,
That tofore god was vicious and dampnable.
And as it was according to their life,
For lack of virtue they fill in great diffame,
And atwene the^ there was an uncouth stryte,
Which of both should give the name
Unto the city, atwene ernest and game,
After their names Rome to be called,
Thus fill the case before or it was walled.
And thereupon full long lasted their strives,
Which should of them have dominacion,
Showing their titles and prerogatyues,
Who should of them give name to the town,
And reign as king in that region:
There was no reason who should go beforne,
Because they were both at once borne.
But to fynishe their fraternal dyscorde,
They have provided atwene the^ anon right,
Thus condiscendyng to put the^ at accord,
Nouther by force, oppressyon, nor might,
That which of them saw greatest flight
Of birds flyeng high upon an hyl,
Should name the city at his own will.
Of this accord for to be witness,
They with them lad a full great multitude,
Thereof to give a dome of rightwisnesse,
Both of wise and of people rude,
Al at ones this matter to conclude:
And to an hyl called Auentyne,
They ben as^ended this matter for to fine.
And birds six to Remus did appear,
By augury as they began proceed,
Called vultures full fierce in their manner,
But in number the double did excede
That Romulus saw when he took head:
Whereof there fill a great contrauersy,
Which of the^ should prevail on his party.
Thus first of al Remus had a sight
Of six birds called Vultures,
And for to auaunce and prefer his right,
He full proudely put him self in prees:
But Romulus was not recheles
His brothers claim plainly to entrouble,
Afforced his title with the number double.
Yet of his purpose one of the^ must fail,
Though it so be that they ever strive:
But Romulus began finally prevail,
And to the city he forth went blyue,
And as auctours list echone discryue,
And in their books as they reherce al,
After his name Rome he did it call,
And al foreins to exclude out
And again the^ to make strong defense,
First he began to wall it round about,
And made a law full dredful in sentence,
Who clymeth the wall by any violence,
Outward or inward there is no more to sey
By statute made he must needs dey.
This was enacte by full plain ordinance
In pain of death which no man break shall,
But so befyll Remus of ignorance,
Which of the statute knew nothing atal,
Of adventure went over the wall,
For which a knight ordained in certain
The said Remus has with a pykeis slain.
His brother list not in no manner wise
Again the law to be favorable,
But assented parcel for couetyse,
Upon Remus to be more vengeable:
Of this intent to make his reign stable,
That he alone might govern and non other
By no claim brought in by his brother.
And that the people should the^ more delight
There to abide and have possession,
As old auctours of Romulus do write,
Within the bounds of the same town,
That he devised by great provision,
In compass round so croniclers compyle,
A teritory that called was Asyle.
This Asylum by Romulus devised,
Was a place of refuge and socours,
Like a theater with liberties fraunchised,
For to receive all forayne trespasours,
Thieves, murdrers, wayliggers, and robbours
By great resort within the walls wide,
To foster all brybers y^ durst no where abide.
And with fled people fro diverse regions,
The city began to increase and multiplye:
And banished folk of strange nations,
To find refuge thither began them hye.
And thus by process began their chiualry,
First through tyrants retcheles of workyng
Till all the world obeyed their biddyng.
Of wilful force without title of right
They brought all people under subjection,
A claim they made by violence and might,
And took no head of troth nor reason,
And the first auctour of their foundation,
Was Romulus, that gathered all this route
Within the city and walled it about.
And many day as made is mention
He had this city in his governance,
And was the first king crowned in that town,
And reigned there by continuance,
Full many years, till the variaunce
Of fortune through her false envy,
In Campania made him for to dye.
Upon a day when it began thunder loud,
His name forever to be more magnified,
Some books say he was rapt in a cloud,
High up in heaven to be stellified,
With other Gods stately deified,
There to be stalled by Jupiters side,
Like for his knights as Mars list provide.
Lo here of panyms a false opinion,
To Christ's law contrary and odious,
That tyrants should by false oppression
Be called gods or named glorious,
Which by their live were found vycious:
For this plain troth I dare it well tell,
They rather ben fiendes full deep in hell.
For but in earth their dominacion
Conveyed be by virtuous nobles,
And that their power and high renoun
Be set on troth and rightwisenes,
Like their estates in prince or princess,
I dare affirm of them both twain,
For vycious living they must endure pain.
But when they ben faithful of intent,
Right and troth justly to maintain,
And in their royal power be not blent,
Wrongs redressyng and pore folk sustene,
And so contune with conscience so clean:
Such life more rath than pomp of wars,
Shall make the^ reign in heaven above y^ stars.
For which let princes understand atones,
And worldly princesses with all their riches,
That their high horns fret with rich stoues,
To heaven their passage does not dress,
But virtuous life, chatitye, and mekenes:
When they list pride out of their heart arace,
That causes the^ in heaven to win a place.
There is no more strange abusion,
Ne tofore god greater ydolatry,
Than when princes list catch affection
Creatures falsely to deifye,
By collusion brought in by sorcery,
Now god defend all princes well disposed,
With such false craft never to be enoysed.
And their eyes by none illusions
Be not avieugled neither with hoke nor line,
Nor by no boytes of false inspections
Wrought by Cyrenes by drink or medicine,
Which of their nature resemble to a shrine,
Through riches outward and beauty sovereign
And who look inward be like to a caraine.
God of his grace amend all such outrage,
In noble princes, and save the^ from such werre
And them enlumine disposyng their courage
In such false worship they no more ne err:
Like to Argus that they seen a far,
That no false fagyng cause the^ to be blind,
Gods nor goddesses to worship again kind.
And though yt Romans did worship and honor
To Romulus by a constraynt dread,
Let no man take example of their error,
But to the lord whose sides were made read,
To save mankind and on a cross was deed.
Let men to him in chief their love observe,
Which can the^ quite better than they deferue
The.xxix. Chapter.
How Mecius king of Albanoys being false of his oath and assurance, was
drawn into pieces.

NExt Romulus with tears al bespraint,
Unto John Bochas appeared Mecius,
Of chere and look and of his port faynte,
His fall declaryng froward and dispitous,
And he was called eke Sufficius,
Low of birth and simple in vpgrowyng,
Of Albanoys till fortune made him king.
Again whose pride the Romans began warrey
Full mightily oppressyng his country:
And for king Mecius list them not obey,
They cast them fully avenged for to be,
Because his birth was but of low degree,
And was risen up unto estate royal,
They the^ purpose to give him a sudden fall.
Hasty clymbyng of pouert set on hight
When wrong title makes him to ascend,
With unware peyse of his own might
A sudden fall makes him to discende,
When he list not of surquedy entende
Fro whence he came, nor him self to know,
Till god and fortune his po^pe has overthrow.
For this Mecius of presumption,
Thought again Romans his pride might avail,
Began war again the^ by rebellion,
Was not fearful their nobles to assail,
Till on a day was signed a battle:
Both their hosts within a field to mete,
To take their part be it sour or sweet.
That time in Rome reigned Hostilius,
A manly man and a full worthy knight,
Twene him concluded and king Mecius
They twain to mete in steel armed bright,
For both battayles to try out the right,
By just accord and therein not vary,
The party vaynquished to be tributary.
And wholly put him in subjection
Without entreatyng or any more delay,
And finally for short conclusion
King Hostilius the triumph wan that day,
That Albanoys could not say nay,
But that Romans as put is in memory,
By singular battle had won the victory.
Thus had Romans first possession
Of Albanoys, to obey them and to dread,
Mecius yielded and sworn to the town
Never to rebel for favor ne for mede,
But for he was double found in deed
Of his assurance, and false to their city,
He was chastised anon as ye shall se.
Against Fidinates a country of Itaile,
King Hostilius for their rebellion,
Cast he would mete them in battle,
For common profit and for diffension
Both of his city and of his royal town:
And for to afforce his party in workynge,
Of Albanoys he sent unto the king
To come in haste with his whole chyualry,
And tarry not in no manner wise,
But make him strong to sustain his party,
Like his behest as ye have heard devise.
But king Mecius full falsely began practice,
A sleighty treason and a covert wyle,
Against his promise the Romans to begyle.
Yet he outward pretending to be true,
Came to the field with ae full great meyny,
Living in hope to se some chaunges new
That he on Rome might avenged be:
And specially that he might se
King Hostilius of froward envy,
That day outrayed with all his chyualry.
First when he saw the Romans enbattailed
And Fydinates on that other side,
Their wards ready for to have assailed,
He covertly did on an hill abide,
And to nor fro list not go nor ride,
Nor his person put in ieopardy:
But who was strongest to hold on y^ party.
Whereof the Romans fill in suspection
Of king Mecius when they took head,
Till Hostilius of high discrecion
Through his knighthode put the^ out of dread*
And began dissunule of Mecius the falsehede,
And to comfort his knights of intent,
Said what he did, was done by his assent.
He was full loathe that his chyualry
Should know the effect of Mecius treason,
Which cause might in all or in party,
Full great hindryng by some occasion,
To deem in him falsenes or treason:
Yet of troth the story bears witness,
All that he meant was untruth and falsenes.
Thus of manhood and of high prudence
He to his knights yaue heart and hardines,
Made them set on by so great vyolence
That he the field gate of high prowes
On Fidinates, brought in so great distress
And so outrayed of force on every side,
Tofore Romans that they ne durst abide.
And when Mecius saw them thus outrayed
By a manner of feigned false gladness,
Like as he had in heart be well apayed,
To Hostilius anon he began him dress,
Him self reioysyng by counterfayte likeness:
And for his meaning plainly was conceived
So as he came, right so was he received.
Thus when Mecius stood in his presence
With a pretense of faithful stablenes,
And all the apport of troth in appearance
He shadowed has his expert doublenes,
Under sote honey covert bitterness:
Friendly vysage with words smothe and plain,
Tho mouth and heart departed were in twain.
But Hostilius has all his fraud espied,
And his compassed falsenes and treason,
And thereupon has justly fantasied
A pain according ypeysed of reason,
Him to punish by a double passion:
This to mean, like as he was divided,
A double torment for him he has provided.
This was his dome and his fatal pain
By Hostilius contrived of justice,
His fete, his arms, atwene charets twain
Naked and bare the story does devise
To be bound and knit in trauers wise,
Contrariously the horse to draw and hale,
Till all his body were rent on pieces small.
And right as he was cause of great trouble,
Found aye in deed most full of variaunce,
Therefore his pain was in manner double,
Right as him self was double in governance
False of his oath, of hest, and assurance,
And double in menyng as he has perseuered
So in his end his me^bres were disceuered.
His fete were draw from the head asunder,
There was no joint with other for to abide:
Here was a leg and an arm lay yonder,
Thus each member from other began divide
And for he could hold in outher side,
By false pretense to outher party true,
Him to chastise was found a pain new.
The.xxx. Chapter.
A Chapter how princes should of their oaths and promises be true, auoydyng
all doublenes and deception.

SO here the end of double false meaning
Wha^ word and heart be contrarious:
Oath and behest false found in a king,
Of Albanoys as was this Mecius,
O noble princes prudent and virtuous,
Let never story after more record
That word and deed should in you discord.
For king Mecius variaunt of courage,
Whose inward menig was ever on treason set,
Traynes contriuyng with a fair vysage,
His thought, his heart, with double cords fret,
By Bochas called disceyte and false baret:
Which vice discriuyng concludes of reason,
Fraud of all frauds is false deception.
For with a face flatteryng and peacible,
Pretending troth under false pleasaunce,
With his panteris perilous and terrible
Trappeth innocents with gryns of mischau^ce:
I mean disceite, that with her countenance,
Folks englueth simple and retcheles,
And than warreth under a face of pees.
Puissau^ce of princes famous and honorable,
Has been disceaued by this traytouresse,
And folk most prudent in their estate notable
Has be distroubled by such doublenes:
And many a knight victorious of prowes,
Has been entryked for all his high renoun,
By traynes found of disceyte and treason.
Disceyte deceyueth and shall be deceived,
For by disceyte who is disceyuable,
Though his disceyte be not out perceived,
To a disceyuoure disceyte is retournable:
Fraud quit with fraud is guerdon couenable
For who with fraud fraudulent is found,
To a defrauder fraud will aye rebounde.
The.xxxi. Chapter.
Of king Hostilius that first weared purple hew, consumpt with fiery leuin.

WHat should I more of disceite endite,
Touching the fraud of king Mecius,
For I me cast now finally to write
The fatal end of king Hostilius:
Which was the first as says Valerius,
In Rome city that auctours knew,
Among kings that weared purple hew.
But after all his tryumphall noblesse,
And many uncouth knightly high emprise,
Fortune to appall the pryse of his prowess,
Made him to be in full froward wise,
Retcheles and slow to do sacrifice,
To Jupiter, for which sent from heuin,
He was consumpt with sudden fiery leuin.
Here men may se the reuolutions
Of fortunes double purueyaunce,
How ye most mighty of Romayne champions
Have suddenly be brought unto mischaunce:
And their outrages to put in remembrance,
Great conquest turned to woe from joy,
For a rebuke I send them this lenuoye.
Lenuoy.
ROme remember of thy foundation,
And of what people thou took thy beginnynge:
Thy buildyng began of false dissencion,
Of slaughter, murdre, and outrageous robbing
Yeuyng to us a manner knowlegyng
A false beginning auctours determine,
Shall by process come unto ruin.
Where be thy e^perors most souerain of renoun
Kings exiled for outrageous living?
Thy Senators with worthy Scipton,
Poets old thy tryumphes rehearsyng?
Thy laureat knights most stately ridyng
In high honor* for all their noble line,
Is by longprocesse brought to ruin.
Where is now Caesar that took possession
First of the empire the tryumphe usurping?
Or where is Lucan that makes mention,
Of all his conquest, by serious writing?
Octauian most solemnly reigning?
Where is become their lordshypor their line,
Process of years has brought it to ruin.
Where is Tullius chief lantern of thy town,
In rethorike all other surmountyng?
Moral Senec or prudent sad Caton
Thy common profit always preferryng?
Or rightful Traian most justly in his deining
Which on no party list not to declyne,
But long process has brought all to ruin.
Where is the temple of thy protection
Made by Virgill, most curious of buyldyng?
Images erect of every region
When any land was found rebellyng
Toward that part a small bell heard ringing,
To that prouynce the image did enclyne,
Which by long process was brought to ruin
Where is also the great extorcion
Of consules and prefectes oppressyng?
Of Dictatours the false collusion?
Of Decemuir the froward disceyuyng?
The great outrage in their living?
Of all echeone the odious rauine,
Has by process them brought unto ruin.
Where is become thy dominacion,
Thy great tributes, thy treasures shynyng,
The world all whole in thy subjection,
Thy sword of ve^geaunce al people manacing
Ever gready to encrese in thy gettyng
Nothing by grace which that is divine,
Which has the brought by process to ruin.
In thy most highest exaltation,
Thy proud tyrants provinces conquering,
To god contrary by long rebellion,
Gods, goddesses, falsely obeiyng,
Above the stars by surquedous climbyng:
Till vengeance thy nobles did untwine,
With new complaints to show thy ruin.
Lay down thy pride and thy presumption,
Thy pompous bost, thy lordships increasing,
Confess thine outrage and lay thy boast adoun,
All false Gods plainly defiyng,
Lift up thine heart unto the heavenly king,
Which with his blood thy sorrows for to fine,
Has made thy raunsum to save the fro ruin
From old Saturn draw thine affection,
His golden world fully despisyng,
And from Jupiter make a digression,
His silueren time heartily dispraysyng:
Resort again with will and whole meaning,
To him that is lord of the orders nine,
Which mekely dyed to save the fro ruin.
Though Mars be mighty in his assencion,
By influence victories disposyng,
And bright Phoebus yeueth consolation
To worldly princes their nobles auaunsing:
Forsake their rightes and thy false offryng:
And to that lord bow down thy chyne,
Which shed his blood to save the fro ruin.
Winged Mercury chief lord and patron
Of eloquence and of fair speaking,
Forsake his service in thine opinion,
And serve the lord that governs all thing,
The sterred heaven the spheres eke meuyng,
Which for thy sake was crowned with a spine,
His heart eke pierced to save the fro tuyne.
Cast up of Venus the false derision
Her fiery brande her flatteries renuyng,
Of Diana the transmutacions,
Now bright, now pale* now clear, now drepyng
Of blind Cupide the fraudulent mockyng
Of Jun^, Bachus, Proserpina, and Lucine,
For none but Christ may save the fro ruin.
Void of Cirses the beastiall poison,
Of Cyrenes the furious chauntynge:
Let not Medusa do the no treason
And fro Gorgones turn thy lokyng.
And let Sinderesis have the in keeping,
That Christ Jesu may be thy medicyne,
Again such raskayle to save the fro ruin.
Of false ydols make abiuracion,
To Similachres do no worshyppyng:
Make thy resort to Christ's passion,
Which may by mercy redress thine erryng,
And by his grace repare thy falling:
So thou obey his virtuous disciplyne
Trust that he shall restore thy ruin.
His mercy is surmountyng of foyson,
Ever increases without amenusyng,
Aye at full cche time and each ceason,
And never waneth by none eclypsyng:
When men list make devoutly their rekening
To leave their sin and come to his doctrine,
He ready is to keep them from ruin.
O Rome, Rome, all old abusion
Of ceremonies falsely disusyng,
Lay them aside, and in conclusion
Cry god mercy thy trespace repentyng,
Trust he will not refuse thy askyng,
The to receive to labor in his vine,
Eternally to save the from ruin.
O noble princes of high discrecion,
Sith in this world is none abidyng,
Peyse conscience against will and reason,
While ye have leisure of heart ymaginyng,
Ye bear not hence but your deseruyng:
Let this conceit aye in your thoughts mine,
By example of Rome, how all goth to ruin.
Thus ends the second book.
LIke a Pilgryme which y^ goes on foot,
And has no horse to releue his trauail,
Hot, dry, weary, and may find no bote
Of well cold when thyrst does him assail,
Wine nor lycoure that may to him avail:
Right so fare I which in my business,
No succor find my rudenes to redress.
I mean as thus, I have no fresh lycou^
Out of the conduites of Calliope,
Nor through Clyo in rethoryke no flower,
In my labor for to refreshe me,
Nor of the sisters in number thrice three:
Which with Citherea on Pernaso dwell,
They never gave me drink of their well:
Nor of their sprynges clear and cristallyn
That sprange by touching of the Pegase,
Their favor lacks my making to enlumin
I find their balm of so great scarcite
To tame their tons with some drop of plente
For Poliphemus through his blyndnes,
Has in me darked of Argus the brightness.
Our life here short of wit the great dulnes,
The heavy soul troubled with travail,
And of memory the blasyng brotilnes:
Dread and vncunnyng have made a strong battle
With werines my spirit to assail,
And with their subtle crepyng in most quaynt,
Has made my spirit in making for to faint.
And ouermore the fearful frowardnes
Of my stepmother called oblivion,
Has a bastyle of foryetfulnes,
To stop the passage, and shadow my reason,
That I might have no clear dyrection
In translatyng of new to quycke me,
Stories to write of old antiquity.
Thus was I set and stood in double werre,
At the metyng of fearful ways twain,
The one was this who ever list to lere,
Where as good will began me constrayne,
Bochas to accomplish for to do my pain,
Came ignorance with a manace of dread,
My pen to rest, I durst not proceed.
Thus my self remembryng on this book,
It to traunslate I had undertake,
Full pale of chere astonished in my look,
My hand began tremble, my pen I felt quake,
That dispayred I had almost forsake
So great a labor dredefull and importable,
It to ^erforme I found me so unable.
Twe ne the residue of this great journey
And little thereof that was begone:
I stood checkmate for fear when I began se
In my way how little I had ^onne,
Like to a man that failed day and son,
And had no light to accomplish his vyage,
So far I stood abacke in my passage.
The night came on darked with ignorance,
My wit was dull by clerenes to discern
In Rethoryke for lack of suffisaunce,
The torches out and quenched was the lantern,
And in this case my style to govern
Me to further I found none other muse,
But hard as stone Pierides and Meduse.
Support was none my dulnes for to gye,
Poverty approached in stale crooked age,
Mercury absent and Philologie,
My purse aye light and void of all coynage,
Bachus far of to glad my courage,
An ebb of plente, scarcete at full
Which of an old man makes the spirit dull.
But hope and trust to put away despair,
Into my mind of new began them dress:
And chief of all to make wether fair,
My lords fredom and bounteous largess,
Into mine heart brought such gladness,
That through releuyng of his benign grace,
False indigence list me no more manace.
O how it is an hartly rejoicing,
To serve a prince that list to advertise
Of their servants ye faithful just meaning*
And list to consider to guerdon their service,
And at a need list them not despise:
But fro al danger yt should them noy or grieve,
Beth ever ready to help them and releue.
And thus releued by the goodly head,
And through the nobles of this most knightly man
All mistes clered of despair and dread
Trust, hope, and faith, into my hartran:
And on my labor anon forthwyth I began,
For by clear support of my lords grace,
All foraynes lettyng fro me I did enchace.
For folk that use to make great vyages,
Which vnderfonge long travel and labor,
When they have don great part of their passages
Of werines to assuage the rygoure,
Against faintyse to find some fau^^^,
Look often again parcel to be releue^,
To se how much their journey is acheued.
Cause why they so often look again
Backward turn look, and eke vysage
Is only this, that it may be seyne
To them how much is done of their vyage:
Eke weary folk that gone on pylgrimage,
Rest them some while a full large space,
Laborious sweat to wipe fro their face.
Their heavy fardell among they cast adoun,
At certain bounds to do their backs ease:
At wells cold eke of entencion
Drink fresh water their grievous thurst to apease
Or holesum wynes their appetite to please,
Rekenyng the miles by computacions,
Which they have past of castles and of towns
It does them ease the number for to know
Sith they began, of many great iourneys,
Of hye mountayns, and of valeyes low,
And strange sightes passing by countries,
The uncouth buildyng of borowes and cities
Counting ye distaunce from towns and the spaces
This is their talking at their restyng places.
The residue and the surplusage
They reken also of their labor coming,
Think it is a manner advantage
To have and se a clear knowlegyng
Of things passed, and things eke following:
For to their hearts it does full great plesau^ce
When all such thing is put in remembrance.
And semblably John Bochas as I find,
Began turn back his look and countenance,
And to remember appoyntyng in his mind
To the stories rehearsed in substance,
In his two books of sorrows and displeasau^ce,
Him self astonished marueilyng a great deal
The fall of princes from Fortunes whele.
Of their unhap as he does rehearce,
Toward the^ self the cause does rebounde,
Their climbyng up the heavens for to perce,
In worldly riches to increase and abound,
Their gredy etike does them self confound:
And their thirst of having vnstauncheable,
Cause^ their nobles to be so variable.
High climbyng up of reason who can se,
Dulleth of brains the memorial,
Blunteth the sight of high and low degree,
Which from aloft makes them to have a fall:
Men say of old, who that covet all
At the unset hour such one shall not chese,
But all his gadryng at once shall he lose.
For worldly folk which so hye arise
With the great peyse of worldly abundau^ce,
And with the weight of froward couetise,
Namely where Fortune holds the balau^ce,
With unware turn of some unhappy chance,
This stormy queen, this double Goddess,
Plungeth the^ down from all their riches.
Wherefore Bochas hereof to make a prefe,
Shows to purpose a sentence full notable:
A clear example of such unware mischefe,
Writes of an auctour by manner of a fable,
Albe the menyng be full commendable,
And well according in conclusion,
To the clear purpose of his entencion.
Finis.
How Andalus doctor of Astronomy concludes how Princes should not atwite
constellacions nor Fortune of their unhappy falling, but their demerites and
vycious living.

The first Chapter.
AT Naples whylom as he does specify
In his youth when he to schole went,
There was a doctor of Astronomye,
Famous of cunnyng and right excellent,
Of him rehearsyng shortly in sentment,
His joy was most to study and wake,
And he was called Andalus the blake.
He read in schools the mening of the heaven,
The kind of stars and constellacions,
The course also of the planets seven,
Their influence and their mocions:
And held also in his opinions,
The fall of princes the cause well out sought,
Came of them self and of fortune naught.
Nor the stars was nothing to wite
By their meuyng, nor by their influence
Nor yt men should of right the heaven at wite,
For no froward worldly vyolence:
For this clarke there concluded in sentence,
How men by virtue long may contune,
From hurt of stars or of fortune.
Their own desert is chief occasion
Of their unhappy who so takes head,
And their demerites unawarely put the^ down,
When vycious life does their bridle led:
Course of fortune nor of the stars read,
Hinders nothing again their felicity,
Sith of free choice they have full liberty.
God punished sin in many manner wise,
Some he chastises for their own avail,
Men may of reason in such case devise,
Sin aye requires vengeance at his tail:
God of fortune takes no counsel,
Nor from her meuyng no man is more fre,
As clerks write, than is glad pouertee.
And unto purpose this auctour full notable,
To his scholars there being in presence,
Full demurely began rehearse a fable,
With many a color of sugared eloquence,
Thereon concludyng the su^me of his sentence,
Touching a strife which he did express,
Atwene glad pouert, and this blind goddess.
A disputation between Fortune and glad pouerte.
HVod Andalus whilom of fortune
In strait place there sat glad pouert
Which resembled of look and of figure
A retcheles woman most ugly unto se,
At a narow metyng of hye ways three,
All to torn, to ragged, and to rent,
A thousand patches upon her garment.
She was hydous both of chere and face,
And in semyng void of sorrow and dread:
And by that way as Fortune did pace,
And of glad Pouert suddenly took head,
She began to smile and laughed at her in deed,
By a manner scornyng in certain,
Of her array she had so great disdain.
Whose froward laughter wha^ pouert did espy
How she of her had indignacion,
She rose her up of high melancholy
Plainly to show her entencion,
Without good day or salutacion,
Doing to Fortune no manner reverence,
Under these words, declaryng her sentence.
O thou Fortune most fool of foles all,
What cause have thou for to laugh at me,
Or what disdain is in thine heart fall:
Spare not a deal tell on let se,
For I full little have ado with the,
Of old nor new I have none aquayntaunce
Neither with the nor with thy governance.
And when Fortune beholds the manner
Of glad Pouert, in her to torn wede,
And knew also by countenance and chere,
How she of her took but little head,
Like as she had to her no manner need,
The which things conceived and seyne,
To poverty she answered thus ageine:
My scornful laughter plainly was for the,
When I the saw so megre, pale, and lene,
Naked and cold, in great adversity,
Scabbed, scoruy, scalled, and unclean,
On back and body as it is well seen,
Many a beast walk in their pasture,
Which day by day of new thou do recure.
Having nothing to wrap in thy head,
Save a broad hatte rent out of nattes old,
Full of honger for defaute of bread,
Slepyng on straw in the frostes cold:
And where thou come as men may behold,
For fear of the, children them withdraw,
And many a dog has on thy staff ygnaw.
To all estates thou art most odious,
Men with the will have no daliaunce,
Thy fellowship is so contracious,
Where thou abidest may be no pleasaunce:
Folk hate so deedly thy froward acquaitau^ce
That finally I dare conclude of the,
Where ever thou come thy fellowship me^ fle.
When glad pouert began plainly understand
The rebukes rehearced of Fortune,
The rude reasons that she took on hand
Which frowardly to her she did entune,
As Pouert were a refuse in commuue,
By the repreues that Fortune on her laid,
For which pouerte, replied again and said.
Fortune (quod she) touching this debate
Which of malice thou do again me take,
Be well certain touching my pore estate,
I of frewyll thy favor have forsake,
And though folk say thou may men rich make
Yet had I lever be pore with gladness,
Than with trouble posse de great riches
For though thou seem benign and debonayre
By a manner counterfaite appearance,
Fat and well fed with round chekes fair,
With many colors of troth as in pretense,
As thereof faith were very existence,
But under all thy flowers of freshenes,
The serpent glydeth of change and doublenes
And though thy clothing be of purple hew,
With great awaytyng of many chamberers,
Of gold and perle each day changed new,
Clothe of gold and sundry fresh attires,
And in thine household full many officers,
Yet I dare well put in ieoparty
With the to pleate and hold champarty.
Thus glad pouert began wax importune,
Of there contrary of look and of langage,
Again this lady which called is Fortune:
That of disdain she fill into a rage,
Behold quod she of pouerte the courage
In wretchedness standing disconsolate,
How again me she is now obstinate?
She can not se how she stant outrayed
Far from the favor of my felicity,
Yet of pride she is not dismayed
Nor list not bow for to obey me,
Though she be cast in mendicite:
Farthest abacke I do you well assure,
In mischefe set of any creature.
But truly pouerte for all thy truaundise
Maugry thy pride and thine outrage
I shall the punish in full cruel wise,
To make the loute under my seruage,
Which resemblest a deadly image
That were new risen out of his grave,
And yet of pride dare against me rave.
But when fortune had these words said,
Glad pouerte began fall in great gladness,
And again Fortune with a sudden brayde,
She began her conceit out show and express:
Fortune (quod she) though thou be a goddess
Called of foles yet learn this of me,
From thy seruage I stand at liberty.
But if I shall algates have ado
With the in arms most cruel and vengeable,
Touching the quarrel yt is atwene us two,
There is one thing to me right comfortable,
That thy courage is flikeryng and unstable,
And where an heart is in him self divided,
Victory in arms for him is not provided.
Me list nether flatter the nor fage,
Nor the to anoint by adulacion,
Though flattery and feigned false langage
Appropred be to thy condition:
And in dispite of thy presumption,
I have forsake of my fre voluntie
All the treasures of worldly vanity.
Whylom I was as thou have devised
Servant to the, and unto thy treasours,
But from thy danger now yt I am frau^chised
Seking of the nether for help nor succors,
Manace kings and mighty emperors,
For glad pouerte late neither sone
With thy riches has nothing to done.
For though thou have embraced in thy cheine
Worldly princes and goods transitorye,
And rich merchants under thy demeyne,
Yeuest to knighthode conquest and victory,
The fadyng palm of laud and vaynglory:
But when echone thy favor have recured,
Tha^ is glad pouerte fre fro thy lure assured.
All thy servants stand under dread,
Quakyng for fear of thy doublenes,
For neither wisdom, force, nor manhede,
Fredome, bounty, love, nor gentilnes,
May in thy favor have no sykernesse,
They be so possed with winds in thy barge:
Where as glad pouert goth fre at his large.
Thy manacyng does me no duresse,
Which worldly princes dreden euerychone,
They may well quake for loss of riches,
But I glad pouerte thereof desire none:
As flow and ebb all worldly things must gone,
For after floudes of Fortunes tide,
The ebb follows and will no man abide.
Flow and ebb to me both aliche,
I dread nothing thy mutabilitee:
Make who^ thou list either pore or rich,
For I nothing will require of the,
Nether lordship nor great prosperity,
For with thy gifts who that has to done,
Of chaunges braydeth ofter then the Moon.
Out of pouerte came first these emperors
That were in Rome crowned with laurere,
Fredom and larges made them first victours
Causyng their fame to shine bright and clear,
Till couetise brought them in daungere:
When they of folly in their most excellence
To thy doublenes did reverence.
For when fredome a prince does forsake,
And couetise put away largess,
And straytnes into honsholde take,
And nygardshyp exileth gentilues,
Than is withdraw from their hye noblesse
The peoples heart, and plainly to devise
Of their servants farewell al good service.
All such sudden chaunges in commune,
In this world used now fro day to day,
Echone they come by fraud of false fortune,
Experience has put at assay:
Love, troth, and faith, be gone far away,
And if that trust with princes will not tarry,
Little maruayle though the people vary.
For through thy chau^ges of fraudule^t fairenes
There is now used in every region
Glad chere outshewed with covert doublenes,
Under the curtayne of simulation:
So secret is now adulation,
That in this world may be no surete,
But if it rest in glad pouerte.
Yet of thy perilous froward variaunce
I set no store truly as for me,
For all thy frendshyp concludes with mischau^ce,
With sudden mischefe of mutabilitie:
Which yeueth me heart to have ado with the,
For suffisaunce in my pore estate,
Shall to thy chau^ges say suddenly chekmate.
Fortune with anger almost dispayred,
Of these words took full great greuaunce:
Pouert (quod she) which may not be apayred
But I now show again the my puissaunce
Men would little account my substance,
O mighty pouerte, O strong Hercules,
Which against me put thy self in prees.
Supposest thou it should the avail,
Other by force or by hardines
To have ado with me in battle,
Which am of conquest and of high prowes,
In arms called lady and princes?
For there is none so mighty conqueroure
That may prevail without my favor.
Of these words pouerte nothing aferde,
Answerde again thus plainly in sentence:
Though I ne have spear, shield, nor sword,
Nor chosen armure to stand at defense,
Pollar, nor dagger, to make resistance,
But bare and naked, anon it shall be seyne
If thou with me dare wrestle on the pleyne.
Which shall be done under condition
That none of us shall him self withdraw,
But still abide of entencion
Till he that vaiquisheth ordained has a law
Such as him likes against his felawe:
The which law shall not be delayed
To be accomplished on him that is outrayed.
Of whose words Fortune again began smile,
That pouert proffered so proudly to assail,
And upon this she stynt a little while,
And to pouert she put this opposayle.
Who shall (quod she) be judge of this battle,
Or give doine justly atwene us twain,
Of this quarrel that we shall darayne?
I ask also another question,
Touching thy profer of furious outrage:
Where as thou put a condition
And a law with full proud langage,
Where shall thou find pledges or hostage,
To keep the promise which thou do ordain
Thereof to abide the guerdon or the pain?
I mean as thus if there be set a law
Atwene us two, or a condition
By surety which may not be withdraw,
As under bond or obligation:
But there is neither law nor reason
May bind a beggar if it be well sought,
When it is proved yt he has right naught.
The sect of pouerte has a protection
From all statutes to go at liberty,
And from all law a plain exception:
Than follows it if thou bind the
To any law that may contrived be,
It were fraud plainly to endite,
Which have right naught thy party to acquit
Thou art so feeble if I came thereto
That thou were brought unto vtteraunce,
For no power when that all were do
Thou should fail to make thy finaunce,
Both destitute of good and of substance:
And sith no law now thy person may coart,
It were folly with such one to ieoparte.
If I would compulse the to wrack,
To ask of the treasure of king Dary,
On that party thou stand far abacke,
My payment so long should tarry
Indigence would the to vary:
And if I would thy person eke compare
To Alysaunder, thy sides ben full bare.
And finally thou stand in such caas
Of misery, wretchedness, and need,
That thou might of reason sing alas,
Both forsake of frendshyp and kynrede,
And there is none dare pledge the for dread:
Yet like a fool supprised with vaynglory,
Hopest of me to win the vyctory.
Quod glad pouerte I doubt never adele
That the vyctory shall pass on my side,
Pledge and hostages let them go, farewele,
I ask no more of all thy great pride,
But to the end that thou wylt abide,
Pledge thy faith, albe that some men says,
To trust in fortune there is full little faith.
And for my part in this hye emprise
Since I have pledges nether one nor twain
More sure hostage can I not devise:
But if so be the victory thou attain,
Than yield I my body bound in a chain,
Perpetually, like the condition
With the to abide fettred in prison.
Than Fortune laughed more the^ she did before
When she saw Pouerte so presumptuous,
In his array all to ragged and to tore,
And had neither rent, land, ne house:
It is (quod she) a thing contraryous
Unto nature, who that can aduert,
To a beggar to have a sturdy heart.
And if I the vainquished in battle,
It were to me no worship nor advantage,
What should thy body unto me avail
The to enpryson straytly in a cage?
It should be a charge and a costage
Thine empty womb each day to fill,
If thou might have vytayle at thy will.
And if I would my self to magnify,
Token of tryumphe after my chare the led,
Men would deem it a manner mockery,
And say in scorn take of that fool good head,
How she a beggar has overcome in deed,
Fought with her for to increase her name,
Which conquest turns to disclau^der and shame.
Yet when I have brought the to vttraunce,
My power shadowed and my great might.
And thine outrage oppressed by vengeance,
After all this as it is skyll and right,
It shall be couthe in every man's sight,
Out declared the great difference,
Atwene thy feebleness and my great excellence.
Than to repress thy surquedy at ones,
Cruel Orchus the tydogye infernal,
Shall rende thy skin asunder from the bones
To show my power which is imperial:
And to declare in especial
Pouerte reclaymed unto prydes lure,
With me to plete may no while endure.
And suddenly or glad pouerte took head,
Fortune proudly first began tassayle,
And unawarely hent her by the head,
Demyng of pride yt she may not fail,
Through her power to ve^quish this bataile:
But it may fall, a dwerye in his right,
To outray a gyaunt for all his great might.
God takes none head to power nor strength,
To high estate, nor to high noblesse,
To square limes forged on bread or length,
But to quarrels grounded on right wisnesse:
For out of wrong may growd no prowess,
For where that troth holds champarty,
God will his cause by grace magnify.
Wherefore pouerte strong in her intent,
Light, and deliver, void of all fatness,
Right well brethed, and nothing corpulent,
Small of dyette, surfettes to repress,
Again fortune proudly began her dress:
And with an ugly stern cruel face,
Began in arms her proudly to enbrace.
Pouert was slender and might well endure,
Fortune was round, short of wind, and breath:
And wombes great oppressed with armure,
For lack of wind the great stuff the^ sleth,
And many a man brings to his death:
For ouermoche of any manner thing,
Has many one brought to his undoing.
A mean is best with good governance,
To much is naught, nor over great plente,
Gretter richesse is found in suffysaunce,
Than in the flodes of superfluyte:
And who is content in his pouerte,
And grutcheth not for bitter nor for sote,
What ever he be has fortune under foot,
Couetyse put him in no despair,
Wherefore pouerte in heart glad and light,
Lift fortune full high up in the air,
And her constrained of very force and might:
For glad pouerte of custom and of right,
When any trouble again her does begin,
Aye of Fortune the laurer she does wyn.
Maugre Fortune in the air a lofte,
Constrained she was by wylfull pouerte,
That to the earth her fall was full vnsofte:
For of pouert the bony sharp kne,
Slendre, and long, and lean upon to se
Hit fortune with so great a might,
Again ye heart, she might not stand vpryght.
To signify that pouerte with gladness,
Which is content with small possession,
And geuyth no force of treasour nor richesse,
Has over fortune the dominacion,
And keeps her ever under subjection:
Where worldly folk with their rych aparaile,
Live ever in dred lest fortune would fail.
The poor man before the thief does sing,
Under ye wodes with fresh notes shryll,
The rich man full fearful of robbyng
Quakyng for dread rydeth forth full still:
The poor at large goth where he list at will,
Strongly frau^chysed from all debate and strife,
The rich aferde always to lose his life.
Thus glad pouerte has the palm ywonne,
Fortune outrayed for all her doubleness,
Upon whom pouerte in haste is run,
And strayned her with so great duresse,
Till she confessed and plainly did express,
with faith and hand in all her great pain,
To abide what law pouerte list ordain.
And in haste after this discomfyture,
Fortune began to complain sore,
But glad pouert which al thing might endure
Charged fortune scorn her no more:
For it was said sithe go full yore,
He that reioyseth to scorn folk in vain,
When he is lothest, shall scorned be again.
Yet quoth pouert though thou were dispitous
Words rehersyng which were not fair,
Strange rebukes full contrarious,
And repreues many thousand pair,
Thou shall me find again ward debonaire:
For though a tongue be slaundrous and ve^geable,
To slander again, is nothing commendable.
Thou must considre touching our battle,
The ordinance and imposycion
That which of us in conquest do prevail,
To bring his fellow to subjection:
He shall obey the statute of reason,
And accomplish of very due det,
What law the victoure list upon him set.
For which thou shall the said law obey,
With circumstaunces of the condition,
By me ordained, and nothing again say:
Make no grutchynge nor replycation,
Consydred first the false opinion
Of them that said all worldly adventure
Of good and bad, abide under thy cure,
Some poets and philosophers also,
Would in this case make the a goddess:
Which be disceiued I dare say both two,
And their error and folly to redress,
I shall withdraw in very sykernesse,
Unhappy adventure away fro thy power,
That she no more stand in thy danger.
This law of new upon the I make,
That first thou shall al open in some pleyne,
Juell adventure bind to a stake,
Or to some pyller where she may be seyne:
To show example to folk in certain
That no man shall lose her ne discharge,
But such as list with her to go at large.
Hereof to make a declaracion,
Touching thy might of yuell adventure,
Thou shall forgo the dominacion,
To hyndre and harm any creature,
But only foles which in thy might assure:
They of their folly may feel great damage,
Not of thy power, but of their own outrage.
For thylke foles which that list unbind
This wretch called unhappy adventure,
Of wit and reason they make the^ self blind,
Like as the world stood in fortunes cure,
As though she might assure them and unsure:
And them dispose to welthe or wretchedness,
In their error calling her a goddess.
Such wilful wretches that them self betake,
To put their fredom in her subjection,
Of god above the power they forsake,
And submit them again all reason,
Under fortunes transmutacion:
Their lyberte full falsely for to thrall,
Namely when they a goddess list her call.
With a derke mist of variacion,
Fortune has clouded their natural light,
And ouershadowed their discretion,
That they be blent in their inward sight,
For to consydre and behold a right,
How god above put under man's cure,
Fre choice of good his reason to assure.
The lord enlumined of his bou^tuous larges,
With mind and wit his memoryall,
Toward all virtue his steps for to dress:
Endued his reason for to be natural,
Of frowardenesse till he wax bestyall:
To bind him self contrariously in deed,
To serve fortune, atwene hope and dread.
Thus bestyall folk made her a goddess,
Falsely wening she might them most avail,
With her plentyes of habundaunt richesse:
And some deem in their supposayle,
with unware change she dare the great assail,
Whose trust always meddled is with trouble,
And her plesaunce includes mening double.
And some affirm that she may auaunce
Conquestes great and discomfytures,
And how it lies also in her puissaunce
To forther and hinder all manner creatures,
And call her princess of al adventures,
The rich to enhaunce by royal apparayle,
And by disdain to hinder the porayle.
when she makes most fulsome her profers,
Her blandisshing is farced with falshede:
when her riches ben stuffed up in cofers,
They ben aye shet under a lock of dread.
Wherefore ye rich of one thing take heed,
As your gathering came in with plesaunce,
Right so your loss departs with mischaunce.
Your gredy thurst treasour to multiply
Causes an etyke of no suffisaunce:
In you engendring a false dropsye,
With a sharp hunger of worldly abundaunce
Making of you a manner resemblaunce
With Tantalus, when ye do depest synke,
Tha^ is your nature most thrustlew to drink
who clymbeth highest on fortunes whele,
And suddenly to richesse does ascend,
An unware turn before seen never a dele,
When he leest weneth makes him descend:
Fro such chaunges who may him defend,
But they that be with pouerte not dismaide,
And can with little hold them self apayde.
The first Chapter.
How king Hostilius worshyppyng false gods was consumpt with fiery leuyn.

While Bochas began muse in this matter.
Consydred first all worldly thing must fail,
With weeping eyes there did apere
Princes ye whylom were famous in Itayle,
Which began their fall full pitously bewail:
For more contrary was their falling low,
That they tofore had no mischefe know.
For more uncouth is thylke aduersyte
Namely to princes when it is sudden,
Which ever have lived in prosperity,
Having on Fortune no matter to complain,
Than of a wretch that lyuith aye in pain:
Of custom causes conceived the sentence,
Of joy and sorrow a full great difference.
Of joy passed the new remembrance
When folk ben fall from their felicite,
In treble wise it does them great greuau^ce:
The unware turn from their tranquilyte,
The unsure trust and mutabilyte
In worldly power which they have found,
Unto their hertes yeueth a grievous wound.
But to a wretch which in wretchydnesse
Has ever lived, and never was partable
Of no welfare nor of wyelfulnesse,
Nor never found Fortune favorable,
His sorrow his myschefe ben so costomable,
That of his pains long continuance
Does to his greues a manner allegeaunce.
But to Princes which sat so high alofte,
A sudden fall is most contraryous,
And their disendynge well the more vnlofte,
In their tryumphes y^ they were glorious,
Reccorde I take of king Hostylius,
Which in Rome from his royal stall,
When he sat crowned, most suddenly is fall.
It is remembered of old and not of new,
Of all Rome that he was lord and sire,
The first of kings y^ weared purple hew,
And of that City governed the empire:
Had of Fortune all that him list desire,
Till that he fill in all his regaly,
In to a froward deedly malady.
And of his pains to find alleyeaunce,
To the temples he went on pilgrimage:
His offering made with devout obeysaunce,
Whereby somdele his pains did aswage,
And he was restored of courage,
Felt him self that he did amend,
To common profit again he began entende.
Upon the Albaynes reignyng in his glory,
To great anayle of Rome the city,
Through his Knighthode he had a great victory:
After the which by full great cruelte,
He beraf^e them fraunchyse and lyberte,
And made the^ after through his high renoune,
To be to Rome under subiectyon.
After his conquest the story does devise,
In his noblesse full stately and royal,
He began make a rich sacrifyse
To queme and please for a memorial,
After the rightes ceremonial,
To Jupiter, by full great reverence,
Before his auters with fyres and encence.
But for that he in his inward intent
By cyrcumstaunces of his oblacyon
Was rechelesse found, and also neglygent,
By some froward false affection,
The gods caught an indignacion:
And suddenly discendyng from the heauin,
He was consumpt with a fiery leuin.
His false gods might him not avail,
Jupiter, Saturnus, Mars, nor Venus,
Let all christen defye such raskayle,
For to our faith they be contrarious:
And among godds a thing most outrageous
Is when that princes bleut in their folly,
List erthly things falsely deify.
For unto God is hateful and odyble
A withdrawyng of his reverence,
To magnify things corruptible
with undue honor, with false concupisce^ce:
Wherefore ye prices beware, of high prudence,
Lest god unawarely punyshe your noblesse,
Make you in earth no false God nor gods.
The second Chapter.
How Anchus king of Rome was murdered by Lucinyo by the assent of his wife.

Think on Anchus king of Rome town,
Which was so noble shynynge in glory,
Weared a crown, full famous of renoun,
Next Hostilius as put is in memory,
Wan the palm of many a great victory:
But for all that with a full sharp knyfe,
He murdered was by assentyng of his wife.
He loved her best above each creature,
Considred not her statery nor falsnesse,
Her double meaning under couerture,
Falsely blent this princes worthynesse,
To rob and reave him of his great richesse
Was her labor, with counterfete pleasaunce,
In her intent to bring him to mischaunce.
This anchus had a great affection
Unto his gods to make sacrifyses,
And to augment the religion
Of paganysme, made in sundry wyses,
Through his manhood and circu^spect deuyses,
Upon Latins rebel to his city,
For common profyt he made a great army.
One of their cities called Polotory,
He knightly wan maugre al their might:
And when he had of them full victory,
He abode no longer, but anon forth right
Made all the people in every man's sight,
As prisoners, this romayne champion,
Brought before him bound in to the town.
Eke as I find this Anchus nolde cease
For common profit in his affection,
Their teritories to augment and encrece,
In all the countries about enuyron,
Toward y^ river where Tiber renneth down
At the which place he let edifye
A full strong city, which called is Ostye.
But not withstanding al his worthynesse,
He was deprived, the story tells so,
Of his kingdom and his great richesse,
By a foraine, called Lucinio:
His wife Tarquild assented was thereto,
By whose outrage and gredy couetyse,
Anchus was murdered in full cruel wise.
The.iii. Chapter.
How Lucinio that murdered Anchus was after murdered.

THus fro the whele of fortune he is fall,
Lucinio in Rome is crowned king:
And the Romans after did him call
Tarquin the old, by record of writing.
Which has atayned by fraudulent workyng,
And by his subtle forged eloquence,
Unto the state of royal excellence.
He first ordained in his estate royal,
Turneys, iustes, in Castles and cities,
And other plays called marcial,
With many famous great solempnitees,
Sessions for states and degrees:
This Tarquin eke was first y^ did his pain
In open streets, tauernes to ordain.
Eke to preserve his city out of doubt
If their enemies list them to assail,
He was the first that walled Rome about,
With mighty toures unlikely for to fail:
And had also many a strong battle
With Sabynes, in their rebellion,
And made them subject unto Rome town.
But for he was assented to deprive
Worthy Anchus from his estate royal,
And after that took Tanquylde unto wyue,
Which slough her lord by treason mortal,
God would of right that he should have a fall
The lord will not, which every thing may se,
Suffer murdre long to be secre.
For Lucinio for his great offense
Touching the murdre of king Anchus,
Yslayne was by sudden vyolence,
Of two sheperdes, the story tells thus,
Which of intent were contrarious
Atwene them self by a feigned strife,
To find a way to reave him of his life.
For while the king sat in judgment
Upon their quarrel for to do iustise,
Full suddenly they being of assent,
Fill upon him in full cruel wise.
And with an axe the story does devise,
One of them or any man took head,
On two parties rofe the kings heed.
This thing was done by the procuryng
Of two chyldre, sons to Anchus,
Which were exyled by false compassyng
Of Lucinio, again them most yrous,
To him their presence was so odyous:
But they shope tho they were out of sight,
Their fathers death to avenge if they might
For of nature blood will avenged be,
To recompense the wrong of his kyntede:
In this chapter like as ye may se,
Blodshed for blood thus both did blede,
By which example let princes take heed
How murdre done for supplantacion,
Requires vengeance for his guerdon.
Lenuoye.
This tragedy by clear inspection
Openly declares in substance,
How slaughter of prices causes subuercyon
Of realms, cities put out of ordinance,
Of mortal were long contynuaunce,
Blood by suppla^ting shed of kings twain,
By example showed false murdre to restrain.
The fine declaringe of murdre and false treson,
The deed horrible cries aye vengeance,
To god above to cast his eyes down,
To punish this sin through his puissaunce:
For i^ is mother of myschefe and mischaunce,
Wherefore ye princes do some law ordain
Within your bounds three vices to restrain.
The vice of sclaundre, murdre, and poison,
Where ever these three have acquayntaunce,
They bring in sorrow and desolacyon:
Put at a prefe by new remembranuce,
Of falshede used under fair countenance,
Wherefore ye princes do your busy pain,
Within your bounds these vices to restrain.
God defend this noble regyon,
With these three vices to have alyaunce,
For slaundre first deuoureth high renoun,
And sleeth good fame thrughe false daliaunce,
Harm done, to late follows repentance,
Wherefore ye princes do a law ordain,
To punish their malice falls to^ges to restrain
God has of murdre abhominacyon,
And false poison does to him displesaunce,
There is no pain in comparyson
Condygne to murdre, paysed in balaunce:
Wherefore ye princes make an ordinance
Within your bounds of some preuy pain,
By dae punishing false murdre to restrain.
O noble princes provide of reason
Again these vices to make purueyaunce,
Of rygour show due execucion,
With your labor and hertely instaunce,
Let death be guerdon for their fynall penance:
To warn other by co^straint of their pain,
From these.iii. vices their corages to restrain.
The.iiii. Chapter.
How for the offense done to Lucrece by Tarquyn, was never after crowned king
in Rome.

TOuching this Tarquin of who^ I told
As mine auctour makes mention,
He called was Tarquinius the old,
Which long in Rome had dominacyon:
Till his kynrede and generacyon
For the offense done unto Lucrece,
Caused of kings the names to cece.
For his son which after did succeed,
For his outrages and his extorcions,
And for many an other cruel deed,
For his hateful vsurpacions,
His froward life and false condycions,
Among the people both still and loud,
He called was Tarquinius the proud.
Full obstinat he was in his intent,
Ambicious taccroche great richesse:
Till that fortune wexed impacient
Against him, in all his great noblesse,
Began her snares and her crokes dress,
Thought she would but he kept him well,
All sodaynlie cast him from her whele.
A son he had full vycious as I find,
To all virtue most contrarious:
To be froward it came to him by kind,
And of nature proud and dispitous,
Again the people fell and malycious,
Not loved but dred, for tyrany of right
Is thing most hated in the peoples sight.
This proud Tarquin y^ story is well couth,
Again Lucrece did a great outrage:
Oppressed her beuty in his unbridled youth,
Her troth assaylyng in a furious rage.
For which his father and his lynage
Exyled were, and for this hateful thing
There was never after in Rome crowned kig.
Her body corrupt she clean of heart and thought,
By force assailed was her innocence:
Oppressed her beauty, but her spirit naught,
Her chaste will did none offense,
But entered is in to her conscience
A great remorse, for all her wifely troth,
To sle her self, which was to great a routh.
And for that Bochas remembers pyteouslye
Her deedly sorrow and lamentacion,
Write her complaynt in order ceryouslye,
Which that she made for her oppression:
I follow must and make mention,
After mine auctor percell rehersyng,
Touching her words said in her dyinge,
Albe it so by byddyng of my lord,
Reherced have in my translacion
After Pierms here and there a word,
Of a full doleful declamacion,
By him remembered of entencion,
For her sake men might se and read
What wifely troth was in her womanhed.
And John Bochas list not set a side
But that he would rehearse in sentence,
Her woeful complaynt, and thereupon abide,
Of wrongs done to her innocence:
And though I can not follow his eloquence,
I shall sue the troth of rehersyng,
As in substance theffect of his writing.
THe morrow next after this foul deed,
Lucrece up rose with a full deadly chere,
Out of her face gone was all the read,
And darked were her heavenly eyes clear:
All clad in blake after the manner,
Of thylke folk which in especial,
Be wont to go to feasts funeral.
All her friends being in presence
Husband, Father, with other eke also,
By and by rehersynge in sentence
The cyrcumstaunces of her heartily woe,
And or that I any further go
Under hope my Lord will me supporte,
What that she said I will to you report.
The.v. Chapter.
The grievous complaynt of Lucrece upon her oppression.

FOr as much (quod she) as I Lucrece
Am by the law joined in marriage,
To the mi lord whose love shall a^e increase
Toward the, with all the surplusage
Of wifely troth, to endure all mine age
As humble subject with faithful obeysaunce,
Under thy lordshyp and thy governance.
O Collatyn my Lord and true husband,
Best beloved, of hole affection,
I will no more no quarrel take on hand
Nor in no wise take none accion,
Without that thou list enclyne down
Goodly thine ears to ye^e me audyence,
To that I shall reherce in thy presence.
Injury done or any manner wrong
Again my worship or mine honest,
By the law my sentence is made strong,
It touches you also well as me,
I am so holy yolden unto the,
Thou art my heed who clerly can discern,
Lord and husband my body to govern.
Parciall causes in sothe there may none be
Atwene us twain nor no disseueraunce,
For sote and bitter, joy and aduersyte,
We must them way both in one balaunce:
Counterpayse our sorrows, and our plesaunce,
Entermedle all thing that stant in doubt,
Receive our Fortune as it comes about.
There may atwen us be no meaning double,
But one heart, one will, and one courage,
And as a woman y^ stands now in trouble,
Without polysshyng of any fair langage,
I must disclose to you the great outrage,
Done unto me, and plainly it discure,
Which to redress lies holy in your cure.
For the matter to speak in words plain,
Aright out serched and the troth out found,
As a just cause indifferent to twain,
Toward us both the quarrel does rebounde:
And more strongly your matter for to ground,
Rehearse I will so that ye saufe it vouche,
A mortal wrong which ye and me does touch.
In a castle which called is Collace,
Of which my lord here has y^ governance,
Tarquyn the young came in to that place,
I full disware to make purueyaunce,
Again his coming, or any ordinance,
Tofore not warned of his officers,
Sat vnpuruayed among my chamberers.
Of intent to eschew ydelnesse,
We sat and span wolles soft:
For she of vices is a chief maystresse,
Where she is cherysshed and yset alofte.
But of custom as I have done full often,
I and my women duly as we ought,
To avoid slouthe full busily wrought.
His entryng was meke and debonayre,
Benygne of port, of look and of vysage,
With a pretense of many words fair,
In whose meaning was full great outrage,
His chere contrary unto his courage:
In this wise there he was received,
Whereby alas I falsely was disceyued.
At prime face, as me thought it due
I him received at his in coming,
Rose up mekely, and began him to salve,
As apertayned in all manner thing,
Unto the son of a worthy king:
And truly Tarquine, for which I say, alas,
Me to traysh stood in the same caas.
A kings son should of duty,
Be to women wall and protection,
Preserve and keep them in all surety,
That no man should of no presumpcion
Do them no wrong nor oppression:
Rather dye than se them suffer unright,
Aduertysinge the office of a knight.
But contrary to knighthod he has wrought,
By false outrage done against me,
Wrong ways and crooked means sought,
Of laws twain to break the liberte:
And to deface the auctorite
Of law Civil and natural also,
In my person offendyng both twoe.
First by his subtle compassyng
He began espy thestrys of the place,
And when a bed alone I lay slepyng,
Like a lion, full stern of look and face,
With his left hand my throat he did enbrace:
And in his other held again all law,
Me to oppress, a naked sword ydrawe.
Thus afforsyng my wifely chastyte,
Again knighthod he did this great offense,
My life, my worship, put in perplexite,
Having no might to make resystence,
Me manasyng by deadly violence,
The one of twain, to dye in his intent,
Or to auoutry falsely to consent.
Thus I stood sole atwene death and diffame,
My body corrupt, my spyrite abode clean,
My spousayle broken, and my good name
For ever disclaundred, y^ whilom shone shene:
Yuell fame of custom will always wax grene,
Never dye, the people so them disporte.
The worste of things gladly to report.
Alas, alas, among my sorrows all
This one the most y^ does my heart agryse,
I am not worthy that men me should call
Or have the name in no manner wise,
For the offense which ye have herd deuyse,
To be called in this wretched life,
Of Collatyn from henseforthe the wife.
Mine eyne also be blinded with derknesse,
Only for shame to lift up their sight,
Outher their stremes or beam up dress,
Of the clear heaven to look upon the light:
Nor I may never be of the nombre of right
Of true matrons, among them far ornere
For to be rekened in their kalendere.
Let mine injury, and this mortal crime
Be so punysshed of right and equity,
Without delay of any longer time,
That ever after it may example be
Through all the world, and eke in this cite,
With such a pain thereupon devised,
That all auoutrors may be thereby chastysed.
And if it seem in your opinyon
In this case I should be vnpure,
I will receive just punycion,
And the pain patiently endure:
If it so stand that perauenture,
Ye deem of reason, that am so just and stable,
In this matter that I be culpable.
Her tale told when they long had mused,
On this complaint in their inward sight,
Of troth echone they held her full excused,
Made all behest, with all their full might
To aue^ge her wrong, and Lucrece anonright
Took a sharp knyfe or they might aduert,
And roue her self even through the heart.
The complaynt of Bochas upon the luxury of princes, as by examples of many
diverse myschaunces.
BOchas in heart brennyng hot as fire,
Of very ire and indignacion,
Again tho princes which in their desire
Have fully set their delectacion,
Their felycite, and their affection,
To follow their lusts of false lechery,
Froward spousebreche, and of auoutry,
He writes again them that seeks occasions,
Places of lusts, to have their libertees,
For to fulfill their delectacions,
And for tacco^plysh their great dishonestees,
Deuyse out tauernes in borowes and citees
And sitting there among their company,
After the deed, they boste of their folly.
If any man pyntche at their outrage,
Or them rebuke for their transgressions,
They will answer with froward false langage,
And for their party allege great reasons
First how it longs to their conditions
By right of nature, as it is well couth,
Freely to use lechery in youth.
Affirm also how law of kind is fre,
And so afforce them to sustain their party,
By example of David which y^ took Bersabe,
And for her sake how he slough Vrie:
Did manslaughter, and false auoutry,
For them allegyng, again right and res^,
For Dalida the luxurye of Sampson.
The story also they frowardly apply,
How for a woman prudent Solomon
The lord offendyng did ydolatry:
And in diffence of their opinion,
Rehearse these stories for their excusacion
Of their error, thereby a price to win,
As tofore God lechery were no sin.
They not consydre in their entencion,
Of these stories of every cyrcumstaunce,
First of king David the great contricion:
Nor upon Samson how god took ve^geau^ce,
First how he lost his force and his puissau^ce,
For his offense: they have not this in mind,
Nor how both his eyes were made blind.
Nor their reasons they list not to enclyne
For to conceive in their discrecion,
The spyrite of wisdom heavenly and divine,
Was take away fro prudent Salamon,
In chastising for his transgression:
And some doctors affirm ouermore,
How Solomon repented him full sore.
The play of youth folk calls lechery,
Say it is a game of nature,
And to sustain and bear up their party,
How it sit well, by record of scripture,
Unto every lively creature
That stant in health, and is coragious,
Of very kind to be lecherous.
Vicious report they have in remembrance,
But virtuous thing is far out of mind:
Fleshly lusts and lecherous plesaunce
In their desires be not left behind,
Auauntyng, lying, they can of new out find,
And now a days they hold it curtesy,
Oaths horrible, flateryng, and ribaudy.
In their auice they take little head
Unto the doctrine of noble Scipion,
Which commanded in story as I read,
To Massinissa full famous of renoun,
Not to touch by no condition
Sophonisba fairest of vysage,
But it were by way of marriage.
Though she were borne of the blod royal,
Her youth was set to all honest,
Daughter and heir to noble Hasdruball
Duke of Cartage, the story ye may se:
And for her virtues of feminyte,
She wedded was of birth as she was like,
To king Siphax, which reigned in Affrike.
And for to preue the great lyberte,
Which is in virtue conveyed by reason,
And the false thraldom of dyshoneste,
Of both to make a plain comparison,
After the doctrine of Censorin Caton,
Showed by him to folks commune,
That virtue never is subject to fortune.
Virtue conserueth measure and reason,
Consydereth things before or they befall,
Takes none emprises but of discrecion,
And on prudence foundeth her works al,
Aye to her counsel atte^perau^ce she does call
Warely providing in her self within
The end of things, to fore or she begin.
This was the doctrine taught forth of Cato^
Lecherous lusts to put them under foot,
Grauntyng to virtue the domynacyon,
Pluck up vices branch, crop, and rote:
Fruit of goodness grows up so sote
When it is planted of youth in courage,
It never appalleth in eld of his tarage.
Caton of virtue was a chief offyter,
Preferryng ever common commoditees
Tofore profits that were synguler:
To enhau^ce the common in kingdo^s and citees,
Their wits peysed and their habylytees,
Persons promoting in who^ it was supposed,
That they in virtue were naturalli disposed.
Manlye in heart he was aye to sustene,
Indifferent troth, and all justice:
Fleshly delytes of folk that were unclean,
He was aye ready by rygour to chastyce.
And set laws in full prudent wise
For to punysh flaterours and lechours,
And such as were open auoutrours.
He had of women none opinion
With them to deal, for lust nor for beauty,
But if it were for procreacion,
So stable he was found in his degree:
The book redyng of immortalyte
Which Plato made, the troth well sought,
Therein concludyng how souls dye naught,
But lives ever in joy or in pain,
Thus wrote Plato in his original.
Men may the body by death full well constrain,
But the soul aye abides immortal,
For which this Caton steadfast as a wall,
For common profit to dye was not aferd,
When he him self slew with a naked sword.
But to fortune before his death he said:
O thou princes of worldly goods vain,
To thy flateries I never did abrayde,
Thy favor is so false and uncertain,
That never I faught no fraunchise to atain,
As for my self no perciall syngulerte,
But all for profit touching the comonte.
Again Caesar I made resystence,
To conquer fredome to me, and to the town,
Freely to eschew his mortal vyolence,
This world dispising in mine opinion,
Our fraunchise thralled under subjection
Justly forsakyng the varyaunce of this life,
My soul conveyed to be contemplatyse.
This philosopher this prudent old Caton
Tendering in heart common comodytees,
Tofore his death wrote of compassyon
To them that sat in royal dignitees,
Which had of virtue lost the libertees,
Princes be sechyng that were luxurous,
To take ensample, and follow king Drusus.
The which Drusus by succession,
Was heir to Augustus and next him emperor
Set all in virtue his affection,
And it to cherysshe did holy his labor:
To lust unlawful he never gave favor,
And touching love, during al his life,
He never had lust, but only to his wife.
And in his palayes amyd of his royal se,
Of noble princes dwelling in Rome town,
He asked was for all his dignyte,
What manner courage of temptacyon,
Or what feruence or delectacion
Within him self he had of loves play,
Sole by his wife when he a bed lay.
And like a prince fulfilled of hye nobles,
Answered again with sobre countenance,
Touching such lust as follows fleshlynes,
Like as nature me put in governance,
In one alone is set al my plesaunce:
For with none other for no concupiscence,
Save with my wife I never did offense.
Princes echone follow not the trace
Of noble Drusus, as ye shall understand.
For some have stand all in another case,
Such as can hold two or three in hand,
Now here, now there, as botes come to land:
Not consydring their degrees nor disauayle,
When newfangylnes blows in their sail.
Eke Bochas writes, so^e prices have be found
which viciously have done their busy pain
Virtuous women by flatery to confound,
And tender maidens to bring in a train,
Such manaces and torments to ordain,
The^ to transform from their perseuerau^ce
And interrupt their virginal constaunce.
But of such folk that give no force of shame,
Nor dread God, such traynes to deuyse,
Husbandmen forsooth are most to blame,
with foraine women to trespace in such wise:
I trow their wives the^ may enough suffice,
For many be feeble their dettes for to quite,
Though they in cha^ige the^ self falsely delight.
Some affyrine for them self allegyng,
To such outrage that they have license
Freely of nature to use their own thing,
And in such case to no wight do offense:
But froward is their error in sentence,
Fro bond of wedlock when they be so unstable,
And tofore God most hateful and da^pnable.
For she that is through her hye noblesse,
Named of clerks which clerly can concern,
Daughter of God, Lady and princess,
Reason called to gyde folk and govern,
Atwene good and yuell justly to discern,
She has departed plainly to conclude,
The life of man from life of beasts rude.
This Lady reason since ago full yore
Gave unto man wit and discrecion,
Taught him also by her souerain lore,
Twene vice and virtue a great division:
And that he should in his eleccion
Unto all virtue, naturally obey,
And in contrary al vicious life werrey.
And to enprinte in his memorial,
How of luxury the great dishoneste
Dissourme a man, and make him bestyal,
And disfigure, of what estate he be:
For when that reason of high or low degree
Is fled away, folk may affirm than
He is like a beast, rather than a man.
wherefore let princes that have been defectife,
To follow their lusts of sensualite,
Shape them by reason for to amend their life,
And to conserve and keep their chastyte,
Both of virgins and wifely honest:
And to punyshe al tho that list labor,
The honest fame of women to devour.
For when a lechour by force, or by maistrye,
Defouled has of virgynes the clennesse,
Widows oppressed, and by auoutry
Assailed wives that stand in stablenesse,
who may tha^ their sclau^drous harm redres,
Wha^ their good name is hurt by such report?
For fame lost ones can never have his resort
A thief may rob a man of his riches,
And by some mean make restitucion:
And some men may disherite and oppress
A poor man from his possession,
And after make satisfaccion:
But no man may restore in no degree,
A maiden robbed of her virginite.
A man may also beat a castle down,
And build it after more freshly to the sight,
Exyle a man out of a regyon,
And him revoke where it be wrong or right:
But no man has the power nor the might,
For to restore the palayes virginal
Of chastyte, when broken is the wall.
Men may also put out of seruise
And officers remeue from their place,
And at a day when fortune list deuyse,
They may again restored be to grace:
But there is nouther time set nor space.
Nor never in story nouther read nor seyne,
That maydenhed lost recured was again.
For which men should have a conscience,
Rewe in their heart and repent sore,
And have remorse in their great offense
To ravish thing, which they may not restore:
For it is said, and has been said full yore,
The emeraud grene of perfyte chastyte,
Stolen ones away may not recured be.
And hard it is to rauysshe a treasour
Which of nature is not recuperable,
Lordshyp may not of king nor emperor
Refourme a thing which is not reformable,
Rust of dyffame which is not seperable,
And maydenhed lost of new or yore,
No man alive may it again restore.
Romans old through their patience,
Suffered tyrauntes in their tyrannies
And in their cities to do great vyolence,
The people to oppres with their robberyes:
But to punyshe they set strayte espyes,
On false auoutrours, as it is well couth,
Widows to ravish and mayde^s in their youth.
Upon this matter the story bears witness,
Touching the exyle of king Tarquinius,
Before rehearsed by writing full express:
The hateful death of Apius Claudius,
For his trespase done to Virginius,
The judgments rehearsed and the pain,
And fro their office deprived both twain.
Was not the city whylom desolate
Of Sychemites for the ribaudry
Of one Sichem which began a great debate,
To have accomplyshed his foul lechery,
When young Dyna as books specifye,
Went rechelesly walkyng up and down,
To se the maidens of that royal town?
But when Sychem this Dyna did espy,
Sole by her self, walk in the city,
He begane anon assail her by maystry,
And for to aforce her virgynyte,
Because she had no leyser for to fle:
Whose great offense and transgressyon,
The city brought unto destruccyon.
Her father Jacob and holy her kynrede,
Again this Sichem began inwardly disdain:
When the fury of Mars was most to dread,
To be venged they did their busy pain:
And specially her worthy brethern twain,
Fill on the cite, Symeon, and Leuy,
To avenge their suster, and stroy it finally.
So mortally they began with them strive
with their swords, ground sharp, and kene,
Of male children they left none alive,
They were so ve^geable in their furyous tene:
The Sychemytes might not sustene
That day against them to stand at defense,
So importable was their violence.
For where that God list punish a man of right
By mortal sword, farwell al resistance:
Wha^ grace fails force goth away and might,
Febleth of princes the magnifycence,
Changes their power into impotence,
Reuerseth the kings their stately regaly,
Example in Sichem for his false auoutry.
It was an hard dreadful punycion
That one princes trespass in lecherye,
Caused before God that all a regyon
Distroyed was without remedy:
This story is told for to exemplify
When noble princes to women them submit,
Grace and al favor anon does from the^ flyt.
Of this matter what should I write more
In Genesis the resydue ye may read,
The death of Sichem and of king Hemore,
And how their kingdom distroyed was in deed
Of Sychemites, lo here y^ final mede
Of lechery and of his false plesaunce,
Which many a realm has brought to myschaunce.
What should I eft reherce again or write
The false auoutry of Paris and Helayne?
Their woeful fate Gu^do did endyte,
Poets echone eke did their busy pain,
To declare how only by these twain
The worthy blood, for short conclusyon,
Of Troy and Greece came to distruccion*
But often it falls that much abundaunce
Of worldli good, with great ease and riches,
In folk that set all holy their plesaunce
To follow their lusts, and froward wylfulnes,
Has caused in lands great mischef and distres:
When vicious life their corages did enco^bre,
Distroied kingdoms, and people out of nombre
For when the people through falls obstinacy
Is indurate to amend them and correct,
And will not turn them from their lechery,
But aye be ready their souls to enfecte:
And unto purpose my style I will dyrect,
To examplify how Gabaa the town,
Was for his sins brought to confusion.
Whylom this people called Gabanytes
From Benjamin descended in their line,
Were aye disposed to follow their delytes:
And of custom their wits did enclyne
In worldly plenty to flour and to shine,
And dempt always to them it was most due,
Of wylfulnes their lusts for to sue.
In lechery was set al their plesaunce,
And in that vice they lad most their life:
Whereby they were brought unto mischau^ce,
And many slain by full mortal strife,
When the Leuyte came forby with his wife,
Full excellent of fetures and beauty,
And took his lodging within the great cite.
He was full old, and she was inly fair,
He impotent, and she but tender of age,
Through Gabaa making their repair,
The cytesyns of importune rage,
Showing the fury of their great outrage,
So long that night her beauty did assayl,
Till life and brethe atones did her fail.
Contagious the sclaundre and the diffame,
In Judicum the story ye may read:
Which to reherce is a manner shame,
To here the abusyon of that foul deed,
And how ye Leuite a morrow began take heed,
With piteous chere, and saw his young wife,
Tofore the gate deprived of her life.
He hent her up and laid her on his ass,
To noise this crime upon every side,
Thought in such case he might do no less,
Took a sharp sword, and list no longer abide,
On twelve parts he began her to divide:
And to each tribe of Jacob he has sent,
A certain part, to se their judgment.
Which thing to them was hateful and terrible,
And in their ^ight full abomynable,
And in all haste lykely and possible,
All of one will and one courage stable,
On Gabaonytes for to be vengable,
They gathered have shortly to conclude,
Tassayle that town, a full great multitude.
when they first met atwen the^ thus it stood,
The twelve tribes were twice put to flyghte
On either party great quantity of blood
was shed among them in that mortal fight:
For sixty thousand (who that co^pt a right)
Were slain there, the story will not lie,
To avenge the sclaundre of false auoutry.
Lo here the guerdon of the froward fyres
In lecherons folk, yt will not staunched be,
That brent so hot through bestiall desires,
In Gabaa the mighty strong cite:
Which was distroyed for his iniquite,
And almost brought of Benjamin the line,
Through his offense to eternal ruin.
Eke for his fervent dronken lechery,
Holophernes by Judith lost his head:
And al his host and al his chiualry
Left the field, and fled away for dread,
And he lay bathed in his blood al read,
Thus through their vice if it be well sought,
Full many a price has be brought to naught.
These said stories ought enough suffyse,
If men would consydre and take heed,
The great vengaunces in many sundry wise
Which God has take for this sin in deed,
As in their books they may behold and read:
Warnynges before full often put at prefe,
How they them self shall save fro mischefe.
Lenuoye.
This tragedy yeueth us great warnig
Biclere examples of manifold reso^,
How many a prince for their (...)uing
And many rych royal mighty town,
Many a city and many a region,
Have been ever since full notable infamous,
For sin of princes that were lecherous.
The chosen of god David the worthyking,
Prophet of prophets most souerain of reno^,
On Bersabe for a sudden lokyng,
To slay Vrye caught occasyon,
For which he suffered great punicion:
Chastysed of god, he and all his house:
For cause only that he was lecherous.
Great repentance he had and great sorowing,
And made psalms of great contricion,
with woeful tears and manyfolde weeping,
To make a sheth for his transgression:
yeuing to princes full clear dyrection,
For to eschew the flattery odious
And the false fraud of women lecherous.
Where was there ever of science or conning
So renomed as was king Solomon?
yet women made him through false flatering
To foraine gods done oblacion,
Which clipsed his honor and brought his fame down,
That was whilom most virtuous,
Till he through women fyl to be lecherous.
Is it not eke remembered by writing
Of Israel how the chief champion
Which gods people had in his leadyng,
I mean the famous mighty strong Sa^pson,
That through his force torent the lion?
But Dilada with tears plentuous,
His grace bereft him, and made him lecherous
Sichem was slain eke for the rauyshyng
Of young Dyna, as made is mention:
His father Hemor brought to his endyng,
Lost his richesse in that discencion,
And his kingdom brought to distruccion:
Lo here the end of princes vicious,
Which them dispose for to be lecherous.
It is in earth one the most perylous thing,
A prince to be of his condition
E^^emynate, his wits enclynyng
By false desires of fleshly mocion
To put him self under subieccion,
And thral reso^, his tresour most precious
To the unlawful lusts hateful and lecherous.
This is the sentence full plainly in menyng,
Where women have the dominacion
To hold the rain, their hokes out castyng,
That sensuality has jurisdiction,
To enter on reason by false intrusion,
War against virtue most contagious,
To be vaynquished, of lusts lecherous.
It takes fro men their clerenes of seeing,
Causes great sickness and corruption:
And to all virtue it is greatest hyndryng,
Makes men seem old as by inspection,
Appalleth their mind and disposition,
Shorteth their life, thing dreadful and piteous,
When they dispose them to be lecherous.
Noble princes in your ymaginyng
Conceive of women the false deception,
Namely of them that love but for winnyng,
And labor aye for your possession:
Whose sugared flattery is false collusion,
Like to Sirens, with voice melodious
Enoynt your ears to make you lecherous.
The.vi. Chapter.
How Cambyses assentyng to the murder of his brother Mergus, at the last slough
him self.

AFter the death of mighty king Cirus,
Next came his son called Cambises,
Heir by succession, full victorious,
Which tofore Bochas put him self in prees,
And began his complaynt, this is doubtless,
That they of Egypt in many uncouth wise,
To sundry Gods did sacrifice.
First unto Apis they did Sacrifice,
Called Serapis their greatest god of all,
Raygnyng in Egypt most of excellence,
And god of gods foles did him call:
And of his nobles thus it is befall,
Slain by his brother, which is a wonder,
Severed on pieces, and full far east asunder.
And they of Egypt made their ordinance,
Upon pain of death in their statute old,
A god to call him, and do their observance
Within his temple, like as they were hold:
Whereof Cambises tofore as I you told,
All the temples of that region
Cast him by force for to throw down.
The temple of Jupiter to rob it by rauyne,
Called Hammon, without exception
His knights sent to bring it to ruin,
But they echoue for their presumption,
With sudden leuin were smit and beat down:
Whereof Cambises in Jsye tho raygnyng,
Had this dream as he lay slepyng.
He drempt his brother yt called was Mergus
Should in the kingdom after him succeed,
Whereof in heart he waxt so envious,
That he purposed of rancour and hatrede
By some mean to make his sides blede:
And that his purpose should take avail,
A magicien he took to his counsel.
And he was hold a full great Philosopher,
Called Comares, full sleyghty and cunnyng:
To who^ Cambises made a full large profer,
Of gold and treasure, to make him assentyng
To execute this horrible thing,
And that he would in most cruel wise,
The murder of Mergus to co^pas and devise.
And while Cambises ordained this treason
To slay Mergus his own brother dear,
God from above cast his eyes down
Him to punish in full cruel manner:
For he waxed wode who so list to lere,
Caught a sword, and roue his thigh on twain
And suddenly he dyed for the pain.
For two causes god took on him vengeance,
As mine auctour Bochas does express,
For his presumptuous and false disobeysaunce,
Spoiling the gods of their great riches:
And for the froward great unkindness
To give assent to the contagious caas,
When y^ Mergus his brother murdered was.
The death of whom was chief occasion
Of full great war, strives, and debate,
Eke fynall cause why all the region
Of mighty Perce, stood disconsolate:
For heir was none of high nor low estate,
By title of right, through his unhappy chance
To be their king and have the governance.
For the magycien called Comares,
Which ^lue Mergus as ye have herd expres,
Took his brother called Dropastes,
And made him king, the story bears witness:
Because that he resembled in likeness
Unto Mergus, of face and of stature,
To crown him king therefore he did his cure
The death of Mergus outward was not know
Nor plainly published in that region,
His body buried, and cast in earth low,
Of whom the murder, and fraudulent treason,
The piteous slaughter wrought by collusion,
And all the manner by process was espied,
So openly, it might not be denied.
And in what wise the noise began out sprede
Touching this murder, odyous for to here,
When that Oropastes occupted in deed
The crown of Perce, the story does us lere,
There was a prince full notable and entere,
Called Hostanes that began his wit apply,
Of high prudence this murder out to espy.
While that Oropastes under a false pretense
Of Perciens was received for king,
The said prince did his diligence
By inquisition to have knowlegyng,
By what ingyne, or by what sleyghty thing,
The said Oropastes caught occasion,
Instead of Mergus, to occupy the croun.
On this matter he had a conjecture,
That his title was neither whole ne clear:
The troth to try he did his busy cure,
And to search out wholly the manner,
He sought so far, that he came right nere,
And in this case let for no sloth,
Till that he had found out the very troth.
The case was thus plainly to termine,
He had a daughter full fair of her vysage,
Which of the king was chiefest concubine,
By whom he thought to catch advantage,
And unto her he has sent his message,
Secretly to enquire how it stood,
Where yt the king were come of Cyrus blood.
And bade that she should secretly take heed,
While that he slept to do her busy pain,
With her hands for to feel his head,
And to grope after both his ears twain:
And if it fill, there is no more to said,
Upon his head that she none ears found,
To tell her father of troth as she was bound.
This mighty prince Hostanes knew well,
Right as it is recorded by scripture,
Touching this case how it stood every dele,
How king Cambyses of sudden adventure,
By his live for a forfeyture
Made of Oropastes, the story says not nay,
Both his two ears to be cut away.
And hereupon to be certified,
He was desierous to have full knowlegyng,
Which by his daughter when it was espied,
Upon a night liyng by the king,
Gropyng his head as he lay slapyng:
Full subtly felt and took good head,
How he none ears had upon his heed.
And to her father anon she has declared
The secrenes of this adventure,
And for no fear ne dread he has not spared,
How that it stood plainly to discure:
And first of all he did his busy cure,
All the princes of Perce land yfere,
To counsel call to entreat of this mattere.
And when they were assembled euerychone,
Of Oropastes he told them all the chance:
And how yt Mergus was murdered yore ago^e
As here tofore is put in remembrance:
Whereupon to set an ordinance,
And to redress these wrongs done toforne,
Of Perce land were seven princes sworn.
Of one assent in their intencion,
By bond of oath they made their assurance,
And a full secret communicacion,
To put Oropastes from his royal puissaunce,
Which had all Perce under his governance
By a full false pretense of heritage,
For he was like to Mergus of vysage.
These seven princes of which tofore I told,
All of one heart, and by their oath ybounde,
Prudent, and manly, and of years old,
Have sought a time Oropastes to confound:
And with their swerdes sharp whet and ground,
Under covert in their apparayle,
Came of intent Oropastes to assail.
And in the palace whom ever that they met,
Or again them made resistance,
All of accord they fiercely on him set
But the magicien y^ was there in their presence
Came against them by sturdye vyolence,
And at the encountregan the^ so constrayne,
That of the princes they have slain twain.
But finally the other princes five,
When that they saw their two feres blede,
In all the palace they left none alive,
And king Oropastes quaking in his dread,
Full unawarely or that he took head,
Was slain, there guerdoned for all his might,
Of pretense kings yt reign and have no right.
The.vii. Chapter.
How Dary obteynyng the kingdom of Perce by sleyght, ended with shame.

AFter the death of these Magicyens,
Was left no king to have y^ governance,
Nor for to rule the land of Perciens,
Save five princes full famous of puissaunce:
Which made a statute and an ordinance,
Of one accord by record of writing,
Thereon concluding who should be chose king.
Their sort, their hap, and all their adventure
Was give to fortune of this eleccion,
And thus the prince the crown shall recure
Among these five, by their conuencion,
For to govern the mighty regyon,
And in that land to reign and contune,
Like as the favor list ordeyn of fortune.
This was the statute, upon a morning
All atones erly for to ride
Atwene Aurora and Phoebus vprisyng,
Up to a hill to houe and to abide,
All rancour and dyscorde set aside,
Whose horse among them was first herd neying,
Without grutching, should be crowned king.
Upon this matter what should I ledger tarry?
Hereon was made an oath in sykernesse,
Among these princes one which was called Da
Aprince of Perce excellyng of noblesse,
Which had a servant y^ story bears witnessery
That kept his horse, and thought in very deed
His lord he would prefer at such a need.
The said servant full sleyghtly in werkyng,
His dilygence list nothing to spare,
The day to fore set of their metynge,
At a place, smothe, plain, and bare,
His lords horse, he made leap a mare:
And on the morrow when the princes met,
On horsbacke there his lord he set.
And when the horse thither came again,
Nature anon afforced his courage,
To neye loud upon the same plain
Where as the mare had used her passage:
Kind in such case had great advantage,
By which sleyght plainly to rehearse,
The said Dary was crowned kig of Perce.
The princes all like their conuencion,
Or Phoebus showed his fiery beams bright,
Without strife or contradiccion
From their horse suddenly alyght:
And unto Dary as lowly as they might,
Said in greek or they up rose,
Policromtudo Basileos
Which is in latin to spoke in words plain,
And in english by expowning of scripture
After the Greek, as much for to said,
As long time might the king endure
And live in health with good adventure,
By the grace and favor of fortune,
Upon all Perce to reign and contune.
Who will consydre every cyrcumstaunce,
It is a marvel not grounded on prudence,
By such sleyght a king to have governance,
Through title or claim as of just evidence,
So to be raised to kyngly excellence:
But when fortune favors such assay,
Till y^ she change there can no man say nay.
Thus was king Dary borne of low lineage,
Set up by sleyght in estate honorable,
Thought y^ he would for his advantage,
To make his kingdom and his reign stable,
Wed such a wife as to him was most able:
Demyng of troth his claim were well amended,
Of Cirus line if she were disce^ded.
To wede such one was all his couetyse,
Stable for to reign upon the Perciens,
And as I find, in full cruel wise
By the counsel of false magicyens,
A werre he began upon the Egipciens,
Eke folily he began for to werrey
Them of Athenes, which list him not obey.
And as mine auctor makes rehersayle,
He for his pride and false presumpcion,
Was discomfyted twyes in battle:
And never after, as made is mencyon,
He was not had in reputacyon
Among Perciens, so began his honor fade,
With sleyght he began, with shame an end he made.
The.viii. Chapter.
How Corolian by Romans exiled began war against them, and how after they
sent out his mother withother for peace: which had, they eft him exiled, and
after was slain.

AFter this Dary, as I rehearce can,
And mine auctour likes to conclude,
To John Bochas came Corolian,
The most woeful of that multitude:
Which began complain upon the ingratitude
Of the Romans, how they whilom in deed
Exiled his person of rancour and hatrede.
Which in his time would never ceace
Through his noblesse and his high renoun,
Their common profit to augment and encrece,
And for to bring to their subjection
Many a city, and many a noble town,
Yet they agaynward for all his chyualry,
Him exiled of malice and envy.
But when this Marcus called Corolian,
Saw of Romans the great unkindness,
Toward a country that called was Tuskan
Of high disdain anon he did him dress:
And them entreated of manly fell prowes,
To gyn a war sithe they so manly be,
Through his co^ueiyng, again Rome y^ city.
And for to put them more in assurance
To have victory through their high renoun,
He told them plainly of a great distaunce
Of a false strife, and a discencion
That was of new fall in Rome town:
Wherefore they should (if it be provided)
Co^quere the^ lightly because they were divided
By their assent they made a great army,
With stuff for war richely apparayled,
Pyght his tents tofore that great city,
And in the field stood proudly battayled:
But the hearts of Romans have the^ failed,
And durst not pass the gates of their town,
There was among the^ so great division.
Their city stood that time destitute,
With fear supprised for lack of governance,
Them to defend they found no refute,
So far enfeblished was their old puissau^ce
For ever gladly where strife and variaunce
In any kingdom have an enteresse,
Touching a defense, adue all hardiness.
Within them self they stood at debate,
Before their enemies ready for to assail,
Comfort was none in high nor low estate,
For where discord is what avails cou^sail?
Their fone without, within them self battle
Brought in alas, to their confusion,
By the false serpent of dissencion.
But at the last afforced and constrained,
They were coact after peace to seek,
The case stood so, of need they were payned
Maugre their might their hearts for to meke:
And their mischefe more to encrese and eke,
In augmentyng of their cruel fates,
They saw their enmies armed at their gates
They sent out first priests of the town,
With their enemies for to entrete of pees,
With humble profers, and low subjection:
But Corolian this is doubtless,
Again the Romans was so merciles
That grace none might in his heart mine,
To their request his ears to enclyne.
Than the Romans, the story tell can,
To Venturia made their prayere
Which was the mother of Corolian,
And to Volumnia his faithful wife entere,
That they should both go in fere
Unto that prince, besechyng at the lest
Benignly to hear their request.
His mother first full prudently abrayde,
Unto her son making this question,
At their metyng to him thus she said:
Shall I (quod she) for short conclusion,
Of faithful heart and true affection,
To thy presence, declare finally,
Be now received as mother or enemy?
After thine answer I must my self dispose
And my wits specially apply
Cause of my coming clearly to unclose,
And tell the effect of mine ambassatry:
And my speech so govern and gye,
After I am received to thy grace,
My self declaryng if I have time and space.
For like thy mother if thou receive me,
And me accept unto thy presence,
I must thereafter so governed be
To tell my tale plainly in sentence,
So that thou give me friendly audience:
And if I be not received in such wise,
More strongly my tale I must devise.
This noble prince, this Corolian,
When that he heard his mother thus complain
Full like a lord and a knyghtly man,
Began her embrace in his arms twain,
In lowly wise, there is no more to said,
Save like a son of due and right
To her he said full like a manly knight:
Madame (quod he) be it to your pleasaunce
To hear my conceyt, as in this matere,
With faithful heart and humble attendaunce
I you receive as for my mother dear:
But and ye like benyngly to here,
The ingratitude done in most cruel wise
To me of Romans, I purpose to chastise.
Ah son (quod she) touching their offense
Done to thy nobles, and their great outrage,
They shall by menes their trespace recompense,
And think thou art borne of their lineage,
And suffer yt mercy thy rigor may assuage:
And think of nature thou may not well wtsay
Thing for the which thy mother does pray.
Thou shall not close thine entrayles of pity
To the requests of me and of thy wife,
Nor gynne a war again thy country
To stroy thy line by new mortal strife,
Thy children and me to make us lose our life:
Wey in balaunce to Romans thy hatred,
Against the love of me and of thy kynred.
Send home again thy strange soldiers
Which ben so ready y^ Romans blood to shede,
Let stand in peace our walls and our towers,
Suffer thy grace thy rancour to excede,
So that thy pity may put away all dread:
And condiscende to receive for hostage,
Me to be pledge for their great outrage.
Behold the womb in which thou were borne,
And se also my naked sides twain,
By which thou were fostred here toforne,
If there were lack thou would cry and plain:
Remember thereon and at me not disdain,
But unto mercy receive this city,
At the request here of thy wife and me.
Whilom my milk thy chrishing was and fode
To stynt thy cry when thou did weep,
Their sote drops full wholesome were and good
Thy tender youth for to preserve and keep:
And like a mother to bring the a sleep,
I woke full often to the I was so kind,
Wherefore dear son on my request have mind.
If that thou list this city now torment,
Their demerites by rygour recompense,
Punyshe me for them, and I will assent
To bear the gylt of their great offense:
But dear son let thy magnificence
Suffer of knighthode yt mercy may in deed,
Attemper thy rygour or thou to dome proceed
Suffer Romans to live in quiet,
Grant the^ peace again their great outrage
Some drope of pity let in thine heart flete,
And think thou art borne of their lineage:
Look upon them with merciful vysage,
Which offer them selfs as they shall fulfill,
Their life, their death, all wholly at thy will.
Remember of nature how that the lion
Set aside his rage and his wodenes
To them that mekely before him fall down,
His royal kind will do them no duresse,
To exemplify to knyghtly noblesse,
with rigorous swerd thou shall no more manace
Them that be lowly yelden unto thy grace.
And when this prince, this Corolian,
Had heard all that his mother list to said,
He goes to her in all the haste he can,
Besprent with tears y^ on his chekes rain,
And her embraced with his arms twain,
And said mother there may be no lettyng,
Me hole of heart to grant your askyng.
The siege he made for to avoid away,
And to repair home to their country,
And with his mother and wife he was yt day
With great gladness and solemnity,
Anon received into that city:
Like as fortune him never would have failed,
But she fone after of new has him assailed.
The gery Romans, stormy, and unstable,
Which never in one still could abide,
Against this prince most knyghtly and notable,
For to conspyre of new they began provide:
And banished him to Tuskan there beside,
Where he was slain within a little space,
For he the Romans before took to grace.
The.ix. Chapter.
How Melciades Duke of Athens with small nombre vanquished.vi. C.M. Percie^s
and after by his comonte that aye of custom desires a chaung of princes new,
he was chayned in prison, and so dyed.

Among other that put them self in prees.
For too bewail their grievous heaviness,
Came of Athens Duke Melciades,
which through his manhod and high prowess,
And through his knightly renomed noblesse,
Like as auctours his triumphs list co^me^d,
Faught many a battle his city to defend.
And of victories, as it is compyled,
For common profyt of that noble town,
Faught with a tyrant yt was tofore exiled
Called Hippias, which by false treason
Had to king Dary made a suggestion
Upon Athens in all the have he might,
To raise al Perce again the town to fight,
Six hundred.M. accounted was the no^bre
Of Perciens armed in plate and maile.
Them of Athenes by force to encombre,
Echone assembled them proudly to assail:
But this Duke for nothing would fail
Melciades, but knightly took his place,
With ten thousand he met him in the face.
For both he was manly and right wise,
And of his hands proved a full good knight,
Set upon them with so prudent auyse,
That they of Perce for all their great might,
Were four times put unto the flight
By thylke Duke, if I shall not feign,
And by the noblesse of other knyghts twain.
Themystocles ycalled was the tone,
Which of his hand as auctours list discryue
Was in a field proved on his fone,
The manlyest knight in his time alive.
Which thylke day so proudly did strive,
Again the^ of Perce, and such a slaughter make
That finally the field they have forsake.
Cynegirus a knight eke of that town
The same day through his chyualry,
With blody sword, as he went up and down,
without nombre in his melancoly
Slough Perciens, books specify:
That for the time they no refute can,
Save to their ships for dread of death they ran.
And there he wrought a strange marueyle
As writes Bochas, affyrmyng it certain:
The greatest ship that bare largest sail
with his righthand he began it so restrain,
Like as it had be fastened with a chain,
Maugre Perciens which did the^ sore grieve
That by no craft they could it not meue.
But when that they none other refute wist,
Freely to escape out of his daungere,
Till they his right hand cut of by the wrist:
But with his left hand he began approach near,
And held it still, an uncouth thing to hear,
That he had force so great a ship to let,
But than alas his left hand of they smet.
Yet maugre the^ when he their malice sees,
All were it so that he had lost each hand,
The ship he still held with his teeth
That they ne might depart from the land,
Like as their vessel had fall upon sand:
Caused that day, mine auctour does reherce,
Two hundred.M. were slain of the^ of perce.
And when this singular mighty champion
Cinegirus most uncouth of courage
Had done this marvel, as made is mention,
Of very anguish he fill into a rage,
Like a be furious and savage
Ran about, alas for lack of mind,
In Bochas book no more of him I find.
But in this process after I beheld
Aye how that fortune can her friends fail,
For Melciades leder of that field
And governor of all that great battle,
Causing victory as made is rehersayl,
yet his people of malice and of ire
Again his nobles, falsely began conspire.
They of Athenes set him in prison,
And in chains mightily him bound:
Unkindly they yaue him this guerdon
For all the knighthod they in him found,
Yet had he suffered many a mortal wound
In their diffence, and for their libertees,
To save their lives, their town, and countrees.
This was the end of duke Melciades,
Through y^ constreynt of his strong bonds,
Eke they exyled the knight Themystocles
Out of their town to live in strange lo^des,
That was so worthy proved of his hondes,
To show the change and mutabylite
Found in fortune, and every comonte.
Lenuoye.
THe stormy trust of every comonte
Their gery corages and trobled co^staunce,
In this tragedy men may behold and se:
Now up, now down, as fortune cast her chance
For they of custom have joy and most plesau^ce,
In their desires unsteadfast and untrue,
To se each day a change of princes new.
Corolyan of Rome, a chief city,
Was there protector through his mighty pusau^ce,
Venquisshed their enemies, set the^ in suerte,
Brought in rebels to their obeysaunce:
But they agaynwarde of wylfull variaunce
Banysshed him twyse, and no cause knew
Save for to se a change of princes new.
The knyghtly noblesse, the magnanymyte,
The polyce, the prudent governance
Of Melciades duke of the country
Where yt Athens is chief town in substance,
When he their common began most to auaunce,
The more unkindly in honor yt they grew,
Most they were busy to change him for a new.
Themystocles having the soueraynte
Of knights all that bare spear or lance,
During his time, I take no more on me,
For co^parisons do often time great greuaunce:
Six hundred thousand he put to vttraunce,
Unto Athens never found untrue,
Yet they conspyred his exyle for a new.
What thing may here flour in felycite
Or stand stable by long contynuaunce?
In high estates outher in low degree,
Now flow, now ebb, now joy now mischau^ce,
After as fortune holds the balance,
And specially false feyning and untrue,
Commons desire a change of princes new.
Noble princes in your prosperity
On sudden chaunges set your remembrance,
Fresshnesse of flowers, of branches y^ beauty,
Have aye on change a tre^blyng attendaunce:
In trust of commons is no perseueraunce,
As winter and somer be diverse of their hew,
So be they diverse in change of princes n^w.
The.x. Chapter.
How Xerxses king of Perce for his rauyne and couetyse was dismembered in to
small pieces.

ANd tofore Bochas pitously weeping
For to declare his deedly heaviness,
Came Xerxses next of Perce king,
And began compain his dole and his distress:
Which in three things, y^ story bears witness
And as the cronycle clerly can us tell,
All other princes in earth he did excel.
In high estate was none so great as he,
Neither in riches, nor worldly habundau^ce,
Nor none that time of so great dygnite,
For as it is put in remembrance
He had all Perce under his obeysaunce:
Nor never prince as auctours do conclude,
Hosteyed attones with such a multitude.
Space of five year he had his ordinance,
Seven hundred thousa^de people he did raise:
Dempt of pride again his great puissaunce
None erthly power might counterpayse:
But some auctors allow him not nor praise,
Because that he people to encombre,
Set all his trust to co^quere with great nombre.
But manly princes have this opynion,
In multitude stands not victory,
For knightly prowess of every champion
Which manly cast the^ in arms to have victory,
Enprynted has fix in his memory,
Marciall tryumphes god ne does not show,
In nombre great, no rather than in few.
This said Xerxses by record of auctours,
Had also, in chronicles as I read,
Three hundred thousand strange soudeours,
Without other that were of Perce and Mede:
Which began the earth for to cure and sprede,
Dried ryuers that they did attain,
Karfe down hills, and made valeys plain.
This was chief conceyte of his fantasies,
To have all earth under subieccion:
Thought his power raught above the skies,
Of surquedy and false presumpcion:
For as he demeth in his opynion
How in his power plainly that it lay,
Fro god of heuin the heuyn to take away.
But thylke lord yt can the meke enhaunce,
And from their sees the proud put down,
And namely them yt have no remembrance
To aduertyse of wisdom and of reason,
To know the lord most mighty of renoune,
The lord of lords which plainly to compyle,
Will suffer tyrauntes to reign but a while.
And one the maruayle that ever I did read
Greatest, and uncouth plainly unto me
Is how Xerxses king of Perce and Mecde
For to show a special syngulerte,
Out of Asie over the great se
As says mine autour, who^ I dare allege,
In to Europe made a mighty bridge.
Some men peraue^ture will there at disdain,
And say it is a maruayle not credyble,
Yet craft in case to such thing may attain,
Which by nature seems an impossyble:
And as to me, it is a thing odyble
Things to inpugne autentyke and old,
Which notable clerks in their days told.
These new men that have but little seyne
Nouther expert in craft nor in nature,
For lack of reason hold all such thing vein
Though that it be remembered in scripture:
For every maruayle and every adventure
Is strange to him, as I reherce can
That lacks ye cause whereof ye ground began.
This said Xerxses had eke possession
By the title of his father Darye
Of all Egypt, as made is mencyon:
But they of Greece were to him contrary,
Wherefore he cast no longer for to tarry
This proud prince, but mightily werrey
Lacedemonoys, which would him not obey.
But one that was called Demaratus
Which of that country had before be king,
And was exyled the story tells us,
That time with Xerxses in household abiding,
Which loved that land for all his exyling,
Gave the^ warning to save the^ fro mischau^ce,
Of Xerxses power and all his ordinance.
He wrote them letters graven in a table,
All themprises of Xerxses out of doubt,
Of all his stuff, and people incomperable,
And of his nombre and his great rout:
The which table covered was without,
Full subtelly with wexe yplaned plain,
That of his sonde there was no letter seyne.
Thus was thentent of Xerxses first discured
Unto the greeks, and all his false workyng:
But in one thing they greatly were assured,
Of trust they had by expert knowlegyng
In Leonidas their noble famous king,
Which among greeks of prowes and foresight,
Was in tho days hold for the best knight.
Of chyualry called the lode sterre,
The son of knighthod yt shone so bryghte and shene,
The bearer up both in peace and war
And strongest pyller, his party to mayntene:
The greeks right hand their noblesse to sustene,
Carboncle of arms, myrror of policy,
And surest captain a field to rule and gye.
And as mine auctour reme^breth in his book
How in this case he was not recheles,
But in all haste four thousand men he took
To let the ways and coming of Xerxses:
And by an hill called Thermophiles,
Where Perciens began first their voyage,
He knyghtly cast to stop their passage.
And secretly espyeng the coming
Of king Xerxses with strong apparayle,
He like a knight made no tarying
Chase out.vi. hundred armed in plate and maile,
Which in such case might most avail,
And in defense and help of their country,
Would rather dye, than from the field to fle.
And covertly they took their lodgyng,
And kept them close till it drough to night,
And at their dinner them self refresshyng
So as they sat in steel armed bright,
The king abrayde like a manly knight,
In to the field before they should gone,
Right thus he said among them euerychon:
Syrs (quod he) now dyne merely,
And with good wine afforce your courage:
Like good knights in porpose finally,
For life nor death not turning your vysage,
But of assent cast in your passage,
As ye here dyne now in especial,
To suppe at night with gods infernal.
This to mean ye shall your self ieoparte
As hardy knights proudly to provide,
Within the field asondre not depart,
But keep close and for no dread divide,
Desire of worship make to be your gyde,
Your expert noblesse eternally to auaunce,
By quick report of new remembrance.
And have this day nothing in memory
Another your riches, blood, ne your kinrede,
Save only hope and good trust of victory,
And hardi prowess you to conducte and led:
And think knightli what shall be your mede
With marcial palms your renome and name,
In the highest place set in the house of fame.
And though ye be but a few in nombre
Let in your hertes one thing be fantasyed,
While division do the you not encombre
Victory in arms may you not be denied:
For nothing is to conquest more applied,
Than true accord among your self to show,
Though you in nombre be but verey few.
But by this counsel syngulerly notable,
And by this knights kingly good langage,
They recomforted held them self able
Again their fomen to hold their passage:
And first of al of hertelye proud courage,
The Perciens more mortally to grieve,
Within their tents, they fill on them at eve.
They of Perce ydrowned were with wine,
This to say, through their great excess,
They lay and slept like as dronkenswyne,
Their watch not kept: lo how y^ dro^ke^nesse
Causes often of very rechelesnesse,
Full many a man that will not take keep,
For to be murdered a nights when they sleep
And as this king did his knights led,
The Perciens tents assayling sodaynlye,
Or they were ware or took any head
Them for to affray they made an hidous cri:
Defense was none upon their party,
For men may know by old experyence,
In folks drunk may be no resistance.
Out of nombre they slough of their fone,
And ceased not of all the long night,
Till on the morrow that the son shone,
That to behold it was an ugly sight:
And proud Xerxses put anon to flight,
Ever the last that would his fone assail,
And aye the first that fled in battle.
In his flight so fast away he ran,
For therein was holy all his trust,
And of great travail anon this Xerxes began
Of coward dread, to have so great a thirst,
So dry he was of salt, sond, and dust,
And by the way serching far and nere,
He another found well ne riuere.
Of adventure amyery ground he fand,
The water troubled, and blody of color,
And Xerxses there dra^ke water with his hand
Him to refresh in his deedly labor:
And as he thought he never drank lycour
To him more holsom, so strayt stood the case,
Confecte with spices, pyment, nor ypocras.
This was the first mischefe and the dread
In which Xerxes the mighti prince stood,
Here men may se such as list take heed
How gery fortune furyous and wode,
Will not spare for riches nor for good,
Mighty princes which list not God to know,
From their estates to bring them full low,
O hateful serpent of high presumpcion,
Aye unstable with gredy vsurpyng,
By new trouble of false sedicion,
Which list of pride receive no warnyng,
For now Xerxses of Perce and Mede king,
Purposed has with odyous apparaile,
The temple of gods contagiously tassayle.
For as him thought it might not suffice
To great example of his contrarious pride,
How here toforne god did him chastyse
By man's hand, to set his pomp aside:
But now of new he began again provide
By sacrylege his mighty hand to dress,
To spoil Appollo, and reave him his richesse.
There was in Delos a temple thylke day,
Most stately builded and set up by masons
Great images, relyques, and rich array,
Of gold and stones in sundry mansyons:
And there Appollo to sundry questyous
Yaue ready answer, the story tells thus,
And he was called Appollo Delphicus.
Four thousand men Xerxses thither sent
By his auice chose out for the nones,
Full clenly armed, and as they thither went
To spoil the temple of gold and rich stones,
with sudden leuin they were bre^t flesh and bones,
With tempest, thundre, hayl, and hydous rein,
Consumpt echone, and never after seyne.
The great Apollo which shines bryghte in heuin
Had of this Xerxes great indignacio^,
Which made his people be consu^pt with leuin
In cruel punishing of his presumpcion:
Yet he purposed to his confusion,
Sith on the land he nothing might wyn,
Upon the sea a new werre to begin.
Began to make so great an ordinance,
That his navy covered all the sea:
Yet Neptunus thought him not to enhaunce
Within her bounds to have no lyberte.
For Themystocles with a small meyny
Beside a city called Salamine,
Him and his ships brought unto ruin.
Yet as I find this proud king Xerxses
Had on his party Themydora, the queen
Of Halcarnois which put her self in prees
Armed in plates that shone full bright and shene,
And thenarme of Xerxses to sustene,
This woman faught like a fell woluesse,
And many a greek that day she did oppress.
It was a strange marvel for to here:
To se a woman so sturdy of vysage,
Yet men expert all day may se and lere,
They be by nature full cruel of courage,
And no cowardes found of their langage:
Set at assay and than it shall be seen
Where they be ferfull their quarrel to sustene.
They may of mekenes show a fair pretense,
Some serpent is of color silver shene:
And some flowers full fresh of appearance
Grow on thystels rough, sharp, and kene.
And some that been angelyke to seen,
And very heavenly with their golden tresses,
Ben at a prefe very lyonesses.
To say the sothe a poor man may be shent,
I dare no more speak of this matere,
But king Xerxses for all his proud intent,
All his navy and his people yfere
Were put to flight, and outraied of their chere:
Their ships drowned among the waves rude
That none abode of all that multitude.
King Xerxses hurt and wounded mortally,
Uneaths he might the great pain endure.
His quakyng heart quit him so cowardly:
On see and land such was his adventure.
And yet again his damages to recure,
Three hundred.M. of feyghters he began call,
Upon greeks of new for to fall.
A mighty Duke called Mardonyus,
Was captain made his people for to lead,
But Themistocles (min auctor tells thus)
Knowing of Xerxses the cowardnes and dread,
A lettre made for to be sent in deed:
Enfourming him by greeks great outrage,
How of his bridge was broken the passage.
Of which maruayle when there came tidinge
To king Xerxses, he after anon right
As he that was aferde of each thing,
Full like a cowarde took him to the flight:
Fled in a boat like a coward knight,
Of al his people there were no more yseyne,
To awayte upon him save a chamberleyne.
All his people departed here and yonder
Standing in mischefe and great indygence,
To many a coast they went and rode asonder,
Pyned with hunger, lacked their dispense:
Punished also with unware pestylence,
Feeble of travail, might not endure
For impotence to carye their armure.
Alas each way lay full of caraynes,
The soil with blood stained, and the grene,
The air terrible of paths and of plains,
That no man might it endure nor sustene,
The savor was so odyous and unclean:
Ravenous fowls full homely in their sight,
Them self to feed upon the corse alyght.
Three hundred.M. of Perciens were slain,
Which Mardonyus before full proudly lad,
Of which tiding king Xerxses was not fayn,
But for distress and sorrow began to mad:
And one the last mischefe that he had
Was when Thimon, a noble grekish knight,
Xerxes discomfited, and put his men to flight
This Thymon was son to Melciades,
His father whilom of Athenes king,
Which last of all outrayed has Xerxses,
Save of his end there fill another thing:
Artabanus full sleyghty of werkyng
Which to Xerxses was not suspect in deed,
Compassed his death, in Bochas as I read.
This Artaban was prouest of his house,
And an officer most especyall:
With his seven sons, strong, and dispitous,
Upon a night furyous and fatal,
Fill upon Xerxses in his palayes royal:
And in his story as it is remembered,
On pieces small they have him dismembered.
This was of Xerxses the last fynal mede,
Of his high pride the funeral guerdon:
From his two kingdoms of Perce and Mede
Froward fortune has him plucked down:
What may avail the dominacion
Of such princes as hold them self even
For to be egall with gods high in heuyn?
Men list not know such chau^ges for no prefe,
And namely princes in their puissaunces,
Against erthly parels and all worldly mischefe
They can provide them, and set ordynaunces,
As they that dread fortunes varyaunces:
But to God ward they take full little head,
For the great riches which they do possede.
If they may hear of an earth quaue
Tofore it fall, or any token se,
Than will they go anon them self to save
Out of their houses, and from the towns fle
To put their life the more in suerte,
Lest their building made of so great costage,
Fill upon them in that mortal rage.
Or if an horse run out of his stable,
Break his colere, thick, double, and long,
Men will ordain a lock of iron able
To keep him in, be he never so strong:
And thus men can redress every wrong
Touching the body by great auysenesse,
Save for the soul they will nothing redres.
When a river passes far his bounds,
Boyleth upward, fyndeth no resistance,
Wynneth land, and ouerfloweth grounds,
Drowneth towns with his vyolence,
Yet men will travail to find a defense:
To turn her course some way shall be sought,
But toward god me^ think little or naught.
Against sickness men seek medicines,
Letwaries, and diverse pocions,
Search in physike sundry disciplynes,
Them to dyete in their transgressions,
Restoratyues, and eke confeccions,
But unto Godward in this present life,
Men not travail for no confortatyfe.
Men their bodies will put in distress
Of false desire, and covetous feruence,
Only cacroche and wyn great riches,
Suffer cold, labor, and vyolence,
And another spare for gold, nor for dyspence,
To vnderfonge perils, of vaynglory
Only for things that been transitory.
They pass mountains, and many hidous roch,
In hope it should to their intent avail,
To many mortal monstre they approach,
And many uncouth sea they sail,
Jeopart their life in war and in battle,
By many a danger, and mani streyt they ride,
For worldly treasor which will not abide.
But toward goods that been perdurable,
Full little or naught their hertes they incline:
Nor to the heavenly company most notable,
They will not lift up another heed ne eyne,
Toward the spheres of Phoebus and Lucine,
Castyng their stremes to us from far,
Which to considre all worldly men done err.
What might avail the great couetyse
Of king Xerxses, in his estate royal?
Of the great people which ye have herd devise
Ten hundred.M. the people was not small,
But for all that he had an hydous fall,
When that he was (as tofore is remembered)
On pieces small piteously dismembered.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedi put us in remembrance
Of y^ vnsiker flateryng and blyndnesse
Both of fortune, and of her vatiau^ce,
And of her ugly froward doublenes,
In Xerxses showed for all his riches:
To us declaring plainly in figure,
A rauynous prince may no while endure.
King Xerxses had under his obeysaunce
Al Perce and Mede (the stori bears witness)
Thought all earth to little in substance
To staunche the etyke of his gredynesse:
A fret of having put him in such distress,
Whose fine declared by record of scripture,
A rauinous prince may no while endure.
He made also an odious ordinance,
Of surquedy his power for to dress,
To rob the gods, maugre their puisaunce,
And spoil the temples, of their frowardnes
Take their treasors again all rightwisnes:
But they him showed, of sudden adventure,
A rauinous prince may no while endure.
Great Appollo took on his men vengeance,
With unware tempest for all their sturdines,
Leuin and thunder brought them to mischau^ce:
Guerdon most able again the falsnes
In princes hertes, aye plainly to expres
Who by rauyne riches will recure,
God will not suffer him long to endure.
Noble princes stable in your constaunce,
Ye that desire to stand in sykernes,
Remember often upon the fatal chance
Of proud Xerxses, and his cursednes,
Your life disposing in your high nobles:
If that ye list your states to assure,
Eschew rauyne, and ye shall long endure.
The.xi. Chapter.
How Artabanus murdered king Xerxses, and how him self was murdered after.

NExt these tragedies weping and dolerous
While Bochas stint and would have be in pees,
A knight appeared called Artabanus.
Which had aforne murdered king Xerxses,
And began his complaynt for to put in prees:
Full concludyng, to speak in words plain,
Who uses murdre by murdre shall be slain.
This Artabanus by record of writing,
With Xerxses provost whylom as I read,
Falsely conspyred by sleight of his workynge,
For to be king both of Perce and Mede:
Having seven sons which that were in deed
Worthy knights, manly, and right strong,
Albe their father was set to do great wrong.
For he presumed by usurpation,
In Perce and Mede to quench y^ clear light:
And trouble the line of just succession.
For so as he of force, and not of right
Nothing resemblyng to a true knight,
The murdre of Xerxses falsely did ordain,
Right so he cast to murdre his sons twain.
And to conclude plainly, and not tarry,
This said king that called was Xerxses,
Had two sons, the youngest called Dary,
And that other colled Artaxerxses:
which as the story reherceth, doutles
Were by descent borne to succeed
After their father, to reign in Perce and Mede.
The murdre of Xerxses outward was unknow
Nor how Artabanus had y^ treson wrought,
Till afterward within a little throw,
He had of new forged out and sought
Falls odious trains, that were never thought,
Told Artaxerses as he began with him rown,
How Dary cast to occupy the croun.
And how the death of Xerxses was ordained
Only by Dary, and by none other wight.
where upon, which ought be complained,
Artaxerxses provided anon right
The slaughter of Dary, and so again all right
This young brother in his innocence,
Was falsely slain and did none offense.
Ye wot by whom this treson was compassed,
Twene brethern twain to make division,
The younger slain and nothing trespased,
Most ready way to the distruccion
Of Artaxerxses, for in conclusyon,
When the brethren murdered were in deed,
Artabanus thought to succeed.
But Artaxerxses by plain instruccion
Of one that was called Baccarus,
By tokens knew the covert false treason
Of this aforesaid double Artabanus:
And how that he by traynes outragyous,
Had Xerxses slain (as ye have herd toforne)
And Dary appeched, whereby he was lorne.
But this uncouth strange treason wrought
When Artaxerxses had knowlegyng,
By great advise ways he has sought,
Artabanus to bring unto reckoning:
But specially he dred him of one thing,
He feeble was to bring this thing about,
Of his seven sons he had so great doubt.
But for to accomplish fully his entente
Full secretly this was his ordinance,
To all the worthy he hah his letters sent
Dwelling in Perce, under his obeysaunce,
Without excuse or longer attendaunce
Armed echone, and in especyall
To come in haste, unto his court royal.
Cause of their coming was to them not know
The kings purpose was holden secre,
And kept so close both from hye and low,
That to his meaning no man was prive:
Except the king said he would se
What number of men, if it come to need,
In his defense he might gather and led.
And among other came Artabanus
Unto the court, and list not for to fail,
A man that was cruel and courageous,
Full of sleyghtes in all his gouernayle,
Which thilke time armed was in mayle,
For he with him none other armure lad,
Save on his back an haburion he had.
Than Artaxerses being in his strength,
To him abrayed of false affection,
For that my mayle wants of his length,
I would with the change mine haburion:
The the other having none evil suspection,
Vngyrt him self would no longer abide,
Both sword and dagger cast the^ far aside.
And while that he threw of his haburion
And with the mayle stopped was his sight,
He being naked, for short conclusion
The king out pulls a sword kene and bright
And through the heart he roue him anon right:
And after that of indignacion,
Took his seven sons, and cast them in prison.
Of their end what should I more endite,
Nor of their death make digression?
God may his vengeance a while respite,
But murder will out and all such treason:
And for Artabanus had a condition
Falsely to murder (as ye tofore have seyne)
with unware murder guerdoned was again.
Thus ever murder requires for his wages,
Slander importable odyous to hear,
A word diffamous most foul in all la^gages
The sound horrible by report to appear,
A clips during whose darkness may not clear
For this word murder most ugly and vnfayre
By a rehearsyng infecteth all the air.
The.xii. Chapter.
How duke Palantes and Spartenoys warred them of Missene for rauishyng their
maidens.

AFter the death and fatal caas,
And piteous murder of Artabanus,
Next in order appeared to Bochas
A mighty duke called Palautus,
Son of a knight named Arathus,
Which was exiled, though he no treasonment
Out of his city that called was Tarent.
Upon his exyle he sore began complain,
Besechyng Bochas to get him a space
Within his book to write his grievous pain,
Albe though he whilom stood in grace,
By glad aspectes of fortunes face:
For she him raised by favor of her might,
To dukes estate from a pore knight.
But cereously this matter to convey,
How he was made duke and governor,
When Sparteyns began mortally warrey
Against Missenes, as says mine auctour,
With great costage and diligent labor,
And cause was this, for they with mighty hand
Ravished by force all maidens of the land.
For this people now named Spartenois,
As the story clearly can devise,
Were called before Lacedemonois,
In arms proved manly and right wise:
And while they did a solemn sacrifise
Unto their gods, the people of Messeny.
Ravished their maidens or they it did espy.
On which wrong for to do vengeance,
The Spartenois caught indignacion,
And of assent with all their whole puissaunce,
They laid a siege round about the town:
And of one will and one affection
They made a vow y^ siege when they begone,
Never to depart till the town were won.
Before the town fully ten year they lay,
And fro the siege as they had made their oath,
They not departed neither night nor day,
But still abode and not a sunder gothe:
Thereof their wives at home were wroth,
To their husbands a messengere they sent,
Under these words, declaryng their intent.
Said it was not according with reason
They like widows to live disconsolate,
Without comfort or consolation,
Far from their husbands to stand desolate,
Mischeues co^sidred that fall in each estate,
By long absence (which each man should dread)
Through diverse sickness y^ fall in womanhede.
The tide abides not for no manner man,
Nor stynt her course for no creature:
And hard it is as we reherce can,
Thing to withstand that comes of nature:
Harm done by kind is froward to recure,
And there is found full little sykernes,
Where as nature afforceth brotylnesse.
This little sonde ought enough suffyse,
To declare damage that may fall
By long absence, folks that been wise
Sometime departed again men may not call.
That seldom is seen in love does appall.
And nothing makes more wives err
Than disceuerau^ce of folk that be in werre.
This was theffect plainly insubstaunce,
Sent to their hasbandes which at y^ sege lai,
Complaining they had had no plesaunce
Space of ten year, as in loves play:
But desolate, in sorrow, and great affray,
Their life they lad, affyrmyng in sentence,
Cause of their cs^trai^t, was their long abse^ce.
And when the letters were at the siege rad
Tofore the city in all their mortal stryues,
They were astonished and began to wax sad,
And very weary almost of their lives,
For to considre the complaint of their wives:
Till their captain a remedy out sought,
By whose counsayl even thus they wrought.
First old knights that the siege sworn
It for to accomplish, and cast them to be true
His counsayl was as they had hight beforn
To hold their promise, and therefore nothing rue:
But young knights that were come of new,
Might as they list freely at their will
Those whether they would go or bide still.
And herupon for their most avail
In haste their captain as made is remembrance
Of high prudence gave them this counsel,
hat knights old, ly^h their assurance,
Should of the siege have the governance:
And young knights most fresh and welbeseyne,
Should from the siege home be sent again.
They made among the^ a strange ordinance,
At their home coming, without difference
To enterchau^ge their wives for plesaunce:
And take her first that came to his presence,
This was thaccorde among them in sentence,
Most ready way to their opinion
To engendrute and procreacion.
There was among the^ quarrel another strife
In this matter, nor no varyaunce,
For eueryman misused others wife,
To their desires as was to them pleasaunce:
And thus children through this ordinance
That were engendered, the case is thus befall,
Parthenois men did them after call.
Which in our tongue to speak in words plain,
After the greek who list consydre and se,
Is no more plainly for to said,
Than thilk children which engendered be
In auoutry: wherefore in that country
Parthenois of custom they were named,
Borne of wombes which that were diffamed
The false occasion of this auoutry
Caused after great mischefe and damage,
That no man could as for his party,
By succession when he came to age,
By title of right claim his heritage:
For where a line falsely does proceed,
Hard is to know by right who shall succeed.
The disturbaunce of false succession,
And tytels claimed afforced with great might,
Where that auoutry has domynacion
And is supported of will and not of tyght,
And claym of troth has lost his clear light:
Though their parties mighti be and strong,
God will not suffer they shall endure long.
And Parthenois paysing all these things
How false assurance was in their lynage,
The gentle blood troubled first of kings,
For no man knew of high nor low parage
His own father, by lykelynesse of vysage:
Nor father none by his great error,
Could give no title to his successor.
Whereupon followed a great mischaunce,
Hateful to hear, through the country:
Echeman troubled in his countenance
Who should claim by any lyberte
To enter his land, or to stand fre:
Such doubt they had echeman for his party,
So importable was their auoutry.
This great mischefe, who so takes head,
By long process made the^ to know and se
How they were able, as by likelihede,
For their outrages to fall in poverty:
And of assent they cast them for to fly
Under a captain by strong and mighty hand
For that country to win some other land.
And as I read, they chase duke Palantus
Of whom I spoke, to govern the passage,
Taking no leave the storye tells thus:
At their departing beginning their vyage,
They were so confuse of chere and of vysage,
For there was none of that great route,
To chose his father but y^ he stood in dout.
They held them selves very ashamed,
And for shame out of the land they went,
Like people disclaundered and diffamed,
Through the auoutry to which they did asse^t:
And to a city that called was Tarent,
Which stant in Poile a mighty strong country
This duke Palantus came with his meyny.
And there he put through his great might,
The citizyns out of that city,
And gate Tarent full like a manly knight,
And there abode in long prosperity,
As governor and duke of that country,
Till that his people by false collusion,
Him to deprive sought out occasion.
They him exiled when he was fall in age,
Lo what it is in commons to assure,
Stormy of heart, unsure of their courage,
That selde or never their frendshyp does endure*
Men may to day their favor recure,
And to morrow (let set it at a prefe)
They rathest hinder wha^ men be at mischefe.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
Of Ceson Quincius exiled, and Graccus taken prisoner.

I Can no more rehearce of Palantes
Duke and leader of Parthenois,
But I will tell how Ceson Quincius
Came before Bochas with a full piteous voice,
His tale began how Graccus prince of Equois,
Both at ones began their song entune,
Most dolefully to plain on fortune.
This mighty prince Ceson Quincius
Complained first as made is mention,
How they of Rome were contrarious
And felly wrought to his destruction,
And full unjustly banished him the town:
And not withstandyng he was a dictatour,
Him to co^founde they did their busy labor.
Cause of his exyle compassed as I read,
That he was slow they said and negligent,
Him to defend, touching appeal in deed
Which again him was brought of falce entet:
Yet Cyncinatus his father, by assent
Paid for amends as says cronyclers,
Met out of land draught of three arblasters.
Yet his enemies would not be content,
But proceed that he was exiled,
Did extorcion of his judgment,
As in his story full plainly is compyled:
He after never might be reconcyled,
Which I have pitye to put in remembrance,
So little offense should have so great ve^geau^ce
Graccus of Rome called Cloellus
Prince of Equois mine auctour says ye same,
Was in his time notable and glorious,
And a great duke full renoumed of fame:
But how ye people of Equois took their name
Under support that no man have disdain,
I will the process here declare in certain.
John Bochas says there is a nation
Which that first were called Hunoys,
And secondly also by succession
Of full long time named Anathois:
And alderlast men called them Equois,
Like as I trow (mine auctor says the same)
Of horse most swyft, they took first the name.
And as it is remembered in sentence,
By their manhood, and famous hardines
Again Alexander they made strong defense
On horsbacke through their great swiftnes:
Beside the hill (plainly to express)
Which in cronicles is called Caucasus,
This people of Equois were vyctoryous.
To their nobles plainly as I find,
Nothing in earth was more expedient
In their conquest of Ethiope and Jude,
As horse most swyft, seruyng their entente:
Thereby conqueryng all the Oryent,
So great prowes was in their passage,
That Equois brought all Egypt to seruage.
Thus where ever Equois did abide,
They gate great good to their possession:
And Graccus was their governor and gide
Which by his strength and false suggestion,
Again the Romans fill in great rebellion,
But to with stand him they sent out anonryght,
Cincinatus proved a full good knight.
He was well trusted and know in the town,
And for his prudence chosen a Dictatour,
His lyuelode small and his possession,
Albe he was a worthy warrior:
Which has vainquished by his knyghtly labor,
The said Graccus, for all his worthy power,
And home to Rome brought him prisoner.
Cyncinatus in his chare was set,
Called Quincius for this great victory,
And most solemnly with Senators met,
Which yaue to him for to encreace his glory,
Laud of tryumphe, to put him in memory:
And Graccus after for his rebellion,
With chains bound, cast in dark prison.
And there he dyed in full great mischefe,
After his conquestes, first famous and notable,
An evidence to us and a great prefe
How fortune is aye false and unstable,
Ever double, froward, and deceyuable,
The fall of Graccus declare began full well,
That whylom sat so high upon her whele.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
Here Bochas rehearses the tyranny of Apyus, and falsenes of judges.

NOt with standing Bochas before has told,
Of Apius the falsenes importable,
And his outrages and surfetes many fold,
To be remembered hateful and repreuable,
Yet as him thought it was here co^uenable,
To more rebuke and spottyng of his name
New to rehearse his slander and defame.
The great offenses of this Apius,
And oppression that he upon him took,
Made him grow so inly covetous,
Through his rauyne yt all the people quoke:
As ye may se in the second book,
Where mine auctour does clearly specify
His fraud in domes, and his lechery.
Eke this tyrant remembered ye may read,
Chief judge he was with other officers,
Called decemvir, and through his pride in deed
Again the custom of them y^ were his feres,
He made be borne standerdes and baneres,
In otherwise, of high presumption,
Then used were beforne in Rome town.
These judges had a custom and manner
Like their estates, in their governance,
Each after him to have borne a bannere,
Where they went, such was their ordinance
By twelve sergeau^tes numbered in substance:
But Apius of pride and great outrage,
Y changed has that custom and usage.
He first ordained each should in his place
Of Decemvir, have a banner borne
In their walkyng the people to manace,
An hundred men of arms them beforne,
And twenty over (by a statute sworn)
Whereby the city bare great cost in deed,
And all the people were put in fear and dread.
To se the sargeau^tes walk in plate and mayle
They thought it was a maueylous working
Judges to go with such apparayle
In their proceadyng as each had been a king:
And whole the intent of Apius menyng
Was that he should of power and might,
Do what him list were it wrong or right.
The ryghtfull punyshe, and the gylty spare,
Favor wrong for brybes and for mede,
The people oppressed stood in sorrow and care,
Found no succoure to help the^ at their need:
Law was there none, for reason lay by dread,
Will was judge, and pleasaunce equity,
And thus by maistry was governed the city.
And as it is remembered by Bochas,
Apius was lecherous of nature,
And caught a quarrel as ye have herd the caas
Against Virginia, a maid clean and pure:
And for he should nothing in her recute
Touching his lust, her father in that strife
With a sharp sword made her lose her life.
And for this tyrant by false rybaudry
Caused her death by hasty vyolence,
And for he should her beauty not maistry
Diyng a maid in her chaste innocence,
Therefore he was demed in sentence
As is to fore made clear mention,
For to be chayned and dye in prison.
Eke Decemvir lost their power,
And never in Rome after bare no name,
Nor of that sect was made none officer:
And among all Apius bare the blame,
Whose crime rebou^deth to his eternal shame
As ye have heard, who that can discern,
And tha^ Tribunes were chose for to govern.
And in Bochas like as it is found,
The said judges in mischefe did fine,
While Apius lay in prison bound
Exiled were all that other nine,
The good, the treasure of them and their line,
Acheted was for short conclusion,
To common profit and increase of the town.
Lenuoy.
THis little tragedy does shortly deuyse
What mischefe follows for the great unright
Used in judges, in many sundry wise:
For when favor blinded has their sight,
And innocence is borne down with might,
In his quarrel pouerte may not proceed,
Bicaue that troth oppressed is with mede.
A judge should of equity despise
To take gifts of any manner wight,
And ready be all wrongs to chastise,
From all gifts turn away his sight,
His hondes close, his ears stop aryght,
And be aye ware for frendshyp, hate and dread,
That troth be not oppressed with mede,
The noble doctrine and virtuous emprise
Of philosophers that had so great insyght,
Was to these judges y^ prudent were and wise
For friend or foe their domes be so dyght
Of right wisenes that the sun bright
Eclypsed never, lest men for their falsehede,
Report the right was put abacke for mede.
Noble princes supportours of iustise,
Called lode stars to give the people light,
On Apius let judges not practice,
Let trouthes la^pe be clear both day and night,
Your office paysed that longs to a knight,
Hold up the balau^ce of dome in your ma^hede,
That law in judges be not corrupt with mede
Bochas against the untruth of judges.
SVyng upon the death of ^pius,
And his rebukes for his great outrage,
Bochas by writing wext som*what yrous,
Again judges false, and thought in his courage,
They should be sad and demure of age,
And their life by virtue should draw
To keep the precepts and statutes of the law.
They ought of reason them self to habyle
To have science of philosophy,
And know their textes of canon and ciuyle,
And thereupon their wits whole to apply:
For cunnyng judges by prudent policy
Cause ordinances in law comprehended,
Through rightful doom greatly to be co^me^ded
Justice of law does realms enlumine,
Susteineth troth, supporteth innocence,
Of rauynours boweth down the chyne,
Punysheth robbers for their great offense:
Sluggy truauntes for their negligence,
And feigned beggars that greatly disauayle,
Constrayneth them to labor and travail.
Founders of law by antiquity,
Caused in lands was suffered none erroute,
And made of princes the royal magestie
To shine in worship, by diligent labor:
Wrested courages of many conqueror,
That their tryu^phes no further should attain
Than law of god and nature did ordain.
Will was that time under subjection
Of right wisnes, by troth full well conceived:
Sensualitye was servant to reason,
And froward lust was under lock ykeyed,
Sentence of statutes was not disobeyed:
The rich did right through every land,
Pore folk lived by labor of their hand.
Lordshyp y^ time anoyded mayntenaunce,
Holy church lived in perfitnesse,
Knighthode tho days for troth whette his lau^ce
And false extorcion had none entresse,
Merchants winning came al of rightwisnes
Artificers the work day were not ydell,
And business of labor held the brydell.
Women that age farced were nor horned,
Nor their tails were not serpentyne,
Wise men of folly, nor clerks were not scorned
Which in science most freshely did shine,
Law disherited none heirs from their line:
Lesyngmongers found y^ time no socours,
And flaterers were made tha^ no co^fessours.
This golden world flouryng in virtue,
Borne up by love, grounded on stablenes,
Of auoutry sprange out none issue:
Prices with doctrine established their nobles,
Preesthod in prayer, knighthod in worthiness
Each thing by law stood under governance,
Marchau^ts by mesure and just peis of balau^ce.
First Phoroneus by dyligent labor
Fond out laws, y^ king was of Argyues,
The greeks study he giit with great honor,
This politic prince avoided the^ from strives,
His statutes kept during all their lives,
Found first the manner (Bochas does deuyse)
How to Jupiter was made sacrifyse.
Eke mighty Minos whilom king of Crete,
Ordained laws again transgressions,
To fear by rygour foles that were unmeet,
And staunche of surfetes all occasyons,
Made for robbers mighty strong prisons:
And Dedalus his chief artificere,
Made laborinthes by diligence entere.
And Mercury borne by the stood of Nyle
As writes Lactance, was of Egypt king,
Unto merchants did law first compyle
Of weight and mesure, to use in chaffaryng:
And for his wisdom and excellent connyng,
Of old poets that whilom were so wise,
He called was God of marchaundyse.
Solon also the best laws made
As Valery writes, him self to magnify:
Athenienses thereof were full glad
His great wisdom when they did espy,
They fond therein so much policy,
And ever he was ready for to debate
Again tyrauntes, so sore he did them hate.
King Lygurgus yet whilom did his cure
To make laws to common advantage,
And that they should perpetually endure
He made his people be sworn of every age,
While that he went out on pilgrimage
Fro point to point to keep them in certain,
Unto time that he came home again.
And for his laws were of great substance,
And profitable to every comonte,
He chase to live in exile and penance,
Never to resort again to his cite:
That his statutes by eternite
Should not be broke, as ye have herd toforne,
By the co^uencion to which they were sworn.
To common profit had he such tenderness,
That he forsook his kingdom and kinrede
To live in exile, his story bears witness:
But or he dyed, as he lay bedrede,
He bad his bones should be cast in led
Amid the sea, fer out from the strande,
That his statutes might in their strength stand.
He eschued eueryche occasyon
As a thing hateful, which was not fair,
That his foresaid royal mighty town
Should break their oath, because of his repair:
But touching that he put them in despair,
Cast him never resort in their days
Lest they would break the se^te^ce of his laws.
The.xv. chapter.
Here Bochas makes an exclamacion of the extorcion of the officers of Rome.

JOhn Bochas here makes a digressio^,
And by rebuking cast him to assail
Thylke officers ye were in Rome town,
Which by extorcion oppressed the porayle,
And again judges also of Itayle,
And namely them that for lucre or mede
Set troth aside and took of it none head.
He makes again them an exclamacion,
Such as to virtue were contrarious:
And under color and occasyon
Of their office list to be lecherous,
Like condicioned unto Apius,
And finally as it was after seen,
False in their domes, and of their life unclean.
O (quod Bochas) O troth, o thou iustise,
Which in your nobles whilom did excel,
Where in effect is now your exercise,
Where is your wonning alas where do ye dwell,
Of your practike full few men can tell,
So fer put back is now your disciplyne,
Your kyn exyled, and your noble line.
Advocates that now done occupye
Your old sees, and places full royal,
All to falshede their wits they apply,
Such couetyse now reigns over all:
Causes of civil, and causes crymynall
Their domes take, where they be falls or true,
All after will, by statutes changed new.
There ben eke other called accessours,
Syttyng by judges, to give them counsel,
Which may full well be called rauenours,
For they not labor but for their avail:
A nombre of robbers follow at their tail,
To pylle the people, as ye have hard to forne,
Bare as a sheep, that is but new shorn.
There is no more in this matter to said
Save only this, troth stant desolate,
And rightwisnes dare to no wight compain,
With wrong oppressed, weping and desolate,
Wherefore ye princes that sit in high estate,
Such thing to me^de, but ye better head take,
God shall with you a full hard rekenyng make.
Your office is in your magnificence
Twene man and man all wrongs to redress,
And where a matter is again conscience
It to refourme only of ryghtwysenesse,
To stand by truth, maintain no falsenesse,
And let wise counsayl such matters examine
Or ye of haste thereon determine.
Have such things in your mind among
Think god will quyte like as ye deserve,
Ye spot your noblesse if that ye do wrong
His sword of punishyng dread or it kerue:
Let your reason and conscience conserve
Your noble estates, and think like your werki^g
The lord of you will ask a rekenyng.
The.xvi. Chapter.
Of Alcibiades exyled, and after brent in his bed.

AFter other that put them self in prees
Tofore Bochas their co^playntes to discure,
Came of Athenes Alcibiades,
That time alive the fairest creature:
And as it is remembered by scripture,
He was discrete, and was at all assayes
One the strongest and manly in his days.
He was first borne of full high lineage,
Above all other of most semelynesse,
Well proporcioned and hardy of courage,
Loved and favored for his great fayrenesse:
Famous in knyghthode for his worthiness
Subtle witted, and could by cloquen^^,
Boche comprehend under short sentence.
His wit inclined to manyfolde sciences,
Had of conyng a passing retentife,
Loved clerks, and fond them their dispences,
Such as in practife he saw most inuentife,
To read in books reioysed all his life,
Kept what he read in his memorial,
And of wise counsel was none to him egal.
An uncle he had ycalled Perycles
Which stood in danger of excessife spendyng,
Yet in his youth this Alcibiades
Seeing his uncle pensiefe in lokyng,
Cast of wisdom to remedy that thing,
And for to aswage his hearts heaviness,
Gave him this counsel by great auisenesse.
First to rehearse how the matter stood
And of his uncles woeful high distress
There was to him delynered a su^me of good
To repair the temple of a goddess
Called Minerna, but for the great excess
Of his dispences he stood somewhat in dread,
Touching thacou^pt, y^ he must yield in deed.
Alcibiades here upon musyng,
To his uncle gave counsel in sentence:
Uncle (quod he) let be your thynkyng,
And for your self shape this diffence,
Not for tacou^pt by mean of your prudence:
Before provided, with face and chere unfeigned,
To such duresse, that ye be not constrained.
And when Pericles his counsel aduertiseth
Fond to his worship it was reasonable,
And by good layser, him self full well auiseth,
And by provision prudent and notable
Saved his estate from each thing reprouable:
So that he stood, touching this matter,
As for accomptes out of all danger.
Alcibiades of Athens chief capteyne
From day to day waxt up to great encres,
Such another was there no where seyne,
Them to govern, both in werre and pees:
And all the city by assent him chees
Of their navy in especial
Upon the sea, to be their admyrall.
For his knighthod they sent him out aferre
To Cathenoys to be their governor,
Gain Cyracusenes for to gin a werre:
First there received with glory and great honor,
But in the end of his great labor,
Fortune that is aye varyaunt and unstable,
Was to this duke not found favorable.
He was accused to them of the town,
Which in Athenes had governance,
That he was gilty in party of treason,
By the^ revoked for all his great puissaunce
Of Capitaynship, and by their ordinance
And fortunes false mutabylitie
Unawarely deprived from all dignity.
But for him self thus he began provide,
Went into exyle not fer from that country,
In to a city that called was Elyde,
There for to have fredom and lyberte,
And of his life, to stand in suerte:
For in Athenes they would have him deed,
Unto their gods to offer up his heed.
But when he was of their intent certain,
To Lacedemone he took the right way,
And by relacion there he herd said
How Cathemenses were put to afraye
In a battle upon a certain day,
Which that they held to their aduersytee
Gain Cathenoys, as they fought on the sea.
But the cause of this discomfyture
As was told Alcibiades,
Was by three captayns through misauenture,
Which in their leading were found recheles,
The chief of them named Demosthenes
The the other called the story tells us,
The tone Niceas, the the other Eurilocus.
Alcibiades having hereof tiding
To avenge his wrong put him self in prees,
Of Lacedemon he gothe first to the king
Which of troth was called Agydes,
Beseching him to grant to his encres
Certain soudyours out of his country.
For to werrey of Athenoys the cite.
Thus he waxte strong of noble prouydence,
Had great people under his governance,
And like a duke made strong in his defense,
The people gadred to his obeysaunce,
That other princes that were of hye puisau^ce
Began have envy of wylful frowardness,
And to malygne again his high noblesse.
For selde or never in any regyon
Prowess of arms, noblesse of chyualry,
Increase of riches, report of high renoun,
Fame of connyng in craft or in clergy,
May no where dwell without some envy:
From whose malice as folk expert may se,
Save only wretches no man has lyberte.
For which this prince as put is in memory,
Escaped not for all his high parage,
But that some enuyed at his glory:
For in this life no man has advantage
Again tongues, nor odyous false langage,
To stop such venym this is the best obstacle
That me^ with suffrau^ce tempre their triacle,
The clear prowess of Alcibiades
Stained the nobles of other princes al,
His eure him raised up to so great encres,
To the highest trone of fortunes hall:
Such fatal grace is unto him fall
That in tho days plainly this is no fable,
There was no knight to him resemblable.
In his exyle so clear his renome shone,
And through Greece gave as great bryghtnes,
As does a ruby above each other stone:
Yet for to clips and shadow his worthynes
Lacedemonois did their business,
Such as not might to his nobles attain,
By false report his renome to restrain.
Awayt was laid to take him at mischefe,
And many traynes were serched out and sought
Of intent to put him at reprefe,
But al y^ ever again him they have wrought
At the end the purpose came to naught:
For God provides of his magnificence,
Again such malice to save innocence.
He was lykely to fall in great daungere
Lacedemonois began so at him dysdayne,
Because his honor and nobles shone so clear,
That to his fone it was a deedlye pain:
And thus his life stood in no certain
For all be it he manly was and wise,
He knew nothing their purpose nor malice.
He had almost ywarned be to late,
And like to have stand in great perplexity,
And more his grace and fortune to abate
By thoccasion of his great beauty,
He with the queen was woxen full prive:
For in her grace so well stood there none,
Which gave to him warnyng of his fone.
And by the counsel only of the queen
Fro Lacedemon he wisely took his flight
Toward Athenes, and thought he would seen
His own country, full like a manly knight,
And though they had not governed the^ a right
Toward him, being in distress,
To avenge his wrong, he did the^ no duresse.
For he thought it was against nature
To be vengeable, or show his cruelte
By thoccasion of any adventure,
Or ginne a werre upon his country:
His native blood meued him to pity,
And of very natural gentlynesse
Was debonayre, again their unkindness.
The case was this, for short conclusion,
How king Dary with great apparayle
Thought to werrey, of indignation
Them of Athenes, and their town tassayle,
And in purpose proudely to prevail:
Thessifernes, a prince of great puissaunce
Of Daries power had all the governance.
Final cause and ground of all this werre
That Darius began on them so hastelye,
And that he sent his puissaunce from so far
For to destroy Athenes utterly,
Was to hold up and sustain the party
Of Lacedomone, which of old hatrede
Were ever enuyous the^ to oppress in deed.
But by mean of Alcibiades
And his treaty founded on prudence,
Thessifernes, inclined to the pees,
Thereby in party to appease his violence:
And all was done of noble providence,
And fro the place, to which he was exiled,
He to Athenes should be reconciled.
Unto the city he did signify
How Darius, had made his ordinance,
And by his letters he began them specify
If they would stand at his governance,
To condiscende plainly in substance:
He would labor, and no longer tarry,
To make accord atwene them and king Dary.
This was the mean that he meant:
Within Athenes that the senators
Should of the city, after their intent
Have full lordship, and be their governors:
But as clear wedder troubled is with shours,
Right so unawarely, within that royal town
Through his treaty fill a discention.
The ^o^meners began suddenly disdain
To be thralled under subjection,
And so by assent the commons did ordain
Only tappease all false discention,
For to revoke again into their town
Aicibiades, as they thought it mete,
Through this prudence to set them in quiet.
First in his coming mine auctour does report
He was made duke again of y^ cite,
And began the party of commons to supporte,
And them restore to their old liberte:
Where through the senate dreding y^ co^monte
Fled to exile, full far out of all prees,
Only for dread of Alcibiades.
They stood that time in so great disioynt
Their town divided, and out of governance,
That they were brought even to the point
To yield the city unto the obeysaunce
Of Lacedemons, through their unhappy chance,
Within the^ self, when they can debate
Under their duke, the senate bare such debate.
But the commons chase in their dyffence
Alcibiades, to govern that voyage,
And to the sea with cost and great dispense
Without abode he holds his passage,
In mighty ships, made for advantage:
Well enarmed, and cast if he might
With Lacedemonois proudly for to fight.
Three mighty captains were on the other side
The first zestro, Bochas tells thus,
And the second that was their lord and gyde,
Called Mydare, the third Pharbanasus
Oh the sea and land, in arms full pompous:
But of knighthode and magnanimite
Alcibiades took them all three.
Strong was the fight or yt they were take,
Of all their meyny away there escaped none,
The duke y^ day, began such a slaughter make
Of high prowess upon his mortal fone,
Cast over board almost euerychone:
And after that, when he came to land,
A new battle met him on the strande.
Such wait was laid about him enuyron
Of his enemies, by sudden adventure,
But of Athenes this mighty champion
Which might in arms most souerainly endure
Made of his fone a new disco^fyture:
Thus in short time this prince in his estate,
On land and water was twyse laureate.
And after that he list not for to cease
Nor to abide the space of half a day
The common profit of his town tencrease,
Toward Asye he took the right way
Towns and castles that were take away
Which apperteyned to Athenes of right,
He gate again full like a manly knight.
Maugre all that to him were contrary
Or wrought again him by rebellyon,
Throughout Asye in the land of Dary
He knyghtly brought them to subjection:
Again whose sword help no proteccyon,
And fynall labor was of his intent,
The common profit of his town to augment.
And with this glory and with this noblesse
He to Athenes repaired is again,
And all the city with joy and great gladness
Came out to mete him upon a fair plain:
And that his triumphs should openly be sain,
Both old and young with full glad vysages,
Of their gods brought out the images.
This was their cry and noise of all the prees,
Victorious prince whose triumphs marciall
Shall ever be song with laud and new encrees,
To fore the gods which ben immortal,
Welcome, welcome, our protector and wall,
Shield of our welfare, again all violence,
Phoebus of knighthod, and sword of our defense.
Thus with their gods they made him egall,
By uncouth praising of paganismes rightes,
Like as he had been very immortal
And song refreytes to commend his merytes:
And to enhau^ce his glory they set al their delites,
And with the light of eternal fame,
Set up torches to enlumyne with his name.
Thus certain days they hallowed of intent
Through all the cite, for his high prowess,
Till fortune has his eyes blent
With new favor of worldly false swetnes,
For all her sugar is meynt with bytternesse:
A bayte of honey shed out at prime face
With mortal venym hyd under to manace.
For in his highest clymbyng up alofte
And in thascence of fortunes whele,
After her custom, as she has full often,
When he best wend for to stand well,
She drew her favor from him every dele:
Made the people under his obeysaunce,
To fall in mischefe for lack of governance.
Thus fro this duke fortune began to vary
And his noblesse go back and eke fail,
When king Cirus successor to Dary
Full unwarely fill on him in battle,
And began his knights proudly to assail:
When he dispurueyed void of prouydence,
Was ouerlayde to make resystence.
For finally this Alcibiades
At mischefe take which he might not recure,
When through veynglory he was made recheles
His noble estate testablysh and assure,
Lack of foresight caused his dyscomfyture:
And to increase of more aduersitye,
Banyshed again out of his cite.
Thus diffaced and clypsed was his glory,
His city put in strange governance
By Lacedemonoys, after this victory,
So that he knew no manner cheuysaunce
To refourme his unhappy chance,
Save for refute mine auctour does reherce,
How that he fled unto the king of Perce.
From Athenes of new he was exiled,
And thirty persons all furious and vengeable
Chase in their cyty, as Bochas has co^pyled,
The town governed albe they were not able:
Vsyng a manner hateful and repreuable,
Through their tauyne tempouerish their cite,
A thing most odyous to all comonte.
A worm of dread was bred up in their heart
Which suffered not them to live in pees,
Among them self when they did aduerte
The great prudence of Alcibiades,
How in manhood he was pereles,
Lest he would after for all their multitude,
Knightly acquyte their ingratitude.
And of assent to abridge his live days,
They again him of malice have conspyred,
After his exyle to make no delays,
For to accomplysh that they long have desired
With brenni^ge hate their hertes falslye fyred
To murdre by envy causeles again right.
Alcibiades the noble worthy knight.
Thus the time approached, and the date
Term before set by constellacion
Of his periody, and his lives fate,
Which was concluded (as made is mencyon)
By cruel murdre to his distruccion:
Alas what prince with gold or soudyours
May him provide again falls conspiratours?
Fortune of new began at him enchace
From her traynes that he ne escape might,
Daily pursued from place aye unto place
In Perce and Mede, tho he were out of sight
Till that his enemies fill on him by night,
Slepyng, alas, to sone they were sped
Wha^ they him found they bre^t him i his bed.
Thus by murdre their purpose was atcheued
Alas it was to horrible a deed,
So good a knight so well in arms preued,
So renomed, so famous in manhood,
For to be brent among the coals read,
First unawarely in his bed ytake,
And so consumed among the coals blake.
This was the end of Alcibiades,
Which in knighthod was most sovereign:
In werre a lion, and a lamb in pees:
As Mars victorius, his fate so did ordain,
To fames palaies he flies with wyngs twain,
Son to Mynerua to speak of high prudence,
And like Mercury by notable eloquence.
The.xvii. chapter.
Here Bochas makes an exclamation upon the death of Alcibiades.

OFatal sustren which span y^ lives thread,
So short a term, why did ye determine*
To suffer him brenne among the coals read?
Ye were to hasty to break and untwine
His web of knighthod yt so clear did shine,
And cast of noblesse his beams out so clear,
Alas that ever he fill in your daungere,
Out on Stix and on Attropose,
That have of malice slain so good a knight
Out on you three that keep your self so close
Daughters ycalled of the derke night:
And thou Letu^ that queyntest eke the light,
Of Alcibiades, myrrour and l^tern,
To speak in knighthod, how men should them govern.
Yeslee the worthy, and wretches ye do spare,
Thercites lives Hector is slain in deed,
Your funeral smokes makes relmes so bare
To race up Cedris their branches may not sprede
Ye pull the laurer, ye make y^ firs sede,
Full little thank in kyngdoms ye deserve,
Caytiues to fostre and do the worthy sterue.
Alcibiades is passed into fate,
Light of knighthod lies clipsed in the shade
The Parcas susterne to soon set his date,
Of his high noblesse to make the laurer fade:
Lacedemonois of his death were glad,
Funeral fire his body has dyffied,
For high prowess his soul stellifyed.
Lenuoye
ALas this tragedy does my heart to blede
My pen quaketh of ruth and of pity,
In my writing, when that I take heed
To se the strange fearful dyuersyte
Of all worldly vusure felycite:
How from their sees shortli to comprehend,
Froward fortune does princes down descend
Alcibiades of courage and of manhed
As is rehearsed (in books ye may se)
Of genltylnes, and of goodly heed,
Of semelynes, of fredom, and of bounte
Of high prudence, and magnanymite,
Was most famous as auctours him co^med,
yet from his seat fortune made him descend.
All the people both of Perce and Mede,
While he governed Athenes the cite
Stood in his danger and began his sword to dread
And all that were rebel to his country
He chastised them in their most cruelte:
But when his fame began highest up tascend,
From her whele fortune made him descend.
Murdre and treson, with prudent frendlihede,
Outward fair chere, covert iniquite,
Plesaunt in speech, and under that falshede
Houyshed out sharp tayled like a be,
Song of Sirenes to drown men in the sea,
In one combyned their malice can extend,
To cause princes from their sees descend.
Noble princes that se so much and read,
Remembering stories of antiquite,
Before prouidyng that treason not proceed:
Be aye most dreadful in high prosperyte,
Let others falling a myrrour to you be.
The turn of fortune al auctors reprehend,
That who sit highest is red^est to discende.
The.xviii. Chapter.
Here Bochas writes agaynest the desires of people.

AFter this process, if ye list to lere,
Like as Bochas makes mention,
That worldly folk most souerainlye desire
To have in lordship great exaltacion,
And up to climb in their entencion
Of worldly worship to the highest place,
All erthly treasours atones to enbrace.
The fervent flame of their gredy desires
In much gatheryng finds no suffisaunce,
Their hungry etyke kyndleth so the fyres
Of avarice, by long continuance,
That their thyrst with worldly habundau^ce
On Tantalus river abraydeth ever in one:
Drowned i^ dri^king, and deem their parts none.
There may no tresour their dropsy staunch,
The more they dri^ke ye more they list in deed:
In Tagus flodes the deper that they launche
The gretter dryness does ^ their breasts bread.
The higher water an ebb most they dread:
False indygence their heart has so confounded,
At the full sees seem their barge is grounded.
Thus every man would to riches attain,
With suffisaunce but few hold them content,
Who most habou^deth rathest will complain
For lack of good, alas how they be blent:
Where shall their gadri^g and their good be spent?
Some one percase shall the^ thereof discharge,
whom they most hate, and spend it out at large.
Within a body full little of stature
Corages grow up to their magnificence,
Which up tascend do their busy cure,
And in their clymbing and transitorye ascence,
Having an hope of worldly appearance,
Like as nothig their puisau^ce might trouble,
Nothing aduerting how fortune is double.
Some set their joy in conquest and in werres
To enbrace all earth under their puissaunce,
Like as they might ^eche above the sterres,
To bring down heaven unto their obeisaunce:
But if their power were wayed in balaunce,
And counterwayd aright in their memory,
They should find that all is but veynglory.
What may auail them their fetherbeds soft,
Shetes of reins, long, large, and wide,
Diverse deuyses or clothes changed often,
Or vicious meyny walkyng by their side,
Void of virtue, ambicious in their pride*
Which causes princes by report of such fame,
For their mis^uing to have an evil name.
And thus for lack of virtuous dilygence,
Through false luxury and ydelnesse
And upon flaterers the outrageous expense
Support of wrong, oppressing right wisnes
Where lesyngemongers have an entresse:
Whom to sustayn when princes do their cure,
God will not suffer that they shall long endure.
Office of princes is to support right,
His sword of knighthode fro wrong to redress,
The pore releuing not toppres the^ with might,
His old servants well preued not disdayn:
His hasty rigor, and his vengaunce sudden
Let mercy tempere, to dome or he proceed,
And God shall quite him at his most need.
The.xix. Chapter.
Here John Bochas speaks against idelnesse, rehersing how some men have joy
in one science, and some in another.

MIn auctor Bochas makes a rehersayle
In eschewing of froward ydlenes,
That unto virtue may most avail
Good diligent labor, and honest business:
And so concluding full plainlye does express,
Every man reioiseth (this se^te^ce is not glosed)
To do such thing to which he is disposed.
Some have joy by heuenlye influence
To know the course above celestial,
And some of knighthod do their diligence
To preue them self in acts marciall,
And some rejoice in their intent fynal
In eloquence, some in philosophy,
Some above all to study in poetry.
The hardy knight is servant to faint George
Mening of planets sercheth thastronomere,
Martes smyth labors in his forge,
Harneys of stele makes tharmourere,
But the deuisour by diligence entere
By fresh contriuyng out of the old entayle,
Fyndeth new devises of plate and of mayle.
The labourer sets wholly his pleasaunce
To tylth of land, in time to sow his grain:
To increase his sede by yearly habundaunce,
And that his plough labor not in vain,
Castyng his seasons of drouth and eke of rain
And poets to sit in their library,
Desire of nature to be solitary.
Such as me^ love such things they undertake
Fyshe or foul to hunt with their hounds,
Some of woul sundry clothes make,
By philosophers was found out the grounds,
And of all study they set out first the bounds:
Caused poets plainly to conclude,
Out of all prease to live in solitude.
Logiciens delight in arguments,
Philosophers in virtuous living,
And legisters following the ententes,
Greatly rejoice in lucre and winnyng:
Phisiciens travail for getting,
And of poets this is the subtle form
By new inuencion things to transform.
Poets should eschew all ydlenes,
Walk by ryuers and wells crystallyne,
To mountains a morrow their course dress,
The mist diffied wha^ Phoebus first does shine,
Study in books of moral disciplyne:
Nothing coueyte but set their intent,
With moderate fode for to be content.
Their chief labor is vices for to fage
With a manner covert similitude,
And none estate with their langage
By no rebukyng of terms dull and rude:
What ever they write on virtue ey conclude,
Appayre no man in no manner wise,
This is the office of poets that be wise.
The.xx. Chapter.
How Malleus duke of cartage for oppression and tyranny was hewn into pieces.

When Bochas had rehearsed of Poets
Their strange study, and solayne wrytynges,
And their desires of solitary seats,
In pleasant place to make their dwellinges
Beside ryuers and wholesome well sprynges,
Which accomplished, he began his pen auance,
Princes of Affrike to put in remembrance.
And while he did his busy diligence
Their pyteous falls to put in memory,
First there came twain unto his presence,
Their old noblesse appalled, and their glory:
Which as him sempt within a territory,
Of Affryke bounds longyng to Cartage,
Did first appear, most deadly of vysage.
The one of them was named Malleus,
Duke of Cartage, of Affryke lord and sire,
His son also called Cartalus,
Whilom chief prince and bishop eke of Tire:
But Malleus which held the great empire
Of all Affryke, for his pompous outrage
Exiled was for ever out of Cartage.
Which caused him in heart he was not merry.
But aye remembered upon his fell banishing,
Gadered his people win the land of Surry,
And in the field while he lay hostyng
Cast him fully to make no tariyng,
But in all haste of knyghtly fell courage,
Maugre his enemies resort unto Cartage.
To avenge his exyle his heart was set a fire,
And his intent more to fortify,
He sent in haste his letters down to Tire
To Tartalus, that he should him hye
And bring with him all the chyualry
Of his city, in steel armed clean,
His fathers party to hold up and sustene.
But wha^ this bishop knew holly the manner
Of this purpose which ye have heard devise,
He consydred how that time of the year
Ordained was to do sacrifyce
After the rytes of their panym wise
To Hercules, which in that city
Above all gods had the souerayntie.
Whose feast was hold space of certain days
Which for to halow he neades must entende,
And by the custom make no delays
But that he must thereto condiscende,
And leauer he had his father to offend
As in such case then through negligence
Unto his gods for to do offense.
Wherefore his father had indignacion
The case arettyng to unkindness,
And thereof caught a great occasion
Again his son, of froward wilfulnes:
For princes often of furious hastines,
Will pyke a quarrel causeles in sentence,
Again folk absent, though there be no offense.
And some tongues venomous of nature,
When they perceive that a prince is meued,
To agreg his ire do their busy cure,
With false langage to make him more grieved
But there is no poyso^ so well expert nor preued
As is of tongues the hateful vyolence,
Namely when princes list give the^ audience.
The feast accomplyshed of mighty Hercules
All innocent of double and false menyng,
This said bishop of will not retcheles,
Came to his father without more tariyng,
Changed neither habit nor clothyng,
With all the ensygnes, and in the same wise
As he tofore had done sacrifice.
Anon his father made no delay
Without excuse it would be no bet,
Of hasty rancour the self same day
Made him be hanged upon an hye gybet:
Law and justice were both aside set,
And tyranny most furyous and wode,
To do vengeance in trouthes place stood.
Who can or may tyrants well discryue
Whose swords ben whet aye for vengeance
Their bloody thyrst does their hearts ryue,
Their ears aye open to hear of him mischau^ce
Their furious mirth, their mortal pleasau^ce
Their pale smilyng, their laughter of hatred,
Concludes ever upon some cruel deed.
They be ministers to Parcas sistern three,
To vntwynd y^ thredes of folks here mortal
And very cosyns through hasty cruelte,
Unto the wode furyes infernal,
Children to Pluto of vengeance marciall:
Which for their vices but they bear the^ well,
Shall turn in hell on Ixions whele.
Thus Malleus father most unkind
Like such a tyrant, shed out his cruelte
As ye have heard, and after as I find
Of furious heart and of old enmyty:
By force is entered Cartage the cite,
And slough all tho in his hateful ire,
That him before had exyled into Tire.
Wrought after will and nothing after right,
Began rob and spoil that noble famous town,
Which made him hated in the peoples sight
For his outrage and great extorcion:
Having no joy nor consolation
Within his heart, plainly nor gladness,
Save like a tyrant the people to oppress.
The people of Cartage sore began to complayn
Upon their mischefe and desolation:
As Bochas writes, rehersyng in certain,
Will is stepmother of wit and of reason,
And where that princes have dominacion,
And by false pyllage to riches clyme up fast,
Trust right well their lordship may not last.
Their great power of worldly excellence,
To their accrochyng of temporal riches,
Wha^ they be tyra^tes, may stand in no defense:
And froward will rules their highness,
For what is lordshyp plainly to express
In this world here if it be discerned?
Love of the people wha^ they be well governed
For tyranny and false oppression
Causes princes to stand in great hatrede,
And what is worth their dominacion
Without love? let preue it at a need,
Men for a time may suffer them and dread,
But when that dread constrained is and gone,
Than is a prince a man but alone.
Se an example how Malleus of Cartage
For all his castles and towers made of stones,
For his oppression, vengeance, and outrage
The people of Affryke rose on him all atones,
And cut asunder his flesh and also his bones
Cast the^ plainly (on him they were so wode)
Unto their gods to offer up his blood.
The people dempt, of mortal cruelty,
There was no offering so plesau^t nor co^uenable
Unto their gods to please their deity,
As blood of tyrants which yt be vengeable:
Thus cruel princes make y^ people unstable,
Of necessity which ought be complained,
To wreke their wrong y^ they be constrained
Lo here the end of Malleus the tyrant,
Which does to princes full well exemplify
To God above how it is not pleasant
Them to delight in no such robbery,
Nor pyl the people by no false tyranny,
Nor for no tales be hasty of vengeance,
For all such thing to god is displeasaunce.
Lenuoy.
Read and considered, this said tragedy
Shows to Princes a myrroure full notable,
How they their rygour shall te^per and modefy,
Or they proceed for to be vengeable:
For in a prince it is right commendable,
Rancour of heart, of chere, and of courage,
For to defer till that their ire assuage.
Their hasty ire, their sudden melancholy,
Their colorike fumes, yr fury vnrestraynable
Their vnqueint fyres with flame of tyranny,
Their fretyng etyke of hate incomparable,
Like beastial Tygres, like lions vntretable
Ne will not suffer that infernal rage,
Defer their domes till their ire assuage.
The royal Lion of moral gentry
Among beasts of force incomperable,
Preueth not his power nor his regaly
Gayn beasts prostrate, which be not defe^sable
And mighty princes should in case semblable
For innocents take mercy in morgage,
Respityng rygour till that ire assuage,
The sparkle of ve^geau^ce is quycked in party
By wyndes four, fell and abominable,
Blast of detraction, and blast of flattery,
Blast of false rowners yt forge many fable,
And blast of brybours vycious and culpable:
with smoky slanders, and felons false vysage,
Causes ire of princes yt it may never assuage
For which let princes of noble policy
Beware of tongues double and disceyuable,
Which with their venym infect each company,
Their poynaunt poison is so penetrable:
To folk absent it is mischeuable,
So deep freteth their serpentyne langage,
Causig in princes their ire may not assuage
Noble princes let virtue magnify
Your high estate, to make you merciable,
For moral Seneke does clearly specify,
The trone of princes by cleme^ce is made stable
Vengeance delayed to God is agreeable,
And hasty rygour does outrageous damage,
When humble requests your ire may not aswage
The.xxi. Chapter.
How the substance of the host of Hymilcho duke of Cartage going to conquer
Cecile dyed of pestilence, and after he him self slain.

AFter these mighty princes twain
Next in order with pale and dead vysage,
Tofore Bochas Hymilcho began compain
The unhappy fall of his fatal passage,
When he was sent by authority of Cartage
To co^quere through his mighty puissaunce,
The land of Cycile, unto their obeysaunce.
They of Cartage had an opinion,
That it was lefull (after their intent)
Without title of right and of reason
Their teritories and bounds to augment:
And for that cause Hymilcho they sent
The mighty duke their nobles to advance,
Which of Cartage had hole the governance
And for he must pass by the sea
Toward Cicyle, this noble worthy knight,
With him he had a full great enarmee,
Chose out of Cartage in steel armed bright:
Their fone to co^quere of very force and might
But Fortune began at him so disdain,
That to his purpose he never might attain.
Ground and gynnyng of his destruction
To be remembered shortly in sentence,
There fill of the air a great corruption,
Which caused a full great pestilence
Among his meyny, by unware violence
And sudden mischefe that is upon him fall,
He lost almost his worthy knights all.
Nigh all his people was slain in y^ morayne,
That but a few be left of his meyne:
Unfortunate he turned is again
Home to Cartage, and they of the city
All causeles of hasty cruelte,
Has slain this duke as Bochas does co^pyle
Lo who may trust Fortune any while?
The.xxii. Chapter.
How Heynon duke of Cartage was dismembered.

AFter whose death a man there began succeed
A mighty duke y^ called was Haynon,
Which purposed for to change in deed
His name of duke by false ambicion,
And to be called throughout y^ mighty town,
King of Cartage, and thereupon of pride
To find out ways he felly began provide.
He was not content a duke men should him call,
But of Cartage for to be named king,
And like as his purpose that it should fall,
Fro day to day the means compassyng
How he might fulfill this uncouth thing,
For to be crowned and reign in that land,
And at the last this mean way he fond.
He had a daughter young and tender of age,
Which of the people stood in great favor,
And he him cast to give her in marriage
To a young knight son to a Senator,
Which in the city was a governor:
And that his purpose might be attained,
Day of the marriage and time was ordained.
And in his palayce chief and principal
This said duke let make his ordinance,
To hold a feast full solemn and royal,
And with great cost made his purueyaunce,
Of sundry daintyes, which y^ in substance
Were necessary in all manner thing,
Unto the feast of a worthy king.
He gave in charge unto his purueiours,
That all were ready again a certain day,
And to his feast came all the Senators,
Dwelling in Cartage there durst none say nay
And of his purpose to make no delay,
Thought his fraud was not apperceyued,
He cast yt day that some should be deceived.
He conveyed in his inward intent
He to be king and raygne in Cartage,
The Senators would never assent
To break their custom nor their old usage
He durst thereof utter no langage,
Kept him secret without noise or soun,
And fully cast him to proceed by treason.
The next way, he knew no better read
To his desire than plainly to ordain
That of Cartage the senators were deed,
Than were he likely his purpose to attain,
For to be crowned lord and sovereign:
So to accomplish his lust in all thing,
And in Cartage to raygne as lord and king.
For if the senate were utterly destroyed
He should find no manner resistance,
Whereby his purpose should be annoyed
None dare say nay to his magnificence:
For in the porayle there was no defense,
And at this feast he cast him to proceed,
All his intent to conclude in deed.
His officers he made to be sworn
To help destroy falsely by poison
The senators of whom I spoke to forne,
And that their vitayles and dainties in foyson
And eke their wines for short conclusion,
Should with venym be intoxicate,
Through all the palaice, and spare none estate.
These officers had a conscience
For to accomplish so horrible a thing,
And secretly under great providence
To the Senate thereof they gave warning:
And when they knew this mortal co^passyng
Of Duke Haynon to show all the affray,
They put of prudence the weddyng in delay.
Whereof this duke began have suspection,
And of this matter fill in a manner dread,
Thought he would by some collusion
Again Cartage more mortally proceed:
And began call to help him at his need
Of Mauritayne, a king of great renoun,
With him by force to fall upon the town.
Made him promise, to his advantage
For to make fre distribucion
Of the riches, treasure, and pyllage,
Which that he might find in the town,
For utter fine of his entencion
Was to destroy of wilful cruelty,
The famous Cartage y^ mighty strong city.
Of all the thralles in the town dwelling
And such as were borne of low lynage,
To strength his party this was his workyng:
He made them all by mortal fell outrage,
Within the mighty castle of Cartage
To keep them close of malice and envy,
Again the city him self to fortify.
But all for naught, the mighty Senators,
Thereof ware, and of high prudence
Gain his malice and all his false robbours
They made the^ strong, and through their providence
In especial to ordeyn a defense
First on their party to let the coming,
Of Mauritayne, the strong cruel king.
And of assent they list not delay,
But rose a tones by great ordinance
Their false duke to venquisshe and outray:
Him and his churles they brought to vttraunce,
Fill upon him with a great puisaunce,
And finally procedyng of reason,
This was his dome, by auyse of all the town.
First of this duke, as it is remembered,
He was dispoyled, his doublet eke unlaced,
Joint fro joint hewn and dismembered,
And from his heed out his eyes araced:
And right as he had before compased
To have distroyed his own mighty town,
As ye have herd, he received the guerdon.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedy does pitously complain,
And makes a manner lamentacion
Of these mighty rich princes twain,
Slain in Cartage as made is mention:
Causeless the tone, save by thoccasion
That pestilence in his froward viage,
Slew all his people that were borne in Cartage.
Fortune also began frowardly disdain
Again this rich mighty duke Haynoun,
When of malice he began mortally ordain
The Senators to murdre of his town:
At his feast by craft of false poison,
As ye have herd reherced his outrage,
He was agaynwarde disme^bred in Cartage.
Who does vengeance ve^geau^ce shall attayn,
In high estate without excepcion:
And who of pity vengeance does restrain,
He shall of mercy receive the guerdon.
For right requires of troth and reason,
Cruel princes shall have for their wage,
Death like this duke disme^bred in Cartage.
Noble princes do your best pain,
For to preserve fro rebellyon
The common people which stand in no certain,
With every wind tournyng vpsodoun,
After fortune they change affeccion,
Turning their hertes with tryst or glad visage,
Like as y^ people did whylom in Cartage.
The autour again covetous people.
NAture y^ is content with little thing
The wise, ware, circu^spect gods
Which under god in heui^ above reignig
The world to govern, is called the^pres:
Mother of rychesses, the first founderesse
Which serched out by her artyficeres,
The strange treasours hyd in the my neres.
This noble lady, this princess most famous,
Knowing of man the uncouth condicyons,
Saw by experyence richesse were noyous,
In him to eclypse the disposyons,
And convey his inclynacions
By a wrong way virtue to set aside,
How couetouse was a full peryllous gyde.
For avarice is to all virtues contrayre,
The gredy worm, y^ serpent vnstauncheable
Man to betraisshe with promyses debonayre,
At prime face sote and agreeable,
Taught him of nature by craft most deceyuable
Through subtle serching as it were for y^ nones
First out of earth to delue precious stones.
Of rich myners they search out y^ entrayles,
To find out metals for worldly auau^tages,
Contryued ships with their broad sails,
By diverse sees to make their passages:
And couetyse ordained first vyages,
Caused princes to ride in lands far,
Each again other for to gyn a werre.
Of avarice began first these robberyes,
Awayte of brigantes, and all extorte pyllages,
Murdre, slaughter, and covert briberyes,
Of old contryued furyous fell domages,
Wrought and atcheued in all manner ages:
Now in these days let set it at a prefe,
False couetyse caused all such mischefe.
She was first rote of false extorcion,
To spoil the temple mother of rauyne,
And sterer up of oppressyon,
To take by force this was her doctrine:
And as mine auctor does plainly determyne,
And concludes in full pytouse wise,
Rote of all yuell is false couetyse.
She is eke norice of conteke and of strife,
Maystresse of murdre and wilful vyolence,
Made men to ieoparte body, good, and life,
Caused discencion and disobedyence:
Grutching of commons wtdraught of reverence,
By rigorous constraynt sudden rebellions,
Rumor in realms, unware subuercions.
This froward dragon full of ydropisy
Whose fretyng etike there may no plenty feed,
To staunche his thyrst there is no remedy,
The more he drinks the more he has need:
And the more tresure y^ more he stant in dread
With Tantalus though he swym in y^ flodes
In Mydas well playneth for lack of goods
This worm eke causes y^ men in riches
Have dread of thieves a night in their waking
And if they hear on cofer, bed, or press,
Cat, rat, or mouse, or any worm meuyng,
He weneth anon within him self demyng
That there were come with great apparayle,
Some uncouth pillor, his treasure to assail.
The woeful soul stands ever in dread,
And aye abides in labor and travail:
And of the goods which he does possede,
Falls in despair lest they would him fail,
Twene hope and dread there is such battle,
Through enterminyng each other to confound
To be most gredy when they most abound.
Hope vnasured with dread dispayred
Metyng in hearts make a mortal war,
Wha^ hope presumes, with dread he is apayred,
And like a cowarde makes him stand afar
Dull of his chere as is a cloudy star:
Which dare not show the light of his treasour
But ever to increase set wholly his labor.
He dare not touch thing that he loves most,
His cofers close be shut under key,
Though he have much he makes thereof no bost
Lest for his tresure men would him werrey:
Playneth for need like as he would dey,
Fayneth false pouert to spare his dispense,
Oppressyng plenty with froward indigence.
And though his chestes heaped be with gold
With iron bars fast shut and closed,
False scarcity governs his household,
That by none excess he is not undisposed:
His indigent heart so straytely is enosed,
To Herebus heir and yet well worse in deed,
In greatest riches to compain upon need.
This Herebus has of yrou and not of stone,
For auaryce buylt a foul city,
Where as the whele turns of Ixion
Under the bounds of Thesephone,
Where zisiphus may never a day go free
But with his stone continually trauayleth,
And the more busy his labor lest avails.
Thus avarice to virtue most contrary,
Found among vices full contagious,
Ever busy their restless stone to carry,
Now up now down with weary zisiphus:
Whose endless labor braydeth on Theseus,
Which held the bridle of fruteles business,
Condemned in hell to live in ydlenes.
Of couetise the cruel marinere
Is called Charon, which with Flegetonte
By many a straight and many fell dau^gere,
Sayleth in the floudes of furious Acheronte,
Under that darked and cloudy Orizonte:
Where avarice chose whylom nygardshyp,
For treasorer, his cofers for to keep.
First to declare the labor in gatheryng
Of covetous men, as it is in deed,
And cou^terpayse how their straight keeping
Is ever meynt with importable dread,
Sorrow at departing for their mortal mede,
Which may be called of troth and equity,
Of Cerberus the wakers heads three.
The first head is vnstauncheable desire
Of worldly goods, great riches to attain,
The more encrece the hotter is the fire:
The second head is the dredefull pain
Which in keeping his heart does constrayne,
Unware departing, that sodaynely does fall,
Is the third head, that greueth most of all.
This wakyr worm yt bears this heads three
Is called the worm of gredy couetyse,
Whose busy co^straynt, restles perplexite
Troubles the soul in full furious wise,
Which froward monster plainly to deuyse,
Braydeth on Hidra (of whom poets said)
One head cut of, there grows three again.
Ever at the tail of plenty and riches
Of custom follows grutchyng and envy,
For he that has of treasure great michnes,
Is selde glad, as for his party,
Thus both twain stand in ieopardye,
The rich with plenty hold him not appayed,
And the neady with pouert is afraid.
And yet in pouert is full great sykernes,
Which is treasour that no man will assail,
As mine auctour Bochas bears witness:
Amiclates among the porayle
Lived in peace sure from all battle,
Held him content with such as God him sent,
When rich were armed and to the werre went.
Virtuous pouert stands ever in siker case,
To watch his house he has full little need,
But proud Pompey assieged in Duras
For fear of Julius stood in great dread:
But people rude hereof take none head,
Such as rejoice them for to shede blood,
In strange werres wrongly to get good.
Stories old full well reherce conne
Diverse studies of folk here mortal,
First how Diogenes was content in his tonne
In which he made his lodgyng principal,
And saw the course above celestial,
Lived gladder among philosophers,
Than king Cresus with all his stuffed cofers.
And if men would unto mind call
The great mischeues following i habu^dau^ce,
And think also how Sardanapall
For all his treasour came unto mischaunce,
And how Sophoclius poorest in substance,
Had but a gardayne full of lekes grene,
And right naught else him self to sustene.
This Philosopher was ever glad and light,
There was no watch made in his tours,
Full surely slepte he all the long night
Having no dread of thieves ne robbours,
In somer walkyng among the grene flours,
And in cold winter full merely and often,
On dry straw he lay and slept full soft.
Cyntinatus a poor laborere,
Feyed dichesse to get his sustenaunce,
without grutchyng ever glad of chere
Both in port and in his countenance,
Dempt he had as much suffisaunce
To his pleasaunce as Cresus king of Lyde,
Content with little nature was his gyde.
This poor man in his pouert assured,
With little fode and clothes but a few
Had hearts ease, and gladsome peace recured:
It lyked him not over his head to hew,
Which thing conceived clerly does us show,
That joyous pouert conveyed with gladness,
Grutching avoided, surmounteth al richesse.
And if that folk consider a right
Their pitous sighs, their thoughtfull business,
Their great labor, their little sleep a night,
Which they endure for worldly richesse,
And of y^ abydyng the dredefull sykernesse,
Which thing peysed and called to memory,
All erthly power is double and transitory.
And by stories which ben credible
Topreue their power is not abydyng
But at a point slydyng and fallible,
Whylom Massinissa of Numidy king,
That was so mighty by record of writing,
For fear of Siphax only his life to save,
Flede into mountains and hid him in a cave.
And there he found full small vitayle,
Constrained narowe of indigence and need
Wha^ other deyntes in mischese began him fail
He gadred rotes, and eat them in his dread:
Eke proud Xerses king of Perce and Mede,
Dra^ke blod and water, to stau^che with his thrust,
Dread and travail gave him such lust.
Yet some men would say of adventure,
They were compelled again their volu^te,
These kings twain such mischefe te^dure,
Maugre their will, of necessite,
For casual chance refte them their liberte,
So that the rygour of this sudden rage,
Came in by constraynt and of no courage.
But for all that folk in their pouerte
On great meats that them self feed,
Ben all strong, whole, and fair to see,
And also lusty preued at a need,
Upright of limbs their iourneys to speed,
As long lyfed, the cause to express,
Is only this they do not use excess.
To poor men the best medicine
Is due labor, with moderate abstinence,
Good air in feldes where Phoebus lust shine,
Voydinge dark mistes y^ causes pestylence:
Of heavy stomach they feel no violence,
They not enriche leches nor potyquares,
Them self to save with uncouth lectuares,
But folks rich worken the contrary
Which in them causes maladies strong,
Fro their diete every day they varye
With diverse meats, and their syttyng long*
And with all this their apetites wrong,
Take out of time, which they may not endure,
Which by custom oppresses nature.
And thus mine auctour, shortly to deuyse,
Sees glad pouert stands most in sekernes,
And of all evil he sees how couetyse
Is rote and ground, with false extort riches,
Riot annexed, engendryng long sickness:
Thereon concludyng how moderate diete,
Sets body and soul in rest and in quiet.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
How Euagora king of Cypre, was by Artaxerses outrayed and put from his
kingdom.

FOlowingi order y^ process of Bochas,
As he remembers next in his writing
To him appeared rehearsed thus y^ caas,
Euagora that was of Cypre king,
His eyes derked by manyfolde wriyng:
Because he had lost that rich land,
Which he tofore had conquered with his hand.
This land of Cypre as made is mention
Of diverse metals is passyngly habounde,
Has of riches great plenty and foyson,
And of this city like as it is found,
It stands far south with many hills round,
And has also many commodities,
Within the bounds of towns and cities.
Touching this Cypre I can no more say,
Of which land Euagora was king,
Till he began proudly for to warrey
With Lacedemons their party susteynyng,
Gain Artaxerses, and at their metyng
The said Euagora was brought to vttrau^ce
Put fro his kingdom and fro al governance.
The.xxiiii. Chapter.
How Theo king of Egypt, by Artaxerses was driven from his kingdom and
fled into Araby.

NExt Euagora came king Theo
Of all Egypt long time possessour,
And to John Bochas ga^ declare his woe,
How fortune did her froward labor,
And fro him drew her frendshyp and favor:
And suddenly through her iniquite,
She cast this king down fro his royal see.
She list her malice from him not differ,
Ne would not suffer him for to live in pe^s,
But caused him for to begin a werre
Again the said mighty Artaxerses:
Wenyng thereby to have had great encrees,
Gadred ships and made a great armee,
In his intent to have met him on the sea.
To Lacedemons he was favorable,
Sent them vessels stuffed with vitayle,
Dempt of pride that him self was able
With Artaxerses to hold a battle:
But hasty trust does fools often fail,
For this Theo was after anon right
Driven out of Egypt and yput to flight.
Artaxerses pursued him so sore
Tofore his face he durst not appear,
Fled into Araby, mine auctour says no more,
Banished from Egypt, deedly of face and chere:
And of his fate who so list to lere,
He was deprived from kyngly dignite,
And by fortune cast from his royal see.
The.xxv. Chapter.
How Amynta of Macedone king, had by Erudice his wife, Alysandre, Perdica, and
Philyppe, that were slain.

ANd among other their fates co^plaining
Through fortunes dredefull violence,
There came Amynta, of Macedone king,
And to John Bochas showed his sentence,
And to declare his magnificence
To Alysandre, graunde father in his life,
Having four children by Erudice his wife.
The first of them was Alysandre called,
And Perdica named the second,
The third Philyppe in Macedone stalled,
King of Greece like as it is found,
Which in riches greatly did habounde,
And was eke father this noble warrior,
To Alysandre the mighty conqueror.
And or mine auctour further does proceed,
He makes a manner of disgression
From his matter, like as ye may read,
And gynneth in order a description
Of Macedone, the famous region,
Among Greeks writes in especial,
Of seven provinces, it is the principal.
And so procedyng he says how that country
Stretches his bounds about him enuyron
Toward the sea, which called is Egee,
Forth by Achaya toward Septentrion,
And to Messene, westwarde it gothe down:
And who that can by craft the costs cast,
To Dalmacia the name thereof does last.
In Macedone he does also us lere
Of Olympus stands the great mountain,
And in that kingdom is many great mynere
Of gold and silver, like as books said:
And on that hill is nouther wind ne rain,
For thylke mountain so high does attain,
That it may nouther blow there ne rain.
The king Amynta of who^ I spoke toforn,
Had in Greece many great battle
Olympiens in Macedone borne
And Illyriens together he did assail,
Through his wisdom he did always prevail
But with his enemies while he stood in strife
His death was shapen by Erudice his wife.
Mine auctour Bochas of her does diffine,
She imagined his destruction
Because she had another concubine,
On whom she set all her affection:
Day set and time to his confusion
Fully ordained at a marriage,
He to be slain of one of his lineage.
He had a suster called Vryone
Which prudently espied the manner
Of Erudice, and secretly alone
Goth to the king and told him all yfere:
And as the story in order tells here,
Though she failed that day of her empryse,
She thought to fulfill it in another wise.
This to mean, of her iniquite
Of her fraud, and false ymaginyng
She was in cause through her co^trariouste,
Of the destruction of their mighty king:
For the conclusion of her false workyng
was to have slain the king and all his line,
She to have raygned with her concubyne.
But when she saw she might not atcheue
Her furious purpose by none adventure,
Her venomous malice upon her lord to preue
On other parties she did her busy cure,
Enmitees and mischeues to procure
Again the king by mortal fell assayes,
With sorrow and trouble for to short his days.
Night and day his life stood ever in dread,
Him to betraye she cast out hoke and line,
And who is he that can or may take heed,
Freely to escape, to eschew, or decline
Malice of women, when they be serpentine*
Se an example of this queen Erudice,
Void of all virtue, and full of every vice.
Alas no prince can beware by other,
To bridel their nobles with reins of reason:
Such as commit, alas both ship and rother
Unto Sirenes to row them up and down
Throughout Caribdis to their destruction,
By craft of Cyrces alas they were made nice
Blind to remember upon this Erudice.
Which made Aminta to live i sorrow and dread,
To rest in peace suffered him to have no space
In thought and trouble his life began he led,
Till by long process death began him manace,
Yet or he died fortune gave him grace,
His eldest son by wisdom to ordain,
Called Alysandre his crown to attain.
Thus Alisandre was his successor,
For Cathynenses began their rancour let
Against him, for he with great labor
By their sufferaunce came to his royal sete:
And for to set his realm in quiet
First with Athenes the mighty strong town,
Provided a peace, of hie discretion.
And for to avoid all ambiguite
Of old debates, and of old outrage,
First he sent into that strong cite
His son Philippe, young and tender of age,
On peace assured to lie there for hostage,
And in that city, the story bears witness,
He began to grow unto full hye nobles:
He was committed unto the discipline
Of a great duke called Epaminondon,
Which to all virtue his youth made incline:
For of this duke Justine makes mention,
By a manner recommendacion
Tofore nor after as by his auyse,
Was never no prince more excellent nor wise
First he commends his virtuous courage,
His hye noblesse, his virtuous excellence,
And by descent he borne was of hye lineage,
And in two things concludes his sentence:
Says that he was of most magnificence,
Egall to Mars by famous chiualry,
And son to Phoebus through hye philosophy
And Bochas here does his style auaunce
Full notably, with excellent langage,
And says no treasour atteyneth in substance
To thylke richesse, auoydyng all outrage:
As when there is by bond of marriage
Knyt up a knot atwene excellence
Of famous knighthode, and of dame prudence.
This knot avails more than gold in cofer,
And is more glorious perpetually to abide:
A mighty prince ought be a Philosopher
Which can by prudence al vices set aside,
For when to manhood providence is gyde,
And virtuous force is captain in the werre,
Let men well trust that party may not err.
This Epaminonda of knighthod sustenour,
Carbuncle of virtue as books tell con,
Of gentel manners called the famous flour,
And of high noblesse a very worldly son,
Whose knyghtly triumphs be so high up ron
To Martes palais, with the blessed souns
Of famous trumpettes and golden clariouns.
For he was called the bright myrrour
Of rightful quarelles the party to sustene,
Of extort wrongs most just reformatour,
Aye egall judge of intent most clean:
Which never could nothing but truth meaane,
Would of custom for hate nor aliaunce,
On nouther party decline the balaunce.
And to commend his virtuous prowess,
His proved triumphs, his magnanimite,
His marciall acts, his knyghtly business,
In the gettyng of many strong cite,
And all his labor was for the commonte:
Which to augment he would never ceace,
Such joy he had the common well tencreace.
This was also his vsaunce evermore,
What ever he gate to part it in largess:
Of gold nor coin he set but little store,
For all his heart was set on gentleness,
By manly fredome, and plainly to express,
He spared no good, it showed well in deed,
His true servants to help in their need.
He kept not in cofers his treasour,
Of his nature he was so liberal
For to releue each manly soudiour,
Such as were preued in acts marciall,
And for to hold his feast funeral,
After his death, his story makes mind
He was so fre, he left nothing behind.
All his offices and famous dignities
And great emprises in his time wrought,
Encresed fra^chises through Greece i^ his cities
With liberties by his prudence out sought
For common profit, and for him self naught:
With great augmenting of strange teritories,
All this came in by mean of his victories.
And among all his knyghtly excellences,
By diverse auctours unto mind is brought
How all his life he studied in sciences,
And upon connyng set holy his thought:
By manly prowess of death he fered naught,
That was showed as it is well found,
The day wha^ he received his dethes wound.
He was home borne unto his pauillion,
All his armor with blood stained reed,
And on a couche by his men laid down,
And began abrayde as he lay half deed:
Sirs (quod he) of one thing take heed,
Has any enemy this day in the field
When I was wounded, taken up my shield?
And when his knights had told him nay,
By a manner of knyghtly reioysyng
He them commanded without more delay
To his presence that they should it bring,
And thereupon full pitously lokyng,
Full like a knight and with mortal chere,
He kyssed it, and said as ye shall here.
Thou were my fellow in arms and my brother
That never would my fellowship forsake,
Sure and abiding, there was not such another,
In every journey that I did undertake:
To me welcome an end I must now make,
After my death my soul shall have plesaunce,
The to be kept yet for a remembrance.
Before his death (as it is put in mind)
The same hour it came to his memory,
To enquire he left it not behind,
Have we (quod he) this day had victory?
Or in the field who has y^ palm of glory?
His knights he prayed y^ day he should dey,
The plain truth they would to him sey.
And they him told plainly all the caas,
How his party had won the feld of might,
And with that word he so reioysed was
That he his spirit yield up anon right,
And so he died like a worthy knight:
In who^ is showed what aueyleth in sentence
Nobles of knighthode, joined with prudence.
And by the mean of his wise doctrine
Philyppe that lay with him in hostage,
Began encreace in knyghtly discipline,
He wext in virtue right as he wext in age,
Whose father was by furions outrage,
(Called Alysandre) as made is mention,
Slain by his mother by false trayson.
After whose death Perdicca in deed
The younger brother, the story does devise,
To the crown began linially succeed,
Slain anon after in full cruel wise:
Such false murder every man should agrise,
As ye have herd first of Amynta,
Of Alysander, and of king Perdicca.
The.xxvi. Chapter.
How the proud tiraunt Aman was hanged, and the innocent preserved.

THe horrible fall furious for to read,
That follows after of y^ great Aman,
A full false tyrau^t found in word and deed,
And was of birth a Macedonian,
Which as the bible full well rehearse can
Was chief master (who can well conscerne)
With Assuerus his people to govern.
He was exalted hye in pride
To gods people most contrarious,
His hateful venym he list not for to hyde,
But like a tiraunt most malicious
Of wylful rancour fell and dispitous,
Fully disposed, and coud him not withdraw
To destroy the Jews and their holy law.
To his intent he gate authority
By his subtell false compassyng,
Sent out letters into each country
Through al Perce by biddyng of the king
That hye and low within the land dwelling
No wight except, that people all about
Should unto Aman obey, knele, and lout.
This was the byddyng of king Assuere
When queen Vasty was voyded for her pride
And Hester chosen a maid most entere,
Was brought to court with y^ king to abide
Which had in youth for to be her gyde
A worthy Jewe, called Mardoche
Within Susis a fair large cite.
By whose counsel every thing she wrought
Passing fair, and of great meekness,
And when the Enukes to y^ king her brought
She was accepted for her great fayrenesse
Unto his grace, her storye bears witness:
And there cherished in especial,
Above all the maidens in the court royal.
And of all Perce she was crowned queen,
A pees commanded through al tho regions,
During the feast that men might seen
The kings nobley in cities and touns,
And of this feast the rich royal souns
Came to the ears of simple Mardoche,
Which came with other the manner for to se.
Tofore the palace as he did abide
With other Jews in his company,
Of hap as he cast his ear aside,
He of two porters the counsel did espy,
How they them cast by false conspiracy
To slay the king, some day of the year,
Like their intent when they found best leisere.
When Mardocheus prudently began feel
The secret malice of their compassyng,
Of compassion he would it not concele,
But made Hester discure it to the king:
Whereof convict they were led to hangyng,
As me seems a competent guerdone
For all that falsely ymagine such treasone.
By which mean the said Mardoche
Was well accepted to the king Assuere,
Lykely also to stand at liberte
Out of the malice and fell daungere
Of cursed Aman, which made him no chere:
But compassed in full fell manner,
Him to distroy and Jews all yfere.
This Mardocheus the Bible tell can,
Withdrew him self to do reverence
Unto this tyrant this froward Aman,
Like as the statute commanded in sentence:
Which thing tauenge by froward violence,
This Aman made of hatrede to be set
Before the palais, a mighty strong gybet.
But who that cast him to do vengeance,
And innocents for to oppress with might,
And wylfull malice, tagrege their greuaunce
As God were blind and had of them no sight,
But at the last he will of very right
Punysh the proud for furious violence,
The poor supportyng for their patience.
As Mardocheus by innocent living
By mean of Hester, and her great mekenes,
Accepted was to Assuere the king,
The law of Jews set in more surenes:
Froward Aman for his cursednes
Vengeable of pride (in the bible ye may see)
Was hye enhanged upon a galowe tree.
Mardocheus of prudence and reason
The furious danger of Aman set aside,
Preserved his people fro destruction
The tyrant hanged for his froward pride:
Thus can our lord his judgments divide
When he sees time, most mighty and puissau^t,
Support the simple and punyshe the tyrant.
The.xxvii. chapter.
Of the two brethren Artaxerses and Cyrus, and how Artaxerses slew his
children and concubines, and how they ended.

AFter the fall of Aman doubtless,
When he best we^d to have be i^ his flours,
Tofore John Bochas came Artaxerses,
Most renomed in his time of conquerours:
Which began declare his sodeyn sharp shours,
With all the parcels of his mortal pain,
Which that fortune again him began ordain
This Artaxerses, as put is in memory,
All other princes excelled in richesse,
Which in his chare famous of glory,
And with his trone of worldly hye noblesse,
Sat in his time (the story bears witness)
Highest exalted y^ was of any king,
That he should fall was it not an uncouth thing?
Kings he had under his obeysaunce,
An hundred, provinces, twenty and eke seven,
Son unto Dary, prince of most puissaunce,
His fame dread more than fyry leven:
None so mighty under the starred heaven
Accounted was that time in war and pees
As was this king called Artaxerses.
He had a brother that named was Cyrus,
Out of one stock came their both lines,
But Artaxerses (the story tells thus)
Was lord of graynes, of oil, and of wines
And had also by diverse concubines
An hundred children, like as it is told,
And fiftene over, tofore or he wexe old.
Of both brethren the power last far,
During their time stood in full hye estate,
Yet atwene them was full mortal war,
Again nature, an unkindly debate:
For thylke wars be most unfortunate
When blood with blod (let no man deem other)
List warrey, as brother against brother.
And finally cause why this war began
Atwene these brethren as made is mention,
Through which debate died many a man,
The ground of all and first occasion
Was only this, for succession:
After king Dary reigning in Perce and Mede
Which of them twain should next succeed.
But Artaxerses by a manner providence
Put his brother privily in prison,
That he ne should make no defense
Nor gather people to his destruction:
This young Cyrus, as made is mention,
Was fast stocked and eke as it is told,
That his stocks and fetters were of gold.
And though it be not remembered in Bochas
How that Cyrus escaped fro prison,
Yet also soon as he delivered was
Through Perce and Mede rydyng up and down,
He gadered people, of entention
Through old hatred his brother tassayle,
The field assigned, they met in battle.
Where Cyrus proudly put him self in prees
To show his manhood in special,
Sought his brother called Artaxerses,
And gave to him a wound full mortal,
Without frendshyp or favor fraternall:
That Artaxerses his wound began so ache,
Constrained was the field to forsake.
And Cyrus than furious as a Lion
His adversaries began mortally to wake,
But false fortune full of collusion
Under faint smilyng a mow began him make,
Which caused, alas, y^ he that day was take,
Before ywounded it would be none other,
And then presented to his unkind brother.
And though this Cyrus had before be found
Young, fresh, lusty, and manly of his hand,
By the constraynt of his mortal wound,
He dyed anon for he no succor fond:
Than the two kingdoms wtin Perce land
Fill to the hands of Artaxerses,
In which after he lived long in pees.
Thus a great space like a mighty king
All Perce he held under his obeysaunce,
By famous nobles full gloriously shinyng,
Having of riches most fulsom abundaunce:
And as it is put in remembrance,
To more increase of his prosperity,
In true wedlock he had sons three.
The first of them called Darius,
Arobratus named the second,
And the third named was Othus,
Manly princes, like as it is found:
And of nature like as the king was bound,
Unto Dary, as made is mention,
Above echone he had affection.
And for he dempt him able to the war
By likelyhode, of years young and grene,
He cast fully his nobles to prefarre
Of hye prudence, thus he did mean,
His impotence to support and sustene:
For he was feeble in Perce to raygne alone,
He set up Dary with him in his trone.
Which was a thing strange and contrarious
Again the custom of Perciens vsaunce,
But he supposed his son Darius
Should in such case increase and aduau^ce
His fathers party, of natural attendaunce,
And show unto him troth and kyndnes,
His impotence to cheryshe of gentleness.
But in estates often it does thus fall,
When that princes be run far in age,
Their childrens love again the^ does appall,
Showing no frendshyp save for adauntage,
How that they may rejoice their heritage:
And in such case when they wexe strong,
Think their fathers live all to long.
And Artaxerses stood in the same caas,
As in the story plainly ye shall find,
By rehearsayle and writing of Bochas,
How this Dary was false and eke unkind,
Forgetful, and had nothing in mind
How his father, the troth to reherce,
Has made hi equal with him to reign in Perce
And to declare the first occasion,
To his father how the said Dary
By a false manner of rebellion,
Began in his workyng for to be contrary,
Which to discure I will no longer tarry:
But with my pen in all haste proceed,
Here to discriue how it fell in deed.
Artaxerses among his concubynes
It is remembered how that he had one,
Which for to reken wives and vyrgynes,
Was fairest hold of them euerychone,
Called Arthasia of full yore agone:
And was that time, her beauty to discryue,
Among the Perciens the fairest hold alive.
And though she were yrun far in age
Like as books list of her express,
Both of color and also of vysage
She kept her beauty, and her natyfe freshenes,
Which was before for her semelines
To the said Cyrus briefly to termyne,
Chose long before to be his concubyne.
But when this Cyrus was passed into fate
Which for his brother might not live in pees,
Anon upon without longer date
She was take up for king Artaxerses,
Because she was of beauty pearls,
After long time when he fell in age,
She claymed was by title of heritage
Of king Dary by his fathers live,
Faynyng his claim by succession,
And though his father again it did strive:
And thus began, as made is mention,
Of their debate the first occasion:
For Dary cast all be he bare it still,
Her to rejoice again his fathers will.
And to accomplish falsely his intent
Of her to have full possession,
To afforce his party he made this argument
Cyrus (quod he) as made is mention
Raygnyng in Perce that mighty region,
And this story do the plainly determyne,
For her beuty made her his concubyne.
And after time when Cyrus was deed
Artaxerses his father ye may se,
Next him succeadyng in Perce it is no dread,
List her to claim eke for her great beauty:
And so (quod Dary) she longs now to me
Because she is so pleasant to my sight,
By succession I will her claim of right.
Thus king Dary to his father said
He would have Arthasia the fair,
And therwithall Artaxerses began abrayde
And answered with face debonayre:
My son (quod he) I will not be contrayre
To thy desire, but of affection,
Deliver her to thy possession.
Of his promise he after began repent
Cast him to make another cheuisaunce,
And secretly his concubine he sent
Called Arthasia (as made is remembrance)
And through his sleyghty purueyaunce,
Unto the temple, such means he has sought,
Of great Appollo yt she in haste was brought
Where she was veyled and made a presteresse
After the rites, plainly and the gyse*
Of old panyms, by a manner holiness,
And there professed for to do service*
As their statutes constrayne and devise:
During her life it might none other be,
She bound was to live in chastity.
This thing was wrought by compassyng
Of Artaxerses by froward ielosy,
Whereof Dary the young lusty king
Wext almost wode when he did it espy,
And began compass of melancholy
Furious rancour, and hasty cruelte,
Upon his father avenged for to be.
And his party of force to sustene
With him he had (the story makes mind)
His brethren in bast an hundred and fiftene,
Which to their father were false and unkind:
Of all this number were left none be hynde
That from this purpose ones list dissent,
His death of one will they al assent.
Yet of this strange false conspyracy
Artaxerses had a knowledgyng,
Although the story does not specify
How, ne by whom he had thereof wyttyng:
For which in haste he made no tariyng,
To gader meyny and make him self strong,
Him self to avenge of this disnatural wrong.
For Artaxerses like as the case tho stood,
Thought it sat well to his high nobles
To be venged upon unkind blood,
For law, nature, decrees, rightwisenes,
And all statutes dampne unkindness:
Whereby this king occasion did find
Again his children, because they were unkind.
Some men deem how great multitude
Of many children makes a man strong,
But thereupon plainly to conclude,
Virtue is cause if she dwell them among:
But if their courage enclyneth unto wrong,
And vycious life do their bridle led,
The greater number the worse they do speed
A progeny borne of a cursed line,
May through his froward false infection,
Outward of troth though they shine
Under appearaunce and simulation,
Infect and corrupt all a region:
For it is said of full old langage,
Fruit of sour trees take a sour tarage.
This was well showed in Artaxerses,
That suffered his brother dye at mischefe:
Bledyng his wound left him helpeles,
Which to his name shall ever be reprefe,
Thus blood unkind has ever evil prefe,
For all the children fro his stock descended
Were cursed euerichone as here is remembered.
Their stock was first contagious of nature,
The grefes froward were great in number,
Which of assent did their busy cure
By false treason their father to encomber:
But there is no shade nor no covert vmber
So closely kept namely of false gyle,
But the venym will show out some while.
And thus the death contagiously conspyred
Of Artaxerses sithe ago full yore,
Whereon to avenge his heart was so fyred
Of furious ire and ybrent so sore,
That he not could defarre it now no more:
But with his meyny fill on them anon,
Or they were ware, and slew the^ euerychone.
He slough also all his concubynes,
That were their mothers of who^ I told toforn
Suffered none to live of their lines,
So of y^ lynage he has the wede vpshorne:
Found among all no grain of good corn,
Couy^t by doom when they were presented,
To his death how echone they were assented.
His clothes sprent with the unkind blood
Of his children which he did shede,
After whose death in great mischefe he stood,
And so in sorrow his life he did led,
Dyed after in mischefe and in dread:
Death quyt with death, and rage with rage,
Lo here the fine of his unwieldy age.
Lenuoy.
THis tragedy before declares here
The great outrage of unkindness,
Between two brethrene reigning both yfere,
In Perce land, as ye have heard express:
Till division of all mischefe maistresse,
Began enter in through fraternall hatrede,
Which again kind destroyed their kinrede.
The war arose contagious for to lere,
Through all Perce of mortal frowardnes,
Of Cyrus death rehearsyng the manner,
How helpelesse he dyed in distress:
And how the number of brethren did the^ dress,
To slay their father, the story ye may read,
Causyng an end of all their whole kynrede.
King Artaxerses with a froward chere
His injuries and wrongs to redress,
Slough his children, their mother eke yfere,
Spared not one of froward cursednes:
By which occasion took a great sickness,
After dyed in mischefe and in dread,
Causyng an end of all his whole kynrede.
Lo here a sorrow not particulere,
For through all Perce ran the cursednes,
The crooked fame spread both far and nere
Of this vengeable hasty fell woodnes:
The air enfecting with slanderous blacknes,
To show of vengeance the co^trarious mede
Of blood unkind borne of one kynrede.
Noble princes lift up your eyes clear,
And consider by great auisenes
The woeful stryues, the odious fell dau^gere,
Sown in kinredes of wilful straungenes:
Of all rancoure your courage do redress,
Peysyng the mischeues following in deed,
Of blood unkind borne of one kynrede.
The end of the third book.
Fruit of writynge set in Cronicles old,
Most delectable of freshenesse in tastynge,
And most goodlye and glorious to behold,
In cold and heat lengest abidyng
Change of seasons may do it no hyndryng:
And where so be that men dyne or fast,
The more men taste the longer it will last.
It does courages renew again and glade,
Which may be called fruit of the tree of life,
So parmanable that it will never fade,
To the five wits greatest restoratyfe:
And to their pleasau^ce most chief confortatife
For of nature when they be quick and good
They of this fruit take their natural food.
Auctours hereon concluden and eke assent
How that writing of his kyndly right
Does loved persons and likenesses represent
Of friends absent severed far from sight,
Darkness of absence is clered with the light
Thus fruit of writing has his advantages,
Of folks far of to present the images.
Law had perished and be writing,
Our faith appalled nere virtue of scripture,
For all religion and order of good living
Takes their example by doctrine of lecture:
For writing causes with help of portrature
Things darked of old that were begone,
To be remembered with this celestial son.
God set writing and letters in sentence
Again the dullness of our infirmite,
This world to enlumyne by craft of eloquence
Canon, Ciuyle, philosophy: these three
Confirmed fraunchises of many strong city:
Couenau^tes asseled, trouthes of old assured,
And writing be might not have endured.
Diligence chief tryumphatryce
Of slogardy, negligence, and slouthe,
Eke of memory vpholder and nouryce,
And registrer to supposayle of truth
Has of old labor and else were great routhe
Brought things passed notable in substance,
Only by writing to new remembrance.
Writing is cause that hereto is remembered
Life of Prophets and patriarchs old,
How the apostles and martyrs were disme^bred
For Christ's faith his banner up to hold:
And writing shows to fore as I you told,
Of confessors the great stedfastnes,
And of vyrgyns the virgynall ciennesse.
Like to a tree which every year bears fruit
Showing his beuty with blossoms and flours,
Right so the fode of our inward refute
By diligence of these old doctors,
And daily fruit of their faithful labors,
Have our courages fostred and pastured,
By writing only which has so long endured
The Epigrames whilom perished had
Of prudent Prosper that was so virtuous,
And of Senecke the tragedies sad
The stratagemes of Vegecius
Rebuke in vices of noble Percius
If in old writing had been found a lack,
These said things had far be put abacke.
Writing caused Poets to recure
A name eternal, the laurer when they wan,
In adamant grave perpetually to endure:
Record I take of Vyrgyll Mantuan,
That wrote ye arms and prowes of the man
Called Eneas when he of high courage,
Came into Itayle from Dido of Cartage.
Three famous books this auctor list compyle,
Eneidos first, which that did excel
In rethoryke by soueraynte of style:
He drank such plenty, this poet as men tell,
Of the stremes yt ran down from the well
Wrought by tho sisters that be in number nine,
Prowes of knighthode most clearly to termin
For in that book he cast not for to fail
With voice melodious to discriue aryght,
The great conquest of Rome and of Itayle
Wrought by Enee the manly troyan knight,
Whose verse notable gave so clear a light
Through all the world as in Rethoryke
That among poets was none to him like.
He wrote also this poet with his hand
By humble style other books twain,
One of pasture, the next of tylthe of land,
The verse conveyed with fete of meters plain:
By which three labors a palm he did attain
To make his name through dities dilectable
Above poets to be most commendable.
Writing of poets has set with in his clos
Conquest of knyghthode, their triu^ph and renou^s
Read in Ouide Metamorphoseos
The great wonders, the transmutacions,
The moral menyng, y^ uncouth conclusions
His book de Ponto, and with great diligence
Full many a pistle co^playnyng for absence.
Of craft of love a book he has compyled
Whereof Caesar had full great disdain,
Which was cause that he was exiled
To abide in Ponto and never turn again:
And yet he did his labor in certain
In hope of grace his wits to apply,
To write a book of loves remedy.
Writing of old with letters aureate,
Labor of poets does hyghly magnify,
Record on Petrarke in Rome laureate
Which of two fortunes wrote the remedy:
Certain egloges and his cosmography,
And a great conflyct which men may se,
Of his quarelles within him self secre.
He wrote seven psalms of great repentance,
And in his Affryke commended Scipion,
And wrote a book of his ignorance
By a manner of excusation:
And set a notable compylacion
Upon the life called solitary,
To which this world is froward and contrary.
Thus by writing he gate him self a name
Perpetually to be in remembrance,
Set and registered in the house of fame,
And made epistles of full high substance,
Called Sine titulo: and more him self to auau^ce
Of famous women he wrote the excellence
Gresylde preferryng for her great patience.
Writing also remembered has how Troy
Destroyed was sith gone many a year
The death of Ector chief pyller of their joy
And for the party of Greeks wrote Omere,
Which in his writing was particulere:
For to Achilles that wrought al by fraud
Above Ector he gave a singular laud.
Writing causes the chapelet to be grene
Both of Esope and of Iuuenall,
Dauntes labor it does also sustene
By a report very celestial,
Song among Lumbardes in especial,
Whose three books the great wonders tell,
Of heuyn above, of purgatory, and of hell.
Men by writing know the miracles
Of blessed saints and of their holtnes,
Medicyne, salve, and eke obstacles
Geyne mortal wounds and great sickness
Recreacion and solace in distres
Quiet in labor, in pouerte patience,
And in riches right, troth, and conscience.
Shortness of life and forgetfulness,
The wit of man dull and aye slydyng,
Negligence and froward ydlenes,
Echone stepmother to science and cunnyng,
That I dare say and be for writing
Only ordained for our aduauntages
Dead were memory and mind passed of ages
And thus in chief the causes before told
Meuyng the heart of Bochas to writing,
And to remember by many stories old
The estate of princes in chares high sittyng,
And for vices their unware falling:
Geuyng example as I affirm dare,
Of false fortune how they shall beware.
His first three books be full clear myrrours
Fully accomplished as Bochas undertook,
The cause of falling of many conquerours
Only, for troth and virtue they forsook:
For which min auctor toward his fourth book
Began sharp his pen to his eternal fame,
Only by writing to get him self a name.
Mine auctour Bochas that so much could,
Begins here to make a process
Again the outrage of princes yt were proud,
Which were brought low for their frowardnes
And notablye reme^breth that mekenes
Which stands whole in one and does co^tune,
Is aye franchised from danger of fortune.
But he in manner does recapitle again
The fall of many that sat in hye stages,
How they for vices stood aye in no certain:
Came to mischefe for their great outrages
Remembryng first of Pryam the domages
How he lost scepter and regaly
For susteynyng of false auoutry.
The fall rehearsyng of Astyages
That gave his daughter whilom in marriage
To one that was called Cambises,
A poor man borne of low lynage:
For he should have none advantage
In no manner nether in right ne wrong
By rebellion again him to be strong.
For me to forne had had a bysion
How there should one proceed of his line,
Which should him put out of his region
And cause him in mischefe for to fine:
But yet fortune could him undermine
That all his wisdom stood in none avail,
For again god preuayleth no counsel.
It needs not his story to reherce,
Nor the manner of his unhappy chance,
Nor the falling of Cyrus king of Perce,
Nor of king Tarquin for his misgouernau^ce:
Though Bochas here put the^ in remembrance,
For as me seems it were a thing in vain
A thing ones told to tell it new again.
And he list not now to be retcheles
New again to make rehearsayle
Of the king called Artaxerses,
Sith it is told what should it more avail*
But he proceadeth straight unto Itayle,
To their stories and begins here,
At Marchus Manlius a romayn co^sulere
The end of the Prologue.
How Marcus Manlius wrought and did for Rome town, and at the last he was by
the commons cast into Tybre, and there drowned.

The first Chapter.
WHilome in Rome there was a great lynage
Called Manloyes of renomed noblesse,
And of that stock, right fair in his young age,
Came this Marcus, the story does witness:
Which by process for his worthynesse
Was three times by just election,
Made Consuler of that worthy town.
Which to the commons greatly did avail:
He diverse times for the towns right
Faught in his days many strong battle,
And aye prevailed through his great might:
And in the field by a synguler fight
Outrayed his enemy, like as it is told,
And took from him a tyche bye of gold.
Torques in Latin in English is a bye
Acercle of gold which that Marcus wan,
Brought it home through his chiualrye:
And of Torques he was called than
Marcus Torquatus, and thus the name began
He to be called the story tells us,
Among Romans Torquatus Manlius.
And he would often ieopart good and life,
For the city, enter the field alone,
And there conquered for a prerogatife
Sondrie crowns with many a rich stone:
Wan tunicles of gold many one,
For thylke time for diverse high emprises
Were crowns made, in many sundry wises.
For as Aul. Gellius makes mention,
There were in Rome devised strange crowns
For such as had foughten for the town,
^y for their labor received their guerdons:
By a prerogative called champions,
Which sundry times of manhood and of might,
Ieoparded their lives for the towns right.
Like their deserts y^ crowns took their names,
For some of the^wer called Triumphal,
You unto knights for their noble fames:
Other also called Obsidionall
In Romayne tongue, and some there were Mural,
Eke other twain Nauall and Castrence,
And all they were of great excelence.
The triumphall made were of gold
Offered in triumphs to worthy emperors,
Set with saphyrs and rubies manyfolde,
Upon the hedes of mighty conquerours:
And when Rome was shynyng in his flours
That crown called with branches burned fair
In their vulgar the Aureate coronayre.
The Obsidionall of which I spoke toforne,
Devised wete as books specifye,
Crowns notable wroughte like greyne or corn
You unto princes which through their chiualrye
Rescued sieges, and saved the party:
Of them that were closed streyte within,
Through their prowes a crown for to win.
Another crown that called was Murall,
Was given and granted by the emperor
To him that first wan upon the wall
At any siege, and there abode the shour
Fightyng alone in hope of some succor:
And he that might such a brunt sustene,
Should of Laurer wear a crown of grene.
Nauall crowns whilom were ordained
For them that fought manly on the sea,
When their ships were togeder cheyned:
He that of manhood and marciall surete
Upon his enemies made first enter
Receive should in all the peoples sight,
Korue like a rother, a crown clear and bright.
The crown next which called is Castrence,
Was given of custom to y^ manly knight
That list auau^ce hi^ through his magnifice^ce,
Hosts assembled ieopart would of might
Toforne all other enter into fight:
Should eke receive his nobles for to queme
A starred crown made like a diadem.
The crown also which called was Ouall
Took first name of joy and gladness,
Which kings and princes in acts marciall
Used sometime in thyr joyous noblesse,
At sudden scrimishes of casual hastiness:
As when they venquished proudly i^ battle,
Such as their highness unwarily would assail.
And for they were of power invincible,
Their noble crowns were seriously wrought
Of myrte branches which ben imputrible,
Enduryng ever and corrupt naught:
For this word Ouall, if it be well sought
Is said of gladness as put is in memory,
Ordained for princes after their victory.
Another crown called Cy^ica
Of oken bows was made round and pleyne,
Ordained for them which pro re publica
Could in battle rescue a citezeyn,
And sle his enemy that was a foreyn:
Of mighty oak he should for manhede
Claim to wear a crown upon his head.
And like as knights in marciall delytes
For common profit did hem self auaunce,
So for their noble victorious merits
The Romayne people had a great pleasau^ce,
With sondrye crowns mercial in substance,
For to guerdon their knights most famous,
Mine auctour record called Aul. Gellius.
Among other that did his busy pain
Such crowns manly to recure,
Marcus Manlius in manhod sovereign
Put often his life in mortal adventure:
For in his force so much he did assure,
That he deserved full yore agone
Of these said crowns many mo than one.
And to thencreace of his noble fame,
He did a thing both manly and divine,
Whereby that he gate him a surname
To be called Marcus Capitolyne:
Which above all his names did shine,
When he alone, whereby he is commended,
The Capitole from enemies has defended.
When they of France had take the cite,
Put all Rome at mischefe unto flight,
And laid awayte with a great meyne
The Capitole for to take at night,
By a passage that lay fat out of ^yght,
Under a roche called Carmenton,
Their cave entered into the chief dongeon.
They were shrouded under a dark vale
With ordinance, and mighty violence,
Toward mydnight the wall for to scale,
Most covertly them keeping in silence,
Dempt plainly for ^ackyng of resistance,
That they should maugre tho within
Their hour assigned the Capitole to win.
But the gees that were within close,
The waker fowls by noise of their coming
Began beat their wings, and up anon arose,
Whereby this Marcus in his bed liyng
Began tabrayde and made no tariyng,
Took his harness most furious and wroth,
And to the walls in all have he gothe.
And he that came first upon the wall
Of very force without more tariyng
Down into Tybre he made him to fall,
And all his fellows busy in scalyng
With shield or pauis or ladders up reysyng,
This manly Mark shortly to co^prehende,
Into the flode made them to discende.
Unto the death of him they were abaued,
For by his knighthode and his hie renoun
Maugre all them the Capitole he saved,
And afterward rescued all the town:
For the fortune in conclusioun
Which that time did unto him fall,
Capitolinus men did him after call.
And for he was so victorious,
Him self alone by this hye victory,
This name he gate to him and al his house,
Perpetually to be in memory:
And registered in the consistorye,
In their cronicles his name determined,
With golden letters to be enlumined.
And the gees of whom I spoke also,
That so well kept watch upon the night,
ytake were and offered unto ^uno
Solempnely with great torches light:
To whom also it granted was of right
When a famine made their store to fail,
They spared were and take for no vitayle.
And thus was Mark a mighty co^querour
Worshypped in Rome, all being of assent,
But when some folk be set in great honor
So^time it happeth they hold the^ not content,
With couetyse their hertes be so blent:
Fro suffisaunce above their degrees
To surmonte to higher dignities.
This Manlius was fret in his courage
To greater worship suddenly to assende,
Deminge so to have had advantage
And in him self began frowardly pretend
In that cite all other to transcende,
Beside triu^phes which were to him reserved,
Higher to climb than he has deserved.
But there was one as made is mention
Called Camillus alord of great substance,
Which in the cite and in that mighty town
Above all other had the governance:
And as it is put in remembrance,
To his greatness no man might attain,
Aye whose nobles Marcus began disdain.
In his heart he had a great envy,
Which caused him by outrage for to err
Against Camyllus, which for his chiualry
The town governed both in peace and werre:
And for Marcus would him self prefer
Above that prince in worship and honor,
First of the people he gate him great favor.
And by a manner of conspyracye,
He gadered hertes of the commonte,
And drew also unto his party
Great multitude throughout the city:
And thus arose first the dreadful enmite
Within Rome, the story tells thus
Atwene these princes Camyll and Manlius.
Thus first the venym atwene hem was sow
Of hasty hatred by false occasions,
Which in the city at wene hye and low
Caused of new diverse discencions:
After the uncouth strange opinions,
For every wight drew to his party,
As they were meued in their fantasye.
But for to stynt this outrageous error
And these hasty stryues furious,
Again fro Tuscan came a dictatour
That time called Cornelius Cassus
Which of wisdom blamed Manlius,
For he caused such rancour in the town,
And for his gylt commanded him to prisone,
Which was in manner hyndryng to his name
And appaled in party his noblesse,
For a time began to eclipse his fame,
But afterward the cloud of that derkenesse
By common favor was turned into ciernesse
For as it had be right for the nones
In his defense the commons rose atones.
First when they had among their rumors,
Amyd of their fell hateful contencion
Shortly rebuked the worthy senators,
Because Marcus was set in prison*
Which had been ay so helpefull to the town,
Whom to deliver they many ways sought
And as I find even thus they wrought.
First they clad them in clothes black,
Pale of their faces pitously weeping
Their berdes vnshaue and their heads slack,
Like furyous men up and down runnyng,
Tofore the prison all the night wakyng:
And on his harms plainly to be wreke,
They began manace the prison for to break.
And for to stynt their outrageous clamor,
The senators made anon ordain
To deliver him out of his soiour,
Lose his fetters and to break his chain,
And when he was delivered out of pain,
He list not stynt of hasty cruelte,
Of proud courage avenged for to be.
And in his furious fell presumpcion,
Maugre the Senate and trybunes echone,
Said he would govern Rome town:
At whose outrage they began disdain anon,
The peoples hertes from him were agone,
And for his pride they by auysement,
Assigued him to come to judgment.
Forsake he was throughout the cite,
There came not one with him of his kynred,
He found no help in his aduersite,
Save a few came with him in deed
Of the commons, full feeble at such a need:
And thus (alas) he found no resistance,
That was veylable to him in his defense.
But for succor constrained, and in dread
Away he put his clothyng and vesture,
And naked stood verily in deed,
Showing his wou^des which he did endure
At many a scrimyshe and disconfiture,
And for rescuse to speak in words few,
The capytole to them he did show.
And in supportyng eke of his quarele
Meuyng the people to rue on his complaint
First to his gods loud he did appele
Topreserue him of that he was attaynt:
The people about him with teres al bespraynt,
That the Judges astoned were in deed,
Where as they sat again him to proceed.
But secretly he was led out of the prees
To a place called Froumentyne,
And there, alas, they were mercylees
His dome by rigor fully to termyne:
Spared nouther nobles nor live,
Fro the capitole out of the chief dongeon,
Low into Tybre for to be cast adowne.
This was his end void of all favor,
Which no man would redress nor amend,
By cruelte cast out of that hye tower
Which he whilome most knightly began defend:
But what man can by writing comprehend
The unsure succor, found in necessite,
To them that labor for any commonte?
Let men behold ye trust in worldly things,
And namelye they yt be proud and hauteyne
Open their eyes, cast up their lokynges
To consider and se well in certain,
Who trusts fortune his trust is in vain:
And yfhe list a clear ensample find,
Among remember on Marcus in your mind.
What might avail his nobles in battle?
Byes of gold* crowns of laurere,
His rich plates or his uncouth mayle,
His mighty sheldes that shone so clear,
Or his triumphs song far and nere,
Or his victories for the city wrought,
In his mischefe auayled him right naught.
The.ii. Chapter.
Here Bochas writes in part against such as can not be content with
suffisaunce, but usurp to high dignities.

HEre John Bochas calls to memory
The strange salayre, ye famous guerdo^
Of them yt gate by conquest and victory
Honor and triumph within Rome town,
How it was used he makes mention:
Seriously reherseth the manner
Which I shall write if you list to here.
Advise was take first of estates three,
Of men of arms which that were present
That saw in deed the magnanimite
Of him that shall have it by judgment,
Of the clergy they must have eke assent,
And of the senate the people most notable,
By preue sought out that he were found able.
This prince also outher the capteyne
Which that the triu^phe receive of very right,
Within a chare full rychely be^eyne
He shall be set of gold burned bright,
Fret with stones, which shall give a light
As Phoebus does in his mydoaye sphere,
That no derkenes about him shall appear.
This heavenly chare shall for more delight
To show thencrease of his knightly glory,
Be led and draw with four stedes white
Through the city, in token of his victory,
And he shall have for a singular memory,
In his right hand a palm of gold full shene,
And on his head a crown of laurer grene.
He shall eke have above all his armure,
Poudred with palms a cote of purple reed,
In his left hand his quarrel for tassure
A standerde round, declaryng his manheed:
And all about set upon the beed,
The princes arms full rich of apparayle,
In whose quarrel he accomplished the battle.
And of custom the said standerde shall
Be richely depeynt with reed color,
And so this knight this man most marciall
Shall Be conveyed like a conqueror:
And yet for more encreace of his honor,
Upon their fete his prisoners echone
Take by his manhood about his chare shall gone,
The most worthy fast by his side,
All the remnaunt after, on him lokyng,
Echone of the poets which in y^ town abide
Shall on him wait at his home coming,
Ditees devise and of his conquest sing,
And strange minstrelles, to be also record
Their instruments shall touch at accord.
All of intent to give him more courage
To the Capitole so he shall be brought,
And lest of pride he fall in none outrage
Nor surquedy within his own thought,
The most wretch shall of the town be sought,
Which of custom shall have a staff in hand
And in the chare behind his back up stand.
Gnotos Eolytos, in Greek he should seyne,
Which in our tongue plainly does express
Know thy self, remembryng in certain
Upon fortunes froward doubleness,
On whom thou trust may be sykernesse:
And who that douteth where that it be thus,
Let him remember the end of Manlius.
What auayled his triumphs or his byes,
Crowns of gold, and perled fresh tunicles,
His high prowes or all his chiualryes,
Singler fyghtyng or marciall particles
Newlye remembered or fed in old cronicles:
Peyse his merits, and see now at the last
How into Tybre their champion they cast.
To his excuse auayled never a dele
Favor of commons, carectes of his wounds,
Nor to the gods his lamentable appele,
Nor remebrau^ce of their frau^chised boudes,
Teritories nor wynnyng of the grounds
Which that he wan with spendyng of his blood,
All knitte in one to him no stead they stood.
Here ye may se how fortune suddenly
Clerenesse of fame can change to derkenesse,
Glory to reprothe, worship to vilany,
And joy passed to mortal heaviness,
Swytnesse of favor into bytternesse,
And soberness into furious rage,
And old franchise to thraldom and seruage.
For there was neither request nor prayere
That auayled to his delyueraunce,
In cheynes fettred dedlye of look and there,
Abode the sentence of his final governance,
Pale of face with trimblynge countenance,
When he alas began mortal approach
Of Terpeya to the hydous roche.
Of Terpeya this roche bare the name
After a lady, as made is mention
Called Terpeya, which fell in great defame
Because she was assented to trayson
To have brought enemies into Rome town:
Whereof convict her story is well know
Under that roche she was ydolue full low.
This roche also was called Carmentoun
After a woman of great aucthorite,
Called Carmentes which through her hie reno^^
The Capitole made in that cite,
And she found letters first of our a b c,
And connyng had among her works all,
Declare before thing that should befall.
And on this hard sturdy roche of stone,
Fro the Capitole Marcus was cast down,
Other favor nor frendshyp found he none,
For all his battayles fought for the town:
The commons hertes were turned vpsodoune,
Whose love is like preued at assay,
A blase of fire now bright and now away.
The common people may hot and cry fast
As their hearts steadfast were and stable,
But at a need their promise will not last
Of their corages they be so remouable,
To follow reason gerysh and untreatable,
Lightly declinynge and that is full great ruthe
After opinions and nothing after truth.
This Manlius was of his trust disceyued,
Whose lust unlawful was departed in twain,
When he of pride would have be received
To high estate which he might not attain,
Where through ye senate began at him disdain,
And the commons aye false at such a need,
Left him in mischefe, and took of him no head.
Lenuoye
IN this tragedy me^ may behold and se
The perilous domages of false ambicio^
Of the^ yt be not co^te^t with their degree
But would up climb (like their opinion)
To hye estate, by usurpation:
Which not consydre the sentence of scripture.
In a good mean men longest may endure.
Who that usurps to higher dignite
Than appertains to his condition,
In royal chares for to make his se,
And has no title of line nor of reason,
Through froward pride full often he is put down,
For lack he sees not every creature
In a good mean lengest may endure.
When Dedalus taught his son to flee
He bad him first of hye discretion,
Fro Phoebus hete keep his wings fre,
And fro Neptunus cold congelacion:
Meaning hereby, for short conclusion,
That who that list with joy his state assure,
In a good mean he longest shall endure.
Remember the manhood and magnanimite
Of Marcus Manlyus, which by presu^ption
Would have governed Rome the cite,
Maugre the senate, ruled that mighty town,
Which turned after to his confusion:
For he saw not, such was his adventure,
In a good mean men longest may endure.
Some in their greatest high prosperity,
Of froward courage and furious mocion,
In their great weal by false duplicite
Have a manner strange condition,
Not to be content with plenty nor foyson:
By a false etyke which of their nature
In a good mean can not long endure.
But in this earth is greatest felicite
In hearts ease, rychest possession
With suffisaunce content for to be,
Of worldly trouble teschewe thoccasion,
Meuyng no quarelles, causyng no disce^cion:
Nor cleyme nothing which hard is to recure,
Since in a good mean me^ longest do endure.
Princes remember in your most majesty
Envy of clymbyng causes division,
Be of accord, trust in no commonte,
Which at a point is but disception:
And specially flee simulation,
Ye may in Marchus se a plain figure,
Which for ambicion might no while endure.
The.iii. Chapter.
How Nectanabus king of Egypt, was by Xerxses constrained to fly his kingdom.

AFter the fall of Marchus Manlius
Bochas anon began his style dress
Brefely to tell of Nectanabus,
King of Egypt and of his great richesse,
Seeing before in all his noblesse
By uncouth craft, how he ne might chese,
That in all have his crown he should lose.
For he was connyng in especial
And right expert as made is mention,
In all the sciences called liberal,
And knew before by calculation
How God would make a transmigracion
Of his kingdom, and plainly to report,
The land of Perce to Greeks full tra^sport.
For by king Xerxses out of his country
Maugre his treasour his connyng and might
This Nectanabus constrained was to fly,
Durst not abide to have of him a sight,
But into Greece he drew him anon right:
Not like a king, but after old writings
Like a magicien he wrought wo^dre things
Upon fortune further to proceed,
By his conning he greatly furthered was,
And by his sleighty workyng eke in deed
He was acquaynted with queen Olimpyas:
And so secre, plainly this is the caas,
That openly her men said by demyng,
He gate Alysandre the great mighty king.
But how he fled out of his region,
Of his images nor of his illusions
Bochas makes no manner mention,
Nor how he wrought by incantacions,
Nor of his subtel operations:
Nor how that he like a man by night,
Whilom apeared in the queen's sight.
Save of his death Bochas writes naught,
Remembering no time nor date
How he and Alisander, togeder have sought
The course of stars toward even late,
Nor how his son, like as was his fate,
Down from a bridge by full mortal wrake
Cast him backward, and so his neck brake.
The.iiii. Chapter.
How Pausanias duke of Lacedemon was exyled by them of Athenes.

This was his end, and after this Bochas
Began in have his style auaunce
Of Pausanias to tell the pitous caas,
And all the manner of his woeful chance:
Which was a duke, and had in governance
Lacedemone there foundyng a cite,
Which of old time was called Bysaunce.
They of Athenes that cite gate with might
And it conquered by their chiualry,
And afterward were it wrong or right
They exyled the same Pausany
And thus fortune through her false envy
Caused that duke without more delays
In pain and pouerte for to end his days.
The.v. chapter.
How Heliarchus the tyrant for extorcion and oppression was slain by the
knight Leonides.

AFter the fall sothly of these twain,
John Bochas was moved of courage
For to rehearse with all his busy pain,
The great fury and the odious rage
Of Helyarchus, which by great outrage
Though he ne were famous in chiualry,
He noyed all Perce with his tyranny.
Wherefore Bochas began at him disdain,
Cast he would only for his sake
Touch of tyrants mo than one or twain,
And by writing again the^ a war make:
And in his hand he began a pen take,
Told in order the perilous pestilence,
Which they wrought by mortal vyolence.
First he declares how fortune of right
Again tyrants furious and wode,
Has full cause for to show her might,
To appal their dignities in which they stood:
Such as rejoice for to shede blood,
Do naught else but labor and devise,
To spoil the temple in many sundry wise.
And Helyarchus through his cruelte
And his contryued false extorcions,
Was mortal enemy to a fair city
Called Heraclye, and many other towns:
And by extort false oppressions
As the deed concluded at a prefe,
All that country he brought to mischefe.
Turnyng his grace and favor to hatrede
Mercy, and pity, unto cruelty,
Franchise of people to servitude and dread,
Oppressed their fredome and old liberty:
And all their statutes by which they were fre,
He interrupted of force and not of right,
Which made him odious in all men's sight.
But to restrain his great extorcions,
Fortune this while was not retchles,
For his horrible abhominacions
She began to auale him, this goddess merciles
By a good knight called Leonides,
Which with a fellow borne of that country
Cast on this tyrant avenged for to be.
They dempt it was an alms deed
To set their land in quiet and in ease,
Of a tyrant the furious blood to shede,
His importable malice for to appese,
Which to their city did so great disease:
And of assent with their swerdes kene,
They slew the tyrant in their mortal tene.
Of whose death many a man was feign,
And specially of Heraclie the cite,
Dempt it was medefull yt he was so slain,
To set in quyete all a commonte:
Lo here, men may the rightful guerdon se
Of tyrants, which by their vyolence,
To oppress the people have no conscience.
The.vi. Chapter.
How the vycious Dyonis king of Cycyle slew his brethren and kynrede, and
after exiled dyed at mischefe.

AFter this tyrant, with a full heavy chere
And countenance piteous and lamentable
Unto Bochas Dionys did appear,
Which in tyranny most was importable,
Through his land hateful and reprouable:
But for all that he began mine auctour pray
Of his manners sumwhat to write and say.
Bochas list not rehearse his lynage,
Nor make no process of his genealogy,
Because he was with all his great outrage
Full of all vices pride, and lechery,
Of avarice, ofyre, and of envy:
In Cicyle held his royal see,
At Cyracusis a mighty strong city.
This Dyonis was cursed of nature,
Most malicious both of thought and deed:
For as it is remembered in scripture,
He slew his brethren, his cosyns, and kynrede
That he alone in peace might possede
Without trouble or interruption,
Of all Cicyle the mighty region.
Among all vices, Bochas does specify,
He began draw unto ydlenes,
Followed his lusts of foul iechery,
And often of custom he fell in dronkennes,
And thought it was most souerain blessedness
Like as he had be master of fortune,
To solow his lusts and aye therein contune.
He waxt right fat and right corcious,
And his eyes began dark of his sight,
That uneath this man most vycious
Ne might not well behold the days light,
And of malice this tyrant again right
With help of robbers and of false foreyns,
Slough of his citte nigh all the cit^zeyns.
His vycious life in order to rehearce
Were contagious to the audience,
His extort pillages done in Greece and Perce
For to write or tell them in sentence,
Would infect the air with pestilence:
But I will briefelye remember and discriue,
The sacrileges which he did in his live.
In Venus temple beside Cytheron,
A great number of women he did call,
F^ll well be^eue, and by oppression
He made his meyny unawarely on the^ fall,
Dispoyled them, so that one and all
By his outrage and froward vyolence,
They naked stood echone in his presence.
And when he saw their shape and feytures,
He such chose out as were to his pleasaunce,
Robbed the other and took their vestures,
And let them go without ordinance:
And for this uncouth abominable chance,
Their city Lo^roys arose with strong hand,
For his outrage banished him their land.
An other time also he did soiourne
Within the temple, like as it is told,
Of Jupiter son unto Saturn,
There beholding his relykes manifold:
Saw among other a mantyll large of gold,
Whereupon when he cast his look,
That rich jewel unto his use he took.
And thus he said him self to excuse,
It was to heavy and to comerous
In somer season that mantyll for to use,
Because it was to large and po^derous:
And ouermore he aledged for him thus,
Sithe the garment forged was of gold,
For winter season how it was to cold.
And when he began away this mantel pulle
Than right anon this tyrant deceyuable,
Gave him another single made of wulle,
Affirmed sothely it was more conuenable
To other season more me^e and agreeable:
Co^cludyng thus for somer it was ^yght,
And warm for winter in the cold night.
An other time this tyrant eke also
Which was of heart most auaricious,
Entered ones the temple of Appollo,
And of his son Esculapius,
And when this tyrant fell and contrarious,
Beheide Appollo, beardles that was old,
And Esculapius with a long bearde of gold,
Quod Dionis than, as seems unto me,
Here is a strange froward co^uenience,
That the father beardles should be,
The son bearded standing in his presence.
Made anon by sturdy vyolence
To take away the bearde which in his sight
Of most fine gold shone so clear and bright.
Through Greece and Perce where he did gone
In all the temples this was his vsaunce,
The stately relyques with many rich stone
And massy tables of full great substance,
To take them all that were to his pleasau^ce:
He spared none, thus living like a thief,
Til he by ve^geau^ce was brought to mischefe.
Ciracusanes where he was crowned king
All of assent, there is no more to said,
For his outrageous and vycious living
They banished him, never to come again:
And so this tyrant vacant went in vain
About the world, like a false fugytyfe,
And so at mischefe this Dionys lost his life.
Lenuoy.
THis tragedy gives a warnyng
To all tho that have domination,
Over the people, prince, duke or king,
To eschew rauyn and false extorcion:
Let them consider how by the occasion
Of foul pillage, and froward tyranny,
This said Dionys at mischefe must dye.
First he compassed, falsely ymaginyng
To slay the citizyns of his royal town,
His brethren, his cosens, his kyn not sparing
Brought all his blood to destruction:
In slaughter he had such dilectation,
Reioysyng ever in murder and robberye,
Which caused him at mischefe for to dye.
To spoil temples was his reioysyng
Took all their treasures to his possession,
Tables of gold with stones fresh shinyng,
Eke fro other gods the relikes he took down,
Where ever he rode in any region:
Whose sacrilege and compassed felony,
Caused him unawarely at mischefe to dye.
In Venus temple, by record of writing,
He did a foul froward abusion,
All gentilwomen that came there to offryng
Them he dispoyled as made is mention,
Let them be naked without exception,
For which diffame and great vngentry
He banished was, and did at mischefe dye.
Noble princes remember on this thing,
Compassed malice and false collus^on
Must have evil endyng, and come to rekenyng
Fraud aye with fraud receives his guerdon:
Have this in mind concludyng in reason
That all tyrants plainly to specify
Has short life or does at mischefe dye.
The.vii. Chapter.
The auctoure again presumptuous people and princes holdyng them selves as
Gods.

YE folks that been astonyed in your aduyce,
To se Tyrants that be incorrigible,
Lift from their sees, that the^ held so wise,
Though their power was very invincible,
Yet to fore god nothing is impossible,
Wherefore remember and do nothing maruayle
With unware falls tho fortune the^ assail.
For when tyrants be set in hye stages
Of dignities, raygnyng like wode lions,
Full hard it is to wrast their courages,
Other to tempt their disposicions:
Worldly felicity so blyndeth their reasons,
As they to god were egall of power,
And had fortune under their danger.
Record of Dionys that often was afraid
By assaut of fortune, like as was his fate:
For vycious living three times dismayde,
As his story remembers of old date,
Next on the ryng now comes Pollicrate,
With one Viturbius tyrants of I tail,
Reigning like wolves to oppress y^ porayle.
For when tyrants in diverse regions
Of surquedy catch an opinion,
That their estates and dominacions
Should ever endure by long succession,
As god nor fortune might put them down:
But as they were in her estate royal,
This world to rule to both two egall.
Toward god they have lost shame and dread
Touching his guerdo^s, other of joy or pain:
Indifferent atwene troth or falshede,
Their lust iserued noforce who laugh or plain
God is forgotten, and they disdain
As both were recleymed to their lure,
Falsely tra^scendyng the bounds of measure.
For which sumtyme (as books specify)
God list suffer as made is mention,
That fortune by a manner mockery
Favors some folk, like their opinion
To enhaunce their power by false deception,
As she were set plainly for to sey,
To serve their lust, and durst not disobey.
The.viii. Chapter.
How king Pollicrate for extorcion and tyranny was hanged till every ioynte
fill from other.

Record I take on proud Pollycrate,
Tyrant of Samos beside the sea Egee
Which sore labored early and eke late,
Again conscience, of furious crueltee,
To abound in riches, and for to have plenty
Of worldly treasures: demyng y^ fortune aye,
To his desires ne durst not say nay.
Fortune to him by many a diverse sign,
Showed outward great tokens of pleasau^ce,
Was to him eke favorable and benygne
In all her port, by a manner attendaunce,
As she had been under his obeysaunce
To stuff his coffers with treasure locked fast,
Of false intent to mock him at the last.
All worldly riches his lusts did obey,
And when he found she was so favorable
For a season as she list to play,
This blind gods unsure and unstable
Set him so hye up at Fames table,
Of false intent in his estate royal,
When he sat highest, she made him to fall.
For in him self of pride he began to deem
How that he stood most in prosperity,
Of them that weared crown or diadem,
Above all other in most felicity:
And thus enhaunced in his royal see,
Thought him egall with gods in common,
Far from all danger of fate or fortune.
And for to attempt of gods the powere,
And of fortune the variant doublenes,
He took a ryng of gold full bright and clear,
Therein a rubye of excellent reednesse,
Sekyng an occasion of new heaviness:
Which never before had know of such thing,
Into the sea anon he cast his ryng
Dispayred again it for to recure,
For he dempt it was an impossible,
But right anon fyshers of adventure,
Like a maruayle very incredible,
Among the wawes hydous and horrible
Cast in their nets, if it would avail,
Taking a fyshe the ryng in his entrayle.
Which was presented at a solemnity
To Pollicrate with great reverence,
When he sat crowned in his most dignity
At a feast of famous excellence:
The fy^^e undone, anon in his presence
Amidde the entrails his keruer found y^ ryng
Of adventure, and took it to the king.
Which dempt of pride and high presumption,
That Neptunus god of the salt see
Had of his ryng made restitution,
And durst not offend his maiestee:
Whereupon a fantasy caught he
Nether heavenly gods, nor fortune blid of sight
Were both vnhardy, to attempt again his might
His great outrage to god was not unknow,
And his presumption fortune has well spyed:
For which she made adversity be her bow
And of her whele the spokes she has so gyed,
Whereon he sat most richely magnified,
That he unawarely from his hye nobles,
Was brought full low into great heaviness.
In worldly joy is nothing more to dread
Than when fortune is most blandishyng,
And yt her flattery is fret with worldly mede,
High on her whele to make foles sing,
Than of her nature sorrow she does bring:
Wytnes of princes of old or new date,
And record also of proud Pollicrate.
Sometime he sat hye on fortunes whele
Of prosperity with beams clear shynyng:
Whose temple is made of glass and not of stele,
His castle ise, unawarely dissoluyng:
Though it be fresh outward in showing
Unsure to stand on, and bryttel for to abide,
Who trusts most most lykely is to slide.
The geryshe queen of chere and face double,
Wythdrewe her favor and began to vary
Fro Pollicrates, and set him in great trouble,
Wext again him maliciously contrary,
Causyng Orontes cunstable with king Dary,
Maugry this tyrant, in his most cruelty,
To gyn a war on Samos the city.
And when his glory was most clear of light,
And his nobles shone highest at the full,
Fortune began through her changeable might,
Of his prosperity the feathers for to pull:
And than at erst his courage began to dull,
And all his pride unawarely for to appall,
When he was spoiled of his riches all.
First when Orontes his country began assail
This Pollicrate of sudden adventure
Outrayed was, and taken in battle
By a full perilous mortal disconfiture:
Thus fortune could bring him to her lure
Through her unware ugly false disdaynes,
Led into prison and bound in strong chains.
The people dwelling within his region
Reioysed in heart to se him suffer pain,
His tyranny his false extorcion
Caused that they did at him disdain,
For of his death no man list complain:
Men through the world have great plesau^ce,
To se a tyrant brought unto mischaunce.
Four things his torments did augment,
Sudden departing from his riches,
And that he saw each man in his intent
Of his mischefe have so great gladness,
Hanged he was, mine auctour does witness,
And honge so long in tempest, rain, and thunder,
Till every joint from other went a sunder.
To beasts wild and fowls ravenous
Naked he henge, such was his adventure
To all folks he was so odyous,
Had in despite of every creature,
At his departing denied sepulture,
Guerdon for tyrants, ve^geable and retcheles,
That can not suffer the people to live in pees.
Thus many tyrants excede far their bounds
By false outrage, and well resembled be
To cruel wolves or to furious hounds,
Frette with an etyke of gredy cruelte,
To staunche their honger aueyleth no piente:
Which for their surfets froward to read,
with Policrates in hell shall have their mede.
The.ix. Chapter.
How the tyrant Alexander sloughe his Philosopher Calistenes with other, for
saiynge troth.

Among all stories to tell the pyteous caas,
Of woeful playntyfes that put them selves in prees,
With weeping eyes, mine auctour Bochas
Was moved in heart not to be retchles
To write the fall of Calystenes,
Which, alas, as it is remembered,
Was for his troth on pieces all disme^bred.
For when Bochas his story began aduert,
He dempt anon in his fantasy
No man had so hard a stoned heart,
That might of right his eyes keep dry
To se the process of his tormentry:
Yet began mine auctour his woeful pen prefer,
To write the wrong done to this philosopher.
This Calystenes in youth right well thewed
His grene age promoted to doctrine,
By influence of heavenly fate endued
Greatly to profit in moral disciplyne:
Disposed of nature by grace which is deuyne,
To conquer, as books do specify,
The noble surname of philosophy.
Of his merits famous and notable,
Philosophy did her busy pain
To give him su^ke, because that he was able
The sote milk of her breasts twain
most precious licour who might thereto attain
For baume is none, the virtue well declared,
Of worldly riches may be thereto compared.
This precious pyment is give to no foles,
Above all lycours it does so far excel,
Whose original sprange in the holy schools
Of Athenes, as famous books tell:
For of philosophy there sprange first the well
Where Calystenes (thexperience is couthe)
With fulsum plenty was fostred in his youth.
Though he was borne of a good lynage
Virtue made him more high for to assende,
To be enhaunced for nobles of courage
More than for blood, who can comprehend:
For philosophers and clerks more commend
The moral virtues entresured by writings,
Then all the treasures of worldly kings.
Of gentle stocks reckon out the issues,
That be descended down from a royal line,
If they be vycious and void of all virtues,
And have no tarage of virtuous disciplyne,
With temporal treasure though they shine,
As for a time sittyng on hye stages,
Without virtue they are but dead images.
For though princes have conquered by battle
This world in roundnes by their chyualry,
What may their triu^phes or nobles avail
Without that virtue by right their titles gye
To be compared unto philosophy*
For philosophers apply all their ententes,
To know heaven and course of elements.
They set no store of things transitory,
Nor of fortunes expert doublenes,
To heavenly things is set all their memory
How the.vii. planets in their course the^ dress
Meuing the stars sparking in their brighnes
With reuolutions of the spheres nine,
Mother of musyke, as auctours determyne.
And in the noble twaye famous houses
Flouryng in Greece, rychest of euerychone
Called by old date the fair true spouses
Of philosophers many mo then one,
In Achademie and Athenes shone
The bright lanterns of most reuerences,
This world tenlumine by lyberall scyences.
And among other this Calystenes
Was in his youth put for to scholey
In the two schools of prudent Socrates,
And of Plato which that bare the key
Of lecre mysteries, and of divine Idey:
In which two schools of great abilitee,
Was no^e profited half so much as he.
These old clerks these old philosophers,
Were in tho days for doctrine sovereign
Called in this world ye rich precious coffers
And treasures, that kept the chestes twain,
Amyd their breasts wherein god did ordain
Most clear possession put in their depose,
Of all sciences under a key close.
This Calistenes scholar and auditour
Of Aristoteles, by cunning conqueryng
The noble gemine and most precious flower
Of philosophy, all flowers surmountyng,
Wherthrough he was chosen in his living,
As his master list for him provide,
On Alexander to awayte and abide.
For Alexander of kings most entere,
And most worthy to speak of hye prowes,
Did Aristoteles humble requere
To provide and do his business
By expert knowing and auisenes,
To send him one which of philosophy,
Might by good counsel his conquest magnify.
To write also his tryu^phes digne of glory,
And to remember his acts marciall,
Put his palms of knighthode in memory,
And to direct in especial
His royal nobles in virtue moral,
That no error be seen here nor there,
In him that should all the world conquer.
But it fell so of knightly adventure,
When of fortunes high promocion
That he by arms proudly began recure,
Of Perce and Mede the mighty region,
Brought king Dary unto subjection,
Gate hole his tresure y^ no man might expres
To account the number of his great riches.
Which unsure tresure and slydyng abundasice,
With wasting shadows of goods tra^sitorye,
In surquedous pride began so his heart auau^ce,
By false ambicion and outrageous vaynglory,
That made him lose mind and eke memory,
To know of nature he was man mortal,
But like to gods that were celestial.
Above the palm of old conquerours,
Knightly triumphs and conquestes marciall
He usurped by title of his labors,
To heavenly gods for to be egall,
And through his merits most imperial
He began presume, by fine he was a^yed,
With the seven gods for to be deified.
Through all his palaice and his royal hall,
A law ne set, upon pain of life
That men of custom should him call
This worlds monarke, not mortal nor passi^e
Soune to Jupiter for a prerogatyfe,
Which had thearth as god most of puissaunce,
Conquered by sword unto his obeisaunce.
By full auyse purposed for the nones
Of pompous outrage and surquedous intent,
Full great treasure of gold and precious stones,
Unto the temple of Jupiter he sent,
That the bishops and priests should assent,
Him to receive at his home coming,
Like as a god and no mortal thing.
Thus by extort dread and usurped might
Was first brought in false ydolatry:
Causyng princes to receive again right
Godly reverence of froward mawmetry.
But when Calistenes this error did espy
In Alexander, he busily did entende,
This false opinion to correct and amend.
Put five causes notable to rehearce
This Calystenes in especial:
Though he was king of Egypt Mede and Perce
He preued of reason he was a man mortal,
His birth eke earthy and not celestial,
Father and mother, as of their natures
Borne for to dye like other creatures.
His father Philyp of Macedony king,
His mother called Olympyades
Worldly folk, and heavenly nothing:
With kings, queen's, vpset by hye encrees,
Yet again death they could have no relees,
Laws of nature maugre their will to obey,
Not like gods but only borne to dey.
Kind made them subject to sundry passions,
And many uncouth diverse infirmities,
Now glad, now heavy of conditions,
Following the form of their humanities:
But of their false usurped deities
I can not say save dread and flattery,
Wrongly in earth did them deify.
Eke Alexander following ever his lust,
For all his lordshyp and his great might
He suffered passions of honger and of thurst:
Now hole, now sick, now heavy, now light
Whose enterchau^gyng in every man's sight
Clearly shows, as clerks rehearce can
He was no god but like a mortal man.
It fill ones mine auctor does compyle
In a great heat (long or he was old)
He bathed him self in the floude of Nyle,
Where of fortune he sodaynely took cold,
His pores opened on parts manifold:
Lay long after, his story bears witness,
Or he was cured of that great sickness.
But at the last by craft of medicine
Delivered he was of that infirmity,
Nothing amended by his power divine
By might of Juno nor Jupiters postye,
Nor by his own usurped deity:
For by the passions which he did endure,
It showed he was a deadly creature.
Of him also it is made mention,
He had a custom to fall in dronkennes,
Through vynolence lost often his reason,
Than of ire and furious hastines
He would smite and hurt in his wodenes:
Which tokens were, plainly to termyne,
In his person not heavenly nor deuyne.
When the philosopher called Calystenes
Began first consider all these conditions
In Alexander, he put him self in prees
Void of dissimulyng and dylacions,
For to reform such false ambicions
Of godly honor, which men did on the^ feign,
And from all vices his courage to restrain.
In this purpose as any center stable,
He cast him fully of true entencion
To correct all that was reprouable
Used in his person or in his region,
Troth gave him heart like a champion,
To tell the king in his estate royal,
He was no god but a man mortal.
For which the king of indignacion
Caught a quarrel again Calystenes,
Put upon him unjustly false treason,
Only to slay his master causeles:
And for to attaynt him before all the prees
Said how he had of his iniquity,
Conspyred again his royal majesty.
And feigned also the self same time,
How he had made a conspyration
Again his lord, by an horrible crime,
Interrupting the religion
Of his deuyne institution:
That in such case there was no better read,
But Calistenes by law must be dead.
And to prolonge of his death the pain
Upon a board he was laid a long,
His fete smytte of and his hands twain,
His eyes rent out, were not his pains strong*
Thus can tyra^tes when they list do wrong
Slay philosophers without any ruthe,
Which spared not for to say them truth.
This cruel vengeance might not suffice,
But Alexander more to increase his woe,
Did cut his lyppes in full cruel wise,
His nose thyrles, his ears eke also,
And with the body he bade men should go
Tofore his host, as it is remembered,
To show the tronke how it was disme^bred.
In a cave deep and wonders low,
Solitary darked all the bounds,
After the pains he made him to be throw
The place stuffed with wode barking hounds,
Of false intent to rende his bloody wounds.
Till Lisymachus of great compassion
To short his torment gave him poison.
Who red ever of torments more terrible?
O Alexander thou ought be ashamed
To slay thy clarke with pains so horrible,
For thy vices because he has the blamed,
Thy royal name thereby is defamed:
But ever tyrants when the^ list be wood,
Of innocents rejoice to shede the blood.
Against his knight gentle Lisymachus
Because he had of him compassion,
King Alexander was melancolious
Without cause, title, or affection:
Let shut him up with a fierce Lion,
Void of all help for to be succored,
Of entencion he should be devoured.
But Lisymachus quyt him like a knight
Against this Lion in the same place,
Ran fiercely on him, and of his martial might
Out of his head his tongue he did out race:
Reconciled to the kings grace,
Because that he so knyghtly has him borne,
Better cherished than ever he was toforne.
Another knight that called was Clytus*
Famous in arms for his chiualry,
One the greatest of the kings house,
And most commended of prudent policy:
Most familier as books specify
About the king, as it was often preued,
To tempre his courage when he was grieved
The king and he walkyng hand in hand
Within the palaice, being in presence
Princes and dukes of many diverse land,
Where they began by notable eloquence
Remember of arms the famous excellence
Of conquerous, and other knights old
And every man about his tale told.
Among which Clytus the gentle knight
Began to commend and greatly magnify
Philyp of Macedon, as him ought of right:
Both of his wisdom and of his chiualry,
Till Alexander had thereat envy,
Began disdain of furtous cruelte,
That any should be commended more than he.
Caught occasion ofyre and false hatrede
Again his knight, y^ was to him most true,
With a sharp swerd unawarely made hi blede
His heart blood hot and read of hue
By his sides raylyng down of new,
Thereby to preue this story tell can,
He was no god nor reasonable man.
Thus in princes furious and cruel,
Men may clearly an evidence se
How that lordshyp is not perpetuell,
But full of change and mutabilite:
Of there now friendly, now sodayn enmite,
Record on Clytus most in the kings grace,
Unawarely slain, and did no trespace.
Was he worthy to be deified
This Alysander, most double of his courage?
Or was he worthy to be stellified
This furious prince, for his fell outrage
That slew his friends in his mortal rage?
Thus fare tyrants when they list be wode,
To seek occasion for to shede blood.
Calystenes slain for moral disciplyne,
And Lisymachus for his compassion:
Eke this tyrant of false gredy rauyne
Slew gentle Clytus again all reason,
As ye have heard for commendacion
Of king Philyp, the story well conceived,
Who trusts tyra^tes shall sonest be deceived.
Lenuoy.
THis tragedy of Calistenes,
Declares us by notable remembrance
He was with Plato and old Socrates
In his youth put under governance,
Drank of the milk of plenteous abou^dau^ce,
Of their two schools, ever deuoyde of sloth,
Last by Alexander disme^bred for his troth
First he was sent by Aristoteles,
For to awayte by prudente purueyaunce
On Alexander, lest he were retcheles
By presumption in his royal puissaunce,
To take upon him by goodly attendaunce:
Which he wtstode alas it was great ruthe,
To be so slain because he said the truth.
Who with tyrants list put him self in prees
To have their favor and acquayntaunce,
He must flatter and fage doubtless,
Be double of heart with feigned countenance,
With there contryued done his obseruaunce,
For faithful meaning slain, and y^ was ruth,
Was Calystenes because he said truth.
Noble princes your subjects keep in pees,
Be not to has^y for to do vengeance,
For to tyrants that be merciles
God sent short life, and sudden mischaunce:
Who says troth have no displeasaunce,
Prynt in your heart how it was great ruth,
That Calystenes was slain for his truth.
The.x. chapter.
How Alexander king of Pyrothe auenturyng to pass the floude of Achero^t,
there at his back by his most trustye was deadly wounded.

AFter the complaynt of Calystenes
Slain tyrantly, and did no trespass,
Came Alexander king of Pyrothes
His wounds bleadyng unto John Bochas:
To him declared how he drowned was
In Acheronte, a river of great fame,
Beside a town Pandosia was the name.
And (as it is remembered) and ytolde
Of this notable mighty strong cite,
It was in Greece buylte of days old,
And after Pyrrus called Pyrothe:
Where as the king held his royal se,
And as books also determyne,
This Alexander came of the same line.
Of whose kynred is made plain mention,
Son to Achilles was king Pyrrus,
And next in order by succession
Father to Alexander was Neoptolomus,
Which had also mine auctour tells thus,
A full fair daughter, the story ye may seen,
Olympiades, of Macedony queen.
And she was wedded to Philip of Macedo,
Whilom mother this queen of most renoun
To Alexander, the story tells so,
Which all the world brought in subjection:
Whose father Philyp of great affection
Let crown the brother of Olympiades,
Called Alexander to raygne in Pyrothes.
To whom Philyp for his great beauty,
Because he was so fair a creature
Had such affection and specialtie
As it is remembered in scripture,
Of false foul lust against nature
As says Bochas, I can him not excuse,
Vnlefully he did his beauty use.
And by mean of that horrible deed,
Which to rehearce is to foul a thing,
This said Philyp (in Bochas thus I read)
In Epirothes he made him to be king:
And of extorcion by record of writing,
Causeles from thence he did enchace,
The king Arabba tho reigning in yt place.
And it fell after the story tells so
Of this Alexander by serious rehearsayle,
Upon the death of Philyp of Macedo
With a great host came into Itayle,
Supposyng greatly for to avail,
To occupy after his proud intent
Wholly the bounds of all the occident.
And though so be yt fortune be chaungeable,
Double also by course of her nature,
At his ginnyng he found her favorable:
Made him twice proudly to recure
Gain them of Luke, to their disconfiture
To have the field, and maugre al their might,
Of very force to put them unto flight.
Against Itaile when he began this war
Fully in purpose the Romans to assail,
Of hye presumption proceed he began so far
With many a prince that was in his battle,
To know before by certain diuinaile
Of his conquest, the bounds for to cast,
And of his life how long it should last.
And in the temple of Jupiter the great
By diuinours that expert were and old,
Seruyng this god wtin the land of Crete,
This was the answer which they to him told
And it affirmed by tokens manifold:
How he ne should eschew the dredefull date,
Over the day assigned to his last fate.
And they also assigned a place
Thereby to have knowlegyng more clear,
Under a city long and large of space
Called Pandosia, and for to go more nere,
By Acheront a famous great riuere,
Told him plainly and could no farther sey
But of necessity there he must needs dey.
And though it were an earnest and no iape
Of god ordained not to be set aside,
He thought of wisdom his desteny to escape
And otherwise for him self provide:
Cast in Greece no longer to abide,
Wenyng this river nor that fair city
Save in Greece should no where else have be.
And for to set him self in assurance
Of intent to eschew his destiny,
Into three battayles departing his puissau^ce,
Came to Itayle tofore Luke the city,
They with help of Samoys the country,
With a great power came out anon right
Slew all his knights and put him to flight.
At the back they pursued him so nere
That his enemies were almost on him fall,
Unto a bridge broke with the ryuere,
And ouerturned with his plankes all:
And Acheronte men did that river call,
As was told him by a certain knight,
Which rode before him the river in his sight
For by a rain that fill the same night
The river waxt to a dredefull floude,
And not far thens in the kings sight
Upon the water a little town there stood,
Which made the king to change his blood,
And specially his pride began attame,
When he wist Pandosia was the name.
And than he began most dredfully remember,
Calling to mind the priests diuinayle,
Which made him quake in every membre
For very fear, and his breathe to fail:
No man could him wish nor counsel,
On every party he stood so on the wrack,
The floude tofore hi his enemies at his back
To take the river he stood in mortal dread,
And if that he his enemies did abide
He wist well that he was but dead,
Passage was none for to turn aside:
Thus dissolate he stood withouten gyde,
Thought it better to ieoparde the ryuere,
Than with his enemies y^ followed him so nere.
These mortal dredes his heart began co^strayne
Dread of the floude for to have passage,
Behind his enemies y^ began at him disoaine,
Lest he were slain in that mortal rage,
His fate approchyng he but young of age,
The town Pandosia the tokens did express,
With ^cheronte that bare thereof witness.
And when that he put in adventure
To pass the floude, or else to be dead,
One whom he most trusted of any creature
Took a spear square and sharp the head,
And at his back he quakyng in his dread
Traitorously through plate and mayle,
Perced his heart, the blood abroad began rail.
And as it is also of him remembered,
The Luca^oyes by vengeable vyolence
They have his carayne on pieces disme^bred,
Till an old lady being in presence,
Required them of humble patience
That she of grace gader might anon,
His members all, and join them into one.
And after to send them unto his sister dear,
Olympyades, the stately great queen,
That of affection and love most entere
When it befell that she did them seen,
Should of nature as it must needs been
We^e and provide in his estate royal,
To bury the body with feast funeral.
Se here example of this proud king,
Which would have escaped his fatal desteny,
Change of places auayle^ him nothing,
Periodie of princes may not changed be,
The term set fro which they may not fle:
For when heuyn of death has set the date,
No mortal man may eschew his fate.
The.xi. Chapter.
How Dary king of Perce and Mede was outrayed by Alexander king of Macedon.

IN Alexander called Epirothes
Me list as now no longer for to tarry,
Slain at mischefe for he was retchles
Double of courage for he could change and vary,
For turn I will my pen to king Dary
Which that whilom who so list take heed,
Most mightily reigned in Perce and Mede.
And among other notable warriors
Like as I deem by heavenly influence,
Only by title of his predecessors,
And through his prudent excellence,
To great increase of his magnificence,
He had all Asie, as made is mention,
Under his lordship and dominacion.
And as mine auctor Bochas does defyne,
He was descended from the imperial blood,
Of Artaxerses, and borne eke of that line:
Passed all princes of treasure and of good,
In Perce and Mede his great empire stood,
An hundred prouynces tencrease of puissaunce,
And seven and thirty he had in governance.
Over all Asie toward the orient
His lordshyp last, books make mind,
And he had eke toward the occident
Over Egypt power (as I find)
The red sea was not left behind,
Demyng him self of all earthly treasour,
Was none but he lord and gouernoure.
Toward Septe^trion under y^ midday spear,
His power raught and his regaly,
Over Inde, in cronicles ye may lere,
And to the bounds of great Armenye,
Lord of the kingdom yt called is Parthy:
Worldly folk dempt him with god egall*
Master to fortune, and she not but his thrall.
But in his highest exaltacion
Of worldly glory, he could not prevail
For all his riches and vain ambicion,
But fortune durst him well assail:
In his most royal rich apparayle,
Cast in her chau^ges to give hi^ a sharp shoure
By Alexander of Greece enheritour.
Unto purpose I will my pen dress,
For to declare and make mention
How proud Dary in his most nobles,
Was by Fortune from his seat ^ast down:
For anon after the coronacion
Of Alexander, in Macedone king,
This was the process of his workyng.
He not delayed nor made no long date,
In purpose fully of ire to proceed,
Of Perce and Mede the scepters to translate,
All their riches to conquer and possede,
Perpetually for no abide in deed,
Under greeks mighty obeysaunce,
In Macedone, to have the governance.
And (as mine auctour) well reherce can,
He set in Greece the mighty strong city
Of Corinthe, the metropolitan
There to establishe his imperial see:
In regalibus when he list crowned be,
As man who^ god list of his might to mark,
The world to co^quere, and be thereof monarke.
At the ginnyng of his conquest famous,
Through out Greece in every region,
First he chose out of his fathers house
Knights yt were most sovereign of renown,
Notable in arms, and of condition
Faithful and true, which had of high prudence
Foresight in arms, of marciall providence.
To them he did full notably assygne
As men expert in knightly apparayles,
To make his stuff with many a rich sign,
And forge of stele his plate and his mayles:
Gave them the rule to govern in battayles,
For providence (of yore it has be told)
Full much avails of knights wise and old.
All this accomplished he list no longer tarry,
This worthy king, but with his ordinance
Purposed to begin on king Dary,
And (as it is put in remembrance)
In most proud wise he began him self auau^ce,
First in his way to brenne and beat down,
Of hasty ire, Thebes the mighty town.
After he gate two mighty regions
The one of Frigie, the other called Lyde
Set by old time were their founda^ions
Upon two rivers, runnyng there beside,
whose golden grauels their brightness may not hide
Paceolus, and Euxyne men them call
Richest of stremes though men reken all.
And of his conquest farther to termyne,
He wan Isauria a province wonder strong
In Asia one chiefest of the nine,
And Pamphile a kingdom large and long,
He gate also were it right or wrong:
For where yt conquest have any title of right,
My cunning it passes my reason and my might.
I took no party nor me list not tarry
In this matter, but forth I will proceed,
How Alexander hasted toward Dary
To atcheue his co^queste of Perce and of Mede:
But first he came to Frigia I read,
Into a city the name to specify,
Thylke days it named was Gordy.
After mine auctoure affirm well I dare,
There was a temple in Frigia (thus says he)
Of Jupiter, in which there stood a chare
With ropes bound of stones and pyrre,
Among which men might behold and se
A fatal knotte, by craft made so subtle,
That no man could undo it by no wyle.
For who that had science or cunning
That curious knot to lose or untwine,
Over Asye he should be crowned king:
And Alexander as books determyne,
Saying this chare, knitte with many line,
And how it seemed a manner impossible
To sever it, which was indivisible.
The chare with coardes was so enterlaced
That rychely stood in ^oues tabernacle,
Which by his wit could not be enbraced,
Neither by craft nor no solemn miracle:
Till Alexander by a divine oracle
Drew out his sword, whereof me^ had wonder,
Carfe the knotte and cords all asunder.
Whereby he wist that he was ordained
Over all Asye to be lord and king,
Which to rejoice this story is not feigned
He rode like Mars, his battayles co^ueiyng,
Through Perce and mede, his sta^derds splayig
Toward his conquest, where I let him dwell,
And of his chare and knottes I will you tell.
Prudent Justinus an old croniclere,
In his cronicles rehearses this story,
Now Gordius a pore laborer
Beside the city that called is Gordie,
^ryng his land did his oxen gye:
And all manner fowls that has flight
Hye in the air appeared in his sight.
Unknow to him the token what it meant,
With diuinours cast him to counsel,
Called ^ugures, which holy in their intent,
Known the process of such diuinayle
Where it shall profit either disauayle:
And at the gate of Gordy the city,
He met a maid excelling of beauty
Which from above by heavenly influence
Had from her birth a manner knowledgyng,
In such augury, great practike and science,
Which to Gordius expowned every thing:
Said of Asie he should be lord and king,
And raygne there during all his life,
In hope whereof, she became his wife.
After his weddyng he waxt fortunate,
The cronicle can bear me well record,
There till in Frigy a sudden great debate
Among the commons a mortal discord,
Knowing no mean to bring the^ at accord,
Till their gods by notable providence,
Taught them a way to appease their violence.
How that debate should among them last
Unto the time they had chosen a king:
And they began cry and pray their gods fast
By some sign or miracle out showing,
To give to them a manner knowlegyng,
That they might to their notable encreace,
Chose such one, y^ should them set in peace.
They had answer to wait, and be well ware
To set spies by busy attendaunce
On whom they met ridyng in a chare
To Joues temple to do his obseruaunce,
And him receive by gods ordinance:
Upon his head withouten more tariyng,
To set a crown in Frigie to raygne king.
And Gordius in his chair ridyng,
Toward the temple they on the way him met
And awaytyng, chose him to their king,
And solemnly home they did him fet,
Upon his head a rich crown they set:
And he to them so egall was and mete,
That he them brought into rest and quiet.
Thus to the crown Gordius did att^yne
By tokens showed unto his great avail,
And their discordes and stryues to restrain,
He to his lieges gave notable counsel,
That they should with royal apparayle,
Take his chair, as he did them deuyse,
And offer it up in most lowly wise
In the temple that was consecrate
To Jupiter, a full solemn place:
And more to make their offryng fortunate,
They should it set (without longer space)
Tofore the goddess that was called Grace,
Which by miracle their hearts to appease
Set all the people in quiet and in ease.
And when the king Alexander had
Losed the knot of which I have you told,
And of the chair which Gordius ladde
The secrets seyne and mysteries manifold,
Worldly presu^ption began make his heart bold,
Without title of any ryghtwisenes,
The city Gordy to spoil of his riches.
And all Affryke he robbed eke also
Up to the mountain yt called was Taurus,
The which hill has famous names two
For it is also named Caucasus:
Where this prince most vyctorious,
Ordained first with spear and shield,
Against king Dary for to hold a field.
Upon a mountain they together met,
The marciall plain named Horestes,
And most proudly their wards there they set
All for the war and nothing for the pees:
Where Alexander, in knyghthode peerles,
All the Perciens battayled in his sight,
And Darius party were put unto flight.
King Alexander shortly to conclude,
In his most stately royal magnificence
Set not his trust in no great multitude,
But in his knyghts, which long in his presence
Had had in arms long experience:
Were well preued in marciall disciplyne,
Tenha^ce his conquest by their prudent doctrine
Which in y^ journey have the^ so well borne,
That in their nobles found was no lack,
For syxty thousand of fotemen the^ beforne,
They slew of Perce, and men on horsbacke
Other ten. M, so mortal was the wrack:
And.xl. thousand as made is mention,
Were prisoners, and put to their raunson.
On Greeks party the story does well show,
Macedonoys on Alysanders side,
In comparison were slain but a few:
For of footmen and men that did ride
Through the feldes y^ were so large and wide,
There were that day in their mortal strives,
Not full three.C. which y^ lost their lives.
Dary could none other rescue make,
Fled at mischefe in full great distress,
His wife, his daughter, led away and take,
His tents spoiled, his story bears witness:
Greeks made glad with full great richesse,
His cofers spoiled, he fond no better succor
And he enpouerished of his whole treasour.
When Dary saw his deedly adventure,
Full pitously in heart he did mourn,
And anon after this disconfiture
To Babylon in have began return:
And while that he did there soiourne,
Knowing no recure to him yt might avail,
With Alysandre to hold more battle,
Than of purpose to set him self in ease,
And for taleye his deedly fell greuaunce,
In his intent king Alysander to please,
Cast for to send him letters of pleasaunce,
Give him gifts in full great abundaunce,
But al y^ slight which darius has wrought,
King Alysander set them echone at naught.
This manly king kept his conceyte close,
List not show what he meant in deed,
But cast fully after his purpose,
Upon his conquest farther to proceed:
After the gettyng of Perce and eke of Mede,
To win Surry, Egypt, and Libye land,
Demyng fortune ready to his hand.
And of his conquest farther to endyte,
When his glory began most freshely shine,
The temple of Jupiter cast him for to visit,
Which stood in Libye, auctours determine,
Said how he was descended from the line
Of thylke god, borne to be his heir,
As lord of heaven, fire, water, earth, and air.
And that the priests fully should assent
With heavenly gods to make him egall,
Great richesse and treasour he them sent,
Thus dread and mede made him celestial,
Falsely forg^t that he was mortal:
And of ambicion by Marciall apparayle,
Cast with Dary again to have battle.
And as I find how they did mete,
The two princes with people innumerable,
In the confront of the land of Crete,
And king Dary of folks defensable
Brought to the field a people incomparable
Four hundred M. of fotemen fet fro far,
With Alysander for to hold war.
An hundred.M. there came with him also
On horsbacke, in steel armed bright,
And all this people when they had a do
(All be that day full long last the fight)
Were slain and take and yput to flight:
Where Alysander to his increase of glory,
Had of king Dary that day the victory.
And Perciens to their final mischefe,
Without mercy or paying of raunson,
With king Dary were put to great reprefe,
Void of all hope and consolacion,
F^ed as I find into the region
Called Parthe, where as it is told,
He of that people was take and put in hold.
And though his fetters were of gold rich,
He had thereof god wot no pleasaunce:
Fortunes gifts be not aye ylyche,
In her false whele there is such variaunce,
Diverse of there, strange of her countenance,
Made Alysander with a little number,
The multitude of Dary to encombre.
Within a town called Tharsa he was take,
In a charet with cheynes strong ybonde,
Of all his friends pitously forsake,
Led, and hurt with many a mortal wound:
And this murdre contrived was and found
By one Bessus, a froward recheles knight,
Which stood before most forthered in his sight.
And was assured by faith of his legiaunce
To king Dary to be true in deed,
But this false traitor god send him myschaunce,
Caused his wounds mortally to blede:
Yet or he died, he sent in all his dread
A Percien knight sad and of great age,
To Alysander, to tell him his message.
To thank that prince of his hye noblesse,
Which of his grace and mercy most habounde
Him list to show so great gentylnesse
Unto my wife, and children as it is found,
For which to him I am so much bound,
That he mine enemy of his benignite
In their distress list have of them pite.
And since I see that needs I must dey
Through blody wou^des, which I may not recure,
Say Alisander of grace that I pray
For to have ruth of mine adventure,
Next to ordain for my sepulture:
And condiscende to grant mine askyng,
For to be buried as longs to a king.
Praying the gods which be immortal
When he has done to quyte him his mede,
That of his mercy most imperyall
Him list of grace for to take heed
To bury me king of Perce and Mede:
For if this tauour be in his heart found,
To his noblesse the fame shall aye rebounde.
Requyryng him of his imperyall might,
Of my foul murder to see each circumstau^ce:
For murder always calls to god of right,
Never cessyng but by continuance
Up to the heaven to cry for vengeance,
Namely on murder compassed and thought
Which by auisement is execute and wrought.
And sithe I have laid on the this bond
To Alysander to do my message,
And him coniured here with my right hand
Tauege my death wrought by great outrage,
My blood out shed with pale and deed visage,
Here boude in stocks to gods most benign,
With right hole heart my sprite I resygne.
Thus he lay stark, there was found no abode
Like as another mortal creature,
When Alysander the murder understood
As ye have herd remembered by scripture,
He did ordain for his sepulture
The funeral feast to hold in all things
As by old time longed unto kings.
Lenuoye
THis tragedy pitous for to here,
Shows of tortune y^ chaunges lameble,
Of royal trones, of gold and stones clear
Of worldly princes how they be unstable:
Their fatal whele most diverse and chau^geable,
With unware turn list not her course tarry
To throw the^ down, record of king Dary.
Who can or may be full assured here
To make fortune to be so treatable,
To find out a way or search out the manner
By obligation to find her immutable?
Her double face, the world aye disceyuable,
Show each day how falsely they can vary,
By covert fraud, record of king Dary.
Example how Phoebus with his bemes clear
Shows some day his light most agreeable,
But long or eve darkness does appear
Through cloudy mystes, and raynes durable:
To us declaryng by tokens full notable,
Worldly dignities now fresh now contrary,
Can change her tides, record of king Dary.
Through al Asye, Perce, and Mede yfere,
His lordshyp last, a thing incomparable,
To Ethiope under the mydday spear,
Full of treasure with gold innumerable
His bounds raught, fortune eke seruisable
To obey his lusts till she began falsely vary,
By expert fraud to preue her might in Dary
Noble princes with hole heart and entere
Lift up your corages, hold this no fable,
Though ye sit hye conceive with good there
No worldly lordshyp in earth is perdurable:
And since ye be of nature reasonable,
Among remember as thing most necessary
All stant upon change, record of king Dary.
The.xii. Chapter.
Here Bochas remembers the batayles and loss of realms of antiquity, with
the falling of diverse nobles.

HEre gineth Bochas remember in certain
The great sorrows, y^ mortal disaueyls
The loss of realines, y^ blod shed i vain
Begone of wars and marciall appareyls,
Called to mind of old the fell batayls
Gone of antiquity, as made is mention,
First atwene Greeks and them of Troy ^ou^.
A pitous heart it would make blede,
To have in memory the great outrage
As ye have heard wrought in Perce and Mede
Atwene Dary and Alysandre in their age,
Eke at wene Romans and them of Cartage,
The woeful troubles of wars first begone,
Causes all mischefes that been under the son.
On outher party who can remember aryght
Now loss, now lucre, comes of division:
Now disencrease, now heavy and now light,
Now life now death, for short conclusion,
For Bochas says such false discention
Has many kingdoms y^ stood in hye estate,
Turned to tuyne, and made them desolate.
Remember of Troy the walls broke down,
In Greece distroyed manyla strong cite,
In Perce and Mede great desolation,
Rome dispurueyed of marciall surete,
Castles and tours of old antiquite
Made ruynous, in Affryke and Cartage,
Caused by wars and Martes cruel rage.
Who list consider wrought by days old
The course of conquest of these warriors,
In Alysander he clearly may behold,
By remembrance of his progenytours,
And of his blood, how all the successors
Had fatally or they did hence wend,
A sudden death or a shameful end.
Full many reckened that were of his lynage
For to succeed in his possessions,
To six and thirty partyng his heritage
To each assigned their royal portions,
First as he made his divisions
He gave of Frigie the prefecture of right
To Leonatus that was so good a knight.
But a little while last his possession,
For the countrees list him not obey,
They of Athenes had indignation
With Antipater for he did warrey:
Yet in that war, plainly for to say,
Leostenes their duke, their governor,
Was slain y^ day he found no better succor.
And Leonatus that was his adversary,
Of Antipater the party to sustene,
Found fortune that day to him contrary:
For in the field though he rode armed clean,
With a spear his wound was made grene
At mischefe slain, mine auctour does co^pile
Thus his lordshyp last not but a while.
Antipater another successor
Of Alysander as made is mention,
Was by record the same false traitor
That for his death tempered the poison,
His son Cassa^der accomplished the trayson,
Bare the cup which that made him sterue,
With y^ strong poison when he did him serve.
Antipater of this crime culpable,
Greatly desired in his opinion
Upon all tho than to be vengeable,
That likely were to espy his trayson:
Dread him sore having suspection
Lest he were accused to the estates,
Of crime called lose maiestatis.
His soon assented to that horrible deed,
Which to Alysander being in Babylone,
Most traytourly without shame or dread
As ye have heard, presented the poysone:
And yet the king as made is mention,
Though he to him false was and contrary,
He made him prefect, lord of y^ land of Carry.
And among other notable warriors,
There were three more full worthy and famous,
Set in the number of his enheritours,
Polycarpus, and Neoptolonius
And each of them to other envious:
Within a field the storye does us lere,
Eueriche slew other as they met yfere.
Of Perdicas what should I write or said,
Which among all was one the best knight*
That when Alysander lay diyng certain
And began to feeble of his force and might,
Dempt before that it sat full well of right,
How this Perdicas for wisdom and manhede,
In Macedone should after him succeed.
And unto him with look and chere benign
Upon his heed for sickness complaynyng,
With full whole heart, for a notable sign
Of succession he gave to him a ryng,
After his day to be crowned king
Of Macedone, since he most might avail
Through al his empire to have y^ gouernaile
And yet says Bochas plainly in sentence,
Though he of knyghthode and hie prowess,
Of manly force, and also of prudence,
Passed all other, the storye bears witness:
By vicious pride and froward boystousnesse,
He was more hyndred through his outrage,
Than all his enemies might do hi^ damage.
For through his pride and great extorcions,
Fro Macedone the people of that country
Fled into other strange regions,
And of presumption the story says how he
Began a war again king Tholome:
Where he was slain in all men's syghtes,
Not of his enemies but of his own knights.
Eke of Anaxarchus of Capadoce king
Which province joins unto Surry,
Touching the bounds by record of writing
Toward the Orient, the land of Armeny,
Having two cou^tryes Scilice and Isaury,
Toward Cypre and a great ryuere
Rennyng amiddes with stremes fresh and clear.
This Anaxarchus were he loathe or feign,
In days few has his kingdom lorne,
For by Perdicas proudly he was slain,
Of whom that I have you told beforne:
Thus worldly prices tho they had it sworn,
For all their lordshyp and domination,
By fraud of fortune unwarily be put down.
And among other princes of that age,
Upon Alysander duly abydyng,
Bochas reherseth Amylchar of Cartage,
Duke of that cite by record of writing,
After the death of that worthy king,
As ye have herd ymurdred by poison,
This said Amylchar repeyringe to his town
Was slain in Cartage, shortly to conclude,
Of cruel malice and conspiracion,
Within that cite of false ingratitude,
When he of knighthode fra^chised had yt town,
And not withstandyng all his hye renoune,
When he stood highest in his felicite,
He by the commons was slain of that cite.
The.xiii. Chapter.
How Eumenydes was twyse outrayed by Antigonus and at the last dyed in prison.

WHa^ Alisader in his roial estate
Had all conquered tofore as ye have herd
He like a god most pompous and elate,
As sovereign prince of all myddleerde,
To take upon him was nothing aferde,
To claim in countrees a thing y^ was not fair,
Of Jupiter to be both son and heir.
One of the principles, who so takes head
That first brought in false ydolatry,
Was thylke time yt priests for false dread
His name with gods began to magnify,
And so to call him of feigned flattery:
And mydde their temples in Liby on a stage,
Of his lykenes they set up an image.
But little or naught to him it might avail
Again his death for to do succor,
When the fell poison his heart did assail
Which made him fade as does a flour,
Of whose empire was none enheritour,
Save in his death thus stood the woeful case,
Twene six and thirty his land divided was
And in his story full plainly it is told,
This departicion to make it ferme and stable
He was laid forth upon a couche of gold,
To rehearse by tokens full notable
Whom he dempt of very sothe most able
Of all his princes plainly to discern,
When he was deed, his kingdom to govern.
First there was one among all that prees
Next Alysander the knightlyest man,
The worthy knight called Eumenides,
Whose high renoun full well rehearse can
Prudent Justinus, the great historian,
Ordained before to govern realms two,
All Capadoce and Pafflagony also.
His hie nobles as made is mention
In especial more to magnify,
Him lacked naught of commendacion
That apparteyned unto chiualry,
To hie prudence, or noble policy:
Except three things mine auctor says y^ same
A crown, a scepter, and a kings name.
But for that he all other did excel
Both of prudence and famous chiualry,
It is remembered as some books tell,
That there were some had thereat envy:
For when fortune list to set up an hye
Any person aloft upon her whele,
Some are beside that like it never a dele.
Who holds him ever upon hie mountains
Fyndeth great experience of blastes and shours,
Often is troubled with storm wind and raines,
So of Alysander the proud successors
When they sat freshest in their flours,
Wind of envy, fortune held so the rother,
That each was busy to destroy other.
On hills hye it is an impossible
A man to abide without wind or reyne,
A thing expert and very visible,
Hye climbyng up is meddled with disdeyne:
Preace has envy as it is often seyne,
And through preferryng of fortune ^ estates,
Is ever cause of great war and debates.
This same thing was well expert and preued
Among these said royal enherytours
Of Alysander, for each of them was grieved
To see his fellow raygne in his flours:
And thus atwene these mighty successors
Of false envy there began so great a strife,
That each made other for to lose his life.
And as it is before made mention,
Pollicarpus and Neptolonyus
By a manner false conspiracion
Again Eumenides were only envious,
Of whose falsenesse he was suspicious,
Till on a day there is no more to said,
Metyng in battle slew them both twain
For which slaughter proud Antigonus,
Of Macedone prefect and governor,
Wext in his heart so fell and dispitous,
And was withal a noble warrior,
With his knights did wholly his labor
Again Eumenides by marciall apparayle,
A field assigned to hold great battle.
Made upon him a great discomfiture,
As they met armed bright in steel:
And thus Eumenides of mortal adventure
Fled at mischefe into a strong castle,
Whereof his knights lyked never a dole:
For as the story plainly makes mind,
That day he fled and left his men behind.
In which castle for he stood destitute,
Fro thencehe cast in all have to fly,
In his great mischefe to find some refute
That time he drew him to a strange country,
Some succor to get avenged for to be,
Called Argyre, by Greeks of intent,
The Latin corrupt of this word argent.
Of Argiraspedes a people that there dwell
The name they took after that region,
The which land as old books tell
Has of silver plente and foyson:
For which cause by old description,
It took the name of nature and of right,
Because the soil like silver shyneth bright.
And of this isle which has so great a pryse
As mine author makes rehersayle,
How the people be provident and wise,
Prudent in arms, and manly in battle,
Both to defend and proudlye to assail:
Which by their wisdom and good counsel,
To king Alysander stood in great avail.
And Eumenides one of his successors,
As ye have herd drew to that country,
There to find some refute and succors
In his mischefe and great aduersite:
And for his words of great authorite,
His noble langage and his fair eloquence,
The people had him in full great reverence.
And for they were manly and coragious,
Able to assemble both plate and mayle,
He made them rise against Antigonus,
By their prowes with him to have battle:
But of fortune his party began to fail,
Where thilke people, the story tells thus,
Had before ben full victorious.
Antigonus has the field recured,
That day his knights fought like wodelyons
In furious tene of his courage assured,
Brake their tents and pauilions,
Spoiled their castles robbed their d^geons,
Where that country unawarely thus affrayed
Had never before in battle ben outrayed.
And of dispite this people recheles,
Caught in their heart great indignation
Again their prince, this said Eumenides,
Which had the^ brought to their destruction:
And all the people of one opinion
Presented him it was not after long,
To Antigonus bound in chains strong.
In this process brefely to proceed,
At great mischefehe dyed in prysone:
He found no mercy plainly as I read,
For all his noblesse nor his hye renoune,
Yet of his manhood made is mention,
Who that story list to look aryght,
With Alysander there was no better knight.
In his conquest every hour and space
He was most cheryshed for his hye noblesse,
Above all other stood most in his grace,
To help and releue folk in their distress:
All be that he dyed in wretchedness,
To us declaryng the great variaunces,
That all day fall in fortunes chances.
Lenuoye.
This tragedy of duke Eumenides
She weth of fortune ye great doublenes,
How worldly princes that been recheles
With unware chaunges fall into distress:
And there may be no greater heaviness
After prosperity, nor greater pain
Than aduersite which that is sudden.
Greatest envy where is greatest preace,
Greatest awayte where is most richesse,
And greatest ease where is rest and peace,
Where most discord most is heaviness:
And of all sorrow sorrow fullest excess,
Is thylke sorrow y^ does a man constrayne,
After prosperity with aduersite sudden.
Princes in earth of power peerles
Which excelled all other in noblesse,
Had in this world by conquest most encrees,
As Alysander the story bears witness:
Remember the fine of all their hye prowess,
And the triu^phes to which they did attain,
After prosperity aduersite sudden.
The strong enheritours which yt he out chees
Six and thirty, the nombre to express,
Which had possession of kyngdoms doutles,
Each thing obeying to their worthynesse,
Till fortune through her wunted doubleness
Showed her might unawarely to ordain,
After prosperity aduersite sudden.
Noble princes to avoid all disencrees
Among your selves discordes to repress,
Be not enuyous, nor yrous causeles,
Work nothing of hasty wylfulnesse:
Let discretion be your gouerneresse,
For there must follow if ye part on twain,
After prosperity aduersite sudden.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
How Queen Olympiades, for she delyted in vices, murdre, and vengeance, dyed
at mischefe.

NExt in order to Bochas did appear
After the mischefe of Eumenides,
The great queen with a full pitous chere
Mother of Alysander, Olympiades,
Borne of the line of Gaades
Among queen's (her story bears witness)
Excelled all other in beauty and richesse.
She was daughter to Neoptolomus
The mighty king of Epirothes,
And had suspecte how Neptanabus
By enchauntment put him self in prees
Of wifely troth to make her recheles:
But Bochas here for to save her name,
Writes but little of her disclaunderous fame.
This said queen right fair of her visage,
Was first brought forth in thylke regions
Where all the worthy of blood and of lynage,
Held their scepters, and their rich crouns,
Through all Greece with full possessions:
So that this queen that time nere and far
Was of beauty, called the lode star.
But among al her great prosperitees,
Her youth flowig in most sovereign noblesse
Her joy was meddled with great aduersitees,
When Philip Maredo in her great heuinesse
Was mortally wounded in distress,
In Cythia by a certain nation
Called Triboloys, as made is mention.
For in that country upon a certain day,
Where as he faught and did his best pain,
To get a cite, and at a siege lay,
And for thassaute did his stuff ordain,
He lost unawarely one of his eyes twain:
That when the queen beheld his wound,
For sorrow she fell platte unto the ground.
Another thing, books specifye
Troubled her fame by great heaviness,
The suspecte sclaunder of aduoutry
Wrought by Neptauabus, enchauntyng her fayrenes,
The light eciipsyng of hie nobles,
By swifte report for to hinder her name,
What flies more swifte then wicked fame?
In womanhede (as authors all write)
Most thing commended is their chaste honest,
Thing most sclaundrous their nobles to atwite
Is when princesses of hasty freeite,
Excede the bounds of wifely chastyte:
For what avails lineage or royal blood,
When of their living ye report is not good?
The holy bed defoyled of marriage
Or ones soyled may not recured be,
The voice goth forth and the froward langage
By many realms and many a great cite,
Sclaunder has a custom (and that is pite)
Crew outher false by contagious sown
Ones raised it goth not lightly down.
And to more hindryng of Olympiades,
Philippe away did from her deciyne,
And of the king of Epyrothes
The wife he took to his concubine
Called Cleopatra plainly to termine,
And thus in myschefe tencrease of her trouble
Their false aduoutrie began to wexe double.
Of this process write will I no more
Cause the matter is abominable,
For king Philip the bargayne bought sore
As is remembered by cronicles full notable,
Slain on a day syttyng at his table
Full suddenly or he took any head,
Pausanias did that cruel deed.
Of which slaughter followed a strange case
As ye have herd by Pausanias wrought,
Olympiades full glad and merry was,
Heavy outward her heart void of thought:
Yet faynyngly she has ways out sought
For him to hold solemn and royal,
Like Greeks rightes, a feast funeral.
After whose death wrought of great cruelte,
King Alysander made no longer let
Made Pansonias taken for to be,
And to be hanged upon an hye gybet:
Upon whose head there was a crowneset
Of gold and peerle, and rich stones Inde,
By Olympiades in story as I find.
For he stood greatly in the queen's grace,
And as folk dempt of suspection,
They met together in many privy place,
Which greatly turned to her confusion:
For noise arose through all that region
That by thoccasion of their mislyuyng,
How Pausanias slough Philyp the king.
But she anon in her malice fervent,
Fro the gybet made him to be take down:
Made his body solempnely to be brent
Kept his exequies with great oblat^on,
After the ryghtes of that region:
Not left behind in party nor in all
That appertayned to feasts funeral.
Upon king Philyp as it were for the nones
To do her lord a shame or a despyte,
Solempnely she made brenne the bones,
Of Pausanias, for a false appetite:
Unto no man she had so great delight,
For which this feast was like in all things,
To thexequies of princes and of kings.
She made his sword also to be take
With which he slough Philyp the king,
Offered it up only for his sake
Tofore Appollo, by record of writing:
Which to her was sclaundre and hyndryng,
Caused folk deem in their intent
To slay king Philyp, how she was of assent.
To be cruel was set all her pleasaunce,
For mercylesse void of all pity,
On Cleopatra causynge this vengeance,
That she her self henge upon a tree:
Murdered her daughter the storye ye may se,
What malice may, if it be declared,
Unto the malice of women be compared.
Speak of them that be malycious
And list of custom for to be vengeable,
Among a thousand one may be virtuous
And in two thousand some one is merciable,
But when they be of rancour vntretable,
There is no Tygre more cruel doutles,
Record I take, of Olympiades.
And she of malice was more set of fire
To execute boldly her vengeance,
By the occasion of the great empire
Of Perce and Mede, full famous in substance,
Which stood by conquest under y^ governance
Of Alysander, whereby she thought her strong
Ta^heue each thing were it right or wrong.
Dempte her power should aye contune
By the mean of his high majesty,
God is stronger than the queen fortune
Which suffered her son in her most dignite
In Babylone, poisoned for to be:
As is remembered in many old stories,
After his triumphs and his victoryes.
But for to pass brefely to the writing
Touching the queen as made is mention,
When deed was Philyp the famous king
She had of Macedone full possession:
And governed that mighty region
Where like a wolves as auctours of her write
To shede blood she began her self delight.
In her tyranny most fervent and yrous
Reioysed in slaughter and to see men blede,
For serpent none was more malicious
Then was this queen, in books ye may read:
Yet after all this she received her mede,
For though fortune favored her a while,
Yet with her trains she could her well begile.
The End of tyrants and eke of tyrannesses,
And of murdrers be they never so wood,
Of poysonmongers, and enchauntresses,
Of false supplantours contrary to all good,
And of conspirers, and them that thryst blood:
All these must have by gods purueyaunce,
Here short life or sudden vengeance.
In Macedone this queen was most behated
For her vengeable mortal oppression,
And Cassander against her has debated,
And gun a war upon her region,
Which to Alysander ministered the poison,
As ye have herd tofore of him devised,
By Antipater most mortally practysed.
She found no refute but took her to flight
This cruel queen, this Olympiades,
Into a mountain that stood far out of sight,
And of her kyn there followed great prees,
Supposyng to have lived there in pees,
For on that hill stood a great dongeon,
Strongly walled about enuyron.
Which that marched to a great cite
Called Epidua, standing in great dout,
Because Cassander of old enmyte
Had for her laid a siege about,
And none so hardy for to issue out,
Till Cassander of false compassed trayson,
Made with them a composicion.
His faith was laid that time for hostage,
By oath assured to Olympiades,
By covert fraud under fair langage
To suffer her with him to live in pees:
But of his promise he false was and recheles,
For under treaty as made is mention,
The queen he took, and cast her prison.
But will ye se a royal hye courage,
How boldly delivered fro prison
She descended, imperial of visage,
With all her maidens about her enuyron:
Her enemies present, woder than Lion
Seeing her stand so stately of her face,
When they were proudest to arest her and manace
She was of purpose arrayed for the nones
(As says Bochas) in most stately wise,
In rich purple gold and precious stones,
Like an empress in the Grekyshe gyse:
Herlyst not fly, the storye does deuyse,
With cry nor noise passed not her bounds,
When the blodye rayled from her wounds.
She not afraid in all her mortal shours,
Void of all fear list not bow her chyne,
Make no prayer to her tourmentours,
Nor no token of courage feminine:
Vpryght she stood list not down declyne,
Gave evidence as it is comprehended,
Of what line and blood she was descended.
For unto the time she gave up the brethe,
Was never seyne prince nor pryncesse
That more proudly took their fatal death,
For as I deem her marciall hardynesse
Came from Bellona, of arms chief goddess,
Or she had it by influence of courage,
You by the gods to her and her lynage.
Force is a virtue, as books specify,
Again all vices to make resystence,
But froward rancour, and proud mela^coly
Gave her a spirit of feigned patience,
A false pretense of her magnificence,
As scaunce she had been in virtue strong,
For troth to have endured every wrong.
Contrarious force made her dispitous,
Strong in her error to endure pain,
Of obstinat heart she was fell and yrous,
In dethes constraynt list not to complain:
Counterfayte suffraunce made her to feign,
Nothing of virtue plainly to termine,
Nor of no manners that be feminine.
In her entrayles all malice was enclosed,
And all contagious venym serpentyne,
Not like a woman but as a fend disposed,
Able to distroy all virtuous discipline:
Thus she began thus she did also fine,
In vicious murdre she did her aye delight,
Wherefore of her me list no more tendyte.
Lenuoye.
ALye that shall this tragedy se,
Of ruth and mercy have compassion,
To see a princes from her imperial see
So unawarely by fortune thrown down:
Of whose mischese this was thoccasion,
In three things was set most her pleasaunce
In vicious life, in murder, and in vengeance.
Alas that ever the mortal cruelte
Of blody sword, by execucion
Should be appropried to feminite,
Again the nature of their condition,
Causyng the final sclaunderous confusion
Of Olympiades, here put in remembrance,
For vicious life, murdre, and false vengeance.
Under fresh flowers sote and fair to se,
The serpent dares with his covert poison,
In christ all waters that calm and sote be
Are peryllous pittes full of deception,
Men se all day by clear inspection,
In faynyng faces angelyke suffisaunce,
Hyd underneath rancour and great vengeance.
Though she excelled of her native beauty
All other pryncesses of that region.
Yet was never none feller seen than she,
To execute like her opinion
The perylous traynes contrived of trayson:
And specially in her pompous greuaunce,
Where she hated, for to do vengeance.
Noble princes set hye in dignite,
Do advertise of discretion,
In your most power and largest liberte
Be merciable, and do remission:
Sugar with pite your indignation,
Let grace and mercy tempre your puyssaunce,
Of Olympiades eschewing the vengeance.
Exyle rygour far out of your country,
Give him with you no jurisdiction,
To womanheed longs not parde
Of cancred rancour new execucion:
Where mercy reigns of grace there is foyson,
Have this in mind by long continuance,
Of Olympiades forgetting the vengeance.
Let patience by virtuous plente
Within your hearts purchase a mancion,
Let your compassion attempre equite
That right excede not the bounds of reason
So that your feminine humble entencion
Be always bridled by provident suffraunce,
Voyding al excess of rygour and vengeance.
For it is said of old aucthorite
To women longs by disposition
Meekness in langage, in port humilite,
In all virtue humble subjection,
Void of manaces strife and contencion:
So that no man in your attendaunce
Espy no token of rancour nor vengeance:
The special mean, the parcialite
Should of all mercy by description
Rebounde to women, for of antiquite
The lamb not used to play the Lion:
Nor no meke dove enuyed the faucon,
Nor to your degree by natural accordaunce,
Sit nouther rygour nor hasty vengeance.
This simple lenuoy receive it at gre,
And have thereof no indignation,
Lowly dyrect to your benignite,
Only of meekness, and no presumption,
Knowing of kind your inclination
Disposed is by natural purueyaunce
To all mercy, and nothing to vengeance.
The.xv. Chapter.
How Agathocles of low birth borne, attained unto royal dignite, ended in
pouerte and wretchedness.

I Have herd said full yore agone
A whirle wind blowing nothing soft,
Was in old english called a rodyon,
That reyseth dust and straw full hye a lofte,
And in thassendyng it falls so full often
Though it be borne almost to the sky,
Where it becomes there can no man espy.
Out of forges by fire that smythes make,
By clear experience it is full often yseyne
That these infernal ugly smokes blake
Transcende ye top of many great mountain,
But often sith by a full sudden rain
Al such ascencions by rage of wind up blow,
With unware turn be reuersed full low.
And semblably to put it at a prefe,
And execute it by clear experience,
One the most contraryous mischefe
Found in this earth by notable evidence,
Is only this, by fortunate violence
When that wretches churlishe of nature
The estate of princes unawarely does recure.
A crown of gold is nothing according
For to be set upon a knaves heed,
A foltyshe clerk for to wear a ryng
Accords not who that can take heed:
And in this world there is no greater dread
Than power give (if it be well sought)
Unto such one that first rose up of naught.
There is no manner just conuenience
A royal carbuncle, rubye, or garnet,
Nor a chaste emeraude of virtuous exelence,
Nor Inde saphyrs, in copper to be set:
Their kyndly power in foul metal is let,
And so the state of politic puy saunce,
Is ever lost where knaves have governance.
For a time they may well up ascend
Like windy smokes their fumes sprede,
A crowned ass plainly to comprehend,
Void of discretion is more for to dread
Than is a lion, for that one in deed
Of his nature is mighty and royal,
Void of discretion that other beastiall.
The gentle nature of a strong lion
To prostrate people of kind is merciable,
For unto all that fall before him down
His royal puisaunce can not be vengeable:
But churlish wolves by rigor untreatable,
And foltyshe asses eke of bestialyte,
Faylyng reason brayde ever on cruelte.
None is so proud as he that can no good,
The leuder head the more presumption,
Most cruelte and vengeance in low blood,
With malapertnesse and indiscretion:
Of churl and gentle make this division,
Of outher of the^ I dare right well report,
Fro thens they came thereto they will resort.
The Rose is know by color and swetnesse,
And violettes for their fresh tarage,
The nettle rough for his fell sharpness,
Thistles, breres prickyng by great outrage*
And thus considred the rote of each lynage,
Froward tetches be ever in churles found,
Where unto gentyls aye virtue does rebou^de.
Let men beware in especial of one thing,
How great deception is in false coynage,
The plate may be bright in his showing
The metal false and show a fair visage:
All is not gold to speak in plain langage,
That shines bright, concluding on reason
Under fair there is often hyd false poison.
For as a sky or an ugly cloud
Which that ascends low out of the sea,
With his blackness does the sun shroude,
That men may not his great bryghtnes see,
Nor have no comfort of his clear beauty:
So vicious tetches I do you well assure
Difface full often the gifts of nature.
God unto some has given by nature
For to excel another in fayrnesse,
Yet in vices by record of scripture
They were disclau^dred Bochas does witness:
Outward sugar in ward bytternesse,
By which ensample to purpose I may call
Agathocles fulfilled with vices all.
In this story he comes now on the ryng
Which of beauty had great excellence,
But to declare the vicious living,
And to discriue his outrageous offense,
If I should write fully in sentence
Like his demerites wholly the manner,
It would through perce and blot my paper.
Touching his birth of low bed descended,
Son of a porter, the story ye may se,
In no virtue I find him not commended,
Except nature gave him great beauty:
Fostred in mischefe and great pouerte,
Had eke disdain I can him not excuse,
Of hateful pride his fathers craft to use.
By the mean of his great fayrenesse
To hye estate he came from low degree,
Yet in a vice which I will not express
He disused cursedly his beauty
Again nature, that yuell mote he thee:
And soyled he was shortly to specifye,
With all the spices of pride and lechery.
Yet not withstandyng his false conditions
God suffered him to come to hie estate,
And to govern diverse nations,
I find a while how he was fortunate,
In his lechery aye pompous and elate:
And in a cite called Cyracuse,
The said vices he frowardly began use.
And for he had beauty and great might,
To all vices his youth he did enclyne,
And could also forther him self aryght
Of eloquence expert in the doctrine:
And as it is said tho he came of low line,
Yet as it is put in remembrance
An hundred knights he had in governance.
Of Centuryen he purchased an office,
And that time he took the order of a knight,
After chosen a tribune of great price,
And gate great favor in the peoples sight:
And this while it fell so anon right
Of Cyracuses he was made duke and head
By election, because their lord was dead.
Which with Ciciliens held a mortal strife,
But Agathocles made him victorious,
Took their duchess after to his wife:
By mean whereof he wext full glorious,
And in his glory he grew right dispitous,
Forgate him self thus growyng in estate,
Wherthrough his cite and he were at debate.
His conditions when they began espy
And saw him work all of presumption,
The people anon knowing his tyranny,
Exiled him out of their region:
In his exyle, as made is mention,
He could not find no better cheuisaunce
But came to a cite y^ called was Murgau^ce.
Where by his sleighty subtel false auyse
He so demeaned him in the peoples sight,
That of a Praetor they gave him an office,
He meuyng them in all that ever he might
Gain Cyracuses to make the^ strong to fight,
Of intent of them avenged to be,
Cause, for his exyle out of that cite.
But in his exyle (the story says none other)
It was so wrought by mediacion
Of duke Hamilchar yt was his sworn brother,
Cyracusans of one entention
Called him home again into their town
And there was restored to his place,
And reconciled to the kings grace.
And unto him they gave by great auice,
By assent of lords and all the commonte,
Of a Pretour newly an office:
For Pretors of custom called be
Officers that dwell in the cite,
And have full charge by dome and judgments
To put all gylty to pain and turmentes.
Than of new this Agathocles
Because he had more aucthorite
Cast for to trouble the quiet and the pees
Of Cyracuses, and out of that cite
All the senators greatest of dignite
Of mortal ve^geaunce this titant made anon
Without exception, to be slain euerichon.
This hasty slaughter wrought by tyranny,
Might not assuage nor sta^che his fell courage,
Till he their treasour took by robbery
And all Cicile he spoiled by pyllage,
Cast of pride upon an hye stage
For to ascend by sleyghty false workyng,
Of all that region to be crowned king.
Made his subjects maugre him dredyng
To call him king, and in especial
One the most worthy prince tho living,
That sat in chair of majesty royal:
Till fortune shope he must have a fall,
For of Cartage the duke a worthy knight
Fought with him twyse, and put him to flight.
Wherthrough he stood in mischefe dispeyred,
And of al people he was had in disdain:
To Cyracuse in have he is repaired,
And to his cite returned home again,
There abydyng in dread and uncertain:
For when fortune began again him take,
His friends old of new have him forsake.
In that mischefe he bode not long
As the process makes rehearsayle,
Gadred people and made him self strong
Only in purpose all Affryke to assail,
With them of Cartage had a great battle,
Th^n discomfited as fortune list ordain,
By hye prowess of his sons twain.
Archagatus ycalled was that one,
Wonder deliver, a man of great might,
The second brother most worthy of echone
Called Heraclydes, which in yt mortal fight
Preued him self that day a manly knight:
For by their ma^hode in which was no lack,
They of Cartage, were fellye put a back.
For though so were by fortune of the war
Agathocles had that day the victory,
False couetyse made him for to err
And eclipsed the light of his glory:
For as it is remembered in his story,
Like as in his birth it is determined,
To all falsenes his courage was enclyned.
Cruel of custom, of heart mercyles,
His will was law were it wrong or right,
Contrary to accord, froward unto pees,
Proud and surquedous in his own sight:
Where his power stretched and his might
Like a tyrant, naturally disposed
To execute vengeance before purposed,
He thought he had power for to bind
Fortunes whele for to abide stable,
Which is a thing contrary to her kind,
Whose property is to be variable:
His pride alas was to abominable
For mortal Prince is none yt may restrain,
Her unware turn nor her course sudden.
By influence of the heavenly stars
The uncouth course above celestial,
By fortune and favor of the wars
This Agathocles of birth full rural
Promoted was unto estate royal,
Till pride, outrage, and froward engendrure,
Caused in his lordshyp he might not endure.
Fortune of kind is so flaskysable,
A monstrous beast departed manyfolde,
A slydyng serpent tournyng and unstable,
Slipper to gripe on whom there is no hold,
As in this book declared is and told:
Her power preued on princes recheles,
Record with other on Agathocles.
As ye have herd rehearsed in sentence
Simple and bare was his natiuite,
Brought up and fostred in great indigence
Out of a stock springyng of pouerte,
Rose to the estate of royal dignite:
The rysyng uncouth marvelous tattayne,
The fall more grievous because it was sodayn
From Cyracuse he was exyled twyse,
Vengeable of heart where he had might,
Of Affricans disconfited thryse,
Ever in battle of custom put to flight,
Had an vsaunce to rob day and night:
And like a tiraunte again conscience
To spoil his subjects by great violence.
Hindered by fortune whereof he was not feign
Her stroke again him sudden and violent,
His sons two in Affrike were first slain,
He of his lymmes wext feeble and impotent,
With a consumption his entrayles brent:
And by an ague continual of feruence,
He was suppressed by stroke of pestilence
All his treasour has from him take
His proud port, and his worldly glory,
His wife, kyn, and fre^des has him forsake,
His conquest derke and put out of memory,
His name yclipsed of his old victory:
And as he began in pouerte and distress,
So he made an end in wretchedness.
Hasty rysyng and thri^te that is sudden,
And surmountyng by violent rauyne,
And extort power may for a while attain,
In rich chair of lordshyp for to shine:
Sudden ascending does suddenly declyne,
And by untruth whereuer there be encrees,
Men wayt of custom a sudden disencrees.
Of Agathocles men may ensample take
What is the end of every false tiraunt,
Wrong climbing up does a foul end make
For a season though tirauntes be puysaunt,
Fortune to them yeueth no longer grant:
But when they sit on her whele most royal,
By unware change to have a sudden fall.
Agathocles was first a sympleman
Brought forth in mischefe and in pouerte,
Son of a porter, the story tell can,
By vicious living came to great dignite,
Of all folk hated for his cruelte,
Clambe fro pouert up to great richesse.
Made pore again died in wretchedness.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedy shows a figure
Both by story and by aucthorite,
How man, and beast, and every creature
Tarageth the stock of his nativity,
Herb of the rote, and each fruit of his tree:
For both of virtue and also of outrage,
Follows some tetche or taste of the lynage.
Agathocles by record of scripture
Borne of low bed, brought forth in pouerte,
Yet Fortune made him to recure
Up to hye estate from full low degree,
His reason blent with sensuality,
Forgate him self, to speak in plain la^gage
Through a false tetche yt came fro his lynage.
There is a difference of colors in pycture
On table or wall, as men all day may se,
Twene gold and gold, atwene byse and asure,
All is not gold that shyneth bright parde:
Some noble is false yt has great beauty,
Let men beware of counterfayte coynage,
Tetches eschuyng of churlyshe lynage.
Some man is furthered of sudden adventure,
Set in a chair of royal dignity,
Wenyng his empire should ever endure
And never to be troubled with no adversity,
With royal Eagles a kyte may not fly:
A Jaye may chatter in a golden cage,
Yet ever some tetch must follow of his lynage.
Gentle blood of his royal nature
Is ever enclyned to mercy and pite,
Where of custom these vyllains do their cure
By their usurped and extort false post,
To be vengeable by mortal cruelte,
Through hasty fumes of furious courage,
Following the tetches of their vile lynage.
O mighty princes your nobles do assure,
Your passions rest with tranquillity,
Se how there is no mean of measure
Where a tyrant catches the souerayntie:
Let Agathocles your worldly myrrour be
To eschew the traces of his froward passage,
As royal blood requires of your lynage.
The.xvi. Chapter.
How Cassander slew the wife of Alexander and Hercules her son, and how
Antipater slew his mother, and of other murders.

THE great mischief of Fortunes might,
The woeful falls fr^ her whele in deed,
Of princes, and pryncesses, who so look aright,
Ben lamentable and doleful for to read:
But for all that Bochas does proceed
In his rehearsayl, reme^bryng thus him selue
To him appeared of men and women twelve.
After the death of king Agathocles
There ca^e tofore him worthy queen's twain,
The first of them was called Bersanes,
And of her mischefe began to him complain,
Wife of Alexander (the story list not feign)
The mighty king greatest under son,
Which by conquest all this world has won.
Wife to Alexander was this Barsanes
By his live, as made is mention,
Which with her son named Hercules,
Wereby Cassander brought to destruction:
And of her death this was the occasion,
Cassander dradde y^ Bersanes the queen,
Would with her son on him avenged been
For his treasons which he tofore wrought
On Alexander and on his lynage:
And specially if that she were brought
To Macedone for her advantage,
With her son that was but young of age,
Cassander thought and dread as I have told
They would avenge his treso^s wrought of old
He cast before of malice causeles
This Cassander most falsely workyng,
That if this knight, this young Hercules
Son of Alexander by record of writing,
In Maredone were take and crowned king,
How that he would of equity and right
His fathers death avenge like a knight.
Which thing to eschew Cassa^der began provide
And by false fraud was not retchles,
But on a day he list not long abide,
Slew first the queen this said Bersanes,
And than her son ycalled Hercules:
Thus by Cassander of murder crop and rote.
They murdered were there was nonother beat
This cruelty might not suffice
Unto Alexander by record of scripture,
But like a tyrant in vengeable wise
He did them bury by froward adventure,
Where no man should know their sepulture:
And thus alas, which pity is to read,
He murdered four out of one kynrede.
To Alexander he ministered the poison,
Slew the queen called Olympiades,
And of hatred by full false treason
As I have told, he slew queen Bersanes,
Wife to Alexander, mother to Hercules:
Which in his youth by Bochas rehearsyng,
In Macedoyne was like to have be king.
After all this he could not live in pees,
But ever ready some treason for to do
Slew eke the queen called Roxanes,
Upon a day, and her young son to:
And she was wife to Alexander also,
Cassander dreadyng in his opinion
Lest they would venge the^ upon his treason.
Thus ever he lived in murder, sorrow, and strife
By way of fraud came all his encrees,
And as I find how he had a wife
And she was called Thessalonices:
And this story remembers doubtless
A son they had borne atwene them twain
To stea his mother which after did his pain.
Shortly to pass (mine auctor writes nono-ther)
Antipater was her sons name,
And because that she loved his brother
Better then him, he to his great defame
Compassed her death, the story says the same:
Notwithstanding to appese his crueltee,
She asked mercy knelyng on her knee.
Her breasts open white and soft as silk,
All bedewed with tears her vysage,
Required mekely at reverence of the milk
With which he was fostred in young age,
For to have mercy and to appease his rage,
And to accept goodly her prayere,
To save the life of his mother dear.
But all for naught he heard her never adele,
He was to her surmountyng all measure
Like his father, bengeable, and cruel:
I trow it was you him of nature,
For by record of kind, and eke scripture,
Selde or never no branch that is good,
Spryngeth of custom, out of cruel blood.
Of her death cause there was none other
That Antipater slough his mother dear,
But for she loved Alexander his brother
Better than him, the cronicle does us lere:
Which Alexander, if ye list to here,
Had in his succor I find by writing
Demetrius, that was of Asye king.
Thessalonices was in this while dead
By Antipater, he most unfortunate
Bathed in her blood, her sides were made red
Without compassion of her hye estate:
And her two sons living at debate,
Til Lisymachus yt prefect was of Trace
Them reconsyled, each to others grace.
When Demetrius knew of their accord,
God wot the sothe, he nothing was feign,
But by his fraud the story bears record
That Alexander maliciously was slain:
This while Antipater sta^dyng in no certain
Till he by sleyght of Lisymachus,
Was murdered after, the story tells thus
To write the process and the manner hough
That Lisymachus by fraudulent workyng
His son in law Antipater thus slough,
False couetise was cause of all this thing:
And Demetrius took on him to be king
Of Macedone, remembered time and date
When both brethren were passed into fate.
During this murder and all this mortal strife,
In this process like as it is found,
Of Antipater Erudice the wife
Daughter of Elenchus was in chains bound.
Cast in prison, dark, hydous, and profound:
And for a while I leave her there soiourne,
And to Demetrius I will again return.
Which made him self to be crowned king,
Of Macedone, through his great puissaunce,
But to destroy his purpose in workyng
There were three princes notable in substance
Confederate and of allyaunce,
Echone assented for short conclusion,
To bring Demetrius to destruction.
One the first was worthy Tholome
King of Egypt, in arms full famous,
Other twain, the story ye may se
Called Seleuchus, and next Lisymachus,
And of Cypre came the king Pyrrhus,
Lord of Prouynce as it is eke found,
They made the^ strong Demetrius to co^fou^d.
Shortly to tell with their apparayls
Of Macedoue they did him first depryue,
Game upon him with four strong battayles,
That he was never so ouerset in his live,
Take of Lisymachus, the story does discryue:
Cheyned in prison, of his life in dout,
For I not find that ever he issued out.
The.xvii. chapter.
Of the two prefectes Perdicas and Amyntas.

NExt in order Perdicas did appear
Whilom prefect of great Babylon,
And with him came Amyntas eke yfere
An other prefect as made is mention,
Which Bactry had in his subjection:
A great province you him by judgment,
Midde of Alia toward the occident.
These said twain for their worthiness
And for their manhood in acts marciall,
Assigned were by diligent business,
To wait and keep in especial
Upon the majesty in his estate royal
Of Alexander, for trust as chamberlayns,
Again the assault and dread of all forayns.
After whose death for singular guerdone
Made prefect both they were in deed,
As ye have heard that one in Babilone
The other in Bactry the story ye may read,
Yet in quiet they might hem not succeed,
For Seleuchus began a war again the^ make,
That they were fayn their lordships to forsake
The.xviii. Chapter.
How Sandrocottus borne of low degree, cherished robbers and thieves.

OTher prefectes there were also I find,
Which held the people in full great seruage,
In Macedone, and in other Inde,
Till Sandrocottus a man of low lynage
Cast he would redress their outrage,
Of intent pore people to restore
To their fraunchises yt playned on them sore.
Sandrocottus auctour of this workyng,
Behight the people throughout all countries,
When he by sleight was crowned king,
Them to restore to their old liberties:
But when he had received these dignities,
All his behestes made with a fair vysage,
Turned after to thraldom and seruage.
Thus when a wretch is set in high estate,
Or a beggar brought up to dignity,
There is none so proud, so po^pous, nor elate,
None so vengeable, nor so full of cruelty,
Void of discrecion, mercy, and pity:
For churlyshe blood selde does recure,
To be gentle, by way of his nature.
He may dissimule and for a time feign,
Counterfayte with a fair vysage,
Out of one hode show faces twain,
Contrary of heart, double of his langage,
Still of his port, smothe of his passage:
Under flowers like a serpent dare,
Till he may stynge, and than will not spare.
And ever like of his conditions
Was Sandrocottus set up in hye estate,
Vexed people, and troubled regions,
Set cities and towns at great debate:
Whose governance was unfortunate,
As it was seen and found at all preues,
Cherished no man, but robbers and thieves.
And to declare how he caught hardines:
And occasion people to govern,
By a pronostike which I shall express,
Right marvelous and uncouth to discern,
Which was this, as I shall tell as yerne:
Right wonderful and uncouth for to hear,
And it was this, if ye list to lere.
There was a man called Procatales
Borne in Inde, which of his living
Was wonders pore, came but selde in prees,
Because he had trespaced in one thing
Again Vena^drus, y^ was that time king:
Co^maundyng to slay him anonryght,
But he escaped (the story says) by flight.
God had given him of fete swyftnes,
By mean whereof he saved him fro daungere,
Through long travail fill in werynes,
And refreshed him beside a well clear,
He lay slepyng that face and all his chere
Dropped of swette, a lion came foreby,
And licked his face as says the story.
With which affray the man anon awoke,
And suddenly lift up his vysage,
The lion rose softly and the way took
Toward the forest, and did him no damage,
Forgate his felnesse and his cruel rage:
Of which pronostyke began the occasion,
Whereof Sandrocottus took an opinion
Cast and thought in his fantasy,
Sith that the Lion is beast most royal
Which not disdayned him self to apply
To lick the face of a man rural,
In his nature to show him beastiall,
He dempt well that it was sittyng
To take on him the estate of a king.
His opinion of reason was right naught,
For where the Lion left his cruelty,
He coutrary wext proud in heart and thought,
Void of mercy, barrayne of pity,
For when that he was set in dignity,
Brought from a wretch to domination,
Again nature he played the lion.
Sum time a lion forgets all felnesse,
Where as a woulfe will naturally devour,
So royal blood has ruthe by gentleness,
On pore playnufes, to help the^ and succor,
Where as a tyrant does naturally labor
When he has power catchyng advantage,
To rob subjects and spoil the^ by pillage.
Sandrocottus thus borne of low kynrede
In hye estate by fortune when he stood,
Began make him strong and vengeable in deed,
With number of robbers, furious, and wode,
Cast him to destroy all the gentle blood
That was in Inde, and by his ordinance,
To stea all the prefectes that had governance.
And with the commons when he was made strong
And began the manner of their death devise,
Like a false tyrant although he did wrong
Again his lords when he began arise,
An Oliphant came in full uncouth wise,
Him obeyed which was a great wonder,
When their battayls were not far asunder.
Though he was wild (the story says ye same)
Sandrocottus lept upon his side,
And on his back as on a beast tame
Toward the battle anon he began to ^yde,
Was their captain that day and their gyde
With his robbers, as it is made mind,
Slew all the prefectes and gentle blood of Inde.
The.xix. Chapter.
How Seleuchus the mighty prince was slain by the great Tholome king of Egypt.

THen came Seleuchus to Bochas complaynyng,
A mighty Prince and a manlye knight
Son of Antiochus the famous king,
Was most favored in Alexanders sight,
Which Seleuchus for wisdom and for might,
Borne of a princes the cronicle ye may seen,
Called Leodice the great famous queen.
The birth of him strange and marueylons,
For his mother upon the same night
That she conceived, drempt, and thought thus
As it seemed plainly in her sight,
Of great Appollo the heavenly god most bright
How she the time of her conceyuynge
Received that night, of gold a rich ryng.
In which ring was set a precious stone
Give unto her for a great guerdon,
Grave with anchor, her commanding anon
After the birth without dylacion,
To give the ring of whole affection
To Seleuchus, whereby in especial,
He should excel in acts marciall.
The same morrow after the child was borne,
Within her bed was found a rich ryng
With all the tokens rehearsed here toforne,
The anchor grave like in every thing
Which that the queen took in her keeping:
And of intent for her advantage,
Kept it secret till he came to age.
Another maruayle fill also withal,
This Seleuchus, which was a wonder thing
Had enprynted eke in special
Upon his thygh, an anchor and a ryng:
So had all by record of writing,
Such carectes the story does determyne,
That after him were borne of that line.
When Seleuchus as made is mention,
The tender years had of his age run,
And came to years of discrecion,
He by this ring full many land has won:
Whose knightly fame shone shene as y^ son,
He well advised, hardy, of great might,
Time of Alexander hold one the best knight.
In war and arms he his time has spent,
Brought all Inde to subjection,
Gate all the kingdoms nigh of the Orient,
Held them long in his possession:
But here alas Bochas makes mention
All his victories that did in honor shine,
With sudden change were turned to ruin.
For when Seleuchus was most vyctorious,
Had all Inde conquered in substance,
Atwene him and king Lisymachus
Of whom tofore is made remembrance,
Began a war and a great distaunce:
And as they met with their apparayles,
In a great field ordained their battayles.
On Lisymachus fill the disconfiture,
Whereof Seleuchus glad in especial
Dempt his winnyng came not of nature,
But by influence very celestial:
Began wax proud in his estate royal,
Not supposing in his victorious stall,
Of his mischeues that should after fall.
For as the process declares unto us,
How of Egypt the great Tholome
Brother in law to Lysimachus,
Fill on Seleuchus by full great cruelte,
Slew him at mischefe the story ye may se,
Lost his life as made is mention,
In Macedoyne, the mighty region.
And it is know of antiquitee
By rehearsayle of the old auctours,
That this foresaid great Tholome
Was to Alexander one of the enheritours,
King of Egypt there reigning in his flours,
After whose name descedyng down by grees
Were all the kings called Tholomees.
As I find touching his lynage,
By procreacion he had children three,
The first of them to speak in plain langage
I named was Ceraunius Tholome,
Next Philadelphus, a daughter Arcynoe
That wedded was by her faders co^sentyng
To Lisymachus of Macedon king.
The.xx. Chapter.
How the two sons of Queen Arcynoe were by their mothers brother
trayterouslye slain, and she exyled.

ANd thus remembered in books old
Death of Seleuchus wrought by Tholome,
Unawarely slain tofore as I have told,
Next in order came Arcynoe
To John Bochas, by great aduersite,
All with tears bedewed her vysage,
And began compain the co^straynt of her rage.
This mighty queen the said Arcynoe
Had sons twain, full famous of renoun,
The tone Lisymachus excelling of beautye,
That other Philip, as made is mention:
And her joy and dilectation
In worldly bliss there is no more to said
Was holy set upon these children twain.
For by the occasion of their great fayrenes
Men delited greatly them to se,
Namely women the story does express,
And their mother this queen Arcynoe
Stood in great hope that they should be
Mighty kings by just succession,
In Macedony the mighty region
Only by the title of their fathers right:
Which to her heart gave full great gladness,
For she dempt that none other wight
To succeed should have no entresse.
But Fortune the blind false goddess
Disposed so for her children twain,
That none of the^ their purpose should attain.
For wha^ their father Lisimachus was slain
The said queen called Arcinoe
To save her life could none other gain
But with her sons fearfully to fle
Into Cassander a mighty strong city:
Only for dread of one Antigonus,
Which the^ pursued, the story tells thus.
But the brother of queen Arcynoe
Called Ceraunius rescued her party
Again Antygonus, ye may the story se,
Yet in his heart he had great envy
Albe that they were nere of one alye,
That her two sons should kings ^e
Of Macedoyne, and raygne in that country.
For he was set only of couetise
To be crowned in Macedoyne king,
And of his false treason, the story does devise,
Them to dis^^yue this was his workyng:
First to the queen full humbly knelyng,
He made promise under great surete,
In Macedoyne she should crowned be.
And her children so fair of their vysage
Should be kept under governance,
Unto time that they came to age:
And for to put her in more assurance
Ceraunius swore, god give him sorry chance
He purposed for all his false workyng,
To crown her queen and make her sons king.
Took all the gods thereunto witness
And swore again with a plain vysage
Unto the queen, of fraud and doublenes,
His purpose was to have her in marriage,
Crown her queen to her great advantage,
Thus he swore all be he was her brother,
Yet in heart god wot he thought another.
Under color of this assurance
She let him enter Cassandre the cite,
Came again him to do him more pleasaunce
With all her lords of hye and low degree:
Made the streets hanged for to be
With clothes of gold, and in solemn wise
To all their gods she did sacrifise.
And thus he was received solemnly,
The day was hallowed and hold feastiual,
The queen for joy ordained rychely
Her two sons that were so fair in all
To be crowned with crowns full royal,
Go before her in the master street,
Gloriously their uncle for to mete.
With felonous heart under a friendly face,
This Ceraunius rote of all treason
Began his cosyns ben^igly embrace,
Him purposyng by false collusion
To proceed to their destruction:
And finally first he did his pain,
The queen texyle, and slay her children twain.
But or this treason was brought to a prefe,
When the queen apperceiued his falsenes
And saw her sons brought to mischefe,
She coniured him (...) her mortal distress
To have pity, of natural gentilnes
Spare his cosins before him where they stood
Of royal mercy so nere borne of his blood.
And with a cry pa^yng (...)
She fyl before him, ^wownyng (...) ground,
Like as she had be (...) culpable,
Seeing her sons bleadyng with many wound:
But all for naught there was no mercy found,
For with their blood, this story is not feigned
Her garment was dolefully distayned.
Her face fair was foiled with ordure,
Her golden here was all to torn and rent,
And like a thrall this woeful creature
With mortal weeping had her sight blent:
And after that I find how she was sent
To bury her children, for there was no space,
Into an isle called Samothrace.
Is any story which makes mention
That a pryncesse of so hye degree
Found so great cause of lamentacion,
She being daughter to great Tholome,
Her children slain by vengeable cruelty,
And to behold the death most dolorous,
Of her husband called Lisymachus*
She after banished in exyle made her end,
with sorrowful co^playnt her life thus draw alo^g,
Till into fate her spirit did wend:
It is no dread her pains were full strong,
And if I should rehearce all the wrong
That she suffered it would grieve me to sore,
Therefore of her now I write no more.
Lenuoy.
THis tragedy shows an appearance,
And a likeness of faithful assurance
Excyte men to give false credence
Unto fortunes false variaunce,
Which cast her baytes and angles of pleasaunce
An hoke hid under of vengeable cruelty,
As this chapter put in remembrance,
Of Lisymachus and of Arcynoe.
Is there any greater evidence
Of worldly trouble or worldly constaunce,
Than to se princes from their magnificence
And from their mighty royal puissaunce
Unawarely brought by fortune to mischau^ce,
And overwhelmed from their tranquillity?
Se here a myrror full notable in substance,
Of Lisymachus and queen Arcynoe.
The ryng, the anchor of great excellence
ye^^ to Seleuchus for marciall suffisaunce,
When App^^^ by heavenly influence
List with his mother make his alyaunce:
Sent hi^ these relikes of singular acquaintance
To set his manhood in more surete,
But in all such quaueryng acquayntau^ce
Think on Lisimachus and Arcinoe.
The uncouth treasour, the gold, ne the dispe^ce
Of them that have this world in governance,
Nor all the subjects up rekened in sentence,
Nor all the regions under their obeysaunce,
Princes princesses with all their attendaunce
May again fortune give them no liberty,
Who not knows her unsure gery chance
Think on Lisimachus and Arcinoe.
Her children and she slain by violence
Of Ceramius, god give him sorry chance,
That by false color did her reverence
And pretended a manner obseruaunce,
The treson close of venomous purueyaunce,
Purposed before to outray them all three:
The children slain which knew no cheuisa^ce,
The mother exiled called Arcinoe.
Noble princes beware, of hie prudence
Among your self that there be no distaunce,
Hyde no rancoure of hateful vyolence
Under a curtayne of double daliaunce,
Like your heart show out your countenance,
Void of dissimulinge and duplicitie:
Wisely way this chapter in balaunce,
Of Lysimachus and queen Arcinoe.
The.xxi. chapter.
How Ceramius of Macedoyne king that murdered his cosins, was slain in bataile
by them of France.

THe Noble Poet Jhon Bochas, in his book
Procedyng forth co^plaineth of pite,
With quaking hand when he his pen took,
And began to writ the woeful desteny
As ye have herd of queen Arcinoe,
And how Ceramius the story makes mind,
Was to her false, traitor, and unkind.
Of whose treason is made a great process,
And how he after was slain in battle,
Punished by vengeance for his falsenesse,
Like as his story makes rehersayle:
Which to remember I cast me not to fail,
Following mine auctour and proceed in writing
How Ceramius was slain, being king.
For while that he by his false workyng,
In Macedoyne had the gouernayle,
Three hundred.M. accounted by writynge
Went out of France to conquer Itayle,
The host departed in many strong battle,
Gate by conquest through their hye renoune
Full many a province, and many a region.
And as they rode through many a great country
This people of Gaul in steel armed clean,
They founded castles and many strong city,
Toward Rome they bylded Myl^n and Seen
Upon the Alps their armor shone full shene
And some of them up to Rome went
By very force, and the city brent.
Some parted up to the grekyshe see,
Had a custom to chese their dwelling place
By Augurie, as birds did fle,
Following their flight they began after trace,
Holding their way within a little space
With mighty hand, the book does specify,
They came to a country called Pannony.
This folk of Gaul, which is called France,
To conquer lands put them self in prees,
As most notable people of puissaunce,
Following y^ example of their knightly encrese
In their ridynge, of worthy Hercules,
Which was worshipped in their acts mercial
Like as a god, and called immortal.
Through grace of fortune in their chiualryes
Conquered countries always forth riding
Them self departing in diverse companyes
Who them withstode they consumed by bre^nig:
Came to Macedone where Ceramius was king
Of presu^pcio^ wening it should avail,
Out of ordinance he met them in battle,
This Ceramius of outrage and of pride
Dempt him able to mete with the^ of France,
But for he was through murdre an homicide
He lacked grace, and power in substance:
Yet they of Gaul by prudent governance
Offered unto him, though he was retcheles,
With Macedonoys for to treat of pees.
But for presumpcion and melancoly
Against his enemies he the field has take,
And discomfited anon was his party,
His men began fly, and have their lord forsake,
His heed smyt of and set upon a stake:
But al his mischefe was to lyte in deed
To recompense his fraud and his falshede.
There is no pain again so great offense
May be devised in no book that men read,
Equivalent murder to recompense,
Duly to punyshe so outrageous a deed,
Of him that made young children blede:
As did Ceramius, which of false couetise
His cosyns slough as ye have heard devise.
To think on murder it is to foul a thing,
To god and man hateful and terible,
The infernal fraud, the deuillyshe co^passing
To each creature of nature is odible:
Which to redress is an impossible,
O cursed Ceramius I leave thy story here,
Thy name no more shall blot my papere.
The.xxii. Chapter
How the prince Belgius was disconfited, and brought to naught.

AFter this tyraunte as ye have heard the eaas
Slain in battle, this traitor odious,
Anon in order came to John Bochas
A mighty prince, called Belgius,
Deadly, pale, with face furious:
Which co^playned among this woeful prees
His disconfiture done by queen Softenes.
This sodayn mischefe grieved his heart sore,
For all the folk that were in his battle
Were put to flight, Bochas writes no more
Of his knighthode nor of his apparaile,
Save only this, he makes rehearsaile
Of the French host he tells in certain,
How he was chosen for a chief captain.
And how he came into the rich land
Of Macedoyne with his people of France,
Till Softenes the queen with mighty hand
Disconfited him, and brought to mischaunce:
Of who^ I find none other remembrance
Save when he wend to be most glorious,
He was outrayed by force of Brennus.
The.xxiii. chapter.
How duke Brennus delityng to rob and steal mischeuouslye ended.

THis Brennus full knyghtlye in workynge,
which by conquest gate many great city
And as I read of Danes he was king,
Disployled regions, and many a great country,
Robbed people of hye and low degree,
Spared no gods, but by vyolence
Took their treasures, did them no reverence.
There was a temple great and marvelous,
Built on a roche and on an hill of stone,
Sacred to Appollo, called Delphicus
In all Greece so great a god was none:
And often sithe the people would gone
Up to a Theater, which that stood without,
To have answer of yt they stood in doubt.
Their trust and hope was to yt god applied,
Having to him singular affection,
As though he might have help and magnified,
And done to them great consolation:
For by a spirit of false deception
He gave answer of sundry questions,
To folk that came from diverse regions.
King Brennus had no fantasy
In their temples after their panym gyse,
Neither to worship nor to magnify
Their Grekysh gods, to do the^ sacrifise:
For in his heart he began them to despise,
Caught a joy with all his false robbours,
Them to dispoyle and rob of their treasours.
Behyght his men and said in plain langage
That his desire and his entencion
Was, to be boty with them of such pyllage,
As Gods had in their possession:
And part with the^ for singular guerdon,
For their labor and great trauayles,
That they had had with him in battayles.
He gave his people a manner hardines,
Made them trust in great multitude,
Having despyte of the innocent symplenes
Of his enemies, because they were but rude,
I mean tho folk shortly to conclude,
Which had in keeping the jewels precious
Of great Appollo, called Delphicus.
The people also which was with Brennus
Had all the day drunk mighty wynes,
To fill their pau^ches they were so desirous
That they forgate their marciall doctrines:
To asce^d y^ mountain feeble were their chines
Their heads totter, and their brain began fail,
The temple aloft to spoil or to assail.
In their assending by ways that they chees,
Upon the roche they were beat down,
Priests of the temple put the^ selves in prees
One bare a standard, another a penoune,
Clad in chesibles for hye devotion,
And with their other uncouth apparayles,
Both on the roche and low in their battayles.
The people of Brennus was incomperable,
Spread all the field the story bears witness,
But it is said of old and is no fable,
That no defense is in dronkennes,
And wisdom fails where is great excess
And in a field plainly to conclude,
Victory always stands not in multitude.
For they were set as Bochas does devise,
Not to knighthode but to false outrage,
To spoil and rob by gredy couetise,
And stuff their somters with great pillage,
Furious rauine has brought the^ in a rage,
And farewell knighthode and marciall noblesse,
Where couetise is lady and maistresse.
Two mighty dukes were with Brennus
Which that were chief of his counsel,
Euridanus that one, that other Thessalonus,
Which, as they thought to their great avail,
Began a purpose, and it was disauayle
To rob the people, the country, and each town,
Which turned after to their confusion.
Thus avarice with stomach vnstau^cheable
Has stra^gled y^ power of many a worthy knight
And couetise her sister vntretable
Has of high nobles full often quaint the light,
Where Ta^talus reigns a lion has no might
This to mean honger and covetousness
Turns all nobles into cowardnes.
For by the counsel of these dukes twain,
Brennus set all his opinion
To spoil and rob, did his busy pain
To pyll the cities of all that region:
But in this while as made is mention,
Myd their battayles Bochas does me lere.
The God Appollo and Pallas did appear.
Appollo first showed his presence
Fresh, young, and lusty, as any sun shene,
Armed all with gold, and with great vyolence
Entered the field as it was well seen:
And Diana came with her arowes kene,
And Mynerua in a bright haberion,
Which in their coming made a terible soun
The noise was herd of their bright armure,
Which made their enemies almost to rave,
That they might before them not endure:
Fled the field for dread them self to save,
And there was herd an hidous erthquaue:
And from heaven in this mortal battle
Of cold constreyning, great stones do hayle,
Their adversaries beat down and grounded,
And before them durst not abide,
And Brennus so mortally was wounded
Both breast and heed and hurt through either side:
Lo here the end of couetise and pride,
For Brennus for constraynt of his smert,
Roue with a dagger him self to the heart.
This was his end ve^geable and merueylous,
And his dukes slain both twain:
Called Euridanus and Thessalonus,
The grekish gods began at him so disdain,
Of sacrilege se here the grievous pain:
For to gods who list do no obseruaunce,
Shall unwarily be punished with ve^geau^ce.
It is not wholesome with gods to play,
Nor their puissaunce presu^ptously to attame,
For where as they by vengeance list werray
who list assay shall find it no game:
For his presu^pcion Brennus found the same,
For Appollo, Diana, and Mynerue
For his outrage unwarily made him sterue.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedy declares who list here
Of duke Brennus many great battle,
His extorte conquest and holy the manner
How by force he rode through al Itayle:
After how he the Romans did assail,
His fall in Greece by vengeable violence,
For he to gods would do no reverence.
Took all the treasours and iuels most entere
Out of their temples, and richest apparayle,
Gold and perle, and all that yfere
To his increase which that might avail:
The rich he robbed, oppressed the porayle,
Of very pomp and froward insolence,
And list to gods do no reverence.
This mighty tirau^t most surquedous of chere
With couetyse brent in his entrayle
Whose gredy fret there might no mesure stere,
Till that fortune at mischefe did him fail:
He lacked might her variant whele to nail,
Again whose fall there was no resistance,
For he to gods list do no reverence.
Noble princes conceive and do lere
The fall of Brennus for misgouernayle,
And prudently paysyng this matere
Virtue is stronger than outher plate or maile,
Before considred what Brennus does counsel
Chief preseruatyfe of your magnificence,
Is to god to do due reverence.
The.xxiiii. Chapter.
How Pyrrus king of Pyrothe list not live in peace, but of pride and
presumption in war, came unto mischaunce.

IN Bochas book next folowi^g on y^ rig
Came young Pirrus son of Earides
Borne by descent to reign and be king,
And to enherite the land of Pyrothes:
Yet in his youth and his tender encrees
The froward people dwelling in y^ place,
Without his gylte began his death purchase.
But to preserve him as made is mention
He was committed and take in keeping
Certain years for his sauacion
To one Glaucus, of Illirie king:
Whose wife was cosyn, by record of writing,
To the said famous Earides,
And she in story called Beronices.
He nigh of blood to this noble queen,
Both twain borne of one lynage,
Wonder gracious to all that did him seen,
And well favored of fetures and visage:
And in the while of his tender age,
One Cassander of Macedone king,
Compassed his death by subtel false workyng.
And his purpose for to bring about
He sent for him by false collusion,
Puttyng Glaucus plainly out of doubt
But if he came like his entencion,
He would work to his destruction:
Gather people both nigh and far
And on Glaucus, gyn a mortal war.
But king Glaucus took hereof no head,
Having to Pyrrus so great affection
Of him received verily in deed
To be his son by adoption,
Purposyng of whole entencion
To make Pyrrus plainly if he may,
To be his heir and reign after his day,
Pyrrus always up growyng by encrees
Full amiable both of there and face,
And in this while the people of Pyrothes
Knowing that he stood in Glaucus grace
Changed their hearts, cast the^ in short space
For to restore all of one courage,
The said Pyrrus to his heritage.
Thus by assent he was crowned king,
Young, fresh, and lusty, and semely there withal,
Wonders well thewed in his up growyng,
Like his lynage of courage wext royal:
The which was cause in especial,
He was beloved offrendes about,
And of his enemies greatly had in doubt.
The name of him began to sprede far
Through all Greece about in each country,
The land of Tarent began in his time war
Again the Romans as ye may se,
Requiryng Pyrrus that he would be
Favorable and helpyng of intent,
To the party of them of Tarent.
To their request he can condiscende,
And of purpose cast him not to fail,
If that fortune would him grace send
With mighty hand, and marciall apparayle,
For to be lord and conquer all Itayle,
As did his uncle whilom doubtless,
King Alexander, called Epirothes.
First he began his conquest in Itayle
Toward Heraclye a mighty great city,
Where with Brennus he had a great battle
Consul of Rome and lord of that country:
And to the increase of his felicity,
As it is remembered in his story,
Upon Romans he gate that victory.
The Olyphantes with castles on their back
Caused Pyrrus the young manly knight
With his wisdom wherein there was no lack
To put his enemies that day to flight:
And in this while it happened forthright
The Sicilians (Bochas bears record)
Among them selves were fall at discord.
There was atwene them great division
Each to other contrary in workyng,
But to reform their false discention
They prayed Pyrrus to come, and be their king
To whose request he fully assentyng
By them made strong, list not to defer
Against the Romans for to gyn a war.
Beside a castle called Esculus
Within Poyl his banner he began splay,
The same day not happy nor eurous
Contrarious fortune his power began affray,
Wounded to the death began greatly him dismay
By which occasion this Pyrrus anon right
Lept on his courser, and took him to flight.
A son he had called Helenus,
Borne of the daughter of king Agathocles
Who^ he ordained mine auctor tells thus,
For to be crowned to his great encrees,
Of Siciliens to raygne there in pees:
Wenyng thereby to have had advantage,
And in this while came to him a message
Out of Tarent, which stood in adventure
For his absence out of that region,
If he not came they might not endure,
Again the power of them of Rome town,
Which of assent were descended down
Against them, they standing in despair,
Save in abydyng upon his repair.
Pyrrus this while stood in full hard point,
Waxt abashed and dull in his courage,
Atwene twain hangyng in disioynte:
Werreyed of Romans, hated in Cartage,
Had a battle to his fynall damage,
Within a field called Arusius,
There put to flight by one Fabricius.
Destitute by Fortune and appayred,
Void of succor, barrayne of richesse,
Like a man of hope dispayred
Toward Epyre in haste he began him dress,
Where he was first, his story does express,
As ye have heard rehearced by writing
By succession whilom lord and king.
But when he came to Epyre the city,
He began of new against Antigonus
King of Macedoyne, a full strong country,
Him to werrey, he was so desierous:
And by conquest the story tells thus,
Within a while there was no great lettyng,
By help of Fortune he was crowned king.
Not seven months reigning in quiet,
By Lisymachus maugre all his might
He was put down, and removed from his sete:
Yet of presu^ption though there was no right,
He took on him to gyn a new fight
Gain Lacedemonois, and felly them werrey,
Only because they would him not obey.
Whose presumption when they beheld
Both of prudence and policy
Women were armed, to make a large field,
With multitude to oppress his party,
For common profit put them in ieoparty:
And finally such was their ordinance,
That Pyrrus was brought to mischaunce.
His son there slain called Tholome,
And many other lost there their lives,
And for all that of pride and cruelty
He began a war again the Argyues,
And at the end of his mortal strives,
For conclusion, this was his last fall,
Slain with a stone as he came to their wall.
His head smit of in the same place,
And thereof made an oblacion
To Antygonus, for a great solace:
Thus list fortune quite his presumption,
After his wars with many region:
Lo here the end of folks retchles,
That followed war, and list not live in pees.
The.xxv. Chapter.
How the tyra^t Aristotimus by treacherous working, set aside the right line,
and was crowned king of Epirothes and after slain.

FOr the proceadyng following John Bochas,
I will reherce in full plain la^gage
How Aristotim a tyra^t (this y^ case)
Cast and compassed by full great outrage,
(Having no title of right nor heritage)
Of Epyrothes by treacherous workyng,
Voydyng the line, there to be crowned king.
Living two children the story tells thus,
Borne by descent to raygne in that city,
The eldest of them called was Pyrrus,
And the second named Tholome:
And both twain by the cruelte
Of Aristotym, were falsely set aside,
He made king this tyrant through his pride.
And while that he thus began occupy
Like a tyrant cruel and vengeable,
Of false rancour and melancoly
Slew all the citizyns yt were most notable,
And exyled (this story is no fable)
Only of malice within his heart close,
All that were contrary unto his purpose.
Unto the women by fraudulent sentence,
He made ordain after that anon
Of fained pity, gave to them license
To their friends freely for to gone
With their riches, but they were euerychone
By his biddyng and by his false treason,
Take by the way, and fettred in prison.
Or they were ware was set on them arrest,
And after that of vengeable cruelty
The children slain suckyng at their breast,
Maidens oppressed of their virginity:
But in this while at Cypre the city
There was a knight passing of great age,
Which cast of purpose to avenge his outrage
The same knight, mine auctour tells thus,
In the story plainly as I read,
Was in Greek tongue called Helematus,
Right wise and manly both in word and deed:
And things twain put him out of dread
To execute his purpose in certain,
Maugre all tho that would be him again.
For common profit he drad not to be dead,
A cause was this for he was fall in age,
And another that put him out of dread
For he no children had of his lynage:
His quarrel rightful gave him advantage,
And here upon gathered him of new
Such as he knew, y^ manly were and true.
This purpose held with circumspect auise,
And thereon made full prudent ordinance,
This Helematus old, hardy, and right wise
Before provided, by knyghtly purueyaunce
The said tyrant brought unto mischaunce,
By help of them that were to him assented,
Unawarely slain, whose death was not repented
The.xxvi. Chapter.
How queen Arcinoe for the aduoutry done with Demetrius husband of her
daughter Beronices, ended in sorrow.

AFter this story Bochas began apply
To turn his pen, like as ye shall here,
To write and tell the froward lechery
Of Arcynoe, pleasant of look and chere:
Which of her port and eke of her manner
Was in her days, like as it is found,
For craft and beauty called Venus the second.
For her fayrenes yeuen in marriage
To noble Agas of Cyrenes king,
Atwene them while they were young of age
They had a daughter by record of writing,
Called Beronices, the king at his endyng
In his testament bad that she should be
Wedded to the son of king Tholome.
And this was done of entencion
To cease the wars y^ had endured long,
Atwene Egypt, as made is mention,
And the Cyrenes, both realms strong:
By this marriage yt he might vnderfonge
In his diyng to set a fynall peace
Twene these.ii. realms, for their both e^crece
After whose death thus the matter stood,
Queen Arcynoe most subtle in workyng,
Again this matter so cruel was and wode,
Married her daughter with out more lettyng
Called Beronices, against the biddyng
Of her father that called was Agas,
As heretofore, rehearsed is the caas.
She married her to one Demetrius,
That brother was, by Bochas rehearsynge,
Unto the mighty great Antygonus,
Being in Greece of Macedoyne king:
But unfortunate was she after her weddyng,
As in this story suyng ye shall se,
By the false workyng of queen Arcynoe.
And to conclude shortly this mattere,
When this queen this double Arcynoe
Saw of Demetrius the vysage and the there
His look, his color, his langage, and beauty,
His manly port, and his liberality,
She was enamored of fleshly pleasaunce,
Like her desire, to have his acquayntau^ce.
Of her nature she was most lecherous,
And of her froward inclination
She brought about that Demetrius
Assented was, by her suggestion,
For to accomplish like her opinion,
All her desires of fleashly appetite,
Thus of accord there followed their delight.
Left his wife called Beronices
The queen's daughter, and again all right
In a place secret out of prees
They lay together almost every night,
Taking no head of god nor of no wight:
Till of fortune the case is so befall,
That he was hated of his knights all.
Dispyte they had of Arcynoe,
The deed horrible when they deed espy,
His wife Beronices eke when she did se
Holy the manner of their ribaudry,
In heart she caught a great melancoly,
Ordained knights in steel armed bright
In their aduoutry to take them on a night.
Lying a bed slept and took no keep,
After false lusts which they had used,
They fell up on them while they did sleep,
The deed open might not be excused,
To all the world thus they were accused:
With swords draw y^ knights thilke night
To slay the^ both were purposed anon right.
Out on Beronices (cries John Bochas)
Because she badde spare Arcynoe
Ground and gynnyng of this horrible caas,
Says her mercy was very cruelte,
To save such one it was a false pite:
As says mine auctour, a thing co^trarious
Her to preserve and slay Demetrius.
O Beronices small is thy discretion
To save the queen y^ has the treason found,
First to Demetrius she gave occasion
For which she should have had the first wound
Take for them both and in cheynes bound,
And after that this false Arcynoe,
To example of other should have punished be.
And while they were taken thus in close,
The said Arcynoe made no delay
But fro her bed anon she up rose,
Without clothes, naked as she lay,
Ran to their swords in all their great affray,
Went atwene them, did her busy pain
To bear of strokes with her arms twain.
To save Demetrius naked as she stood
Void of all dread did her busy cure
Her white body all bespreynt with blood
Began to cry out on every creature:
Alas (quod she) let me alone endure
Death by my self, ye be to dispitous
To save my life and slay Demetrius.
To the earth anon she fill adowne
To stand vpryght she might not sustene,
Deed, pale, and wan, with many pitous sown
Death of Demetrius began wofullye bemene:
Embrasyng him with all his wou^des grene,
And in her arms albe that he lay deed,
She kyssed his mouth, blew and nothing reed.
In sorrow and co^playnt thus she made an end,
I write no more of this Arcynoe
But to Beronices again I will now we^de,
For Bochas says in the story ye may se
She after wedded was to worthy Tholome
Like as it was her fathers first intent,
When y^ he dyed, and made his testament.
Thus ends the fourth book, and hereafter follows the fyfte.
Here Bochas vvryteth against them that delight in beauty and semelynesse,
calling to purpose how a man borne in Tuscan, which excelled in beauty and
fayrnesse, and for his beauty should not give other occasion to sin, he
disfigured his visage and body, with many a great wound and spotte.

The first Chapter.
HEre Bochas scorneth and has disdain
Of three manner of folk he did se,
In this world which that in certain
Set at their joy and all their felicite
For to excel in fayrenesse and beauty:
Not withstandyng as ye well tell can,
It has undone full many a worthy man.
Record he takes of Demetrius,
Which in his time was fairest in certain,
Which caused him to be contrarious
To al virtue, his story ye have seyne:
But of tho folk Bochas has most disdeyne
That busy ben to conquer and recure
Beauty by craft, which comes not of nature.
The third is he yt grutcheth again kind
For lack of stature and of semelynesse:
And all these three ben ignorant and blind,
And again reason their corages they dress,
Yet above beauty virtue is maystresse,
And little worth is fayrnesse in certain
In a person where no virtue is seyne.
Unto purpose he tells of a man
That excelled all other in fayrenesse,
Called Spurnia and borne was in Tuscan,
And folk had joy and great gladness
To behold him for his semelynesse
Whose beauty brought women in dotage,
When they cast her look on his vysage.
Wives and maidens dwelling in that country
Presed fast on him to behold,
By theccasion of his great beauty
Not only young but some that were old
With loves axcesse now were they hot now cold,
Thus was his beauty to many a creature,
Found in effect a perylous lure.
Husbands old caught a fantasy
And had a manner suspection,
Styred by the serpent of false Jelosye
Toward Spurnia, as made is mention:
But for to avoid all cruel occasion,
Of any people that such malice thought,
Ye shall here how wisely that he wrought.
To put away false dylectacion,
And all occasions of Cupides rage,
He of prudence and discretion
With many wound diffaced his vysage:
For he dempt it was great damage
That by thenchesen of excellent beauty,
Any creature hyndred should be.
Philosophers and poets that were wise,
Gave unto him a great commendation,
That he could so notably deuyse
To find a way within his reason
To set aside all occasion
Of such unlawful fleshlye fantasye,
That might styre women unto lecherye.
He knew before and saw by experience
That all beauty shall waste away and fade,
Like somer flours in their most excellence,
That grow on hills or below in shade:
The rose, the lyllye, when they be most glade
Upon their stalks, their prefe is daily seyne
Been beten down with a stormye reyne.
And semblably in every creature
Of low degree or of hye estate,
Beauty abides not nor longer does endure
Than youths ceson, with age is full checkmate:
Who thinks hereon I hold him fortunate,
And can before in his reason cast
No worldly beauty, in earth may always last.
Lenuoye.
YE worldly folk that rejoice in beauty,
Se with the eyes of your aduertence
How with a small sudden infirmite
When death and age list she we their presence,
Disdain al freshnes with unware violence
Again whose might there is no other grace
Process of years all beauty does deface.
Though Demetrius was fair upon to se
As ye have herd rehearsed in sentence,
Gain law and right he loved Arcynoe
Thoccasion found by her false insolence,
Because reason made no resistance,
Not aduertyng how every hour and space
Process of years, all beauty does difface.
Full horrible was their iniquite,
And tofore god hateful their offense,
For through false lust and sensualite
Lost was the bridell of inward providence,
Sharp mortal sword made ye recompense,
Drowned in teres when she did hi embrace,
With blody wounds disfigured all his face.
O noble princes let this story be
A clear myrrour to your magnificence,
Therein considred the false fragilite
Of worldly fayrnes which is but appearance,
And transitory, but so be that prudence
Govern the passage vicious lust to enchace,
Process of years, all beauty does difface.
The.ii. Chapter.
How the two brethren, Seleuchus and Autiochus, each desirous to excel other,
fill at discord and ended in mischefe.

THere is no man that can in story read
Of more mischefe nor of more debate,
Than of debate that is atwene kinrede,
Twene blood and blod, gain kide unfortunate,
Namely in persons which ben of hye estate,
As it fill ones, the story bears record,
Atwene two brethren that were at discord.
That one Seleuchus, Antiochus the other,
As the story hereafter shall deuy se,
Each desirous for to excel other
In worldly worship, and wonderly they were wise,
And both blent by worldly couetyse
For to clymbe up to hye estate
Which caused them to be at debate.
Both mighty kings Bochas makes m^cio^,
And of one womb sothlye they were borne
Under a cursed fell constellacion,
Of froward sede may grow no good corn:
And through couetyse both they were lorne,
And distroyed by the mortal werre
That was atwene them, in Asie nigh and far.
It is to me very contagyous
To read the batayles and discencions,
The false promyses of Antiochus,
With the disceytes and conspirations:
Brethren of birth, and of conditions
Contrarious ways ever they did wend,
Frowardly they began, and so made an end.
Their mother was called Leodices,
And in Asya Seleuchus was reignyng,
Ever in werre, could not live in pees:
And in Surry Antiochus was king,
And among robbers they made their ending,
Where ever they fought in wrong or right,
Never they bode but took them to flight.
Though Seleuchus was at his gynnyng
Shynyng in glory and in hye prowess,
And of Asya he was lord and king,
With great diffame was derked his noblesse:
Because that he of great unkindness
Full falsely slew without judgment,
His younger brother that was innocent.
And by the byddyng of Leodices
Which was his mother of hateful cruelte
Falsely to murdre the queen Beronices,
Wife to the king called Tholome,
Reygnyng in Egypt, but it stood so that he
For all his power failed of his pray,
Because that she was ware, and fled away.
Yet afterward of old hate and envy
This Seleuchus by full false treason,
Murdered Beronices by conspiracy,
Her son also, as made is mention:
The sclaundre arose through many a region,
And was reported unto his diffame,
Wherthrough he lost his worship and his name.
And on this murder avenged for to be
For the horrible great abusion,
The king of Egypt the said Tholome
Began make him strong, and came with people down
But for there was so great discention
Through al his land, the story says certain,
He was constrained to return home again.
Seleuchus than made a strong armee
Gathered ships, stuffed them with vytayle,
Toward Asye he taken has the sea,
But such tempest began his people assail,
That hertes and power of them began fail,
with thundering and lightning ve^geably distrained
To take the land of need he was constrained.
The people of Asye seeing this mischefe
Had of Seleuchus great compassion,
And their succor to set at a prefe
They him received into that region,
Though it stood (as made is mention)
That aforetyme for his cruel deed
They had his person in full great hatrede.
And for he fond fortune favorable
Not considryng her mutabilite,
He cast of rancour for to be vengeable
And gyn a werre again Tholome:
His men outrayed he was constrained to fle,
Knew no refute nor succor of none other,
But for great mischefe sent to his brother.
I mean his brother called Antiochus,
Behestyng him for to crown him king
Of all Asye, his story tells thus,
Took truse this while by subtle false workyng
With Tholome, for ten year enduryng:
And when his brother came with his powere
Falsed his promise, double of heart and chere.
Thus of new they fill at debate
Each began other myghtely werray,
False couetise to encreace their estate
Caused that nouther list other to obey,
Met in a field there is no more to say:
Fought hand for hand, their hosts both two
Seleuchus fled as he was went to do.
Thus a false werre of hatred fraternall,
Again nature set them at discord,
Each busy was in especial
As their story remembers by record,
Never their life to be at one accord:
But wha^ Seleuchus was put thus to flight,
The people of Surry began deem anonryght
That he that day was outher take or deed,
And Gallougreis a people of great post,
Of Couetyse began have them in great speed
To enter Asye and spoil all that country:
To Antiochus they had eke enmyte,
That he was feign for his fauacion,
To pay to them a full great raunsom.
Their heart was give only to pyllage,
Taking of him of gold a great quantite,
And he seeing of robbyng the outrage
Drew to the pyllours, and one of them was he:
And through al Asye they robbed each country,
For Seleuchus they began so purchase,
That he not durst abide in no place.
Than Antiochus drew to Tholome,
Void of saueconduyte or any assurance,
Though yt atwene them was great enmyte
For a season as made is remembrance,
To have found succor in his great greuau^ce:
But all for naught, for in conclusion
Tholome him took and cast in derke prison.
There constrained of necessite
Knowing no mean to make his raunson,
By a woman that lived in pouerte
He was help out of that derke prison:
Lo here of fortune a false condition,
That could make a king without pere,
Of a woman to stand in daungere.
To proud folk this may be a myrour,
To se a prince thus suddenly brought low,
That shone in riches like an emperor,
Which of disdain list no man to know,
Now is he cast, now is he overthrow:
Now has he cause to plain, weep, and mourn,
Knowing no friend for succor him to turn.
He was aferde to hold his passage
By hye ways, or for to come in sight,
Fill among thieves and they by great outrage
All mercylesse, slew him anon right,
And his brother for all his great might
Called Seleuchus, which was a wonder,
Fill from his courser, and brake his neck aso^der.
The.iii. Chapter.
How the noble Queen Laodomya, was in the temple slain, and vengeance take
upon him that slew her.

Six of estates princes and pryncesses
Showed them to Bochas pitouslye playnyng,
To him declarynge their mortal heuynesses,
And first of all there came to him weeping
The noble queen her sorrow rehersyng,
Called Laodomya which with heavy chere
Complained the mischefe of her suster dear.
Called Nereis, young and tender of age
That wedded was of Cycile to the king,
And on the day of that great marriage
There fill a strife and a great meuyng
Among the commons, by a manner rysyng:
And when the queen thereof had a sight,
To Dianes temple anon she took her flight.
The people was party and rose again y^ king,
For which rumore and sudden strife
Laodomya full fearfully quakyng,
Ran to the temple for to save her life,
Supposyng in her ymaginatyfe
That for the temples chaste reverence,
Men would spare to do there violence,
But there was one by whom the strife began
And was first ground of this great motion,
Called Milo, a false Cecylian
Void of all reverence and devotion,
Ran to the temple feirser than a Lion,
And where the queen the auter did enbrace,
With a sharp sword slew her in the place.
This sacrilege was punished by ve^geaunce,
Gods were wroth through this great offense,
And Diana by full great displeasaunce
Made in the court a sudden pestylence,
And Mylo was by unware violence
Turned bestiall, made wode in that affray,
And slew him self suyng the twelft day.
The.iiii. Chapter.
How Cleomenes king of Macedone was slain with his wife and children.

AFter this vengeance taken on Mylo,
Came Cleomenes of Macedoyne king,
And to Bochas began show his deadly woe
His great injuries of enemies assaylyng,
His hye emprises, his kingdom defendyng,
And alderlast how he in his city,
Was by the son slain of Tholome.
First in his country, the story does devise,
Again his enemies he had a great battle,
Of his people defendyng the fraunchyse,
Of knightly prowess as he yt list not fail
For his right to fight in plate and mayle:
His lieges echone being of one assente,
To live and dye with him in their intent.
Men, women, and children young of age,
Were in one heart as in that mattere,
Which made them strong and gate auau^tage
That undivided they stood echone yfere,
Of one courage, of one will, and of one chere,
Greatly assured in their opinion,
Because among them was no division.
Their common profit they did more prefarre,
Than they did treasure, life, or good,
For their fredome aye ready to the war
Not afraid to spend their own blood:
And fynallye so together they stood
That of one thought each began him ready make
To live and dye for his brothers sake.
He had an enemy borne of that region
The name of whom was Antigonus,
And he had wedded the book makes mention
The old queen of king Demetrius:
And had her son the story tells thus,
Called Phylyp, fro youth in his keeping,
Thereby pretending a title to be king.
Of Lacedemonoys claymed again right
There to reign and take possession,
Like a tiraunt vsurpyng of great might
For to be crowned in that region:
But for all his false presumption
He was put of and yset a far,
Though he with the^ held a mortal war.
And Cleomenes that was rightful king
Was in the field armed every day,
Hardy as Lion, dread him nothing,
Gain his enemies he stood s^ at a bay
That fro the field he made them fly away:
His dredefull sword ground was so kene,
That to abide him they might not sustene.
And on a day descendyng from his cite
Held in the field a full strong battle,
With little people made his fone to fle:
Retournyng home full weary of travail
Thought in his heart that it should avail
To stynt the werre, hangyng in no certain
Till yt his people refreshed were again.
Set ordinance through all the country
Gain all enemies to make resistance,
And into Egypt he goth to Tholome
With wife and children wtdrawing his presence,
There received with great benevolence,
Like his estate out of care and dread,
And there abode till Thotome was deed.
But the son of king Tholome
Which raygned after by succession,
Of false envy and vengeable cruelte
Slew Cleomenes in that region,
His wife, his children, void of compassion,
Alas it was to strange a cruel thing,
Within a kingdom to murder so a king.
The.v. Chapter.
Of king Nero, Cornely, and Hanyball.

AFter whose death thus wrought by violence,
The story remembers procedyng
Forth came Nero and showed his presence,
Of Siracuse the mighty strong king,
Tofore Bothas full pitously playnyng:
Besechynge him with a full pitous chere
Of his mischefe to write the manner.
The which Nero, wylfull and furious
List to presume of false rebellion,
For to debate with Appius Claudius
And to malign again Rome town:
But he anon for his presumptioun
Constrained was in all his most pride,
Like a cowarde to fly and not abide.
No more of him mine auctour writes here,
But in his book as he does proceed,
There came Cornely, of Rome a consulere
Him self complaynyng of y^ great falshede,
Which unto him accomplished was in deed,
By assurance broke of Haniball,
Which of Cartage was chief admiral.
To this Cornely Haniball was sworn,
With the Affricans by a manner flatery,
To succor him as we have told toforne,
With the Romans to hold up his party:
But when they met, the book does specify,
Cornely was take and fettred in prison
At mischefe dyed, there gained no raunson.
Than Haniball entered of intent
With his knights into a great cite
Of Cicile called Agrigent,
Where Julius Silua of old enmyte
Laid a siege with a great meyne,
That he constrained the said Hanyball
For very hungre to leap over the wall.
By a posterne he took him to the fliyght
Gathered ships, and took the large see,
And Julius Silua like a manly knight
Faught with him, and made him for to flee
Upon the water, anon after he
Was of his knights stoned to the death,
And so constrained he yielded up the brethe.
The.vi. Chapter.
Of the duke zantipas cast into the sea.

AFter that Hanyball was stayne thus
And put to flight as made is mention,
Tofore Bochas came worthy zantipus
A famous duke full notable of renoun,
And he was lord of the strong region
Lacedemoyne, and was come a far
Into Cartage, to help them in the werre.
By whose prowess to his encreace of glory
The proud Romans were put to flight,
Cartaginences had of them victory,
And there was take the wise manly knight
Marcus Regulus, and brought anonryght
Into Cartage, and led as prysonere
By zantipus, as Bochas writes here.
This noble duke for all his hye prowess
Done in Cartage, and showed to their town,
And for all his notable kyndnesse
They most unkindly quit him his guerdon:
For saylyng home toward his region,
In a ship stuffed of their country,
Of false envy they cast him in the sea.
To his noblesse and famous chiualry
When he of knighthod sat hiest i his flours,
They of Cartage by hatred and envy
Maligned again him, chief sun of their socours,
Taclipsed his light, but theragayn auctours
Have by writing perpetually set his name
And it regestred in the house of fame.
The.vii. Chapter.
How Marcus Regulus of his freewyll, dyed for the common well.

WHo can tell or rehearse the ground of werres
The first cause of such mortal outrage
Whether it began by influence of sterres
Twene man and man, or of wylfull rage
Atwene Romans and folks of Cartage,
To great hyndryng, consydred the manner
Of both parties, as Bochas does us lere.
Italiens therewith were grieved often,
Namely when fortune was their adversary
And Affricans felt full vnsoft
When she to them list be contrary:
Whose course of custom stou^dmeale does vary,
By experience it has be proved well,
In ye ouerwhelmynge of her untrusty whele.
The most worthy and the most famous
Before remembered upon each party,
Fortune to day made them victorious,
And to morrow she did their might defye:
Now up, now down, all stood in ieoperdy,
Like as she list them favor nigh or far,
Their loss and wining called fortune of werre.
To some well wylled, happy, and eurous,
To some also full strange of acquayntau^ce,
Reken among other Marcus Regulus,
On Romayne party a Prince of great substance:
To be preferred and put in remembrance,
One the most worthy and true found in deed,
Of knyghtly policy that I can of read.
To common profit was aye his aduertence,
Twene love and hate standing so vpryght
To nouther side declyned the balaunce,
Of his domes, for favor of no wight:
Till that the eye of his inward sight,
Conceived had where the troth stood,
Than gave he sentence, and thereon he abode.
In all this world there was no better knight
Better named, and borne of good lineage,
A semely person deliver and of great might,
Hardy as Lion, right manly of visage,
Wall of Romans, sharp yard to Cartage:
Demure not hasty seeing all thing toforne,
And in Papinia I find that he was borne.
And for he had so great discretion
This worthy knight, this Marcus Regulus,
Chosen he was a Consul of the town
And had a fellow called Manlius,
In arms manly wise and virtuous,
Which for their notable hye constaunce
Of Romayne werres had the governance.
Their ships stuffed made a great army
Full prudently with knightly apparayle,
These princes twain taken have the sea
First with Ciciliens had a great battle,
Discomfited them at their arriuayle,
Outrayed Amylchar, the story is no fable,
That was of Affrike captain and constable.
Wan in that country castles many one
Took prisoners, stuff, and great richesse,
And all that party to Rome he sent anon
By Manlius the story bears witness:
And the Romans for his worthynesse
All of assent because he was so wise,
Prolonged have the term of his offy^e.
Of knyghtly noblesse was none to him like,
Nouther in arms, nor politic ordinance,
And for the conquest of Cartage and Affrike
To him they gave whole the governance:
Brought cities and towns to the obeysaunce
Of the Romans, this noble worthy knight
Where ever he rode maugre their foes might.
By his faithful laborous dilygence
Gate all the countries to Cartage town,
Till tidings came unto his presence
Beside a river there was a great dragon
So horrible (as made is mention)
That al y^ country of him stood in such doubt,
No man durst neygh him far about.
An hundred foot and twain was his length,
Like as writes Tytus Liuius,
Was none so hardy man nor of such strength
That durst approach he was so venomous:
But by the manhood of Marcus Regulus,
Slain was this monstrous serpent,
And for a maruayle the skin to Rome sent.
Thus in conquest while he did his pain
To get castles and mighty strong towns,
Again him were sent Asdruballes twain,
Called of Affrike the hardy champions,
With all the power of their regions:
But as the story makes rehersayle,
They were discomfited in battle.
Amylchar after came with spear and shield
In defense of Affrike and Cartage,
And he was also distroyed in the field
With all his host maugre his visage:
Thus Marcus had always the vauntage
Making y^ Romans this knight virtuous,
Through his prowess to be victorious.
And where that he in his tender age
List do labor and till his own land,
For exercise, and virtuous advantage
To hold the plough and led it with his hand,
Avoiding sloth as ye shall understand:
Now through Affrike with many noble knight
In steel and mayle he rydeth armed bright.
Thus noble Mark what ever he had ado,
He was in arms sovereign singulere,
And in the temple at Rome of Appollo,
For him was kept a crown of fresh laurere:
Forged of gold, fret full of stones clear,
And in the temple of Jove was reserved,
A robe of victory, which he has deserved.
To these gods who can consider well
Of old custom the ryghtes to mayntene,
As for a thing being perpetuell
Which fades never, of nature, thus I mean,
Ysacred is the fresh laurere grene
For causes twain, granted to conquerours,
In marcial acts by conquest made victours.
For the noblesse of this tree divine,
Shows his odor in wisdom and excellence,
By the grenesse which never does declyne,
Long abydyng of virtuous prudence:
The round crown betokens providence,
In sign only of knyghtly governance,
Takes his guerdon of long continuance.
Their strength granted them not the crown,
Nor a proud ginninge stablysheth not their
But perseuera^ce who list muse and roun
Grants to them and puts in memory glory,
The triumph, and palm of their victory:
The crown of laurer in story it is told,
And of Jupiter the rich crown of gold.
Who can discern, of all these gifts three,
Most appertains unto chyualry,
Manly prowess and wisdom, anon let se,
Strength, hardynesse, conquest, and policy,
For the Romans caught a fantasy,
For his merits notable and glorious,
To magnify this Marcus Regulus.
For this Marcus during his lusty years
Prince of y^ werres gayn Affrike and Cartage,
Took all their young knights prisoneres,
Sent them to Rome for common auau^tage:
But o alas when he was fall in age,
The gery goddess among her chaunges all,
Again this prince her favor did appall.
For to withstand the prowess of this knight
In help of Affrike as made is mention,
Came zantipus of whom I spoke now right
A mighty duke the which was sent down
Fro Lacedemone, which through his renoun
When the power of Marchus began to fail,
His meyny slain, took him in battle.
Into Cartage sent him prysonere,
And there he lay in strong chains bound,
Lo how fortune change began her chere
Falsest of trust, when she is most iocounde:
First favorable after froward found,
This is her manner with her double face
Folk yt sit highest to change the^ fro their place.
For he that whylom had in subjection
Almost all Affrike, and Cartage the cite,
Now lies he bound and fettred in prison:
Whylom in glory, now in aduersite,
Cast in misery from hye prosperity,
Fortunes be made who so looks well
Of brotyll glass rather than of stele.
This manly knight albe y^ he lay chayned
Which had brought Rome to so hye encrees
That they of Affrike and Cartage were constrained
Unto Romans to pursue for a pees,
And for to accomplish this matter doutles,
Under assurance made in Cartage town
They took Marcus anon out of prison.
Bound by his oath there is no more to said,
He to be changed for Affrike prisoneres,
There for to abide and they to come again,
The young knights fresh and lusty of their cheres:
So that Marcus feeble and old of years,
By Affricans were to Rome sent,
Both assured to accomplish their intent.
For the Romans had in such deynte
This noble Mark for manhood and prudence,
And for the furtheryng of their commonte,
They had his person for wisdom i reverence,
Called in y^ town their wall and their defense:
Had in more cheerte for knighthode in yt age,
Tha^ all their prisoners of Affrike and Cartage.
Romans greatly reioysed of his coming
And specially for his delyueraunce,
All at ones of heart and true meaning
Said welcome home our joy and suffisau^ce,
Welcome myrrour of knightly governance:
This was their voice, and this was their langage,
At his repair fro Affrike and Cartage.
And thus was he received like to his estate,
And conveyed through all the cite,
Nobly presented unto the Senate,
Began his tale anon as ye shall se,
As he that had more in cheerte
The common profit, than his deliverance,
Said unto them these words in substance.
Syrs by the auyce of you echone present
First by the estates, next by the commonte,
As prince and Consul to Affrike I was sent,
And as ye know seven year there I have be,
To chastyse rebels of that country,
And by the favor and help of gods might,
To your city have quit me like a knight.
In this matter it needs not to tarry
Ye know your self I am now wexen old,
And fortune is to me right contrary
Whereby your enemies in Affrike be made bold,
And they desire me for to be sold
In erchaunge by short conclusion,
For prisoners which they have in the town.
And by the favor of gods hye in heaven
And by my fellows wise mediacion,
Countries and prouynces more than six or seven
I have in Affrike made subject to this town,
Maugre their might and their rebellion:
And them constrained like as ye desire,
For to obey unto your empire.
To make your empire more glorious
And to increase the bounds of your cite,
Whylom by grace I was victorious,
Ve^quished your enemies where I did the^se,
Now through fortunes mutabilite,
Made unhappy, and desolate of chere,
Sometime a prince, and now a prysonere.
Before my power by fortune was frau^chised,
Now am I thrall and fettred in prison,
Mine old triu^phes be newly now disgysed,
And victories oppressed and borne down:
With this considred the transmutacion
Of youth passed, and mine unwieldy age
Little wonder though dull be my courage.
Yet there is a thing yt draws a length my life,
Which in my heart has set great gladness,
To your encreace how this mortal strife
By my labor and knightly business
The marciall princes famous in worthynesse
with all the knights most souerayn of renoun,
Sought through Affrike be in your prison.
By whose absence febled is Cartage,
The country pouerished, brought to disencreace,
Seeing yt I am dull and fall in age
Gain Affricans to put my self in preace,
Causyng your enemies to pursue for peace,
By exchange of me y^ may but small avail,
For affrike knights most expert in battle.
They stand in hope of their delyueraunce,
By exchange of me now sent out of prison,
Of intent to increase their puysaunce,
Of new to gynne a werre upon your town:
Now take good head in your discretion,
Payse of prudence this thing yt I have told,
Their youth considred and how I am old.
I am consumed and weared in the werres,
Fortune contrary, I febled to bear armor,
They lusty, fresh, their name spread far is,
And in the field they able to endure:
I unwieldy, and like a creature
More semely to draw home to my grave,
Than be armed this cite for to save.
And in effect I have more cheerte
Of very faith without variaunce,
Unto the profit of your commonte
Than to the matter of my delyueraunce:
Two things paysed and wayed in balau^ce
Of Affrike knights expert worthynesse,
In me the constraynt of ages feblenesse.
And to conclude upon this matere
I might never as seems unto me
As of knyghthode deserve the laurere,
Nor the triumph in this famous cite,
Better than dye to encreace the commonte:
And thus auysed of heart and hole courage
Yield up the spirit of my unwieldy age.
In this purpose he steadfast as a wall,
Of one will and one perseueraunce,
Him self commendyng to gods immortal,
Chase for to dye of polytike constaunce,
And to prefer by notable purueyaunce
The common profit, this was his motyfe,
Set aside his good, his treasour, and his life.
Right well chered, stable of his visage,
Of perfect love he had unto the town,
He is repaired again unto Cartage,
The articles kept and the condition
At the departing from Affrike region:
This to say, texplete their lust certain,
Or prisoner he for to resort again.
At his departing the Romayne senators
Began wexe pale of compassion,
To se the pauis of all their old soccours,
As prisoner depart out of the town:
Princesses and ladies fill in a sown down,
Children wept, and cried for pite,
Farwell upholder, chief wall of their cite.
Was ever found any trewer knight
Which of his own faithful mocion,
Where he was free and had power and might
To have stand at large, by his election
To keep his promise repaired to prison*
What shall I write of his noblesse or show,
To find one like him I read but of a few.
And when he came again with his message,
Knowing thentent of this worthy knight
Most furiously the people of Cartage
In the presence of every manner wight
Ordained have to tourment anonryght,
First the lyddes of his eyes twain
They cut of, to encreace his pain.
That he not should sleep in prison,
But ever watch with pain intolerable,
And for the constraynt of his passion
Cry and complain with sighs lamentable:
And after this took a plain table
Fret full of nails, sharp whet and ground
And thereupon naked they him bound.
Another table they laid on him aloft
Nailed also, and atwene these twain
They couched him, this bed was full vnsoft,
Most importable so hidous was ye pain,
The blod ran out of every senow and vain:
This was his turment, alas a cruel death,
Of worthy Marcus till he yield up y^ brethe.
Who read in books or ever did se,
Of any princes so steadfast and so stable
As whylom were in Rome the cite?
Or in their conquest so long perdurable
Of virtue found, of courage vnstauncheable?
Reken up all that ever were in that town,
And to this Marcus make no comparison.
Reken Camillus, Papyrius, Scipions,
Notable and worthy for many great victory,
Reken up all the worthy champions,
Cursius, Fabricius, famous of memory,
But this Regulus eclipseth all their glory,
And surmounteth by report of renoun
All these for said in comparison.
Reken up y^ four that whylom were so rych^
The first of them called Lucius,
Other twain of condition lyche,
As was Scaurus, and Gayus Delius,
And forget not the great Emilius,
But for all their great possession,
Make to Marcus no comparison.
Remember of Crassus of whom it is told
The Assiriens to staunche his couetyse
Powered in his throat stra^gled him with gold,
So he dyed the story does deuyse:
And though these four wend have be wise,
Greatly commended through false opinion,
Of them to Marcus make no comparison.
Touching this Mark let men behold and se
He left his treasour, fredome and richesse
And for the profit of the commonte
Forsook his fre^des, Bochas bears witness,
To further his town dyed in distress,
To keep his faith resorted to prison,
Make of none other to him comparison.
Mine auctour here puts in remembrance
Some that had gold, stones, and pierre,
Some that had of richesse habundaunce
And of other that stood in dignite,
And some that had worldly prosperity,
Set all aside and conclude of reason,
Twene them and Marcus is no comparison.
Princes may live after their ententes,
After their power frowardly in vices,
Of gold and purpure wear rich garments,
After their lusts and their delyces,
Grant their ministers great offices:
Twene all their pomp and vain ambicion
And atwene Mark make no comparison.
All these things remembered in certain,
Well considred and yput in mind,
There was in Rome but few such seyne
To common profit that found was so kind:
And till I may such another find
In all this book turnynge up so down,
I will to him make no comparison.
Lenuoye.
This tragedye who that can take heed
Is entermedled with woe and gladness,
Joye for worship and singular manhede
That was in Mark by excellent noblesse,
To read his fall it is great heaviness:
Which chase to dye where as he stood fre,
Only for profit of the commonte.
To keep his oath plainly as I read,
Made in Cartage, there being in distress
This noble prince constrained of no need
But of frewyll, mine auctour does express,
Fro Rome again thither began him dress,
To suffer tourment of his fre volunte,
Only for the profyt of the commonte.
This story should crowned be in deed
With golden letters, for to bear witness
How the said Mark, having of death no dread,
To set Rome fro werre in sykernesse:
Whose hie renome most soue rayn of prowess
May never eclypse by none antiquite,
Which chase to dye to forther the commonte.
He deserved for to have the mede
Of triumph, and marciall worthynesse,
And of Jupiter to wear the purple wede
Fret full of stones, most heavenly of brightness,
The laureat crown co^seruyng his grenesse:
Granted to victours who list consider and se,
Which chase to dye for the commonte.
Noble princes which that govern and led
All wordly people, take heed in your hynesse
To this story true as is the creed,
Taking example to do your business,
Aye to support and mayntayn right wysnesse:
And let Marcus to you a myrrour be
Which chase to dye to forther the commonte.
The.viii. Chapter.
How Tholome king of Egypt, called Philopater slew father and mother and
his wife, in lecherye spent his life, and mischeuouslye ended.

NExt in order to Bochas complaynyng,
Vicious of life there came Tholome
Called Philopater, and was of Egypt king,
In tender age by horrible cruelte
Slew father, mother, and suster ye may se:
He to be crowned, as it is made mention,
To reygne alone in that region.
He was disposed unto every vice,
Froward to virtue and to all doctrine,
Slew his wife called Erudice,
Left his spouse and took a concubyne,
Wasted his life and began him self enclyne
To all ryote, surfeit and outrage,
And in this wise he spent his young age.
Thus was disclaundred his royal majesty,
In lecherous lusts watched all night,
In bed till noone again all honest,
Of false excess shope him anonryght
When he arose to drink again might,
Gorge upon gorge, to afforce his lechery,
The long day he spent in glotony.
I wexe weary the process for to write
Of this tyrant vicious and wode,
It is contagious the process to endite
Because the example does harm and no good:
And of vengeance thus with him it stood,
Of sudden mischefe I read he did fine
Enbraced in arms of his concubyne.
Agathoclia plainly was her name,
And had a son called Agathocles
Vicious both and sclaundred by diffame
Noysed by report they were so recheles,
Both at ones take in a sudden prees,
With their alies all at ones fet,
And by just dome led to the gybet.
The.ix. Chapter.
How Brythomarus and Viridomarus dukes of France after great batayls were by
Romans slain.

Next Philopater called Tholome,
There came in order a worthy duke of France,
Brythomarus, and out of that country
Rode into Greece with a great puysaunce,
And first he began to make his ordinance
Again Romans albe they were far
Proudly with them for gynne a werre.
But they of Rome to their confusion,
By their bys^ oppes and priests began devise
To use a cursed false supersticion,
Unto their gods, in full cruel wise
To offer up men by a new sacrifice,
To burye the^ quike, in Bochas thus I read,
By a false hope the better for to speed.
Of france and Greece they took ten in nombre
Half men and women togider twayn and twain,
And by false murder they did the^ encombre,
Buried the^ quike their death was sudden:
At this sacrifice the gods began disdain
And to the Romans wexte contrarious
For their false ryghtes supersticious.
And by record of old Croniculers
The year five hundred fro their foundation
And one and twenty, tho being consulers
Three in number as made is mention,
Which governed and ruled all the town
The first called Lucius Emilius,
And the second Catullus Gaius,
Actilius Regulus the third consulere,
By all the senate ordained were these three
As I have told the self same year,
For to govern and rule the cite:
And to preserve them from all aduersite
Again two peoples of Gaul and Lumber^y
Which them werred of malice and envy.
Of which werre ye Romans stood in doubt,
The Senators and all the citisayns,
Because against them there came so great a route
Of Lumbardes, by this half the mou^tay^s,
Joined together with many fell forayns,
Which stood departed as made is remembrance
Fro them of Rome and their obeysaunce.
The people rude bestiall and unstable
Together assembled wode and furious
Of multitude very innumerable
Vengeable of heart of courage dispitous,
Void of all reason suddenly furious,
As says Bochas I can no further gone
Their soudiers bare gisarmes euerychone,
And gisarmes of gisarmes they were called,
Toward Rome them hastyng day by day,
Of great labor the fotemen sore appalled
But aye their trust on muintude lay,
Of whose coming Rome stood in afray,
And specially the Consulers three
That out were sent to fight for the cite.
Four score thousand as write the croniclere
Mighty and strong to stand at defense
In his fellowship had each Consulere,
And of the gisarmes number in sentence
Three hundred thousand by sturdy violence
Going on foot, I find that they had,
Eight thousand over, yt all the field sprad.
I reken not them that rode on horsbacke,
Which six and thirty thousand were in number,
Six hundred over purposed for the wrack
Finally the Romans to encombre:
The shadow of them gave so great an vmbre
That on the soil which tofore was grene
There was uneath any sun shene.
Their captain was Brythomarus,
A manly man and a full worthy knight,
And with them went Viridomarus
Another captain in steel armed bright,
Twene them and Romans long last the fight
But on the party of Rome the city
Was slain a Consul one of the three.
After whose death of fortune, anonright
On the party of them of Rome town
Eight hundred thousand took them to flight,
And thus began the fame and the renoun
Of Brithomarus, as made is mention:
Of which victory his heart was made feign,
And on his party were three thousand slain.
But the Romans resorted be again
And after that had a strong battle,
And in the field so manly they were seyne
And so proudly their enemies did assail,
That as mine auctour makes rehersayle
Of the Gisarmes long or it were night,
Forty thousand were slain in that fight.
The third time with help of them of France
Joined to Lumbardes and folk of Gaul also,
They fought again all out of ordinance,
Beside the river that called is the Po,
Where both battayles together had ado:
And as I find Consulers twain
Two Roman sheltro^s knightly did ordain
Manlius Torquat called was that one,
Flaminius Flaccus was with him yfere,
And with the Romans forth togider they gone
Toward that river with a full manly chere:
In which battle the story does us lere,
Nine and forty thousand slain on that day
Of their enemies, that none ne went away.
Brithomarus was taken prisonere,
In token of triumph brought to Rome town
To the capitoyle, with a full pale chere
Bound in chains, there gained no rau^son:
Thus has fortune appalled his hie renoun,
And in token of his discomfiture,
Offered to the gods was his cote armure.
Thus Lachesis his lives threde began draw
Till Attropos it brake with full great pain,
Viridomarus that was his felawe
Slain in the field by Romans in certain,
And of these worthy princes twain
This was the end, and the mortal fall,
The feast accomplished called funeral
And in the time of these mortal wertes
Atwene these dukes and them of Rome town,
Many tokens were showed in the sterres,
Meruaylous lyghtni^ges fro the heaven down,
And many an uncouth constellacion:
Sundry cometes did in the welken appear
Who sees the stories may the troth lere.
The water Pytene that renneth in Itayle
Which in that country is a famous flode
The same hour and time of their battle
Is says the storye, was turned in to blood:
Fyres in the air most furious and wood,
That mighty ^owrs were with the flames bre^t,
Three mones apperynge in the Orient.
The people for fear fled in to low caves,
For dread wext pale and deedly of their chere,
And in three days were three earth quaues
During this werres, and in the same year
Of great Appollo fill down the pyllere
Of marbyl white, large and of great strength,
That syxty cubytes accou^te was the length.
And in that time, the story says not nay,
Of Rome a Consul with a great puissaunce
Called Claudius slew upon a day
Thyrty thousand, and brought to mischaunce
Of the soudiers that came out of France:
And there was slain with many a captain lorn^
Viridomarus, of whom I spoke to forne.
To his great shame and confusion
As it is remembered by scripture,
The Romans made a great oblacion
Up to Jupiter, of his cote armure:
And in token of his discomfiture
Within that temple of gold beaten clear,
To his dispite they hynge up his banere.
The.x. Chapter.
How Siphax king of Numedy was take, and dyed in prison.

HEre Bothas breuelye for a remembrance,
Writes werres, debates, and battayls
That were that time in Itayle and France
In Spain, Cha^payne, with marcial apparails
And among other in his rehersayles
He tells in Affrike the great discencion
Atwene Hanyball, and worthy Scipion.
He touches their names and abides not long,
Upon their stories he bide not but a while,
Here not rehersyng their werres strong
Nor of their strives he does not here compile,
But down disce^dyng directs forth his style
For to reherce and tell by writing
The fall of Siphax, in Numedy king.
This said Siphax, battles had twain,
One with king Galba, he of very might
Had eke an other in which he did his pain
To mete Massinissa after anonright,
And both kings he put to the flight:
And of Messulie I find by writing
How Massinissa was governor and king.
This said Siphax through his chiualry
Made Massinissa to fly his region,
Constrained him to live by robbry,
To walk in forestes with beestes up and down,
And for diffaute as made is mention,
To save his life he found no better refute.
But fed him self on rotes and on fruit.
Out of his realm Massinissa was enchased
And constrained to ^^e fro his country,
Fro mind of folk his name was out raced,
For no man wist where he should be:
His liegemen and folk of his city
Through al Affrike knew no better reed
Of his person, but dempt that he was deed.
Thus of king Siphax encrece began the glory
Which by force two kings has outraied,
And upon them won the victory,
Put them to flight and the people affrayed,
That Rome and Cartage were of him dismayed
And each of them did their busye labor,
Of their werres to make him governor.
Unto Siphax out of Rome town
As it is written for a memoryal,
To Numedy was sent Scipion
For this matter in especial:
Out of Cartage was sent Hastrubal,
And at the Castle where Siphax lay,
Both twain arrived at one day.
And by plain writing as I have conceived
And as the story remembers in sentence,
At their coming both were received
Of king Siphax with great reverence:
And through his notable manly diligence,
As it is written by good record,
He made these Capitaines hertly of acorde.
That they together lay the same night,
They had of Siphax so great surete
By promise made, as he was true knight,
That nouther of them should disceyued be:
But there was found great duplicite
Followyng after, who so can take heed,
Like as this story shall deuyse in deed.
For by the fraud and falsenes most mortal
Compassed beforne, it is thus befall
That by the sleight of this Hastruball
As affricans be nigh double all,
Under sugar can hyde well their gall,
So Hastrubal by false decepcion,
Under fair chere deceived Scipion.
He brought in Siphax by false subtilte,
And by his slight painted fair langage,
That he should with him alied be,
By full assent to have in marriage
Sophonisba a maiden of Cartage,
Which was daughter young and fair withal
As says Bochas, to this Hastruball.
The which thing by craft was brought about,
And acco^pished verily in deed,
And by this mean plainly out of doubt
There first began rancour and hatrede,
Simulacion feigned, and falshede
That atwene Siphax and Hastruball alas,
Scipion was desceiued in this caas.
And after that done was this marriage,
Siphax full enemy to this Scipion,
With Hastruball rode in to Cartage,
And began werray again Rome town:
And in this while, as made is mention,
King Massmissa out of wilderness
Toward Scipion in all have began him dress.
With his people began to make him strong,
Through help of Scipion and of Belgius,
Went again Siphax, and abode not long
His heart again him was so envious:
And on a day the story tells thus,
With Affricans and folk of Cartage,
Siphax the Romans met in the vysage.
Of Massinissa the people were so wood
Upon Siphax avenged for to be,
Through their battayls came to him there he stood,
And maugre him and his cruelte,
Of very manhood, space was none to fle,
They brought him home through their hye renoune,
Into y^ hands of worthy Scipion.
Siphax was take thus or he was aware
Under his baner, maugre al his might,
And in to Rome led before the chare
Of Scipion the noble worthy knight,
That wan the triu^phe granted him of right:
And Sophonisba before to Syphax wife,
Wed to Massinyssa at the^de of all this strife.
Lo how fortune change can her tides,
To one this day she can be favorable,
Mark capitayns and these great gydes
Which wend have found her whele stable:
But she is aye froward and chau^geable,
Friendly to day to morrow at discord,
If this be true Siphax can bear record.
This Siphax was sent out of the town,
In chains bound without more taryinge,
And at Tyburny lay fettred in prison,
Dyed at mischefe made there his ending:
And for because that he was a king,
The Romans made of marcial pity
Him to be buried, within their city.
The.xi. chapter.
How Nabyn having no title but by ticannye, took on him to be king of
Macedoyne and was slain.

Next came Nabyn full pytously weeping
Tofore Jhon Bochas, which by tirannye
Of Macedoyne took on him to be king,
Having no title save title of robbery,
Only by force him self to magnify:
Which with strong hand took full possession
For to be crowned in thylke region.
This Macedoyne as by old writings
Whylome was had in full great reverence,
Because only it floured in two things,
Both in knighthode and sovereign Sapience,
Mars there by manhood Pallas by prudence:
And while these two had gouerna^ce,
Or al welfare they had suffisaunce.
And while noblesse of these things twain
That is to say the flower of hye clergy
The hye renome most famous and sovereign
Of marciall prowess and of chiualry
Governed that land by new policy,
Than stood that kingdom auctours reherce ko^ne,
Among the Greeks like an heavenly son.
But at the last eclypsed was the light
B^th of knighthode and Philosophy,
When couetise began enter again right
For to usurp upon the regaly
By intrusion of false tyranny,
And by extorte force made their entrynges
Having no title there to reygne as kings.
This was chief cause for short conclusion
That the noblesse of Greece was brought baas,
And Macedoyne brought to confusion
By couetyse that set them in such caas:
Thereby their knighthod translated was
And their polycy, in Cronicles ye may se
Out of Greece into Rome the city.
And among other by clear remembrance
Of such tyrauntes by order rehersyng,
Nabyn was one that had governance
In Macedoyne, and was there crowned king,
Without title there falsely reignynge:
And for his froward contagious cruelte
He was behated of Rome the city.
The Romans sent a mighty Consulere
Tytus Fla^minius of their werres gyde,
To Macedoyne, he began to aproch nere
Toward Argos where Nabyn did abide,
Of intent for to abate his pride:
But while Nabyn stood hiest in estate,
Of Greece his lieges with him were at debate
A Duke yealled Philopomenes
With the people that dwelled in Greece land,
To strive with Nabyn put him self in prees.
Discomfyted him fighting hand for hand*
And at great mischefe ye shall understand,
Alexamenes a knight of that country,
Slew this Nabyn the Cronycleye may se.
The.xii. Chapter
Here Bochas reherseth the mortal werres between Romans and Affricans.

AFter this Nabyn Bochas does proceed
To tell the werres and the mortal strives
Twene Romans and Affricans in deed,
Whereby full many lost their lives,
Caused widows, maidens, and eke wives
To weep and wail, in such dis^oynte they stood
On outher party to se the loss of blood.
For the party of them of Rome town
Were made capitaines and diverse officers,
Which into affrike with people were sent down,
And specially there were two Consulers
Notable in arms, and famous in tho years,
Marcus Ma^lius borne of the Romain lie,
That other called Lucius Censorine.
With them was sent a tribune full notable
Of whom tofore I made mention
For the werres most worthy and most able,
I mean of Rome proud Scipion,
Which of their cite was chefest champion:
Of intent the affricans tanoye
And specially Cartage to distroye.
And nigh by Cartage there was a city strong
Mightily builded, and stood upon the sea,
The walls thick, round, square, and long,
Chief diffence called of that country
To save and keep them from aduersite,
And forty cubytes with crestes marciall,
Like as I find, of height was the wall.
And in the front raised for the werre,
Of stones square was an hye dungeon
Called Birsa, fro which wounder far
Men might behold the courtreis enuyron:
And ss I read for their salvation
The Affricans of purpuse did ordain
For their captains Hastrubalies twain.
The said dungion mightyly battailed
Again al sautes to stand and endure,
But worthy Scipion for all y^ has not failed
For to approach and do by bu^y cure
With his engyns mighty strong and sure,
So that by force this knight most marcial
A great quantite brake down of the wall.
And Lucius called Sensorine
Departed is with Marcus Manlius,
And by the Counsel of Scipion and doctrine
Both of assent in arms virtuous
They took their way, mine auctour tells thus,
With Hastrubal sothly and they might
Where as he lay that same day to fight.
These Consulers assailed the city
Called Ci^ie, and beat down the wall,
Slew fourtye.M. the Cronycle ye may se,
Of Affricans by vengeance full mortal:
And their constable called Hastruball
Was slain that day, by him it is no doubt
That he most trusted and next was him about.
And this while most manly of courage
The worthy Tribune Publius Scipion
By very force is entered in Cartage,
And six days, as made is mention
He and his knights constrained so the town
That dispaired with their deedly cheres
They of the town yielded them prisoneres
Mekely requiryng unto Scipion
To receive them in this mortal rage,
That men and women dwelling in that town,
With the cite sins young and old of age
Might abide and live in seruage
Under the Romans, there was no better refute
And year by year pay them a tribute.
And of Affrike that other Hastruball
Which among the^ before was crowned king,
Left his estate and his power royal,
Yielded him prisonere humbly knelyng,
And his wife most pitiously weping,
When that she saw her lord taken so,
Ran in to fire and brent her self for woe.
Six and twenty thousand as I find
Where led of women into captyuyte,
Thirty thousand of men came behind
Take prisoners in great aduersite,
And seuentene days brent that city:
That in their walls was none so hard stone
But to poudre it was brent anon.
And this was done breuely to conclude
By the prowess of Publyus Scipion,
Sold in seruage was a great multitude,
Their old lords led fettred to prison,
This was of Cartage fynall distruccion:
On their complaints Bocas abides no while
But into Greece turns again his style.
The.xiii. Chap.
How king Perseus was by Romans outrayed and after take.

IN Lacedemoyne remembrynge on a king
Called Perseus, a full proud werryrour
Claymyng a title upon him vsurpyng
For to succeed as true enherytour
To great Alisau^dre most mighty conqueror,
Fully affirmyng again a certain day
He will be crowned maugre who says nay.
And his name to put in memory,
Cast in his person to renew the prowess
Of king Alisaundre, and to increase his glory,
To follow his traces in knighthode and nobles
And first of all of hasty wilfulnes
That his conquest might sprede far,
Began of purpose with Romans to have werre.
But after this he was better auysed
When he perceived the Marcial apparayle
Of the Romans, whereof he was agrised,
Wext aferde their noblesse to assail,
Which aye were found victorious in battle:
And where before he had been recheles,
Sent ambassatours with them to treat of pees.
They had perceived his presumpcion
And how he was proud and surquedous,
Sent a Consul with a great power down
The name of whom was Sulpicius,
Which deedly hated the said Perseus,
Through rancour again him wext solayne
Of his ambassade having but disdain.
And their party for to fortify,
With their said Consul Sulpicius
They sent another expert in chiualry,
A Consul also Paulus Emylius
Among Romans notable and famous:
And following after the self same night
The moon eclypsed fully of her might.
A clear token as made is mention
That king Perseus should have a sharp shoure
And that his lordship and his region
Should be oppressed void of al socour,
And that Macedons should have no favor
Again the Romans, togider wha^ they met
With round spears and swords sherpe whet*
The day of battle to his increase of glory
For the party of them of Rome town,
There was a knight that caused the victory,
Young fresh and lusty that called was Caton,
Which brought their enemies to confusion:
For Macedonoys through his great might
Outraied were, and Perseus put to flight.
But Emplius the noble Consulere
Sent a captain called Octauius,
To pursue after in costs far and nere
The proud king the said Perseus,
And he was take for there was no rescus
With his sons, that were in number twain,
Philip and Alisaundre the story is certain.
Mine auctour tells here of kings many
Thurty in number, the first Gramaus,
Which have reigned within Macedony,
And last of all was this Perseus:
The number of years, Bochas writes thus
Was nine hundred as I remember here,
Space of their reigning with.xxiiii. year.
After translated was the region
With all their yles unto the obeysaunce
Of them of Rome without excepcion:
To great lords that were of most pu^saunce
Abode there long under governance.
And Perseus disco^late of chere
During his life abode there prisoner.
The.xiiii. chapter.
How the people of Achaia with their chief city Corinthe by Romans was
distroied.

THus the lordeshyp weared out and spent
Of Macedoyne, as made is mencio^
The two countries thereto adiace^t
That one Achaia a little region,
And Spartonoyse going enuiron,
Mighty of people, and of great substance,
In one confederate, and of one alyaunce,
They were co^ioyned, and both made al one
By a manner faithful conuencion.
And when the Romans knew the^ for their fone
Having their frendshyp in suspeccion
They cast to make a disjunction
Between these lands in bread and length,
For thig dysceuered is weked of his strength.
Ordained cytyes and towns here and yonder,
Whereon the Romans began make a decre
That their lordshyppes should be set a sonder,
Which made the people in every great city
Wha^ they knew their subtylite
To rise at ones, most cruel of their cheres
And would have slain ye Romayn messa^gers.
And finally by this occasyon
Romans again them began wexe furious,
Took hardynes of their deuysion:
And a Consul called Meuius
A manlye knight in arms full famous,
In to Achaya was from Rome sent,
It to distroy by great auysement.
They of Achaya by their negligence
And by their froward wylful rechelesnes,
Of very pride list make no diffence,
Thought them self, without auisenesse
Of power able and stronger in southnes
Than were Romans verily in deed,
Thus were they stroyed before or they took head.
They stood in hope in their sturdines
By that battle to have had great pyllage,
Of the Romans to have won great riches,
And for a pomp of wylful false dotage
They took their wives and women young of age
And set them upon an hye mountain,
That their ma^hode might in the feld be seine.
When the Romans met them in battle,
They dispurueyed and out of ordinance
Slain like beasts, their power began to fail
Of froward pride and recheles governance,
That Achaya was brought to mischaunce:
Women and children for sorrow almooste mad,
To live in seruage were to Rome lad.
Corinthe that time was their chief city
Distroyed by Romans and brought to ruin,
Which among cities (in Bocas ye may se)
Above all other did in honor shine:
Of al Sciences there floured the doctrine,
And of crafts artificers most wise,
Reken all the world there was chief marchau^dise.
Thus unwarily in their most noblesse
Sittynge of fortune in the high stage,
They were distroied of treasour and richesse
Brought to naught by slanghter and pyllage,
Their walls broke in that cruel rage:
And in that bre^nyng Bochas says the leuin
Raught a great part upward to the heaven.
Plain with the earth the walls broke down,
The people slain merciless young and old,
And there was made a great diuysion,
Some led in seruage and some of the^ were sold:
Images of coper, of silver, and of gold
Where sodaynely in all that violence
Together molte, so hot was the feruence.
Of which metal thus after it is fall,
Gold silver and coper meddled in to one,
Coper of Corinthe men did it call
Through all the world of custom euerychon*
Fame of which metal is so far gone,
That the vessels forged of the same,
Corinthoyse called is the name.
After Corinth was thus brent to naught,
A prince called Philyp Phylermene,
To Bochas has his co^playnte brought,
In whose face and chere it was well seen
The woeful constraynt of his mortal tene:
And he was whylome (Bochas does specify)
Lord of a city called Vallaquy.
Marcus Actilius took him prisonere,
Brought him to Rome, list him not respite,
Next to Bochas with an heavy chere
Appeared a knight called Democrite,
Of Etholys mine auctour does so write
He was chief lord, but he and his country
Translated were unto Rome the city.
This Duke was cast and chayned in prison,
Escaped ones in story as I find,
Take again, throw in a derke dungeon,
There for soro we went out of his mind,
Slew him self at mischefe again kind:
Lo how these princes proud and recheles,
Have shameful end that can not live in pees.
The.xv. Chapter
Now great Antiochus using riot and vycious living by Marcus Actilius was
outrayed and dyed suddenly.

Touching the storye in order here following
Of Seleuchus and great Antiochus,
Of his mother Leodices and the king,
With other tokens and signs merueylous,
And how also the same Seleuchus
Had in his thygh as written is toforne,
Prynt of an anchor y^ day wha^ he was borne,
And all the children by succession
Had by dyscent borne of his lineage,
Print of an anchor, as made is mention,
In the fourth book with all the surplusage
Of other tokens there told in plain la^gage,
And of the said same Seleuchus
Came by descent the said Antiochus.
Whose heart was set of hye couetise
To follow his lusts and dilectacions,
And specially he cast began and devise
To win in Greece diverse regions:
And of the people he caught occasions
By their favor to conquer their country,
And rebel again Rome the cite.
With multitude and great apparaile
He gate in Greece castles and eke touns,
Longing to Rome, conquered by battle,
Took upon him in his presumpcions
Falsely to follow the inclynacions
Of his birthe, while he did abide
In a city that called was Talcide
For cause of sloth he left his chyualry,
Forsook Mars and took him to Cupyde,
Restyng the winter he spent in lechery,
In watch, and riot, chase Venus to his gyde:
Sensuality made reason stand aside,
And by these means for short conclusion,
He was conveyed to his dystruction.
And when y^ winter with his frostes cold
Passed was and al his storms kene,
In ryote spent and wasted as I told,
And Veer came in with his new grene,
And fresh Flora which is of flours queen
Of custom gynneth her motles out dress,
In which season as auctours all express
Kings and princes with marcial apparayle
Time when Phoebus in the ram does shine,
They them dispose to go out to battle,
For exercise of marciall disciplyne:
And down from Rome expert in y^ doctrine
Dyscended is Marcus Actylius
Again this vicious proud Antiochus.
This noble Mark proved in arms well,
Which in his time was so good a knight,
With all his host armed in bright stele
Again Antiochus came to the field right:
Upon a morrow when Phoebus shone bright
Set his wards by captains y^ he chees,
Upon a hill Called Thermophyles.
Antiochus upon that other side
Whom glotony and riot did oppress,
And dronken Bachus with him did abide
with Morpheus wife of slo^ber chief goddess,
Which caused him thorugh slouthe and ydelnesse
That providence out of his court was gone,
Causyng y^ day the slaughter of many one.
Wha^ the Consul Marcus y^ worthy knight
His adversaries proudly began assail,
They vnpuruayed took the^ to the flight,
Disarayed, they might not avail:
Thus Antiochus fled out of battle,
For again Romans he might not endure,
Therefore on him fyl the discomfiture.
Thus rebuked fled to Ephesie
Far in Greece, and there to dwell he chees,
Sent to Romans a great ambassadrye
With the said Marcus for to treat of pees:
But in this ambassed this is very doutles
When they attained of Marcus the presence
They were refused, and had no audience.
Of which Antiochus greatly was ashamed,
Cast again Rome of hate and enmyte
To raise a power, and has of new attamed
To gather ships and make a great arm,
Gynne a werre again them on the sea,
Having an hope under a cowardedrede
Better on the water tha^ on the land to speed.
Made his ships be stuffed with vytayle,
And his captains has the land forsake,
But when y^ Romans of new began hi assail
His ships brent, and al his stuff was take,
And as mine auctor co^pe^diously does make,
Thus on the sea the Romans werraying
He was outraied, the storye wytnessyng.
Yet efte again to his confusyon
Upon the land he began make him strong,
Met with Cornely called Scipion
With waynes and carts made for y^ were strong,
Shod with iron, sharp sithes set among
In trauers wise by great ordinance,
But for all y^ he was brought to mischaunce.
With Oliphau^tes and Castles on their back
That day was slain many worthy knight,
Upon his host so cruel was the wrack
That he constrained took him to the flyghte,
Forsook the country fled out of men's sight:
To the Romans, he could it not delay
Each year constrained a tribute for to pay.
But he of fraud because of his tribute,
For couetyse fained sore pouerte.
Gathered robbours, and by false pursuit
Oppressed Merchants, spoiled the country
Robbed temples of hateful cruelte,
And fro Jupiter called Dodanon
Took all the relikes the story tells con
Did sacrileg^, and entered in that close
Without reverence or any obseruaunce,
For which the temple again him rose,
And as it is put in remembrance
By the gods there fill a great vengean^ce
Upon this tyrant, quakyng in his dread
All suddenly he fyl to ground deed.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedy of Antiochus
Who list in order his froward story se,
First to all virtue he was contrarious,
And rebel ever to Rome the cite:
Justly accused of vicious things three,
Of pride, sloth, and of glotony,
And of disordinate superfluyte,
Of night excess, riot, and lechery.
On him the Romans were victorious
Twyse on the land, ones on the sea,
He was not hardy, but malicious,
In every battle his custom was to flee:
There vices reign there may no grace be,
To al surfettes his lust he did apply,
Noysed and disclau^dred through his country
Of night excess, riot, and lechery.
Among his lieges wode and dispytous,
And for a cowarde know in y^ field was he,
The pore toppresse a wolf most furious,
And by disceite a fox for subtilte:
No man more froward of hie nor low degree,
Nor more deliting in falshed nor flatery,
What was his ende^ a sudden death parde,
For his outrages of pride, and lechery.
Noble Princes of prudence full famous
In all your greatest roial majesty,
Remember plainly if ye be virtuous
Ye shall persevere in long prosperity:
Where the contrary causes aduersite,
As this story before does specifye,
Of Antiochus cast from his dignite
For this great pride, riot, and lecherye.
The.xvi. Chap.
How Jeronimus kig of Ciracuse was slain, and how Scipio Affrican yt labored
for common well of Romans was exiled by them, and so dyed.

After the death of this Antiochus,
There came a price to Bocas co^plaining,
Which that was called Jeronimus
Of Cyracuse whylom lord and king:
Which of his lieges he nothing trespasing
Slain was, with his three susters dear
Of hatred, mine auctour writes here.
Ciracusanes had a condition
Through chau^ges new aye to be unstable,
Of wilful malice void of al reason
On their kings for to be vengeable:
They loved not to have them perdurable,
But every year of custom, this is true,
Them to govern to have a prince new.
And for their chau^ges and their uncouth strives
With variaunce of their condycions,
Because no fruit is found in their lives
Nor in their stories nor in their successions,
I will pass duer and speak of Scipions,
And first to write of the worthy man
Called in his time Scipio Affrican.
A famous knight in all nations
For his conquest shortly to conclude,
Which had brought full many regions
More by wisdom than by multitude
To obey the Romans: but for ingratitude
Which that he fond in them (as I read)
How he wrought, to tell I will proceed.
It is remembered of his worthynes
While that he was flouring in young age,
How Rome was made lady and maystresse
Of many a land, to their advantage:
And specially all Affrike and Cartage
By his prowess as made is mention,
Were brought of Romayas under subjection.
But they againeward were to him unkind,
By accusacions fond out by their falsenesse
Said again him (as it is put in mind)
By record of many a false witness,
That he should have imbezeled the richesse
Of Cartage and Affrike the country,
Which appertayned to Rome the cite.
But againeward this noble Affrican
Proudly gave answer to his accusours,
He never wythhelde fro time yt he began
Toward him self, no part of their tresours:
Save as the manner is of conquerours
For to conserve his worship and his name,
As most was profit to the towns fame.
This is to mean plainly and not tarry,
He never accroched treasour nere nor far
Toward him self, but that was necessary
For their worship to maintain their were:
And yet that time he was their lode sterre,
To increase their bounds and fully his delight
Was al hole set to the common profit.
He took none head of all the surplusage
Of their treasours nor their great richesse,
The name reserved of Affrike and Cartage
To his knyghthod and his hye noblesse:
But their malicious expert unkindness,
Was in cause breuely to compyle,
His body fro them perpetually to exyle.
Cast him never within Rome town
After that day among them to be seyne,
Unkindness gave him occacion
To absent his person, and of hye dysdayne
To exyle him self and never to come again:
But for to abide in a small vyllage
Called Lynterne, when he was fall in age.
And for men should mind on him have,
By a manner of indignacion
An Epitaphie he set upon his grave,
Which said thus to them of Rome town:
O people unkind, unkind again reason,
My funeral ashes nor my bones deed
In thy walls thou shall never possede.
In thine unkind froward teritory
My bones shall not rest nor abide,
But thine unkindness to put in memory
To remembrance shall be red full wide:
Of these letters grave on every side
By report only of this small scripture,
Which here is set upon my sepuiture.
Lo here the cause by brefe dyscripcion
Set on my grave, for a memorial
Why that my bones out of Rome town
Be buried here low under this wall,
In exile hold my feast funeral:
Unkindness me drove out of that cite,
That wrought so much for the co^monte:
The.xvii. Chapter.
How Scipio Asian lord of Asye that labored ever for the common well was
murdered.

AFter the end of this Affrican
Called i his time worthy Scipion,
Came next his brother Scipio Asyan,
Which in Asie had dominacion:
Gain whom was made an accusacion
To all the Senate, that he untruly should
Certain tresours toward him self with hold
Which that he in Asie had won
In his conquest, by many strong battle:
Which accusacion falsely was begone
Of old envy causlesse, this is no fail,
Whose worthynesse, full much did avail
To common profyt, by these two conquerours
By great ritchesse encreasyng their tresours.
The tone in Affrik as ye have hard me tell
By his wisdom and his chinalry,
That other in Asia which did excel
In hye prowess, as books specifye:
Flalsly hyndred of hatred and envy,
By compassyng of one Antiochus,
Him to distroy he was so desirous.
Not withstanding these twain Scipions
Had in their time, by manifold battayls
Brought unto Rome so many regions
To obey their city with marcial apparayls:
And ever more to their great auails,
Brought in tresours to encreace with their town
Yet have they wrought to their distruccion.
The tone in exyle as made is mention
Dyed alas, when that he was old:
The second was murdered in prison,
Their boeth stories remembered here and told,
To give example to princes manyfolde,
That who that labors for a comonte,
Leseth often his thank, by Scipions ye may se.
The.xviii. chapter.
How the Duke Philopomenes was take, put in prison, after drank poison, and so
dyed.

AFter the process of these two Scipions
Twene two peoples wylfull and recheles
Began in Greece new discencions,
Twene Acheoys and Etholois doutles,
And a great Duke Philopomenes,
A Prince y^ time of full great puissaunce,
Had of Messenois holy the governance.
This said Prince Philopomenes
Leadyng his host upon a full fair plain,
As he rode armed and put him self in prees,
Myd his people as governor and wardaine,
Folk out of rule for to call again,
Upon his stead as he began them fette
In due order, his wards for to set,
And this Prince of port most marcial
In the pursuit which that he began make,
Among his enemies he had a sudden fall,
Void of al rescue unawarely he was take:
Of al his friends like a man forsake,
Among his enemies brought unto prison,
There made an end by drinking of poison.
Of Philopomenes this was the fatal caas,
Out of governance his people disolate,
Except a captain called Ligorias,
Which in the werres was wonder fortunate
Of Acheoys took on him the state
Them to govern and the people led,
Of him no more in Bochas I do read.
The.xix. chapter.
Of the third Scipion Nasica y^ ever wrought much for the comonte.

WIne auctoure here makes a dygressyon,
And reherseth for a memorial
Of the third worthy Scipion
Called Nasica, which in especial
By disposycion very natural
Hold among Romans by report of laugage,
Passinge all other in wisdom and courage.
Old of discrecion and not but young of years,
For a miracle mine auctour does express
When Senators sent messageres
In to Frigia by great auysenesse,
For Berosynthia most famous goddess,
Wha^ she was brought by them y^ did her gide
In house nor temple she would not abide
Save in the palace of this Scipion,
To put his name more in remembrance.
The which also through his hie renoun
Gallogrois he brought to vttraunce,
A people of Greece far out of governance:
But Scipion began them so werrey
Maugre their malice y^ Romans for to obey.
Whereby his name was put in memory,
And full great thank he has in Rome deserved,
Because only of his great victory
For which the triu^phe was to him reserved:
But at last full falsely he was served,
Of the Romans, after their old manner
In this tragedy anon as ye shall here.
After he had augmented their treasours,
Conquered in Asia many regions,
Caused of their fone that they were victours
Appeased of Graccus the false occasions
Compassed of malice by new discencions,
Atwene the people and also the Senate
He ofhye wisdom has stynt all that debate,
Trusting y^ Romans Scipio^ was begiled,
Lost their favor and offended naught:
By them unawarely banished and exyled,
Clean forgoten, put out of their thought.
For common profit all that he has wrought
The guerdon lost, thus princes can not se,
Of all that done for any comonte.
Like a blase for a while light
Which shows clear and is never after seyne,
Or like a son for a moment bright
Unwarily shrouded with a shower of rain
Right so the windy favor blowynge vain
May be rese^bled for mutabilite,
Of them that do for any comonte.
The people follows their own opinions,
In their conceytes they be so wonderful,
Will holds the brydel of their discrecions,
Their hasty demyng so bestiall is and dull:
Like blind bayarde they brayde at a pull,
To quite y^ guerdons of marciall bounte
Of them that done for any comonte.
This day a price stands in the peoples grace
Like as they would his name deify,
Above the sterres in Jupiters place
With Mars and Phoebus his name to stellify
But by to morrow there comes a soden sky
Showing there is a full faynte surete
Of them that do for any comonte.
And for to affirm that it is trewly so,
Call three Scipions to remembrance,
First of Affrike and Asie both two
Note ^ cronicles their knightly governance,
Their restless labors Romai^s for tauau^ce:
Reken agaynwarde how these princes three,
Were full ungoodly quit by the comonte.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedy of three Scipions,
So worthy in knighthode and eke notable
Made so many famous regions
Subject to Rome (this storye is no fable)
Where the Romans double and disceiuable
Showed agaynward to these princes three,
The thank lost and guerdon couenable
Of him that does for any comonte.
Reken up in Affrike the cities and the touns,
Great Cartage with castles defensable,
Reken in Asie the great possessions
With revenues very innumerable,
Reken their tryu^phes of prise incomparable,
Which considred ye may a myrrour se
How the guerdons be false and flaskysable,
Of them that do for any comonte.
They were whilom the Romans cha^pions
Of Senators to set the honor stable,
To avoid discord and al discencions
Atwene the commons and states honorable:
But she that is of custom aye chau^geable,
Fortune, in whom may be no surete,
Shows in her whele the guerdo^s mutable
Of them yt done for any comonte.
Noble princes payse in your reasons
All worldly thing in earth is transmutable,
Faint and unsure your dominacions,
Charter is there none to make the^ perdurable
Sorrow at departing your bodies coru^pable
A thing resemblyng y^ never had be,
Record on Scipio^s by guerdons semblable
Of them that dove for any comonte.
Trust never in your opinions
But ye your power is each day remeuable,
Be not made blind in your discrecions
But considre by examples reasonable
The eye of fortune like hasarde, retournable:
With sudden change of false felicity
Unto the guerdons daily comparable,
Of them that done for any comonte.
The.xx. Chapter
How Duke Hanyball after many victorious deeds murdered him self with poison.

NExt, to Jhon Bocas as I read
Out of Affrik and Cartage therwithal
There came a Duke yt had most hatrede
Again the Romans in especial,
This famous prince called Hanyball,
By whose prowess as it is well know
The said Romans were brought full low.
And among other worthy Dukes all
As old Cronicles makes mention,
Of Hanybal the fate is so befall
At his birth by dysposicion
That of his natural constellacion,
Set in the heaven that he should be
Perpetually enemy to Rome the cite.
As the storye of him does devise,
While his father Duke whylom of Cartage
Called Amylchar, did ones sacrifyse
To his gods, and he nine year of age
Sworn and auowed of heart and of crrage
During his life without excepcion,
Ever to be enemy unto Rome town.
This Martes child this lusty young knight
Was to Cartage the strong mighty wall,
Which succeeded in his fathers right
After the death of worthy Hastruball:
First he made a werre full mortal
Gain Sagu^tinois, as it is specifyed,
Cause with Romans y^ they were alyed.
A dreme he had and was thus in sentence,
That he should conquer in battle
Maugre al tho that stand at diffence
Two mighty countries, first Spain and than Itaile,
Down disce^dig with great apparaile
Passing the famous river Iberus
And where he rode alwaie victorious.
With him, of Affrike many chefetayns
Rode through Gaul, found no resistance,
Of Pyrenes by the hye mountayns
To show the rigor of his magnyficence,
Over the Alps by sturdy violence,
Not wtstandynge the passage was full wycke
Of slydinge frostes, and of s^owes thick.
A great party of his people lost
By the constraint of that fell passage,
Horse and Oliphantes that many besaunt cost,
Found great dau^gere of the^ in his carriage:
Assaut of brigantes when they found advantage
And as Bochas put in remembrance,
Felt great loss of al his ordinance.
The Alps passed with travail and great woe,
This Hanyball with all his chiualry
Aproched is the river of the Po,
Came to a town that called is Cursye
Which stands upon the cite of Pauye,
Where a Consul called Scipton
Gave him battle even before the town.
The same Consul Gneus Scipion
Which by prowes of manly Hanybal
Was discomfited, as made is mention
Tofore Pauye had a right foul fall:
The first victory in especial
That he had beyond the mountayns,
When he pursued tassayle the Romans.
Sempronius another Consulere
That was fellow to the said Scipion,
Sent ^ke fro Rome with a full proud chere
Gain Hanyball: but in his coming down
Tofore Tresbie a large mighty town
Outrayed was by fatal adventure,
And after never his fall might recure.
Of two Consulers this was the woeful fine,
Sempronius and Gneus Scipion:
Over the mountain called Appenyne:
Went Hanibal through his great renoun,
To great damage and great confusion
Of his people that passed the mountains,
Distroyed with cold, snow, and hydeous rayns.
Lost his knights, his tresour and his goods,
There might as tho be made no defense,
His great stedes drowned in the floodes
By the waters mighty vyolence,
Fond for the time no better resistance,
Save he escaped fro that sudden wrack
On an Oliphau^te, he rydyng on the back.
So importable was his grievous pain
Only borne up of marcial courage,
Yet there he lost one of his eyes twain
Kept of knighthode one chere and one vysage:
Through Itayle held always his passage,
Slew a Consul called Flaminius,
Thus in three battayls he was victorious.
But in this while as says mine auctoure
Quintus Fabius subtyl and disceyuable,
Which was in Rome a famous dictatour
And he apperceyued by tokens full notable
No Romayne captain was in tho days able
As it was showed by experience
Gain Hanyball to make resistance.
Yet in his conceyte he subtillye began search
To find a way he did his busy pain,
Day by day began fully thereon werche
Outher by fraud or some compassed train
To lie in wait, and secretly ordain
Embusshmentes to his advantage,
Of Hanyball to stop the passage.
But al his traynes served him of naught,
For Hanybal this worthy Affrican
In his conquest so proudly has wrought,
So like a prince and a knightly man
For thilke time that he werres began
Again the Romans both on see and land,
That they were feeble his power to withstand.
This Qui^tus fabius kept him always close,
Lyinge a wait to fall on Hanihal,
And of assent eke to his purpose
There was one Varo manly and wise wythal:
And these twain in especial
Within Poyle a large great country
Fought with Hanybal at Cannas the city.
As the story makes rehersayle
The Romayne party of worthy werriours
Where forty thousand slain in battle,
Emilius Paulus and thurty senators,
Twenty in number yt had been Pretours,
And three hundred captains of estate
Slain by Haniball, in that mortal debate.
And by the slaughter of Emilius
The noble consul, Romans dispayred,
And Hanybal that day victorious
To his lodgyng is again repaired:
His fone outrayed and mortally appayred
Knew no refute again this manly knight,
But at mischefe took them to the flight.
The which day if that Hanyball
Had them followed proudly to the town,
By the counsel of one Marthaball,
A manly knight a prince of hye renown,
He should have had full possession
That day of Rome like to his intent,
But I suppose fortune list not assent.
In this process plainly as I read
This Hanyball wexte proud and right pompous,
Of four victories dempt him self in deed
Above all other to be most glorious,
Of his courage most inly surquedous:
But o alas alytle sloth and pride
For lack of pursuit his conquest set aside.
Yet in his conquest of knights y^ lay deed
Of Consulers old and young of age,
With Senators the process who list read
Slain in the field in that mortal rage,
Duke Hanyball sent unto Cartage
Of clean gold by record of writings,
Out of the field three bushel full of rings.
After four victories here remembered,
By and by the process who list se,
In which many worthy were dismembered
Both of Affrike and Rome the cite,
Abate began the great prosperity
Of Hanybal by froward adventure
Set ones back fortune is hard to recure.
After the flours of his felicite
His noblesse drew to declination
To Capne he went a mighty strong cite,
There to soiourne as made is mention,
All the time of winter cold season:
Where to his lust and bodily pleasaunce,
Of all vitayle found great haboundaunce.
Which made his knights slow to y^ werre,
For wine, women, and plenty of vitayle
Full often sithe cause men to err,
Make them feeble their enemies tassayle:
Gorges agroteied enbossed their entrayle,
Disposes men rather to rest and sleep,
Then of their enemies for to take keep.
But when winter with his frostes cold
Was ouergone in thylke region,
Hanyball began his purpose hold
To lay a siege unto Rome town,
But so great raynes fill fro heaven down,
So great tempest upon every side,
For the constraynt he might not abide.
To fortifye the said Hanyball
Again his enemies where he had ado,
Sent letters unto Hastruball
In right great haste for to come him to:
But fortune her whele has turned so
That Hastruball were he loathe or feign,
By Salmator venquished was and slain.
Of which mischefe and discomfiture
Hanybal began dull in his courage,
Complained sore of his misauenture,
Knew no refute again this mortal rage:
Herd eke say that Affrike and Cartage
Were of new to his confusion,
Strongly werryed by worthy Scipion.
Siphax also of Numedy king
Which again Romans began a werre make,
Maugre his might and all his fell workyng
Was by force of Scipion ytake,
Wherthrough his courage greatly began aslake:
And how Cartage chief of that region
Besieged was also by Scipion.
Thus Hanyball constrained was of need
Home to repair for rescue of Cartage,
And was also in books as I read
The same time fall far in age:
And at mischefe and great disauauntage
Again Scipion full little might avail,
By whom he was discomfited in battle.
Cartage constrained of necessite
Them to submit unto Rome town,
And for their more aduersite
Gneus Gernilius was fro Rome sent down
Only of purpose for this conclusion,
For to procure in especial
Final destruction and death of Hanyball.
After all his marciall labors
His old felicite wext froward and unmeet,
In holow images put all his treasours,
Took his passage into the land of Crete,
And fortune contrary and vnswere
Made officers keep his richesse,
In the temple of Diane the goddess.
Some what for trust and percell eke for dread
To find succor, he went to the king
Of Bithinye, to help him in his need,
Called Prusias, but of his coming
The sleyghty Romans had knowledgyng,
To Bithinye down their letters sent
If Hanybal escaped they should repent.
The letters read the king the same day
Made his people besiege the dongeon
Where duke Haniball of trust alone lay
All destitute, when he knew this treason
Tescape his enemies dra^ke wylfully poyso^:
Chase rather so (other escape was none)
Then in the hands to fall of his fone.
Tofore his death said this oryson
To all y^ gods devoutly down knelyng,
That they would of this false treason
Take vengeance of Prusias the king:
Which was cause by his false workyng
Of the destruction and death final
Of this famous worthy Hanyball.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedy froward to write or read
Of this forsayde manly Hanyball,
My pen quoke my heart I felt blede
For to behold the woeful pytous fall
Of him that was the defensable wall
Of Cartage, the mighty strong town
Which slew him self by drinkyng of poison.
It was to him he thought more manhede
To sle him self by vengeance most mortal,
Than his enemies by constraynt should him led
In chains bound, he to be thrall:
So great dispite he had of them at all
That lever he had than bide in their prison,
To murder him self by drynkyng of poison.
As me seems in this horrible deed
He resembled the furies infernal,
Of cruel Pluto I trow he took his mede,
Void of all reason became bestiall,
It whose terrible feast funeral
Goddess Proserpina came with Manes down,
The same time when he drank poison.
Noble princes consider and take heed,
Leauyng the surplus his deeds marcyall,
Knyghtly remember, and have in heart hatrede
Of his enpoysonyng in especial,
Abominable to god and man withal:
That a prince so famous of renoun
Should murder him self by drinking of poison.
The.xxi. Chapter.
How Prusias king of Bithinye, that betrayed Hanybal would have disherited
his son and heir, went a beggyng in strange lands.

Following in order there came to Bochas
Of Bithinye the great mighty king,
Which in his time was called Prusias
Greatly sclaundred and noysed of one thing,
That he was false and double in workyng
Again the noblesse of his estate royal,
Because that he betrayshed Hanyball.
This diffaute derked the bryghtnesse
Of his fame and his knyghtly renoun,
And eclipsed his passed old prowess
By report in many a region:
Alas that ever the condition
Of doubleness by falsenesse or faynyng,
Should be found and namely in a king.
Of this Prusias further to proceed
Which again Hanyball wrought this treason,
A son he had called Nychomede
Borne to be heir by just succession:
But his father by false collusion,
Purposed him, for he was young of age,
To put him out of his heritage.
In this matter there grew up a great strife
By Prusias again this Nychomede,
Cause that he by his second wife
Had a young son in books thus I read,
Whom he purposed to prefer in deed:
For which he cast by short conclusion
Of Nychomede the destruction.
And for tacomplyshe this froward falsematere
By full great delyberation,
King Prusyas began show heavy chere
Gain Nychomede sekyng occasion
To deprive him of possession:
After his days by subtell false workyng
In Betheny he shall not reygne as king.
The people seeing this great iniquite
Wrought by the king gain good conscience,
Through all the land of hye and low degree
To Nychomede all of one sentence
Gave their good will and their benevolence:
For every lord and every great baron
Stood whole with him through all the region.
Thus by just title he was crowned king,
Prusias for shame and heaviness,
In strange countries lived by beggyng,
All desolate cried for alms:
Lo here the end of treason and falsnesse,
Left at mischefe, mine auctour says y^ same,
Of pouerte forsook his own name.
Se here two things and take right good head
Of Prusias the unware sudden mischaunce,
The disherytyng done to Nychomede,
After following on him the great vengeance,
As the story puts in remembrance:
For treason done odyble and mortal
Again the foresaid famous Hanyball.
The.xxii. Chapter.
How Perses of Macedone king, that enpoisoned his brother, was by Emilyus
outrayed and died in prison.

BEspreynt with tears pitouslye weeping
As Bochas sat in his study alone,
Next came Perses of Macedone king,
And mortally he began sygh and groan,
And furiously for to make his moan,
That he was whylom of so great renoun
Constrained after to dye in prison.
This said Perses of nature was froward,
Yuyll disposed eke of his condition,
Though he of birth was but a bastard
He compassed by false collusion,
After his father to have possession
(As mine auctour remembers by writing)
Of Macedone to be crowned king.
His father Philip the story tells thus,
Had a son which was young of age,
Wise and ready called Demetrius,
Borne and begot trewly in marriage:
But Perses cast by furious outrage
Him to destroy and murdre by poison,
He of that kingdom to have possession.
Falsely compassed to his advantage,
In his intent Demetrius to deprive
Of Macedone which was his heritage:
And thereupon he letters began contriue
To preue him traitor while he was alive,
Whereof king Philip greatly was anoyed,
That he and Perses should be distroyed
By Demetrius, that thought no damage,
Meant no harm in his opinion:
Yet his father suspicious of courage
(For Perses gave him false information)
Made him be slain by drinkyng of poison,
Upon a day, a thing abominable,
Sittyng at meat at his fathers table.
King Philip after when he knew the troth,
Had of his death great compassion,
But all to late and that was great routh:
Which caused after his own destruction,
For sorrow dyed, and of presumption
Perses after falsely vsurpyng,
In Macedone was crowned for the king.
With diverse countries made his alyaunce,
In Greece and Trace gate friends nere and far,
And of pride and wylfull governance
Cast with Romans for to hold werre:
Vngrace and youth made him for to err,
Till a Consul sent fro Rome town
Brought this Perses unto destruction.
Called Emilius was this Consulere
Sent again Perses to have a great battle,
Seeing his daughter heavy of her chere
When he went out his enemies to assail,
Made unto her this uncouth apposayle:
Why weep ye so what thing does you agreue
At my departing, taking of meleue?
Father (quod she) and ye take good head
A whelpe I had that did great pleasaunce
Called Perses, the which right now is deed,
And this chief cause is only of my greuau^ce:
Her father than began change countenance,
This is a token to mine encreace of glory
That I of Perses shall have the victory.
In Macedone he and Perses met,
And quit him there like a manly knight,
Conquered the land none might him withlet,
And manly put Perses to the flight:
After to Trace he took the way right,
Of which conquest short process to make,
With his two sons Perses was there take.
Emilius after this victory
Asks the triumph to his guerdon,
And as it is remembered in his story
Perses follows his chair through Rome town,
Condemned after to dye in prison:
The which death he did well deserve
For he by poison made his brother sterue.
Thus can fortune erly and eke late,
Down from her whele and hye stage
Of proud princes the surquedy abate:
When to her lust she sees most advantage
She frowardly began turn her vysage,
And suddenly the estate of them consume
Above their office that wrongly list presume.
Among which a king of Israel
Again the precept and law of Moses,
Called Ozias, the bible can well tell,
Of presumption wylfull and recheles
To sacrifice put him self in prees,
Like a bishop in the temple arrayed,
But or he passed greatly he was affrayed.
Lost his speech, smyt with meselty
During his life, lo here a great vengeance:
Of his crown and his regaly
Impotent to use the governance,
Peril for pride and disobeysaunce:
For he list not mekely the law obey,
For which at mischefe he did a leper dey.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
How Amonyus a prince of Antioche, delytyng in pyllage and robbry with other
vicious living, fled in woman's clothyng, after taken and slain.

NExt in order complaynyng his distress
Came Amonius, a notable werriour,
To John Bochas to show his heaviness
In Antioche prince and governor:
Of which country while he was possessour,
Had a custom and this was his travail
To rob the rich and spoil the porayle.
Spared nouther old nor young of age,
Took fro merchants treasour and richesse,
And in delytes of lecherous outrage
Was all his lust with watch and dronke^nesse:
Will in his court of reason was maystresse,
Causyng the people through all the region
To rise again him by rebellion.
Contrary he was to all good discipline,
The people arose again him on a day,
And he for fear in habit feminine
Like a wretch fled cowardly away,
Take at mischefe there was made no delay:
Falsely confessyng, hering many a man,
Again nature that he was a woman.
The troth know and the sclaunder ryfe
All of assent the people Antiochene
Rose attones, and so he lost his life,
They were so wode again him in their tene:
Thus of fortune the change is always seen,
Fro better to worse she can so well transmue
The state of them that will no virtue sue.
The.xxiiii. chapter.
How Andriscus of low birth borne, having no title became king of Macedone,
and was after taken, and died in prison.

But of one thing fortune is to blame,
That she is so chaungeable of courage
To set a boy unknown of birth and fame,
By false error upon a royal stage:
For one Andriscus by surquedous outrage,
Without title, by subtle compassyng
Of Macedone took on him to be king.
Color was none his claim to make stable,
Except that he of there and of visage
Was to king Philyp of fetures most se^blable,
Whereby the people in their furious rage
Caught opinion of wylfull false dotage,
Again reason Bochas does discriue,
That king Philyp was risen fro death to live.
Whylom father of Perses as I told:
And for Andriscus brought up in wretchedness,
In presence both of young and old
Was bold to claim by title of rightwisnesse
Showing no ground but personel likeness,
Mocking the people which by their favor
Of royal dignite received the honor.
Thus he that was fostred as a wretch
In misery and eke in pouerte,
Fro poor bed his horns did up stretche
To hold a scepter of kyngly dignite:
And by the supporte of the commonte
Began wexe pompous and elate
Brought up of naught when he stood in estate,
Nothing more cruel nor nothing more vengeable
Nor more hasty to do execution,
Nor more deynous nor more untreatable
Than when a beggar has domination:
I curre more froward than a strong Lion,
And semblably none so great cruelte,
As when a wretch is set in dignite.
This Andriscus in all his royal chere
To execute his hateful cruelte,
Gathered people in countries far and nere,
In Macedone, and of old enmyte,
Began malign gain Rome the cite:
But to withset his froward false intent,
One Inuencius a Praetor was down sent.
But because that he was negligent,
And of dispite took of him no head,
He was outrayed and by Andriscus shent,
With all the people that he did led:
But the Romans of hope better to speed
Have sent Metellus a full manly knight,
To Macedone, to mete anon right
This worthy man list not long to tarry,
Set proudly on in hope it should avail,
Made Macedone to Rome tributary,
Took Andriscus manly in battle,
Brought him to Rome with mighty apparayle,
And made him lie fettred in prison,
For his outrageous false presumption.
Thus for his froward usurpation
That was haute in his prosperity,
Knew not him self by false abusion
Blent with a mist of blind felicite,
List not remember of his first ponerte:
Whom to chastise fortune brought him low
Because he list not him self for to know.
The.xxv. Chapter.
How Alysander Ballas king of Surry, for extorcion, pride, and unkindness
dyed at mischefe.

THus can this lady play her pagent
By a manner of deynous mockerye,
Her entermesse forth served them of intent
To folk that trust her only of folly:
And to purpose whylom of Surry
There was a king like as write Bochas,
Called Alisader whose surname was Ballas
Of which Ballas to tell the process
First of his risyng and after of his fall,
Antiochus the story bears witness
Called Eupator which in especial
Claymed title to thestate royal
After his father named Antiochus
Epyphanes, the story tells thus.
After whose death the kingdom of Surry
Should long by succession
To Eupator, and eke for his party
Demetrius hostage in Rome town
Claymed a title in that region
Of Surry, because Epiphanes
Was brought to him the story is no les,
Demetrius fro Rome is come down
Into Surry to claim his heritage,
Received the crown, took possession,
Began wexe proud presumptuous of courage:
Thus Eupator that was but young of age
Excluded was in Surry to succeed,
Of Demetrius ferther thus I read.
Outragyous he was above measure,
Right vengeable and full of cruelte:
Hateful also to every creature,
And heavy borne of worthy kings three,
First in Egypt of worthy Tholome,
And of Actilius in Asy tho reygnyng,
And Aryrarches in Capadoce king.
All of assent again him have conspyred,
Found a way Demetrius to deprive,
His undoing so sore they have desired:
And their intent to execute blyue
They began a fable of purpose to contryue,
As ye shall here, together as they went,
To which all Surry at ones did assent.
They took a galaunt borne of low lynage,
Called Ballas, of their acquayntaunce,
And affyrmed all of one courage
How he was son and just heir in substance
To Epiphanes, and next heir in aliaunce,
To succeed by tokens affyrmyng
Next in Surry to be crowned king.
Alysander of purpose they him call,
Because they thought of person he was able,
Set him up in his royal stall
Maugre Demetrius, cruel and vengeable:
And fortune was to them favorable,
Made their purpose finally to avail,
With whom Demetrius had a great battle.
This Alysander which named was Ballas,
By Demetrius as put is in memory,
First overcome, and after fill the caas
He of Demetrius had the vyctory:
And to increase of his royal glory,
Of fortune by sodayue adventure
Ballas the field of him did recure.
Thus by promocion of these kings three,
When he was crowned king of al Surry,
To false extorcion and hateful cruelte
This Alysander did his wits apply
To robbyng, pyllage, and eke tyranny:
And dispysed shortly to conclude,
The said king of ingratitude.
He had forget his estate of pouerte
Knew not him self of false ambicion,
Wedded the daughter of worthy Tholome
Called Cleopatra as made is mention:
And all his labor in conclusion
Was only this, in Bochas as I read,
All the kingdoms about him to possede.
Who all coueteth sometime all does lose,
One again all selde has soueraynte:
And for Ballas frowardly began chese
To hold werre with king Tholome,
And with the foresaid worthy kings three,
All of assent have such ways sought
That by their workyng he came to naught.
First Tholome fro him took his wife
Cleopatra, and took her in marriage
To one Demetry, causyng full great strife
For he that time was but young of age:
But Ballas after by full great outrage
With all his power gathered nigh and far,
Gain Demetry began to hold werre.
Together they met proudlye in battle,
Ballas constrained cowardly to fle,
And when he saw his power did fail
In Arabye a mighty strong country
^abydus, a prince of great post
Took him by force quakyng in his dread,
To king Tholome sent anon his head.
Men may two things consider in this caas
Pride punyshed and unkindness,
And presumpcion in this man Ballas
Without title or claim of ryghtwysnesse
Made king of Surry, set i great worthiness:
What was his end ye get no more of me,
His heed smyt of and sent to Tholome.
Lenuoye.
This tragedye does naturally complain
Upon this vice called unkindness,
Which to punyshe is tourment none ne pain
Rygour condign, flagell nor duresse,
Emprisoning nor none earthly distress
That may suffice brifely to conclude,
Again the vice of ingratitude.
All creatures on this vice complain,
Law, nature, decrees, rightwisnesse,
This monster in kind does y^ light distaine
Of every vertne derketh the brightness,
Alisander can bear hereof witness,
Which to his furthers he of his tetches rude,
Showed again ward great ingratitude.
Of Cerberus thinfernall treble chain
Nor of Tantalus hungre nor thrustinesse,
Of Ixion or Ticius both twain
Reken the turment remember the sharpness,
All to litell to chastise or redress
The hateful vice of them that can delude
Their friends old, by false ingratitude.
Noble princes which in your demayne
Have governance of all worldly richesse,
Gain folk unkind look that ye dudayne,
Suffer them not to have none entresse
For to aproche to your hye noblesse:
For there is no vice more hateful to conclude
Than is the vice of ingratitude.
The.xxvi Chapter.
Here Bochas writes of the rebellyons and sedicions in Rome between Tribunes
and the commons.

Following mine auctour in stories merueylous,
I must now write y^ strong rebellions
Of Gayus first, and of Tiberius,
And of the great hateful secious
Meued in Rome twene tribunes and commons,
And by their stryues how they began conspyre:
For to attain falsely to the empire.
The year six hundred by computacion
Gayus Graccus made tribune in that age
After the cities first foundation,
Which turned after to full great damage
Of common profit, for by their mortal rage
Tumulte and noise of commons in the town,
Caused a great part of their destruction.
For in departing of champayne heritage,
Atwene the worthy and pore of the cite
By egall portions Graccus with fair langage
Had greatly meued all their commonte:
By which occasion in story men may se,
Another Graccus called the second
Was slain in Rome, and low laid in ground.
After the death of Graccus as I read
Was chosen a tribune called Munycius,
Which fordyd the laws all in deed
Of old Graccus called Gayus:
But he that was named Tyberius
With help of Flaccus Tribunes of estate,
In the Capitoyle began a great debate.
They were supported by the commonte
By voice of people y^ word of no man know,
For Graccus party hye upon a tree
A trumpet stood and proudly began to blow,
Which slain was and fro the tree down throw:
By which slawter y^ book makes rehersaile,
Flaccus wext feeble his party began to fail.
For dread he fled into the teritory
Of Janus temple ran up to a tour,
When Tyberius as put is in memory
Saw in the cite he had no favor,
Dispayred, knew no better succor:
Sword set at breast in presence of Myncrue
Fully purposed before her for to sterue.
There stood one by and drew his hand a back,
Fro that purpose made him to declyne,
Thus Graccus party goth dai by dai to wrake
And Flaccus took the temple of Lucyne:
His son, his friends, almost all his line
They kept the^ strong, but maugre their defense
They were there slain by sturdy violence.
While Graccus friends fought for his party,
And he him self constrained was of dread
He began to pray a boy of his company
To take a sword and smite of his head,
Set on a spear with the blood made read,
Sent it his mother complaining in her tene,
Into her castle that called was Missene.
Named Cornelya his mother was in deed,
Whylom daughter to great Scipion,
Her ch^oren all slain as I read,
And Graccus goods acheted to the town:
Thereof after made a division
By judgment, thorughout the cite,
Where most was need among the commonte.
Of Graccus side five hundred slain and twain
Upon an hill called Auentyne,
And Oppinius a consul did his pain
Of their conspiring y^ ground to search and mine:
And Flaccus party to bring to ruin,
He slew two thousand by hasty judgment,
Among which was many an innocent.
The.xxvii. chapter.
How the wife of Hastruball brent her self and her children.

HEre John Bochas list in especial
To remember how Cartage new again
Distroyed was, and how Hastruball
Came to mischefe, y^ troth was well said:
Which to reherce of new it were but vain,
Sithe here tofore is made clear mention
Both of their brennyng and their destruction.
Save here he tells how Hastrubals wife
Only to eschew to live in seruage,
Chase with her children for to lose her life,
And wylfully of furious courage
She and her sons tender and young of age
Among the flames and the coals reed,
Consumed was into ashes deed.
Dydo the first that bylte that cite
And made tours and the strong wall,
Which was betrayshed also of Ene,
Before remembered the fires funeral,
And after long the wife of Hastruball
Chase rather to dye with her children twain,
Than among Romans for to live in pain.
The.xxviii. chapter.
Of Machabeus Jonathas take by the king of Surry.

IN order suyng, unto John Bochas
There appeared an heavy man of sight
Machabeus, y^ worthy Jonathas,
Which occupied for wisdom and for might
Office of prince, priesthod, and of knight
By title of Juda of werres took thempryse,
By claim of Leuy as priest did sacrifise.
The law of Jews manly to defend
With all the land of promyssion,
This Jonathas full knyghtly did entende
Again all enemies about them enuyron,
Till of Surry the false king Tryphon
By traynes compassed and promise falsely hold,
Took Jonathas of who^ right now I told.
In Machabeorum is reherced all
Of his knighthode, and of his worthynesse,
With all the treasons in especial
Wrought by Tryphon by great falsenesse,
His subtell sleyghtes and his doubleness,
Them to reherce ye get no more of me,
For in the bible the story ye may se.
The.xxix. Chapter.
How Demetrius the second lost at the last his head.

But I will return to Demetrius
That called was Demetrius the second,
Which by descent came fro Antiochus,
And by his manhood as it is well found
Did the pride of king Ballas confound
Called Alysander which by great out rage,
Had put his father fro his heritage.
This Demetrius famous and notable
Upon Parthoys had many great victory,
Till king Arsacides double and deceyuable
Him self delytyng greatly in vaynglory,
By his sleyghty frauds deceptory
Under a shadow of faynyng and false chere,
Took Demetrius unawarely prisonere.
And to great hindering and sclau^der of his name
Arsacides by a manner mockery,
Made Demetrius for dispite and shame
Poorly arrayed of hate and great envy
For to be led through all Jury:
Made him after by great auisement,
To wed his daughter again his own intent,
This Demetrius was kept out of prees
That but few had of him sight,
Unto time that Arsacydes
Was deed and passed for all his great might,
Than he cast to escape away by flight,
And secretly to accomplish his intent
He gate him counsel that was of his assent.
Gallymandrus a lord of that country
Which that was of his assent in deed,
In their flight to keep them more secre
Made Demetrius for to change his wede,
And preuy ways forth he did him led:
But all for naught his flight was in vain,
For by strong pursuit he was taken again.
After by constraynt presented to the king,
That he began wexe weary of his life,
Kept more straytly folk on him waytyng,
And maugre him presented to his wife
With her to abide full heavy and pensyfe:
But when they had children atwene the^ twain
To go more at large losed was his chain.
And thus he had space and fre license
To go and come at his advantage,
For while his wife held with him resydence
They dempt his children were suffisaunt hostage,
But he was ever unstable of his courage
With Gallymandrus the foresaid knight,
Three times take and brought again by flight.
And for he was so diverse many fold
King F^aha^es in token he was unstable,
Sent him three dice forged square of gold
To play raket as a child chaungeable,
His disposition was so varyable
But for to restrain his condition
He was est take and fettred in prison.
But when fortune had given him a pull
By many a diverse strange aduer site,
To punish him more Phrahates wexeth dull
And Demetrius of prison was made free,
Full restored again to his country,
Wext proud again of new it is so fall,
That he was hated of his lieges all.
Cleopatra his mother that was queen
Of all Egypt and wife to Tholome
Was with her lord at strife, who list seen,
Which turned after to great aduer sue:
But to strength her party thus wrought she,
Made her son for to take on hand
For her to fight again her husband.
But Tholome called Euergetes,
Gain Demetrius defended his country,
Made zebenna to put him self in prees
Son of a merchant borne of low degree,
To make a claim by false subtylte
Of all Surry to have possession,
For him allegyng title of adoption
He to be son to Antiochus
Claymyng thereby the kingdom of Surry,
Only texclude the said Demetrius:
And Tholomeus to sustain the party
Of zebenna, with all his ch^ualry
Gathered in Egypt and countries enuyron
Again Demetrius, proudly is come down.
And fortune with her double face
Caused the country rise by rebellion
That Demetrius stood clean out of grace,
Whereby the people of that region
Were whole again him in their opinion:
That by Tholomes wonderful workyng
zebenna there received was as king.
Thus zebenna by false intrusion
Of all Surry was made lord and king,
Title was there none but collusion
Texclude Demetrius by subtle compassyng,
Yet as I find his party defendyng
How Demetrius zebenna began assail,
Their quarrel darreyned with a great battle.
Great people slain upon outher side,
Demetrius put from his region,
And overcome for his great pride
At great mischefe, to his confusion:
Having no succor nor consolacion,
But with a few chose of his meyne
Fled by water to Tire the cite.
Like as he would have lived there in pees
By a faint manner of perfection,
Within the temple of mighty Hercules
Under a shadow of religion:
But suddenly at his coming down
Into Tire, and at his arriuayle
His heed smit of, what did his pride avail?
The.xxx. Chapter.
How zebenna king of Surry, by entrusion entryng, had mischeuous endyng.

Touching zebenna of whom I spoke toforne,
Poorly brought up and of low lynage,
And of kynred but a beggar borne,
Came tofore Bochas trist of his visage,
Soore weeping, muet of langage,
Began complain his woeful adventure
Unware and sudden, impossible to recure.
His conditions somewhat dull and rude,
First in pouerte proud and presumptious,
Appeched after of great ingratitude
Showed in his life to king Autiochus,
His first furtherer the story tells thus:
For which Antiochus greatly was anoyed
Cast a mean by which he was distroyed.
There was a cosyn yt called was Grispus
To Antiochus and of the same line,
Which by title of Demetrius
Claymed as heir by many uncouth sign
To reygne in Surry, and proudly began malign
Again zebenna, whose party to supporte
Stood Antiochus chief as I can report.
This said Grispus young and tender of age
By the furtheryng and supportacion
Of Antiochus, had in marriage
His own daughter with great possession:
That zebenna for short conclusion
Compelled was for all his great might,
To Antioche for to take his flight.
And there he fill in so great pouerte,
Failed money for to pay wages,
The soudyous which in that country
Abide upon him of all manner ages
Strange folk and sundry of langages,
Thieves, inurdres, mansteers, and pyllours
First of Jupiter assaylyng the treasours.
To his disclaunder perpetual of memory
The diffame arose so many fold,
In Jouis temple the baner of victory
He took away that was of mass^fe gold,
With a great image that stood there of old
Of gold also, with other mo treasours,
With which pillage he paid the soudiours.
Of sacrilege having no conscience
To escape away he entered is the sea,
But Eolus by great violence,
With wind and tempest as he did flee
Did unto him full great aduersite:
And all his meyny forsook him of intent,
And he was take, and to Grispus sent
King of Surry, to who^ when he was brought
Gave on him by judgment this sentence,
For sacrilege that he had wrought
Spoy^^g temples by great violence,
Doing to gods no manner reverence
For which Grispus commands has as judge,
He to be slain there was no better refuge.
Of birth a boy clambe up to royal stage,
Brought up of naught and set in dignite
Knew not him self, wext cruel of courage,
Arose fro pouert to great prosperity:
But through fortunes mutabilite
That blind lady so made her power stretche,
As he began to end like as a wretch.
Reken the estates of worldly regaly,
No^bre of meyny, gold, treasour, and richesse,
Stately castles paleys on each party,
Conquest by fortune, cumbinge to hie noblesse,
Cruel sword conveyed by wyifuinesse,
Power extort, with couetyse oppressyng,
Causes destruction of many earthly king.
But in contrary who list him self know
And is by grace inclined to meekness,
Though he in pouerte be brought up low
And is by virtue inclined to worthynesse,
With scepter of peace, and sword of rightwisnes
Indifferently his domes demeanyng,
Such one is able to be cleped a king.
What is chief cause ground and occasion
That princes often stand in ieopardy
Of worldly chaunges, in such division
Reygnyng among them yt serpent of enuy^
Symulacion, faynyng flatery,
The south out serched who so list to look,
By many tragedy expert in this book.
The.xxxi. Chapter.
How Bitynctus king of Auergnoyes, by the Romans was taken and died in prison.

BItynctus next of Auergnoyes king
Came tofore Bochas ginnig his complaint,
Of his distress thordre rehersyng,
And how that he was made feeble and faint,
Again the Romans mischeuously attaint:
Not withstanding to maintain his quarrel,
He cast of pride again them to rebel.
But it is first put in remembrance
How Auergnoyes is a nation
Hanging on Gaul longs unto France,
Of which Bityncte stood in possession:
Having dispite in his opinion
To the Romans in any wise to obey,
But proudly cast again them to werrey.
His labor was to stand in franchise
And be at large from their subjection,
Gau of pride their lordship to despise,
Gadred people of presumption:
Whom for to mete Fabius was sent down,
A mighty consul which knightly took on hand
For their party Bitynctus to withstand.
Of whose coming Bytictus took dysdayne
By cause the folk which Fabius did led
Were but few, and when he has them seyne
He said of scoru: this people who takes head
May not suffice my hounds for to feed
Wha^ they be slain, to few they be in no^bre
With multitude yt I shall them encombre.
An hundred thousand in his vaoward he had
That pass should of Auuergne the ryuere,
And fowerscore thousand beside that he lad,
the Consul Fabius met him with good chere,
When he was passed of Rodanus y^ da^gere,
Fought all the day till it drew to night,
The Romans wan, their fone put to flight.
At the ryuere like as says the book,
There were drowned and brought to mischau^ce
Fyfty thousand, as they water took,
Through fortunes froward variaunce:
And by attaynt tencrease of his greuaunce,
Biti^^tus take was of the Romans,
Dampened to prison there to dye in chayns.
The.xxxii. Chap.
How the tyrant Euergetes wedded queen Cleopatra, slew her eldest son,
exyled his wife and wedded her daughter.

AFter whose death pitously to read and seen
Of Epiphanes the great Tholome
Came the daughter, Cleopatras the queen,
Began complain her great adversity,
Her sorrow furious diffaced her beauty:
Her chekes white of blood and tears meynt
Rent with her hands were pitously bespreint.
To Philometor she wedded was aforne
Whylom son to Tholome the king,
And by her lord in true wedlock borne
Two sons she had, as by old writing:
After whose death anon up suynge
To Euergetes a prince young of age
She was again joined in marriage.
By title of her in Egypt lord and sire,
King of that land, cruel, and dyspytous,
Whose story shows no kigdom nor Empire
May of them self make no man virtuous:
For like a tygre this tiraunt furious
Her eldest son day of their marriage
Borne to be heir he slew of mortal rage.
Not long after this extorte cruelte
Albe they had children atwene the^ twain,
Out of Egypt he made her for to fle
And of malice he began at her disdain:
I trow she had matter for to plain,
He took her daughter when yt she was gone
Again nature and wedded her anon.
She called was Cleopatras also,
But Euergetes to she we him more ve^geable
Again her mother that was fro Egypt go,
The city which was to her favorable,
The people exyled, he wode and vntretable,
In her dispyte gave that notable town
Of hateful malice to a strange nation.
But when he know through his cruel deeds
And began conceive how he was culpable,
Saw again him y^ many fold hatredes
And conspiracion of states honorable,
He at large to be more vengeable
Game Cleopatras, to gyn an uncouth strife
Went in to exyle with his new wife.
Gadred people his old wife to assail,
On her children to show more vengeance,
A day assigned held with her battle,
But which of them was driven to vttraunce
Mine auctour plainly put not in remembrance
But suyng after thus of him I read,
How of malice he wrought a cruel deed.
Which to reherce is nouther good ne fair,
But terible and abominable:
He dismembered her son and his hair
On pieces small, this tirau^t most vengeable,
And when the mother sat at her royal table,
With body and heed at a solempnite,
Let her be served of froward cruelte.
Whereof al Egypt had indignacion,
And for to avenge his cruel great outrage
They took his plates, basnet, and haberion,
And his cote armure wrought of great costage
Fro their temples rent out his image,
In token he was a tiraunt most attaint
Each thing diffaced, yt was of him depaint.
Whose hateful story replete of wretchedness
Full of vengeance and fro ward mischeues,
Therefore I deem Bochas list not express
More of his life fulfilled of al repreues:
Of Cleopatra wrote not the fynal greues
In this chaptre, what fatal way she took,
Lest y^ matter should difface his book.
The.xxxiii. Chapter.
How Jugurtha by entrusion was king of Numedy, slew y^ rightful heirs and
after he him self was drowned.

AFter this woeful deadly adventure
Of Cleopatras, whose storye is full old
Came Jugurtha the manly man to lure,
And to Jhon Bochas has his tale told
Of his conquestes, and deeds manyfolde:
Subtyl of wit, and as mine auctour says
Gave little force for to break his faith.
But in order the story to convey
Of Jugurtha and of his kinted,
Massmissa king of Numedy soth to say
His uncle was and also as I tede
The said king had a son in deed,
Called Mysipsa eldest in wrytinge
After his day to reign as king.
This Massinissa ordained afterward,
Tofore his death of hole entencion
By cause Jugurtha was borne a bastard,
To deprive him of al succession.
In his Testament, but in conclusion
His son Mysipsa afterward made king,
Was to Jugurtha friendly and loving.
Mysipsa had two sons as I find
The tone of them called Adherbales,
The second the story makes mention
Was that time named Hyempsaies,
With whom Jugurtha put him self in prees
For to abide and dwell in especial
Like as their cosyn in their corte royal.
Cherished full well because ye he was wise
And right lykely of disposicion,
Chosin afterward for a synguler prise
To go to Spain to help Scipion
Gain Nume^taynes, a famous mighty town
And there Jugurtha so knyghtly has begone
That by his nobis the town anon was won:
And to remember his knyghthod of intent,
His worthynesse and his hye renoun,
To Mysipsa letters were down sent
By the forsaid worthy Scipion,
Which gave so great a co^mendacion
To Jugurtha, him calling in that werre*
Of manly prowess the young lode sterre.
Of king Mysipsa received notably,
Called hun son by adopcion,
The king dead, sone Jugurtha traitourly
Slew Hiempsales heir by succession,
He of that realine to have possession:
This was his custom how ever y^ title stood
By slaughter and murdre for to get good.
He list to gods do no reverence.
Of his nature wylful and recheles,
Having nouther remors nor conscience
Touching the slaughter of Hiempsales,
Falsely practiced for his own encrees:
For which murdre Romans have set down
A Consulere to do correccion.
Calphurnius he called that was sent
Only to punish that horible deed,
But with treasour his eyes were so blent
Of execucion that he took none head,
The Romans overcome with mede
Gave to Jugurtha by collusion
Of this murore a colored false pardon.
By which he took a manner hardiness
Of tyranny which he did exercise,
Gathered people of hareful cursydnesse
And in him self began curledly deuyse
To execute the le^fe same gyse
Of false murdre (I mean now none other)
To slay Adherbales the second brother.
That he alone by false intrusion
Of Numedy might be lord and king,
Thus of his cruelte, murdre, and false treason
The noise was borne by la^gage and writing:
Of which the graffes flasly abroad spredynge
Brought forth in hyndring of his name
Fruit of disclaundre, and report of diffame.
Mortal treason was covered under flours,
To save him self by some subtylte,
And specially with his great treasours
To appease the Senate if it would have be:
But theragayne all the co^monte
Made again him a coniuracion,
On his salse murdre to do correction.
Four. M^men of arms were down sent
With a pretour called Actilius,
The which pretour set al his intent
To gather treasour, for he was covetous:
And couetyse is contrarious
Unto knighthode, as auctours all express,
And stepmother unto worthynes.
A siege he laid about a mighty tour
Wherein Jugurtha put all his richesse,
The siege was laid for love of the treasoure
More than for worship, or for worthynesse,
Whereby his name and his noblesse
There discomfyted, brought unto mischaunce:
After for mede made his alyaunce
With Jugurtha, to his increase of shame,
Caused Affrike through false cheuysaunce
(They together disclaundred by diffame,)
Them to withdraw fro the obeysaunce
Of the Romans: and more them self tauau^ce,
To their purpose corrupted with treasour
Many a Tribune and many Senator.
Of new again all the comonte
Fro Rome sent Gayus Marius,
For the murders and horible cruelte
Wrought by Jugurtha the tiraunt furious:
Which to refourme the said Gayus
A Consulere of purpose was sent down,
A manly knight, and famous of renoun.
Full notably the werres he began,
Wrought every thing of hie providence,
And fortune which helps hardy man
Gave him great favor by her influence:
And alderfirst he did his diligence
For to avoid all that were vicious,
Delicate people, and folks lecherous.
A day was set and taken a battle,
But Jugurtha by false subtilte,
Proffered much good which might not avail
To have corrupt, if it would have be,
The said Marius but ever in one degree
He stood aye stable upright as a wall,
And took none head to his profer at all.
Than Jugurtha in party dispaired
Greatly astonyed within him self musing,
But like a man hyndred and appayred
He began purpose anon a new thing,
Of Mauritaine he went to the king
To get help which called was Boccus,
Him to succor again this Gaius.
Twene them was made of new an alyau^ce
The which last but a little space,
For king Boccus began fall in repentance
Cast he would resort to the grace
Of the Romans, and no more trespace:
And to perform his entencion
He made to Gayus this mediacion.
There was one Scylla called a Questour
Of Gayus host had governance,
For king Boccus he was mediator
That there was newely accordaunce
Twene him and Gayus: and by the purueyau^ce
Of this Boccus, Jugurtha anon was hent
Maugre his might, and t^ Gayus sent.
And al his kingdom without resistance,
Gain to Romans came under obeysaunce,
And Marius forgave them their offense,
Received them under assurance,
That he shall by dome do no vengeance,
To punyshe y^ trespaces that they did aforne
The space co^pted fro time they were borne.
Jugurtha taken almost for anger mad
Brought to Rome and fettered in prison,
To Terpeya an hye hyl he was lad
Jugement give for his false treason,
Bound to a stone and after throw down
Fro the place full hye where he stood,
Without mercy in to Tibre flode.
Lenuoye.
THis may be well called a tragedy,
By description taking auctorite,
For tragedy, as Poets specify,
Ginneth with joy ends with aduersyte,
From hye estate cast in to low degree:
Example taken this story says aright
Of Iugurtha that was first a good knight
At his ginnyng famous in chiualry,
Gate Nume^taigne, of Spain a great city,
But in repairing home to that party
I mean when he came home to his country
He changed knyghthode into cruelte,
With couetise so blinded was the sight,
Of Iugurtha that first was a good knighte.
His wit, his power he holy did apply
To hateful murdre, fraud, and subtylte,
By extorte title him self to magnify
Slew rightful heirs, reft the^ their liberty,
By false intrusion clambe up to their se,
And gave no force were it wrong or right
A thing contrary to every worthy knight.
Noble princes lift up your hertes iye.
Within your self remember and do se
Of this murdre the hateful tyrrany,
With oppression done to the commo^te,
His gynnyng good a cursed end had he:
Murdre axeth vengeance day and night,
A thing contrary to every worthy kyght.
Here ends the fyfte book and here after follows the sixte.
Here Bochas sittinge in his study alone writes a great process how
Fortune like a Monstrous Image having an.C. hands, apeared unto him and
spoke, and Bochas unto her: making between them both many great arguments and
reasons of fortunes chances.

The First Chapter.
IN his study alone as Bochas stood
His pen in hand, of sudden adventure
To remember he thought it did him good
How that no man may him self assure
In worldly things fully to recure
Grace of fortune to make her to be stable
Her daily chaunges be so variable.
She braydeth ever on y^ chau^tipleure
Now song now weeping, now woe now gladness,
Now in mirth now pain to endure,
Now light now heavy, now in swetnesse
Now in trouble, now fre now in distress,
Showing to us a manner resemblaunce
No worldly wealth has here non assurau^ce.
While Bochas pe^syfe stood in his lybrary
With chere oppressed, pale in his vysage,
Somdeale abashed, alone, and solitary,
To him appeared a monstrous image
Parted on twain of color and courage,
Her right side full of so^mer flowers,
The the other oppressed with winter stormy shoures.
Bochas astoined full fearful to abrayde
When he beheld the wonderful figure
Of fortune, thus to him self he said:
What may this mean is this a creature,
Or a monstre transfourmed again nature,
Whose brenning eyes spercle of their light
As do the sterres the frosty winter night?
And of her chere full good head he took,
Her face semyng cruel and terrible,
And by disdain manasing of look,
Her hear untrussed, hard, sharp and horyble,
Froward of shape loathsome and odible
An hundred hands she had of each part,
In sundry wise her gifts to depart.
Some of her hands lift up men alofte
To hye estate of worldly dignite,
Another hand griped full vnsofte
Which cast another in great aduersite,
Gave one richesse an other pouerte,
Gave some also by report a good name,
Noysed an other of sclaundre and dyffame.
Her habyte was of many fold colors
Watchet blewe of feigned steadfastness,
Her gold allayed like son in watery showers
Meynt with grene for change and doubleness,
A pretense reed, dread meynt with hardines,
White for clennesse like sone for to fail
Faint blake for mourning, russet for travail
Her colors meynt of wolles more than one
Some while eclypsed, some while bright,
Dull as an ass when men had haste to gone,
And as a swalowe geryshe of her flyghte,
Twene slow and swifte, now crooked now upright,
Now as a creple low corbed down,
Now as a dwery and now a cha^pion.
Now a cowarde durst not come in prees,
Now somwhyle hardy as a lion,
Now like Ector, now dredful Thersites,
Now was she Cresus, now Agame^non,
Now Sardanapallus of condition,
Now was she ma^nishe, now was she feminyne,
Now could she rain and now falsely shine.
Now a Mermayde angelyke of face,
A tail behind very serpentyne,
Now de bonaire now froward to do grace,
Now as a lamb tretable and benign,
Now like a wolf of nature to malign,
Now Sirenes to sing folk a sleep
Till Caribdis drown the^ in the deep.
Thus Bochas considringe her figure,
Al her features in order he began behold,
Her breadth her le^gthe, her shape and her stature
An hundred hands and arms there he told,
Whereof astoined his heart began wexe cold:
And among al her members euerychone
Him sempte she had no fete upon to gone.
And while that he considred al this thing
Twene them as it were in a trance,
She suddenly toward him loking
He conceived by her countenance
Were it for ire were it for plesaunce,
Outher for favor outher for disdain
By the manner she would somewhat said.
Loking as coye as she had had disdain
Bochas (quod she) I know all thine intent
How thou trauailest, busiest the in vain
In thy study ever diligent,
Now in the west now in the orient,
To seche stories north and meridien
Of worthy princes yt here toforne have been.
Some dwelled under the pole artike
By my favor up raised to the sterres,
Other under the pole A^tartyke
Which in contrary fro us so far is,
Some encreced and set up by the werres:
Like as me list their triu^phes tauaunce
Frownig on other I brought the^ to mischa^ce.
I se the busy remembering by Scripture
Stories of princes in every manner age,
As my favor follows their adventure,
By humble style set in plain langage,
Not made curious by none advantage
Of rethorikes, with muses for to strive,
But in plain four me their deeds to discriue.
In which process thou do great dyligence.
As they deserve to give the^ thank or blame,
Set up one in royal excellence
Within my house called the house of Fame,
The golden trumpet with blastes of good name
Enhaunceth on to full hie parties,
Where Jupiter sytteth among the heavenly skies.
Another trumpet of sownes full vengeable
Which blows up at feasts funeral,
Nothing bright but of color sable
Far fro my favor, deadly, and mortal,
To plonge princes from their estate royal
When I am wroth to make the^ lowte low,
Than of malice I do that trumpet blow.
Thou have written and set together in gross
Like their deserts worldly men's deeds,
Nothing conceled nor under covert close,
Spared the crowns nor their purple wedes,
Nor golden septers, but yaue the^ their medes:
Crowned one with laurer hye on his head set,
Other with peruinke made for the gybet.
Thus diversely my gifts I depart,
One accept another is refused,
Like hasardours my dyce I do ieoparte,
One well furthered another is accused,
My play is double my trust is ever abused,
Though one to day my favor has won,
To morrow again I can eclipse his son.
Cause of my coming plainly to declare
By good auice, unto thy presence,
Is to show my manners and not spare,
And my conditions breuely in sentence
Preued of old and new experience:
Plainly to show me list not for to rowne,
To day I flater, to morrow I can frown.
This hour I can show me merciable,
And suddenly I can be dispitous,
Now well wylled, now hastily vengeable,
Now sobre of chere, now hasty and furious,
My play uncouth, my manners maruaylous
Brayd on y^ wind, now glad and now murne,
Like a wedercock my face each day I turn.
Wherein Bochas I tell the yet again
Thou do folly thy wits for to ply,
All thy labor thou spyllest in vain
Gain my manners so fully to reply,
By thy writing to find a remedy
To interrupt in thy last days,
My statutes, and my customable ways,
All the labor of Philosophers old
Travail of Poets my manners to deprave,
Has been of yore to say like as they would,
Over my fredom the souerainte to have:
But of my laws the liberte to save
Upon my whele they shall them not defend,
But when me list than they shall discende.
Why should men put me in blame
To follow the nature of my double play?
With new buddes does not Ver the same
When primroses appear fresh and gay?
To day they show to morrow gone away:
Somer after of flours has foyson
Till June with sythes after mow the^ down.
Now is the sea calm and blaundyshyng,
Now are the wyndes comfortable and still,
Now is Boreas sturdy in blowynge
Which young sheep and blosomes greueth ill:
Why also should I not have my will,
To show my self now smothe, and after trouble
Sith to my kind it longs to be double?
No man so far is fall in wretchedness
But that he stands in trust to rise again,
Nor none so deep plonged in distress
Nor with despair nor wa^hope over layne,
But that there is some hope left certain
To give him comfort, serving his intent,
To be releued when me list assent.
The earth is clad in motlayes white and read,
When Estas enters with vyolettes sote,
The greues are grene, and in every mede
The vawm fleteth which does to herts bote:
Angust passed, again in to the rote
By course of nature y^ virtue does resort,
To reuolucion of kind I me report.
Who should than debar me to be double,
Since doubleness longs to me of right*
Now like so^mer now with winter trouble,
Now blind of look derke as y^ cloudy night,
Now glad of there of heart merry and light:
They be but foles again my might to muse
Or me atwite though I my power use.
Selde or never I bide not in one point,
Men must at lowpes take me as they find,
And when I stand furthest out of joint
To set folks backwarde far behind
Than worldly men with their eyes blind
Sore complain upon my doubleness,
Call me than the froward false goddess.
Thus by your wrytig and marvelous la^gage
I am disclaundred of mutabilite,
Whereof by right I catch great advantage
Sith doubleness no sclaunder is to me,
Which is a percel of my liberte:
To be called by title of ryghtwysnesse
Of chaunges new lady and princess.
Thus when fortune had said her will
Parcel declared of her governance,
Made a stint and soberly stood still,
Jhon Bochas sat and herd al her dalyaunce,
Fearful of chere, pale of countenance
In order enprinted each thing yt she said,
Full demure thus he did abrayde.
He took upon him virtue and courage
Upon a point for to abide stable,
Certes (quod he) like to thy vysage
All worldly thiges be double and chaungeable,
Yet for my part by remembrance notable,
I shall perform southly if I conne,
This litel book that I have begone.
And lest my labor dye not nor appall
Of this book the title for to save,
Among mine other little works all
With letters large above upon my grave
This books name shall in stone be grave:
How I John Bochas in especial
Of worldly princes written have the fall.
Of which emprise the cause to discriue
This was first ground, I will not deny,
To eschew sloth and vices all my live,
And specially the vice of glottony,
Which is norice unto lechery:
This was chief cause why I undertook
The compylacion of this little book.
Yet by thy talkyng as I understand
Each thing here of nature is chaungeable,
After thy sentence both on see and land,
Yet could I reken things that be stable
As virtuous life abydyng vnmutable,
Set hole to godwarde of will and thought,
Maugre thy power, and ne chau^geth naught.
Thou may eke call unto remembrance
Things made stable by grace which is deuyne
Have thou not herd y^ perseuerau^ce
Of holy martirs which list not to decline
Fro Christ's faith till they did fine?
Thy whele in them had none interesse
To make them vary fro their stablenesse.
A man that is enarmed in virtue
Again thy might to make resistance,
And set his trust by grace in Christ Jesus
And has al hole his hertely aduertence
Ou right wisnesse, force, and on prudence,
With their suster called Attemperaunce,
Has a sauecondute again thy variaunce.
They set no store by thy double whele,
With supportacion of other ladies three
Their trust stand not in plate, mayle, or stele,
But in these virtues faith hope and charity,
Called virtues theologice:
Watch with the four before here specified
Thy whele and the have utterly defied.
If I with wings might fly to heaven,
There should I se thou have nothing adone
With Jupiter, nor the planetes seven,
With Phoebus, Mars, mercury, nor the moon
But worldly foles erly late and sone
Such as be blent or dyrked with lewdness,
By false opinion call the a goddess.
Gifts of grace, nor gifts of nature,
Alms deed done with humilite,
Love and compassion be far out of thy cure
Semelinesse strength bou^tye or beauty
Virtuously used in their degree,
Gain non of these thy power may not stretch
For who is virtuous little of thee does retch.
Of thy conditions to set another prefe,
Which foles use in their aduersite
For excusacion, as sometime says a thief
When he is hanged it was his destyne,
A^witeth fortune of his iniquite,
As she had power and domination
To rule man by will again reason.
For which quod Jhon Bochas in party desolate
To determine such heavenly hid fecrees,
To tho that be deuines of estate
I remit such uncouth priuitees:
And with Poets that be of low degrees
I esche we to climb to hye a loft
Lest for presumpcion I should not fall soft.
But if I had hyd in my courage
Such mysteries of divine providence,
Without envy I would in plain langage
Vttre them by writing with huble reuer^ce:
Predestynacion nouther prescience
Not appertain fortune unto the
And for my part I will excuse me.
And proceed like as I undertook
After that I told my matere
Of fall of princes for to write a book,
But yet before if thou would here
I desire of hole heart and entere
To have a copy of princes names al,
Which fro thy whele thou have made to fall.
Thy secre bosom is full of stories
Of sundry princes how they their life have lad
Of their triumphs and victories
Which old Poets and Philosophers sad
In meter and prose compiled have an rad,
Song their lauds their fautes eke reserved,
By remembrance as they have deserved,
Of which I have put some in memory,
Thereon set my study and labor
So as I could to their increase of glory,
Though of la^gage I had but small favor,
Cause Caliope did me no socour,
For which thou have duringe all this while
Rebuked me of my rude style.
Men would accou^pt it were a great dullness
But if language conveyed be by prudence,
Out declared by sobre auysenesse,
Under support favored by defense
Of Tullius chief prince of eloquence,
Should more profit shortly to conclude,
Than my style spoke in terms rude.
Yet often time it has be felt and seyne
Under husks growyng on land erable
Has be found and tried out good greine,
Under rude leaves shaking and unstable
Pulled fair fruit wholesome and delytable:
And semblably where rethorike has failed,
In blu^te terms good counsel has auayled.
Philosophers of the golden ages,
And Poets that found out fresh ditees,
As king Amphion with his fair langages
And with his harpig made folk of low degrees
And laborers tenhabyte first cytees:
And so by musyke and Philosophy
Began first of commons noble policy.
The chief of music is melody and accord,
Well of Philosophy sprang out of prudence,
By which two means began unity and acorde
With politic virtue to have their asistence,
Wisemen to reign, subjects do reverence:
And by this ground in stories men may se,
Were bylte the walls of Thebes the city.
Accord in musyke causes the melody
Where is discord there is diversity,
And where is peace is prudent policy,
In each kingdom and every great country
Strife first induced by thy duplicite:
For which you may as clerks thee discryues,
Be called lady of contekes and of strives.
First were found out hateful deuysions
By thy contrived false mutabilitees,
Slaughter, debate, froward dyscencions,
In regions, provinces, and citees:
Desolacions of towns and of countrees,
Where of men had first experience
By thy chaungeable gery violence.
Thus by the opinion of thy whele double
As fair by nature as it was possible,
Ouerthwertly thou broughtest me^ in troble,
Made each to other froward and odible,
By thy trains uncouth and terrible,
Like as a corser makes coltes yt be wild,
With spur and whyp to be tame and mylde.
Thus by the tempest of thine aduersitees,
To make men more tame of their corages,
In their discordes twene kyngdoms and citees
After the sharpenes of thy cruel rages,
Only by speech and mean of fair langages,
Folk by thy fraud fro grace far exyled
Were by fair speech to unity reconsiled.
People of Greece, of Rome, and of Cartage,
Next in Itayle with many a region
Were indused by swetnesse of fair langage
To have together their conversation,
To build castles and many a royal town:
What caused this to tell in brief the form,
But eloquence rude people to enfourine*
Before time they were but beastial
Till they to reason by laws were constrained,
Under discrecion by statutes natural
Fro wilful lusts by prudence were restrained,
By assent made one and togider enchayned
In golden chains of peace and unite
Thus began the buylding of every great cite.
But when thou medlest to have an entresse,
They that were one to bring them at discord
To interrupt with thy doubleness
Citees and regions that were of one accord:
Like as this book can bear me well record
Fro the time that thou first began,
Thy mutabilite has stroyed many a man.
Thou causedst men to be obstynate
In their corages, and incorrigible,
Wilful, and froward, causeles at debate,
Each to other contrarious and odible,
Them to refourme almost impossible,
Till fair speech voidinge division
Peace reconciled twene many a region.
For there is none so furious outrage
Nor no matter so fer out of the way,
But that by mean of gracious langage
And fair speech, may a man convey
To al reason mekely for to obey:
By an example which I reherce shall,
Well to purpose and historial.
The hardy knight the cruel Achylles
When hateful ire assailed his courage,
There was no mean with him to treat of pees,
To still the tempest of his doleful rage,
Save only this which did his ire aswage,
By attemperaunce to obey to reason
When of an harp he heard the sweet soun.
Which instrument by his great swetnesse
Put al rancour out of his remembrance,
Wrested him again to al gladness
From him avoiding al ra^coure and greuaunce:
Semblably fair speech and daliaunce
Set men in rest in realms here and yonder,
By good langage that were far asonder.
With these words Bochas wext debonaire
Toward fortune as he cast his look,
Withdrewe his rancour and to speak fair
Touching his labor yt he upon him took
Beseching her for to forther his book,
That his name which was but little know,
By good report might be further blow.
That his name might ferther sprede
Which stood as yet shrouded in derknesse,
By her favor his name forth to lead
His book to forther do her business,
By good report to give it a bryghtnesse,
with laureate stremes shad forth to people al
By foryetfulnesse that it never appall.
This was the hyl which yt Jhon Bochas
Made unto fortune with full humble style,
When fortune had conteiued al his caas
Soberly stood and began stynt a while,
And glad of chere after she began smyle
On mine auctour, and with a fresh visage
In sentence spoke to him this langage.
Sothly (quod she) I se the business
Of mortal men, how curious yt they be,
How they study by great auysenesse
Of my secrets for to be prive:
To know the conceits hyd within me,
And my counsails, ye men do al your pain
Albe that lightly ye may not thereto attain.
In this matter your wit does never faint
Ymaginyng my likeness in your mind,
Like your conceytes ye forge me and painte
Sometime a woman with wings set behind,
And portrayen me with eyes yt ben blind:
Cause of all this brefely to express,
Is your own covetous blyndnesse.
Your appetites most strange and diverse
And ever full of change and doubleness,
Froward also malicious and peruers,
By hastye clymbing to worship and riches,
Always void of troth and stablenesse:
Most presu^ptuous, search out in all degrees,
Falsely to attain to worldly dignitees.
Bochas Bochas I perceive every thing,
And know full well the great difference
Hyd in thy self of words and thynkyng,
Atwene them both the disconuenience:
Have thou not written many great sentence
In thy book to sclaundre with my name,
Of hole intent my manners to defame*
Thou call me stepmother most unkind,
And sometime a false enchauntresse,
A mermaide with a tail behind,
Of scorn somwhyle me namyng a goddess,
Sometime a witch, sometime a sorceresse,
Fynder of murdre and of disceites al,
Thus of malice mortal men me call.
All this is done in dyspite of me
By accusacion in many sundry wise,
Ye often appeche my mutabilite
Namely wha^ I your requests do dispyse,
For to accomplish your gredy couetise:
When ye fail ye lay on me the wit
Of your aduersitees, me falsely to atwite.
And thou of purpose for teslaundre me
Have written ungoodly a co^trarious fable,
How I wrestled with glad pouerte,
To whose party thou were favorable,
Set me a back, gain me you were vengeable
Now of new requirest my favor
The for to help and forther thy labor.
Ascaunce I am of manners most chaungeable,
Of conditions very femynine,
Now here now there as ye wind unstable,
By thy description and by thy doctrine,
To every change ready to enclyne:
As women ben young and te^dre of age,
Which of nature be diverse of courage.
But for to further in party thine intent
That of thy book the process may proceed,
By my favor to the accomplishment
I am well wylled to help the in thy need,
Like thy desire the better thou shall speed,
When I am toward with a benign face
To speed thy ioruey by support of my grace.
That thy name and also thy surname
With Poets and many an old auctour,
May be regestred in the house of Fame,
By supportacion of my sudden favor,
By assistence also of my socour
Thy work texplete the laurer for to win
At Saturninus I will that thou begin.
The first Chapter.
Here reherseth Fortune her conditions unto Bochas, showing how many one she
enhaunceth for a time, and anon after them suddenly overthrows.

Among Romans this said Saturnyne
Was outrageous of condicio^s,
Caused in Rome wha^ he began malygne
Great debates and great sedicions:
And by his froward conspiracions
He was sharp enemy again the prudent judge
Called Metellus, deuoide of al refuge.
Fro the Capitole set with mighty hand
Found no socour Metellus in the town,
The same time thou shall understand
How by my help and supportacion
One that was small of reputacion
Called Glaucus, in pouert brought low
Made Consulere, the story is well know.
A servant first and almost set at naught,
And afterward I made him fortunate,
Left never till I had him brought
By a prerogatife chose of the Senate,
To be a pretour an office of estate,
Which also wrought by conspiration
To bring Metellus to destruction.
Of whose assent there was also another
Called Marius being the same year
Texplete this treason their sworn brother,
which was also that time a Consulere:
I fortune made them full good chere
Like their desires gave them liberte,
To banyshe Metellus out of their cite.
Of these three Romans the first Saturnine,
And Glaucus was called the second,
And Marius laid out hoke and line
As I have told Metellus to confound,
To their purpose I was also found
Favorable, to bring them to mischefe
As their story shows an open prefe.
They banyshed him out of Rome town,
And Saturninus by his subtell workyng
Clambe up fast of presumpcion
To be called of Rome lord and king,
I gave him favor by a manner false smiling
Till at the last plainly to declare
Of his destruction I brought him in y^ snare.
The Senators knowing the malice
Of Saturn which made a great gadryng
Of sundry folk, castyng in his auyce
By their favor he might be called king,
All this while of his vpclymbyng
I showed him during a long space,
Him to disceyue a full benign face.
Till Marius a mighty Consulere
To withstand his presumption
Rose with strong hand, and with a knyghtly chere
Beset his palace about enuyron,
Brake his gates amyd of the town:
And Saturninus void of all favor
To the Capitoyle fled for succor.
He was forbarred by Marius of vitayle,
The Capitoyle besieged round about,
At the entryng was a strong battle
On outher party slain a great route:
Thus of my favor he began stand in doubt,
Thus Saturninus brought in great distress
His good acheted lost all his richesse.
Experience full openly men leareth
Such as highest thereupon ascend
Like as the turn of my whele requires
When they lest wene, down they shall disce^de:
They have no power them self to defend
Again my might, when they be overthrow
What do I than but laughe and make amow.
Drusus also borne of great lynage
And descended of full hye noblesse
Unto virtue contrary of his courage,
Froward found to all gentleness,
Yet chose he was the story does express
Questour of Asye an office of hye degree,
For his birth to govern that country.
But often time virtue nor gentleness
Come not to heirs by succession,
Example in Drusus the story bears witness,
Which both of courage and disposicion
Was ever froward of condition:
For which let men deem as they must needs,
Not after birth but after the deeds.
Virtues all in him were set aside,
Slow to be armed, hated chiualry,
Most covetous, deynous, full of pride,
His deeds froward, full of treachery,
To hie estate I did him magnify:
Yet al my gifts in him ne might stretche,
For here tofore thee he comes like a wretch.
He dare for shame not show his visage
So far disclaundred is his wretchedness,
His couetyse, and vicious outrage,
Falsely caused by his doubleness:
Maguldusa a prince of great noblesse,
Betrayshed was for mede to the king
Called Boccus by Drusus false workyng.
What manner turme^t or what grievous pain
Were co^petent couenable or condign
To him that can outward flatter and feign,
And in his heart covertly mal^^^e*
As Drusus did which showed many sign
To Maguldusa of love and frendlyhede,
Underneath false treason hid in deed.
But Maguldusa like a manly knight
Gain king Boccus has hiselfe soccoured,
When he by dome was judged again right
Of an olyphaunt for to be devoured:
Escaped freely, and after that labored
To acquit him self through his hie renoun
Slew false Drusus myd of Rome town.
Bochas also men put the lack in me
That I was cause of the destruction
By my contrarious mutabilyte
Of the notable famous Scipion,
Which in the time of Sensoryn Caton
Gate the triumph for many great victory,
To put his name perpetually in memory.
For his merits chose a Consulere
And chief bishop to govern their cite,
To all the Senate patron most entere,
Most famous of name and dignite,
Saved Romans from all aduersite:
Time when the werre dredefull and dispytous
Began atwene Pompey and Caesar Julius.
Thus when the said famous Scipion
Was through my favor aco^pted most notable
He fro my whele suddenly was throw down
Which never in word nor deed was culpable:
But the Romans malicious and unstable,
By their hangman first chayned in prison,
After racked, there gained no raunson.
Thus he that had auayled them so often,
To save him self found succor on no side:
His dead body they henge it hye alofte
For a spectacle long there to abide,
Thus geryshly my gifts I denyde
Stou^dmeale now friend now adversary,
Reward good with guerdons full contrary.
This was expert full well in Scipion,
Began with loye and ended in wretchedness:
Bochas remember make hereof mention
And of Fanaticus how I of gentleness
Made him ascend to notable hye prowess,
Yet books say touching his kynrede
Manly of person, a chorle borne in deed.
For my disporte with a glad vysage
I set him up (...) hye upon my whele,
Gave him lordshyp out of low seruage,
To do him favor it ly kedine full well:
Wherefore Bochas his story every dele
Note it well, and in especial
How he by sleyght came to estate royal.
By sleyghty fainyng to diverse folk he told
How that he spoke with Scirra the goddess,
At every hour plainly when he would,
Of presumption discriued her likeness:
Said also how she of her goodness
Had granted him (his stare to magnyfy)
During his life a spirit of prophesy.
And furthermore the people for to blind
He fantasied by a craft uncouth
Within a shale the story makes mind
Of a nut to have fire in his mouth,
Blew it sparkling north and southe:
Affyrmed (wherewith folk were blent)
It was a spirit to him from heaven sent.
By which he wrought many great virtue,
Gadred people till he had in deed
Two thousand churles at his retinue,
Which afterward his purpose for to speed
To syxty thousand encreaced as I read:
I suffered all, served him at the tide
Till all the court grutched at his pride:
Though of birth he was but a vileyne
Rose up of naught by sodeyne adventure,
My gery favor made him to be seyne
Royal of port, did his busy cure
To raise his baner ware a cote armure:
And by gracious supportation,
Brought great people to his subjection.
At the last my lust began appall
Toward him not being favorable,
Down fro my whele anon I made him fall:
For by Romans was sent a great constable
Called Porpenna a prince full notable,
Which fill on him, venquisshed him anon,
Slew and outrayed his churles euerychone.
Him self was hanged upon an hye gybet,
Some of his meyny was cast in prison,
Thus to his pride I gave a great tripet,
And fro my whele I cast him low down
In his most highest domynacion:
Took no head, where he did laugh or mourn
For with no man, I do always soiourne.
Bochas quod fortune, take good head also
How I can both further and disauayle,
For ensample se how Athenyo,
That whylom was a shepherde in Itayle
A brigaunt after merchants to assail
Lay in wait beside a great mountain,
Of fugitives he was made a captain.
Slew first his lord a rich Senator,
By violence brake many a strong prison,
And for a time I gave him great favor
To gather robbours about him enuyron:
All the churles of that region
He assembled through his iniquite,
To hold a werre with Rome the cite.
Besieged castles brake down mighty tours,
Slew and robbed about in each country,
Spoiled palayses of worthy Senators,
Title had he none save title of volunte:
Took upon him of pride and cruelte
For to be clad in purple like a king,
Bare a scepter among his men ridyng.
Upon his head ordained for the nones
His golden hear tressed like an emperor,
A ^oyfe enbrouded all of rich stones,
Me list to laughe that a false robbour
By supportacion of my gery favor
Which last not long, for after in short while
As is my custom I did him begyle.
I suffered him and made him feigned chere
As I have done to other mo full often,
Till down fro Rome was sent a Consulere
Which took him proudly, and henge him alofte,
His churles slain, and some of them not soft
In cheynes bound, for short conclusion
Were dempt by law to die in prison.
By which story Bochas thou may lere
A great party of my condition,
But now in have a story thou shall here
How in the year fro the foundation
More than sixty.C. I mean of Rome town,
Was a gatheryng a great company
Together sworn, by false conspyracy.
Them to withdraw fro the obeisance
Of a Tribune called Clodoue,
Which for knighthode had governance
And was sent down from Rome cite
With mighty hand to rule a great country
Called Champayne, and plainly for to say
The people there list him not obey.
Three score and four were of them in number
That named were chief conspyratours,
Which y^ cast the^ their captain to enco^bre
with multitude of thieves and robbours:
Which chase among the^ to be their supportours
Three mighty captains, of which there was one
Called Spartharcus chefest of echone.
Gadred churles made them self strong,
On an hye hill took their dwelling place,
Having no regard were it right or wrong
To spoil the country, beasts to enchace:
I cherished them with a benign face
For a season, and gave them liberte
By false rauyne to rob the country.
What thing is more cruel in comparison,
And more vengeable of will and not of right
Than when a churl has domination*
Lack of discretion blyndeth so the sight
Of comuners for defaute of light,
When they have power countries to govern,
Fare like a beast that can nothing discern.
Gladiators folks did them call,
For their swords were with stele made fine
For to fight gain wild beasts all,
As lions, bears, bores, and wild swyne:
And the mountain where they did line
Called Venuse, and through their cruelte
Slew and robbed about in each country.
Spartharchus was their chief captain
Brought up of naught and borne of low degree,
But Claudius a mighty strong Romayne
Was sent with power fro Rome the cite
For to defend and save the country:
The hill besieged before them as he lay
He was rebuked, beat, and driven away.
Many of them that kept the mountain
Were hurt that day, the story tells thus,
Among which was slain a great captain
That was fellow unto Spartharchus,
As I find he hight Inomaus:
For whose death was take so great ve^geau^ce,
That all the country felt thereof greuaunce.
They of the mountain all of one assent
Without mercy or remission,
Most vengeable have robbed and brent
All the country about them enuyron,
Till two Consulers came fro Rome down:
The first of them called Lentulus,
Both put to flight by y^ said Spartharchus.
Whereof the romans greatly dismayed,
The Senators of indignacion
Both ashamed and in them self affrayed
Sent one Crassus a great lord of the town,
With the nombre of a legion:
And when yt he on Spartharcus first set
Slew of his men, six.M. when they met.
And afterward beside a great river
Called Salayre they had a great battle,
Where Spartharcus stood in great danger
For his chere and countenance began fail:
Thurty thousand clad in plate and mayle
Were slain yt day, there gained no raunson
All their capitayns assigned to prison.
Without all this as made is mention
Sixty thousand in the field lay deed,
And six thousand were sent to prison:
The field with blood stained and made read,
And fourscore.M. quakyng in their dread
Were thylke day after the romayne gyse
Take to mercy, received to fraunchyse.
And Spartharcus at mischefe put to flight,
When I from him turned my visage
He lost chere, he lost also his might
When I appalled the fine of his passage:
And for he was a churl of his lynage,
Of his encrees I lyked nothing well,
Therefore unwarily I cast him fro my whele.
Of my manners to make a greatter prefe
There was another famous great robbour
Which through Spain, was a disclaundred thief
And for he dred of justice the rigor,
Trusting he should find in me socour
Called Vrinatus he Spain anon forsook,
And to Rome the right way he took.
Gadred meyny of his condyrion
Of every sect to make him self strong,
Thieves and robbours of every region,
Many a churl was medied them among:
His name tencreace were it right or wrong
What ever he gate in cite or village,
With his soudyours he parted the pyllage.
Thus by my help he came to great richesse,
Which brought in pride and presumpcion,
He not provided of my doubleness
Began to malign again Rome town:
But by the prudence of last Scipion
Son of Lepidus, making thereof no boste,
He slain was by them he trusted most.
By which ensample notable of remembrance
Showed heretofore John Bochas unto the,
Thou may know in party my puysaunce,
My sudden chaunges, my mutabylite:
And for to avoid all ambuguite
To declare the sum of mine intent,
Great Marius to thee I do present.
Black his wede and his habyte also
His heed unkempt, his locks hoar and gray,
His look down cast in token of sorrow and woe
On his chekes the salt tears lay,
Which bare record of his deadly affray:
Wherefore Bochas do thy pen dress
To discryue his mortal heaviness.
His robe stained was with romayne blood,
His sword aye ready whet to do vengeance
Like a tyrant most furyous and wode,
In slaughter and murdre set all his plesaunce:
Yet not forthy I gave him governance,
Over the people, rose on my whele up fast
But as unawarely down I did him cast.
Twene him and Scilla y^ woeful deadly stryues
At large herafter Bochas thou shall write,
How many romans lost by the^ their lives
I will also in order that thou endyte,
And if I shall rebuke them and atwyte
As I fro naught made them in honor shine,
So I again ward made the^ in mischef fine.
Forget not also, the deadly pytous fate
Of him that was so notable in his life,
I mean the great famous Mithridate
Whose name is yet full couthe and ryfe,
To whom I gave a great prerogatyfe,
Forty winter, the deed was well seen,
Again Romans the werre to sustene.
For which herafter I give it the in charge
Of Mithridate, the story set alonge
When thou haste leyser and a space large,
Remember his conquest and his deeds strong:
And how that I meddled me among
For all his noblesse and his felicite,
To give him part of great aduersite.
Next in order after her own choys
Fortune untrusty upon each party,
To John Bochas both conuayed fro Parthoys
Strong Herodes, reignyng in Parthy,
Lo John (quod she) take heed of this story:
All his kindred if it be well out sought
Were by Scithie^s chased and brought to naught
And yet for all my mutabylite
Some of them while they stood dispayred
I restored unto their dignite:
Unto which when they were repaired,
This Herodes was hindered and apayred
By chaunges, for his hateful pride,
When he lest wend un warely set aside.
Suyng after within a little while
This geryshe lady of condition,
Began an ill laughing falsely for to smyle
Lokyng on Bochas brought with her down
A mighty prince which in Rome town
Had in his days notable price and fame,
All be that she expressed not his name.
Bochas than his head began down declyne
Seeing that prince of face disfigured,
Of suspection began to ymagyne:
When he his mind fully has recured
By certain tokens and signs well assured,
It was Pompey surquedous of estate
Which with Caesar so long was at debate.
Disconsolate through his unhappy caas,
His face soyled with water of the sea,
Time when Fotynus and cruel Achyllas
Drowned his body of furyous enmyte,
His face disfigured at the solempnyte
With smokes blake deadly and mortal,
Called of clerks the feast funeral.
Codrus caused the corpse was brent
And consumed into ashes deed,
To Caesar after his head was borne and sent
Upon a pole, his story who list read:
After all this Bochas took good head
How fortune by a manner mockery
In scorn of him, began thus to specify.
Up to the heaven after his deuyse
I began enhaunce and increase his glory,
By my favor I gave him many a pryse
Conquest of kings with many great victory,
And more to put his noblesse in memory,
By my support through his chiualry
With Caesar Julius to hold champarty.
And while that I my favor did apply
Toward him his victories to assure,
His fame arose till that in Thessalye
I began withdraw his party to succoure,
Sufferyng his enemies make discomfiture
Upon this Pompey, hyndred in my sight
When to Lesbos at mischefe took his flight.
By the servants of young Tholome
Reygning in Egypt, Pompey in his dread
Was take and slain, he found no help in me,
I gave him up and so he lost his head:
Yet of my chaunges no man takes head,
Nor how vnsurely I cast my dredefull look,
Save thou art busy to set them in thy book.
Bochas astonished parcel of her presence,
Both of chere, face, and countenance,
And this while having his aduertence
Thought he saw a manner resemblaunce
Of a person which stood in great greuaunce:
Till at last fortune cast her sight
Toward Bochas, and told what he hight.
This is (quod she) plainly to termine
The famous man prince of eloquence
That gave to Latynes y^ scole and the doctrine
Of Rethorike, as well of that science:
For which I will thou do thy diligence
To write with other of this Tullius,
All the case, and gyn at Marius.
These words said fortune made an end,
She beat her ^ynges and took her to flight,
I can not se what way she did wend
Save Bochas tells like an angel bright
At her departing she showed a great light:
But as soon as she began disapere,
He took his pen and wrote as ye shall here.
The.ii. Chapter.
How Gayus Marius of low birth borne, came to hie estate, which blent with
couetise, after many great batayls dyed at myschefe.

HEre Bochas gynneth to tell of the man
Called in his time Gayus Marius,
Borne at Aprina a castle of Tuscan,
Son of a carpenter the storye tells thus
Pursued arms manly and virtuous:
Through all Rome nor in that country,
Was there no man hold so strong as he.
Discyplyne and great subtylite
He had also as books specify,
Prudence, manhood, and habylite
Both in arms and in chyualry,
Most famous hold toward the party
wtin a while, mine auctour says certain,
Chose a Tribune, and a great captain.
But fro the gynnyng of his tender age
As histories put in remembrance,
He was pricked so sore in his courage
By a gredy fret, of long contynuaunce,
Never to staunche with none habundaunce:
The world, nor fortune with all their richesse,
Suffyled not to appease his gredynesse.
Entering a temple he found a diuynour,
Counsayled him there by his diuynayle
To enter Rome, and hold there soiour,
By good auice, and knightly apparayle:
Made him promise that he should not fail
To attain by favor of the commonte,
To great office and state in the cite.
Favor of commons brought hi to hie estate,
By them received unto dignyte
Of Consulere, albe that the Senate
Had disdain of his felicite,
Because he was borne of low degree:
Granted to him after by the town
To conquer realms by a commissyon.
He gate the province, through his hie renoun
Of Numedy, as he did them assail,
And took the king of that region
Called Jugurtha, proudly in battle:
For which emprise by marcial apparayle
He gate ye triumph, through y^ town ryding,
Because only for taking of that king.
And for he was a person so notable
For many a famous sudden victory,
Namely in conquest preued profitable
To all the commons, as put is in memory,
And for thencreace of his renome and glory
By the opinyon hole of the cite
In his hand lay all their prosperity.
Again a people y^ called was Cymbroys
The^ to conquer from Rome he was sent down
Also against the boystous Tigurnoys
Gadred together of many nation,
All them he brought to subjection,
Like as Romans had before desired,
Because they had again their town co^spired.
They took upon them of false presumption
To pass all the mountains of Itayle,
First discomfited as made is mention
Three Romayne dukes felly in battle,
Fourscore thousand clad in plate and mayle
Slain of Romans y^ story is well know,
Under the Alps at mischefe overthrow.
This Marius of marciall adventure
In Germany had a great battle,
With Tewtobochus a gyaunt of stature,
Put first to flight with all his apparayle:
For Marius did him so sore assail
At the chase proudly borne to ground,
Maugre his might take and in chains bound.
Marius after with his host him drew
Toward ye people of Cimbroys for to fight,
Two hundred people I find of the^ he slew,
Eight thousand take, three.M. put to flight:
King Bolerus a full famous knight.
Slain in the field for all his great pride,
Again Marius like as he did ride.
That day of Cibroyes was al ye people slain,
The women after he list not to reserve,
Yet they proffered and would have been full feign
Their chastity devoutly to observe,
In the temple of Vesta for to serve:
But their request for he list not here,
With him they fought echone slain yfere.
Except some when they saw none other
Remedy, of purpose they were set
Eueriche of them to slay and murder other:
And some thought also it was bet
To hang them self upon an hye gybet,
Than to abide of Marius the outrage
Perpetually to live in seruage.
Thus Marius of three nations
Through his conquest acco^plyshed y^ victory,
With prisoners of sundry regions
Entered Rome to his encreace of glory,
With special lauds notable of memory:
First the triumph, a guerdon singulere,
He times six was chosen a Consulere.
Thus fortune was to him favorable
To set him up in worldly dignities
For a season, but for she was chaungeable
Among her gifts, and great prosperitees,
She gave him part of great aduersytees:
And specially the time accounted, than
Twene him and Scilla when the werre began.
Lucius Scilla abiding in Champayne
Marius at Rome tho present,
When the deuysion began atwene the^ twain
Each to other contrary of intent,
Melancolous and impacient,
Which of both (the story well conceived)
To govern, should sonest be received.
All suddenly were it right or wrong
Toward Rome taking his passage,
Again Marius to make him self strong
Began slay and burn, and of great outrage
Wylfull, and hasty, furyous of courage
For sudden coming and unware violence,
Again him found no resystence.
Two mighty batayls he did with him led,
Entryng the cite began through y^ wall mine,
With one bataile fast began him speed
To pass the gate called Aquylyne,
That other gate named was Colyne:
At whose entering by record of the book,
Scilla by strength the capitoyle took:
But when Marius had knowlegyng
That Scilla had so great power and might,
Without arest or longer abydyng
In to a maryshe, Gayus anonright
With all his people took suddenly his flight:
Fet out by strength, could him not defend,
Scilla after to prison did him send.
Thus the prowess for a while slept
Of Marius lying in prison,
Scilla that time the capitoyle kept
Whereby all Rome stood in subjection:
And of hatred in haste he sent down
A sturdy chorle to Marius in his dread
While he lay bound to smite of his head.
This chorle well compacte of braune and bones
Set of purpose Marius for to oppress,
For his strength ordained for the nones:
To the prison the chorle began him fast dress
Where Marius was fettred in distress,
Fully in purpose without more delay
To behead him in prison there he lay.
Losing him first lying on his couche
And Marius rose up like a man,
The chorle fearful to ^inite him or to touch,
And Marius full proudly tho began
To enter a place beside of a woman,
Found an ass there of adventure
Upon whose back the sea he began recure.
Toward Affrike there he fond passage,
By enprisoning though he were wext faint
Yet there abode still in his courage
Hye worthynesse, with prudence meynt:
Which in his person were not queynt
Again the malice to make a countertayle
Of proud Scilla, the malice efte tassayle.
Of Itayle rode through the country,
Took his voyage through Rome tou, n
With four batayls entered the cite,
Six hundred knights by computacion
Slain in the field as made is mention:
Where men may se, who list look aferre
What damage diuysion does in werre.
First by the manhood of this Marius
In this diuysion the story who list read,
The great Consul called Octauius
Lost his head and his life in deed,
Upon a pole while it did blede:
Was cruelly presented of intent
Before the judges, sytting in judgment.
Of whose death some of them were feign,
Some sorry of love as they were bound,
And in this werre Merula was slain
Priest in the temple, like as it is found,
Of Jupiter, with many mortal wound:
The romayne slain y^ called was Crassus,
With fire consumed was proud Catullus.
All his enemies Marius dydencombre
Which again him by conspyracion
Were assented with a full great nombre
In their auise for to have put him down,
Take from him his dominacion:
But he abode the turment and the shoures,
Strong to co^dempne al his co^spyratours
Six times aforne rehearsed here
Of condition though he were dispytous,
He was chosen so often consulere
Till fortune began wexe enuyous,
Again this said cruel Marius
Which made the Senate with all the chyualry
To grutche again his hateful tyranny.
In this time the story makes mind
Damasippus a Praetor of the town
Friendly to Marius and helpyng as I find,
Under a shadow of deception
Unto their cite for to do treason,
Causyng four Romans come in fere
Tofore Marius a certain day tapere.
And their names to put in memory
Sceuola, Carto, and Domicius,
The fourth of them as says the story
Called in Rome the wise Antistius,
Together assembled tofore Marius:
He of rancour again judgment or law,
Made the^ be slain, and through the cite draw.
Their bodies after were in Tybre cast
By cruelte of the said Marius,
All this while the cruel werre last
Twene him and Scilla, till duke Co^paneus
Came to the party hardy and dispitous
To help Scilla their baners first displayed,
Whereof all Rome was suddenly affrayed.
At the gate that called was Collatyne
Marius and Scilla had a great battle,
Four score thousand the number to termyne
On Marius side slain, it is no fail:
Scilla victorious with marcial apparayle
Entering the town again his oath parde,
Three thousand citezius slew of that cite.
Of folk disarmed and naked in the town
They nouther spared old nor young of age,
The cruel murdrers walking up and down
By Scilla sent in that mortal rage:
Till Catullus a prince fall in age
Said unto Scilla we can no difference
Twene rebellion nor atwene innocence.
We murder and slay without exception
Both hie and low holdyng no manner,
Again all knighthode to mine opinion
We do proceed in our conquest here,
Our title is lost the triumph to requere
Of hie prowess, when we can not observe
No difference to slay nor to reserve.
And in this while of hateful cruelte
Scilla contrived letters diffamable,
Whereby five hundred out of that cite
Were falsely banished citezins notable,
Agayns them he was so untreatable
All their goods atche^ed in that rage,
Of auaryce and of false pyllage.
Another romayne named Marius
Brother to Marius of who^ tofore I told,
For dread of Scilla fled and took an house
Which unto Gotes was set up for a fold,
Found and rent out in his days old,
With cords draw no rescue might him save,
Of cruel vengeance to Catullus grave.
Where Scilla made by cruel judgment
With a sharp sword forged forto byte,
After time his eyes were out rent
Both at ones his hands of to smite:
His head of smit, no ran^som might hi quyte,
Set on a pole it would be none other,
And of dispight sent unto his brother
To Marius of whom I spoke now right,
The great duke so mighty and so huge:
Which had before take him to the flight
For fear of Scilla in that mortal deluge,
Into a city to find there refuge,
Called Preneste there standing in great dread,
Namely when he beheld his brothers head.
Forasmuch as he no succor fond
Dispayred this was his purpose,
To slay him self with his own hand
In thilke place where he was kept close,
Drew out his sword and up anon he rose
Constrained his servant in that sudden affray,
Smit of his head the self same day.
Men say how death is fine of all mischefe,
End of aduersite that does wretches tarry,
Fortune here makes another prefe
In Marius how she her course began vary,
By an evidence hateful and contrary,
To show her malice and vngoodlyheed
Again this duke, alas, when he was deed.
This froward lady of malice most ve^geable
When her list furiously to rave,
And show her self cruel and unstable,
To none estate she list no regard have:
Caused Marius to be take out of his grave
By cruel Scilla, in story it is found,
His ugly carayne smyt on pieces round.
And after more to show his cruelte
Marius should have no burying place,
Cast his carayne of cankred enmyte
Into Tybre there was none other grace:
Lo thus can fortune for her folk purchase,
By which example touching Marius,
Of worldly chaunges Bochas writes thus.
Makes in this chapter a description
First what thing is very gentleness,
To set a prefe and a probacion
Nothing attayneth unto hie nobleness
But the clear shinyng of virtuous clennesse:
Which may not show i hie nor low parage,
But where it grows out of a pure courage.
Worldly power, oppression, tyranny,
Erthly treasure, gold, stones nor richesse.
Be no means unto gentry
But if virtue rule their hye prowess:
For where vices have entresse
In hie birth, mean, or low kynrede,
Deem no man gentle but only by his deed.
In royal places of stone and metal wrought
With galaryes or stately cloisters round,
Gentilnesse nor noblesse is not sought,
Nor in selers nor in vautes round,
But only there where virtue does habounde:
Curyous clothes nor great possessions
Makes not a man gengle, but condycions.
Philosophers conclude in their intent
And all these worthy famous old auctours
No man may que the in his testament
Gentilnesse unto his successors,
Of wicked wede come no wholesome flours:
Concluding thus of good men and of shrewes,
Call each man gentle after his good thewes.
Duke Marius of whom I spoke toforne
Of nature (the story bears witness)
As by descent poor and nedy borne,
By disposycyon of coragyous noblesse
Had in his person wit, strength, and hardynesse:
Under all this there did his heart mine
A worm of auaryce his worship to decline.
What vayleth plenty, y^ never may suffyse:
Or what the flode that stauncheth no thurst:
Or what an appetyte which ever does arise
Always to eat, and ever to eat has lust:
Of cankred hungre so fretyng is the rust
That the river of Tantalus in his rage
Of gredy etykes the fret may not assuage.
Of Marius ye have herd the end
His woeful fall and his unhappy caas,
In to fate, how he did wend:
Now will I follow mine auctor Bochas,
How unto him three Cleopatras
With look down cast, woeful face and chere,
All atones did to him appear.
The first of them by process of writing
Had three husbands, Bochas does express,
Wedded in youth to Alisaundre the king,
Called zebenna a prince of great noblesse:
After that for her great fayrenesse,
She wedded was unto Demetrius,
And last of all to king Antyochus.
Of her three husbands woeful adventure,
And of her sons great unkindness
Bochas before has done his busy cure
Curyously the manner to express,
Which to reherce again were ydelnesse,
Sith all the process here tofore is found,
Of the first, and eke of the secounde
Which wedded was to king Tholome
Like as before eke made is mention,
Both of their joy and their aduersyte,
The first slain by drinkyng of poison,
And the second to her confusion
By Euergetes were she woe or feign,
Was with her child served y^ was slain.
The third wedded was to king Crispus
Slain in a temple by full great outrage,
For dread and shame began wexe furious
To save her self knew none advantage,
Save she enbraced of Jupiter an image:
In the story as here tofore is found,
Or she was dead suffered many a wound
The.iii. Chapter.
How king Mithridate bode.vii. year in wyldernes, had great turmentes both on
sea and land, by his blood brought to vttraunce, slew himself with a sword.

I Will pass over these Cleopatras three,
Forth proceed to the hasty fate
Sone execute by Parcas cruelte
Upon the duke called Mithridate,
First reherce the great vnkyndlye hate
Of them that were his tutours as I read,
Him to destroy by assent of his kynrede.
Which of purpose did his death provide
By many uncouth strange occasion,
In his tender youth first they made him ride
Upon an horse wylder than a lion,
Of purpose only for his destruction:
But al be so that he was young of age,
The horse he ruled in all his most rage.
Not of doctrine but even of nature
He was disposed connyngly to ride,
Over him the maystry to recure
Maugre the horse of wit he was his gyde:
What way he took forward or aside
He daunted him, y^ where so ever he rode
Bridled him and on his back he bode.
His own kyn and his next alyes
Most labored to bring him to mischefe
With venomous drink, set on him espyes
At good leyser as does a couerte thief,
Of their fell poison for to make a prefe,
In their intent this is well couthe,
Him to murder in his tender youth.
But when yt he apperceyued their treason,
To save him self made great ordinance,
Anon as he began have suspection
Of their unkindly hateful purueyaunce,
For remedies made cheuisaunce:
Was provided their malice to decline
By many notable proved medicine.
And their malice prudently to eschew
Is remembered while he was young of age,
With certain friends which y^ did him sue
He disposed of custom his courage
To hunt and chase beasts most savage:
Under that color he did it for a wyle,
Far fro his country tabsent him for a while
Of one courage, one heart and one chere
Suffered manly, took none heaviness,
In deserts space of seven year
Among hye hills bode in wilderness,
Set in Asia, the story bears witness:
Found no lodgyng trasyng the countrees,
Save in cauernes, and great holowe trees.
The book remembers how that his diet
Were beasts wild enchased with great might
Fled ydienesse eschewed all quiet,
And little sleep su^^ised him at night:
By exercise his body was made ^yght
There was nouther, when him list pursue,
Heart nor hynde y^ might his hand eschew.
He nouther drad tigers nor lions,
He was so swifte, tho they did him assail:
Like of strength to old champions
No wild beast of great nor small entayle
Tescape his hand might not countreuayle:
If he were ware, early outher late,
So great swiftness had this Mithridate.
Among he had in arms exercise,
Among to tournay and ren on horseback,
All dilicate fare he did also dispyse
Of gredy excess in him there was no lack:
A nighter time his sleep full often he brake
Stoundmeale the hours for to mark,
In the daunyng rose up or the lark.
The space accomplished fully of seven year
He is repaired home to his country,
Showed him self of manhood and of chere
Full like a knight, his story who list se:
Whereof his enemies astonished be,
Caught of his coming in heart a manner dread
Supposyng before that he was deed.
In whose absence his wife Leodyces
Conceived a child (as made is mention)
For the diffame should not come in prees
Him for to murder she sought occasion,
Fully in purpose to slay him by poison:
Of which defautes her lord was not feign,
Knowing the troth made her to be slain.
Took on him after many knightly deed
First to conquer all Paflago^ye
By the help of worthy Nychomede
That time called king of Bithinye,
Together assured to be of one alye:
In loss or lucre fortune to be their gyde
And thereto sworn never to deuyde.
To Mithridate Legates were down sent
Fro the Romans, him lowly requiryng
That he would like to their intent,
Paflago^ye restore to their king,
Which he had won the cite assaylyng:
But he list not advertise their prayere,
Nor on no parties their requests here.
He dred not their thretes nor manaces,
Gate proudly after the land of Galathye
In his conquest wan many other places,
Capadoce took to his party,
Slew their king of hatred and envy,
Ariarectes a full manly man,
And in this wise his conquest he began.
Again thassurau^ce twene him and Nichomede
All suddenly he began fall at debate,
Thought he would warrey him in deed
Because that he pompous and elate,
In Capadoce took on him thestate
To reygne as king agayns his intent,
He nouther being of counsel nor assent.
Yet Nychomede or they began debate
Had long before to his own encrees
The suster wedded of ye Mithridate,
When they as brethren lived in rest and pees:
And she also was called Leodices,
Having two sonues borne for to succeed
After discease of the said Nychomede.
And by process these said children twain
In Capadoce by help of Mithridate,
Claymed a title justly for to attain
Unto the crown, their father died but late:
For which they began felly to debate,
Till Mithridate falsely began contriue
His two neuewes ungoodly to deprive.
All Capadoce he took into his hand,
His own son he has crowned king,
Capadociens by assent of all the land
Began disobey of purpose his workyng:
When the Romans considred all this thing
Artaberzanes in have they sent down
Gain Mithridate to keep that region.
The son of who^ fro the^ they have refused,
Out of their kingdom began him to enchace,
For they se^pte their fraunchyse was abused
To see a foraine occupy that place:
Mithridate began newly them manace,
And took with him to sustain his party
Tygranes the king of Armenye.
Artabarzanes that was fro Rome sent
To Capadoce, to help them and counsel,
Of Mithridate knowing the entente
How he came down proudly him tassayle,
With Tygranes, set in the first battle:
Of Capadoce that all the region
Was brought that day to their subjection.
Thus Mithridate having his intent
In short time countries conqueryng,
Was mightiest prince of all the orient,
And in tho days one the greatest king:
And as it is remembered by writing
He delyted most in astronomye,
In sortilege, and in sorcerye.
And with all these he did his busy cure
For to learn uncouth conclusyons,
And secrets sought out by nature,
Knew the langages of diverse regions,
Of two and twenty sundry nacious:
And held women many more than one,
Loved Hipsycrata above them euerychone.
To the Romans this manly Mithridate
As books old record of him and said,
Upon a day of very cruel hate
Through all Asya he bad that each Romayne
Should of his men merciless be slain:
Twenty thousand he slew eke on a day
Of Romain marcha^tes, durst no man say nay.
To him he drew diverse nations
To encreace his party by puissaunce,
Kymbrois, Gallois, with other regions,
Bostornois took to his aliaunce,
With strange people made his acquaintau^ce:
Where that ever he rode nigh or far
With them of Rome for to hold werre.
In Greece also he gate many an isle,
All Cyclades to his subjection,
Conquered so that within a while
Of Athenes he gate the famous town:
But when Romans knew his entencion
They sent Scilla in a furious hete
With Mithridate in Greece for to mete.
Archelaus which that was constable
Leading the host of king Mithridate,
Began again Scilla trusting he was able,
Maugre the Romans with him to debate:
As they met in their furious hate,
Beside Orthonia of Greece a great town,
Of Archelaus y^ party was brought down.
There began Scilla to be victorious
Gain Mithridate, and by great violence
Gate al Ephesie a kingdom full famous,
Rode through Asye, found no resistance:
By his knighthode and manly providence
Capadoce, and Bithinye eke also
To Romain hands he gate them both two.
When Mithridate perceived has this thing
How the conquest of Scilla took encrees,
Anon he cast without long tariynge
For a time with him to have a pees,
Of hie wisdom he was not retcheles
To dissimule till he found time and space
In double fortune to find better grace.
Abode his time, kept him self close,
Till he found layser like his opinion,
In this while of adventure arose
Within Rome a great discencion,
Twene two Consules being in that town:
Which to appease by his auctorite,
Scilla came up again to the cite.
When Mithridate his absence did espy,
To his purpose found oportunite,
Gadred people and with his chiualry
A siege laid unto Cyzite the cite
Of all Asye most of auctorite:
Till Lucullus a mighty Consulere
To break the siege approach began full nere.
Mithridate had on five captayns
Tofore the town made a discomfiture,
Of hie dispyte he had to Romans:
But Lucullus the damages to recure,
To enclose his enemies did his busy cure,
To his mynours gave anon in charge
About the siege to make a diche full large.
They within had knowledgyng
By certain tokens of all their governance,
Whereupon they made no tariyng
To cast a way for their delyueraunce:
Mithridate seeing their ordinance
Of hie prudence to escape away beside,
And at the siege list no longer abide.
Lucullus then the mighty Consuler
Pursued after, slew of his meyne
Such a multitude that Asopus the river
Was made with blood like the reed se,
with wind and tempest fordriuen also was he:
And when he saw no succor in the land,
To ship he went with strong and mighty hand.
He found fortune cruel adversary
On land and se this worthy Mithridate,
And Neptunus made the sea contrary
Agayns him his puyssaunce to abate:
What shall men call it, influence or fate:
So suddenly a prince of hye renown
Fro hye noblesse to be plounged down.
For any mischefe he kept aye one visage
This Mithridate, and loathe was for to plye,
Or for to bow, so strong was his courage:
But efte again goth with his chiualry
Toward Adrastus an hill of Armeny,
Where as Pompey beset him enuyron,
Sent fro Rome to his destruction.
Mithridate making his lodgyng place
Under that hill, when it drew to night
The troubly heaven with thu^dring began manace,
The fiery leuyn dyrked has his sight,
The cloudy move eclipsed of her light
Astonished him by unware violence,
That he stood confuse of all prouydence.
He was by tempest and unware derkenesse
Almost made weary of his woeful life,
Yet I find of very kyndnesse
Hipsicrata which that was his wife,
Nouther for werre nor no mortal strife
Left him never, disguysed of vysage
Followed him arrayed as a page.
Yet in his most mortal heaviness
When cloudy fortune began him most manace,
Of his courage the natural quickenesse
Appaled not, nor remeued from his place,
So hie prowess did his heart enbrace:
Not dispayred for no sudden fall,
Of condition he was so marciall.
In token whereof he standing at mischefe
Changed nouther chere nor countenance,
An evidence and a full great prefe
Of manly force and heartely assurance,
Defiyng fortune with all her varyaunce,
When that he found to his destruction
Of despair greatest occasion.
With him he had a baylife as I find
Called Castor, which of condition
Was to his lord false and eke unkind,
And conspired again him false treason:
In token whereof up to Rome town
His lords children young and tender of age
^yke a thief, he sent them in hostage.
One of his sons he murdered by treason,
Which Mithridate took full sore at heart,
Another son as made is mention
False to his father, which wha^ he did aduerte
The unkindness made him sore smerte:
For of all vices shortly to conclude,
^orst of al is hateful ingratitude.
This same child of whom I make mind
Called Pharnax, which again nature
To his father traitor and unkind,
And his purpose again him to recure,
In all have did his busy cure
For to accomplish his purpose in party,
Drew to him hole his fathers chyualry.
By sleight and mede wha^ he was made strong,
He besieged his father round about,
Unto nature me seems he did wrong
To put his father in so great a dout:
Kyndnesse was far shyt without,
When the son with hate set a fire,
Again his father falsely did conspyre.
With multitude his father was constrained
Maugre his might in to a toure to flee,
His son unkind has at him disdained,
And yet for all his strange aduersite
Of his courage the magnanimite
In his person stood hole, list not vary
Though fortune was to him contrary.
Yet mine auctour Bocas bears record
That Mithrydate if it would have be,
Required his son to be at accord,
And set aside al old contrariouste:
But he unkind indurate was parde,
Ever froward, malycious of courage,
So disposed from his tender age.
So that the king Mithrydate alas,
Was overcome by unkindness,
That never before in no manner caas
Stood dismayed: but of hye prowess
Kept aye one face all passions to repress,
This virtue force by marcial doctrine
For none aduersite suffered him declyne.
End of his werres and his mortal stryues
Of his debates and discencions,
His concubines, his daughters, and his wives
By mean only of certain pocions
Slew them al, by drinking of poisons:
For he not would, the cause to dyscriue,
After his death they should bide on live.
His own death of mortal fell rygour
Compassed before thus he began deuyse,
Made a french knight y^ was a soudiour
With a sharp sword in full cruel wise
To ren him through, whereby the frau^chyse
Conserved was, his purpose to fulfill
He would not dye but by his own will.
Lo here the end of king Mithridate,
Let princes all of his death take heed
How rechelesly he passed in to fate,
And by assent made his heart blede:
And Bochas here who list his book to read
Plainly rehersynge but in words few,
To worldely princes does his co^ceyte show.
Lenuoye.
Mighty princes lift up your corrages
Toward heaven do your hertes dress,
Of your memory turn up the vysages
Where joy is ever, peace, concord, and gladness,
True armonye, and celestial swetnes:
Counterpayse in your remembrance
Worldly chaunges, fortunes variaunce.
Advertise the mortal fell outrages
Of blody werres impossible to repres,
While false envy with his furious rages
In sundry realms has so great entres,
Slaughter, murdre, division, falsenes
Which conscience have brought to vttrau^ce
Through soden change of worldly variau^ce
Reken up princes that sat hye on stages
What was the fine of their royal noblesse:
Or of tirauntes reken up the blody wages:
Sudden slaughter guerdoned their wodenes:
Mithridate can bear hereof wytnes,
By blood unkind brought unto vttrau^ce,
Through soden change of worldly variaunce.
Princes remember upon the golden age
When Saturn ruled y^ world in rightwisnes,
Next Jupiter for peoples auau^tage
The silueren world conserved in clennes,
Which Mars has now turned to felnes,
Made it steelen with sword dagger and lance,
Through soden change of worldly variau^ce.
Of Mithridate regestre the vyages,
Conspired poisons taffray his prowess,
On land and see tempestious passages,
By co^straynt bode.vii. year in wilderness,
Of his wandrynge payse the vnsykernes,
His end myschefe, knew no auoydaunce
Gayn worldly change nor fortu^es variau^ce.
If neglyge^ce have brought you in rerages
Toward God, or he reken in streyghtnesse
Let reason meddle for you to lay hostages
Compassyon, mercy, partynge of alms,
Toward heaven to support your feblenesse,
When your merits shall paise in balaunce
Of worldly chau^ges and fortunes variaunce.
Death spares another hye nor low lynages,
Have mind heron for any rechelesnes,
Transitory be here your pylgrimages
Set with briga^ts unawarely you toppresse:
But of prudence by great auysenesse,
With prouydence preserve your puyssaunce,
Gayn worldly change and fortunes variaunce.
The.iiii. chapter.
How Eucratydes king of Sythie was slain by Demetrius, and after his carayne
cast to hounds.

NExt in order to Bochas did apere
A woeful prince that put him self in prees,
Reignyng in Sithia, his story does us lere,
The name of whom was Eucratides:
But to disturb his quiet and his pees
Again him plainly as I find
Came Demetryus, y^ mighty king of Inde.
Of whom the power and the vyolence
To Eucratides was very importable,
Besieged first, and for lack of defense
Take at mischefe, his fone not mercyable
For Demetrius was on him so vengeable,
When he was slain wtin his own bounds,
Made the carayne be cast out to y^ hounds.
Not wythstandinge he was a worthy king
Borne of hye blood such was his adventure,
Demetrius son above al erthly thing
Hated him, by record of Scripture,
Of rancoure denied his sepulture:
And for the matter is hateful and contrary,
On his story I will no longer tarry.
The.v. Chapter.
How Herodes king of Parthoys werred with Romans, which after his son and
heir was slain, made his bastard son king yt anon after slew his father.

TO Arthabanus whilo^ of Parthois king
I purpose my style to transporte,
A full old prince, had in his living
Sons twain books so report,
Which in his age did him most comfort:
Mithridate was the eldest brother,
And herodes called was that other.
Mithridate by reason of his age,
His father dead did after him succeed,
Which banished was for tyranny and outrage,
Afterward for mischefe and for need
In to Babylon he took his flight for dread:
The people anon after his partyng
Of Indignacion made his brother king.
Thus came Herodes to estate royal,
Pursued his brother in to Babylon,
Laid a siege round about the wall,
They to him yielded up the town:
Thus was his brother brought to confusion
Before the castle without longer date,
Made smite of the head of Mithridate,
In Parthois after he took possession.
Thus young Herodes of voiu^te and pride
Began a werre again them of Rome town,
Whom to wtstande they list not long abide
The co^sull Crassus came down to their side,
Commanded was short process for to make
Toward Parthois his voyage for to take.
Crassus list not to enter in that reme
Left Parthois the story does deuyse,
Took his way toward Jerusalem
To take there a solemn empryse,
In the temple, only of couetise,
Took there again the title of ryghtwysnes
Up al their treasour and their great riches.
By which he gate in diverse regions
Great multitude to hold up his party,
Led with him eleven legyons:
Toward Parthois fast began him hye:
By his letters proudly began defy
The said Herodes, and with great apparayle.
Myd his country profred him battle.
The next morrow wha^ Crassus took y^ field,
To him was brought of black a cote armure
Which when his knights auisedly beheld
Dempt it a token of discomfiture,
For in contrary Romans do their cure
When their captain shall fight or be head,
His cote armur is outher white or red.
Another token froward to behold,
The first Egle beat in his banere
Also soon as men did it unfold,
Contrariously he turned look and chere,
The back to Crassus folk saw yt stood nere:
A pronostyke to Romans full certain
How fortune to them was that day again.
By the flud passinge of Eufrates,
with unware tempests his standerdes echone
In to the river were cast among the prees,
To reken them all vpryght stood not one:
Whereof astoyned they would no further gone,
These pronostykes made them so afraid
Like men in heart dispaired and dismayed.
Of these tokens Crassus was recheles
The pronostykes also he did despise,
Took upon him to pass Eufrates
To enter Parthoys only for couetise:
To whom Herodes sends in this wise
That his coming was more for pyllage
Than for knyghthode, manhood, or courage.
All the power of Parthoys tho came down
With many Prefecte and men of great courage,
Again Crassus and them of Rome town,
Which as I told abode on their pyllage,
That turned after to their great damage:
The son of Crassus slain in that fray,
His father take, and al upon a day.
His head smyt of, in whom was no defense,
But disconfyted with many a legion,
The head of Crassus brought to the presence
Of Herodes within his royal town,
Which has commanded gold to be brought down
To be molte there as he lay dead,
And to power thereof full his head.
This thing was done for a mockery,
In sign only (the storye does deuyse)
That gold nor treasour upon no party
Staunche might his thrust of couetyse:
Such gredines each man should dispyse,
For auaryce of custom in each place
Of hye prowes does the prise difface.
Herodes after did search all the wards
Through all the field upon Crassus side,
Took the penons, baners, and standards,
And in his tempels large, long, and wide
Let hang them up of surquedy and pride,
In sign only and eke for a memory
He of Romans has get the victory.
With which he list not only be content
Wenyng his fortune should abide stable,
In to Surry he has his son sent
Called Pachorus, made him a constable
Of that region, with him to be partable
Of al treasours and mouables y^ he found
Whereuer he rode throughout al land.
This Pachorus by his chyualry
Increase began in his tender age,
Whereof Herodes his father had envy
Fearful it should turn to his damage,
Lest he would by title of heritage
Maugre him at his again coming,
Take upon him of Parthoys to be king.
Than Pachorus was called home again
Out of Surrye, where in conclusion
All that he had wrought was in vain,
Because one Cassius fro Rome was come
Slew all the people in the region
Which appertayued to Pachorus, as I find, down,
Without captain for they were left behind.
To withstand this Romayne Cassius
Herodes has his son sent again,
Which anon after, the story tells thus,
Amyd the field unhappily was slain:
To trust fortune it is a thing but vain,
Which of custom to day is favorable
And to morrow geryshly chaungeable.
Of Pachorus death when the noise arose
And the distressynge of his chyualry,
And to Herodes abydyng in Parthois
Tyding was brought, farde as he would die,
Of hertely sorrow fyl in to a frensy:
Heir was none left of the royal lines
Save thurty bastardes borne of concubines.
Thus Herodes was cast in great sickness,
His sons death was to him importable,
His worldly joy was gone and his gladness:
Fortune contrary which never can be stable,
Age fylon, his life was not durable,
And of one thing most he did him dread
Cause he had none heir to succeed.
Which would not suffer him live in pees,
Till at the last he caught a fantasy
Chase a bastard called Pharactes,
Because he was famous in chyualry,
Gave him the crown and the regaly,
Which anon after breuely to conclude
Slew Herodes of ingratitude.
The.vi Chapter.
How Fimbria a Consul of Rome slew him self

AFter to Bochas by process of this book
Four mighty princes notable of estate
Toward him they cast chere and look
Like unto folk that were unfortunate,
With whom fortune had been at debate:
For by their manner, as it sempt well,
They were at mischief fall fro her whele.
First Fymbria a romayne consulere
Sent by the romans to a great cite
Called Nichomede, came as a messangere
To help Flaccus slain by great aduersite,
As he entered in to that country:
After whose death his party to auaunce
Of Flaccus meyny took the governance
Of presumption without auctorite
This Fymbria by dyligent labor
Full far above his state and his degree
Took upon (...) by fortunes false favor
To be called captain and Emprour,
Through all that country books specify:
Of whose presumpcion Scilla had envy.
Pursued him through many a great city,
To a castle made him take his flight,
Where Fymbria of great necessite
Constrained was maugre all his might,
Dyspayred, for sake of every manner wight,
To slay him self, the storye tells thus,
Within the temple of Esculapius.
The.vii. chapter.
Of Albinius that was slain with stones.

ANother Consul stood in case semblable
In his time called Albinius,
Whose hareful pride was abominable
To al folks loathsome and odious,
Which like a rebel wode and furious
Again Romans ofter than ones
When he lest wend, slain was with stones.
The.viii. chapter.
How Adriane borne of low degree falsely usurped to be king of Rome, which with
his chorles was after brent.

NExt came Adrian which rose to hie estate
First in Rome, borne of low degree
Chosen and sent by the whole Senate
To govern of Affrike the country:
Where of his own pompous auctorite.
Took upon him by subtel false workynge,
Maugre Romans there to be crowned king
Whom to support, shortly to conclude,
Was a great number of the co^monte
Of chorles gadred, a confuse multitude,
Title was none nor ground but volunte:
Gentlemen than being in that country
All of assent and one opinion,
Assembled them to his destruction.
At Vtices a large great cite,
Him and his churles beset round about,
Of wood and faggot with large quantite
In co^pas wise closed him without:
Gadred with him of vylayns a great rout,
Laid on fire that with flames read
Echone consumed in to ashes dead.
The.ix. chapter.
How Sinthonius king of Trace yt much coueted, al forwet, and died in pouerte.

NExt Adrian came Sinthonius
Tofore Bocas with teres spreint his face
As the story reherseth unto us
In his time he was king of Trace,
Fall suddenly from fortunes grace
Cast down low from his estate royal,
Which came to Bochas to complain his fall.
Whose purpose was, if it would have be,
Seven realms to have conquered with his hand,
That were subget to Rome the city,
And all seven were of greeks land:
Who al coueteth ye shall understand
He al forgothe, full well affirm I dare,
At unset hour whereof each man beware.
Long or his conquest was brought to a prefe
From her whele fortune cast him down,
The praetor Se^cius brought him to mischief,
Dyed in pouerte as made is mention:
And Bochas here makes a digression
Compendiously within a little space,
To discriue the region of Trace.
The.x. Chapter.
Here Bochas in party makes a dyscripcion of the kingdom of Trace, and
passes over lyghtlye unto the acco^plyshment of his book.

TRace whylom a country of great fame
And contains a full large space,
And of Tyras it took first y^ name,
Son of Japhet, and so was called Trace
Which many a day dwelled in that place
Toward Septemtrion, plenteous of good
Beside Dynoe the large famous flode.
Southward Trace renneth the flode Egee,
Macedone stands in the Occydent,
And the kingdom called Propontide
Stant in Trace toward the Oryent,
Where great plente of blod was shed and spente
When Sencius through his hye prowess
King Adrian there manly did oppress.
Ebrus in Trace is the chief city
As mine auctour makes mention,
I cast not long to tarry, but in breuite
To make of Trace a description,
And to proceed in my translacion
After mine auctor, which writes a long process
Of great Pompeye and his worthynes.
The.xi Chapter.
How after many great conquestes of Duke Pompeye great war began between him
and Julyus, in which three hundred thousand were slain, and at the last the
head of Po^peye smytten of.

This Pompeius of whom the name is couth,
Wise and worthy and famous of prowess,
Took upon him in his tender youth
After his father by fortunate duresse,
Called Po^peye, the story bears witness,
Distressed was by sudden death, coming
As says y^ story through thu^dre and lyghtning.
His host dystroyed by the violence
Of unware tempest, like as says the book,
Forty thousand slain in that pestilence,
For fear the remenaunt the field forsook,
Til young Po^peye of courage on him took
In his beginning proudely to proceed,
Full like a knight his fathers host to lead.
Rome that time by their dyscencions
Among them self, nigh brought to ruin,
By the froward false diuysions
Twene Marius and Silla brefely to termine,
Till that a new son began to shine
Of worthynes, which shad his light
In manly Pompeye the famous knight.
This said Pompeye this knyghtly man
At his beginning through his chyualrye
The proud captain slough when he began
Which of Marius held up the party,
Called Brutus, which in Lombardy
Was by Po^pey through knightly governance,
With all his host brought to mischaunce.
In his beginning Pompey eke also
To set Romans in rest and quiet,
One that was called Gneus Carbo
He slew him knyghtly when he did him mete,
Which in Cicyle proudly held his sete:
And all the countres about him enuyron
Pompey made the^ subject to Rome town.
After all this Pompeyus on the sea
With many a ship stuffed with vytaile
Toward Affrike made a great armee,
And there in have after his arriuaile
With Domicius had a great battle:
Brought the country through his hye renoun
To be to Rome under subjection.
He pursued the great mighty king
Called Jertha, to Marius honorable,
And had also his royal abiding
In Numidy a country full notable:
Again Pompey his power was not able,
For at a Castle as they met in fight
He slew king Jertha like a ma^ly knight.
Thus in brefe time holdyng his passage,
For common profit, as made is mention,
By his wisdom and knightly hye courage
Brought al Affrike to subjection,
Which stood before in rebellion
To the Romans: but all their sturdines
The said Pompey did in haste redress.
The greatest enemy again Rome town
Thylke days was one Sertorius,
And of fortune, which is now up now down
On Pompeye ones was victorious:
But after soon of him it happed thus,
Among his meyny falling at debate
He slain was in his most hye estate.
After the death of this Sertorius
Came Porpenna Pompeye to assail,
And as they met anon Pompeius
Full like a knight slew him in battle:
Which victory greatly did avail
To the Romans, after by governance
He brought Spain to their obeysaunce.
By auctorite give by the Senate
This Noble Pompeye for veil of the cite
Upon the sea would suffer no Pyrate,
Where ever he came fro him they did flee:
For with his ships he scoured so the sea
And bare him there so ma^ly with his hand,
That maugre the^ he brought the^ to the land.
All the pirates and these false robbours
I gadred out were of the region.
Called Sylla, which like to rauinours
Made again Rome a conspiracion,
Robbed and spoiled saylyng up and down
Romayne marcha^tes, and people of each country,
That none was so hardy to pass by the sea.
After Pompey had made the sea to obey
That Pyrate none durst thereon abide,
He by the Senate was sent out to warrey
Toward thorient, his knights by his side:
And where soever that he did abide
Mine auctour writes by influence of heaven,
His conquest was swifte as fire or leuin.
And to the increase of his eternal glory
Perpetually to get him a name,
His laud and renome to put in memory,
He builded a cite in Asia of great fame,
Called Nichopoly, Bochas says the same:
Twene two flodes, that one Araxases
And that other was called Eufrates.
He builded this cite only of intent
That Romayne knights yt were fall in age,
And such as were in the wars spent
Should of custom have their herbergage
(This was the custom and usage
In that cite always, and not fail)
Beddyng and clothes spendyng and vytayle.
Pompeye after rode in to Armeny
Rebel to Rome, where Tigranes was king,
Fought with him there, and through his chyualry
Disconfyted him, there was none abidynge:
Where Tigranes him self submyttynge
Unto Pompeye, with every circumstaunce
Ever to abide under his obeysaunce.
Than in all haste Pompey began him hye
To ride to Asia, where like a manly knight
He gate the kingdom called Albanye,
Which took his name who so look aryght
Of whytnes, for every manner wight
That there is borne by record of writynge,
White as snow has his here shynyng.
There ben hounds marvelous of nature
For tassaile bulls and lions,
No wild beast may again them endure
So Pompeye by many regions
Rode through Armeny with his champions:
Where grown herbs y^ may never faint
What ever color man list with the^ paynt.
Conquered realms about in every coost,
Of Hiberie he gate the region,
And Arsaces the king with al his host
Disconfited, as made is mention,
With his power to Surry he came down:
Than to Fenice a kingdom of great fame,
Which of Fenix whylome took his name.
Brought al these countrees to subieccion,
Of Sidonye, the mighty strong cite
Of Iturie, he took possessyon,
Chrugh Araby, he came down to Jude,
Which of Jews was sometime the country:
Of Libanus he passed the mountain
Where Ceders grow as authors said.
Sent tofore him entering in that realm
One Gabinius a mighty strong constable,
Reignyng that time in Jerusalem
Aristobolus a prince full notable:
And for the temple was strong and pregnable.
Laid a siege about in bred and length
Space of three months, gate it so by strength
Three.M. Jews under ye wall were found
Dead at the assaut, which made resistance,
The wall after beaten down to ground:
Pompey than by sturdy violence
Is entered in, without reverence
Sancta sanctorum men that place call
Made by Hyrcanus highest priest of all.
The great bishop Aristobolus
Sent to Rome in mighty cheynes bound,
Toward Septe^trion I find written thus
Gate.vii. kingdo^s with citees walled round,
Rebel to Rome, he did them confound
With mighty sword, gate all the country
Fro Caucasus down to the reed see.
In his conquest it sempt verily
As the gods had done their cure,
And that fortune was with them eke busy:
This mighty Pompey prince of Assure
What ever him list by conquest to recure,
In Spain he gate when they were rebels
Three.C. cytees and.lx. strong castles.
Hard to remember his conquestes echone,
All the prowesses of this knyghtly man,
Toward the party of Septentrion
A thousand castles I find that he wan,
Six hundred mo fro time that be began
Eight and thirty citees out of dout
With mighty walls closed round about.
Peyse his deeds his conquestes marciall,
Thrice Consul chose for his encrees,
Read ye shall find how he was egall
To Alysandre, or to Hercules,
Where that ever he put him self in prees
Al came to hand, concludyng (ye may se)
To commen profit of Rome the cite.
His marcial deeds to put in remembrance
One was chose to do his diligence,
To enacte his conquestes in substance,
And his knighthode to singular excellence,
And Trifanes famous of eloquence
Assigned was unto that labor,
Took his guerdon of the common treasour.
Pompey of Rome was chief governor,
Caesar absente in Gaul a far country,
Which time Pompey stood in great favor
Both of Fortune and Rome the city,
Somewhat made blind of his prosperity:
Purposyng in his clymbing not stable
He would have none y^ were to him se^blable.
Unto purpose was said full yore agone,
How that love, nouther hye lordshyppe,
(Prefe has been made in many mo than one)
Nouther of the^ would have no felowshyppe,
Each by his own would his party keep
In these two cases brother unto brother
Fails at a point each will put out other.
To Pompey resorting now again
He took on him all the gouernaile
Of y^ Romans, as ye have herd me said,
Both of estates, commons, and porayle:
And for his part all that might avail
In making laws, statutes, or decre
Al up engrosed by his authority.
Folk this while which that had envy
Toward Caesar in his long absence,
Let make a law by conspiracy
And a statute concluding in sentence
Without excepcion favor or reuerenc^
No man should by will of the Senate,
In his absence be chose to none estate.
Nor be admitted by no procuratoure
To have aucthorite of dignite or office,
In court of Tribune nor of Senatoure
To be promoted, this was their advice
Were he never so manly nor so wise,
This law ordained by folk envious
For hyndring only of Caesar Julius.
When Julius knew their false working,
Fro Gaul sent up to the cite
All the Senate requiring by writing,
To grant him by their auctorite
Of triumph the notable dignite,
To have also the office and estate
Called in Rome the second Consulate.
For him allegyng many a great vyctorye
In diverse countrees done for the cite,
Many conquestes notable of memory
Wrought by the knyghthode of his equite:
Requiringe them guerdoned for to be.
But contrary unto his intent
They denied him al by one assent.
Which was chief ground rote and occasion
That brought in first the controuersye,
Civil discordes, and froward division,
When every man drought to his party
Of old hatered to kyndel new envy,
Causing princes Julius and Pomey
To their confucion each other to warrey.
The triumph denied to Caesar
Fraud of Po^pey made him thereof fail,
Of whose disceite Julius was ware,
Made him ready with many a strong battle,
Passed over the Aipes of Itayle,
Fully in purpose plainly if he might
With the Romans and Po^pey for to fight.
Thus began the wars atwene these princes twain,
Po^pey chose for party of the town
To be their duke and captain sovereign
Again Caesar as made is mention:
And thus alas the desolacion
Sued of the cite by many a strange sign,
With uncouth tokens when they began malign.
At the ginnyng of these woeful wars
In the heuyn were seen dredful sightes,
Sparclyng bro^des, comets uncouth stars,
Flame of fire, with many fearful lyghtes,
Like lamps bre^ning all the long nights:
Casting of speres and darts in the air,
Whereby Romans fylin great despair.
From the party of Septentrion
Toward Rome came full great lyghtninge.
At noone seen stars, like blood the son shon,
The Moon eclypsed terrible in showing,
The mount Ethna fearfully brennyng
From his cauernes cast up flames read
Toward Itaile, which set the^ in great dread
But of Caribdes a danger in the sea
Wawes terrible boiled up like blood,
From the rocks that in Cicile be
Was herd hou^^ng of hou^des that were wode:
Vesta the goddess in Rome where she stood
Myd her temple, was al with tears spreynt,
Wha^ the heavenly fyres were before her queint.
Before the goddess at the auter principle
Was fire perpetual brennyng day and night,
Till wars ciuyle hateful and terrible
Began among Romans in the co^tagious fight:
Than of vengeance anon was queit y^ light
Tofore Vesta, the fire partynge on twain
Of division a token full certain.
Earth quaues sudden and terrible
Ouertourned castles up so down,
With flodes rage, hydous and horrible
Neptunus did great destruction,
Drowned vyllagest and many a mansion,
Reuersed in temples of gold al their vessels,
Threw down baners, sta^derdes, and pensels
Gain these signs was found none arest,
The unware mischefe could no man declyne,
Lions and wolves came down fro the forest
With many other beasts sauagyne:
Wild beasts, and serpents of rauyne
Came to the cite, and some again kind
Spoke as do men in Bochas as I find.
Diverse fowls which of their nature
Have in custom to fly but a night,
Before these wars did hem self assure
At midday, when Phoebus is most bright,
Through their cite for to take their flight:
Women with child (the story list not fayn)
Brought forth some that had heads twain.
Tofore these wars that called were ciuyle,
Senators being in Rome town
Came to the woman that called was Sibile,
Unto her made this question.
To declare by short conclusion
Among their other questions al,
Of their cite what fortune should be fall.
To whom she gave an answer full obscure
Whereupon she made them sore muse,
Took them six letters set in plain scripture,
Which in no wise they might not refuse:
For false rightes that they did use
Like the three letters twyse set in number
Who Understands they shall y^ town enco^bre.
Three R R R first she set on a row
And three F F F in order fast by,
Long time after or they could know
The exposicion thereof openly,
Till their diuinours began search subtelly
To find out like to their intent,
By the six letters what Sibylement.
Of this word regnum the first letter is R
So is the capital of Rome the city,
Who looks a right the third is not far,
This word ruet gynneth with R parde,
Of which words when they joined be
The sentence concludes in meaning
Of their cite the ruinous falling
Touching three F F F who can advertise,
Of this word Ferro F goth toforne,
And the chief letter of Fame to deuyse
Is F also, the process well forth borne
The same of Fla^ma by which ye town was lorne:
Of which reasons make a coniu^ction,
Causyng of Rome final destruction.
Fire, swerd, and hunger caused by the wars,
Desire of clymbyng, froward ambicion
Sheweyng of cometes, and uncouth sterres
With pronostikes of their descrecion,
Worst of al wilful division,
Among them self by unware vyolence,
Of letters six accomplished the sentence.
The sword of Caesar werres of Pompey,
Twene these twain lastyng a great while,
Made many a Romayne and Italien to dey
By the battayls that called were Ciuyle:
With prophecies remembered of Sibile
As the writing full well reherce can,
Of the old Poet that called was Lucan.
In Martes temple on heith where he stood
And Bellona the gods dispitous,
The priests cried and offered up their blood,
With lamentacion like folk furious,
Cause of tokens fell and contrarious
Which that were showed in that sentuary,
How their gods to Romans were contrary.
Among dead bones that lay in their graves
Were voices herd like woodmen in their rages,
Cry of gostes in cauernes and in caves
Herd in feldes, paths and passages,
Laborers fled home to their vyllages:
Serpents and adders scaled silver bryghte
Were over Rome seen flying all the night.
Another token pitous for to here
Which astonished many a proud Romayne,
Dead bodies did in the feldes appear
Which in battle had before be slain,
Fro their tombs risyng where they layne:
Which in the wars woeful and dispitous
Were slain by Sylla and proud Marius.
It was eke told by their diuinours
How Pompeyus was like to have a fall,
And how thestate of Romayne Emperors
With their triumphs that be imperial
At Julius first now begin shall,
And after him thestate shall forth proceed
By election or in Linial kinrede.
To withstand the power of Caesar
Which toward Rome took his way right
Po^pey was sent, wise, manly and right ware,
But when he herd tell of the might
Of Julius, he took him to flight:
Eke all the Senators with him did flee,
Toward Epyre, in Greece a strong cite.
Pompey was hold famous in chiualry,
Caesar but young and hardy for tassayle,
Upon the plains of Greece and Thessaly
Pompey and he had a great battle,
Gain Julius sword no Roman might avail,
Constrained of force y^ field to forsake
Toward Egypt they have the way take.
Po^pey thorugh Cipre came to Tholome,
By a great water at Paphus did ariue,
On the stronde there he did se
A stately place, and up he went bliue,
The name of which plainly to discriue
Cacobasyle the country did it call,
Of which name the fortune is thus fall.
The name tokeneth of froward ariuaile,
Sownyng in great, unhappy adventure,
By which the trust of Pompey did fail,
Fyl in dispeyre and might it not recure:
Forsook that isle and did his busye cure,
To take a ship so by the sea sailing
Toward Egypt, where Tholome was king.
Of trust he fled to this Tholome
In hope he should find in him socour,
Fair chere showed under duplicite
Failed at the point, gave him faint favor,
Albe Pompey by his friendly labor
Crowned him king in Egypt as I find,
To whom again he was false and unkind.
To mete Pompey he let stuff a barge
By a manner pretense of frendlyhede,
Gave his meyny that were there in charge
To murdre Po^pey, behight the^ great mede,
Tweyne there were y^ bare to him haterede,
And in the vessel with sharp swerdes whet,
Or he was ware of his head they smet.
That one of them was called Achylas
And his fellow named was Fotyne
Took up the head of that prince alas,
Famous in knighthode borne of gentell line:
Among Romans, as authors determine,
Hold in his time, if men do him right,
Through all the world one the best knight.
Thus erthly princes with at their po^pus fame
Which over the world yeueth so great a soun,
Of slauter and murdre they took first their name,
By false rauyn and extorcion:
Clambe so up first to dominacion,
Bre^nyng of countries conquest by vyolence,
Set them in chaires of worldly excellence
In this battle that called was civil,
Hold atwene Pompey and Caesar Julius,
Three hundred.M. slain within a while,
Three thousand take the story tells thus:
Without princes not able and glorious
As kings and pretours reckned al atones,
Tribunes, Consuls, and Centuriones.
Phoebus on y^ soil might not his bemes spread,
Nor on the ground show out his clear light,
Men that were slain lay so thick on bread
That of the earth no man had a sight,
Wolves, bears, and rauinous fowls of flight
Came great plente to feed there each day
Beside the river of Nile where they lay.
Gobbets of flesh which fowls did arace
Fro dead bodies borne up in the air,
Fyl fro the claws upon Julius face
Amydde the field, where he had repair,
Made his visage blody and not fair:
Albe that he to his encrees of glory,
Had thylke day of Romans the vyctory:
The head of Po^pey brought with his stately rig
Off^^d up to Julyus hye presence
He by compassyon the murdre aduertisyng
Of his innate imperyal excellence
Brast out to weep, and in his aduertence
Thought it pity a price of so great might,
Should so be slain, y^ was so good a knight.
The corse abode without a sepulture
Till one Codrus of compassyon
After the battle and disconfyture,
Besought him of great affection
To hyde the trunk low in the sa^des down,
Sought tymbre and there he fond but small,
To do exequies with fyres funeral.
Now since this prince came to such mischefe
Murdered and slain by Tholome the king,
Here of her power fortune has made a prefe
What trust there is in any worldly thing:
After his death wanted he not buryeng?
This proud Po^pey so famus of his hand,
Of fyshe devoured as he lay on quicsande.
What shall men set by power or noblesse?
Of slyding goods, or any worldly glory?
Which to restrain may be no syckernes,
Fortune and the world is so transitory,
Though Mars to day give a man victory
Parcase to morrow unawarely he shall dey,
I take record of Caesar and Pompey.
Since al stant under danger of Fortune
Ye worldly men do your look up dress
To thilke place where joy does aye co^tune,
The blind lady has there none entresse:
Set pride aside take you to meekness,
To sue virtue do truly your labor
Gain al pomp make Po^pey your myrrour.
Lenuoy.
This tragedy of Duke Pompey
Declares in gross the chief occasion
Why he and Caesar began first warrey,
Each again other, through vain ambicion
To have lordshyppe and dominacion
Over ye Romans, by fauer, fraud, or might
Possession take, no force of wrong nor right.
To trouthes party pride is loath to obey,
Extort power does great destruction
Wise policye al out of the way,
Prudent counsel age with discrecion
Lost their liberte of free eleccion,
Who was most strong with him held every wight,
Possession take no force of wrong nor right.
Such division made many man to dey,
Brought the cite to desolacion,
With two princes fortune list to pley,
Till from her whele she cast the^ both down:
Subtel disceit, fraud, and collusion
By ambicious climbinge blent their sight,
Possession take, no force of wrong nor right.
Noble princes remember what I say,
Peyse this story within your reason,
Of false surmou^ting avarice bears the key,
Record of Caesar and Pompey of Rome town:
Whose wylfull wars and hateful discencion
Gives clear warning to you and every wight,
No claim is worth without title of right.
The.xii. chapter.
How victorious Julius Caesar burnt the vessels of Tholome, slough Achilas
that would have murdered him: and after great victories was murdered with him
self bodkins by Brutus Cassius.

AFter the woeful complaynte lamentable
Of Pompeyes death, pitous for to here,
Wars remembered with treso^s importable,
Compassed frauds faced with fair chere,
Conspired murdre, rehearsed the manner
How king Tholome fraudulent of courage,
The death conspired of Pompey fall in age.
The process told I hold it were but vain
Thereof to write a new tragedy,
Thing ones said to reherce again
It were but ydel as for that party,
But how Caesar went out of Thessaly
Came to Alisandre to lodge him in that place,
I will remember with supporte of your grace.
He lodged was in the paleys royal,
Where he was busy by diligent labor
Through that region in temples royal
To spoil gods, and have al their treasour,
Where he was mocked and found no favor:
For Achilas which that slew Pompey,
Cast him with Caesar proudly to warrey.
His purpose was to fall upon Caesar
(As of nature was his condition
Falsely to murdre men or they were ware)
By some slight to find occasion
To distroy Julius by treason,
And to accomplish his purpose in party
Had twenty thousand in his company.
This Achilas false, cruel, and disceyuable,
Cast him disceyue Caesar if he might*
Of the Egipciens leader and constable
With the Romans purposes for to fight:
But when Caesar thereof had a fight,
He is descended* and fast by the sea
Brent all the navy of king Tholome.
All the vessels were driven up with a flode
To great damage of the said Tholome,
Julius brent them even there he stood
And a great part beside of the cite,
And there was brent, which was great pite,
The famous lybrary in Egypt of the king
Full.xl. thousand volumes there lying.
In which thing Bochas reherseth in sentence
How Tholome was greatly commendable
That through his busy royal providence
Made him self a librarye so notable:
For to al clerks in study that were able
Of seven sciences, the story bears mind,
Like their desire might books find.
After this fire in Farus the country
The Egipciens had a great battle,
Where Caesar was of great necessite
That day constrained when ye field can fail
Took a barge from Egypt for to sail:
But so great prees followed at his back,
Almost the vessel was like to go to wrack.
Caesar armed with letters in his hand,
Put his person that day in a venture,
Two hundred paas he manly swam to land,
And co^nyngly to land he does recure,
Notwithstanding his heavy great armure:
But yet tofore or Caesar took the sea
He in the field had take Tholome.
And Achilas the murdrer of Pompey,
With all his fellows that were of assent,
Were slain that day there went non away:
Many Egipcien the same time brent,
Caesar of mercy for Tholome has sent
To Alysandre, sent him home of new
Charging he should to Romans be true.
But when he was delivered from prison
Of Egipciens in Alysandre the cite
From every coast gadred great foyson,
Again Julius came down with his meyne:
But yet for all his hasty cruelte
Such resistance Caesar began to make
That.xx. M. that day were slain and take.
Sixty galeys not far fro the land
Twelve.M. men coming to Tholome
Echone were yielded, and brought to hand
Of Julius his prisoners to be:
Than Tholomeus busied him to flee
To the water, where maugre al his might
He drowned was in his hasty flight.
He known was by his rich haburion
Of gold and stele it was entremayled,
By Caesar sent unto the royal town,
Which for dyffence was strongly enbattailed
Buccles of gold richely enamayled,
Which tokens anon as they have seyne
Despeired to Caesar sent again.
Of the^ to Caesar was made faith and homage,
The reaim of Egypt brought to subjection,
Till he of grace and merciful courage
To Cleopatra gave all that region
Longyng to her by succession,
By tytel of right that time and none other
Because only Tholome was her brother.
King Lagus whylom in his testament
Father to Cleopatra and to Tholome,
Tofore his death by great auisement
Clearly euacted his last volunte
That his kingdom departed should be,
Half to Tholome as his bequeth was,
That other half to queen Cleopatras.
She by her brother was hold in prison
To keep her wrongly from her heritage,
Whereof Caesar had compassion
Purposed him to reform her damage,
And while that he held there his hostage
Of equite, of law, and of reason
Of al Egypt gave her possession.
Than came Juba of Libye lord and king
Sower of stryues and discencion,
Proud, hye of port, and cruel in workinge,
Which in especial had indignacion
Unto the worthy last Scipion,
Cause he was chose like as books sey,
To succeed next Consul to Pompey.
This Juba bare to him great hatrede,
Sought a quarrel again him for a thing
Cause that he was cladde in purple wede,
For him allegyng how only y^ clothing
No manner estate should use but a king:
Meant for him self syttyng in royal trone
He would as king that color wear alone.
Here mine author makes a digression
Putting ensample of Almayne the country,
Says that there is none other nation
Touching array that is so dysguyse
In waste of cloth and superfluyte,
Rehersyng here in full plain langage
In many wise such wast does great damage.
It causes pride and ambicion
Again the virtue of humilite,
To Lechery it gives occasion
Which is contrary unto chastity,
Wast of array set folk in pouerte,
Causes also such costage spent in vain,
Of other poor to have full great disdain.
Where superfluite is used of array
Ryote follows, proud port and ydelnes,
With wast of time drive forth the day:
Late drinkyng, watch, surfeit, and dronkenes,
Engenders fevers and many great excess:
Thus every surfeit englued is to other,
And one mysrule brings in another.
God suffers well there be a difference
Touching array as men ben of degree,
Hye estates that stand in excellence
Must be preferred of reason men may se,
As cloth of gold stones of pyrre
Was for princes with other fresh clothinges,
But specially purple was for kings.
Thus was there set of hye discrecion
Array according to princes hie nobles,
And for other estates lower down
Like their degrees, twene pouert and riches
An order kept from scarsyte and exces:
A mean provided atwene hie and low
Like to him self each man may be know.
But king Juba insolent and mad
Of surquedy caught an opinion
That none but he in purple should be clad,
Causyng debate twene him and Scipion:
Yet were they party both with Rome town
Again Caesar, and drew toward Pompey
For which at myschefe both they did dey.
When Juba felt him self of no powere
Again Caesar to hold champarty,
For sorrow he lost countenance and chere
Of his disdain and melancoly,
Called one Peitrin a knight of his aly:
Made the^ by assent y^ they were both feign
Felly to fight till one of them was slain.
Again nature was this strange fight,
Each to slay other and knew no cause why,
But for king Juba was an hardy knight
He slew his fellow and abode proudly,
And rather chase to die wylfully
Of hie dispyte and of proud courage,
Than under Caesar to live in seruage.
Made call a man whom he loved well
Gave unto him gold and great guerdon
To take a sword forged of fine stele
And make thereof no lengar delacion,
But he should for short conclusion
Take upon him, and have no fear nor dread,
Without tarying to smite of his head.
Thus king Juba rather chase to dey
Than longer live in subjection
Under Caesar, he loved so well Pompey.
Than next to Bochas as made is mencyon
Came Aristobolus with face and look cast down,
Which was to Rome before as I have told
Sent by Pompey to be kept in hold.
Which after was delivered from prison
By help of Caesar in full hasty wise,
Standing in hope of his region
To be restored unto the fraunchyse,
Where Hyrcanus as ye have herd the gyse
Preferred was to his great hindering,
By Pompey of Jews crowned king.
Which Aristobolus hops to recure
Cast means there to reign again,
Wrought thereon, did his busy cure,
Whose hasty labor was but spent i^ vain,
Fill in the hands of a proud captain
Which that whilom was lo^ginge to Po^pey,
And he with poison unawarely made him dey.
The.xiii. Chapter.
How the last Scipio^ Consulere of Rome, for he list not to live in seruage of
Julius, rofe him self to the heart.

NExt came the last worthy Scipion
Which after Pompey was made Consulere,
With whom Juba was at discension
For wearing purple as was told well ere:
And afterward fyl in great fear
when Caesar had within Libye land
Outrayed the^ with strong and mighty hand.
Whereby Scipion began fall in dispeyre,
Lost his chere as man disconsolate,
With three romans began make his repeyre
Dansippus, Plectorie and Torquate,
Going to ship the time unfortunate:
Toward Spain, the tempest began the^ drive,
That they in Affrike unawarely did ariue.
Scipion seeing this woeful case sudden
How he was brought unwarily to mischefe*
For Scicius a mighty strong captain
Being a Pyrate and of the sea a thief
Which is a name of full great reprefe,
The same Pyrate longyng to Cesare
Fill on Scipion or that he was ware.
Being in purpose took him prisonere,
Within his ship tofore his ariuaile,
For which alas dull began his chere
His countenance appall, and eke fail,
To find comfort no man could him counsel:
Pulled out a swerd when he might not stert,
And rofe him self even to the heart.
This was the end at last of Scipion,
Leauer he had at mischefe so to dey
Than under Caesar lie fettred in prison,
Or to his lordshippe in any wise obey:
To Bochas next him came Pompey
Son and heir to great Pompeyus,
Contrary also to Caesar Julius.
Had brethren and susterne mo than one
And many another of their aliaunce,
And of assent they cast them euerichone
Their fathers death having in remembrance,
Upon Celar to take thereof vengeance:
Eke upon Tholome which by collusyon
Slough their father by full false trayson.
The eldest brother called eke Pompey
Being in Spain with full great apparayle,
Cast him of new Caesar to warrey,
And his people proudly to assail:
And as I find there was a great battle,
In which Pompey the eldest son of three
By Julius men constrained was to flee.
He fond no socour nor receipt him to save
Of his life he standing in great dread
Knowing no refute fled in to a cave,
Tescape away knew no better read,
Where he was slain to Caesar brought hyshede:
Sent forth in scorn anon to Hispalee,
Which in Spain is a full great cite.
Thus by process al holy the kinrede
Of Pompeius for short conclusion,
By Caesar was and by his men in deed
Without mercy brought to destruction:
Thus began en^reas the fame and renoun
Of Julius conquestes, on sea and eke on land,
Whose mortal swerd might no man with stand.
First in Libie, Spain, and eke Itayle
Thexperience of his royal puissaunce,
In Germany by many strong bataile,
His power preued often times in France,
Brought all these kingdoms to ye obeisaunce
Of the romans, peised all this thing and sein
Touching his guerdo^ his labor was in vein.
Toward Rome making his repeyre
By him appeaced civil discencions,
Of Throne imperial climbing in the air
For the conquest of. xiii, regions
Of the triumph required the guerdons:
Which to recure his force has applied,
Albe the Senate his request has denied.
And his name more to magnifye,
To show the glory of his hie noblesse
To the Capitole fast he began him hie,
As Emperor his domes there to dress:
That day began with joy and gladness
The eve nothing according with the morrow,
Thentring glad the end care and sorrow.
Calphurnia which that was his wy^e
Had a dreme the same night beforne,
Tokyns showed of the same funeral strife
How that her lord was like to be lorne
By conspiracy compassed and sworn,
If he that day without auisement
In the Capitole satte in judgment.
She dremed alas as she lay and slept
That her lord through girt with many a wound
Lay in her lap, and she the body kept
Of womanhede like as she was bound:
But woe alas to true her dreme was found,
The next morrow no longer made delay
Of his periody was his fatal day.
A poor man called Tongilius
Which secretly the traison did espy,
Let write a letter, took it to Julius,
The case declaring of their conspiracy,
Which to read Caesar list not apply:
But woe alas ambicious negligence
Caused his murdre by unware violence.
Caesar sitting amydde the consystorie
In his estate most imperial,
After many conquestes and victory
Fortune awayting to give him a fall,
With bodkyns persinge as a nall,
He murdered was with many a mortal wou^d,
Lo how false trust in worldly po^pe is found.
Lenuoye.
Through all this book read each tragedy
Before rehearsed and put in remembrance,
Is none more woeful to my fantasy
Than is the fall of Caesar in substance:
Which in his highest imperial puissaunce
When he wend have be most glorious,
Was murdered at Rome, by Brutus Cassius.
This marcial prince ridig through Lo^bardy
Each country yielded and brought to obeisau^ce,
Passing the Alps rode through Germany,
To subjection brought the realm of France,
Gate Brutes Albion by long continuau^ce,
Two lustres passed, this manly Julius
And murdered at Rome by Brutus Cassius.
Among the Senate was the conspiracy
All of assent and of one accordaunce,
Whose triumph they proudely began deny
But maugre them was kept thobseruaunce,
His chare of gold with stedes of plesaunce
Conveyed through Rome this prince most po^pus
The murdre folowig by Brutus Cassius
Reken his conquestes reken his chiualry,
With a counterpeis of worldly variaunce,
Fortunes chaunges for his purparty
Way all together cast them in balaunce
Set to of Caesar the mischeuable chance:
With his periody sudden and envious,
Murdered at Rome by Brutus Cassius.
Books all and Cronicles specifye
By influence of heuinly purueiaunce,
Mars and Jupiter their favor did apply
With gladaspectes his noblesse to enhaunce,
Mars gave him man, Jupiter governance,
Among princes hold one the most famous
And murdered at Rome by Brutus Cassius.
Behold of Alysandre the great monarchy
Which all the world had under obeysaunce,
The prowess of Hector meddled with gentry,
Of Achilles the melancolike vengeance,
Reken of echone the quauering assurance:
Among remembering the fine of Julius,
Murdered at Rome by Brutus Cassius:
Princes consydre in marciall policy
Is nouther trust, faith, nor affiaunce,
All stand in change with twicling of an eye,
Up toward heuin set your attendaunce:
The world unsure and all worldly plesaunce,
Lordship abides not record on Julius,
Murdered at Rome by Brutus Cassius.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
How Octauian succeeded next, and how the murdrers of Julius died at myschefe.

AFter the death of this manly man,
This noble Prince, this famous Emperor,
His worthy neuewe called Octanian
To reign in Rome was next his successor,
Which did his deuoyre by diligent labor
To punysh all tho of nature as he ought,
By rightful dome y^ the murdre wrought.
Chief conspiratour was Brutus Cassius
Which of this murdre made all thordinaunce,
Another Brute surnamed Decius
Was one also conspyryng the vengeance
Wrought on Caesar, he after slain in France:
Here me^ may se what coasts y^ men wend,
How murdre always requires an ill end.
Within the space almost of three year
Distroied were all the conspiratours
By sudden death, and some stood in daungere
To be banished or exyled as traitors:
And as it is cronicled by aucthours,
Space of three year tekened one by one
Dyed at myschefe the murdrers echone.
To murdre a prince it is a pitious thing,
God of his right will take thereof ve^geaunce,
Namely an Emperor so famous in each thig
Which all the world had in governance:
Reken his co^questes digne of remembrance
All peysed in one Bochas bears witness
In hie estate is littell sykernesse.
The.xv. Chapter.
How Tullius was two times exyled and at the last slain by Pompilius.

Mine auctoure here writes no long process
Of Julius death complaining but a while,
To write of Tully in have he began him dress
Compendiously his life for to compile,
Complaining, first says his barayne style
Is insufficient to write as men may seen
Of so notable a rethoriciene.
Lamp and lantern of Romayne orators
Among them called prince of eloquence,
On Pernaso he gathered up the flours
This rethoricien most of excellence,
Whose merytes truly to recompense
The muses nine me thought as I took head,
A crown oflaurer set upon his head.
Bochas astonished began in him self conclude
His book, abashed, dull of his courage,
Thought his terms and reasons were to rude
And that he lacked conning and langage
Whereby he should to his advantage
Though he labored writing all his live,
Of Tullius the merits to discriue.
Whereof supprised he caught a fantasy
Within him self remembering anonright
Though it so fall sometime a cloudye sky
Be chased with wind before the son bright,
Yet in effect it leseth not his light:
So Bochas dempte that his dull writing
Eclypsed not of Tullius the shining,
With rude langage a man may well report
The laud of triu^phs and co^questes maruelus,
Which thing remembering greatly ga^ confort
The heart of Bochas, and to him self said thus
Two colors seen that be contrarious
As white and black it may be none other,
Each in his kind she weth more for other.
In Phoebus presens stars lose their light,
Clear at midday appears not Lucine,
The fame of Tulli whilom shone so bright
Prince of fair speech father of y^ doctrine,
Whose bright bemes unto this hour shine:
Sothly quod Bochas of who^ wha^ I endite
My hand I feel quaking while I write.
But for to give folk occasion
Which in rethorike have more experience
Than have I, and more inspection
In the colors and craft of eloquence
Them texite to do their diligence,
Unto my writing when they may attend
Of compassion my rudeness to amend.
Unto him self having this langage
Bochas to write began his pen dress,
Under supporte afforced his courage
To remembee thexcellent noblesse
Of this orator, which with the swetnesse
Of his ditees abroad as they have shyned,
Has this world most clearly enlumined.
This Tullius this singular famous man
First to remember of his natiuite
Borne at Arpinas, a cite of Tuscan
Of blood royal descended who list se:
Grekyshe books of old antiquite
Made of rethorike, and in their vulgar song
He translated in to the latin tongue.
In tender youth his country he forsook
And fro Tuscan his passage he began dress,
Toward Rome the right way he took
Entering the city the renomed noblesse
Hid in his person she wed the brightness
Of diverse virtues, time while he abode,
That like the son his fame sprede abroad.
For his virtues made a citezaine
The good report of him shone so clear,
Like as he had be borne a roman
In their favor his name was so entere:
Among them chose for a Consulere,
Again the cite time of his Consulate
When Cateline was with them at debate.
By the prudence of this Tullius
And his manhood rekened both in fere,
Catelina most cruel and yrous
Froward of port, and froward of his chere,
Busy ever to find out the manner
How he might by any token or sign
Again the city covertly malign.
Six hundred year fourscore told and nine
Rekened of Rome fro the foundation
This cruel tyrant this proud Cateline
Made with other a coniuracion,
Again franchises and fredame of the town,
First discured as books tell can
In the parties and bounds of Tuscan
The purpose holy of this Cateline
Imagined on false couetyse,
Was to bring Rome unto ruin,
And thereupon in many sundry wise
Found out means, and ways began devise
To his intent by diligent labor,
In the cite to get him great favor.
But finally his coniuracion
Discured was by one Quincius,
Which was before false unto the town
Told at the case unto Tullius,
By whose prudence and working marueilus
By help of Antony that was his felawe
The coniuracion was broken and wtdrawe.
By wit of Tulli all the coniuratours
Espied were and brought unto mischaunce,
Their names red tofore the Senators.
Of their falshead told all the governance,
Manly ordained through his purueiaunce
With all his people as made is mention,
Catelina departed from the town
With Antony the said Cateline
Beside Pistoy had a great bataile,
Slain in the field he might not decline
For he abode when the field began fail:
Power of one littel may aueile,
Namely when falshed of malice and of pride
Again troth dare the bront abide.
There was another called Lentulus
Of his fellows that named was Fabine,
The third of them eke called Cetegus
All assented and sworn to Cateline
Strangled in prison, at mischefe did fine:
Cause Tullius did execucion
Tulliane was called the prisone.
Thus could he punish traitors of the town,
Outray their enemies of manhod and prudence,
Called of their cite governor and patron
Sent from above to be their defense,
Their champion most digne of reverence,
Chose of their gods their cite for to gye
By two prerogatives knighthode, and clergy.
Like the son he did them enlumyne
By hie prowes of knightly excellence,
And through the world his bemes did shine
Of his rethorike and of his eloquence:
In which he had so great experience
By circu^staunces that nothing did lack,
He transcended Plocius and Gracke.
Of orators it is put in memory
This Tullius through his hie renoun
Of all echone the honor and the glory
Was give to him, as made is mention:
Surmounted al and in conclusion
The golden trumpe of the house of Fame
Through the world blew abroad his name.
He knew secrets of philosophy,
Came to Athens to scole for doctrine,
Where he profited so greatly in clergy
In all sciences heavenly and divine
That he was called as aucthors determyne,
Among Romans of very due right,
Of eloquence the lantern and the light.
It is remembered among orators
How Tullius pleted causes twain
In the roman court before the Senators
The cause defending by langage souerain
Of two accused again them that did plain
On their defautes, them saving fro mischefe
The court escapyng fro dangere and reprefe.
These causes twain he pleted in latin
With so excellent flouring fair langage,
With such reasons concluded at the fine
That he by wisdom caught thauauntage
In his matters, with all the surplusage
That might aueile unto his party
What he said there coud no man deny.
Among Greeks at Athens the cite
So great he was of reputacion,
So famous hold of auctorite
To be compared by their opinion
To the Philosopher that called was Plato^,
To whose cradell bees did abrayde
And honey sote they on his lyppes laid.
Apronostike like as books tell
Plato should by famous excellence
Of rethorike be very sours and well,
For his langage myrrour of eloquence:
Yet the Greeks recorden in sentence
How Tullius in party and in all,
Was unto Plato in rethorike egall.
Through his langage this said Tullius
Reconciled by his sote orisons
To the lordshyp and grace of Julius
Princes and kings of diverse regions,
That suspecte stood by accusacions:
Because they did Julius disobey
Were inclined with romans to Pompey.
He could appease by his prudent langage
Folks that stood in discencion,
By craft he had a special advantage
Favor synguler in pronunciacion:
In his demenyng great prudence and reason,
For the pronounsing of matters in substance
His thank receives by chere and countenance.
To a glad matter longs a glad chere,
Men treat of wysdom with words of sadness
Pleintes require after the matere
Grievous or moral, a chere of heuines,
Like as the cause outher the process
Gives occasion to hinder or to speed,
The doctrine in Tullius men may read.
The name of Tulli was couth in many place,
His eloquence in every land was ryfe,
His langage made him stand in grace
And be preferred during al his life,
Married he was and had a right fair wife,
Children many, servants young and old
And as I find he held a good houshoulde.
De Officiis he wrote books three,
De Amicitia I find how he wrote one,
Of age another notable for to se,
Of moral virtue they treated euerychone:
And as Vyncent wrote full yore agone
In his myrrour called Hystoriall,
Nombre of his books be there remembered all.
He wrote also the dreme of Scipion,
Of rethorike compiled books twain
And twain he wrote of diuinacion,
Of titell of land to write he did his pain,
A large book of glory that is vain,
Dear Publica and he says him selue
Of his oracions he wrote books twelve.
And of his dities that called be moral
Is remembered notably in deed
In the said myrrour Historiall,
And yet this said Tullius as I read
Myd his worshyps stood always in dread
Of fortune, for in conclusion
He by envy was banished Rome town.
Being in exile this famous Tullius
At Campania in Atiue the cite,
Received he was of one Plaucius
A man that time of great authorite,
And while that he abode in that country
Sleping a night the book makes mention,
How that he had a wonders vision.
He thought thus as he lay sleping
In a desert and great wilderness,
Finding no pathe but to and fro romyng
How he met cladde in great richesse
Gaius Marius, a prince of great noblesse,
Askyng Tulli with a sad countenance
What was chief and cause of his greuaunce.
When Tullius had him the cause told
Of his disease and his mortal woe,
Marius with his hand set on him hold
To a ^ergiaunt assigned him right tho:
And in all have bad him he should go
To convey him do his bu sy cure
In all have possible to his sepulture.
Where he should have tidinges of plesaunce
Of his repeyre in to Rome town,
Be alleyed of his old greuaunce
This was the end of his auision
The next morrow as made is mention
There was hold to Tullius great aueile
Tofore Jupiter in Rome a great counsel.
Within the temple builded by Marius,
The Senators accorded were certain
To reconsile this prudent Tullius
Out of his exile to call him home again:
After received as lord and sovereign
Of eloquence, by assent of the Senate,
Fully restored unto his first estate.
This thing was don when y^ Rome town
Was at grettest strife twene Caesar and Po^pey,
And for Tullius drue him to Caton
With Pompeius, Caesar to warrey,
And of Julius the party disobey,
Out of Rome Tullius did him hie
Fled with Pompey in to Thessalie.
Caesar after of his free mocion
When he stood hiest in his glory,
Him reconsyled again to Rome town,
Upon Pompey accomplished the victory:
But Julius slain in the consistory
By sixty Senators being of assent
Tullius again was in to exile sent.
And in a cite called Fariman
Tullius his exile did endure,
For Antonius was to him enemy than
Because that he percase of adventure
Compiled had an inuectife scripture
Again Antony rehersing all the caas
Of his defautes, and of Cleopatras.
Thus of envy and of mortal haterede
His death compassed by Antonius,
And afterward execute in deed
By procuring of one Pompilius,
Gate a commission, the story tells thus
Of false malice and forth anon went he
In to Gayre of Compayne the cite.
And by the virtue of his commission
Taking of Antony license and liberte,
Chief rethorician that ever was in the town
Among Romans to worship the cite,
Was slain, alas, of hate and enmyte
By Pompilius rote of all falshead,
Profering him self to smite of his head.
Tullius before had be his defense
Fro the galowes and his death eke let
Which had deserved for his great offense
To have been banged upon an hie gybet:
Who saves a thief when the rope is knet
About his neck, as old clerks write
With some false turn ye bribour will hi quite.
Lo here the vice of ingratitude
By experience brought fully to a prefe,
Who in his heart treason does enclude
Cast for good will to do a man reprefe,
What is the guerdon for to save a thefe^
When he is escaped look and ye shall find,
Of his nature ever to be unkind.
This Pompilius traitor most odible
To show him self false, cruel and ve^geable,
Toward Tully did a thing horrible,
When he was dead this br^bour most culpable
Smit of his right hand, to hear abominable,
With which hand he lerning on him took
To write of virtues many a famous book.
The hand, the head, of noble Tullius
Which every man of right ought complain,
Were take and brought by Pompilius
Upon a stake set up both twain,
There to abide where it did shine or rain
With wind and weder till they were defied,
In token al favor was to him denied.
The.xvi. Chapter
* A chapter again ianglers and dyffamers of rethorike.

BOchas complaining in his study alone
The death of Tulli and the woeful fall,
Grudging in heart made a pitous moan
The folk rebuking in especial
Which of nature be boystous and rural,
And hardy ben for they no conning have
Craft of rethorike to hindre and deprave.
Clerks old did greatly magnify
This noble science that were expert and wise
Called it part of philosophy,
And said also in their prudent auise
There be three parts as tresours of great prise
Compiled in books and of old provided,
In to which Philosophy is divided.
The first of them called is Moral
Which directs a man to good thewes,
And the second called Natural
Tells the kind of goodmen and shrewes,
And the third racionall well shows
What men shall void and what thing vnderfong,
And to that party Rethorike does belong.
By Tullius, as authors determine,
Of his person rehersing in substance
Traunslated was fro Greek into Latin
Craft of rethorike, and for the abundance
Of eloquence stuffed with plesaunce,
All orators remembered him toforne
Was there none like nor after him yet borne.
Bochas also says in his writings
And preueth well by reason and sentence,
To an orator longs four things,
First natural wit, practike, with science,
Virtuous life, chief ground of eloquence:
Of port and manner that he be tretable,
These means had, mine auctor hold hi able.
In his writing and in his scriptures
Bochas well parceiueth it must needs ben
How y^ of right there long five armures
To every notable rethoricien,
Set here in order who list them seen
Which he calls rehersing in sentence,
The five baners longing to eloquence.
The first of them called Inuencion
By which a man does in his heart find
A secret ground founded on reason
With circc^staunces yt naught be left behind,
Fro point to point imprinted in his mind,
Touching y^ matter ye substance and the great
Of which he cast notably tentreat.
Another armure in order the second
Of right is called Disposicion,
As of a matter when the ground is found
That every thing by just division
Be void of al foreine digression:
So disposed touching time and space
Fro superfluite keep his due place.
The third armure named in sentence
Is Elocucion with words many or few,
Matters conveyed by just conuenience
Diposed in order co^uenably to show:
Like a caruer that first does tymbre hew
Sqware and compass cast fetures and vysage,
With caruing tole makes up a fair image.
Pronunciacion is the fourth armure
Necessary to every orator,
In such case when craft unto nature
Joined is by diligent labor,
With elocucion, and that there be favor
In declaring with every circumstaunce,
Following the matter in chere and countenance
An heavy matter requires an heavy chere,
To a glad matter longs well gladness,
Man in pronounsing must follow the matere
Old orators can bear hereof witness:
A furious complaint vttred in distress
This was ye manner as poets do discriue,
In his tragedies when Senec was a live.
The fifte armure called Remembrance
With quick memory by providence to se
So auisely to groce up in substance
Holy his matters that naught forgoten be,
Lest forgetfulness derke not the liberte
Of clear report, each thing to have in mind,
That in pronounsing nothing be left behind.
Before provided so that forgetfulness
Be no hindrer to inuencion,
And in proceeding no foreyne rechelesnesse
Trouble not the order of disposicion:
And for taccomplishe all up with reason
That pronounsing by clear remembrance
Be well favored with chere and countenance.
These said things be inly necessary
To every prudent notable orator,
Not to hasty nor ouerlong to tarry
But to convey his process by measure:
In chere according stant all the favor,
For in pronounsing who lacks chere or face
Of Tullius schole stands far out of grace.
All erthely bestes be muet of nature
Save only man, which has advantage
By a prerogative above each creature,
To utter his conceit only by langage:
The soul by grace represseth all outrage,
Namely when reason has the soueraynte
To bridel passions of sensualite.
Kind unto man has given eloquence
A thing conuenable en especial,
When that it is conveyed by prudence
To talk of matters that be natural.
And secrets hyd above celestial
Does entreat of son, moan and stars,
Thin^^uent power sent of pees and wars.
God of all this has granted knowleging
Only to man by wysedom and reason,
And through langage give to him showing
Outward to make declaracion
Of the heavenly course and sondrie mocion:
Diverse chaunges and plainly to diffine
The reuolucion of the spheres nine.
Men by langage show out their ententes,
The natural meuing and mutacions,
Accord and discord of the four elamentes,
Kyndly variaunce of four complexions,
The generation and the corrupcions
Of erthely things, contrary each to other,
Corrupcion of one engendring of another.
This is the power and the precellence
Which is give to man reasonable,
That by langage and by eloquence
A man is taught in virtue to be stable:
Of soul eternal of body corrumpable,
Taught with his tongue while he is aline
Of his defautes how he shall him shryue.
Bochas eke tells touching rethorike
There be two manners, one is of nature
Learned in youth which does one speak like
As he hereth or lerneth by scripture:
Craft of rethorike is give to no creature
Save to man which by great diligence,
By study comes to craft of eloquence.
Craft of langage and of prudent speech
Causes prechours by spyrituall doctrine
Virtuously the people for to teache
How they shall live by moral discipline,
Langage techeth men to plant wine
Enformeth folk to worship holy church,
The artificer truly for to wurche.
Yet there be some y^ plainly teache and pr^che
Have of langage this opinion
God has not most regard unto speech
But to the heart and to the affection
Best began guerdon the inward intencion
Of every man, not after the visage
But like the meuing of their inward courage.
To our langage is great diversity
When men show theffect of their mening
Beit of joy or of aduersite
Chere for taccorde therewith in vttring,
Now debonayre some while rebuking,
And in rehersing like chere always tapply
Be it of rudeness be it of curtesy.
Of discrecion set a difference
In his pronounsinge to perce or undermine,
To draw the judge unto his sentence
Or to his purpose to make him to incline:
Se wheder he be melancolike or benign,
Or his matere be vttred or unclosed
Consider before how that he is disposed.
Peised all this thing by a rethoricien
With other thiges which apperteine of right
To craft of speech, he must conceive and seen
Matters of substance and matters y^ be light,
Dispose him self tentreate every wight,
Like to purpose and fine of his matiere,
As for the time rethorike does require.
As by ensample mine auctor does record
Men set at war in heart far a sonder
The rethoricien to make them for taccorde
Must seche ways and means here and yonder,
Of old rancour tappeise ye boystous thunder
By wise examples and proverbs pertinent
Tenduce the parties to be of one assent.
A man also that stant in heuinesse
Dispeired and disconsolate,
The rethoricien must do his business
The ground considred and felt of his estate,
The cause serched why he stant dissolate,
Which to reform by diligent labor
Is the true office of every orator.
Of rethoriciens whilom that were old
The sugared langage and virtuous daliau^ce
By good ensample and proverbs y^ they told
Words pesible enbelished with plesaunce
Appesed of tyrants the great ve^geaunce,
Set aside their furious sentence
By virtue only of prudent eloquence.
And contrary plainly to conclude
Men se all day by clear experience
Folk vnauised, and hasty foles rude
And braynlesse people of wylfull negligence,
Because they were barraine of eloquence
Vttryng their speech, as naked men and bare
For lack of rethorike their matter to declare.
By clear example, as purple (who takes head)
Lo^geth to kings in story ye may find,
With clothes of gold and rich velvet wede
Fret with Rubies and other stones Inde,
Saphirs, emeraudes, peerles of their kind
As all these things appropred be of right
Plesaunt obiectes to a man's sight:
So the langage of rethoriciens
Is a glad obiecte to man's audience,
With song melodious of musiciens
Which does great comfort to every presence:
As by example Amphion with song and eloquence
Builded the walls of Thebes the cite,
He had of rethorike so great subtilite.
In his langage there was so great plesaunce
Finding thereby so inly great profit,
That all the country came to his obeysaunce
To here him speak they had so great delight:
The people enuyron had such an appetite
In his person in peace and in bataile,
Here me may se what rethorike does aueile.
The.xvii. Chapter.
How Sextus warreied again Triumuir, and of the death of great Antonie and
Cleopatras.

Following thorder of Bochas in his book
With pen in hand as he cast up his eye,
Tofore him came pale of chere and look
A mighty prince son unto Pompeye
Called Sextus, which as books say
Delyted him with a great nauee:
Like a Pyrate to rob on the sea.
To his father contrary in such caas,
For every Pyrate of custom he did hate:
Upon the sea whose usage was
Against them proudelye to debate,
Pursued them early and eke late,
Where this Sextus to his great reprie^e
Was on the sea a robbour and a thief.
The sclaundre of him began to sprede far,
Reported was in many a far country,
With Triumuir this Sextus began a war,
Which is an office and a dignite
By the Romans committed unto three,
Notable estates, those for chiualry
Thempire all hole to govern and to gye.
The first of them named Lepidus,
And the second called Octauian
The third in nombre was Antonius,
Again which three Sextus this proud man
Of surquedy a new war began,
Before by Julius for his rebellion
Banished for ever out of Rome town.
Triumuir of politic governance
Well auised before in their reasons,
Treating for peace by notable purueiaunce
With proud Sextus under conditions,
Write and enacte in their conuencious,
But anon after list no while tarry,
He to his promise was froward and contrary.
For his conuycte outrageous falsnesse,
And on the sea for his robbery
Bochas of him writes no long process,
Having disdain his name to magnify
For he to virtue list nothing apply:
The different cause which is in the state
Atwene knighthode and life of a pyrate.
With fugitive thieves and robbours
And men exiled out of Rome town,
Banished people, false conspyratours,
With other conuicte of murdre and trayson,
He took all such under protection:
And one Moena a churl of his certain
Of forty ships he made him capitain.
The said churl unawarely tho began
To follow the nature of his condition,
Alied him self with Octauian
Again his lord, of full false traison
With all his navy and ships he came down,
Spared not to mete of very pride
With Menecratus yt was on Sextus side.
But al so soon as the bataile began
And the parties togider should gone,
All the vessels of Octauian
With sudden tempest were drowned echone,
Beside a castle buylt of lime and stone
Called Nauleton, where yet to great reprefe
Sextus fled and was brought to mischefe.
Went in to Greece to make him strong agein
To hold a battle with Antonius
Take in his coming by strength of a capitcin
Longing to Antonie called Phurnius
Whilom nephue to Caesar Julius,
And or duke Sextus might farther wend
He slain was and made there his end.
Of Triumuir in thempyre as I told
There was a captain called Lepidus,
Which by his office like as he was hold
Right busy was, the book reherseth thus,
To reconsile the proud Antonius
To the grace of great Octauian,
Each thing forgive whereof the war began.
And to conclude shortly who list se
Fortune a while was to him gracious,
Thempyre all whole governed by these three
Lordshyp of Affrike had Lepidus,
By which he wext proud and contrarius,
To him assigned under commissions
Fully the nombre of twenty legions.
Whereof in herthe caught such a pride
Causing by process his destruction,
Surquedy a while was his gide
Fro his estate till he was fall down,
Namely when he of false presumpcion
Took upon him of malice to warrey
The said Octauian, and began him disobey.
When Octauian his malice did se
That he began wax suddenly contrary,
He threw him down from his dignite
Cast him in exile, list no lengar tarry:
Lo how Fortune began suddenly vary
To make him that had governance
Of all Affryke, to come to mischaunce.
Another prince Caesar Lucius
Exiled was from Rome the cite
By his uncle the said Antonius,
Of wylfulnesse and hasty cruelte:
For in that time, as men may read and se,
Contrived causes were found up of malice
Texile princes notable hold and wise.
Some because they held with Caesar,
Other for Pompey y^ held on that party,
Some for their good before or they were ware
Some for suspection, some for envy,
Some for they could not flatter nor lie:
Some for virtues which was great routhe
Because they were so stable in their truth.
In this trouble dredefull and odious
As is rehearsed, in order ye may read,
The noble knight Paulus Lucius
Exiled was of malice and hatered
Following upon the great horrible deed
The pitous death and the hateful caas
Of great Antonie and Cleopatras.
The tragedy of these ylke twain
For me as now shall be set aside,
Cause Chaucer chief poet of Britain
Seeing their hertes could not divide
In his book the legende of Cupide
Remembering there, as one they did endure,
So were they buried in one sepulture.
Thing ones said by labor of Chaucer
Were presumpcion me to make again,
Whose making was so notable and enteer
Right compendious and notable in certain,
Which to reherce the labor were in vain*
Bochas remembering how Cleopatras
Caused Antonie how he distroied was.
Her Avarice was so importable,
He supprised with her great fayrnesse
Following her lusts foul and abominable,
She desyring to have be empress
And he alas of froward wylfulnesse
To please her, unhappily began
To warrey the great Octauian
Froward ambicion set his heart on fire
To climb up to the imperial sea,
To have possession of the hole empire,
Took upon him if it would have be
To reign alone in Rome the cite,
Cleopatras to foster her in pride
Tytell of Octauian for to set aside.
With multitude of many legions
As I have told, again Octauian
To him accroched of diverse regions
Great multitude of many manly man,
First on the sea to war he began
Where he was maugre all his might
To his confusion unawarely put to flight.
Dispeyred fled home to his country,
Knowing no help nor mean to recure
But to thencreas of his aduersite,
When that he saw his woeful adventure
Gain Octauian he might not endure,
With a sharp sword his danger to divert
Him self he rofe unawarely to the heart.
Of whose death the queen Cleopatras
Took a sorrow very importable,
Because there was no recure in the caas
Thought of his woe she would be partable,
Whose fatal end piteous and lamentable
Slough eke her self love so did her rave,
After they both were buried in one grave
Thus ends the sixth book and here after follows the seventh.
Of Antony son and heir to the great Antonie: and of Cesarius, Julia,
Agrippa, Cassius, and Galbus.

The First Chapter.
THis story ended, last of the sixte book,
Bochas weary thought for the best
Of great traueile oppressed in his look
Fill in a slombre leani^g on his chest,
Fully in purpose to have take his rest:
But euin as he rest should have take
Came a great prees, and made him tawake.
First of that fellowship came the son and heir
Of Antonie, with blood spreint all his wede,
Called Antonie fall in great dispeyre,
Cause Octauian bare to him haterede,
Whose sword he fled quaking in his dread
To an old temple socour for to have,
Trusting fro death the place should h^ save.
In that temple Caesar was deified,
Of who^ by Romans was set up an image,
But when he saw he was espied
He ran to Julius hie upon a stage,
Began him to enbrace in his piteous rage,
He rent away by sudden violence
Unawarely slain there gained no defense.
Next in order came Cesarius
Of whom there fill a wondre pitous caas,
Whilom beget of Caesar Julius
Upon the young fair Cleopatras,
Slain in his youth, thus writes Bochas:
As Octauian did him self assign,
For he gain Romans should not malign.
Following in order Julia began
Her grievous complaint to Bochas specify,
Whilom daughter to great Octauian,
With weping began to houle and cry,
Which by her father to punish her lechery
Exiled was out of her country,
For lack of socour died in pouerte.
Her son Agrippa young and tender of age
Borne of hie blood, Bochas does express,
Came next in order pale of his visage,
Which spent his time in slombre and idelnesse,
Froward to virtue, and for his wretchedness
Octauian which was great touthe,
Suffered him die at mischef for his sloth.
After Agrippa came forth anon right
Cassius, of Parme a famous great country,
Which in Itaile was hold a ma^ly knight,
With Mark Antony well cherished and secre
Bode in his court and there withal parde
Greatly allowed, first for his chiualry,
And for his notable famous policy.
And there withal he had in existence
A right great name, and stood in great favor
For his knighthode and for his hie prudence,
After accused unto the Emperor
Octauian for a coniuratour,
He should have be of froward false intent
To Julius death fully of assent.
For which by bidding of Octauian
Take he was being but young of age,
And as mine auctor well remember can
Brought tofore Julius hie upon a stage,
There offered up unto his image
By cruel death* the story tells thus,
For the false murdre of Caesar Julius.
After the death of the said Cassius
Another came of Rome the cite,
Which as I read called was Galbus
Of a Pretour having the dignite,
And for suspection slain eke was he,
His eyes first out of his head were rent
For Julius death, than in to exile sent.
Toward his exile by brigantes he was slain,
And After that within a litel while
Of his labor nouther glad ne feign
Bochas began to dyrecte his style
To great Herodes, breuely to compile
His grievous fall and holy the manner
To set in order next as ye shall here.
The.ii. Chapter.
How the tyrau^t Herodes slough his wife and children, and after died at
myschefe.

REmembrynge first in Jurye he was king,
Antipater his father, who list se,
In Arabia mightily reignyng:
Over the prouynce called Idume,
This same Herodes gardeyne of Galile,
Ordained was first for his hye prudence
And for his notable knyghtly excellence.
Famous in manhood, famous of his line,
Famous also by procreacion,
I read also he had wives nine,
And among all as made is mention
To his pleasaunce and his opinion,
Master of stories reherseth there was one
Mariannes fairest of echone,
By whom he had worthy sons twain,
Alysander, and Aristobolus,
But for his suster did at her disdain
Called Saloma, the story tells thus,
He unto her wext suspicious,
Because she was accused of envy
By Saloma touching auoutry.
Again her of rancour suddenly
He began of heart grievously disdain,
With rigorous heart he slew her furiously,
But as the story does us ascertayne
He for her death after felt great pain,
Ever when it came to his remembrance
Her port, her chere, her woma^ly plesaunce.
Lo what it is a prince to be hasty
To every tale of rancour to assent,
And counsaylles to proceed wilfully
To execucion of froward false intent,
For Herodes so sore he did repent
That he for thought fyl in to an noy,
Of hertely sorrow and malencoly.
Rest had he none nouther day ne night,
Troubled with fury that he wext frantyke,
with dremes vexed and many an uncouth sight,
Of chere nor color to no man he was like:
And every month ones lunatike,
A great while he had this woeful life
For sorrow only he had slain his wife.
And as the storye well reherce can,
In the Capitoyle mydde Rome the cite
By Antonye and by Octauian
He crowned was, and made king of Jude:
By the Senate made thereon a decree
And registered, that he and his kynred
Should in that land lineally proceed.
In Rome was made the confirmacion
To this Herodes, books specifye,
Being before the translacion
Was made of Juda and of Jurye,
Septer and crown with all the regaly
By him usurped as ye have herd toforne
Upon the time when Christ was borne.
This same Herodes by procuracion
Of Antonye, did also occupy
By Augustus plener remission,
The great estate called Tretrarchy
In two kyngdoms, with all the regaly
Of Traconitides, Jtury eke also,
By the Romans made lord of both two.
Master of stories reherseth of him thus
For commendacion in especial,
In Aschalon he builded a stately house
Of right great cost, a palayes full royal,
Was none so rich for to reken all:
After which mine authoure does so write
He called was Herod Aschalonite.
This same Herodes cruel of nature
Of chere and port passing ambicious,
Aye to be venged did his busy cure
On all that were to him contrarious,
His wives brother Aristobolus
In Jerusalem chief bishop as I read,
Falsely he slough of malice and hatered.
Unjustly reigned and borne through his realm
His heart fret and cankred with envy,
Another bishop in Jerusalem
Called Hircanus, mine author list not lie,
This same Herodes in his malencoly
Slew him unawarely by ra^cour vengeable,
Setting at dinner at his own table.
There was no man of corrage more cxuel
Nor more desirous to be magnified,
To make his name also perpetual
Four statelye cities he has edified,
Of which the names be here specified,
Cesaria, Sebastin, citees sovereign,
Antipadra, Cipre, that other twain.
He had also a false condition,
He trusted none that was of his kynrede,
His sons twain he had in suspectio^,
Their purpose was to sley him of hatred,
When he were dead hopyng to succeed:
And causeless as father most unkind
Made the^ be slain, in story thus I find.
In all his workyng he was found double,
A great tirant hold through his realm,
Never thing so greatly did him trouble
As when three kings came to Jerusalem
Jesu to seche, that was borne in Bethelem,
Boldly affirmynge cause of their coming
Was to worship that blessed young king.
The which thing when he did advertise
Prophecies remembringe and writings,
Within him self a mean he began devise
First to distroy these famous holy kings,
Namely when he knew of their offrynges:
Imaginyng began suppose blyue,
The child was borne that should him deprive
Newly descended fro David down by line
Cast almost Herodes in a rage,
Of cursed heart began frowardly malign
Like a tirant of venomous outrage
Slew all the children within two year of age
About Bethelem a full large space,
He spared none for favor nor for grace.
One of his children being at nurcery
As the story puts in remembrance
Of adventure, or they could it espy
His knights slough, I trow it was vengeance:
Each tirant gladly ends with mischau^ce,
And so much he that wext again Christ wode,
Which for his sake shed innoce^tes blood.
The no^bre of children that were slain in deed
About Bethelem and in tho parties,
An hundred forty and four.M. as I read,
Two year of age sought out by espies
Of Herodes, and for the prophecies
Of Christ's birth mention did make
They were echone slain for his sake.
Fro that day forth as made is mention,
He fyl in many uncouth malady,
His flesh began turn to corrupcion,
Frette with worms upon each party:
Which him assailed by great tourmentry,
His legs swole corbed black began shine,
Where vengeance works adue al medicine.
Of his sickness the stenche was so horible
To awayte on him no man might abide,
Unto him self his carrayne wext odible
So sore he was troubled on each side,
Leches for him did a bath provide,
But al for naught, in such mischefe he stood
Of grievous constraynt he suddenly wext wode.
In token he was weary of his life
So importable was his mortal pain,
To pare an apple he asked a sharp knyfe,
His malady did him so constrain
Fully in purpose to cut his heart in twain:
The knife he raught leysar when he found
One stood beside and bacwarde drue his hond.
For pain uneath his wind he might draw
Gave al his friends in commandment
By a decree and a furious law,
That all the worthy of parties adiace^t
Which y^ were feign or glad in their entente
Of his death, he void of all pitee
The same day they should slain be.
This cursed wretch this odious caytife
I read of none stood farther out of grace,
In sorrow and mischefe ended has his life,
Each man was glad when he should pace:
And for his storye does this book difface,
With woeful clauses of him when I write
Therefore I cast no more of him tendite.
Lenuoy.
OF Herodes the unware cursed fall,
The life ungracious of him and his kinrede,
Ever vengeable in his estate roial,
His wife, his children, slough of old hatered:
Innocents he made in Bethelem blede,
Reignyng in Juda, borne of foreyne lygne,
The first tyrant, ye may the Bible read,
Which again Christ began frowardly malign.
His sword of rigor cruel and mortal
Aye ready whet to do vengeance in deed,
Hasty and fumous with furies infernal,
Of wylfull malice innoce^tes blood to shede:
Did execucion also on womanhede,
Slew his alies, which was a cursed sign,
For the first cause he stood in dread
Which again Christ began frowardly malign.
He would that none were to him egall
That day alive in Israel to succeed,
The birth of Christ dred in especial
Cause fro Jesse his line began flower and sede,
He but a forrayne came in by fraud and mede,
Without titell to that estate vndigne,
The first also who list take heed
Which again Christ began frowardely malign.
Noble princes that govern over all
This large world, both in length and bread,
When you sit highest in your royal stall
Do not the people oppress nor ouerlede,
Upon Herodes remember as I read,
In what mischefe that tyrant did fine,
To show y^ none shall in his purpose speed
Which again Christ does cursedly malign.
The.iii Chapter.
Of Antipas exiled by Octauian, and of Archelaus son of Herodes the second.

COmpendiouslye thus ye have herd the fall
Of Herodes remembered by Bochas,
Who in his testament set in especial
To succeed him Herod Antipas,
In have exiled (of him this was cas)
By Octauian to Vien as I read,
And Archelaus ordained to succeed,
Son of Herodes called the second,
Which in effect took possession,
In Jerusalem reigned as I read:
Of whom mine aucthor for short conclusion
Makes in his book but small mention,
Him and his brother set suddenly aside
Of them to write no longer list to abide.
Save that he writes the forsaide Antipas
At Vien a mighty great cite,
In his exyle soon after slain was:
And Archelaus succeding in Jude
With Herodias who list the storyse,
By Agrippa to Tiberye accused
Of certain crimes, could not be excused.
A certain time commanded to prison,
Of the emperor could never get grace,
Banished him fer from his region
In to Spain, for a certain space,
And his worship breuely to deface
Fortune caused to his final reprefe,
He died there in pouerte and mischefe.
The fatal end rehearsed of these twain
In what distress that they did fine,
Mine auctour after began his pen ordain
To write the case by many a woeful line,
Upon the striefe at wene Messalyne
And other twain, standing by her side
Tofore Jhon Bochas how they did chyde
Tofore Bochas they came all three to plain,
Messalyne the wife unto Claudius,
Again whom there were other twain
Calligula and Tiberius
In whose time was slain Christ Jesus:
Touching y^ debate that was among these three
Suyng the process here following ye shall se.
The.iiii. chapter.
Of the strife between Calligula Tiberius and Messalyne.

This empress named Messalyne
As I have told was wife unto Claudius,
Successor as books determyne
To Calligula called Gayus:
And as I find, that Tiberius
With Calligula both wode for tene,
Stood before Bochas and Messaline atwene.
Metynge al three with furious look and chere,
Gayus Calligula called by his name
Began first reherce anon as ye shall here
Without reverence or any manner shame,
With an exordye to diffame:
Bochas present felly began abrayde
To Messalyne and even thus he said.
Thou sclaundred woman, noysed in lechery
Through the world, as folk thy name atwite,
And reported for thine aduoutry,
What do y^ here in thy mournyng habit*
I trow thou come of purpose to visit
In this place the unhappy women five,
Touching disclaundre that ever were alive.
The first of them called Emilia,
And Lepyda was named the second,
Liuia, and Plaucia and the fyfthe Elya,
Diffamed echone in deed as it was found:
In token whereof the lechery to confound
Of Emilia in auoutry take
Was by the law of her lord forsake.
By the whylom was know that Drusus
Strangled was and murdered by poison,
Like to Claudia daughter of Claudius,
Which by her lord the book makes mention
Was thrown out to her confusion,
For her defautes found in auoutry
Sclaundred for ever there was no remedy.
Thou coudest whylom make thy lord sleep
With certain drinks to cast him in a rage,
By which he was made his bed to keep
To get layser in thy flouring age
For to misuse of false lust thine outrage,
A nightertyme took upon thee a wede
At the bordell dyddest amysse for mede.
Thine appetite was very vnstau^cheable,
It is a shame to write it or express
Thine hateful life was so abominable,
Tibery and I can bear hereof witness:
And with the word anon she began her dress
When she had herd al their fell langage,
Gave them this answer with a sad visage.
Certes (quod she) I could never keep
To save my self a woeful creature,
I have great cause to complain, cry, and weep
My sclau^drous life which I may not recure:
But I suppose I had it of nature
To be such one, for by days old
An astronomer so my father told:
At my birth taking the ascendent,
Told long before of my misgouernaunce.
The son, the moon, toward the orient
Were in the sign that bears the balau^ce,
And said also more for assurance,
The same sign had by description
His foot in Virgyn, arms in Scorpion.
Amid the heaven was Venus exaltate,
with Mars co^ioyned, the book makes mention:
And Jupiter was also unfortunate
To my said disposicion,
Within the fyshe held tho his mancion:
Thus by the lordshyp plainly of Venus
I was disposed for to be lecherous.
In her excuse the said Messalyne
Began allege her constellacion,
But prudent clerks plainly determine
Of heavenly course the disposicion
Is obeysaunt and subject to reason:
That every man which well governed is
Is not constrained of force to do amys.
Nor byndeth no man of necessity
Vicious lusts frowardly to sue,
A virtuous man stante at liberte
False inclinacions by prudence to remewe,
Every man by grace may eschew
Al thing to virtue that found is contrary,
For there is no sin but it be voluntarye.
Yet for all this the said Messalyne
In her excuse would not be in pees,
The heuyn (quod she) as Poets determyne
Was borne up whylom by mighty Hercules:
Yet could he never of nature have relees
For all his knighthod and his chiualry,
To overcome the vice of lechery.
But thou Calligula and thou Tiberius
What ever ye say I take thereof none head,
For thou Calligula called eke Gaius
Thy self diffouled with lechery in deed,
To rebuke other y^ should stand in dread:
But thy rebukes in party for to quyte
Who is defouled none other should atwyte.
By fames tru^pe thy sclau^dre is out blow
Through all the world reported shamefully,
Thy three susters fleshely thou dydest know,
Wexe read for shame, and for thy party
For the vice of hateful lecherye
During thy life putme no more in blame,
Which art thy self defouled in the same.
It sits not in no manner wise
A thief for theft to sit in judgment,
A lecherous man a lechour to chastise,
Nor he that has al his life spent
In waste and riote forfeted and miswent,
To be a judge other to redress,
Nor leprous leches to cure men of sickness.
I would have suffered and take in patience
If of Affricke the chaste Scipion
Had me rebuked for my great offense,
I would have suffered his word of just reason:
Or if the famous prudent old Caton
Had again me in such case made abrayde,
I would have suffered what ever hehad said.
Or if Lucrece for my correction
Had laid to me, by virtuous doctrine,
All my forfetes myd of Rome town,
I would have bowed both back and chine
To have obeyed unto her discipline:
Shame for a creple to stand y^ has no might.
To rebuke other for they go not upright.
Against the also I may reply
Many an other false conspiracion
Touching matters of nygromancy
And many an other contrived false poison,
Found in two books Bochas makes mencio^:
One called Pugio most supersticious,
And the second named Gladius,
Able all this world tenuenyme and encloy.
Again three states dwelling in Rome town
Their names write of them thou cast distroy.
Which to remember is a great abuston:
A chest also fulfilled of poison
After thy death cast in thee see I read,
By which an hundred.M. fishes were dead.
On this matter is tedious for to abide,
Namely to princes, princesses, borne of hie estate,
It sits not gentle blood to chide
By furious rancour to stand at debate,
And for these matters ben unfortunate
I will pass over and no more of them write,
Save of their end co^pendiously to endite.
To the Tiberye I have somewhat to said
Know and reported by many a creature
How in Cha^paine folk had of the dysdayne
For thy most hateful lecherous ordure,
In thilke vice which is again nature:
Which tacco^plish void of al hap and grace.
Thine abydyng was in a suspicious place.
To such false lusts duringe all thy life
List not forbear, in thy latter age
Thou vsidst many rich restoratife
In such unthrift to encreace thy corrage,
Of ribaudy thou fill in such dotage,
How may thou than rebuke me for shame
Which in such case art blotted with diffame?
I did amysse but it was in my youth,
Horrible things which Gaius has told,
But thine outrage the report is yet couthe
Thou dydest them use both young and old,
And for tafforce your vices manifold
Thou and Caligula in all such ribaudy
Did greatest surfeit in froward glotony.
Also Tiberye thou being Emperor
Cruel, causeless, and most malicious
Did murdre in Rome the famous orator
Called in his time prudent Asinius,
Which through thempire Romans told thus
Was light and lantern found at all assayes
Of rethorike called in his days.
Thou were eke cause that werthy Nonomus
King of Parthois through thy cruelte
Exyled was, thou were so covetous
To have possession of his treasour parde,
Died in mischefe and in pouerte:
Be shamefast any wight to accuse
Which in such case thy self can not excuse.
To Agripyne thou dyddest great outrage,
As Romayne stories well reherce can,
When she for socour to the great image
Ran to be saved of Octauian,
Myd the temple a place called than
Which halpe her not, y^ she list thither wend
Put out by force, for hunger made an end.
Thine own brother called Germanicus
Which in his time was so good a knight,
Thy brother also called eke Drusus,
Both were poisoned and slain against right,
By false co^spiring of thine imperial might:
Texcuse the murdre thy self at the leest
Were clad in black at their funeral feast.
I have no connyng spech nor langage
To reherce nor make mention
Specially of ye great outrage
And sacrilege thou dyddest in Rome town,
By violence when thou drew down
The image of Janus, and after in all have
In to Tibre thou made him to be cast.
And thou Caligula among thy vices all,
Of surquedye and false presumpcion
Would that men a god the should call,
Twen Pollux and Castor to have thy mancio^,
Fro which place thou art now throw down:
Which held thy self among the gods seven
Egall to Jupiter for to sit in heaven.
Answer to me here being in presence
Which of these four Mars, Janus, Minerue
Or Mercury god of eloquence
Has rent the down as thou dydest deserve,
Fro Jupiter in mischefe for to sterue,
That thou herafter where so y^ laugh or froune
Shall have no favor more with him to rown?
With these defautes and many other
Before reherced in hindering of thy name,
How thou ordaynest first to sle thy brother
with me^ of arms which was to thy great shame:
To Tholome thou did also the same,
Son and heir to king Jubatoun
And many a senator thou slew in Rome town
Shittest up myd Rome the cite
Their garners which never before was seine,
Whereby enfamyned was the commonte
Pite to here, this plat and plain,
Of necessite constrained in certain
(Shame to reherce or put in scripture)
Ete their members a thing again nature.
Jupiter nor Juno the goddess
Gave no such counsel I suppose unto the,
But it was Venus to flater thy hyghnes
And furious Mars by froward cruelte,
To slay senators greatest of that cite,
Thy self after (whereof the town was feign)
By thy servants murdered werte and slain.
And for tabate thine outrage and thy pride
Which thou have used all thy life,
Lift up thine head look on thy left side
Thou finder up of murdre and of strife
Slew* thou not Cesonia thy wife?
Thy daughter after that called was Drusil,
Of cursed intent thy malice to fulfill?
I have marvel how any of you twain
Thou Calligula or thou Tiberius
Be not ashamed any thing to said
Again me with vysage dispitous,
Me for to atwite that I was lecherous:
Of a small mote ye can abrayde me,
But in your eye a beam ye can not se.
Where have your souls take herbergage
That be contrayre with me for to strive?
I trow that Caron has made your passage
Up at the stronde in Hell for to aryue,
There ye abide thus I descryue,
Where dredful Stix called infernal flode
Of custom re^neth with furious wawes wode.
Radamantus one of the judges twain
With king Mynos has you a judgment
Perpetually ye shall bide in pain,
And Eacus has ordained your turmente
In Flegeton the floode most violent:
Ye shall be drowned and an end make
Ever for to abide among ye stremes blake.
I may you call of Emperors the refuse,
Ye should be shamefast to show your visages,
Very astonyed dredful and confuse
To have to me so vncurtoys langages:
Thus Messalyne daunted their corrages
With her feminine crabbed eloquence,
They durst no longer abide in her presence.
The.v. Chapter.
Of the most vicious tiraunt Nero that slew Peter and Paul and at the last
him self.

This hateful story with many a woeful line
Of Calligula and Tiberius,
Touching the strife atwene them and Messalyne,
Shamful rebukes, froward and odious,
By them rehearsed with chere most furious,
As ye have herd here ended their chiding
Nero the tyrant comes next upon the ringe.
One most cursed in comparison
That ever was of hye or low degree,
Most disnaturall of condition
By great outrages of cursed cruelte,
That ever reigned in Rome the cite,
His father called (books determyne)
Domicius, his mother Agripine.
This Agripina by her subtilte
And blind fortune being favorable,
That set up tirauntes of froward volunte
(By their demerites though they be not able)
To estate imperial and notable,
What thing more dredefull who can understand
Than cruel tirauntes with blody sword in hand*
When this Nero of age was twelve year,
He was ordained in especial
After he had learned his gramere
And the seuin arts called liberal,
Unto a master in all virtues moral,
Called moral Senec which did his pain
From al vices his youth to restrain.
He kept him ever this Senec, as I read,
Maugre his fatal disposicion
By a constraint and a manner dread
From al outrage, and by inclinacion,
Conceived well his dysposicion
To be vicious of his nature,
Which to restrain he did his busy cure.
At one and twenty winter of his age
Croniculers of him written thus,
How he that time took in marriage
Octauia daughter to Claudius,
All this while being virtuous,
While Senec had him under discipline
His mother in law called Messaline.
The said Senec made him to desire
To pursue connyng by diligent labor,
At entering in first of his empire
I mean when he was crowned emperor,
Of all the Senate had great favor:
And by report as clerks of him write,
In prose and meter he could right well endite.
In Jhon Bochas as it is made mind
He did excel greatly in poetry,
Made in tho days also as I find
A book notable of strange poesy,
Like as mine auctour of him does specify:
The title thereof called Lusce
Again a pretour Claudius Polle.
Excelled in music and in armony,
Crowned with laurer for ye best harpour
That was that time, and he did edify
In Rome a palace with many a rich tour
Which in buylding cost great treasour,
The circuit being three thousand paas
And Transitory that palace called was.
For this cause as put is in memory
The said palace afterward was brent
Therefore it was called Transitory,
But after that Nero in his intent
Let build a house by great auysement
To recompense that other that was old,
And called it the rich house of gold.
In all this world was none to it lyche
Where that ever men did ride or gone,
Tables of yuorye fret with perry rich,
Pyllers of cristal garnished with many stone
Saphyrs, Rubyes, and Topasion,
Crisolytes, and Emeraudes grene
With plate of gold siled that shone full shene.
To bodily lust and dilectacion
This said Nero set al his desires*
Gardayns and condyttes for recreacion
He did ordain to endure many years,
With nets of gold fyshed in his ryuers,
His garnementes of gold and Inde stones
And never he would have them on but ones
In his beginning the story does deuyse,
Lord and Emperor in the cite
To Senators he gave full great frau^chyse,
Granted commons many a great liberte,
But in his most imperial dignite
Of froward will left all good policy,
And al atones gave him to ribaudry.
Of Greece and Egypt with diverse iogelours
And among villayns him self dysportinge,
Left the presence of old Senators
And among ribaudes he would harp and sing,
Made comodies dishonestly sowning,
At the bordel did him self auaunce
With common women openly to dau^ce.
Thus by process to al virtue contrary,
By great excess he fill in glotony,
And after that list no longer tarry
As every vice to other does apply,
Surfeit and riot brought in lechery
And ground of al as chief porteresse
To exyle virtue was froward ydlenes.
About the cite called Hostience,
Beside Tibre and other fresh rivers
Did ordain by excessife expense
Tents for riot, cokes, and tauerners,
And all the night revel about the fires:
Ladies be came that were before well named
By such false riot afterward defamed.
The same Nero by false abusion
It is reported, his story who list se,
By violence from their religion
Such as had auowed chastity
And were professed to virginite
In the temple of Vesta the goddess,
Of froward lust he did them oppres.
Among which Rubria was one
Maugre her will she durst it not deny,
From the temple builded of lime and stone
Sacred to Vesta mine auctour list not lie,
He rent her out to use his lecherye,
Not withstandyng she was religious
Made her to abide at the borde^ house.
By my writing men shall never read
The matter is so foul and outrageous
To be reherced, and the horible deed
Which Nero used whylom on Sporus,
And on an other called Ompharus,
Both male children as books tell can
Them to transfourme to likeness of a woman.
Some books of him determine
Like a ribaude horrible and detestable
He misused his mother Agripine,
And like a tiraunt cruel and vengeable
Which to remember is abominable,
He made her womb be corue upon a day
To se the place nine months where he lay.
Of disnatural hateful cruelte
To God nor virtue having no regard,
And of the vice of prodigalite
He was accused, in knyghthod a cowarde,
And to al virtue contrary and froward:
Of whose wodenes good head when I took,
I was ashamed to set him in this book.
He hated all that were virtuous
And to them had special envy
His brethern, his wife, this tirant dyspitous
He falsely slew in his malencoly,
His master Senec (auctours specifye)
Aye when he saw him having a manner dread,
In an hot bathe to death he made him blede.
To Polifagus a wodeman most savage
Which that fed him most with flesh of man,
Nero took men old and young of age
To find him vitayle in streets where he ca^e,
Cursed at his end, cursed when he began,
When he did offer innocents blood
To be devoured of him that ran so wode.
Christ's fayeth first he began werreye
Of emperors in his froward intent,
Peter and Paul in Rome he made deye
Upon a day their legende does assent:
Half the cite of Rome I find he brent,
And Senators welnye euerychone,
This Nero slew spared almost never one.
Made his Mules be shod with silver shone
Of surquedye when he should ride,
The cite brent Romans after sone
Pursued him upon every side,
And from a subarbe where he did abide
Twene Salaria and Numentana right,
There stant a path whyder he took his flight.
By a deep marys as Nero took his flight
When he saw he might not asterte,
He was so pursued by a Romayne knight
To find socour he might not dyuerte:
Roue him self anon unto the heart,
With a sharp dagger a cursed end lo,
Of the false tiraunt that called was Nero.
Instead of a Lenuoye.
OF this Nero to write a Lenuoye
Nor of his deeds to make mention
To read the process no man should have joy,
For all concludes of murdre and of treason,
On aduoutry excess and poison,
Riot, glotony, lechery, vengeance,
Slaughter of him self ended with mischau^ce
If that I might I would race his name
Out of this book that no man should it read,
His vicious life chief myrrour of diffame,
Set him aside let no wight take heed
For to remember so many a cruel deed,
Save only this to think in substance
How every tiraunt ends in mischaunce.
Of him I cast to wrytenowe no more
And what I say is said but in reprefe
Of the vices that he wrought of yore,
During his empire, concluding for a chief
All tyranny shall end with myschefe:
Record on Nero which for misgouernau^ce.
As ye have herd ended with mischaunce.
The.vi. Chapter.
How Eleazarus a Jewe borne for extorcion and robbrye was brought in prison
and there ended.

AAter Nero came Eleazarus
A Jewe of birth, a price of robbry
An extorcioner, cruel, and dispitous,
For his outrages don in that party
To redress his hateful tyranny
A mighty pretour was sent fro Rome down,
Called Felix, in to that region.
By force of Felix take he was and bound,
Maugre his might unto Rome sent
Strongly fettred, with massy chains round,
Suffered in prison many great turment,
At the last this was his judgment,
There to abide because he was a thief,
For evermore, ended in mischefe.
The.vii. Chapter.
How the head of Galba was smytten of, filled full of gold, and offered at the
sepulture of Nero.

TOfore Bocas next came Galba down,
Which in Spain did many knyghtly deed,
After the death rehearsed of Neroun,
In hope stood this Galba as I read
In thempyre justly to succeed,
Parcel for knightehode he has him so well borne,
And for great marriage which he had beforne.
I find in Bochas rehearsed in sentence
He was disclaundred of hateful vices three,
He was cruel contrary to clemence,
Strait in keeping, gain liberalite,
Vengeable of heart gain mercy and pity,
A thing not sitting unto chyualry,
Of custom give to sloth and slogardy.
To occupye thempyre he began,
Among Romans took possession,
Claiming a title by one Licy^ian
That was his son by adopcion:
But anon after for his presumpcion
One called Occho a full manly knight,
Smyt of his head were it wrong or right.
This said Galba mine auctour writes thus
From his empire un warely pulled down
Had an enemy called Patrobolus,
The head of Galba took in possession,
Filled it with gold, made an oblacion
At the sepulture of Nero therewithal,
To all the gods and goddesses infernal.
The.viii. Chapter.
How Occho and Vitellius for glottony, lechery, ribaudry, and cruelty, ended
in mischefe.

ANd after that this offryng was full do
As ye have herd, to Bochas than
To make his complainte in order came Pyso,
Before surnamed justly Lycinian,
Son adoptyfe to tell as I began
Of the said Galba, claimyng to succeed,
Slain anon after by Occho as I read.
Than was thempire parted in to three,
Occho took Rome unto his party,
And Vitellius to reign in the country
Over the bounds of all Germanye,
And Vaspasian reigned in Surrey,
But first this Occho surnamed Siluius
Came to complain cruel and dispitous.
Of al thempire this same Siluius
By slaughter, rauyne, and extorcion,
By murdre, death, and deeds outrageous,
With mighty hand took the possession:
And there began a great division
Which was occasion of great sorrow and woo
Atwene Vitellius and this said Occho.
It is reherced that in Germanye
In sundry places they had battayls three,
In the which Occho with his party
Venquished the field, made his fone to flee,
But through fortunes mutabilite
The fourth time plainly this is the caas,
Maugre his might discomfited there he was.
Tofore Bedry a mighty strong cite.
Of Germanye was this discomfiture
After which of froward cruelte
This said Occho seeing his adventure,
With woe supprised might not endure
Of his constraint the unportable pain,
Took a sword and roue his heart a twain.
Vitellius having the victory
With his power as made is mention,
Of surquedy and false vain glory
Came with his host in to Rome town:
But Bochas here makes a description
Rehersing shortly his birth and eke his line,
And how that he of blood was Saturnyne.
This to say, Saturnus king of Crete
Chaced by Jupiter out of his region,
And Ianus had in Itayle take his sete
Upon a mount called Ianiculum,
Where now of Rome is bilte the large town,
Ianus receuyng of liberalite
When Saturn fled in to his cite.
Tofore y^ coming of Saturn this no fail
Rude and boystous and beastial of reason
Was all the people abiding in Itayle,
Land was none sow nor turned up so down,
Nor marchaundise used in no town
Till Saturn taught the manner of living
Of tilth and labor to Ianus that was king.
Before whose coming tofore as I you told
Craft was none used by no creature,
Nor no building of houses new nor old,
But lived as beasts their liuelode to recure,
Like as they were learned of nature:
They could tho days make no cloth ne shape
Of frosty wethers the grievous cold tescape.
They were not busy by costfull apparayle,
Of sundry meats and confections
Of diverse drinks and manifold vitayle
To be curious to their refections,
Marketts were none in cities nor in tounes,
No man with other bought nor sold
Till Saturn came and the^ the manner told.
And when he had taught them the manner
And set an order of their governance,
There simple people as books do us lere
Like as to god did their attendaunce,
with certain rightes to do their obseruaunce,
Worshipped him and after did him call
Saturn most mighty of their gods al.
After this Saturn was made a petegre
To set an order conveyed from his line,
Discending down the manner who list se
To one Latinus, and so forth to Lauine,
Which was his daughter as poets determie,
Thus by disce^t fro Saturn and Faunus
Borne of their blood came Vitellius.
The first knight borne of that lineage,
Because he was manly and right famous
Had in arms prowess and great corrage
He called was Vitellius Publius,
And of him came Vitellus Lucius,
Father to him mine auctour does express
Of whom that I have gonne this process.
Diverse stories remember and plainly tell
During his youth and stood at liberte,
How this for said that called was Vitell
Was the most vicious y^ any where might be,
Give to ribaudy and al dishoneste:
Because of which changed was his name
Called Spintour a name of great diffame.
I find that he was an hasardour
In all his works passing riotous,
For his surfetes great with the emperor
That whilom was called Claudius,
And for his deeds and manners outrageous
For his great waste and prodigalite
Of great dispce, he fell in pouerte.
Among his riotes and surfetes more than one
Which he did in countries here and there,
I find that he for need sold a stone
Which his mother bare whylom at her ear:
For by old time was used who list lere
Women that were that time of hye degree
Bare at their ears stones and perre.
And by the sellyng of that rych stone
For which that he received great treasour,
By subtle workyng and sleightes mo than one
He gate him trendes and was made emperor:
And therewithal he did eke his labor
To receive another dignite,
To be chief bishop in Rome the cite.
And in short time this Vitellius
Of thempyre took on him all the state,
The sword received of Caesar Julius,
Used a garnement that was purpurate:
Dempt of him self he was most fortunate
Not with standing more boldly that time atleest
Of Aliensoys holden was the feast.
Aliensoys was a solempnite
Among Romans kept by days old,
In french mine auctour records thus parde:
And in that time of custom no man should
Nor by statute bound was nor hold
To do no manner occupacion
That touched unto religion.
During this feast he should have his askyng
By a custom used in that cite,
And Vitellius as emperor and king
Asked that time another dignite,
To be chief bishop and have auctorite
Of that estate with power hole and plain,
No man so hardy to reply theragayne.
From al virtue Vytel did vary,
Set at naught al wisdom and science,
Thought unto him was not necessary
Co^ning, knighthode, ma^hode, nor providence,
Gave him only to sloth and negligence,
To glotony, following his desires,
Watch alnyght with drink and ^eresoupers.
Being a bishop of their panym law
Like romayne ryghtes doing their seruise,
Tofore the gods he would him self wtdrawe
And cast aside senser and sacrifice,
And call a boy in full ungodly wise
A kechyn boy tofore the hye auter,
And him commanded to bring him his dinner.
Being arrayed in his pontificail
For the manner void of devotion,
Like a ribaude or like a wode minstral
Ever dronkle we and out of all ceason,
Gorge upon Gorge this excessyue gloton
Most ydropike drank often again lust,
The more he drank the more he was athrust
This was a bishop sacred for Satan,
And an emperor crowned with mischau^ce,
More like in port a beast than a man
Used al his power in slaughter and vengeance,
To shed blood was set all his pleasaunce,
Taking no head nouther of wrong ne right
And thus he wexte hateful to every wight.
His soudiours forsook him nigh echone
In all parties, by him where they were sent,
Through all the countries of Septemtrion
And in all Surry toward the orient,
Of one accord and all of one assent
Echone forsook him, with him bode not a man
And became servants to Vaspasian.
Vitellius saw it would be none other,
And for feeble of dronknenes and outrage,
And saw the power began fail of his brother
When he had sent and signed the voyage
Again Vaspasian to hold his passage,
But al for naught backward went his party
Stood dyspayred of every remedy.
Thus Vitellius unhappy to the werres,
Like a fordronke unhappy gloton,
Whose bost before raught up to the sterres,
Now al his pride in mischefe is come down,
Feign for to accord to this conuencion:
For litel treasour which men should him assygne
To Vaspasian thempyre to resygne.
This was his promise but he held it naught,
What he said his word was never stable,
Certain flaterers changed had his thought
And certain como^s that ever be chau^geable
Gave him counsel, said him self was able
To govern thestate imperial
And none so able for to reken al.
First of Almayne he sent out soudiours
And of presumpcion a new werre he began,
Thought y^ he was among other werriours
Able to fight again Vaspasian,
And of adventure it befell so than
In these werres Vaspasians brother
Yslayne was it would be none other
This froward man called Vitellius
Ungracious ever found in his intent,
Smyt of the head of the said Fabius
Brother of Vaspasia^ and to Rome it sent,
And after that the Capitoyle he brent,
But suynge on within a little space
Among Romans he lost both hap and grace.
Of his riot what should I more entrete
For except riot nothing of him I read,
His coke, his pastelere, folk were most mete
To serve his lusts and appetites to feed,
Forsook him not but went with him in deed
Toward Champayne, right as any line
Up to a hill called Auentyne.
Standing in hope but that was but in vain
Of Vaspasian the favor to recure,
Even to Rome returned is again,
The palace entered, and there him self to assure
Having with him none other creature
The gates shyt which was to him shame
Take at the last, forsook his own name.
Half naked he was and half clad
Al alone like as he was found,
So in the city before the people lad
Both his hands behind his back bound
With mighty chains and ropes round:
Like a woodeman of look and of visage,
The people to him having this langage.
O thou old lecherous foul gloton,
A very cowarde, to al virtue contraire,
Cruel, vengeable of thy condition,
To every good man cruel aduersayre,
To all cursed benygne and debonayre,
Rote of al surfetes, having aye delight
To sue and follow thy lecherous appetite.
With such rebukes and castyng of ordure
With donge and clay blotted was his vysage,
In the presence of many a creature
With cords draw he was by great outrage
Unto a place called in their langage
Their chief rackes, or galowes of the town,
Where is of custom done execucion.
Some men remember he slain was in haste
with sharp swords disme^bred on y^ ground,
His carayne after into Tybre cast
With a large hoke of iron sharp and round,
No more reverence than a stinking hounde:
Remembering here mine auctour says also
Of this Vitellius Galba and Occho,
Affyrmyng thus as for their party
They be named among the emperors,
For a time the state did occupy:
And first this Galba by record of auctours
Died at mischefe void of all socours,
Eight months reigned as lord and sire,
And after that cast out of his empire.
The third month as made is mention
Occho died, proud and ambicious,
And as I find the dominacion
Last eight months of Vitellius,
And for they were proud and lecherous,
Cruel, vengeable, and borne of cursed live,
In wretchydnesse echone they did fine.
The.ix. chapter.
Here Bochas against gluttony complayneth saying as it follows.

HEre Bochas seeing the great offense
Of this foresaid froward company,
Took his pen of entere diligence
And in his study began him self apply
To dampne the vice of hateful glotony,
For which sin record of Adame
All our mischeues and sorrows came.
By the outrage of disobeysaunce
Our said father being in Paradise
Twene him and virtue there rose a great distau^ce,
Clearly conceived he that was so wise
Above creatures by reason bare the prise,
Till he of folly wrongly began assent
To be governed by a false serpent.
His innate virtues did him anon forsake
For his assenting, and did in haste return
Again to heuin when the infernal snake
Instead of virtue did with man soiourne:
For which we have great matter to mourn
Sith that we be disfourmed in certain
By vicious living of virtue made barayne.
And thus came in the dominacion
Of vices al, and held a great battle,
The retinue sent from the infernal dongeon
Us woeful wretches in earth for to assail,
Stretching their power and proudly began prevail
Through the world and possession took
For out demerites when virtue us forsook.
These said virtues comprised in the nombre
Of four, rekened prudence, attemperaunce,
From vicious life, tadawed us fro y^ slombre,
Rightwisnesse to have hold the balaunce,
And fortitude of their aliaunce,
When they forsook mankind to govern
Than of all virtue was clipsed the lantern.
Thus through derknesse vices were bold
The multitude almost innumerable,
Among all rekened of new or old
There be four perilous and repreuable,
Sloth, lechery, and most abhomynable
False aurice, by a gredy desire
With glotony, chief kyndler of their fire.
Nature in sothe with littel is content,
And as mine auctour abides here a while
And to remember was somewhat diligent
To write when Saturn reigned in the isle
Called Crete, the prophetess Sibyle
In her time by great auctorite
The world divided prudently in three.
The.x. Chapter.
A chapter discriuinge the golden world, that is to say when attemperaunce
had holy the governance.

THe world wha^ Saturn was first king
Reigninge in Crete in his Royal estate,
Noe and Abraham by virtuous living
Caused erthly folk to be most fortunate,
The world tho days was called aureate,
For sobrenesse and attempraunce
Had in that world holy the governance.
There was y^ time no wrong nor violence
Envy exiled from every creature,
Dissolucion and dronken insolence
Rybaudy and al such foul ordure,
Froward surfetes contrary to nature,
Banyshed were because attemperaunce
Had in that world holy the governance.
Youth was bridled under discipline,
Virtuous study floured in myddle age,
Dread held the yard of norture and doctrine,
Riot restrained from surquedous outrage,
Hateful detraction repressed his langage,
Kouth was charity because attemperaunce
Had in that world holy the governance.
Fortitude stood tho in his might,
Defended wydowes and cherished chastyte,
Knighthod in prowess gave so clear a light
Gyrte with his sword of truth and equire,
Held up the church in spiritual dignite,
Punished heritikes, because attemperaunce
Had in that world holy the governance.
Rightwisnesse chastised all robbours
By egall balaunce of execucion,
Fraud, false mede, put backwarde fro jurors
True promise hold made no delacion.
For swering shamed durst enter in no town,
Nor lesingmongers, because attemperaunce
Had in that world holy the governance,
That golden world could love god and dread,
All the seuyn deeds of mercy for to use,
The rich was ready to do almesdede
Who asked harbor men did him not refuse,
No man of malice would other tho accuse,
Diffame no neighbor because atte^peraunce
Had in that world holy the governance.
The true merchant by mesure bought and sold
Disceite was none in the artifycer,
Maki^g no balkes y^ plough was truly hold,
Abacke stood ydelnesse fer fro the laborer,
Discrecion marciall at dinner and souper,
Content with measure, because atte^perau^ce
Had in that world holy the governance.
Of waste in clothing was yt time no excess,
Men might ye lord from his subjects know,
A difference made twene pouerte and richesse,
Twene a princess and other states low,
Of horned beasts no boste was tho blow:
Nor countrefte faining, because atte^perau^ce
Had in that world holy the governance.
This golden world long while did endure,
Was none alay in that metal seen,
Till Saturn cesed by record of scripture
Jupiter reigned, put out his father clean,
Changed Obrison in to silver shene,
All up so down because attemperaunce
Was set aside and lost her governance.
Of Martes mineral the metal is so strong
Inflexible and not malliable,
By sturdinesse to do the people wrong
With rigorous sword, furious and vengeable,
The merciful gold of Phoebus, not plicable
To have compassion, because attemperaunce
Was set aside and lost her governance:
Leed of Philosophers is called gold leprus,
Tyn of Jupiter, crasshing and dull of soun,
False and fugitife is Mercurius,
The moon is mutable of her condition,
The golden world is turned up so down,
In each estate sith attemperaunce
Was set aside and lost her governance.
By Sibyles exposicion
Take of this metal the moralite,
The golden world was governed by reason,
The world of iron was furious cruelte
The moon is mutable full of duplicite,
Like to this world because attemperaunce,
Is set aside and has no governance.
Venus of lovers empress and Queen
Of vicious lusts lady and maystres,
Her metal coper that will ternyshe grene,
A chaungeable color contrary to sadness:
A notable figure of worldly brotylnesse,
Like gery Venus because attemperaunce,
Was set aside and lost her governance.
Mine auctour Bochas began pitously co^plain
Of the disordynate Cormetous glotony,
Of Vittellius and his fellows twain
All three diffouled with horrible lechery
Diffamed by sclaundre for their rybaudry,
Contraryous enemies echone to ate^perau^ce,
Banished al three might have no governance
Of glotonye and ryotous excess,
Watch and revel, and drinking all y^ night,
Come uncouth fevers and many great access,
Me^bres podagre makes me^ go not right,
Goutes, mormalles, horrible to the sight,
Many infirmitees, because attemperaunce
Was not of counsel toward their governance.
Out of their court banished was prudence,
Fortitude had none enteresse
Gain vicious living to make resystence,
Cried woiues, hid was virtuous sobernes
Troth durst not meddle back stod rightwisnesse,
Put out of household was atte^praunce
And with these emprours had no governance.
Son of the prophet called zacharye
The patriarch the holy man saint Ihon
Victorious champion of gredy glotonye,
Lived in deserte daynties he had none,
Eat mel Siluestre, lay on the cold stone
Locustas gadred, his coke was temperaunce
And of his household had all the governance.
Of camel hears was wouyn his clothyng,
Record the gospel that can the troth tell,
Honysocles his moderate fedyng
Monge wild beasts when he did dwell,
To stau^che his thurst drank water of y^ well,
This blessed Baptist rote of attempraunce,
Set for chief myrrour of good governance.
Of his diete catour was scarsite,
His costful fode was virtuous abstynence,
Rotes of deserte his delicate plente,
His rich pymentes his ypocras of dispense
Hinge not in costretes nor botels in the spe^ce,
Not excessive because attemperaunce
Had of his household holy the governance.
This Baptist Ihon by his moderate food
The chief triu^phe of abstinence has begone,
This patriarch rekened on the good
Content with littel al suffisaunce has won,
As Dyogenes in his littell ton
Held him apayed, because attemperaunce
Had of his household all the governance.
His tonne to him was receite and household,
And if I should boste of his celere
There were no cups of silver nor gold,
His costful vintage came from the riuere,
Well timed mesure was for his mouth butlere,
And his tastour was attemperaunce
Which of his household had al ye governance.
His conquest was more sovereign of degree
Than Alysaunders for all his hie renoune,
For he conquered his sensualite,
Made him subject and servant to reason,
Daunted of prudence each forayne passion,
His clerk of kitchen called attemperaunce
Which of his dyete had all the governance.
Of superfluite, of slouthe, and of sleep
This Diogenes stood ever among in dread,
Of worldly favor he took no manner keep,
Straw was his litter, a simple russet wede,
Turned his ton again the wind in deed:
Twene hot and cold, that attemperaunce
In somer and winter had hole the governance.
Lenuoy.
NOble princes of prudence take heed
This litell chaptre breuely to comprehend,
The golden world is turned into led,
Pray to god his grace down to send
Of his hie mercy that it may sone amend,
And that this princess called atte^peraunce
May of your household have the governance.
Chefely for love and parcel eke for dread
In your estate when ye be most shynende,
For your encrees and your most gracious speed
To his precepts do diligently attend,
Of old emperors read the legende
While they were ruled by attemperaunce
In long prosperity stood their governance.
Of worthy kingdoms Rome is called head
Whose royal bounds farthest out extend,
In marcyall acts both in length and bread
Rem publicam by prowess to diffende,
No forayne enemy hardy to offend
Their hye noblesse while attemperaunce
With her three susters had the governance.
The.xi. Chapter.
How the kinrede of Jacob was distroyd, Christ borne and died, Jerusalem
distroyed: and.xi. hundred.M. slain by sword hungre fire and pestilence.

THe story ended of Vitellius
Of his two feres Galba and Ocho,
How his caraine horrible and hidious
Drowned in Tybre was possed to and fro:
After their story accomplished was and do
Came a great nombre to Bochas as I read
Echone descended of Iacobes kynrede.
In token of complaint and heaviness
Like folk dismayed clad in mourni^g wede,
For the constraynt of their wretchydnesse
Bespreynt with tears quaking in their dread,
Knowing no recure in so straight a need
Resembling folk by tokens full mortal,
That were toward some feast funeral.
Their ugly cheres pytous to behold
As they began aproche the presence
Of Ihon Bochas to tell their sorrows old,
Their wounds bleding by marcial violence:
Oppressed with hunger thurst and sode^ pestilence,
By forayne sword their lives manasyng
Upon the death as beasts abiding
That were enclosed narowe in a fold
Dispayred socour to recure,
To pass the bounds for dred they were not bold
Within enfamyned, barayne of all pasture,
This woeful story remembered in scripture
How that of Jacob the generation
Was vengeably brought to destruction.
This patriarch called whilome Israel
Most renomed among all nations,
And most famous the Bible can well tell
Their line out rekened through all regions,
By gods behest took their possessions,
Maugre Egypciens and Pharaos pride,
When Moises by god was made their gide.
With dry fete they passed the Reed see,
Conveyed by Moses and also by Aaron,
Their law was written ye Bible who list se
Upon Syna in tables of hard stone,
And through deserte as they did gone
With angels meat called m^na as I read,
Forty winter there he did them feed.
After Moses led by Josue
In to the land of Promission,
Twelve lynages of Jacob there parde
He let make a distribucion,
And to each line he gave his portion:
By promise made before to Abraham
To Isaac and Jacob, when they thither came.
By patriarchs and prophets ye were sad,
Maugre their enemies and their mortal fone,
By mighty dukes and judges they were lad,
Gate all the regions where they did gone,
Till at the last of pride they echone
Like other nations would have a king,
Saul was chose god granted their asking.
Thus by patryarkes and by their alyes,
From Abraham the genelogie
Told by prophets and by their prophesies,
Conveyed to David, which in his regalye,
Held of Jews all hole the monarchye:
Of whose kynrede by process thus it stood
Was Christ Jesus borne of that roial blood.
Sent from his father as prophets determine
Took flesh and blood for our salvation,
By the holy ghost borne of a pure virgyne,
Had among Jews great tribulacion,
Under Herodes suffered passion,
And as the gospel truly does discriue,
The third day he rose from death to live.
This blessed lord, this lord of most virtue,
End of Decembre borne in Betheleem,
And by the angel named was Jesus,
Showed to three kings by a sterre beem,
This same Jesus in Jerusalem
By conspyracion of Jews through envy,
By Pylate dempt to dye on Caluary.
Thus unto Jesus, Jews were unkind
For which they were distroyed nigh echone,
Christ prophesied the gospel makes mind
How of their cite there sholud not lie a stone
Upon another for their mortal fone
Should the^ besiege he told them so certain,
And make Jerusalem with ye soil al plain.
With weping eyes Christ told the^ so beforne
Of their ruin and their destruction,
Sin was cause that they were lorue
For they not knew to their confusion
Time of their notable vysitacion
When Christ came down borne here in erthelowe
For their salvation they list him not to know.
Thyrty years fully cronyculers write
And somewhat more, after his passion
Among the Jews plainly to endyte,
Within them self fill a division,
Murdrers to se up within their own town
So great a nombre with many an homicide
That in the cite no man durst well abide.
Their presidentes reigning in Jude
Seeing this horrible foul rebellion,
And of murderers the mortal cruelte
That long endured in that region,
Which for to appese romans sent down
Vaspacian, with many a manly knight
Which in to Galylee, took his way right.
And to chastyse tho murderers and robbours
Brent their country as he rode up and down,
So continued with his soudyours
Till unto time the countries enuyron
Of Jerusalem entered be the town,
With their oblacions, in many sundry wise
As Pask^ required to do their sacrifyse.
Tofore tho days was Jerusalem
Had in great worship of all nations,
Called princess of every other reem,
Whose fame stretchyd through al regyons,
Their treasour great and their possessions:
Double walled of buylding most notable,
Dreding no enemy for it was impregnable.
Among romans was many a manly man
Willing echone of one affection,
Through the knighthode of Vaspasian
Echone to labor to the destruction
Of Jerusalem, for great division
Among them self was gone in the cite,
By certain captains yt were in nombre three.
Simon John and Eleazarus
Horrible tyrauntes oppressing the porayle,
Of governance froward and outrageous
Falsely divided each other did assail,
Among them self had many great battle,
Werre without and werre was within
Thus of vengeance mischefe did begin.
Vaspasian not being rechelees
For his party like a prudent knight
By notable means exited them to pees,
But all for naught blent their own sight,
To chese the best they could not se a right:
And in this while this noble werryour
Vaspasian was chosen emperor.
By Alexsaundrie, to Rome he went again,
Received there themperiall dignite,
His son Titus he made his chief captain
His procuratour to govern in Jude,
Beset enuyron Jerusalem the cite,
With men of arms sieged it so about,
That none might enter nor none issue out.
Stopped their co^dutes and their waters clear,
Enfamined them for lacking of vitayle,
A certain woman thus says the croniculere
Roasted her child when vitaile did fail,
She had of store none other apparayle:
Thereon by layser her self she did feed
Which in a woman was to horrible a deed.
Their mighty walls with gons cast down
Two strong towers take of their cite,
Resistance began fail in the town,
They stood of hungre in such perplexyte:
Tytus of knighthode and magnanimite
Throughout the toure called Antonian
Is entered in like a knightly man.
The people in streates lay for hunger dead
To bye nor sell no lyfelode in the town,
There was no succor of drink nor breed
In pain of death borne nouther up ne down,
Vomyte of one was the refection
Unto another, there was such scarcite
Who redeth Josephus the troth he may se.
Brent was the temple made by Solomon,
Which had endured (thus writ ye cro^yculere)
That was so royal buylt of rich stone
Fully a thousand and two hundred year,
Romans entered maugre their portere,
With spear, pollax, and sword sharp whet,
Like wode lions slew whom they met.
Their rich gates covered with plate of gold
Were brent and molten without excepciou,
The siluet images y^ forged were o^ gold,
The vyolent fire made them run ^oun:
Noble Tytus had compassiou,
His marciall dukes spated nothing certain,
Lest of presumpcion they would rebel again.
A leven hundred thousand were there stain,
By sword, by hungre, by fire, and pestilence,
Stynke of carayns y^ in the str^^^s layne
Caused of death most sudden vyolence,
And Titus gave among them this sentence:
I mean of them that did alive dwell,
For a penny men should thurty sell.
So as Judas sold Christ for thurty pence,
Titus again thought of equyce
Of marchaundyse to make recompense,
Thurty Jews found in the cite
For a penny and for no more parde
They to be sold, for their great outrage
Ever among Sarazyns to live in seruage.
Of the temple a priest that was full old
Two stately lantarnes y^ were bright and shene
Tables, basyns, violes of bright gold
He presented, and thus he did mean,
That their treasure should well be seen
Of the temple, and showed to Titus
In token it was whilom so glorious.
To show eke there he did his busy cure
Silk, sinamone, and frankencens withal,
For sacrifise, the purpurate vesture,
With Vrimthumun, the rich pectorall,
Which ordained were in especial
For the solemn place of places all
Sancta sanctorum, and so men did it call
Of the cite a prince called Ihon
To Titus came and showed his presence,
Pale for hunger there came also Simon,
Brought by a duke yt named was Terence,
Clad in purple brought by violence:
Received of Titus when this noble town
Castles towers and walls were smyt down.
In to a castle called Mazadan
Eleazarus had take his flight,
Belieged of Scilla, or he the castle wan
This Eleazar like a furious knight
Within the castle the self same night
Styred every man, father, child, and brother
With sharp swords erche man to sle other.
Thus was this cite most stately of bilding
That whilom was of this world chief town
Where Melch y^^der reigned priest and king,
By days old as made is mention,
Restored by David, builded new of Solomon
Princess of proninces, was no where such another
Now is it ahiect and refuse of al other.
Unto the Jews Christ Jesus ga^e respite
Full thurty year, or he took veingeaunce,
In token the lord has joy and great delight
When that sinners dispose them to penance,
By contricion and vertely repentance,
This blessed lord this king most merciable
Lengest abides or he list be vengeable.
He was to them so gracious and benygne.
Bade that they should to him convert sone,
Showed unto them many an uncouth sign
During twelve days eclipsed was y^ mosis:
The people atones knew not what to done,
But indurate in their froward intent
Like folk abashed wist not what it meant.
Before the siege or Titus began the werre
Over the cite (whereof they wext aferde)
There appeared a comete and a sterre,
The sterre was shape like a sharp sword,
Touching the comet there was never herd
Of such another so fiery bright and clear,
Which endured the space of al the year.
Their festiual day hallowed in Apryl,
Their priests busy to make oblacion,
So great a light in the temple fill
That all the people standing enuyron,
Thought it so bright in their inspection
Passing the son as it did seem,
But what it meant no man could deem.
As the priests did their busy cure
To offer a calfe anon or they took head,
The same calfe a thing again nature
Brought forth a lamb ye same time I read:
An ugly token which put them in great dread,
A contrary pronosticacion
Showed unto them of their subversion.
With other tokens froward and contrary
The same time were showed ever among,
The brazen doors of the inward sentwarye
With iron bars shit that were most strong,
Broad of entayle round and wondre long,
That might not meue with.xxx. men's might,
Opened by them self twyse on a night.
There were seen also chares in the air,
Men of arms with bright swords clear,
Of plate and maile the armure was so fair
Bright as Phoebus where it did appear*
And as the story also does us lere
With their sheltrons and their apparayle,
A profer made their cite for tassayle.
To the Jews it did sygnifye
A pronostyke of their destruction,
Priests to the temple as they did hie
Upon a night to do oblacion
Amid the temple was herd a dreadful foun,
Of which noise this was y^ dredeful end,
Rise up echone and let us hence wend.
And full four year tofore the siege began
One Ananias young and tender of age
Of his birth, son of a rude man,
By disposicion dull of his courage,
Like as he had fall in a rage
Ran in the cite by a manner frensye,
Spared not with open mouth to cry.
Unto this noise was made none obstacle
But obstinat ever to his intent,
Day of the feast hold in the tabernacle
A voice (quod he) out of the orient
Voice fro the southe, fro north, and occident,
Voice fro y^ four wyndes y^ blow so wide
Voice again Jerusalem cries on every side.
Voice again the temple again y^ people also,
Voice again husbands, voice again wives,
Woe to Jerusalem, with a treble woe,
Of hungre, thurst, and lesing of their ^iues,
Of sword and fire and many sodayn strives:
This was the wretched lamentacion
Which Ananie cried through the town.
Beaten he was for his affray full often,
Whipped, scourged, endlonge and upright,
Al were it so be felt it full vnsofte
Was by ^eating made faint and feeble of might,
He stynt not to cry so day and night:
A pronostike showing to the cite,
How right sone it should distroyed be.
By rehersayle also of Carnotence
With that cite for sin it stood so tho,
That if Romans by marciall vyolence
Had not come and done them all this woe,
The earth should have opened and undo:
Devoured the people void of al refuge,
Or drowned ye town by some sudden deluge.
Breuely to pass this vengeance most terryble
Done upon Jews for their transgression,
For their demerites ye punishing most horrible
Of Jerusalem fynall subversion,
Of the temple, the tabernacle, and the town,
In Josephus who list se all the deed,
De Bello Iudaico y^ surplus he may read.
Thus ends the seventh book and here after follows the prologue of the eight.
The Prologue of the eight Book.
BOchas makes here an exclamacion
Again the jews great unkindness,
Brought by the romans, their cite adoun
Like as the story did here tofore express,
They disparcled to live in wretchedness,
By gods hand punished for their outrage,
For ever to live in tribute and seruage.
Following mine auctor, I cast for to touch
So as I can rehersyng the manner,
How John Bochas lying on his couche,
Spoke to himself, said as ye shall here:
Why art thou so dull of look and chere?
Like a man thy face bears witness,
That him disposes to live in idleness.
Certes quod John I take right good keep,
Of much travail that the outrage
Has by long slombre cast me in a sleep:
My lymmes feeble, crooked, and faint for age,
Cast in a dread for dullness of courage:
For to presume upon me to take,
Of the eight book an end for to make.
Thou wenyst perauenture in thine opinyon
By this labor to get the a name,
For to reherce the sudden falling down,
And by some new process for to attame,
Of princes sitting hie in the house of fame,
In diverse books where thou do them find,
Perpetually to put thy name in mind.
Thy days short put the in great dread,
Of such a labor to take the passage:
The more feeble the flower is the speed
Thy sight darked, and thou art fall in age.
Among remembering think on this langage
When men be buried low in the earth down,
Save of good living, farewell all guerdon.
Worldly goods shall pass right sone,
Tresour, connyng, and al shall out of mind:
Friendship chasigeth, as does y^ cloudy moan,
At a strayte need few friends men do find.
But a good name, when it is left behind,
Passes all riches, if it be well deserved,
And al gold, in cofer locked and conserved.
Of thy labor the fame shall were derke,
Beware Bochas, and hereof take good head:
Sloth snake to me, and bad me leave warke,
For small reward y^ shall have for thy mede.
As by ensample, thou may of other read,
This was the langage, I had thereof routhe,
Atwene John Bochas and this lady Slouthe.
Bochas astonished began down his heed decline,
Upon his pillowe hanging in a trance,
Stood in great doubt, could not determyne
Like a man hanging in balauuce,
To what party he should his pen auaunce:
To proceed as he undertook,
Or leave the labor of his eight book.
Atwene twain abiding thus a while,
What was to do in doubt he began to flete:
Half within and half over the style,
Could not discern to him what was most mete*
Till Fraunces Petrark* the laureate poet,
Crowned with laurer, Grace was his gide,
Came and set him down by his beds side.
And as Bochas out of his slombre abrayde,
And began adawen somewhat of his chere,
And saw Petrarke, lowly to him he said:
Welcome master crowned with laurere,
which have Itayle, like a son clear,
with poetry plainly to discriue,
Most soueraynly enlumined by your live.
I have desired as it is well couthe,
Of rightful heart by humble attendaunce,
To do you worship fro my tender youth,
And so shall I ever void of all varyaunce,
During my life: for trewly in substance,
Ye have been lantern light and dyrection,
Aye to support mine occupation.
As in writing books to compyle,
Chief ensample to my great advantage:
To refourme the rudenes of my style,
with aureat colors of your fresshe langage.
But now for dulled by impotence of age,
Of Deccepitus marked with many a sign,
My labor up of writing I resign.
I cast me not forth to proceed,
Stand at a bay fordriuen for werynes,
Quod Fra. Petrark lose not thus thy mede,
Give me no cause to report nor express,
In thy last age, thou have found a maistres,
which the bridled in soth and that is routhe,
And holds thyrein and she is called sloth.
An evident token of froward slogardye,
Upon thy bed thy limbs so to dress,
Rise up for shame, for I can well espy,
Folk that can groan and feel no sycknesse,
Their chamberlayne is called ydlenes:
which layth thy pyllow at ^ue and morrow,
Void her from the and let her go with forow.
To all virtue froward and contrary
Is idleness, here in this present life:
which has the draw away fro thy lybrarye,
Will the not suffer to be contemplatyf^.
For her condycion is to hold strife,
With every virtuous occupacion,
which men should void of wysdom and reso^.
In this matter what should I long tarry?
Thyslombre leave and up thine eine dress,
The book I made of life solytarye,
Remember thereon, the which in sykernes,
Teaches the way of virtuous busynes:
By and by, who list read every line
Of contemplacion moral and divine.
As I said erst yet lift up thy look,
Forsake thy bed, rise up anon for shame,
Would y^ rest now upon thy seventh book?
And leave the eight, in soth thou art to blame:
Proceed forth and get thy self a name.
And with one thing do thy self comfort,
As thou deseruest, men after shall report,
Make a comparison twene derknes and light,
Twene ydlenes and occupacion,
Twene fair days and the cloudy night:
Twene a cowards prowess and hye renoun,
Twene virtuous speech and false detraction,
And to conclude all vices to repress,
Contrary to slouthe, is virtuous business.
Virtuous business (O Bochas take heed,
Renews all things of old antiquite:
Makes men to live after they be dead,
Remember the nobles of many a great city:
And ne were writers al were gone parde,
Wherefore Bochas sith y^ art nere the land,
Suffer not thy ship to stomble on the sand.
I mean as thus the ship of thy travail,
Which has passed the se of books seven,
Cast not ankre till thou have good ^^^ayle,
Let no tempest of thundre nor of ^eum
Nor no wyndes of the cloudye heaven
Nor no falls ^a^glers of demers the will bliue,
Deprave thy labor and let thy ship to ariue.
Haste on thy way let grace cross thy sail,
Fall on no land of wilful negligence:
Let good will be chief of thy counsel,
To gye thy rother set entyre diligence.
If vitayle ^ayle and wine to thy dispense,
yet at the last think forth y^ socour
Some royal prince shall quite the thy labor.
Think by writing auctors did their pain
To give princes their commendations,
To Remu^ and Romulus called fou^ders twain
Of Rome town, and of two Scipions,
The kinghthode, Prudence of two Catons,
Of Julius, Pompey, and Hanybal eke also,
By ensample of whom, look that thou do so.
Of Prophets they wrote the prophesies,
And the noblesse of old Moses:
Of poets the laure at poesies,
The force of Sa^pson, y^ strength of Hercules
Of two greeks Pyrrus and Achylles,
By their writing books say the same,
Unto this day, yet endures the name.
And he that can, and cease for to write
Notable ensamples of our predecessors,
Of envy men will him atwite,
That he in gardayns let peryshe the wholesome flowers.
In sundry wise that might do great socours,
Labor for other and spare not thy travail,
For virtuous labor again sloth does avail*
A thing remembered of antiquite,
Is when there is set a fair image
Of a prince, of hye or low degree,
Or of a person a prynte of his visage,
Gladdeth his friend quicketh his courage,
And semblably by example men may find,
Things forgotten by writing come to mind*
And for to make our names perdurable,
And our merits to put in memory,
Vices to eschew in virtue to be stable,
That labor may of sloth have the victory,
To claim a see in the heavenly consistory,
Dispyte of ydlenes and forthering of virtue,
Fine of our labor be give to Christ Jesus.
When Petrark had reherced this lesson.
In rebuking of vicious ydelnes,
Bochas supprised and moved of reason,
Rose from his couche, and began his pen dress:
well overcame the impotent feebleness
Of crooked age, that Bochas undertook
For to accomplish up his eight book.
I following after for dulled for rudeness,
More than three score years set my date:
Lust of youth passed his freshnes,
Colors of rethorike to help me translate,
were faded away, I was borne in Lydgate,
Where Bacchus lycour does full scarsly flete,
My dry foul for to dew and we^e.
Though passed age has fordulled me,
Trembling joints let my hand to write.
And fro me take all the subtylte
Of curious making, in english to endyte,
yet in this labor truelyme to acquit,
I shall proceed as it is to me due,
In these two books Bochas for to sue.
FINIS.
The first Chapter.
How the proud tiraunte Domician Emperor of Rome, and many other
Emperoures and Nobles, for their outrages and wretchedness, mischeuouslye ended.

BBrother to Titus son of Vaspacian,
Came next iordre as writes mine autour
The proud ambicious called Domician,
That was in Rome crowned Emperor:
An extorcioner, and a false pillour,
Proudly commanded (in his estate up stalled)
Of all the world he should a God be called.
Through hye presu^pcion of him it is eke told,
Nether of timber koruin, nor of stone,
Set up images of silver and of gold,
In token there was no God but he alone:
In to Pathmos he exyled eke saint John,
And again christian the second next Neron,
That began first the persecucion.
This same tyrant, reignyng in his estate,
To all the city was passinge odyous:
Best and most worthy he s^ewe of the senate,
And unto all that were virtuous
Mortal enemy, and most malicious.
And for slaughter of senators in the town,
Asked the triumph as made is mencyon.
Made among jews, by full great outrage,
where as he had greatest suspicion
To slay al tho that were of the lynage,
Of David's kindred, and of king Solomon,
Least he were put out of dominacion:
Among jews this was his meaning,
Slew all tho that was borne to be king.
Amyd the palace as God would of right
Punysh a tyrant and quite him his mede,
This Domician was slain upon a night:
His caraine after unburied as Irede.
And Comodus does after him succeed,
which was all give by fleshly appetite,
To leave all virtue, and follow his delight.
Theater plays of custom he did use
As was the custom there and the usage,
His life in vices he falslye did abuse,
In lecherous lusts spent al his young age:
To the romans did full great damage,
For of the senate that were most virtuous,
were falslye slain by this Comodus.
In his time by stroke of thunder dente,
And firye lightning y^ came down fro heaven,
The common lybrary was of the cite burnt,
With royal books of all the crafts seven,
Books of poets mo then I can neuyn:
And Comodus breuely to termyne,
was slain and strangled by his concubyne.
Helinus Pertynax came next on the ringe,
Ordained after Emperor of that town,
Old, and unwieldy, ^lame in his ginning:
After whom the book makes mention
By no title of succession
But an intrusour one called Iulyan,
The state usurping to reign there began.
But of the noble lynage Affrican,
Borne in Tripolis a mighty great city,
One Seuerus that was a knightly man,
Gadred of romans a wondre great meyne:
Both made strong, Julian met and he
At Pont miluin a city of Itayle,
And there was Iulyan slain in batayl:
Seuerus after entered the empire,
And took upon him the dominacion:
Upon christian of malice set a fire,
Began again them a persecucion,
Of tyranny and false ambicion.
But one of Egypt called Poscennius
Again Seuerus began to work thus.
Gadred meyny Seuerus for to assail,
In purpose fully and thereon did his pain,
First with him to have a great battle,
Next of thempyre the crown for to attain:
But ye shall hear what fell on these twain:
On Poscennius fill the discomfiture,
And Seuerus thempyre does recure.
In his purpose or he might avail,
with one Albinus that was a manly knight,
He had in Gaul a full great battle,
Full great bloodshed in that mortal fight:
Albinus slain of very force and might,
Seuerus after entered in Bretayne,
Caught sickness and died of the pain.
After Seuerus next came Antonine,
Of whom the froward disposicion
As all auctours of him determine
His business and occupacion
Set holy in fleshly dilectacion
So false a lust his courage did assail
Among Parthois flayne in battle
Macrinus after tofore Bochas came down,
Whylom a prefecte in Rome the cite
Of the pretoyr, and by invasion
Came to the imperial famous dignitye,
Occupied a year sat in his imperyal se,
Till fortune list him so disgrade,
Among his knights flayne at Archelade.
Next came Aurelius surnamed Antonyne,
A great rybaude passing lecherous.
Yet was he bishop as auctoures determine,
In the temple of Heliogabalus:
And in his time was one Sabellius
A false heretic, of whom began the names,
Of a sect called Sabellianes.
This said Aurelius again all nature,
Of false presumpcion in books it is told,
Would not purge his womb by nature,
But in vessels that were made of gold:
And in dispyte, when that he was old.
Slain of his knights and not after long,
His carayne was thrown in a gonge.
After this proud foresaid Antonine
In to thempyre by just election,
Of senators as books determyne,
Came Aurelius and for his hye renoune
Surnamed Alisaunder, as made is mencio^:
Fought with Perciens like a manly knight,
And there king Xerxes was put unto flight.
This Aurelius this proud knyghtly man,
When he sat judge in the consistory.
There sat one with him called Vlpian,
A great ciuilian, notable of memory:
Of whom it is to his encreace of glory,
Reported thus by great auctorite,
He of digestes made books three.
Full piteously this emperor lost his life,
Casuelly as made is mention,
Among his knights by a sudden strife,
Where he was slain in that discencion:
After whose end for short conclusion
Tofore Bochas the book well tell can
Came Maximinus and with him Gordyan
Maximinus the cronicle both expres,
Chose of his knights and his soudiours,
For his victorious marcyall hye prowess,
Done in Almayne, and among Emperors
Set up in Rome maugre the senators:
After strong enmy as mine autoure says
With all his power unto christian faith
He was enemy his life who list to seen
To christian clerks of auctorite,
And specially to old Origene
But in his most furious cruelte,
In Aquyleya a mighty strong country,
Of a prefecte called Pupien he was slain
Of whose death christian men were full feign.
Next by the senate chosen was Gordyan,
First against Parthois he cast hi to werrey,
Of Ianus temple (when the werre began)
He made the gates be opened with the keye:
Which was a token as old e books seye,
Tho gates opened to folks nigh and far,
That with their fone y^ romans would werre.
With Parthois first this said Gordian
To hold werre fast he began him speed,
And upon them always the field he wan:
After he sped him in to Perce and Mede,
Always victorious in battle as I read,
Upon Eufrates slain as I find,
By false treason y^ cronicle makes mind.
Next in order came Philip by his name,
His son eke Philip came with him also,
Mine auctour Bochas reherceth y^ same:
The father, the son, baptized both two.
Right sad and wise in that they had to do,
And were the first christian of echone,
Emperors rekened, for there tofore was none
By Poncius the martyr as I read,
In Meya a famous great cite,
They were baptized, and afterward in deed
Slain in battle for they list not fle:
Tofore their death both of assent parde,
Their treasour hole that were imperial,
To christ's church I find they gave it all
The Bishop Sixtus took possession,
Virtuously assigned it to Laurence,
Thereof to make distribucion
To poor folk in their indigence:
For which deed by cruel violence,
The tyrau^t Decius again the^ took a strife,
Caused holy Laure^ce by bre^ning lose his life
This same Decius cursed and cruel,
Caused y^ slaughter of these Philips twayn:
And for he was subtell, false, and fell,
By sleight and falshed he did his busy pain,
To the empire by force for to attain:
The seventh tyrant, by persecucion
which again christen folk took first occasion.
Mine auctour writes time of this Deciue,
The holy Hermyte example of perfytenesse,
By days old called Antonyus,
Lived in deserte far out in wilderness:
As an Hermyte dispysing al riches,
Lived by fruit and rotes as men tell,
And of perfection drank water of the well.
Upon Decius for his cursednes
Again christen which gave so hard sentence,
Through Rome and Itayle mine auctor bears witness,
In every cite was great pestilence:
That by the sudden deadly violence
The hertes of men dependinge in a trance,
To save their lives could no cheuisaunce.
Of this matter write nomorc I can,
To this emperor I will resort again,
Speak of Gallus and Volucian,
That busy were their labor was in vain,
Their time short as some books saine,
For Martyn writes an old cronyculere,
In thempyre they reigned but two year.
But both were slain by the procuring,
And by the purchase of one Emelyan,
A romayne knight which by slye workinge,
To occupye thempyre tho began:
By tyranny the Lordshyp there he wan.
Whose lordship for hap and lack of grace,
No longer last then two months space.
This little chapter as tofore is seen,
Reherced has and told in words plain,
Of emperors almost full fourtene,
And of all were good none but twain:
which to reherce I have do my pain,
And to proceed further as I began,
I must write of one Valeryan.
HIs son and he called Galiene
To all christen bare great enmyte.
Slew al tho their legend men may seen,
That served Christ in troth and equytie:
whose persecusion and hateful crueite
Abated was, as I can well reherce,
By one Sapor that was king of Perce.
By force of arms Sapor this mighty king,
Began in Asia and with his host came down,
By tygre, Eufrates, and knightly so rydyng
Toward the parties of Septemtryo^*
To Caucasus not far fro Babylon
And all Surrye he proudlye did assail,
And Capadoce he wan eke by battle.
Whom for to mete came Vale rian,
To Mesopotayme with many legions:
The werre was strong, but this knightly man
This hardy Sapor with his champions
The field has won with all the legions
Before reherced, and through Perce he lad
Valerian bound with chains round and sad.
He was by Sapor maugre his vysage*
This Valeria^ so straytly brought to wrake,
Like a prisoner bound to seruage,
By obeysaunce that found were no lack,
To knele on four and profre his back,
Unto Sapor when him list to ride,
Thereby to mount for all his great pride
This was the office of Valerian
By servitude during many a year,
Wherefore he was called of many a man,
The assendyng stock in to the sadyll nere:
Which is in french called a mountuere,
This was his office to bow down his corse,
When y^ king Sapor should light on horse.
This is the guerdon and favor of fortune,
Her old manner to princes and to kings,
Her double custom used in commune,
By sudden change of all worldly things:
After triumphs and their vprisinges,
What follows after here well tell I can,
I take record of Valeryan.
This Lady fortune the blind fell gods
To Valerian showed herself unstable,
Taught him a lesson of the doublenes,
To king Sapor she was favorable,
But yet he was to cruel and vengeable.
With his fete deuoyde of all favor,
To foil the back of an emperor.
Of old it has be song and cried loud,
Record on Cyrus, and many other mo,
Kings of Perce of custom have be proud,
After punyshed and chastised eke also,
Princes of mercy should take heed thereto.
After victory in their estate notable,
To their prisoners for to be merciable,
Mine author Bochas in this matter tell can,
Rebuke tyrauntes that were by days old,
Turns his side speaks to Valerian,
Where be thy rubies and saphires set in gold?
Theryche peerles and rings manifold?
That y^ were wont to wear upon thy ho^ds?
Now as a wretch art bound in foreign bonds.
where thou were wont of furyous cruelty,
Clad in purple within Rome town,
To Christ contrary in thine imperyall se,
Gave dome on martyrs to suffer passion:
Now lie thou bound fettred in preson,
To king Sapor constrained to enclyne,
when he list ride both neck and chine.
Thus art thou fall in thine imperial stage,
Think on fortune and have her in memory,
She has the cast in thraldom and seruage:
And eclypsed all thine old glory.
where thou sat whilom in the consistorye
As an emperor and a mighty judge,
Lie bound in chayns and know no refuge.
It is fall far out of thy mind
The knightly deed of worthy ^ublyus,
Of Rome a captain ordained as I find,
To fight again Aristomachus,
King of Asye, of fortune it fell thus:
when the romans did the field forsake,
This Publius among his fone was take.
This noble prince standing in dredeful case,
His life and worship dependyng atwen twayn,
In his hand holding a sturdy mace,
Smyt out one of his eyes twain,
Of him that led him, that other for the pain
That he felt and the great smerte,
Took a dagger and roue Publyus to the heart.
which loved more his worship tha^ his life,
Chase rather to dye than live in seruage,
This conceit he had in his imaginatife,
And considred sithe he was in age,
To save his honor it was more auau^tage,
So to be slain his worship to conserve,
Than like a beast in prison for to sterue.
Fortune his chaptre of him it was not rad,
As Valerius makes mention,
After whose conceyte no man in virtue sad
Should not long languy she in prison:
But rather chose like his opinion
Of manly force and knightly excellence,
The death endure of long abstynence.
As whylom did the princess Agripine,
when she in prison lay fettred and bound,
Of her fre choice she felt great pyne,
Of hungre and thurst in story it is found:
That she lay pale and grofe upon the ground.
Maugre Tibery and let her ghost so wend,
Out of her body this was her fatal end.
Thou stood far of all such fantasy,
I speak of the (O thou Valerian)
Thy cruel heart of false malencolye,
Made whylom dye many a christen man
And martyr, sith Christ's faith began:
Which for mankind dyed upon the Rode
There for tacquyte him list shed his blood.
Again his law thou were impacient,
And importune by persecucion,
Thou dydest favor and suffer in thine intent*
That Egipciens did their oblacion,
Their sacryfices and ryte up so down,
Unto ydols of froward wylfulnesse,
That was of Egypt called chief goddess.
Favorable thou were in thy desire,
To suffer Jews their sabote to observe:
And Caldeis to worship the fire,
And folk of Crete Saturn to serve,
And christian men thou made falsely sterue
Of whose law for thou did not retche,
Thou died in preso^ at mischefe like a wretch.
The.ii. Chapter.
How Gallyen son of Valerian was slain.

NExt in order to Bochas tho ca^e down,
Son of Valerian one called Gallien
But for great horrible effusion
Of christen blood that men might seen,
Shed by Valerian, God would it should been
Showed openly to romans by vengaunce,
Of many a country sudden dis obeysaunce.
They of Almayne the Alps did pace,
Unto Rauenne a cite of Itaile,
Goths also proud of chere and face,
Had again greeks many a great battle:
And they of Hu^gry armed in plate and mayle,
with them of Denmark furious and cruel,
Again romans wexte of assent rebel.
To whose damage in this mean while,
Among romans, it is befall thus:
woeful werres which called been civil,
Began in the cite cruel and dispiteous.
First when they met was slain Gemyus
which first took on him in books as I read
Of hye courage to we are purple wede.
One Posthumus a mighty strong romayne,
Kept all Gaul under subjection
To their avail, after unwarily slain,
Among his knights for all his hye renoun,
By a sudden uncouth discencion:
Next Victoryne having the governance,
Of al Gaul was first slain in France.
But Gallien of whom I spoke toforne,
Son and heir to Valerian,
His Domination of purpose he has lorne
In Republica when he began,
Like a contrarious and a froward man,
wext lecherous and obstinate of living,
At mischefe slain* this was his ending.
The.iii. Chapter.
How Quintilius was murdered by women.

NExt Gallien came one Quintilius,
A man remembered of great atte^perau^ce
Brother of birth to great Glaudius,
wise and discrete in all his governance.
who may of fortune eschew the chance?
To write his end shortly in a clause
Of women murdered I can not say the cause.
The.iiii. Chapter.
Of Aurielan in Denmark borne.

OF Denmark born next came Aurelian,
A worthy knight his enemies to assail:
Again Goths a great war he began,
Gate victory in many strong battle.
whose noble conquest greatly did avail
To common profyt, for all his work parde,
was to the encreace of Rome the cite.
He recured all the Septemtrion,
And west ward had many a great victory:
Among other I find that he was one,
Asked the triumph to be put in memory.
But there was a thing eclipsed his glory.
which did y^ light of his knightho^ withdraw,
For he was enemy to Christ and to his law,
Of him Bochas list no more to write,
But in his book go forth as he began,
Of one remembering that called was Tacyte
which was successor to Aurelian,
And after him suceeded Folorian
Of which twain no remembrance I find
That is notable to put in mind.
The.v. Chapter.
How Probus discomfited romans and after was flayne.

Probus after raygned full seven year
And four months, which by his hye renoun,
Gain went Saturninus with a knightli chere,
Brought him proudly to subjection,
Not withstandyng that he in Rome town
Took upon him of wylfull tyranny,
Holy thempyre for to rule and gye.
Beside the cite called Agrypyne.
This said Probus gain many romayne,
A battle had, list not to declyne:
Met Portulus a mighty strong captain
With one Bonosus and both they were slain,
And all their meyny of very force and might,
Slaynm y^ field the remnau^t put to slyghte.
After this battle and this discomfyture,
Probus was lodgedi Smyrmie a great cite,
And there unawarely of sudden adventure,
Slain in a tour that called was Far,
But a small season last his prosperity.
Siche is fortune let no man in her trust;
All worldly things chaungyng as she lust.
The.vi. Chapter.
How Carus and his two sons were mischeued.

TOfore Bochas Carus next came down,
with his two sons Numeria and Carine
And as I find he was borne in Narbon:
But when that he most clearly did shine,
By his knighthode, plainly to termine,
In his empire he gate cities twain,
Chole and Thessiphontin Parthia with great pain
Beside Tygre a famous swyfte ryuere
He pight his tents, cast him there abide:
A sudden lightning his face came so nere,
Smyt all to powder for all his great pride,
And Numerian that stood by his side,
Had a mark that was sent fro heuyn,
Lost both his eyes, with the fiery leuyn.
His other son Carinus a good knight,
In Dalmacia had all the governance:
And for that he governed not a right,
He was cast down and lost all his puissaunce,
Vicious life comes always to mischaunce.
Sepcius chose Dalmacia for to gye,
Among his knights murdered of envy.
The vii. Chapter.
How the hardy Queen zenobia fought with Aurelian, and was take

MIne auctor here no le^ger list soiourne,
Of these e^perours y^ falls for to write,
But in all haste he does his style turn,
To zenobya her story to endyte:
But for Chaucer did him so well acquit
In his tragedyes her pyteous fall to entreat,
I will pass over rehersyng but the great.
In his books of Caunterbury tales
This sovereign poet of Brutes Albion,
Through pilgrims told by hills and vales,
where, of zenobya is made mention,
Of her noblesse and her hye renoun,
In a tragedye compendyouslye told al,
Her marcial prowess, and her pyteous fall.
Mine auctour first affyrmeth how that she,
Descended was to tell of herlynage,
Borne of the stock of worthy Tholome,
King of Egypt, full notable in that age:
And this zenobya expert in all langage,
wise of counsel and of great prudence,
Passed all other in fame of eloquence.
Among she was armed in plate and mayle,
Of Palmyrences wedded to the king,
Called Odenatus prudent in battle
She was also by record of writing.
Hardy and strong her lordship defendinge,
Maugre al tho with her cheualry,
Against all them that wrongly took party.
By Odenatus she had sons twain
Heremanus called was that one,
And Tymolaus of beautye sovereign,
After whose birth their father began anon
To occupy the prouynces euerychone
Of Perce and Mede, by process made the^ ^^ene.
Of zenobya the hardy wise Queen
while Odenatus wext glorious
In his conquest thrughout Perce and Mede,
Slain he was by one Mionius,
Which to the king was cosyn as I read:
But for because of this horrible deed,
And for the murdre of king Odenate,
He dyed at mischefe, and passed into fate.
By process after zenobya the queen,
Took her two sons and proudly did the^ led,
Tofore her chare, the men might them seen,
How they were borne as princes to succeed:
Made them like kings clad in purple wede,
Them to defend this mighty creature,
Hardy as Lion took on her armure.
For all her Lords and knights she had sent
Maugre the romans proudly began herspede
All the parties of the Orient
To occupye, and her host so led:
Of the emperor she stood nothing in dread
Called Aurelian met him in battle,
With her meyny proudly did assail.
On outher side yt day great blood was shed:
The stroke of fortune withsta^t no creature,
The queen zenobia was taken and forth led,
Fought first as long as she might endure,
With rich stones fret was her armure,
with whom the emperor so entrig Rome town,
Of triumph required the guerdon.
He dempt it was couenable and sittinge,
This Emperor this proud Aurelian,
To ask the triumph it was so great a thing,
To take zenobia that such a werre began,
Gain romans, this marcial woman
For I suppose of no woman borne,
Was never queen so hardy seen aforne.
This hardy princess for all her crueltye,
whose renome through the world was know,
With stocks of gold was brought to y^ citi,
From hye estate in pouerte plunged low.
A wind contrary fortune has so blow,
That she, alas, has pitoufly made fall,
Her in that prowess passed women al.
The triumph yeuen to Aurelian,
For the conquest he had upon this queen,
Called zenobya, came Dyoclisian,
Borne in Dalmacia his story who list seen:
Out of his country first he did flene,
Of garlyke and lekes as says the cronycler^*
Because that he was but a gardinere.
Other mention is none of his lineage,
Of his birth forsook the region,
Left his craft of deluyng and cortlage,
Gave him to arms and by election,
Chose to be emperor and regne in Rome town,
First into Gaul he sent a great power,
And Maximian he made his vicar.
His vicar there had many a great battle,
Upon such people that by rebellion,
Began frowardly and contrary to assail,
To obey his lordship within that region.
Till Carausius by commission
And an hardy knight under Maxymyan,
Them to chastise took on him like a man.
But by process the story does devise
His lordshyp there did great damage,
To common profit, so he by couetyse
The country robbed by full great outrage:
And to him self he took all the pyllage,
And of presumpcion ware the color
Of rich purple like an emperor.
This Carasius of Bretayns twain
Proudly usurped to be their governor,
Like a rebel again Rome did his pain,
And busyed him by marciall labor,
with many a strange forayne soudyoure:
Having no title nor commyssion,
Continued long in his rebellyon.
Whereof astonished was Dioclisian,
Seeing this mischefe dredful and perilous:
Ordained in haste that Maximian,
Was surnamed and called Herculius,
Made him emperor called Agustus,
Which had a fore no more governance,
But Gaul which now is called France.
Also more over this Dioclisian
Made in this while governors twain,
Constancius and one Maximian,
Surnamed Galerius Co^stancius i certain:
In this while to wedde he did his pain,
Daughter of Maximian called Herculius,
Named the odora mine auctor writes thus.
By Theodora this Constancius
Had six children in true marriage,
Brother to Co^sta^tyne y^ cronicle tells thus,
Which afterward when he came to age,
For his manhood and marciall courage,
Was chose and made Lord and governor,
Of all the world, and crowned emperor.
Carausius which had full seven year
Like as I told rebelled in Bretayne,
Against the romans, a great extorcionere:
A knighte Allectus that did at him disdain
Murdered him, and after did his pain,
By force only and extort tyranny,
Fully three years his place to occupye.
Till Asclepio was sent from Rome down,
Slew Allectus maugre all his might*
Brought all Bretayne to subjection,
Of the romans, like as it was right.
And in this while like a manly knight.
For Italiens began romans disobey,
Constancius began proudly them werrey.
He first with them had a strong battle,
His meyay slain and put to the flighte:
Trustyng on fortune he began the^ efte assail,
And sixty thousand were slain in the fight,
The field was his through fortunes might,
As she that could dissymule for a while,
And afterward falsely him begyle.
I will pass over as brefely as I can,
Set a side all forayne incidentes:
Resort again to Dioclisian,
Which at Alisau^dre proudly pytched his tents.
The captain slew, gave command eme^ts
To his knights to do their advantage,
With the cite by robbynge and pyllage.
Can again christen great persecucion,
Used this tyranny in the Orient,
By his bydding Maximian came down,
Toward the parties of the Occident:
Both these tyrauntes wrought by assent,
Under whose sword many martyr deyes,
Slain in Octodoru^ the legion of Thebeies
At Verolamye a famous old cite
Saint Albou slain, his legend does so tell:
And in Rome by furious crueltye,
The pope slain that called was Marcel,
By their statutes and by their domes fell
Churches were brent, in towns and cities,
Lost their fraunchise and al their liberties.
Froward enemy he was to Christ's law,
Made many a martyr to dye for his sake:
Wext feeble and old, and began him withdraw,
From occupacion his rest for to take,
His attorney Maxymyan he does make,
In his last age it is reherced thus,
Stood in great dread of Constantius.
The dread of him sat so nigh his heart,
And thereupon took such a fantasy,
Imagining he might not start,
By fraud of him but that he should dye,
Almost for fere fill in a frensye:
Of which dread the book makes mention
He slew him self by drinkyng of poison.
As I told erst in the Occident,
Maximian called Herculius,
Reigned as Emperor, and ever in his intent
To pursue martyrs he was aye laborus:
Of whose birth Bochas found no auctoures.
This to say he could never read,
Where he was borne nor of what kynrede.
He finds no more of this Maximian
Of his usurping in esspeciall,
But that he was by Dioclisian
Set in dignite called imperial:
Famous in arms prudent and marcial,
Daunted al tho that did again him strive,
Slew Gencyans called in number five
Rode in Affrike like a conqueror,
Brought to subiections the sturdy nations,
Fortune that time did him such favor:
Gate Sarmatoise with other regions,
with other cities and many rich towns,
By his conquest of new that he has won,
Through y^ world his name shone like y^ son.
He was cheryshed in arms from his youth,
And did great emprises for Rome the city:
Yet Dioclisian as it is well couthe,
Counsayled him resign his dignity,
But he was loathe to forsake his see,
Sith he was Lord and governed al,
For to renounce his state imperial.
But by assent of Dioclisian,
As he him self had left the governance,
Even so this Maxymyan,
Discharged him self of his royal puissaunce.
But afterward he fill in repentance,
And busy was as diverse books said,
The state of Emperor to recure again.
Which for to acheue he did his diligence,
He was distourbed by Galerius:
For his son that called was Maxence
Put in possession, mine auctour writes thus,
To which thing he began wexe enuyous,
And began ordeyne means in his thought,
To trouble him but it auailed naught.
When his purpose might take none avail,
Again Maxence as Bochas does discryue,
His daughter Fausta that knew his cou^sail,
Discured his purpose, for which he fled bliue
Into Gaul, and durst no longer strive:
And by Constantius in Marcile the cite,
Slain suddenly, lost al his dignite.
The.viii. Chapter.
How Galerius oppressed martyrs and Christ's faith, and myscheuously ended.

NExt tofore Bochas came Galerius,
A man disposed to riot and outrage,
Euel teached, froward, and vicious,
There is no story that speaks of his lynage:
Yet was he set full hye upon the stage,
Of worldly dignyte, rose up to hye estate,
Yet in his ginning he was not fortunate,
He was sent out by Dioclisian,
And made emperor by his auctorite:
Again Narseus the proud knightly man,
Reignyng in Perce and Lord of that country,
Which held werre with Rome the cite.
For which Galerius took on him this emprise
with mighty hand his pride to chastyse.
Galerius entered into Derce land,
King Narseus met him of adventure,
Had a strong battle, fought hand for hand,
His fortune such he might not endure.
On Galerius fill the discomfyture,
Clad in purple as made is mencyon,
Of Dioclisian received his guerdon.
At their meting anon or they were ware,
Dioclisian made him to abide,
To his confusyon, sytting in his chare
To walk on foot by the chares side,
With many a rebuke abated was his pride:
Galerius for the great shame,
Began seek a mean again to get his name.
Came for to assemble his old soudiours,
Made for his ordinance by diligent workig:
Chase out the best proved warryours,
With a great host to Perce he came ryding:
and often there fought with the king,
That the perciens maugre al their might,
Were of Galerius that dai put to flight.
The field was his, he gate great riches,
Robbed their tents, and wan there pillage,
In this resort received in sothnes,
In great nobles because of that voyage:
Thus can fortune change her vysage,
Of Dioclisian where he stood in disdain,
with new tryumphe resorted is again.
This cloudy queen stands never in certain,
whose double whele quauereth ever in dout:
Of whyse favor no man has be certain,
Though one have grace another is put out.
Let every man as it comes about,
Take his turn, and never in her assure
Faylynge in arms is but adventure.
Thus Galerius after his battle,
On Perciens began wexe glorious,
Governed Affrike and lordshyp of Itayle,
Throughout the Orient he was victorious,
Till he for age began wexe tedious,
His last days maligned as men says,
Of false hatred again christen faith.
And him to healpe in these false matters,
It is remembered, to his confusion
In his empire he set two vicats,
Gave them power in every region,
The law of Christ to oppres and put down,
To punyshe matters, and put them to death.
And in this while full many one he flees.
By this said truell Galerius,
which of thempyre had all the governance,
Of cursed heart and courage dispiteous,
By his usurped imperyal puissaunce,
Gave auctorite for to do vengaunce,
Unto twain Seuerus and Maxence.
On al christian by mortal vyolence.
A certain space both of one accord
To the state of emperor chose was Maxe^ce,
Till Seuerus and he fell at dyscorde,
And after by vengable pestylence,
within a city of noble preeminence,
Called Rauenue, Seuerus there was flayne.
Of which Galerius was nothing feign.
For which in haste this Galerius
Him to support, and stand in his defense,
Chase out of Denmark a knight Lucinius
To be emperor through knightly excelle^ce.
For to withstand and fight again Maxence.
But Maxence of romayne knights all,
was chosen emperor and set up in his stall.
with which election Galerius wext wode,
Fill in a manner of froward frensy:
His entraile brent corrupt was his blood,
And of his froward vengable malady,
In every membre began rotte and putrifye,
Till the air about him enuiron,
To all that felt it was venim and poison.
Like a Lazar corbed back and chine,
In this while on christian most vengeable,
To him auailed no manner medicyne
But there was in Christ's faithful stable,
That spoke unto him with langage full notable
In words few concludinge in substance,
The great Jupiter, has take on y^ ve^gaunce.
And evermore for short conclusion,
with a bold spyrite to him began abrayde:
It is not Jupiter worshipped in this town,
In the capitoyle set, sothly as I said,
But Jupiter that was borne of a maid*
which list not suffer of that thou do endure,
That any medecynes should therecure.
Like atyraunt by vengaunce furious,
At mischefe dies as books tell,
Perpetually with cruel Cerberus
Upon the whele of Ixion to dwell,
For His demerites with tantalus in hell,
There to receive his final guerdon,
which could on martyrs have no compassion
It was his joy for to shed their blood,
Sent out letters to diverse regions,
Like a slye wolf rauynous and wode,
To slay martirs by diverse passions:
Like his desert received his guerdons,
Horrible death did them first confound,
with furies infernal lies in hell bound.
The.ix. Chapter.
How Maxence the emperor enemy to Christ's faith mischeuously ended.

After Galerisu cruel vyolence,
Gain christen blood as Bochas has told,
with piteous there the Emperor Maxence,
Came tofore Bochas of age not full old,
Famous in arms, sturdy, fresh, and bold.
Albe he entered notlike an heritoure,
Coke upon him to reign as gouernoure.
To Christ's faith he was also enemy.
After sone he lost his governance.
Of infortune slain suddenly:
God on tyrau^tes unawarely takes vengasice,
Of whose burying was made no remembrance
For he was not received of the ground
But cast in Tibre like a rotten hounds.
The.x. Chapter.
How Lucinius enemy to Christ's faith was slain.

Next tofore Bochas came Lucynius,
A knighte of Denmark borne of good line:
which had an ennemy the book says thus*
An hardy knighte called Maximine,
Chose a captain with the mperour Co^stantyne.
To the faith of Christ he bare great enmyte.
Slain anon after in Trace the cite.
Of whose death Lucinius was glad,
Began again christen persecucion,
In his procedyng suddenly wext mad,
which commanded of false presumpcyon,
when he began to do execucion,
That nochristen nowhere him beside,
By no condition should in his house abide.
This Lucinius which falsely did err
Again our faith christen men to assasle,
Gain Constantine of new he began war:
But of his purpose in sothe he did fail,
For he was twice discomfited in battle,
By Constantine ones in Hungrye,
Next in Greece beside Eualye.
Thus Co^stantyne through his hye renoune,
Gate nigh Gcece and every great country
Alde Lucinius flode in rebellion
Gain Constantine, both on land and sea:
But when he saw it would none otherbe,
He might not escape in no place,
Put holy him self in Constantyns grace.
But Constantine for his hie rebellion,
Gave judgment in have that he be dead:
Least in the city were made division
By Lucinius, whereof he stood in dread.
This same while as Bochas took head,
There came before him with chere full piteous*
Brethern twain Constantine and Crispus.
The.xi. Chapter.
Of Constantyne and Crispus: and how Damalcus was slain.

To constantine of whom I spoke toforne,
They were sons Constantine and Crispus:
The same twain of one mother borne,
Ca^e tofore Bochas his book reherceth thus.
with them came eke Lucinius
Son of Lucinius, which in Rome town,
Before was slain for his rebellyon.
Constantine his werres to govern,
Made them vicars the self same three:
Echone rightwise and could well discern
What might avail most to their city,
To encrese the profit of the commonte.
Their names told Constantine and Crispus.
Tofore remembered, with them Lucinius.
while these three vicars under the emperor.
Governed Rome as Knights most famous,
In Alisaundre rose up a great error,
By a false priest called Arryus;
To our believe a thing contrarious:
And for he did again our faith so wyrche.
By a decre was put out of the church.
By assent at Bithinye, full notable
In Nicea a famous great city,
This error was proved full dampnable,
Three.C. bishops were present there parde,
And eightene the cronicle who list se,
And all these of one sentence ^like,
Preued Arrius a false heretic.
This same time books does specifye,
How Constantine of hasty crueltye,
The said vicars nigh of alye,
Feigned a cause to slay them all three,
No cause rehearsed nor told of equitye:
Save only this, in which he began proceed.
To make his cosyn Dalmacius to succeed.
But his favor was not fortunate
Toward Dalmacius, nor gracious in sentence
Among whose knights fell a sodeyn debate,
Constantine there being in presence,
Dalmacius without reverence,
with sharp swords, to speak in words few*
Unto the death was wounded and phewe.
The.xii. chapter.
Of the brethern Constaunce and Constancius and how Magnentius and Decius
murdered them self.

THan came Constaunce and Constancius
young brethren, thus writes min autour.
To Constantine in time of Arrius,
And each of them by full great labor,
Did his pain to reygne as emperor:
Till at the last breuely for to say,
Eueryche of the in began other to werrey.
This said Constaunce is entered Perce land
Nine times he fought again Sapore,
The same king as ye shall understand
That with romans had foughten before
But finally Constaunce has him so bore
To hold the field he might not endure,
For upon him fill the discomfiture.
His fortune began change anonryght
When that he left to be virtuous,
He was in Spain slain like a knighte,
In a castle strong called Maxencius,
Than was none left but Constancius,
The roman knights destitute euerichone
Chase them an emperor one Vetramone.
This Vetramone was far run in age,
Barraine of wit and coud no letture,
Nor in knighthode had no great courage,
Nor was not able to study in scripture:
Nor like anemperour no while to endure,
For which Co^sta^cius of whom I spoke now late
With this Vetramone cast hi to debate
This Vetramone has left his estate,
List not werrey again Constancius,
Forsook the field loved no debate,
But of Spain, min auctour writes thus,
As I wrote late, how that Magnencius,
Gain Co^sta^cius with sword spear and shield
Presumed proudly for to hold a field.
To great damage and hindering of the town.
For many romans thilke day was deed,
Beside a cite which called was Leon.
Till at the last of very coward dread,
Magnencius which captain was and head,
Again Constantius has the field forsake,
Lo how fortune can her chaunges make.
Magnencius for very sorrow and shame,
Bode no longer but gate him a sharp knyfe,
Sole b^ him self wherein he was to blame,
Roue through his heart and so lost his life:
His brother Decius partable of the strife
About his neck cast a mighty cord,
And hynge him self books so record.
Constancius thase after him, Gallus
His uncles brother to govern France,
Was a false tyrant cruel and outrageous,
Sone after slain for his misgouernaunce.
Another vicar for his disobeysaunce,
Called Syluanus by judgment was slain.
For which in France many a man was fayn.
The.xiii. chapter.
How Constantine baptized by Siluester was recured of his lepre.

OF this matter stynt I will a while
And following min own strau^g opinion,
Fro Constancius turn away my style,
And to his father make a digression,
Cause Bochas makes short mention,
Of Constantine which by record of clerks,
Was so notable found in all his works.
This mightyprince was borne in Bretayne,
So as the Brute plainly does us lere:
His holy mother was called Helayn,
He in his days most knightly and entere.
Of mercial acts he knew all the manner,
Chosen emperor for his hye nobles,
Fyl in to lepre cronicles does express.
His sore so grievous that no medicine
Might avail his sickness to recure,
He was cou^sayled to make a great pyscyne
With innocentblud of children y^ were pure,
Make him clean of that he did endure:
Through Itayle children anon were sought,
And to the palais by their mothers brought.
It was great routhe to behold and se,
Of tender mothers to here the sobbing,
By furious constraint of their aduersiti,
Their clothes to rent be dewed with weping:
The strange noise of their hidous cryinge,
Assended up in their piteous clamor,
Came to the ears of the emperor.
Of which noise the emperor was agrysed,
When he knew ground and occasion
Of this matter, before told and devised,
This noble prince began have compassion:
And for to stynt the lamentacion
Of all the women there being in presence
Of merciful pity has granted his sentence.
This glorious, this gracious emperor,
Is clombe of mercy so hye upon the stayre,
Spared nouther vitayle nor his treasour,
Nor his langour that did him so appayre,
with full glad there made them to repair,
where they came sorry to Rome the cite,
They have returned glad to their country
Royal compassion did in his heart mine,
Chase to be sick rather then blood to shede:
His breast enlumined by grace that is divine,
Which fro the heaven did upon him sprede;
He would not suffer innocents to blede.
Preserving pity and mercy more than right,
He was visited upon the next night,
Peter and Paul to him did appear,
Sent from the Lord as heavenly messa^gers,
Bad Constantine be of good chere,
For he that sits above the nine speres,
The Lord of Lords, the lord of lengest years
Will that thou have it well in mind,
In mount Sarapty y^ shall thy leche find.
God of his grace list the to visit.
To shed blood, because that thou do spare,
He has us sent thy labor for to quite,
Tidinges brought of health and thy welfare,
Pope Siluester to the shall declare,
As we have told, be ryghtwel assured,
Of thy sickness how thou shall be recured.
To mount Sarapty in all have that thouse^d,
Suffer Siluestre to come to thy presence:
Sought and found breuely to make an end,
Received after due reverence,
Did his deuoyre of entyre diligence,
Like as the life of Siluester has devised,
By grace made hole when he was baptized.
His flesh, his synewes made suddenly white,
By thrice washing in that pystyne,
Of holy baptym, well of most delight,
where the holy ghost did him enlumine,
Enfourming after by teching of doctrine
Of Siluestre like as mine auctour says,
Of all artycles that long unto our faith.
The font was made of Porphyrie stone,
which was after by cost of Constantine
with a round bye that did about gone,
Of gold and perre and stones that were fine,
Myd of the font right up as alyne,
Upon a pillar of gold a lamp bright,
Full of fine bawme that brent all the night,
A lamb of gold he did also provide,
Set upon this font upon a small pyllere:
which like a condyte upon eueryside,
Shad out water as any cristal clear:
On whose right side an image most entere
was richly forged of our savior,
All of pure gold that cost great treasour.
And on this lamb on the otherside
An image set long to endure,
Of Baptist John with letters for to abide,
Grave curiously and this was the scripture:
Ecce agnus dei that did for man endure
On good friday offered up his blood,
To save mankind died upon the rode.
He let also make a great censere
All of gold, fret with perles fine:
which by night as Phoebus in his spear.
Through al y^ church most freshly did shine*
There forty stones Jacinctine.
Appollos temple, min auctor writes the same,
was hallowed new in saint Peter's name.
The romayn temples that werbuilded of old,
He has fordone withal their maumetry:
Their false gods of silver and of gold.
He has to broke in each party.
This goodly prince of gostly policy,
Set new statutes of great virtue,
To be observed in the name of Christ Jesu.
The first law as I rehearse can
In order set with full great reverence,
That Christ Jesu was sothfast god and m^
Lord of Lords, lord of most excellence,
which has this day of his beniuolence,
Cured my lepre as ye have herd devised,
By blessed Siluestre when I was baptized,
This gracious Lord my souerain lord Jesu,
From bence forth for short conclusion,
I will that he as Lord most of virtue,
Of faithful heart and hole affection,
Be worshipped in every region:
No man so hardy my byddyng to disdain,
Least he suffer death or else grievous pain.
Following the day called the secound,
This Constantine has ordained a decre,
That who that ever in town were found
Or else where about in the country,
What ever he were of hye or low degree,
That blasphemed the name of Jesu,
By dome should have of death a plain issue.
The third day in every man's sight
By a decre, confyrmed and made strong
To every christen, who that did unright,
By oppression to collateral wrong,
It should notbe tarried over long:
Who were conuicte or gilty shall not these,
By law ordained half his good to lose.
The fourth day among romans al,
This privilege pronounced in the town:
Give to the pope sytting in Peter's stall,
As sovereign head in every region
To have the rule and iurisdiccion,
Of priests all alone in all thing,
Of temporal Lords like as has the king.
To the church he granted great fraunchyse
The fyfth day, and specially lyberte:
If a felon in any manner wise,
To find socoure thider did fle,
within the bounds of danger to go fre,
To be assured and have thereof full refuge
From execucion of any temporal judge.
No man presume within no city,
The sixth day, he gave this sentence.
No man so hardy of hye or low degree
To build no church but he have license
Of the Bishop being in presence:
This to say that he in his estate,
By the pope before be approbate.
The seventh day this law he did eke make
Of all possessions which be royal,
The tenth part yearly shall be take,
By judges hands in party and in all.
Which treasour they deliver shall
As the statute does plainly specify,
Hole and entere churches to edify,
The eight day mekely he did him quite
with great reverence and humble affection,
When he did of al his clothes white,
And came him self on pilgrimage down:
Tofore saint Peter of great devotion,
Notwithstanding his roial excellence,
Made his confession in open audience.
His crown took and knelyng thus he said,
With weping eyes and voice lamentable,
And for sobbyng as he might abrayde,
O blessed Jesu, O Lord most merciable,
Let my tears to the be acceptable,
Receive my prayer my request not refuse,
As man most sinful I may me not excuse.
I occupied the state of the emperor,
Of thy martyrs I shed the holy blood,
Spared no saints in my cruel error,
Them to pursue most furious and wode:
Now blessed Jesu most gracious and good,
Peysed and consydred mine immortal offense,
I am not worthy to come in thy presence.
Nor for to enter in to this holy place,
Upon this ground unable for to dwell,
To open mine eyes or to lift up my face,
But of thy mercy so thou me not repel
As man most sinful I come unto the well:
Thy well of grace, of mercy and pite,
For to be washen of mine iniquity.
This example openly he has showed,
His state imperial of mekeneslaid aside:
His purpyl garment with tears al be dewed,
Swerd or septer ne horse upon to ride,
There was none nor baners splayde wide,
Of marcial triumphs was no token found,
But crying mercy, the inperor layon ground.
The peoples gladness was meddled with wepig,
And their weping was meddled with gladness:
To se an emperor and so noble a king,
Of his fre choice to show so great mekenes,
Thus entremedled was joy and heuines,
Heaviness far passed old vengaunce,
With new reioising of ghostly repentance*
This soy was lake a feast funeral,
In folk of custom that do their busy cure,
To bring a corse which of custom shall
Have all the rightes of his sepulture:
And in this time of sudden adventure
To life again restored be his bones,
Causing his friends to laugh and weep atones
Semblably dependyng atwene twain,
The people wept, and there with reioising,
To se the emperor so pitously complain,
For his trespace mercy requiring:
Of joy and sorrow a gracious medlyng,
That day was seen gladness meynt with moan,
with weeping, laughter, and all in one person,
After all this he dug up him selue,
Stones twelve where he was knelyng:
And put them in coffins twelve,
On the.xii. Apostles devoutly remembrynge,
Compassed a ground large for buildinge,
Beside his palace cast thereon to wyrche,
In Christ's name to set up there a chirch.
The place of old called Lateranence,
Builded and edifyed in the apostels name:
Constantinus bare all the dispense,
Ordained a law, mine autour says the same
If any poor, naked, blind or lame,
Receive would the faith of Christ Jesu,
He should by statute be take to this issue
In his promise if he were found true,
were not feigned nor no faytoure,
He should first be spoiled and clad new,
By the costage of the emperor:
Twenty shillings receive to his socour,
Of which receyte nothing was withdraw,
By statute kept, and hold as for a law.
It were to long to put in memory
His hye prowess and his notable deeds:
And to reherce every great victory,
which that he had with hosts that he ledes.
And to remember al his gracious spedes,
The surplusage who list comprehend,
Let them of Syluestre read the legend.
Among other touching his vision,
which he had, in cronicles men may lere.
when he slept in his royal dongeon,
How Christ to him graciously did appear,
Showed him a cross, and said as ye shall here:
Be not aferde upon thy fone to fall,
For in this sign, thou shall overcome the^ al.
By which vision he was made fullight,
Through gods grace and heavenly influence:
First in his baner y^ shone so clear and bryghte,
The cross was bete^ chief toke^ of his defense
Slew the tyran^t that called was Maxence.
After whose death through his hye renoun,
Of all the mpyre he took possession.
In which estate he mayntayned the right,
Upon al poor having compassion:
During his time hold the best knight,
That any where was in any region.
Of Christ's faith the imperyal champion,
Through his noble knightly magnificence,
To all christen protector and diffence.
After his name which never shall appal
Changed in Greece the name of Bisance*
Constantinople he did it after call:
And on a stead of brass (as men may se)
Manacyng the turks of the country,
He sytteth armed a great sweard in his hand,
Them to chastise that rebel in that land.
Rejoice ye folks that borne be in Bretayne*
Called otherwise Brutus Albion,
That had a prince so notable a sovereign,
Brought forth and fostred in your region:
That whylom had the domynacion,
As chief monarche, prince and president,
Over all the world, from Est to occident.
Time of his death that month of the year,
Phoebus not seen, withdrew his fervent hete:
Was eclipsed, and might not appear.
And long before showed a great Comete,
Always encreasyng drew toward the cete,
Of Nychomede, shone early and eke late,
Where in his palayes he passed into fate.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
How Julyan Apostata enemy to Christ's faith by false illusions was chosen
emperor, and after slain.

AFfter the death of this marciall man,
I mean this worthy noble Constantine,
Comes the Apostata cursed Julian,
which by descent to Constantyne was cosyn:
His gynnyng cursed had a cursed fine,
Entered relygion as books specify,
Under a color of false ypocrisy
It has been said of antiquity,
where there is a dissimuled holiness,
It is called double iniquity,
Fie on all such feigned perfitenesse,
For simulacion covered with doublenes,
And false semblaunt with a sour face,
Of all sects, furthest stant out of grace.
A certain space as made is mention*
To al perfection he did him self apply:
Till he wext weary of his profession,
Forsook his order by apostasye,
And first he gave him to nygromancy,
Double apostata as mine autour says,
First to his order, and after to our faith.
By ordinance of Constancius,
This said Julyan rote of ypocrisye,
Of governance froward and vicious,
was sent to Gaul with great cheualrye,
As vicar chosen the country for to gye:
Gate him favor, and falsely began conspire,
To have possession of the hole empire.
And for he was not likely to attain
To that estate he did his heart apply
Another mean plainlye to ordain,
wicked spyrites to make of his alye:
Became aprentis to learn sorcerie,
To have experience by inuocacions,
To call spyrites with his coniuracions.
By false illusyons in the peoples sight,
wicked spyrites had so great favor,
A crown of laurer upon his heed a light:
Made folk to deem by full false error,
It came by miracle to chose him emperor.
which in truth as in existence,
was but iutrusion and feigned appearance.
with them he had his conversation,
Spared not to do them sacrifice,
with eyremonyes and false oblacion,
And to be emperor he rose in this wise.
The state received first he began devise
Again greeks out of his country far,
To make him strong, with them to have werre.
The fiende a while was to him favorable,
Gave him entrye and possession,
And made him promise for to abide stable,
In his Lordship and dominacion:
To have this world under subjection,
Of which be hest he stood in perilous caas,
Following the opinion of Pictagoras.
Pyctagoras had this opinion,
when men dyed anon after than,
There was made a translacion
Of his spyrite into another man:
A manner likeness the Bible tell can,
The double spyrite of grace and prophecy,
To Helisius granted by Hely.
Hereon concluding like his opinion,
As Pyctagoras affyrmed in sentence,
He that had full possession
Of such a sprite in very existence,
Should have the same wisdom and science,
The disposicion after him as blyue,
Which had the spirit that was here alive.
Of governance, and also of nature,
Resemble him of manners and living:
And thus by fraud Pluto did his cure,
To make Julyan trust in every thing.
He had by birth the spyrite of the king,
Called Alysandre, by which he should wyn
This world by conquest, when he list begin.
Thus began he fo^e and fail in fantasy,
To trust on Pluto and gods infernal,
They should enhaunce him by his cheualry,
For to possede and rejoice al
Sword, seipter, crown, and state imperial:
Pass Alysandre in honor and in glory,
And him excel in triumphal victory.
He trusted Satan by who^ he was disceiued
To Christ's faith became mortal enemy:
Where that ever he has perceived
Cross or crucifixe, he brake them vengably.
By false langage he caused traitourly
Christ Jesu be called Galilee,
And of dispyte sometime of Nazaree.
Again our faith this tyrant wext so wode.
Again Christ had so great hatred,
Slew many a martyr and fasly shed their blud,
An ydolater, and regenate in deed:
Held mortal war with the^ of Perce and Mede,
Coming to Perce first he began debate
Gain Sapor, of whom I spoke but late.
Of Parthois also he entered through the reem
Where he fond no manner resistance,
And as he came by Jerusalem,
The Jews anon he gave license
To build the temple with great diligence,
In dispyte of purpose to do shame
To Christ's church bilt a new in his name.
In this while he caught a great courage
In a Theater made broad in the town,
To wild beasts cruel and savage
Of saints blood to make oblacion,
They to devour men of religion:
And al christen of purpose to distroy
His lust was set, and al his worldly joy.
By an heraude that did his host convey.
Of very purpose to bring them in a train,
By strange deserts found out a froward way,
The heat importable did him so constrayne
Brent through the harneyse, felt so great pain,
The dry sands, the air infect with hete,
Made many a man in have their life to let.
This froward tyrant knowing no remedy,
Of cursed heart began Christ Jesu blaspheme,
And of malycious hatred and envy,
Wode and furious, as it did seem,
Began curse the lord that al ye world shall deem,
Christ Jesu, which of long patience
List not by vengaunce his malice recompense.
And more cruel was there never none,
Nor more vengable not Cerberus in hell,
Mortal enemy to good men euerychone,
Whose blasphemies and rebukes fell
Byrehersayle if I should them tell*
I am afraid the venomous violence,
Should enfect the air with the pestylence.
He cast out darts more bitter then is gall,
Of blasphemy, and infernal langage,
And in this while among his princes all,
A knight unknow angelyke of vysage,
Freshly armed to punyshe his outrage,
With a sharp spear through every vain,
Of this tyrant roue the heart on twain.
Bathed in his blood this tyrant fill low,
To God and man froward and odious,
Though y^ time the knight was not know,
Yet some men said it was Marcurius,
Which by the prayer of Basilius
This tirant slew as cronicles does us lere,
By a miracle of Christ's mother dear.
This Mercurius as books determyne,
In Cesaria a mighty strong city
Within the country called Palestine,
Buried before, rose up at this iournee
Out of his grave, a strange thing to se,
An horse brought to hi arrayed in his armure,
Which hyng tofore beside his sepulture.
The same armure was not seen that night,
Nor on the morrow at his grave found,
Till midday that Phoebus shone fulbryghte
when Mercurius gave him his fatal wound
His blasphemy for ever to confound: preue,
which thing accomplyshed this miracle to
He and his armure were there again at eve.
Of his blasphemy this was the soden wrake
^hiche the tyrant received for his mede,
The last word, I find that he spoke,
Was: thou Galylee have overcome in deed,
Took the blood that he did blede
This deuyllyshe man dying in despair,
Dispyte of Jesu cast it in the air.
His body slain and his skyn was take,
Tawed* after the precept and bidding,
Souple and tender as they could it make,
Saporbadde so that was of Perce king,
That men thereof might have knowlegyng:
Early on the morrow and at eve late,
He did it nail upon his palace gate.
And to a cite that called was Kayre,
As chronicles make rehersayle,
This Apostata would often a day repair,
To a woman which had in her entrayle
Spyrites closed, to make his diuinayle,
In whose womb barain and out of grace,
Of wicked spirits was the dwelling place.
This said woman was a creature
The which before by cursed Julyan,
By his life his purpose to recure,
In sacrifice was offered to Satan:
And so as he with cursednes began,
Such was his end, as al books tell,
whose soul with Pluto is buried deep in hell.
With this tyrant Bochas began wexe wroth
For his most odious fell outrage,
And to reherce in party he was loathe
The blasphemies of his fell langage:
For nouther furye, nor infernal rage
May be compared with poison fret within,
To the false venyme of this horrible sin.
It is contrary to all good thewes
And tofore God most abominable,
Hateful to all save to cursed shrewes,
For of all vices very imcomparable
Most contagious, and most delectable,
The mouth enfect of such infernal hounds,
Which every day sle Christ with new wounds.
For obstynate of purpose for the nones,
Of disposicion furyous and wode,
Not afraid to swear gods bones,
with horrible other, as body, flesh, and blood,
The Lord disme^bring most gracius and good.
His fete, hands, arms, face and heed,
Reno him of new as they would have him, deed.
This blessed Lord which is immortal
Though they be dedly they would him slay ageyn,
They be erthly, he is celestial,
In froward wise they ben ouerseyne:
Discrecion fails, their reason is in vain:
All such blasphemy, for short conclusyon,
Proceeds of pride and false ambycion.
It seems to me they have foul failed
Of kyndnes, to do him reverence
which for their love upon the cross was nailed,
To pay the ransom for man's offense,
Suffered death with humble pacyence,
False rebukyng, spyttyng in his vysage,
To bring mankind unto his heritage.
False surquedy that does the hearts reyse
Of such blasphemers, as was this Julian,
whose great empire might not counterpeise
Again the Lord which is both God and man:
The original ground of pride was Satan,
Prince under him most unfortunate,
was this Apostata, reignyng in his estate.
What was the end of this tyrant horrible?
This cruel felon hateful to every wight?
By sudden miracle to al his host visible,
There did appear a very heavenly knight,
Most freshly armed, angelyke of sight,
With a sharp speere sitting on his stead,
Made the tyrant his heart blood to blede.
His false gods might him not avail,
His froward off ring done to maumetry,
Nor al his proud imperyall apparayle,
His inuocacions, nor hateful sorcerye:
For this apostata that did his faith deny,
Among his knights slain by death sudden,
His soul in hell with satan in great pain.
The xv. chapter
How themperoure Valence slew Heremites shed christen blud* distroyed
churches, and after was brent.

BOchas in have does his style dress
Next, to the mperour ye called was Vale^ce,
Rehersyng first the perfyte holiness
Of Heremytes, that did their dilygence
To live in penance and in abstynence,
Forsook the world: and for Christ's sake,
In to desert they have the way take*
In this world here they list no lengar tarry,
Diverse and double of trust no certain,
Far in Egypt to live solitary,
Deep in deserts, of folk not to be said:
The soil was dry, of vitayle full barayne,
The frutelesse trees up seared by the rote,
For Christ's love they thought ye life most so^e
This said Valence of malice frowardly,
To this Heremites y^ lived in great penance,
Causeless with full great envy
Troubled them, and did the^ great greuau^ce,
Like a tyraunte set al in vengaunce:
Distroyd churches with people that he ladde,
And where he went christen blood he shadde.
This mean while by robbyng and rauyne,
In Mauritayne which is a great country,
There was a prince that called was Faryne,
And in Cesaria a famous great cite,
For his extorcion and his cruelte,
He took upon him proudly there reignynge,
Maugre romans to be crowned king.
Theodose the first a manly man
Was sent out his malice to withstand,
By the bidding of Valencian,
Which that time the mpyre had in hand,
Both atones: but ye shall understand
Theodose was sent out to assail
The said Farine, and slew him in battle.
Of which Faryne by full cruel hate
In that country presumptuously reignynge,
Smote of his heed, and sat it on the gate
Of Cesaria this was the endyng:
Which by intrusio^ before was crowned king,
In Mauritayne oppressing them by dread,
As ye have herd for which he lost his head.
In this matter Bochas does not soiourne,
By no attendaunce nor long diligence,
But of purpose does again return
To the mperour, that called was Valence:
Which as I told did so great offense
The holy church, of froward cursednes,
Slewal Hermites that bode in wilderness.
God would not suffer he should long endure,
Grants no tyrant here longlyfe:
For by some mischefe, or sudden adventure,
They dye by murdre, with dagger, sword, or knife
The Gotheyes whilom began a strife,
For his outrage and great oppressyon,
They again romans fill in rebellion.
A prince of his called Maximus
Distressed them by so great tyranny,
And was upon them so contrarious
That they gadred all the cheualry,
And wext so strong upon their party,
That by their manhood it fell of adventure,
They on Valence made a disconsiture.
Spared not by robbynge and pillage,
Slough and brent many a stately place,
Cities, towns, and many a small village,
That were famous within the la^d of Trace:
But furiously they met him in the face,
Where like a coward he turned his visage,
To save his life, lay hyd in Cartage.
Thus finally this emperor Valence
As ye have heard failed of his intent,
The Goths followed by cruel violence,
As wild beasts al of one assent,
The house and him to ashes they have brent:
Lo here the fine, ye princes take heed,
Of tyrants, that saints blood do shed.
The.xvi. Chapter.
Of king Amacisius and how Gracian and Theodosy distroied temples of falls
gods and how Gracia^ was put to flight

AFter Valence to God contraryous,
In all his works most froward of liue^g,
Tofore Bochas came Amacisius,
Which of Goths was whilom Lord and king.
Of his great age piteously complaining,
Inflate and dole list make no delays,
Slew him self to short his grievous days.
Then came down the brother of Valence,
The mighty emperor called Gracian,
Which before had had experyence
First with his uncle Valentinyan
In the Empire, as books tell can:
And afterward Theodosy and he,
Had governance of Rome the cite.
Theodosy and Gracien of assent
Distroyed temples as in that party:
Of false gods also they have down rent
The great ydols, and all such maumetrye,
And full devoutly began churches edifye.
And in this while as fortune did ordain,
One Maximus was vicar in Bretayne.
An hardy knight, albe that he did vary
From his promise made by sacrament,
In Bretayne list no lengar tarry*
But into Gaul of heart and hole intent
Gain Gracian he suddenly is went
And as it fill set by their both auyse,
They had a battle not far fro Parise.
This Gracien was there put to flight
By the prowes of a proud captain,
Called Merobandus an hardy knight,
Which with his power has so ouerlayne,
That Gracian was constrained in certain
When his power might not avail:
Gain Maximus, to fly out of Itayle.
This Maximus of pride began desire
In his heart by false ambycion,
To reign alone, and of the hole Empire
In his hands to have possession:
But in what wise fortune threw him down
With such other as be in nombre five,
In this chapter, Bochas does discriue.
Against this same tyrant Maximus
When that he had slain Gracian,
The noble Emperor Theodosius
To venge his death, a war in have he began:
Because also that Valentinian
was wrongly banished through the cruelte
Of Gracian, far from his country.
with Maximus to hold up his party
was Andragacian a full notable knight,
which was made prince of his chiualrye,
That took upon him of very force and might
To keep y^ mountains that no manner wight
with Theodose armed in plate and mayle,
No man should over the Alps of Itayle.
Theodose made a great army,
By grace of God, and marcial courage,
Laid a siege to Aygle a great cite,
And wan the town maugre his visage:
Took the tyrant, and for his great outrage
Berafte him first his royal garnement,
And slew him after by rightful judgment.
when Adragracian knew that Maximus
That was his Lord was slain in such wise,
Anon for sorrow the story tells thus,
He drowned him self, as Bochas does devise
Thus can fortune make men arise*
And to the estate of Emperors attain,
with unware stroke give him a fall again.
This Maximus of whom I spoke tofore,
Before his death made an ordinance
That his son which called was Victore,
Should after him govern Gaul and France:
whom Arbogastes had in governance,
A great constable with Valentinian,
Slew this Victore to reign when he began.
The.xvii. Chapter.
A goodlye process how Theodosye with prayer and small nombre, gate the
victory,

When Valentinian with great apparayl,
By Arbogastes took possessyon
Of Lombardy, and of al Itayle,
Brought all that land to subjection,
Than with his power he came to Gaul down:
There received with great solempnyte,
At Vienne, a famous old cite.
Arbogastes of whom I spoke but late,
His chief constable as ye have heard deuyse,
Of his Lord by full cruel hate
The death conspired, of false couetise:
Thereby supposyng that he should arise
Unto thestate to be chose Emperor,
when he were deed, like a false traitor.
Up in a tower he heng him traytourly,
To more sclandring and hindering of his name,
Reported outward, and said cursedly
This Arbogastes to hide his own shame
His sovereign Lord to put in more blame,
Stiffely affirming a thing that was false,
How he him self hyng up by the halse.
Thus like a murdrer and a false traitor,
And of conditions hateful and odious,
Labored sore to be made Emperor:
That he alone with Eugenius,
Might exclude Theodosius.
First to let him he should in no party
Pass through Itayle, nor through Lombardy.
Set spies to bring him in a train,
which that time as they understood,
Like a just prince did his busye pain
As he that thought nothing but good,
In the hills of Lombardy abode:
whom Arbogastes of furious outrage;
Cast him to trouble and stop his passage.
He and Eugenius being of assent
Theodosy mortally to assail,
which when he knew their mening fradule^t,
Albe that he had but scarce vitaile,
On every cost he set with a battle:
And of his knights forsake in manner,
He left all thing, and took him to prayer.
with him was left but a small meyne
True and faithful in their affection,
And first of al he fill down on his kne,
And to Jesu began make his orison:
O Lord (quod he) thine ears enclyne down,
And of thy mercyful gracious goodness,
Deliver me out of my mortal distress.
Consider and se how that I am thy knight,
Which often since through my fragilite,
With fleshly lusts blinded in my sight,
A thousand times have trespased to the:
But gracious Jesu of mercy and pite,
To my request beningly take heed,
Me to socour in this great need.
My trust is holy plainly to conclude,
Thou shall forther and fortune my viage,
With few folk again great multitude:
To make me have gracious passage,
After the Proverb of new and old langage
How that thou may and can thy power show.
Gain multitude, victory with a few.
And as thou saved whilom Israel
Again Pharaos mighty puissaunce,
And from the lion delivered Daniell,
And saved Susanna in her mortal greuau^ce
Save me this day fro sorrow and mischau^ce:
In this mischefe to grant me this issue,
To escape from danger by grace of y^ Jesu.
This blessed name by interpretacion
Is to say, most mighty Savior,
There is no dread nor dubitacion,
That Jesus is in all worldly labor,
To all that trust him victorious protector:
Now blessed Jesu pauise of my defense,
Make me tescape mine enemies vyolence.
Let mine enemies that so great bost doblow,
Though their power be dredful and terrible,
That they may by experience know
There is nothing to the impossible,
Thou two and three and be indivisible,
Though I with me have but a few men,
Saueme this day Jesu fro death, amen,
The day began clear the son began shine bryghte,
when Theodosy devoutly lay knelynge,
And by grace ad own began his sight,
Fro cloudy wawes of long pitous weping:
His chief hope was in the heavenly king
Jesu his captain, in whose holy name,
That day he escaped fro mischefe and shame
The holy cross was bette in his armure,
Borne as chief standerd tofore in his bataile,
God made him strong in the field to endure,
Hardy as lion his enemies to assail:
Jesus his champion, his plate and eke his mail,
Jesu alone set in his memory,
By whom that day he had the victory.
There was a knight prince of the chiualry
Of Arbogaste and Eugenius,
which governed al hole their party
Arcibio called manly and virtuous,
which goodly came to Theodosius,
Did him reverence and with glad cheer
Saved him that day fro mischefe and dangere.
when Theodosius on his enemies began set,
Like a knight not tournynge his visage,
And both battles together when they met,
Of Theodosy to explete the passage,
Fill a miracle to his advantage:
By sodayn tempest of wind hayle and tain,
Troubled all tho that sieged the mountain.
Vulcanus which is chief smyth of heaven,
Gain Arbogaste began him ready make,
To bend his gu^ns with thu^der and with leuyn,
And Eolus his wyndes began awake,
Out of the cauernes hidous brown and black,
All of assent by sturdy violence,
With Theodosius to stand at defense,
Again Eugenius and Arbogast his brother,
Their people and they departed here and yo^der
With wind and mist y^ non of the saw other,
By unware vengaunce of tempest and of thu^der:
Their speres brast, their shields roue a so^dre.
Eugenius take after and lost his head,
And Arbogast slough him self for dread.
Thus began the Lord of his eternal might,
Chastise tyrants and their malice repress,
Saved Theodosy his own chosen knight,
who trusts him of parfite stablenes
Gothe fre fro danger, escapes fro duresse,
Books record how Theodosius,
Was in his time called Catholicus.
The case was this as I reherce can,
In Thessalonyca a famous great cite
Being Bishop saint Ambrose in Millan,
Certain Jews for to do equite
And sytte in dome having auctorite,
Notwithstanding their commission,
Were slain by commons, entryng the town.
Thereof the Emperor was nothing feign,
But commanded of hasty wilfulnes
when he knew the judges so were slain,
That his knights should them thider dress:
Entered the cite by cruel sturdinesse,
With sword, pollax, and daggers sharp whet
Indifferently to sle all that they met.
By whose biddinge the cite to encombre,
That day was slain many an innocent,
Five thousand deed remembering in nombre,
Murdered in host without judgment,
By them that were in to the cite sent:
But when Ambrose herd of this cruel deed,
Like a just prelate thus he began proceed.
Ye have herd how this vengaunce began
By Theodosy, to chastise the cite,
The same emperor came after to Myllan,
Would have entered at a sole mpnite
The cathedral church in his most royalte,
Bishop Ambrose at the porche him met,
And of purpose manly him with set.
Quod the bis shop I counsayl the wythdraw,
In to this church thou have none enter,
Thou have offended God and eke his law,
Be not so hardy nor bold I charge the,
To set thy foot nor enter in no degree,
Because thou art a cruel homicide,
That maugre thy might thou shall abide.
Unto thy palaes home again return,
This eight months look thou be not sein,
Pass not thy bonds, do mekely there soiorn,
For trust me well, and be rightwel certain,
All such murdrers god has them in disdain:
Blood falsely shed, have this in remembrance,
Calls day and night to him to do ve^gasice,
Against the, for this great offense
Innocents blood shed again right,
By just auctorie I give this sentence:
This eight months accounted day and night*
To enter the church y^ shall not com in sight:
Reason shall hold so just the balaunce,
Till thou have fully accomplished thy penance.
what I have said take thereof good head,
For this time thou gettest no more of me,
withdraw thy hand innocents blood to shede,
For any rancour or hasty cruelte:
Than behold the great humility
Of the Emperor, and consydre well
For it would have peersed a heart of stele.
with heed enclyned no word he spoke again,
Fill in wepinge, with subbyng vnstaunehable,
His purple wede bedewed as with rain,
Returning home with chere most lamentable:
So continued in his purpose stable,
with all the tokens of faithful repentance,
In lowly wise accomplished his penance.
He gave ensample to princes every chone
In case semblable that work of wylfulnes
To execusion to proceed anon:
Mentain their error and froward cursednes,
Defend their trespass meintein their wodnes,
Far out of joint if it shall be declared,
To Theodosy for to be compared.
To the earth he mekely did obey,
Gods knight did lowly his penance:
Where there be some that wrongly it warrei,
Hold there again by froward maintenance.
Touching this matter set here in remembrance,
As mendeserue let every wight take heed,
He that sees al, quiteth them their mede.
Theodosius list nothing abredge
To short the yard of his correction,
Forsook the platte, of rigor took the edge,
Mekely to suffer his castygacion:
To bow his chine was no rebellion,
By meke confession knowing his trespace,
By saint Ambrose restored again to grace.
Virtuous princes may ensample take
Of Theodosy how they the lord shall queme,
He not froward amends for to make
His ceptre, his sword, and his diadem
Subject to Ambrose what him list deem,
Obeyed al thing, and for his great offense
To holy church to make recompense.
He knew that God was his souerayn Lord,
To holy church how greatly he was bound*
Grutched never in will, thought nor word
Holy on Christ his empire for to found.
where virtue reigns virtue will ay rebound,
And for this prince obeyed to al virtue,
Has now his mede above with Christ Jesu.
The.xviii. Chapter.
How knights and gentilmen, chase Alerike king: and the commons chase
Radagasus which ended in myschefe.

IT is remembered of antiquite
In the Bible, after Noes flood
How by descent of his sons three
Of their linege plainly and their blood,
All kinreddes dylated ben abroad,
And mine author as it is made mind,
Of Japhet seven nations he did find.
The people first of Gaul and Galathe,
Of Magoth, Goths and folk of Itayle,
Tire, Cithia, with many a great country,
Standing in Asia, as by rehersayle:
But in Europe stant Trace, it is no fail:
Goths and Cithiens, of purpose did ordain*
Among them self governors twain.
Knights and gentelmen chase Alericus,
To be their prince and have the souerayntie,
Where the commons chase Radagasus,
The Goths first for great suerte
With king Alerike entering the cite,
In to Rome to find there socour,
That time Honorius being their emperor
By grant of whom all the hole country
Gave to Alerike, Gaul Spayn and France,
There to abide and thereto hold his see,
Goths spaynolfes under his obeisaunce,
Taking on him all the governance:
Till Stillicon out of the Occident,
To mete with him was from Rome sent.
That time Honorius being Emperor
Stillicon began Alerike enchace,
With many a sturdy proud soudioure,
For to fight they chose have their place:
But Aleryke stood so in the grace
Of fortune that by very might
Stillicon he put unto the flight.
Radagasus and Alerike of assent
Have concluded, and full accorded be,
Through Itaile for to make their went
Toward Rome, and to enter that cite,
Maugre romans to have the souerainte:
Tofore their entering began the town manace,
The name of Rome to change and difface.
The town for evermore to do a shame
Their purpose was, as ye have heard devise:
First of al to change the towns name,
Dempt them self able to that emprise.
But for tune thought all otherwise,
Like her manners to do most damage,
When she to men shows fresh her vysage.
Her conditions be not always one,
Stondmele of custom she can vary,
For she was first froward to Stilicon,
And to Radagasus efte again contrary
In one point she list never tarry:
To Radagasus her favor did fail,
By Stillicon he vanquished in battle.
All his pride might not make him speed,
For fortune list so for him ordain
That he was feign at so strayt a need,
To fl ye for socour to an hye mountain,
Of all vitaile naked and baraine:
Weere for hunger he felt so great grief,
Nigh al his people dyed at mischefe.
Of all socour destitute and baraine,
Saw no remedy took him to flight:
By the romans he was so ouerlaine,
Take at mischefe, and maugre his might
In chains bound, and dampened anon right
For to be deed, his people as it is told
Many one slain, some take and some sold.
There was none prouder nor more su^q^dus
In thylke days plainly to discryue,
Then was this said king Radagasus,
Which took on him with romans to strive:
His ^ower short was ouerturned bliue.
For fortune of malice had a lust,
To ^^e this tirant with hunger and with thrust.
Among other proud princes all
Reioised him self by a manner vainglory,
Because that men in countres did him call
King of Goths, short is the memory
Of him rehearsed or written in history,
To give ensample in deed men may find,
The name of tyrants is sone out of mind.
The.xix. Chapter.
How Ruffyn chamberlayne with Theodosy usurped to be Emperor, and therefore by
Honorious dampened and his head smyt of.

HIe climing up has often an unware fall,
And specially when it is sudden,
Fro low degree to estate imperyall
When false ambicion the ladder does ordain.
By usurpation presumptuously to attain,
About the skies with his head to perce,
Fro whens he come were shame to reherce.
I mean as thus al such hasty climbing,
Of them that list not them self to know,
And have forget the ground of their ginning,
By froward fame with worldly winds blow*
To reise their name above sagitaris bow:
Record of Ruffin which proudly began desire
By false intrusion to occupi the ^pite.
Which Rufin was whilom chamberlayn
With Theodosy, and hold a manly knight,
Yet in one thing he was ^oule ouersaine,
By couetise blinded in his sight,
To spend his labor that had no title of right:
By the emperor Honorius he was sent
For to govern all the Orieate.
By process Ruffin was made vike^e,
Called after the vikarimperial
Took upon him holy and entere
By authorite chief and principal,
Him self alone for to govern all:
And most able thus he did deem,
Before all other to wear a diedeme.
Of him self so much he did make
In port, and thereto most ambicious
At Constantinople he was unawarely take,
First bound in chains, after served thus
By true judgment of Honorius:
His head smot of, and his righthand in deed:
This was his end, no more of him Irede.
The.xx Chapter.
How Stillyon and other of like condicon ended in mischefe,

AFter whose death to Bochas came one
Such other like of condition,
Before remembered called Stillion,
Purposed him to have possession
Of the Empire hole, thus he thought,
And by what mean, y^ way his fader sought.
Compendiously to tell of these twain,
Fro diverse countrees toward Septe^trion
To gather people did their busy pain,
Of many diverse strange nation:
Again Honorius they came together down,
And as they met fortune made them fail,
Both atones slain were in battle.
Their ginning cursed had a cursed fine.
After whose death I read of other twain,
Of one Constance, his father Constantyne,
Which Constantine took on him certain
To reign in Gaul, and after did ordain
In that country to be governor,
There to continue, as lord and Emperor.
His son Constaunce caught a devotion,
Of conscience, and forthwith anonright
Was shave a monk, and made his profession:
His father after of very force and might,
Let take hi^ out, gave hi^ thorder of a knight,
Both of assent began make them self strong,
Toppres the country and do the people wrong.
This said Constaunce as mine auctor says,
Was confederate of hateful cruelte
With one He^ricius, assurau^ce made of faith,
As brethern sworn for more authorite,
And for to make the nombre up of three
Constantyne was sworn with them also,
To be al one in what they had to do.
These said three sworn, and joined thus,
Conquered in Spain many a great cite:
But in this while this said Henricius
Traitor false, and full of duplicite,
His fellow slought again his oath pardye:
Thus was Constau^ce through false collusio^,
Of Henricius murdered by trayson.
Henricius lived not but a while,
By his own knights he slain was also:
Fraud for fraud, disceit is quyt with gyle,
It follows ever and gladly comes thereto.
Men receive their guerdon as they do,
Let men always have this in remembrance,
Murdre of custom will end with mischau^ce.
Among such other thus endinge in mischefe
Came Attalus and one Eraclyan,
For no prowes but to their great reprefe,
Remembered here, their story tell can,
Again Romans when they rebel began,
By Honorius before made officers,
And of the Empire called chief vykars.
First Attalus for his tyranny
When he in Gaul was made governor,
Went in to Spain with a great company,
Did his pain and fraudulent labor,
By false slight to be made Emperor:
Take, and bound exiled for falsnesse,
His hand smyt of, ended in wretchedness.
Of Eraclian the end was almost like,
Yet was he promoted to great prosperity,
Made governor and lord of Affrike,
Of Consulere rose to the dignite:
Rode through Libi, and many a great country,
With three thousand ships began to sail,
And with seuin hundred to ariue in Itayle.
So many ships never before were seine,
Like as it is accounted by writing,
His navy passed the navy in certain
Of mighty zerxses that was of Perce king,
Or Alisandre: but yet in his coming
Toward Itaile, when he should aryue,
The sea and fortune began again him strive.
At his arriuaile he had a sudden dread,
Cause Honorius had sent down a capitain,
Constancius called, gouernoure and bid
Of all the Romans, to mete him on ye plain:
For which Eraclian turned is again,
As I find began take his passage,
Toward the cite, that called is Cartage.
Thus fortune list her power show
Or he came fully to that noble town,
With sharp swerdes he was all to hew,
Among his knights through false collusion,
As they fill at a discencion:
Of intrucion first began the quarrel,
Again Romans, when he began rebel.
The.xxi. Chapter.
A goodly process why Rome was distroied, and for the same or like cause many
other realms.

OF many mischeues before rehearsed
Some draw a long, and some shortly told,
And how fortune has her whele reuersed,
By tragedies remembered manyfolde,
Tofore by Bochas of princes young and old,
In the eight book rehearsed the process,
Echone almost ended in wretchedness.
Namely of them that did most desire
By wrong titel them self to magnify,
To have lordshyp and govern thempyre,
The state imperial proudly to occupy:
Which estate plainly to specifye,
As far as Phoebus does in his spear shine,
Among all lordships is brought to ruin.
Fro mine author I list not discord,
To tell y^ ground why Rome came to naught,
By an example I cast me to record
What was chief cause if it be well out soght
By a story that came unto my thought
Of John Bochas, which ye shall here
That full notably is rehearsed here.
Which ensample and story rehersing,
Ceriously following mine author
Odoacer whylom a famous king,
A king by name and a great governor,
But of his conditions a rauinous robbour,
Out of that country were mercy and pite
Banished for ever with troth and equite.
In that region where mercy is not used,
And truth oppressed is with tyranny,
And right wysenesse by power is refused,
False extorcion subporteth robbrye,
And sensualyte may have the maistry
All of reason, be tokens at a prefe,
Which many land have brought to mischef.
There is no realm that may stand in surete
Ferme nor stable in very existence.
Nor continue in long prosperyte,
But if the trone of knightly excellence,
Be supported with justice and prudence,
In him that shall as egal judge stand,
Twene rich and poor with scepter in hand.
A clear ensample this matter for to ground:
So as a father that is natural
Or like a mother which kindly is bound,
To foster her children in especial:
Right so a king in his estate royal,
Should of his office diligently entende,
His true lieges to cheryshe and defend.
By good ensample his subjects tenlumine,
Temporal realms should (as says scripture)
Resemble the kingdom which is divine,
By law of god and law eke of nature,
That Res publica long time may endure,
Void of discord and false duplicite,
Of one body in long prosperity.
Nouther their reign nor dominacion
Have of them self none other assurance,
The estate of kings began by permission
Of gods grace, and of his purueyaunce,
By virtuous life and moral governance
Long to continue both in peace and war,
Like their deserts to punish wha^ they err.
They should be the myrrour and the light,
Transce^de all other by virtuous excellence,
As examplers of equite and right,
So by discrecion of natural providence,
To tempre their rigor with mercy and clemence*
What shall fall before cast al things,
As appertains to princes and to kings.
Things passed to have in remembrance,
Conserve wisely things in presence,
For things to come before make ordinance,
Follow the traces of virtuous continence,
Again all vices to make resistance,
By the virtue of magnanimite,
Which is appropred to imperial majesty.
Brother to force authors say echone,
Which conserueth the royal dignite,
In such a mean stable as any stone,
Not ouerglad for no prosperity,
Nor over sad for none aduersite,
For life nor death high courage to remue,
To god and man to yield the^ that is due.
Gain fleshly lusts arm the^ in sobrenesse,
Void all surfettes and froward glotony,
Gredy appetites by measure to repress,
Out of his house avoid all ribaudy,
Rowners, flattrers, and such as can lie:
Ware in his domes he be not perciall,
To poor do alms, to virtuous be liberal.
In his array show him like a king,
From other princes by a manner appearance:
So that men praise his virtuous living,
More than his clothing, far from his presence.
And let him think in his aduertence,
Trust thereon verily certain,
As he governs men will report and said.
Let him also for his great aueile.
Have such about him to be in presence,
As notable princes to be of his counsel,
Such as to fore have had experience
Twene good and evil, to know the difference:
And six things hateful of new and old,
To banish them out in have from his household.
First them that love to live in ydelnesse,
All such as love nouther god ne dread,
Covetous people that poor folk oppress,
And them also that do all for mede,
And simulacion cladde in double wede:
And such as can for their advantages,
Out of one hode show two visages.
Let him also void out at his gate
Ryotous people, y^ love to watch al night:
And them also that use to drink late,
And lie a bed till their diner be dight,
And such as list not of god to have a sight,
And recheles folk that list not here mass,
T^uoyde his court and let the^ lightly pass.
For which defautes rehearsed here toforne,
Not only Rome but many a great country
Have be distroied, and many a kingdom lorne,
In old cronicles as ye may read and se:
False ambicion and froward duplicite,
Has many a realm and many a la^d encloied,
And ben cause why they have be distroied.
Jerusalem was whilom transmygrate,
Their true prophets for they had in dispite:
And Balthazar was eke unfortunate
For he in Babilone followed al his delight:
Dary in Perce had but small respyte,
Suddenly slain and murdered by treason,
The same of Alysa^dre when he dra^ke poison.
Discord in Troy grounded in couetyse
When by false traison sold was Palladion,
Rome and Cartage in the same wise
Distroied were, for short conclusion,
Among them self for their deuisyon:
Reken other realms that be of later date,
And of deuisions in France y^ was but late.
Al these defautes rehearsed here breuely
Out sought the rote, and weied in balaunce,
Chief occasion to tell by and by
Has been i^ princes, y^ have had governance:
And specially to put in remembrance,
For an example tells as comes to mind,
Of Odoacer the story as I find.
Borne in Pruce and hardy of courage,
At his beginning him self to magnify
Though no mention be made of his ^mage,
Having no titell, but theft and robbery,
His conquest began naught of blood and au^cetry,
But gadred people of sundry regions,
Entered Itayle with many nations.
With his soudiours first he began assail,
With a multitude entryng anon right,
Kingdoms of Hu^gry, and countries of Itayle,
Met in his passage a Romayne knight
Called Horestes, in steel armed bright:
The field was take and put in ieoparty,
Horestes fled for socour to Pauy.
Straightly besieged and the town won,
Found for the time none other cheuesaunce,
The next morrow at rising of the son,
Bound in cheynes, tencrees his greuaunce,
Sent to a cite that called was Plesaunce:
Again whom Odoacer was so fell,
Let him be slain by judgment full cruel.
After whose death by sudden violence,
Odoacer is passed through Itaile,
Entered Rome found no resistance,
Zeno the Emperor durst him not assail,
For there was none to give him battle:
So that by force and rauinous working
Of all Itaile he was crowned king.
Had all Rome under subjection,
Fortune a while list him not fail:
Zeno thereof had indygnacion,
Began work again him in hope it should avail
And thereupon the lordshyppe of Itaile,
He gave of purpose, his power committing
To Theodorike, that was of Goths king.
So y^ Theodorike in hope to have vyctorie
Again Odoacer, began make resistance,
Of his name to put in memory
Took upon him by knightly excellence
For the Romans to stand in diffence:
Met him proudly with his chiualry,
Beside a river that called was Soury.
With their batails togider when they met,
Beside Leglere that stands in Lo^bardy,
With round speres and sharp swerdes whet,
Odoacer for all his tyranny
Was put to flight, disconfyted his party:
And fortune that best can change and vary,
At unset hour was to him contrary.
Him and his power the Romans have defied,
He brent their vines and toures envy ron,
Because thentre was to him denied,
And to Rauenne he is descended down:
But maugre him he was take in the town,
By Theodorike, let each man take heed,
Odoacer he commanded to be deed.
Mine author Bochas of entencion,
For the time as came to remembrance,
Toward Romans makes a digression
To them recording the great variaunce
The unware chaunges, the gery cou^tenau^ce
Of Fortunes false transmutacion,
These same words rehersing to the town:
Remember o Rome and call again to mind
The days passed of thy felicite,
Thy marcial co^questes, thy triu^phs left behind,
Thy great victories most of auctorite:
Thy famous laws song in each country,
Which through ye world by report did shine,
Now all atones is turned to ruin.
From Est to west thy lordshyp did attain,
Above all powers most excellent and royal,
But now from Rome into Almaine
The estate translated which is imperial,
Name of thy Senators, name in especial,
The golden letters darked and diffaced,
And from remembrance almost out raced.
Cite of cities whilom most glorious,
That most freshly floured in chiualry,
To which the alpies and mountains most famous
Were subject of all Lombardy
Til that discord, division, and envy
Among your self has clipsed y^ brightness
By a false serpent, brought in by doubleness.
Kings and princes were to the tributary,
Of all prosperity so fulsome was the flode:
Among yourselfe till ye began to vary,
The world throughout to you subject stood,
Till ye began show two faces in one hode:
What followed after, fortune has so provided
Ye came to naught when ye began be divided.
Unpurveyed of prudent Senators,
Thy merchandise turned to pouerte,
Of knighthod naked, barayne of soudiours,
Disconsolate stant all the co^monte:
Towers and walls broke of the cite,
That whilom was a paradise of delight,
Now all the world has the but in dispite.
Cause to conclude of al thy wretchedness
Is false ambicion, pride, and lechery,
Division, and malicious doubleness:
Rancour, hatred, couetise, and envy,
Which set aside all good policy,
In brefe rehearsed for short conclusion
Have be chief ground of thy destruction.
The.xxii. Chapter.
How the kings Trabstila and Busarus were brought unto subjection and made
tributares to Theodorike.

AFter these mischeues told of Ro^e town
Came Trabstila king of Gepidois,
With other twain as made is me^cio^
Busarus, that was king of Bulgarois,
With Philitheus reigning in Ragois:
All these three brefely for to saine,
Came all atones to Bochas to complain.
Their realms standing toward Septe^trio^,
And to remember of the first twain,
Were brought atones to subjection
By Theodorike, that did his busy pain
Them to conquer and proudly did ordain
That they were never so hardy to rebel,
Again Romans to take no quarrel.
To Theodorike they were made tributary,
Most wretchedly bound in seruage:
Never so hardy after for to vary,
In pain of death during al their age,
Of servitude lo here the surplusage,
Of al wretches most wretched they be found,
That to thraldom constrained be and bound.
Tresour of tresours if it be well sought
Is virtuous fredome with large lyberte,
With worldly goods it may not be bought,
With royal rubies, gold, stones, nor pyrre,
For it transcendeth, and has the soueraynte
Above all richesse that be in earth found,
A man at large freely to stand unbound.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
How Philitheus lost his kingdom and of Marcian and Leo.

NExt these two in order ye may se,
To John Bochas began show his pre se^ce
The third king, called Philithe
Which by fortunes sudden violence,
Lost his kingdom by cruel sentence
Of Odoacer, the tyrant mercylesse,
Lost his life, and came no more in press.
The sudden chau^ges to read when I began,
And saw the whele so often turn up so down,
Of fortune there came one Marcian,
Of whom is made none other mention
Save only by a coniuracion
He murdered was, being innocent,
Among his knights which slew him of asset.
Than tofore Bochas to show his presence,
There came one that called was Leon,
Which caught a titell by no violence,
But made his claim by just succession:
After his father and took possession,
Which of Leon mine auctor says the same,
Being Emperor, bare the same name.
This young Leon again all truth and right,
By tyranny as made is mention,
Through cruel zeno y^ was a good knight,
Was put out of his possession:
Constrained to live in religion,
But to what order that he did wend
I find not, but there he made his end.
The.xxiiii. Chapter.
How Simacke and Boes his son in law were banished, and after judged to die.

AFter these mischeues Simak began him draw
Toward Bochas, with a full pitous face
Boes came with him, y^ was his son in law,
Which among Romans greatly stodi grace:
But in this matere brefely for to pace,
The said Boes only for his truth,
Exiled was, alas it was great routhe.
For common profit, he was unto the town
In matters that grounded were of right,
Very protector, and steadfast champion
Again two tira^tes, which of force and might
Had in the porail oppressed many a wight,
By exactions and pyllage gun of new,
Upon the co^mens, full false and eke untrue.
Theodorike of Goths lord and king,
Took upon him by false intrusyon
To reign in Rome, the people oppressing
By his prouostes two, as made is mencyon,
Did in the city great oppression,
Confederate as brother unto brother,
Coniugast, and Triguill was that other.
Compendiously this matter to declare,
To save the commons stood in defense
For life nor death he list not for to spare,
To withstand of tyrants the sentence:
King Theodorike of cruel violence,
Banished him by hateful tyranny,
He and his father to abide in Pauy.
Afterward Theodorike of cruel haterede,
Like a false tyrant, of malice and envy
Gave judgment that both two were deed:
But touching Boes as books specify,
Wrote diverse books of Philosophy,
Of the Trinyte matters that were divine,
Martyred for Christ, and called Seuerine.
The.xxv. Chapter.
Of king Arthur and his co^questes, and of the commodities of England, and how
he was distroied by his cousin Mordrede.

WAs never prince might him self assure
Of fortune the favor to restrain?
Like his desire his grace to recure
To abide stable, and stand at certain?
Among all other reken Arthur of Bretayne^
Which in his time was hold of every wight,
The wysest prince and the best knight.
To whom Bochas began his style dress
In this chaptre, to remember bliue
His great conquest and his high noblesse,
With singler deeds that he wrought i his live
And first he ginneth breuely to discryue
The site of Britain, and of that country,
Which is enclosed with a large see.
Set far westward as ye shall understand,
Having Spain set in the opposite
Of a small Angle called England:
Fran^ce about hi discryuing thus his sight,
With many a riuere plesaunt of delight,
Both bathes and wells there be found,
Diverse mines of metalles full habounde.
About which ronneth the Occian
Right plentuous of all manner of vitaile,
The name of which at Brutus first began,
London has ships by the sea to sail:
Bachus at Wynchester greatly does avail,
Worcestre with fruits haboundeth at the full,
Herford with beasts, Cotswolde with wul.
Bathe hot bathes wholesome for medicine,
York mighty timbre for great advantage,
Corn wall mines wherein to mine,
Salisbury beasts full savage:
Whete, milk, and honey, plente for every age,
Kent and Canterbury has great co^modite
Of sondrie fyshes, there taken in the sea.
Bochas reherseth there is eke in Bretayne
Found of Get a full precious stone
Black of color, and virtuous in certain
For sickenesses many mo than one:
The poudre of which will difcure anon,
If it be drunk (though it be secre)
Of maydenhede broken chastity.
There ben of peerles found in muskil shelles,
And the best that have most whiteness:
And as the book of Brutus also tells,
How king Arthure to speak of worthynesse,
Passed all kings in marciall prowess:
Touching his line, his royal kynrede
Who that list se in Brutus he may read.
His father called Vter Pendragon
A manly knight and famous of courage,
Right notable in his acts euerychon:
Arthur but young and tender of age,
By full assent of all his baronage,
By succession crowned anonright,
Called of Europe the most famous knight.
Curteys, large, and manly of dispense,
Myrrour called of lyberalite,
Hardy, strong, and of great providence,
And of his knightly magnanimite
He drove Saxons out of his country:
Conquered by prowess of his mighty hand,
Orcadoys, Denmark, and Holande.
Irland, Gaul, Norway, Scotland, and fran^ce,
As Martes son to the werres mete:
Wrought by counsel and by ordinance
Of prudent Marlyn, called his prophet:
And as I find, he let make a sete
Among his Brito^s, most famous and notable,
Through all the world called y^ round table.
Most worthy knights proved of their hand
Chosen out by Arthur, this order was bego^,
Their famous nobles through every land
Shone by report, as does the midday son,
To Fames palace the renome is up run,
Statutes set, by virtuous ordinance
Under profession of marciall governance.
The first statute in the regestre found,
Fro which they should na^ decline of right,
By full assurance of oath and custom bound
Aye to be armed in plate forged bright,
Except a space to rest them on the night,
Seek auentures, and their time spend,
Rightful quarrel to sustene and defend.
The sebler party, if he had right,
By their power manly to supporte
If that they were required of any wight,
Folk disconsolate to bear up and comfort:
At all times men may of him report
No manner wise they do no vtolence,
And again tirau^tes make knightly resistece.
That widows and maidens suffer no damage
By false oppression, and hateful cruelte,
Restore children to their true heritage,
Wrongly exiled folk to their country:
And for holy churches liberte
Ready ever to make them self strong,
Rather to die than suffer them have wrong.
For common profit as chosen champyons,
Pro Republica defending their country,
Show aye them self hardy as lions
Honor to encrece, chastise dishoneste,
Releue al them that suffer aduersite:
Religious folk have them in reverence,
Pylgrimes receive y^ fail of their dispense.
Called arms seven deeds of mercy,
Buried soudiours that fail sepulture,
Folk in prison deliuere them graciously,
Such as poor be their ransom to recure,
Wounded people that languyshe and endure
Which pro republica ma^ly spent their blood,
By statute bound to do such folks good.
To put them self never in adventure
But for matters that were just and true,
Before provided that they stood sure
The ground well know, were it old or new:
And after that the matter when they knew,
To proceed knightly and not feign,
As right required their quarrel to darrayn.
A clerk there was to cronicle their deeds
By purciuauntes made to him report,
Of their exployte and their good spedes,
Rad and song to folk gave great comfort:
These famous knights making their resort
At high feasts, eueriche took his sete,
Like to their estate, as was to them mete.
One was void called the sea perilous,
As Sanke royal does plainly determyne,
None to enter but the most virtuous
Of god provided to be a pure vyrgine,
Borne of discente to accomplish and to fine
He alone, as chief and sovereign
All auentures of Wales and Bretayne.
Among al kings renomed most famous,
As a bright son set amyd the sterres:
So stood Arthur notable and glorious,
Like fresh Phoebus cast his light aferres,
In peace like Argus most marcial in werres
As Ector hardy, like Vlixes tretable,
Called among christen, king most honorable.
His roial court he did so ordain
Through each country so fer spread out the light
Who that ever came thider to complain
By wrong oppressed, and required of right,
In his defense he should find a knight
To him assigned, finally to entende,
By marciall dome his quarrel to defend.
If it fell so that any strange knight
Sought auentures, and thither came fro far,
To do arms his request made of right,
His challenge seen were it of peace or werre
Was accept, to the court came nerre:
Like as he came with many or alone,
They were delivered, forsake was never no^e.
There was the schole of marcial doctrine,
For young knights to learn all the gyse,
In tender age to learn full disciplyne,
On horse and foot, by notable exercise:
Thing take in youth does help in many wise
And ydelnes in grene years gonne,
Of al virtues clypseth the clear son.
Wydowes and maidens oppressed folk also,
Of extorte wrongs wrought by tyranny,
In that country what nation came thereto,
Received were, there list no man deny,
Of their complayntes found sone remedy:
Made no delay but forth anon right,
Them to defend assigned was a knight.
Eke by their order they bound were of troth
By assurance and by oath sworn,
In their emprises let for no slothe
Plainly to tell how they have them borne:
Their adventure of things done beforne,
Right as it fill, and spare in no manner
To tell each thing unto their regystrere.
Thing openly done or thing that was secre
Of adventure as between twain,
Or any quarrel take of volunte
Trewly report, and platly not to feign:
Them to be sworn the statute did ordain,
Not conceled of worship nor of shame
To be regestred, report the self same.
And to conclude the statute has us leared
Every quarrel grounded on honest,
In that court what knight was required
In the diffence of troth and equity,
Falshed excluded and duplicite,
Shall aye be ready to sustain that party,
His life and his body to put in ieoparty.
Thus in Bretayne shone y^ clear light
Of chiualrye and of hie prowess,
Which through the world shad his beams bright,
Well of worship, condite of al noblesse,
Imperial court all wrongs to repress,
Head spri^g of honor, of largise chief cesterne,
Myrrour of ma^hod, of noblesse the lantern.
Yet was there seen never so bright a son
The summers day in the mydday spear,
So freshly shine, but some skies done
Might percase curtain his beams clear:
Often it falls wha^ fortune makes best there,
And falsely smyleth in her double wede,
Folk seen expert than is she most to dread.
Thus when the name of the worthy king
Was ferthest sprade by report of memory,
In every realm his noblesse most shinynge,
All his emprises concluding on victory:
This double goddess envied at his glory,
And cast means by some manner train,
To clipse the light of knighthode in Britain.
Thus while Arthure stood most honorable
In his estate, flouringe in his age,
Among his knights of the round table,
Highest of princes on fortunes stage,
The Romans sent to him for truage,
Began make a claim froward and outrageous,
Taking their title of Caesar Julius.
The same time this mighty king Arthur
Conquered had Gaul, and also France,
Outrayed Frolle like a conqueror,
Brought Paris under obeysaunce:
Took them to grace and with his ordinance
Gate al Anioue, Angory, and Gascoine,
Poitowe, Nauerne, Berry, and Burgoyne.
Cesed not but did his busy pain,
Most like a knight held forth his passage,
Gate all the land of Poyters and Tourayne,
Their cite yolde to him they did homage:
To be rebel they found none auanutage,
Soiourned in France as says y^ Cronicler,
Held possession the space of nine year.
Held a feast full solemn at Paryse,
All the countries whyth he gate in France,
Like a prince full prudent and rightwyse,
Which had of fredome full royal suffisaunce:
Of all his conquest the countries in substance
For his princes and barons so provided,
Like their deserts he has them divided.
To his Seneschal that called was Kay
Anioue and Main he gave all the party,
To his butler was made no delay
Called Bedwere he gave Normandye,
To a baron nigh cosyn of alye
A manly knight which named was Berell,
Gave the duchy of Burgoyne every del.
Thus he departed lordeshyppes of that land
There he thought was most expedient,
Some he reserved in his own hand,
Again to Britayne returned of intent:
Sent out letters held a great parliament,
After which he made a feast anon,
In the country called Gloumorgon.
At a great cite called Carlion,
As is remembered by old wrytinges,
Came many a prince and many a fresh baron
In nombre I find, there were.x. kings,
Ready to obey Arthur in all things:
Present also as was well seen,
There was of earls rekened full thurtene.
All the knights of the round table
Feast of Pentecost as feast principal,
Many estates famous and honorable,
Of princes barons borne of the blood royal
Were present there, and in especial
All that were by oath and promise bound,
To y^ brotherhede of the table round.
And it fell so while that king Arthur
As appertayned sat in his estate,
There came.xii. sent down by great labor
Of old men, chosen of the Senate,
Sad of their port, demure and temperate,
Richely clad, of look and of vysage,
Gray heared, sempt of right great age.
First connyngly as they thought it due,
Cause of their coming and plainly their intent
First of assent the king they did salve,
Next after that they told who them sent,
And their letters mekely they present:
Concludyng thus, to speak in brefe langage,
How the Romans ask of him truage.
Customed of old sith gone many a day
When that Caesar conquered first Britayne,
The king requiring to make the^ no delay.
Arthur abode, list nothing to said,
But all the court began at them dysdayne,
The proud Britons of cruel hasty blood,
Would have slain the^ even there they stood.
Nay quod Arthur to al his officers,
Within our court they shall have no damage,
They entered been and come as messangers,
And men also greatly fall in age,
Let make them chere with a glad visage:
Took his counsel with such as were most wise,
With this answer said in curteyse wise.
Your letters red and plainly understand,
The tenure hole remembered in this place,
Touching y^ charge that ye have take on hand
To give answer, reherced in short space,
By word and writing ye greatly me manace,
How ye purpose with many strong battle,
Pass the mou^tains me felly for to assail.
It needs not such conquest to allege
Again Britons, of none old truage,
Of your coming down y^ way I shall abredge,
With gods grace short your passage:
Make you no delay but with my baronage
Pass the sea, without long tariyng,
To mete Romans at their down coming.
This was the answer you to the messa^gers,
At their departing bare with them great riches,
As he bade also unto his officers:
Again to Rome anon they began the^ dress,
Plainly reporting the plentuous largess
Of worthy Arthure, considred all things
Of christendom he passed al other kings.
Arthurs court was the sours and well
Of marciall prowes, to Lucius they told,
And how that he al other did excel
In chyualry, with whom they were wthold:
The chosen knights both young and old
In all Europe who can considre arighte,
Of all noblesse the torches be there light.
He cast him not to pay no truage,
Said of the Romans he held no land,
Which to defend he will make his passage
Of your claymes to break a two the bond,
And knyghtly preue with his hand
Ye have no title, ye, nor your cite
Again Britons, which ever have stand fre.
With y^ all the kingdoms subject to Rome town
Kings Princes above the hie mountains,
With Lucius they be descended down,
To mete Britons upon the large playnes:
Arthurs coming greatly he disdains,
Because he had plainly to dyscriue,
In multitude of people such five.
At Southhampto^ Arthur took the sea
With all his knights of the round table,
Behind he left to govern the country
His cousin Mordrede, untrusty and unstable,
And at a prefe false and disceyuable:
To whom Arthur of trust took al his land,
The crown except, which he kept in hand.
Fro Southhampton Arthur began to sail
With all his worthy lords of Britain,
At Harflue fond good ariuaile,
He and his princes their passage did ordain
Through Normandy, France, and eke Burgoine:
Up to a cite called Augustence,
Where he first fond of Lucius the presence.
So large a field nor such a multitude
Of men of arms, assembled in a plain,
Upon a day shortly to conclude
Togider assemble before was never seine:
Lucius had on his party certain
Eastwarde the world all the chiualtye,
Brought by y^ mou^tains down to Germany.
Their wards set in each a great battle,
With their captain to govern and to gye:
Arthur with britons the Romans did avail,
Fond many Sarazins upon that party:
The Briton Gaulfride does plainly specify,
As he of Arthur the prowes does discriue,
He flewe that day of Sarazins kings five.
The great slaughter, the effusion of blood
That was that day on outher side,
Each again other y^ furious were and wode,
Like for the field as fortune list provide,
That if I should long thereon abide,
To write the death, the slaughter and manner,
Touching the field were tedious to here.
To conclude and leave the surplusage,
In that battle dead was many a knight,
The Co^sul Lucius slain in that rage,
The proud Romans by force put to flighte,
Of gentilnes Arthur anon right
Let the body of Lucius be carried,
Again to Rome, it was no longer tarried.
The worthy princes and lords that were dead,
And manly knights abidynge with Arthur
Like a king solempnly took head
That they were buried by dilligent labor:
And in this while like a false traitor,
His cosyn Mordrede did his busy pain,
To take from him the kingdom of Britayne.
So as the story plainly makes mind,
Mordrede falsely to his advantage
Entreted them that were left behind
Under color of fraudulent langage,
Gave the^ great fredo^e, and they did him homage:
That by his false conspiracion,
Brought al Britain in to rebellion.
By fair behestes and many friendly sign
Drew the people to him in sundry wise,
Showed him outward goodly and benygne,
Gave lybertees and many great fraunchyse,
To make Brito^s their sovereign lord despise:
And purueiaunce he began make blyue
To keep the ports, he should not ariue.
When king Arthur had knowledgyng
Of this false treason, and all the purueyau^ce:
That Mordrede made, he like a manly king
Left Burgoyne and all the land of France,
Cast on Mordrede for to do vengeance:
Took the sea with great apparayle,
Cast at Sandwiche to make his ariuaile.
Mordred was ready with knights a great no^bre,
Made a strong field to mete him on the plain,
In purpose fully Arthur to encombre:
At which arriuayle slain was Gawayne,
Cosyn to Arthur, a noble knight certain:
Eke Aguisel was slain on the stronde,
King of Scotts or he came to land.
Maugre Mordrede Arthur did arryue,
The ground recured like a manly knighte,
For fear of whom anon after blyue
The said Mordred took him to the flyghte,
And toward London took his way right,
The gates shyt and kept was the cite
Again Mordred, he might have none enter.
In all haste to Cornwayle he fled,
The sword of Arthur he durst not abide,
Lest he should lay his life to wed:
Yet for him self thus he began provide,
With multitude gathered on his side
Put life and death that day in adventure,
There to dye, or the field recure.
In fortune there may be no certain,
Upon whose whele al brotilnesse is founded,
Mordred tharday in the field was slain,
And noble Arthur to the death was wounded:
By which the field of britons was confo^ded
Of so great slaughter and good knights lorne,
Upon a day men have not seen beforne.
After the battle Arthur for a while
To staunche his wou^des and hurtes to recure,
Borne in a lytter came to an isle
Called Aualon, and there of adventure
As the said Gaulfride records by scripture,
How king Arthur flour of chiualrye,
Was fet with his knights and lives yet in fairy.
Thus of Britayne translated was that son
Up to the rich sterry bryghte dongeon,
Astronomers well reherce konne.
Called Arthurs constellacion,
Where he sit crowned in the heavenly mancion,
Amyd the palaies of stones cristalline,
Told among christen of the worthies nine.
This error abides yet among Brytons,
Which founded is upon the prophesye
Of old Marlyn, like their opinion,
He as a king is crowned in fairye,
With scepter and sword and with his regalye,
Shall resort as lord and sovereign,
Out of fairy and reign in Britayne.
And repair again the round table,
By prophesy of Merlyn set the date
Among princes king incomparable,
His sete again to Carlion to translate:
The parchas susterne spon so his fate,
His Epitaphe records so certain,
Here lies king Arthur yt shall reign again.
Unto Bocas I will again return,
Before rehearsed parcel of his prowess,
Thereon to abide me list no more soiourne,
But to remember the great unkindness,
The conspiracion, the treason, and falsnes,
Done to king Arthur, by his cosyn Mordred,
Make a Lenuoy that al men may it read.
Lenuoye.
THis tragedy of Arthur here following,
Byddeth Princes all beware of false treason:
For in earth is none so perilous thing
As trust of fayeth where is decepcion,
Hyd under curtayne of false collusion,
For which me^ should I hold the counsel good,
Beware before ever of unkind blood.
The world diverse, fortune aye chaungeable,
In every country and every region
In a strait need few friends abide stable,
Long absence causes discencion:
And if princes by false division,
Nygh of alye show two faces in one hode,
Let men beware ever of unkind blood.
Who was more hardy of princes here reignig
Or more famous of marciall renoun,
Tha^ whilom was his enemies outrainge,
Arthur, chief son of Brutus albion?
But for all that the disposicion
Of fate and fortune most furious and wode,
Caused his distruccion by unkind blood.
What more co^trarious to nature in shewinge
Than fair pretense double of entencion,
Great aliaunces frowardly workyng
Hid under flowers a serpent cast poison,
Bright silver scaled domageth the dragon,
Each worm so^e party tarageth of his broad,
And what more perilous than unkind blod?
Noble princes on Arthur remembringe,
Deem the day of Phoebus going down,
Al is not gold that is clear shininge,
Before provided of your inward reason,
False undermining and supplantacion:
Remembering aye with Arthur how it stood,
By conspiracion of unkind blood.
An exclamacion of Bochas again kynredes unkind.
Again kynredes and unkind alyaunces,
Bochas makes here an exclamacion,
Upon Mordrede which with his ordinances
Caused of Arthur final distruccion,
The fame eclypsinge of Brutus albion:
Not with standing plainly to discriue,
He trusted him above al men alive.
It is a marvel and uncouth to deuyse
By what occasion, or by what corrage
That a man should in any manner wise,
Be found unkind unto his lineage,
Hateful to god, that in any age
Blood again blood borne of one kynred,
Conspire should of malice and hatrede.
In this matter it were but vain to tarry,
The story know of Arthur and Mordrede
By blood alied in workyng most contrary
Which made many a Briton knight to blede:
For by vsurpyng conspiracion and falshede
Of the said Mordrede most unfortunate,
Caused al Britayne to stand desolate.
First desolate by absence of their king,
Called in his time of kings most notable,
The desolacion of knights abiding
Whilome in Britain, famous and honorable,
Brethern echone of the round table:
Which by Mordred y^ false for sworn knight,
Stood long eclipsed and dyrked of his light.
The light of noblesse y^ shone in Britain
By false Mordred was dirked of his bemes,
The monarchye departed was on twain
That stood first one with his marcial strems:
But afterward the brightness of his beams
Drough to decline, by false division
Which has distroied full many a region.
All the process upon a duplicite
Plainly concludes, and that is blood unkind,
Adue welfare and all prosperity
Where peace and concord is left behind,
Trees may not thrive departed fro the rind,
A plain example in Arthur and Mordrede
Who can conceive and list the story read.
The.xxvi. Chapter.
Of Gisiuill king of Venandre and of three other kings, and how they were
distroied.

AFter all these strange uncouth things
Tofore Jhon Bochas as made is mention,
There came four mighty kings,
For to complain their desolacion:
First Gisiuill king of the region,
Called Venandre, in werres full contraire,
Unto a prince called Belisaire.
And to this said noble Belisaire
Full renomed that time in chiualry,
The king of Goths was also aduersayre:
And both atones of hatred and envy,
Assented fully to hold champerty
Gain Belisaire, which through his hie renoun.
Took the^ both and cast the^ in prison.
There is no more of the^ in Bochas found,
But after them in order by writing
Came Amarales with many blody wound,
Which in his time was of Mawres king,
Without cause or title of any thing
Upon Jane Sanguin began werray again right,
Which through Affrik was one y^ best knight.
The said Jane armed in plate and mayle
Met Amarales in Affrike on a sand,
And held with him a mighty strong bataile,
And like a knight slew him with his hand:
Drove al his people proudly fr^ that land,
And in my book there is none other mind,
To be remembered o^ him that I can find.
Than Synduall of Bretaine lord and king
Tofore Bochas put him self in prees,
Began show his mischefe pitiously weeping,
When he held werre wylfull and recheles
Again a prince, called Narsates:
A Romayne knight feirse, hardy, and strong,
In his defense wha^ men would do hun wrong.
This Narsates, of case or adventure,
Though he in deed was a manly knight,
He failed members in sothe of engendrure,
His adversaries echon he put to flight:
Took their king and forthwith anon right
As the cronicle plainly does record,
Hye on a galowes he hinge him with a cord.
Of Narsates after this victory,
King Totila had full great disdain,
With a great host most po^pous in his glory,
Came upon him, and met him in a plain,
With multitude though he were ouerlayne,
Turnyng Totila which many man beheld,
Of Narsates was slain in the field.
In order next Bochas does write
Of Gepidoys, how king Trusmonde
Required him that he would endite
The great aduersites in which he did habou^d,
And of his daughter called Rosamounde,
The unhappy chance to make and discryue:
To whom fortune was contrary al her live.
Albuinus king of Lombardy
Which many a laud held in subjection,
Conquered Beme, Prage and Hungery,
The land of Gepedois with many a region:
Fought with their king as made is mention,
Slew in battle the said Trusmonde,
Wedded after his daughter Rosamonde.
Mine auctour greatly comendeth her beauty,
And writes also she was but young of age,
Whose story first when I did se,
How ungracious also was her marriage,
I began were pale and dead in my visage
Greatly astoined confuse of very shame
To write the story, in hindering of her name.
I will forbear and lightly pass here,
The surplusage lightlye ouerpasse
For by and by to tell all the manner
Of felonies that did in hertes brace,
It should blot this book, and eke deface:
For which I cast truly and not fail
Touching her story, to make rehersaile.
The.xxvii. Chapter
How Albuinus was murdered by his wife, and how she most vycious was after
murdered also.

King Albuinus as ye shall understand,
After many a conquest and victory
Which he had both on see and land,
To put his triumphs in memory
Let cry a feast, to his encrese of glory,
At which feast solemn and principal,
So as he sat in his estate royal,
Parcel for pride, parcel for gladness,
The queen present the said Rosamonde,
Take and supprised he was with dronkenes,
Of strong wynes, which yt day did habo^d:
Sent a Goblet of gold as it is found,
Unto the queen with licour full pleasant,
Bad to her father she should drink a taunt.
She dempt it was a manner mokery,
First her name and worship to confound,
To bid her drink ataunt for her party
To her father, this said Trusmounde,
Slain before with many blody wound,
By Albuinus through his unhappy chance,
Of which rebuke she cast to do vengeance.
She bare the rancour full long in her intent,
Which day by day began renew and increase:
A certain squier she made of her assent
It to accomply she she would never cease.
And on another squier she began preace,
Called Perdius, accorded all in one,
This false murdre to execute anon.
The day was set, while he lay a sleep
Fill upon him with sharp swords ground,
Her lord was slain alas he took no keep:
Or he died of fortune he has found
A spears head to a tronchon bound,
Him self defending in that mortal strife,
But slain he was by treason of his wife.
After this murdre to escape fro danger,
This Rosamonde fled away by night,
With her went Melchis her squier,
Took a ship sailed by sterre light:
To Rauenne they took the way right,
Led with them for refute and socour,
Of Albuinus all the hole treasour,
After she was wedded to Melchise,
Man of this world stood most in her grace,
Her love appalled, set of him no prise,
For she not could be content in one place,
Her joy was ever new thing to purchase:
To assaye many never pleased with one,
Till by experience she preued had echone.
Provost of Rauenne and chief governor
For the excellence of her great beauty,
Above al women loved her peramour,
When she entered first that cite:
And through her fraud and duplicite
She cast to murdre, in her froward auyce,
Her new husband that called was Melchis.
The hot summer in lusty fresh May,
The same Melchis for hete and werines
Him self to bathe went a certain day,
Caught a great thurst of very fayntnes,
And Rosamonde of infernal falsnes,
Took a goblet with licour great fo^son,
Gave him to drink wine meddled with poiso^.
He drank up half and therwithal he began,
Breast and belly to swell and to arise,
Intoxicate wext deadely pale and wan:
And when he did her treason advertise,
He made her drink in the same wise.
Maugre her will she might it not restrain,
Guerdon for murder, they died both twain.
In this chapter but little fruit I find,
Save only this, to put in remembrance
That folk should call again to mind
Murdre before god requires aye ve^geaunce:
This funeral story wayed in balaunce,
Wrought by Melchis compassed and found,
By false treason of cursed Rosamounde.
Slew first her lord Albuinus as I said,
Two of her squiers did execucion
Out of his sleep when he did abrayde:
Let counterpayse what was her guerdon,
Each murdered other by drinking of poison,
Melchis drank first, and next dra^k Rosamou^de,
At them it began and to the^ it did rebounde.
Counterpaysed one murder for an other,
Albuinus slain by Rosamounde his wife,
By assent of Melchis, and after each to other
The poison parted, there began a fatal strife:
Murder for murder, they both lost their life.
Who uses falsnes full well affirm I dare,
Shall with falsnes be quit or he be ware.
As they departed, such part again they took,
As men deserve such shall be their mede,
This froward storye end of the eight book,
Of Rosamonde and Melchis wrought in deed,
For short conclusion byddeth men take heed:
They shall again receive such measour,
As they measure unto their neighbor.
Thus ends the eight book and herafter follows the nynthe.
How the Emperor Mauricius his wife and his children were slain at
Calcidony.

The First Chapter.
TO Frances Petrark as Bochas undertook,
In eschewyng of slouthful ydelnes,
As he began tacco^plysh up his book
Assurau^ce made him do his business:
Which thing remembered began his pen dress
The nynth book, so god would give him grace
It to perform if he had life and space.
At the beginning sothly of his labor,
In his study there did to him appear
Mauricius, the mighty Emperor,
Which complained rehersynge the manner
How he by Phocas cruel of look and chere,
Distroied was, wife, children, and kinrede,
The slaughter couth, who list the story read.
The said Maurice as write Bochas Jhon,
Was by Phocas brought to distruccion:
His wife and children were slain echone,
At Calcidony, as made is mention.
After whose death he took possession
The said Phocas, as put is in memory,
Gave Pantheon to saint Gregorye.
Which was a temple of old foundation
Full of ydols, up set on hye stages,
There, through the world of every nation
Were of their gods set up great images:
To every kingdom direct were their visages,
As Poets and Fuigens by his live
In books old plainly does dyscriue.
Every image had in his hand a bell,
As apparteyneth to every nation,
Which by craft some token should tell
When any kingdom fill in rebellion,
Or began malign again Rome town:
Which to redress with strong and mighty hand,
Sent a prince to chastise all that land.
The said temple builded of lime and stone,
Pope Boniface as books specify,
Where it was first called Pantheon,
Set up crosses upon each party,
Hallowed it to martirs and to Mary:
Year by year gynnyng of Nouembre
The feast hold the martiloge does remember.
In Asia this Emperor Maurice was slain,
In the cite that called is Calcidony,
Al his household and many good Roman
By Phocas and percie^s (as had is in memory)
And Phocas after for his vaynglory
Slain by Heraclius, he tha^ was Emperor
Four and twenty winter he was governor.
The.ii. Chapter
Of Machomet the false prophet, and how he being drunk was devoured among
swine.

AFter the death of Phocas as I told,
Wha^ Heraclius to rain first began,
Came Mahomet, in his time yhold
A false prophet and a magician,
As books old well reherce can
Borne in Arabia, but of low kynred
All his life worshipped ydols in deed.
And when that he grew in to great age,
Disceyuable in many sondrie wyses,
with Camels used first his carriage
False and double, and subtle in his diuises
He went to Egypt and fette marchandi^ses,
To Jews and christen he sondrie times sent,
Learned the old and the new testament.
As books old record in that party,
This Mahomet, this cursed false man
Out of Egipte fast began him hye
Toward a country called Corosan,
With a lady that hight Cordian:
Through his subtle false daliaunce
By craft he fill in to her acquaintance.
He wrought by his enchauntementes
And by false means of nygromancy,
Her enclyning toward his ententes,
For both he could flatter well and lie:
Said openly that he was Messy,
Jews abiding upon his coming,
As greattest prophet and their sovereign king.
Thus the people he brought in great error
By his techyng and his false doctrine,
He wext among them a great governor:
The said lady also did to him enclyne,
As to a prophet which that was divine,
Sent from above as she did understand,
For which she took him to her husband.
His lynage began at Hismaell,
Had a syckenesse, full often sith fill down,
In his excuse said that Gabriell
Was sent to him fro the heavenly mancion,
By the holy ghost, to his instruction:
And for the Angel showed him self so shene,
To stand upright he might not sustene.
On his shoulder were often times seyne
When he to folk showed his presence,
Milk white doves which that piked greine
Out of his ears, affirmyng in sentence
They came by grace of gostly influence
Him to visit, to show and specifye
He was the prophet that called was Messy.
New laws also he did ordain,
Showed signs by false appearance,
Like Moises him self he did feyne
A prophet of most excellence,
And thereupon to show an evidence
Small ports with milk and honey borne
On a great bull were hanged on each horn.
He made the people give credulite
To his doctrine and froward teaching,
By milk and honey figured was plente,
By the merit of his gostly workyng:
And thus he was at his beginning
Take of Sarasis, as they began to him draw,
Which by false error bound the^ to his law.
A clerk of his called Sergius
Wrote his laws, and these miracles three:
First of the doves how they came to hi^ thus
As here tofore rehearsed was by me:
How milk and honey were tokens of plente,
And of the Bull before by craft made tame,
By false disceytes to get him a name.
Of Arabiens and Sarasins as I read,
And of Turks made prince and governor,
With Hysmae^ytes and folk of Perce and mede
He gadered people began wexe a warrior
Again Eraclius the mighty emperor:
And usurped to ride in the contrees*
Gate Alisandry with many mo citees,
Of tho parties desirous to be king.
Of that purpose when he was set aside,
The people falsely dyssimulynge
Told he was sent prophets to provide
For tho countries, for to be their gyde:
And for he was lecherous of courage,
He made of Venus to set up an image.
Made Sarazins to worship the friday,
Semblably his story does express,
So as the Jews hallowed the saturday:
All his works concluding in falsnes.
When he drank wine fyl in dronke^nes,
Taught the people like a false prophet,
To drink water and good wine to let.
As I said the heretyke Sergius
With him of counsel, froward and contrary,
Fone to our fayeth he and Nestorius
From holy church greatly they began vary:
On whose errors Bochas list not tarry,
More to write of this Machomete,
Any gromancian and a false prophet.
Who list to se his laws euerychon
Give to Sarazins, his book ca^ bear wytnes,
As they be set in his Alkeron,
Echone in order grounded on falsnesse:
Like a glotton dyed in drunkenness,
By excess of drinking much wine,
Fill in a podell, and devoured among swyne.
This was the end of false Machomete,
For all his crafts of nigromancy,
The funeral fine of this said prophet
Dronklewe of kind, called him self Messie,
Whom Sarazins so greatly magnifye,
Jhon Bochas let be for a queen of France
More of his error to put in remembrance.
The.iii. Chapter.
How Brounchylde a queen of France slew her kin, brought the land in
division, and after was hanged and hewn in pieces small.

She came arrayed nothing like a queen,
Her here vntressed, Bochas took good head,
In all his book he had before not seen
A more woeful creature in deed,
With weping eyes, to torn was al her wede,
Rebuking Bochas cause he had left behind
Her wretchedness for to put in mind.
Unto mine auctour suddenly she abrayde
Like a woman that were with woe chekmate
First of al thus to him she said:
Sometime I was a queen of great estate
Crowned in France, but now all disolate
I stand forsooth, Brou^shilde was my name
Which to rehearse I have a manner shame.
Thou were busy to write the woeful caas
Within thy book of Arcinoe,
Dyddest service to queen Cleopatras,
Of Rosamonde thou wrote also parde,
And among al thou have forgoten me
Whereby it seems thou do at me disdain
List no parcel to write of my pain.
When Bochas herd this of chere he wext sad,
Knowing nothing of that she did endure,
Iwysse (quod he) before I have not rad
In no cronicle nor in no scripture
Of your froward woeful adventure,
No (quod she) I pray you take good head
So as they fill I will reherce in deed.
Bochas with Brounchilde began debate anon
Sothly (quod he) this is the condition
Of you women almost euerychone
Ye have this manner without excepcion,
Of your natural inclinacion,
Of your declaring this obseruaunce to keep
Nothing to say contrary to your worshepe.
Nature has taught you all that is wrong to excuse,
Under a curtain al thig for to hyde,
With litel grain your chafe ye can abuse,
On your defautes ye list not for to abide,
The gaul touched all that ye set aside
Show roses fresh wedes ye let pass,
And fairest chere there ye most trespass.
And if ye shall tell your own tale
How ye fill fro fortunes whele,
Ye will unclose but a litel male,
Show of your vices but a small percele:
Brotle glass shows brighter than stele,
And though of virtue ye show a fair pretense,
He is a fool that yeueth to you credence.
Quod Brounchilde I do right well espy
Thou haste of women a false opinion,
How they can flatter well and lie,
And ben diverse of disposicion,
Thou myghtest have made an excepcion
Of hie estates and them that gentle been,
Namely of me that was so great a queen.
Your hye estate by kind has no power
To change in nature nouther cold nor hete,
But let us pass and leave this matter
Thereon to abide or any more to plete,
Of your complaint say to me the great:
By way of service to you I shall me quyte
As ye declare take my pen and write.
Take heed (quod she) and with good auice
Fro the truth beware that thou ne varye,
Whilom in France reigned king Clowise
Had a son that named was Clothary,
Clothar had an heir yt named was Lotarye,
And this Lotary named the second,
Had sons four in story it is found:
To the cronicle who can take heed
As it is put in remembrance,
When their father the mighty kig was dead,
Atwene these four was parted all France:
Each by him self to have governance
By one assent as brother unto brother,
Wearing their crowns each quit the^ to other.
The same time I called Brounchylde
Me list not varye from the old writing,
Had a father named Leuechylde,
Of all Spain sovereign lord and king:
My said father to full great hyndring
Of both realms, the fame ran so far
Twene Spain and France began mortal werre.
The brethern four in France crowned kings
Again my father made strong defense,
Of marcial pride and fortunat chaungynges
When they met by mortal violence
Of sudden slaughter fill such pestilence
On outher party, the field like a great flode
With the tirrible effusion of blood.
To both realms y^ werres were importable
Causyng of death passing great damage,
Sought means, wext by assent tretable,
Of blood shedyng to appease the woeful rage,
By one accord I was give in marriage
To Sigebert reignyng tho in France,
Twene both realms to make aliaunce.
Nay (quod Bochas) I deem it was not so,
Twene you and me there must begin a strife,
Be advised take good head thereto
The first assurance of marriage in your life,
Of Chilperik ye were the wedded wife,
Cronicles seen what every express,
In this matter will bear with me wytnes.
Though some books reherce and so said
Like as ye have made here mention,
Their rehersaile stand in no certain
For by the assent of outher region
Spain and France in their conuencion,
Ordained so, in my tender age
To Sigebert I was give in marriage.
Imeneus was not there present
When he took our chamber toward night,
For Thesiphone her susterne of assent
Infernal goddesses bare the torches light,
And as the torches showed derke and brighte
Thereby the people present one and al
Dempt of the marriage what should befall.
This custom used of antiquite
From their temples of gods and goddess,
At marriage of folk of hye degree
Torches were borne, of whom men took witness
As they were dercke or showed their bryghtnes
The difference seen in each estate,
If it were toward or unfortunate.
Of this marriage short process to make
The torches brent, and yet they were not bright
Showed out combrous smokes blake,
Of consolacion lost was all the light:
Thus in derknes wasted the first night,
Their verse song of gods, and goddesses,
Were all together of sorrow and heuynesses
These were the tokens the night of marriage,
Pronostikes of great aduersyte,
Yet of nature I had this advantage
Of womanhead and excellent beauty,
And like a queen in stones and perre
I was arrayed, clad in purple wede,
With a crown of gold upon my head.
Solempnely crowned queen of France,
Which for to se folk fast began repair,
Of all welfare I had suffysaunce,
Clombe on fortune full hie upon the stayre,
A son I had called Clotayre,
By Sygebert by record of writing
Third of the name in France crowned king.
So would god that day that he was borne
He had be put in his Sepulture,
In salvation of blood shede here toforne,
Caused the death of many a creature
As diverse books report in scripture:
Ground and ginning as made is mention,
Within this land of great division.
He with his brethern of whom I spoke late,
At him began the first occasion.
Not so (quod Bochas) ye failed of your date
Who was chief cause of division?
Sothly (quod she) in mine opinion
Among them self I dare well specify
Chief ginnyng was fateruall envy.
Keep you more close in this matter ye do fail
Following the traces of your condition,
Ye halte foul in your rehersaile:
For of your own ymaginacion
Ye sewe the sede of this dissencion,
Among these kings if ye take heed,
By which in France many man was dead.
Than Brounchilde began to change chere
To Bochas said with face full cruel:
Not long agon thou knew not the manner
Of my living but a small parcel,
Me seems now thou know every del,
So that ye may without longer strife
Sit as a judge that knows so well my life.
When these brethren stood at discord
Each again other by mortal violence,
Under a color to treat of accord
With many a manner feigned diligence,
Chilperik there being in presence
Whylom brother to Sigebert the king,
Was slain among the^ by false conspiring.
On whose death avenged for to be
As Sygebert did him self auaunce,
Among the preace he slain was parde:
Not so (quoth Bochas) but of false governance
Of your misliuing fyl this unhappy chance,
That Sygebert was murdered in sothnesse
Only by occasion of your doubleness.
Following the traces of new fangylnesse
Gain Sygebert ye wrought full falsely,
When ye loved of froward doubleness
Landrike the earl of Champayne and of Bry,
For by your outrage and your greyt folly
The king was slain, and ye did assent
In a forest an hunting when he went,
Which called was the forest of Compyne,
Alas (quod she) and brake out complaining
Bochas, Bochas, thou do sore undermine
All the surfetes done in my living,
Thou know the death of Sigebert y^ king,
Which y^ was wrought alas by mine assent,
How know thou and were not there preset?
Of these debates and of all the werre
With rebukes reherced here in vain,
In rehersaile greatly thou do ecre,
For I cast be right well certain
In my defense to reply again
It was not I she that thou do mean,
It was Fregundis ^he lusty young queen.
This Fregundis thou shall understand
Right womanly and fair of her visage,
Chilperik was whylom her hrsbande,
For her beauty took her in marriage
By her trains and her great outrage
He was after (the story who list read)
At mischefe slain, thou shall so find in deed.
Though ye by langage make strong defense
In these matters, which cause me to muse
I have again you lost my patience,
That so subtelly would your self excuse
Coutrariously your traynes ye abuse:
For Clo^ayre I have so red parde
Was not engendered of Sigebert, nor of the.
I remember full well that I have rad
That Chilperyk though ye thereat disdain,
Record of auctours that prudent be and sad
He in troth was gendred of you twain:
Which in his dying me list not for to feign
Left sons two, the story ye may read,
Theobarte and Theoderyke to succeed.
Bochas (quoth she) though thou turn up so do^
The said stories reherced here in deed,
Following the malice of thine opinion
Maugre thy will forth I will proceed
As I began, take thereto good head:
The first Theoderik thou shall understand
Cousin German was to my husband.
King of Burgoine that time, and another,
He of hatred and indignacion
Slew Theobart, which was his brother,
His wife and children, for short conclusion
Which in the mighty famous region
Of Antras^e reigned as lord and king,
What ever thou say this is troth and no leasinge.
Nay nay (quoth Bochas) it was all otherwise,
I may not suffer how ye go there among,
All this langage of new that ye devise
Brought to a prefe concludes upon wrong:
What should we longer this matter draw alo^g
Your self were cause where ye be loath or feign
By Theodorik ye Theoberte was slain,
The ground hereof began percell of envy
By your froward breunyng couetise,
Which ye had only to occupy
To rule the land after your own gyse:
And if I shall plainly here devise
Of these mischeues reherced god do bote
Ye were your self ground, chief crop, and rote.
Quod Brounchylde I conceive well and se
Ye of your party have lost all reverence,
Your self enarmed to show your cruelte
Against me, touching the violence
Of two slaughters reherced in sentence:
First how Theodrik his brother slew i^ deed,
Called Theobarte a pitous thing to read.
Him self after strangled with poison,
His wife, his children, hew in pieces small.
As ye (quod Bochas) make here mention
Some part is true but not al your tale:
For I suppose ye should wexe pale
For shame of thing which ye can not excuse,
When Theoderik begins you to accuse
He put on you the crime of false treason,
Ye slew his wife and children also,
Him self also ye murdered by poison:
I would wete what ye could say hereto?
Alas (quoth she) what should I do,
Was never woman in hie nor low estate
All thing considred more unfortunate.
Fortune of me set now but little price
By her froward furious violence
Turnyng her whele and visage of malice,
Causes to me that no man yeueth credence:
Had in dispite, void of reverence,
And by fortunes mutabilite
Sole, abiecte, and fall in pouerte.
O Bochas John for short conclusion
Thou may again me thy style auaunce,
I have deserved to have punicion:
And all the princes and barons now in France
Cry out on me and ask auengeaunce,
Refuge is none nor recure in this thing
Tho with Clotarie my self be crowned king.
For my defautes foul and abominable
Tofore the judges of all the parliament,
I was foriudged and found also culpable,
Of every crime conuicte by judgment:
Mine accusours there being present
Of one and other standing a great route,
Marked with fingers of folk y^ stood about.
For very shame I did mine eyes close
For the^ that gaured and cast on me their sight,
But as folk may by tokens well suppose
Mine ears were not stopped half a right,
Taken by force lad forth by might
By the hangman draw over hill and vale
Dismembered after, and hew on pieces small.
With my blood the pament al bespraynt
Thanked by fortune, such was mine aue^ture,
The soul parted the body was so faint:
Who red ever of any creature
That much more turment did endure?
Prayde Bochas to have al thing in mind,
Write her life and leave nothing behind.
Lenuoy.
THis tragedy of Brou^child y^ queen,
Look her story who list give attendaunce
Froward to red, co^tagious to seen,
And contrary to all good governance,
Borne in Spain, crowned queen of France
Double of tongue, vpfynder of treason,
Caused all that land stand at division.
From tho trains there could no man flene,
Sourse and headspring of sorrow and mischau^ce,
Shed honey first, stange after as do been,
Her myrremedled with sugared false plesaunce:
What she said encluded in variaunce,
Maystresse of murdre and of discencion
Caused all that land stand at division.
Princes of Gaul might not sustene
Great outrages, nor the great greuaunce,
Nor the surfetes done in their years grene,
Brought y^ kingdom almost to vttraunce:
All of assent cried on her vengeance,
The fame arose how all that region
In her falsnesse stood at division.
The knyfe of murdre ground was so kene
By her malice of long continuance,
Her courage fret with infernal tene
Spared nouther kyn nor alyaunce,
Paysed her forfetes and wayed in balaunce,
As Bochas writes she was the occasion
Which made al France to stand at division.
Bochas marueyling of the malice and cruelte of Brounchylde writes thus.
BOchas astonished ga^ inwardly mar-uayle,
Fill in a manner ambyguyte
Of Brounchyldes marvelous rehersayle.
How any woman of reason should be
So full of malice and of cruelte
To slay her kyn, and set at distaunce
By division all the realm of France.
Bochas dempt it was not credible
That a woman should be so vengeable,
In her malice so venymous and terryble
Of slaughter and murdre to be culpable,
The story susperte held it but a fable:
Only except that she did him exite
With great instaunce her story for to write.
Her cry on Bochas was very importune
To set in order her felicitees,
With her unhappy chaunges of fortune
Her disclaundred great aduersitees,
With her diffame reported by countrees,
No very ground found in books old
But of confession that she her self told.
That mine auctour reherced with sole^pne style
Reherce should her words disclaundrous,
Her flouring years, also for to compyle.
Meddled with her days y^ were contrarious:
Her fatal end froward and furious,
Whereof encombred of very werynesse
Toward Eraclius he began his pen dress.
The.iiii. Chapter.
How Eraclius the Emperor sustained heresy, fill in to dropsye and sickness
incurable, and so died.

AFter Phocas with great honor and glory
Crowned emperor of Rome the cite,
In whose time as says the story
The Romans stood in great perplexite,
By them of Perce, that rose with Cosdroye,
Which took upon him to be lord and sire
As a tyrant to trouble the empire.
Gate many a province and many a famous Reiem
Through all Asie, as the cronicle says,
Began approach toward Jerusalem,
Before the town proudly a siege he laythe,
As a tyrant froward to Christ's faith,
But Eraclius maugre all his might
Smyt of his head, slew him like a knight.
And by grace, which that is divine,
This famous prince this Eraclius
In his beginning slew many a Sarazyne,
Hold in tho days notable and glorius:
And in his conquest passing famous,
Diverse relykes of the cross he sought
And from tho countries many of the^ he brought
Was none so famous hold in his days
As Eraclius the empire for to gye,
Nor more manly found at all assayes
Of hie prowess nor in chyualrye:
But when he began sustain heresye
God took from him within a littel space
His hap and welfare his fortune and his grace.
He began sustene and follow certain rites
Of wylfulnesse and froward fantasy,
Of a sect called Monacholites
Which was a sect of froward heresy,
And since that he drew to that party
The story tells for all his high estate
This Eraclius was never fortunate.
Where he was first drad on the sea and land,
Namely of Sarazins, for all his chyualry,
Grace and fortune from him wtdrew her hand:
For when he fill in to heresy
He was travailed with such a dropsy
That therwithal he had a froward lust,
Ever to drink and ever he was a thurst.
In tho days found was no leche
Albe that they were sought on each party,
The said prince that could wyshe or teach
Him to releue of his dropsye,
Made faint and feeble with a great paulsye:
Thus in sickness he has his days spent,
By vengeance slain with infernal turment.
Of Eraclyus this was the woeful end
As is reherced, slain with sickness,
Out of this world when he should wend
Al hole the empire stood in great dystres:
Force of Sarazins did them so oppress,
And day by day drew to decline
By his son called Constantine.
The.v. Chapter.
How Constantine the son of Eraclius supporting errors and heresy was
murdered in a stewe.

Which was his successoure as made is mention,
In whose time through his great folly
Sarasins did great oppression
Spoiling the countries of all Lumbardy:
And Constantine of wilful slogardy
Wasted his days, till he has brought
All the Empire almost to naught.
Gain Christ's faith in especial
He began of malice his wits to apply,
And was thereto enemy full mortal
And chief supportour of false heresy:
And toward Rome fast he began him hie,
Spoiled temples of many rich image,
And by water after took his passage.
To Constantinople fast he began him hie,
By Sc^^il the way was al most mete,
At Syracuse I find that he did ariue,
And for the season was excessite of hete
Which in his labor made him for to sweet,
And secretly he began him self remue
To be bathed in a preuy stue.
Of euny there he was espied,
His own knights like as it is found
By conspyracion certain of them alyed
Fill upon him with sharp swords ground
And merciless with many mortal wound
They stewe him there on him they were so wode,
Amid the stewe naked as he stood.
After whose death they did the^ self auau^ce
To chose a knight borne in Armenye,
Of the empire took the governance
And to supporte falsely their party:
But Constantine succeding of alie
Being next heir the truth for to sue,
To him that was murdered in the stewe.
Called Constantine as his father was,
Right notable in acts marciall:
More wisely governed stood in other cas,
Like a prince by judgment royal,
Of manly heart and courage natural
The conspyratours first of all he slethe,
That were assented to his fathers death.
To great encreace of his famous renoun
Grace of god did him enlumine
Constantinople in that royal town
Old heresy to cease and to fine
Two hundred bishops and eke also nine
He made assemble to stand at defense
Of Christ's faith, of manly providence.
He was eke busy churches to restore
All heretics manly to withstand,
Their opinions examined well before:
And when the troth was well understand
Like Christ's knight list for no man wonde
To punish them justly by rigor
Without excepcion of person or favor.
Of him in Bochas litel more I read
Nor of his empire I find none other date,
Spared no heretics for gold nor mede,
At Constantinople he passed in to fate
When Bulgarence began with him debate,
A froward people wilful and recheles
Gave them a tribute for to live in pees.
The.vi. Chapter.
How Gisulphus was slain and his wife ended mischeuously in lecherye.

NExt came Gisulphus to Bochas on the ring,
A famous duke and notable in his life.
With weping eyes pitously plaining
With whom also came Rimulde his wife,
Which that lived ever in sorrow and strife:
Yet was she both of birth and of lynage
Right excellent, and fair of her visage.
Six children had this famous queen
By Gisulphus gotten in marriage,
Wonder semely and goodly unto seen,
And fortunate by process of their age,
Albe their father felt great damage
By the werres he had in his living
With Cathamus, that was of Narces king.
This Cathamus with many strong battle
Is descended, and take the way right
Of duke Gisulphus the lands to assail,
Together met in steel armed bright:
Gisulphus slain, his people put to flight,
And Cathamus with strong and mighty hand,
Took possession and conquered all his land.
After whose death Rimulde the duchess
Greatly astonished, pale of her visage
To the castle of Forgoile began her dress,
With her knights of strong and fell courage:
Cathamus made after his passage,
Laid a siege, cast him to ieoparte,
His life and body rather than depart.
About the castle armed as he stood
Like a prince sat knightly on his stead,
Upon the walls as Rimuldis abode
Freshly besene in her purple wede,
And of the siege began to take heed:
Her look unawarely as she cast aside
She saw the king before the castle ride,
So like a prince and a manly knight,
She began on him look wonder narowe,
The god of love perced through her sight
Unto her heart marked with his arowe:
That of the siege she took but litell sorrow,
Made the soil so plyaunt of her thought,
And of her castle she set almost right naught.
And for to accomplish the hole entencion
Of her false lust in any manner thing,
She is agreed by composicion
To yield the castle in haste unto the king,
She for to come without more tarying
Like a duchess her self to present
Where as the king sat armed in his tent.
The people within prisoners take,
Her four sons took them to the flight,
Love caused that she has forsake
Her blood, her kyn, where it were wrong or right,
And Rimulde the space of al a night
With Cathamus had all her delight,
And ever after he had her in dispyte.
And by the king when she was refused,
Twelve in nombre y^ dwelled in his house
Most frowardly her beauty has abused,
Of her nature she was so lecherous,
And to reherce it is contagious
How she wext after so abhomynable
To be aquainted with gromes of y^ stable.
It were but vain to tarry on this mattere
Or any long process for to make,
Her story is contagious for to here
But finally at myschefe she was take,
For a spectacle fetched on a stake:
Set up alofte mine auctour tells so,
Died in distress for constraynt of her woe.
The.vii. Chapter.
Of Justinian the false extorcioner exyled by Patrician, after both nose and
eyes cut from his head.

BY example so as fresh armure
Through long restinge leseth his brightness,
Fret with old rust gadreth great ordure,
Is diffaced of his fresh clerenesse:
Semblably the Romans hie prowess
Began for to appal (alas and that was routh)
When they gave them to negligence and sloth.
Who in knighthode list have experience
Must eschew ryotous ydelnesse,
By prudent and entyre diligence
Large with discrecion, manly with gentilnesse,
To high emprises his courage dress,
And be well ware on each party
Him to preserve from all slogardye.
The which greatly has appayred
As it is remembered of old antiquite,
Caused Romans to be dispayred
By froward lusts hindering their cite,
And appalled their old prosperity,
Of which defautes came to plain blyue
To John Bochas emperors five.
As many kings of the same nombre,
Which by sloth were before oppressed,
Whom that sloth whylom did encombre:
Their names by and by here expressed
To mine auctor they have their course dressed
Like their degrees to speak in words few,
Justinian first began his face show.
Not Justinian whylom so virtuous
And of prudent governance so notable,
But Justinian Temerarius
Double of his deeds, false and disceiuable,
Of his promise diverse and unstable,
Whylom exiled by Patrician
For extorcions that he in Rome began.
His nose and eyes Patrician gave in charge
To be cut of by furious cruelte,
And of the empire that was so wide and large
Leoncius next governed the cite,
And through fortunes mutabilite
The same Leonce by Tibery was cast down,
His eyes put out, and died in prison.
Tiberius after served of the same,
His nose cut of, from his see put down,
For a rebuke and a perpetual shame
To a cite that called was Cerson,
Without mercy favor or raunson
Exiled he was, prisoned as a thief
By long turment dyed at mischefe.
The.viii. Chapter.
How Philippe the Emperor died at mischefe.

NExt to Bochas came Philip on the ring
Whose Empyreno while did endure,
Like an heretyke cursed of living,
And odious to every creature
Beat down images, and many fresh picture
Of holy saints, which in their temples stood
Whereby Romans dempt y^ he was wod.
Pursued he was by a manly knight
Called Anastase, and put out of his place:
And in Cecile of very force and might
He did his eyes out of his head arace,
By judgment his vysage to difface,
Semblably as he by great outrages
Of Christ's faith diffaced the images.
Died at mischefe dyrked with blindness,
Than Anastase took possession,
In whose time books bear witness
And cronicles also make mention,
Of the empire was made division,
That first was one parted in to twain
Whereof mine auctor in manner does complain.
The.ix. Chapter.
How Anastase was compelled to leave the empire to be a priest and live in
pouerte.

AS he reherceth in his opinion
And thereupon does a ground devise,
Cause and rote of their division
Took original of false couetise,
And ceriously he tells here the gise
In to y^ church wha^ riches brought in pride,
All perfeccion anon was set aside.
The pore staff, and potent of doctrine
When it was changed and list natabyde
In wylfull pouerte, but began anon decline
On stately palfrays and hie horses to ride,
Shortes of here were also laid aside,
Turned to copes of purple and sanguine,
Gowns of scarlet furred with hermine,
Slendre fare of wine and water clear
With abstinence of bread made of whete,
Changed tho days to many fat dinere
With confect drink and ypocras sweet,
All sobernes did his bounds let,
Scarsnesse of fode left his old estate,
With new excess began wexe delicate,
Gostly living in the church appalled,
Caused Greeks withdraw them in sentence
From the pope, in Peter's place stalled,
And list to him do none obedience:
False avarice caused this offense
That the Greeks did them self divide,
Fro the Romans for their great pride.
Thus couetise and false ambicion
Did first great harm in the spiritual,
Brought in discord and division
Among princes in their estate royal:
Who clibeth highest most perilous is his fall.
Record I take of the foresaid Anastace
By Theodosie put out of his place.
This Theodosie did his busy pain
On Anastase such werre for to make
That maugre him he did him so constrayne
That he was feign the empire to forsake:
For fear and dread he did upon him take
The order of priesthod from y^ imperial se,
Content with littel lived in pouerte.
The.x. Chapter.
How the head of Lupus king of Lombardy was smyt of by Grimaldus.

AFter these chaunges remembered by writings
Like as I have told here in party,
Came to Bochas four mighty kings
Reigning echone of old in Lombardie,
After the manner and gyse in Barbarye:
They were arrayed in their passage
With hear frogrowen body and visage.
Their berdes raught to their nauil down,
Their garnementes of colors manyfolde
With brod baudrikes enbraced enuyron
Large buckles and pendauntes of fine gold,
Their brech enbroudred after y^ gyse of old
Fret with perle leg stocked to the kne,
Playnynge to Bochas of their aduersite.
Their shone were raced freshly to the tone
Richely transuersed with gold wyre,
And thereon set many a strong stone
Gain Phoebus light shone bright and clear,
These lombarde kings began taproch nere:
The first of all the king Lupus
Unto Bochas began to complain thus.
Bochas (quod he) as for my party
For to reherce by short conclusion
One Grymaldus a prince of Lombardy,
Has me enclosed out of my region,
And cruelly enchayned me in prison
And after that did a sergeaunt send,
Smyt of mine head and there I made an end.
The.xi. Chapter.
How the head of Alexius was smit of by Comperton.

AFter this end reherced of Lupus
For to declare his mortal heaviness,
Next in order there came Alexius
A lo^bard king, famous of richesse,
Which took on him of surquedous prowess
For to compass the destruction
Of a prince called Comperton,
Which ware also a crown in Lombardye:
Atwyxt both was werre and great distau^ce,
But all the people and lords of Pauie
With mighty hand and marciall governance
The said Alexius brought unto mischaunce:
And Comperton escaped from all dread,
Of mortal vengeance let smite of his head.
The xii. Chapter.
How Ariperton was drowned with his riches.

AFter whose death pitously playning
Tofore Bochas came Ariperton,
Of Lombardy whilom lord and king
Which like a fool of high presumpcion
All causeless took occasion
Of volunte, there is no more to say,
Again the duke of Bagaroys to werrey.
These princes twain taken have the field,
And of Ariperton the party began apayre,
His adversary anon as he beheld
His cowarde heart began fall in despair,
Into Pauie for fear he began repair:
Took his treasour in purpose anonright
For uery dread to take him to the flight.
Took a vessel and entered is the sea
With sudden tempest assailed and derknesse,
His barge perished by great aduersite,
And was drowned with al his great richesse:
Lo here the fine of worldly wretchydnesse,
Namely of them to get great treasours
That gyn werre again their neighbors.
The xiii. Chapter.
How Dediere by Pope Adrian and Charles of France was put to flight, and died
at mischefe.

Next, to Bochas with heuye look and chere
King of Lombardy showed his presence,
Called in his time noble Dediere,
Notable in arms and of great excellence,
And where his father had done offense
To the Pope and full great duresse,
This king cast the domages to redress.
Agistolphe was his fathers name,
Which to the Pope did great aduersite,
For which his son to encreace his fame
Of royal fredom and magnanimite
And of benygne lyberalite,
Gave to the Pope with humble reverence,
A stately cite that called is Fagence.
Therewith he gave treasour and great good
As he that list of fredome not to spare,
A mighty castle which on Tybrestod
Within the bounds and lordshyp of Ferrare:
Which is a cite plainly to declare
Of antiquite mine auctour tells so,
And stant upon the river of the Poo.
This Dediere reigning in Lombardy
Began wexe famous at his beginning,
Had a great name upon each party:
But in the earth is nothing abiding,
All stant on change, and fortune in workyng
Is found unstable and double of her vysage,
Which of this king changed the courage.
There he was large on every side
Lyberal found in many sondrye wife,
His goodlyhede was changed in to pride
And his largess in to couetyse,
Of doubleness he began anon deuyse
To claim again (as ye shall understand)
His said gifts out of the Popes hand.
Which Dediere had made aliaunce
As the cronicle makes mention,
With king Pepin reignyng tho in France,
After whose death to have possession
And full lordshyp of all that region
He began of new fall at distaunce,
Both with the Pope and with the king of France,
Of presumpcion these werres he began
Again his promise, of double variaunce,
Pope in tho days was holy Adrian
Which to stynt the troble and great mischau^ce,
Required help of the king of France:
And great Charles in Bochas as I read,
Came to the Pope to help him in this need.
Charles that time was chief protectoure
To holy church their pauis and defense,
Which of hole heart and dyligent labor
With Dediere by manly violence
He met in Tuskie of knightly excellence,
Had a battle to preue their might
Charles victor Dediere put to flight.
As I find he fled in to Pauie,
Worthy Charles laid a siege aforne
Constrained them upon each party
For lack of vitaile they were almost lorne,
They wanted licour grain and corn,
By sudden constraynt and great aduersyte
To king Charles they yielded up the cite.
King Dediere was sent in to France
With mighty chains fettred in prison,
Like a wretch in sorrow and great penance
Died at mischefe there gained no raunson,
Which had before so great possession,
After whose day by old writing
Among lo^bardes was never crowned king.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
Of Pope Johan a woman with child and put down.

AFter the Princes reherced here toforne,
Drowned in tears came a creature
Like a bishop rounded and yshorne,
And as a priest he had abroad tonsure:
Her apparayle outward and vesture,
Being a woman whereof Bochas took head,
Like a prelate shape was her wede.
She was the same that of yore agon
Unworthily sat in Peter's place,
Was afterward called Pope John
Aberdlesse prelate no hear seen on her face,
Of her birth named was the place
Maxence a cite standing in Itaile,
Upon the Keen full famous of vitayle.
In her youth and in her tender age
Forsook her kyn, and in especial
Cast she would for her advantage
Give her to conning, body, heart and all,
And in the sciences called lyberall
In all seuin by famous excellence
By great study she had experience.
Her name couthe in many a diverse land
To show her co^ning first when she began,
Serchyng provinces came to England,
No wight supposing but y^ she was a man:
Came to Rome her story tell can,
Taught Grammar, Sophistry, and Logike
Red in schools openly rethorike.
In the time of the emperor Lotarye,
After the death as made is mention,
(Fro mine auctour if I shall not vary,)
Of the Pope which called was Leon,
The said woman by election
I stalled was, no wight supposing than
By no token but that she was a man.
The book of Sorts after that anon
Of adventure turned up so down,
She was named and called Pope John:
Of whose natural disposicon
Fill by process in to temptacion,
Quick with child the hour came on her than,
Was delivered at saint Jhon Lateran.
After put down for her great outrage,
I will on her spend no more labor
But pass over all the surplusage,
Of her living and of her great error:
Turn my style unto the emperor
Called Arnolde, and write his pitous chance
Son to Charles y^ great king of France.
To this Charles as books determine
He was son not borne in marriage,
But begotten on a concubine,
Took upon him of surquedous outrage
Without title, birth, or lynage
To succeed by fraud and false labor
Among Romans to reign as emperor.
He was ungracious sitting in that estate,
In mischefe spent his days euerychoue,
With lyce and worms made unfortunate,
Through skyn and flesh fret unto the bone:
Craft of medicine nor socour was there none,
So deep he was fret in his entrayle,
Died* in distress no leche might avail.
Here Bochas counsayleth princes to remember on Arnolde.
Mine auctour Bochas stynte here a while,
Sharped his pen of entencio^,
Began for anger to transporte his style
To write of tyrauntes the transgression,
More wode and fell than any Scorpion:
Them counsailing when they be most bold
For to remember of this proud Arnolde.
He ne was not in his pride assailed
With wolves, Tigres, nor Lions
With rauynous Bears nor wild bores trauayled
Nouther with other mighty champions
Which have conquered many regions,
But with worms engendered of his kind
The said Arnolde was murdered as I find:
In such disioynt the said Arnolde stood
With lice and worms fret again nature,
That was so nie borne of Charles blood
Impotent the pain to endure,
Which was in sothe an uncouth adventure
That a prince might not be socoured
Of small worms for to be devoured.
A great ensample who list considre and see
To princes all, for to abate their pride
Let them consydre their fragylite
To se an emperor to abide
Thassaute of worms, and ley* their boste aside:
In this Arnolde wisely aduertyse
How god has power their pomp to chastise*
Death of Arnolde did my pen encombre
For the great abhomynacion,
Than to Bochas came the twelft in nombre
Called Pope Jhon as made is mention,
Entering by fraud and false election
To gods law froward and contrary,
Nar like a pastor but like a marcenarye.
Called aforne he was Octauian,
Nothing resembling Peter's governance,
Fro the time in Rome that he began
To sit as Pope, he gave his attendaunce,
To follow his lust and his fleshly plesaunce,
In hauking and hunting stood his felicite
And among women conuersaunt to be.
Unto surfete, riot, and glotony,
He gave him wholly and took of it no keep,
Greatly disclaundred he was of lechery,
Kept in his court without shame or dread
A nombre of women, in cronicle as I read:
Two cardinals of purpose did entende
His vicious life to correckre and amend.
And of intent these Cardinals two
The church esclan^dred cast them to redress,
Made letters, sent them to Orcho
Duke of Saxon, that he should him dress
Toward Rome, and of hie noblesse
On holy church to have compassion,
Make of this mischefe just reformacion.
This Pope Jhon when he has perceived
Of these Cardinals the manner of writing,
And how the duke y^ letters has received,
He to do vengeance made not taryeng.
Bode no longer this judgment yeuing,
Cut of the nose felly of that one,
Hand of y^ other, and both were called John.
The emperor did his letters send
To this Pope of hole affection,
Of his defautes he should him amend:
But there was found no correction,
For which he was deposed and put down
By Cardynals for his cursidnesse,
Me list no more to write of his wretchidnes.
For his defautes and his great ontrage
This John put down as ye have herd devise
Mine auctour after caught a great courage
Seeing this mischefe in many londry wise
In holy church which that did arise,
Among prelates cast him self blyue
Their defautes openly to discryne.
Of their pride and presumpcion,
And while he began study in this matter
He began rembre anon in his reason
Upon a verse written in yt Sautere
Touch not my prophets ne nigh the^ not to nere,
Nor again the^ beware in deed and thought
In no wise that ye malign naught.
For this cause as ye shall understand
Touching this matter (plainly as I read)
Mine auctour began withdraw his hand,
Left his purpose and forth began proceed:
To whose presence or that he took head
Came a prince duke Charles of Lorayne,
Him besought to write his grievous pain.
The.xv. Chapter.
Of Charles of Lorayne confounded with hunger.

THis Duke of Lorayne as ye shall conceive
Had werre with y^ king of France
Called Hugh Capet, and as I apperceyue
An archebyshop to do the king plesaunce
Of hatred made his ordinance
Again this duke, and a wait upon him set
That he him took a bed when he slept.
The said bishop began falsely undermine
This worthy duke by full false treason,
Which as I find was called Anceline,
And he was bishop that time of Leon,
Which by fraud and false collusion
Took this prince yt was duke of Loraine,
And to the king he brought him by a train.
By whom he was delivered to prison
To Orliaunce, and with chains bound:
What was his end was made no mention
But in a pyt horrible and profounde
Mischefe with hunger did him so confound,
That I suppose this duke of Loraine
Consumed was for constraint of his pain.
The xvi. Chapter.
How king Salamon whylom king of Hungery was put to flight.

AFter to Bochas there came down
Princes four, and each for his party
Their grefes told, and first Salamon
That whylom reigned in Hungry
Both fool and cowarde books specify,
Void of reason, noysed of ygnoraunce
And at a point could no purueiaunce.
Fortune also did at him disdain
For he was nouther manly nor coragious,
Again whom were worthy knights twain
Herta was one with Laodislaus
Famous in arms notable and virtuous,
Both at ones on Solomon came down
And made him fly out of his region.
Through his unhappy froward cowardice
There was in him found no defense,
Flight was his shield, list in no wise
Gain his enemies make no resistance,
Failed heart to come to presence
To save his land, he dread him self so sore,
Of whom Bochas writ in his book no more.
The.xvii. Chapter.
How Petro king of Hungery was slain.

AN other king put here in remembrance
Called Petro reygning in hungry,
For his defautes again the king of France
Y called Charles of malice and folly
By indignacion this was his turmentry,
His eyes put out there was no better socour,
And after slain by dome of the emperor.
The.xviii. Chapter
How Diogenes the Emperor was taken, and his eyes put out.

AFter to Bochas there came twain on the ryng
Duke of Sweue formest as I read,
Again the emperor first malicyously working,
Henry the emperor reigning tho in deed:
But for his malice this was his fatal mede,
Banyshed to dwell among beasts savage
Slain in a forest for his great outrage.
When Constantine departed from this life
Which of all Greece was lord and governor,
By marriage of her that was his wife,
A knight Diogenes was made emperor:
Fortune to him did so great favor
Constantinople holding in his hand,
As sovereign prince of al greeks land.
Yet there were some that grutched theragain
And had of him great indignacion,
The king of Perce Belset Tarquiniaine,
Fro him by force took many a region,
Mesopotamie to his possession
Took by strong hand through his chiualry,
Maugre Diogenes and almost all Surrye.
Belset Tarquinia^ made him self so strong
By manly force Diogenes to assail,
And for Diogenes thought he did him wrong
He began ordain great stuff and apparayle,
A day assigned they met in battle:
Diogenes of froward adventure
He and his knights brought to discomfyture.
Take he was, and brought by great disdain,
In whom as tho there was no resistance,
To king Belset called Tarqumiaine:
And when he came to his presence
Against him was give this sentence,
To lie down plat and that king Belset
Should take his foot and on his throat set.
This was done for an hie dispite
Diogenes brought forth on a chain,
Without reverence, favor, or respyte,
At great feasts assigned was his pain:
And alder last put out his eyes twain,
The whele of fortune tourneth as a ball
Sudden clymbing asks a sudden fall.
The.xix. Chapter.
How Robert duke of Normandy fought with the Turks, was named to the crown
of Jerusalem, and died at mischefe.

AWorthye Prince spoken of in many reem
Noble Robert duke of Normandy,
Chose to the crown of Jerusaleem,
But for cause he did it deny
Fortune unto him had envy:
The same Robert next in order was
That came to plain his fall unto Bochas.
For Christ's faith this mighty champion
This duke Robert armed in plate and maile
With manly Godfray, Godfray de Bollion,
Again turks fought a great battle,
For Christ's faith that it should avail,
To sustene the law in their intent
To all the kings of the Occident.
Of Turks and Sarazins was so great a no^bre
Gain Christ's law gadred in puissaunce
The faith of Christ falsely to encombre,
But there were made hasty ordinance
By kings of England Normandy and France
First to socour did their busy pain
Godfray de Bollion, yt was duke of Loraine.
Which on Sarazins made a discomfyture
Maugre Turks for all their great might,
In which battle Christ made him recure
The field that day to supporte his right,
Where Robert was found so good a knight
That for his noblesse by record of writing
Of Jerusalem was named to be king.
He assented not to the election
Because of new that he did understand
His elder brother for short conclusion,
Y called Willyam was dead in England:
Would in no wise take y^ crown on hand
Of Jerusalem, but like a manly knight
Came to England for to claim his right
And yet or he came he had knowledging
His younger brother called Henry
Had upon him take to be crowned king,
Told his lords and princes finally
He was next heir, entered rightfully
As enheritour to succeed in that reem
His brother being king of Jherusalem.
God wot the cause stood all in other wise
The said Robert duke of Normandye
Purposed him by marciall emprise
From his brother to take the regalye,
Took his princes and his chyualrye
Thought he would like a manly knighte
Arryue in England, and rejoice his right.
Both in one field assembled on a day,
The brethren twain, each with strong party
To darraine and make no delay
Each with other to hold champarty:
But when these lords the mischefe did espy,
They busied them and were not recheles
Atwene the brethren to refourme pees.
The said brethren were fully condiscended
Upon this point for short conclusien,
As in the accord was justly comprehended,
Henry to hold and have possession
During his life of all this region,
And Robert should have for his party
A sum of gold with all Normandy.
Three thousand pound put in remembrance
Each year to Robert sent fro his region,
Of which payment to make full assurance
Was laid hostages as made is mention:
But yet of new fill a discencion
Atwene the brethren of hatred and envy
For a certain castle y^ stood in Normandy.
Which castle longed of heritage
Unto the kings jurisdiction,
Of which the duke took his advantage
Maugre the king and held possession,
Turned after to his confusion:
And when the king this thing did espy
With strong hand came to Normandy.
Where the duke was laid a siege about,
Made ordinance to recure his right,
Gate the castle, took his brother out,
Emprisoned him of very force and might:
Left him alone out of all men's sight
Fourtene year, the cronicle writes so,
There he died in mischefe and in woe.
While Bochas was busy in his labor
His book tacomplyshe with great diligence,
To him appeared the great emperor
Called Henry, showed his presence,
Began complain upon great offense
Done to him, the mischefe and distress
By his sons great unkindness.
The which son was called eke Henry
Greatly accused of ingratytude,
Cause he wrought so disnaturally,
Took his father with force and multitude,
Entreated him boysteously and rude,
And afterward there gained no raunson
At great mischefe, he dyed in prison.
The.xx. Chapter.
How Joceline prince of Rages for pride, sloth, and lechery, dyed in pouerte.

NExt in order with trist and ded visage*
Unto Bochas to show his heuines
Came Jocelyne, lord and prince of Rage,
Which is a cite famous of riches:
And this prince (mine auctor bears witness)
Was greatly give to sloth and slogardy,
And all his lust he set in lechery.
Left his lordshyp out of governance
For lack of wisdom and discrecion,
In fleshly lust set all his plesaunce,
And of the countries about him enuyron
He was not had in reputacion:
Certain princes mine auctor does discryue
Of his lordshyp cast him to deprive.
Among which the prince of Alapy
Called Sanguyne the story who list se,
To Joceline having great envy
Laid a siege to Rages the cite,
He being absent far from that country
And thus for slouthe and wylful negligence
Rages was take by mighty violence.
And Joceline commanded to prison,
To him fortune was so coutrarious,
Lost his lordshyp and dominacion:
Lo here the fine of folks vicious
Slow, delicat, proud, and lecherous,
Dyed in pouerte in mischefe and in need:
Of vicious princes lo here the fynall mede.
The.xxi. Chapter.
How the emperor Andronicus slew all that were of the blood royal, cheryshed
vicious people, and after was hanged.

AS very heir here and true successor
By election and also by lynage,
Came Andronicus lord and emperor
Of Constantinople, crowned king of age,
Next to Bochas with trist and pale vysage:
Beseching him to do his busy cure
To remember his woeful adventure.
Among greeks by story and scripture
This Andronicus governed not aright,
Again law and eke again nature
Found with his suster fleshly on a night,
Both of assent took them to the flight:
Again him his cosyn was so fell
Lord of that country called Emanuell.
For a time stood as a man exiled
For his disce^cions and many an uncouth strife,
By his princes after reconsiled
Standing in hope he should amend his life:
But in the time that he was fugitife
He was made lord and stood so for a while,
Reignyng in Pontus, of Asie a great I Will.
In this while Emanuell was dead
Fall in great age the story tells thus,
Having a child, and he who list take heed
While he dwelled in his tathers house
Among greeks called Alexius,
And the tutour that he was assigned to
Y called was Alexius also.
The same that was assigned his tutour
To se upon him all the governance
Had full power as lord and Emperor
And all the empire under his obeisaunce,
Princes and lords gave to him attendaunce:
Where that he were present or absent
Each thing was done at his commandment.
I mean as thus, he had al in hand
Constantinople, a cite of great substance,
But for extorcions which he did in the land
On his subjects, and for misgouernau^ce
Among the lords it fill in remembrance
Al of assent in heart began desire,
To Call Andronicus again to his empire.
By assent restored and crowned Emperor
Constantinople entering the cite,
Busied him by fraudulent labor
All the blood borne of the imperial see
For to be slain by vengeable cruelte,
By judgment of this Andronicus
Except a prince called Jsacius.
Thus in effect the troth was well seen
He was vengeable last in his old age
Right as he was in his years grene,
Felly governed, full of false outrage:
Last of al malicious of courage
Took to counsel in Greece he was thus named,
Al such as were disclaundred or diffamed.
Homicides he had in his houshoulde,
Tirantes y^ wrought again ryghtwysenes,
Cherished all that hardy were and bold
Widows, wives, and maidens to oppress:
Ribaudry was called gentilnes,
Spared nouther he was so lecherous
Women shorn chaste, nor folk religious.
Had also no manner conscience
To his subjects, falselye by rauine
Took what him list by unjust violence,
To al vices his youth he did enclyne:
And all that were of the royal line
Were slain echone except Jsacius,
As I told erst, by Andronicus.
And as I find for him in haste he sent
For this purpose to come to his presence,
To murdre him this was his intent
By diverse tokens and many euydence:
And fully knew the fine of his sentence
He like a prince list come no nere,
Smyt of the head of the Messanger.
And After that of manly providence
Myd the cite showed him like a knight,
Prayde lords to give him audience
Princes, and judges, for to do him right,
That he might declare in their sight
Great injuries and domages outragions
Wrought by the emperor called Andronicus.
O Citezins that know all the gise
Of your Emperor called Andronicus,
Not emperor so as ye list aduertyse
But a tiraunt cruel and furious,
A false murderer, vengeable, and dispitous,
Has of new and froward false courage
Slain of the Empire holy the lynage.
There is alive left none of the blood
Save I alone of the royal line,
For Andronicus like a tiraunt wode
Has slain echone breuely to termyne,
His sword of ve^geaunce they might not decline
Now purposes he of mortal tira^nye
To slay me also that am of their alye.
Requiringe you in this consistory
O citezins that here present be,
To remember and call to memory
How this famous imperial cite
Has aye ben ready to do equite,
Busy also of their noblesse
Wrong of tirauntes manly to oppress.
Philosophers and Poets eke deuyse
In their sawes prudent and notable,
Blood of tirauntes is noble sacrifice
To god above when they be vengeable:
And since ye be ryghtfull, just, and stable,
In your works void of variau^ce
Weye this matter justly in balaunce.
The people echone al of one assent
For outrages of this Andronicus
Put him down by ryghtfull judgment,
In whose place was set up Jsacius:
The said tiraunt froward and vicious
Began malign and him self dress
In his defense to make a fortress.
It help him not to make resistance,
So as he stood void of al favor
Seiged he was, and by violence
Maugre his myhgt rent out of that tower,
Spoiled cruelly found no better socour:
Stood all naked quakyng in his pain,
And first rent out one of his eyes twain.
And ouermore he had this reward
Without help, socour, or respite,
Rode on an ass his face set backwarde
The asses tail holdyng for dispite,
Whom to behold the people had delight:
To pore and rich through the cite
Him to rebuke was granted liberte.
After all this in a carte set
And vengeably lad out of y^ town,
By dome hanged on an hye gybet
The people on him to his confusion,
Made clamor and terrible soun:
Would never fro the galowes wend
Till in mischefe by death he made an end.
Lenuoye.
IN this tragedy against Andronicus,
Bochas makes an exclamacion
Again al princes vicious,
While they have power and dominacion
By tirannye vsinge extorcion,
Concludynge thus that their false living
Of right requires to have an yuell ending.
Indifferently this tyrant lecherous
Of wives and maidens made none excepcion,
Following his lust froward and disclaundrous
Spared no woman of religion,
Made wives break their profession
By violence, peyse well all this thing
Of right requires to have an yuell endyng.
Most in murdre he was contagious
Of innocent blood to make effusion,
Vengeable also again al virtuous,
Against his kynrede sought occasion
To slay them, fro which that he came down:
Which considered all such false working
Of right requires to have an yuell ending.
Bochas manaceth princes outrageous
Which by their proud hateful abusion
To god and man of will contrarious,
Having in heart a false opinion
Al tho that been in their subjection
They may devour their power so stretchyng,
Which shall not fail to have an yuell endyng.
Noble princes ye that been desirous
To persevere in your deminacion,
And in all virtue to be victorious,
Cherishe troth and put falshede down,
Be merciable measured by reason:
Of Andronicus the surfetes eschewyng
That ye by grace may have a good endyng.
The.xxii. Chapter.
Of Jsacius made blind and take at mischefe.

AS is rehearsed when Jsacius
Had all the Empire in his possession,
To avenge the death of Andronicus
Constantinople in that royal town
A brother of his there came down,
With a basin brenning bright as glede,
Made him blind, of him no more I read.
Except Jsacius was take at mischefe
Of him that wrought his destruction,
Liyng awayte as does a preuy these
Took the Emperor, put him in prison:
Vengeably did execusion
As is remembered with a basyn bright,
Brennyng red hot and so he lost his sight.
A son he had called Alexius
Tender of age, cast him to succeed,
By his tutour false and contrarious
Murdered he was at mischefe as I read:
The same tutour purposing as in deed
Of the empire by false collusion
By fraud and mede to have possession.
In this chapter of him no more I find
Reherced here in order by writynge,
But to mine auctour y^ process makes mind
There came in haste Sangot of Egypt king,
And with him came pitously weeping
Mighty princes Soundans twain,
Reigning in Damas, their falls to compain
Of Alopye Salech was that one,
Reigning in Damas of his true right,
Cathabadyn there being eke soudan
Which in tho days was hold a good knight
And right notable in every man's sight:
And for the Soudan of Babylon aferre
Called Saladyn oppressed was with werre,
For socour sent to these princes twain
To come in have with all their chiualry,
Him to supporte and do their busy pain,
Enforce their might to sustene his party:
Whose request they list not deny
Abode no longer but made them self strong
To stand with him were it right or wrong.
Of this matter the substance to conclude
These princes came Salech and Cathabadyn,
For their guerdon they found ingratitude
In this forsayde Soudan Saladin,
Found him unkind, plainly this is the fine
From their estates as it was after know
Disgraded the^ both, and brought the^ full low.
Of him in so the they had none other mede
For their labor, nor for their kyndnes,
What fill after in Bochas I not read
For he forthwith leaves this process
And unto Robert does his style dress
Called Farentyne reigninge in Taurence,
Who lost his lordshyp by sudden violence.
This to say he reigned but a while,
This said Robert lost his governance.
Next to Bochas came Guylliam of Cecile
King of that country lord of great pu^saunce,
Lost his kingdom through fortunes variance,
His eyes twain rent out of his head
After died in mischefe and in dread.
Which Guilliam reignyng in Cecile
Was by descent borne ^ye of alye*
To Robert Guisterde, as books do compile,
That whylom was duke of Normandye,
Greatly deliting in chyualry
With his brother full notable of renoun
Which brought Naples to subjection.
His brothers name was Rogere,
Which had a son to be his enheritour
Called Tancret as says the croniclere
Which took upon him to reign as successor:
Thus in Cecile Tancret was governor,
Again whom by title sought a fer
Of aliaunce he began a mortal werre.
For a maid that called was Constaunce
That daughter was to the king Rogere,
Which was set of spiritual pleasaunce
To be religious of hole heart and entere,
And by record of the croniclere
This Constaunce has the world forsake,
And to religion has her body take.
Of this Constaunce the self same year
That she was borne as made is mention
There was a clerk a great astronomere,
Told of her birth by calculacion
She should cause the desolacion
Of that kingdom, by process of her age
By the occasion only of marriage.
Some that were to Tancret great enmy
By their ungoodly exhortacion,
Moved the Emperor y^ Called was Henry
To take Constaunce from her religion,
And by the Popes dispensacion
She wedded was to the emperor by his might,
By title of her put Tancret from his right.
With a great nombre of Italiens
The Emperor entered in to that region,
But by favor of Ceciliens
Tancret long time stood in possession:
But through fortunes transmutacion
The same time to conclude in sentence
The said Tancret dyed on pestilence.
His son Guillia^ y^ was but young in deed
With Ceciliens cast him not to fail
To keep his land and his right possede,
Met the Emperor with stately apparayle
Made him ready with him to have a battle:
But the Emperor to great auantage
Cast otherwise of fraud in his courage.
Fayningly during the dyscorde
The Emperor cast another while,
By a fase color to fall at accord
And young Guilliam ungoodly to begile:
Under treaty taken in Cecile
Falsely deprived of his region
Sent to Itaile, and throw in prison.
By wey of treaty the story who list see
All concluded under false treason,
With Guilliam take were his susters three
His eyeu put out for more conclusion,
He perpetually dampened to prison:
Dyed in pouerte lost his enheritaunce,
Lo here the fine of worldly variaunce.
Further to write as Jhon Bochas began
After that Guilliam was put from his reem,
To him appeared Guyot Lucinian
Those before king of Jerusalem,
Whose knightly fame shone like the son beem
Which by his noblesse he whiso^ did attain
Godfra^y present that was duke of Lorayne.
But by the Soudan named Saladine
He was enchaced of that dignite,
Al worldly pomp draws to declyne:
So for the constraint of his aduersite
The years, passed of his prosperity
Went in to Cipres as a fugitife,
What fill after I read not in his life.
To make his co^playnt after him came one
Which had stand in great perplexite,
Earl of Brye^ne and was called Jhon,
Which afterward was king of the cite
Called Jerusalem, and had also parde
A fair daughter young and tender of age,
Joined after to Frederike in marriage.
Being that time lord and Emperor
Was desirous above al other thing
Of Jerusalem to be governor,
And of Eecyle to be crowned king:
Which alderlast for his subtyle workynge
Constrained was down fro that party
To be a captain and serve i^ Lombardye.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
Of Henry the eldest Son of Frederike the second myscheued by his father.

NExt to Bochas, crooked, halte, and sick
One called Henrye ca^e for to plain
The eldest son unto Frederike
Which by sickness had felt great pain,
Megre and pale contracte in every vain,
Of whose langour the chief occasion
Was that he lay so long time in prison.
Al his disease at great aduersite
Ycaused was for short conclusion
By his fathers froward cruelte,
As Bochas after makes mention:
And this Henry by generation
Son unto Frederike like as it is found
I mean Frederike called the second.
This Henry by descent of line
Of Cecyle first was crowned king,
And of Jerusalem whose renome did shine
Through many a land at his beginning:
And fortune also in her workyng
Was to this Henry passing notable,
In all his works inly favorable.
Of his person he had this auantage,
To all the people he was right acceptable,
Well commended in his flourynge age
Of there face and look right amyable,
And of his port very demure and stable,
Called in his ginninge such favor he has won
Of princes al very light and son.
But often it falls that a glad morning
When Phoebus shows his beams brighte
The day sometime thereupon following
With some derke sky is clipsed of his light:
And semblably through fortunes might
This said prince by her false variaunce
Fond in her whele full noious greuaunce.
Who may the furies of fortune appese,
Her troubly waves to make them plain?
Where me^ most trust they find most disease,
Where double corages stand in no certain,
A shining day is often meint with rain,
Thus of Frederike the great unstableness
Has brought his son in mischefe and dystresse.
This Frederike set up in great favor
By the Popes diligent business
Unto the state lift up of Emperor,
But through his fatal froward unkindness
Of couetyse fyl in such excess,
Took upon him the Patrimony to gye
Of Christ's church, that part to occupy.
Fyl in the Popes indignacion,
Counsel nor treaty might none avail,
But of malice and presumpcion
Cast with the Pope to have a great battle:
The said Henry his father began counsel
Again the church to do no violence,
But him submit with humble obedience.
The strife enduringe atwene these estates
Frederik made his son to be accused,
To him of crymelese magestatis,
Would not suffer he should be excused:
But like a man maliciously refused,
By his fathers cursed false treason
He was commanded to dye in prison.
Some books say he was taken and brought
To his father of dome to have sentence,
But like a man passed sorrow and thought
Which to his life had none aduertence,
Furiously and with great vyolence
As he was lad alas on horsbake,
His horse fyl down and so his neck he brake
Some books rehearse of him and said
His father took again him occasion:
And when he had long in cheynes layne
At great mischefe he dyed in prison.
And some say that he fyl down
Of a bridge as Bochas reherseth her^
And drowned was in a deep ryuere.
A commendacion of Bochas of such as be kind to their kynred.
Next in order mine auctour did his cure
To make a special commendacion
Of such as be disposed by nature
And by their kyndly inclinacion
As blood requires and generation,
To acquit the^ self in thought will and deed
Without fayning unto their kindred.
Specially that none unkindness.
Be found in them for none aduersite,
To consider of natural gentylnes
To them appropred is mercy and pity
And to avoid the false duplicite.
That was in Frederik, which so unkindly
Let slay his son that called was Henry.
Pity is appropred to kynrede,
Father and mother by disposicion
To cherysh their children and eke feed
Till seven year pass, law makes mention:
And as they be bound of natural reason
That time passed their tenderness ten^lyne,
Unto fortune by virtuous dyscipline,
Than afterward in their adolescence
Virtuously to tech them and chastise,
Norish them in doctrine and Science,
Fostre in virtue vices to despise:
To be curteyse prudent sad and eke wise:
For when they gyn with virtue in that age
Gladly after they do no great outrage.
As it longs to every gentle lygne
And blood royal by kyndly influence,
To father and mother show them self benign
Of humble hertes to do them reverence:
Aye to remember in their aduertence
On six princes that wrought the contrary,
For which fortune was their aduersarye.
Eueriche to other found was unkind,
In cursed blood may be no kindness,
Of one tarage sauoureth tree and rynde,
The fruit also bears of the tree wytnes:
And semblably the fathers cursednes
With mortal sword in nature reprouable,
Again the child is often seen vengeable.
Among which Brutus is rekened one,
Next in order followed Manlius,
Slew their children by record euerychone,
Philip Manlius and also Cassius,
And cruel Herod fell and malicious,
Frederik also most vengeably,
Slew his son that called was Henry.
This Frederik aye froward and contrary
Toward his son not gracious nor benygne,
From holy church ungoodly he began vary,
And theragayne frowardly malign:
And like a man obstinate and vndigne
Dyed accursed through misgouernaunce
Without confession or repentance.
The.xxiiii. chapter.
How Manfroye king of Poyle was slain.

Next too Bochas of Poyle came the king,
Began his fall and complaynte to specify,
Called Manfroy, and for his false workyng
Put down and slain cause of his tiranuy:
Lo what avails septr or regaly,
To a tyrant which of violence,
List to god ward have none aduertence?
The.xxv. Chapter.
How Ences king of Sardiny dyed in prison.

With look down cast, deadly, pale of chere
Of Sardinya Ences next came down,
King of that land to tell the manner
How he werrayed again the mighty town
Called Bonon^a to his confusion
By them ve^quished and with chains round
Dyed in prison so long he lay there bound.
Folowi^g mine auctour called Bocas Jhon,
In Sardinia, as he makes mind,
Serpent nor wolf in that land was none,
Having a well which of very kind
Thieves eyes the water makes blind:
To true folk as he does divine
Water thereof was health and Medicine.
There grows also an herb as books sey
Which that is so diverse of nature
Who tastes thereof laughyng he shall dey,
No medicine may help them nor succor:
The touch thereof stante eke in adventure,
If it enter his mouth on any side,
He shall alive for laughter not abide.
The.xxvi. chapter.
How an other Frederyke was slain by judgment of his brother.

THere was another froward Frederike
Son of Alphonce that was king of Castyle,
Of courage wode and eke fran^yke,
His own brother falsely to begyle
Began a werre lasting but a while:
Whose purpose was his brother to dysceiue
And the crown of Castile to receive.
This Frederike came with a great battle
Again his brother for the same intent,
Of his purpose yet he did fail,
God nor fortune were not of assent:
Take in the field, and by judgment
Of his brother for his great trespace,
Slain openly he had no better grace.
The.xxvii. Chapter.
How Manimettus and Argones dyed at mischefe.

MAnymettus of Perce lord and king
Came next in preace distressed in great pain,
Upon fortune pitiously playnyng
His aduersite did him so constrayne:
For there was one which at him did disdain
Called Argones, void of title or ligne
Gain Manimettus proudlye began malinge.
Which Argones for his presumpcion
Take at mischete by sudden violence,
His dome was given to dye in prison,
Of no power to make resistance:
But fortune that can no difference
Of her chaunges atwene friend and fo,
Caused them dye at mischefe both two.
The.xxviii. Chapter.
How Charles King of Jerusalem and of Cecile for avarice and auoutry died at
mischefe

AFter these forsayde rehearsed in sentence
As Bochas remembers in his style,
Came Noble Charles unto presence
King of Jerusalem and also of Cecile,
Of whose coming mine auctour a great while
Astoyned was, to se his knyghtly face
With such chere come in to the place.
For by his port who beheld him well
Considred first his look and his vysage,
It sempt he trad upon fortunes whele,
And of his noble marciall courage
Had of her power gotten advantage:
Showing him self on each party
Her and her might did utterly defye.
First to commend his royal hye lynage
And of his virtuous famous alyaunce,
And by writing and praising of langage
The name of him specially to auaunce,
Says he was borne of the blood of France,
And to encreace most soueraynlye his prise
Writes he was brother unto saint Le wise.
Gave to France this commendacion,
So as Phoebus passes each other sterre,
Right so that kingdom in comparison
Passes every land both nie and far:
In policy, be it peace or werre,
For it transcendeth in peace by prouydence,
And in werre by knightly excellence.
These words be not take of mine auctour,
Entytled here for a remembrance
By one Laurence which was translatour
Of this process, to commend France,
To praise that land was all his plesaunce:
Says influence of that royal land
Made Charles so worthy of his hand.
Of whose noblesse Pope Urban had joy,
Him to increase for virtuous living,
Which that time was duke of Anioy
After chosen of Cecile to be king,
Of Pope Urban required by writing,
Toward Rome that he should him dress,
Of king Manfroy the tyranny to oppress.
Again the Pope and holy church right
This said Manfroy did great extorcion,
Noble Charles as gods own knight
Came with strong hand up to Rome town,
Which in his coming gave possession
To Gyot Manfort for to have the guard,
In his passage to govern the vowarde.
To Rome with great ordinance
They passed over the bounds of Itayle,
This ma^ly knight Charles borne in france
Lad with him many a strong battle
The Popes enemy manly to assail:
But all this while to stand at diffence
This said Charles found no resistance.
Entering Rome to be their protector
Full well received at his first entryng,
Chose and preferred for chief senator
By the pope, most glad of his coming,
Of Cecile was after crowned king:
And of Jerusalem as made is mention
Granted to him full possession
Which in his ginning bare him so well,
Entering y^ land with knightly apparayle
Of Cassine gate first the strong castle,
At Beneuent had a great battle,
With king Manfroy, whose party did assail
To reherce shortly his adventure,
Charles made on him a discomfyture.
In which bataile king Ma^froy was slain,
And noble Charles took possession,
Whereof Romans were full glad and feign
Yet in Cecile there was rebellion,
But they were brought unto subjection,
And Conradine record of al wrighting,
Son of Conrade claymed to be king
Began make him strong, proudly took his place
At Alygate a famous old cite,
Noble Charles with knightly chere and face
Fill upon him, made him for to fly:
And to set rest in the country
To avoid trouble and make al thing certain,
Gave judgment Conradyne to be slain.
Among kings notable and glorious
Charles was put as made is mention,
Like a prince strong and victorious
In full peasyble and hole possession
Of Cecile and all that regyon,
Agayns whom was no disobeysaunce
Yielded of hole heart to his governance.
By title also of his alyaunce
Fortune greatly did him magnifye,
For as it is put in remembrance
The noble princess that called was Mary
Daughter to Stephane reigning in Hungry
Joined was and knit in marriage
To Charles son, to thencrece of his lynage.
This same Charles by auctorite
So as him self list to ordain,
Was made king of the great cite
Called Jerusale^, of towns most sovereign.
By which title he bare crowns twain,
His brother Jews old books say
The same time in Egypt began werray.
Gate all the countries about enuyron
which that sarazyns did falsely occupye,
Brought them again to subjection
Of Jerusalem that iande to magnifye:
Cartage in Affrike with all their regalye
And all the countries being before co^trayre,
To king Charles became tributayre.
This while he sat highest in his glory
Like Phoebus shyning in his mydday spear,
with many conquest and many great victory:
when his noblesse shone most bright and clear
The same time with a frownyng chere
Fortune began from Charles turn her face,
And him berafte her favor and her grace.
This lady fortune does selde in one co^tune
She is so geryshe of condition,
A sorceresse, a traitor in common
Cast a false mean to his destruction
One of his sons slain with poison,
which did eclypse mine auctor does express,
A full great party of his old gladness.
He was disclaundred of all the vice
which appertains unto tyranny,
I mean the vice of froward auaryce
which is contrary unto his chiualry:
Diffamed also of false auoutrye:
which was sustained through his mayntenau^ce
within the land by a knight of France.
The same knight abydyng in his house
All Cecile troubled with that deed,
The great offense was so disclaundrous
Through all the region it began to sprede,
For thylke woman plainly as I read
was wife to one which suffered this offense,
And to be venged did his dyligence.
John Prosith plainly was his name,
which cast him fully avenged for to be
That king Charles should bear the blame,
Slew all the frenchmen that bode in y^ country
Without grace, mercy, or pite,
And for to do full execucion
Required was the king of Aragon.
Lost of Cecile hole the region,
With obeysaunce of many country,
And of Jerusalem the possession
Fill by process in great aduersite:
And last constrained with grievous pouerte
To god most mekely with full heavy chere,
Soon to be dead was his prayer.
Supprised he was with sorrow in his courage,
Lost his force, fyl in to malady,
Languished forth till he began fa^l in age,
Again fortune found no remedy:
And by occasion of false auoutry
Fyl to mischefe and for sorrow and dread,
This Charles died, no more of him I read.
Lenuoye.
Like as Phoebus in some fresh morninge
After Aurora the day does clarifye,
Falls often that his bright shining
Is derked with some cloudy sky,
Alykenes showed in this tragedye:
Expert in Charles the story does well preue
Youth and age rekened truly
The fair day men do praise at eve.
The noble fame of his fresh gynning
To saint Lowes he was nygh of alye,
Right wise, manly, and virtuous of living,
Called of knighthod flour of chiualry,
Till maintenance of auoutry
Came in to his court to hurt his name and grieve,
His life, his death, put in ieoparty
The fair day men do praise at eve.
Like deserts me^ have their guerdoning,
Virtuous life does princes magnify,
The contrary to them is great hyndring
Folk expert the troth may not deny,
Search out the reward of cursed lechery
Where it is used the household may not preue,
In this matter to Charles have an eye
The fair day to praise toward eve.
Noble princes al vices eschewing
Your high courage let reason gye,
Withdraw your hand fro riotous watchyng,
Fly fleshly lusts and vicious company:
Oppress no man, do no tyranny
Socour the nedy, pore folk do releue,
Let men report the prudent policye
Of your last age when it draws to eve.
The.xxix. Chapter.
Of Hugoline Earl of Pise slain in prison.

AFter Charles story red the woeful fine
As ye have herd the manner and y^ gyse,
To Jhon Bochas appeared Hugolyne
Called whylome the earl of Pyse,
Till they began again him arise
Most vengeable, cruel and unkind,
Slew him in prison no more of him I find.
Save his children of haterede and envy
Were murdered eke in a deep prison
Next with his co^playnt the king of Armeny
Came tofore Bochas that called was Atho^,
A christen prince full famous of renoun,
For our faith from which he list not err
Gain Tarta^ines longtime he held werre.
This manly king in knighthod full famous
It was showed, his story who list read,
Had a brother fell and dispytous
Called Sabath desirous to succeed,
Sted of his brother the kingdom to possede
By false treason, reued of his right,
Kept him in hold and put him out of sight.
This Sabath lost both hap and grace,
His other brother as made is mention
By strong hand put him from his place,
Chased him out of that region:
Take by force, and fetred in prison
Died there, no man list him visit
Lo how god can treason and murdre quite.
The.xxx. chapter.
How Pope Boniface the eight was take by the lynage de Columpnes, eat his
hands, and dyed in prison.

AMong these woeful princes three
Which showed the^ so ugly of their chere,
Pope Boniface by great aduersite
The eight of that name began to approach nere,
A thousand. C C C. accounted was y^ year
Fro Christ's birth, by computacion:
When that he made his lamentacion
This same Pope caught occasion
Which under Peter kept governance
To interdicte all the region
Time of king Philip reigning tho in France,
Dyrecte bulls down to Constaunce
To Nycholas, made by Bouiface
Archdeacon of the same place.
Of holy church the prelates nygh ethone
Bishops of France felly have declared,
Preuing by points many mo than one,
In a great sin plainly and not spared
By him the church was hurt and not repaired,
Put on him crimes of great misgouernaunce
Denou^cing enemy to al y^ land of France.
Put on him many a great outrage
Wrongly how he had done offense
To a cardinal borne of the lynage
De Columpnes, a kinrede of reverence:
For which cause he kept him in absence,
Out of the court drew where he was borne
By which occasion y^ Pope his life has lorn.
De Columpnes y^ lynage has so wrought
Took Boniface for his old cruelte,
with great force and power they have him brought
Unto a castle which stood in the cite
Called Sa^^ri Angeli, gave auctorite
To a Cardynall and by co^myssion
Power to do full execucion.
Of these matters hangyng in balaunce
At wene parties were it right or wrong,
Both of romans and prelates eke of France
The pope aye kept within y^ castle strong,
Of adventure abiding there not long
Fill in a flixe and afterward for need,
For hunger ete his hands as I read.
Hour of his dyeng it is made mention
About ye castle was merueylous lightning,
Where the pope lay fettred in prison:
None such before was seen in their living.
And while Bochas was busi in writing
To write the fall of this Bonyface,
The order of templers came tofore his face.
The.xxxi. Chapter.
How the order of Templers was founded and Jacques with other of the order
brent.

CRoniclers the troth can record
Calling to mind the first fou^dacio^
And old auctours therewith accord
Of these Templers how y^ religion
Began that time when Godfray de Bullion
Had won, that noble knightly man,
Jerusalem, that order first began.
By certain knights which did their pain:
When the cite was first ywonne,
By noble Godfray duke whilom of Loraine
There crowned king this order they begone,
Old books well reherce konne
Taking a ground of pouerte and mekenes
To found this order did their busynes.
Their beginning began of devotion,
The ground ytake of wylfull pouerte,
And made first their habitacion
By the temple not far from the cite:
In token of clennes sworn to chastity,
Of the temple like to their desires
Took their name, and called were Templers.
Pope Honorie gave them auctorite
Of holy church being that time head,
A white habit they bare yt time for chastity,
Eugenius after gave them a cross of read:
And to defend pylgrimes out of dread
Gain sarazins through their high renoun,
This was chief point of their profession.
While they lived in wylful pouerte
These crossed knights in ma^tel clad of white,
They are spread in many a far country,
For in perfection was set all their delight:
Folk of devotion caught an appetite
Them to increase gave great alms,
By which they began wexe to great richesse.
By process within few years
The nombre great of their religion,
And the fame of the said Templers
Began sprede wide in many region:
With the sudden rising of their profession,
With tours, castles, they gave the to delices,
Appalled in virtue yt brought in many vices.
It were to long to reken them all,
But among other I find there was one
A manly knight, folk Jacques did him call,
Great of auctorite among them euerychone,
As cronicles remember of yore agone
The which Jacques in the realm of France
Was borne of blood to great enheritaunce.
The same Jacques hold a manly knight
In his gynnyng fresh, lusty of corrage,
Had a brother by elder title of right
Occupied al hole the heritage:
Because Jacques younger was of age
Which might not by no condition
Nothing claim of that possession.
His elder brother occupied all
While this Jaques but low was of degree,
Wonder desirous to be with him egal,
Always put back by froward pouerte:
And to surmounte if it would be
Found out a mean like to his desiers,
Was chosen master of the templers.
And was promoted by fre election
By them that should chose him of right,
Whereby he had great dominacion
Riches, treasour, great power and might,
Of his person was eke a manly knight,
The same time put in remembrance
Philip le Bele crowned king of France.
Which had of Jacques great indignacion,
To all the templers and all the chiualry
Cast ways to their destruction,
Gate auctorite his lust to fortifye
Down fro the pope books specifye
Clement theer concludyng if he may,
All the templers to distroye on a day.
For certain crimes horible to here
Al at ones were set in prison,
By their friends touching this matere
Counseled to ask mercy and pardon:
That they should by plain confession
Requiring him knelyng on a row,
And as it was their trespase ben aknowe.
Jacques was take and with him other three
Kept in hold and to prison sent,
And the remnaunt for their iniquite
Ordained were by open judgment
To mighty stakes to be tied and brent:
The king in manner like to do them grace
So they would confess their trespace.
But al for naught they were so indurate
All of accord and of one corrage
To ask mercy were obstinate,
The fire ready al with one langage
When the flame approached their vysage
Full plainly spoke cried pitiously,
Of their acts which they were not gylty.
From their purpose they list not to declyne
But with one voice echone and one soun
Fully affyrmed till they did fine,
How their order and their religion
I grounded was upon perfection:
And their death verily in deed
Compassed was of malice and hatred.
The said Jaques of whom I spoke to forne
Brought to a place which called was Leon
Tofore two legates or that his life was lorne
All openly made his confession,
He was worthy for short conclusion
For to be dead by rightful judgment,
This was his end to ashes he was brent.
The.xxxii. Chapter.
Bochas here commends Theodorus with other two Philosophers for their
patience notably.

YEuing a prise to Philosophers three,
Bochas co^me^deth with great diligence
How each of them was in his co^tre
Soueraynly by virtuous excelle^ce
Of old commended for their patience:
Which may be set and crowned in her stall
As Emperesse among virtues al.
Among Ceciliens first Theodorus
For patience had in great reverence,
Among Greeks the story tells thus
Anaxerses for his magnificence,
By force of virtue grounded on patience
Because he was virtuous and wise
For sufferaunce gate him a sovereign prise.
Among Romans put in remembrance
Sceuola, both philosopher and knight,
For his marciall strong constaunce
When that he held amyd the flame light
Hand and fingers among the coals bright,
Till the joints falling here and yonder
From the wrest departed were a sonder.
First Theodorus borne in the famous isle
By patience great pains enduringe,
Chief philosopher called of Cecile
With chains bound upon the ground lying,
On his body laid gaddes reed brennyng:
Suffering his pain list it not refuse
By king Jerome the tiraunte of Siracuse.
For common profit suffered all his pain
Long time before liyng in prison,
Which by assent of mo than one or twain
Was the most chief by conspiracion
To bring the tiraunt to his distruccion:
For no pain that he might endure
The coniuracion he would not discure.
Rather he chase in mischefe for to dey
Than by name openly declare
Of him that slew the tiraunt sothly to sey,
Thought of right no man should spa^e
For common profit health and welfare:
To slay a tiraunt demyng for the best
Al a region for to set at rest.
For which title he list suffer death,
All his turment took most patiently,
Theodorus till he yielded up the breath
Grutched not with noise nor loud cry:
Amyd wose heart roted was faithfully
Common profit, Bochas writes the same,
Among Ceciliens to get him a name
Greeks also commend above the sterres
Anaxerses and greatly magnifye,
Cause that he to stint mortal werres
List not spare to acquit his party,
In rebukyng manly the tirannye
Of Nico^reon, a tiraunt full mortal
Reignyng in Cipre in his estate royal.
Spared nouther for death ne dread
Him to rebuke by virtuous langage,
The tiraunt bad cut out of his head
His tongue in haste, but he with strong courage
Said he should have none advantage
Of that membre, which with al his might
Had told him trough in the peoples sight.
Of his manace set but litell tale
Bytte of his tongue of strong courage,
Chewed it al on pieces small
Of manly heart thought it no damage
Spyt it out in the visage
Of the tiraunt, gate so the vyctory
To put his name evermore in memory.
And Sceuola equal to these twain
For common profit by just comparison,
Put him in preace, did his busye pain
To slay Porcenna enemy to Rome town,
For to accomplysh his entention
Took a strong darte passingly trenchaunte,
With all his might cast it at the tiraunte.
Of his mark cause he did fail
To slay his enemy after his intent,
Which in Tuskan by many strong battle
Gayns Romans with his knights went,
This Sceuola his own hand brent:
Cause that he failed of his art
To slay Proceuna with casting of his darte.
To declare the force of his manhood
Put him self avenged for to be,
As I have told in coals read
His hand he brent for love of his cite:
Only to aquite his magnanimite
Of fervent love his cite to avail
To slay the tiraunt cause that he did fail.
Thus for to put the marcial suffraunce
Of these noble philosophers three
In perpetual mind and remembrance
How they them quit each like his degree,
For their pure party unto the commonte,
Cause al their joy and inward delight.
Was for avail to the common profit.
First Theodorus put him self in prees
For Ceciliens to dye in prison,
And for Greeks noble Anaxerses
His tongue torn felt great passion,
And Sceuola for Romans and their town
Suffered his hand by short auisement,
Of very troth in coals to be brent.
A martirdom it was in their manner
Of their courage to have so great constaunce,
Were so stable of heart body and chese
For common profit, of face and countenance
Unto the death without variaunce:
Gate the triumph by sovereign excellence
With laurer crowned for their patience.
Like as Phoebus passes the litel sterre
Highest vpraised in his mydday spear,
So this virtue in trouble peace and werre
Called patience, most freshely does appear,
Among virtues to show his beams clear:
For patience knyt with humilite
Where they abide may none error be.
T^rauntes hertes this virtue does appease,
Modifyeth their cruel fell wodenesse,
Rage of Lions who list live in ease
Of folk prostrat his malice does repress,
Al our joy began first with mekenes,
For of Juda the hardy strong lion
A maide^s mekenes fro heaven brought down.
In battle and mighty strong sheltrons
Advice with sufferaunce wins the victory,
Patience venquisheth champions
Lowness in virtue by many old hystory,
And mekenes perpetual of memory
Al to conclude grounded on reason
A maidens mekenes wrought our rede^pcion.
Bochas here commends humilite.
Virtue of virtues O noble patience,
With Laurer crowned O virtuous constau^ce,
Laud honor praise and reverence
Be give to thee prices of most pleasau^ce,
Most renomed by old remembrance:
Of whom the mighty marciall armure
Gain all vices lengest may endure.
Ground and gynnyng to stand at defense
Again Satan's infernal puissaunce,
Laureat queen where thou art in presence
From outrages have no governance,
Condite, head spring of ple^tuous habu^dau^ce,
Cristall well celestial of figure
Gain al vices which lengest may endure.
Chief founderes by sovereign excellence
Of gostly building and spiritual substance,
Empress of most magnificence
With heavenly spirits next of aliaunce,
With life everlasting thy triu^phes tauaunce:
And joy eternal thy noblesse lo assure
In the aureat throne perpetually to endure.
Three Jerarchies there living in prei^ence,
With who^ humilite has sovereign acquaintau^ce
Where Osanna with devout diligence
Is song of angels by long continuau^ce,
Tofore the throne keeping their obseruaunce
Sing Sanctus sa^ctus record of scripture,
With voice memorial perpetually tendure.
The bre^ning love of Cherubin, by feruence
Perfect in charity diligent obeysaunce,
And Seraphin with humble obedience
And orders nine by heavenly concordaunce
Dominacion with virtuous attendaunce,
Before the trinite sing freshly by measure,
With voice memorial perpetually tendure.
Suffraunce of panims has but appearance
Done for vainglory, hangyng in balaunce,
But Christ's martyrs in very existence
List again tyrau^tes make no repugnau^ce:
Rather die than show god displeasaunce,
Showed in no myrrour likeness nor picture
Take full possession with Christ ever tendure.
Suffraunce for virtue has y^ preemynence
Of them that set in god their affyaunce,
Record of Stephyn Vincent and Laurence
Blessed Edmonde by long perseueraunce,
Suffered for our faith victorious greuau^ce:
King made and martyr a palm to recure
In the heavenly court perpetually to endure.
And for to set a manner difference
In Bochas book told every circumstaunce,
How for our faith by full great violence
Diverse saints have suffered great penance,
Stable of their chere visage and countenance:
Never to vary for none adventure
Like Christ's cha^pions perpetually te^dure.
Whose foundation by notable providence
Grounded on Christ their souls to auaunce,
Grave in their hertes and in their conscience
Voiding all trouble of worldly perturbau^ce,
Chaunges of fortune with her double chance:
Loved god and dred above each creature
In hope with him perpetually to endure.
The.xxxiii. Chapter.
How Philip le Bele king of France was slain with a wild Bore, and of his
three sons and their wedding.

When Bochas had written of patience
And commended the virtue of suffraunce,
Philip le Bele came to his presence
Fifth of the name crowned king of France:
Began complain his unhappy chance,
And on fortune of custom that can vary
Which was to him cruel adversary.
Wounded he was with a grievous sore,
Began his complaynt to Bochas determyne,
How he was slain with a wild bore,
In a forest which called was Compyne,
Told how he was sclaundred and al his line
Ones in Flanders with many a worthy knight
Ve^quished of fle^minges, and felly put to flight.
Proceeding ferther began touch of his lynage
How in his time he had sons three,
Jews Philip and Charles young of age,
The fourth Robert: also a daughter had he
Called Isabell, right excellent of beauty:
The said Robert the story is well kouthe
Which that died in his tender youth.
To this story who li^t have good regard
The circumstaunce wisely to discern,
His daughter Isabell was wedded to Edward
Carneruan, the book so does us learn:
This young Philip wedded in Nauerne
The kings daughter, a stately marriage,
Called Jane, while she was tender of age.
The same Philip after crowned king
Of Nauerne, his father of assent
Five sons he had than living,
Of which five as in sentyment
Three in nombre be right pertyn ent
The matter who so list to look,
And the process of the same book.
The eldest son called was Lewise
To whom his father gave possession
Of Nauerne, because that he was wise
For to govern that noble region:
Philip his brother for his high renoun
Was afterward by just enheritaunce
And rightful title crowned king of France.
The third brother was by title of right
Made earl of march and named was Charles,
Each of them in the peoples sight
Were famous hold and passing of great prise,
And for they were right manly and right wise
Philip and Charles took in tender age,
The earls daughters of Burgoin in marriage
But as the storye reherseth in certain
To their noblesse fortune had envy,
And by a manner of malice and disdain
Brought in a process upon the party
Of their two wives froward auoutry,
Causing the death of these wives three
When they most floured in their felicite.
After these three princes glorious,
Tofore Bochas had show their intent
A mighty duke notable and famous
Came to complain Charles of Tarent,
Which in his time to Florence went
To make peace in his royal estate
Twene Guer^te and Gemellius standing at debate
The said Charles borne of the blod of france
A manly knight the story does devise,
By whose unhappy fatal froward chance
In the werres twene Florence and Pyse
On horsbacke sittinge in knightly wise,
Hurt with an arowful low down to ground,
Whereby he caught his last fatal wound.
A man of arms being a soudyour
With the pisanes were it wrong or right
Of false disdain did his busy labor
To tread on Charles in the peoples sight,
When he lay gruffe wherefore he was made knight
By their captain, for a manner pride
Which governed the Sybelines side.
And in his study with full heavy chere
While John Bochas bode still on his sete,
To him appeared and began approach nere
Daunt of Florence the laureate Poet,
With his dities and rethoriques sweet,
Demure of look fulfilled with patience,
With a vysage notable of reverence.
When Bochas saw him upon his fete he stod,
And to mete him he took his pase full right,
with great reverence auailed cappe and hod,
To him said with humble chere and sight,
O clerest son, O very sothfast light
Of our cite, which called is Florence,
Laud be to the honor and reverence.
Thou have enlumined Itaile and Lombardy
With Laureate ditees in thy flouring days,
Ground and ginning of prudent policy
Monge Florentines suffered great affrayes:
As gold pure proved at al assayes
In troth made mekely thy self strong,
For common profit to suffer pain and wrong.
O noble Poet touching this matter
How Florentines to the were unkind,
I will remember and write with good chere
Thy pytous exile and put here in mind:
Fray (quod Daunt) here stante one behind
Duke of Athens turn to him thy style,
His uncouth story breuely to compyle.
And if thou list do me this plesaunce
To discryue his knightly excellence,
I will thou put his life in remembrance
How he oppressed by mighty violence
This famous cite called Florence.
By which story plainly thou shall se
Which were friends and foes to the cite.
And which were able to be excused
If the troth be clearly apperceyued,
And which were worthy to be refused
By whom the cite full falsely was disceiued:
The cyrcumstaunce notably conceived
To reken in order by every side
Which should be chaced and which should abide
The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
How duke Gaulter of Florence for his tirannye lechery and couetyse ended in
myschefe.

ANd when Bochas knew all thentencion
Of the said Daunt, he cast him anon right
To obey his master as it was reason,
Took his pen and as he cast his sight
Alite aside he saw no manner wight
Save duke Gaulter of all the long day,
For Daunt unawarely vanished was away.
This said Gaulter bruely to perocede
Like as it is put in remembrance,
Touching his line and his royal kynrede
He was descended of the blood of France,
By long process and knightly purueyaunce
His father first by diligent labor
Of Athenes was lord and governor.
Stood but a while in clear possession,
Greeks to him had full great envy,
Cast of assent to put him down
And de prive him of his famous duchy,
To their intent a layser they did espy:
Took him at mischefe, quaking in his dread
Of hie dispyte in haste smyt of his head.
Upon whose death avenged for to be
This said Gaulter with mighty apparayle
Cast he would asiege that cite,
But of his purpose long he did fail:
And in this while with many strong battle
Two mighty prices were come down of Pise,
Laid a siege to Luke in full knightly wise.
Florentines to Luke were favorable,
And to deliver the siege from the town
With multitude almost innumerable
Made ordinance, and knightly came down,
Which turned after to their destruction:
For it fell so of mortal adventure
On Florentines fyl the discomfiture.
The noise and fame of this great battle
Began sprede far by report of langage
In Lombardy and in Itayle,
Monge soudiours lusty of courage,
And among other fayning a pylgrimage
The said Gaulter by unware violence,
Came fro Naples down in to Florence.
The Florentines held first a parliament
For the salvation and guard of their cite,
By great prudence and great auisement
Of such as were highest of degree,
By one assent they gave the soueraynte
Them to govern hopyng to their increace,
With statutes made both for werre and peace.
The greatest states rulers of the town
Called Magnates tho days in sothnes
To Gaulter gave this dominacion,
Of intent the commons to oppres:
And merchants to spoil, their of riches,
Streyne men of craft by froward violence
Again their lybertees used in Florence.
The people always in awayte lying
To be restored unto their lyberte,
Began grutche sore among themself plaining
For great extorcion done to their cite:
The greatest also of most auctorite
Had lever to suffer Gaulter reign,
Than their actions to modify or restrain.
The said Gaulter in full subtle wise
By a false manner of symulacion
Enemy in heart unto their fraunchyse,
All that he wrought for short conclusion
Was done only to their destruction,
With a pretense feigned of frendlyhede
To his promise contrary aye was the deed.
Clambe up by process to full hie estate
By feigned speech and subtle flattery,
In his heart wext pompous and elate
His working outward no man could espy:
Lyte and littel drough to his party,
That to conclude shortly for to sey
All Florence his lusts did obey.
Began subtelly please the commonte
For to accomplysh falsely his desyers,
Made promise to encreace their liberte:
To such as were froward of manners
Made an oath to distroy their officers
But they would of their fre volunte
Grant unto him larger lyberte,
Gretter power and dominacion.
To encreace his might on every side
Began manace the grettest of the town,
And day by day encreace in his pride:
Felly he began felly he did abide
Thereupon, kept close in their entrayle
The Florentines greatly began marvel.
In this while there was one Reymere
Of great auctorite and of great reverence,
A mighty sergeant and a great officere,
To whose bidding obeyed all Florence,
Which with Gaulter accorded in sentence
With soudiours had stuffed each hostry,
For to sustene of Gaulter the party.
And traytourly for to fortifye
The intent of Gaulter fell and ambycious,
To have the state only by tyranny
As their chief lord froward and surquedous.
To reign in Florence the case peryllous:
When two tyrauntes both of one assent
With multitude to accomplish their intent.
Which thing considred by their governors
And Magnates called in the cite,
When they found among them no socours
To remedy their great aduersite,
Fill to accord of necessite:
Gave their assent without variaunce
That Gaulter should have al y^ governance.
And condiscended they were to this issue
That Gaulter should in all his best wise
Upon the body be sworn of Christ Jhesu
Them to restore unto their fraunchyse
Used of old, and for no couetyse
From their promise for life ne death decline,
As the conuencion list to termine.
Herupon was blow a trompet
For to assemble the states of the town,
A parlyament was holden Gaulter first set
Holy to pronounce the conuencion,
With every percell entytled by reason
Like their accord declaring anonright
Stood up a vocate in the peoples sight.
With men of Arms in steel armed bright
Unto their palayes chief and principal
The said Gaulter conveyed anonright,
Set in a seat most stately and royal:
And the people with voice memorial
Began cry loud concluding in sentence
Gaulter for ever chief lord of Florence.
Who to persevere during all his life
Took in the palayes full possession,
There durst none again it make strife
Granted to him the domina^^^
Of all the castles about enuyron:
Tuscan, Areth, and castle Florentine,
With all lordshippes to mount Appenyne.
As ye have herd Gaulter thus began
By his own furious diuinayle,
Said he was borne to be lord of Tuskan
And a great party also of Itayle,
Told he was lad and conuayed by a quail:
Said evermore were it right or wrong
That was the sentence of the birds song.
The same bird brought him first to Florence
All the way before him took his flight,
With sote synging did him reverence
Hye in the air of courage glad and light,
would never part out of his sight:
Gave him tokens to set his heart afyre,
That of Florence he should be lord and sire.
The same bird he bare in his diuyses
Full rychely enbrauded with pyrre,
Took upon him many great emprises
As chief lord of Florence the cite:
Sat in judgment governed the country,
Drew to him flaterers and folk y^ could lie
Baudes and ribaudes where he might the^ spy.
Of that cite took meruaylous truages,
Croched to him richesse of the town,
Of lechery used great outrages,
Of maidens and wives made none excepcion:
Void of mercy grace and remissyon
Found quarrel for to be vengeable,
That to reherce it is abhomynable.
Where he hated mercylesse he slay the,
Brake fraunchyses and old lybertees,
The people plained, desired sore his death,
Cried vengeance about their citees,
For tyranny done in their countrees:
Which was cause of great discencion
And of their city almost subuercion.
Thus they were among the^ self divided
For their grievous sudden oppression,
Lack of foresight y^ they were not provided
To se mischeues that should fall in the town:
This is very sothe where is diuysion
By wytnes and record of Scripture,
May no kingdom nor cite long endure.
For which they began complain one and all
Both of the great and comonte,
And of accord among them self they fall
To refourme the hurt of their cite,
And finally they condiscended be
By a manner fell coniuracion
To proceed to his destruction.
Upon a day they armed in steel bright
Magnates first with commons of the town
All to assent rose up anon right,
Began to make an hidous sown,
Let slay this tyrant, let us pull him down:
Laid a siege by mighty violence,
Aforne his palace, where he lay in Florence.
Such as were enclyned to Gaulter
Amyd the palais the story does us learn,
To eschew the siege with full heavy chere
Ordained them self to fly away full yerne:
Out of the town by a small posterne,
When Florentines did their labor
To undermine round about the tour.
Of which thing when Gaulter took head
This message sent unto the town,
Not of troth but fayningly for dread
Made promise by false collusion
For to make full restitucion
Of their fredoms, as they list deuyse
Sent them out Guyllamine Dassyse.
Which to the cite was proved utter foe
Had aforne done them great damage,
With Guyllamyne, he sent to them also
His son and he ire to stint al their rage,
Worse than his father of will and of courage
Both at ones were hanged anon right
Tofore the palace in Gaulters sight.
Another also that called was Henry
Which had before year instruction
Unto Gaulter, and was eke enemy
To stire him again that noble town,
Gynner and ground of their diuysion
Which tofore Gaulter his judgment to show,
With sharp swords he was all to hew.
The execucion done upon these thr^
In Tuskan borne, the rancour did apease
Of Florentines, to staunche the cruelte
Again Gaulter, and to his life great ease:
He glad to escape out of his disease
Fled away in full secret wise,
The town restored again to their frau^chyse.
Thus he lost by his insolence
All his power and dominacion
Both of Tuskan and also of Florence,
And as mine auctour makes mention
Fro Lombardy he is descended down:
Drew to king John reigning tho in France,
And of birth full nigh of alyaunce.
As I find he was on that party
With king Ihon this Gaulter like a knight,
When that the king with all his chiualry
Was take him self his lords put to flighte,
Into England lad after anon right:
The said Gaulter having no regard
To his worship fled like a cowarde.
Met in his flight with diverse soudyours
Of Lombardy abiding with king John,
Which that time as brygantes and pyllours
Took this Gaulter led him forth anon,
His force his courage his heart was agone,
Of adventure a certain Florentine
Smit of his head this was his fatal fine.
The.xxxv. Chapter.
Of Philipot Cathenoise borne of low birth, which came unto great estate, and
after she, her son and her daughter were brent.

BEspraynt with tears and woeful noise
Tofore Bochas quaking in sorrow and dread,
Next in order came Philipot Cathenoyse,
Poor of degree borne of low kynrede,
Which rose after to great estate in deed:
And began with sorrow and complaint full mortal
Seriously to tell her woeful fall.
Touching her birth derke was her lineage,
Of poor bed borne on outher side,
Bochas was loathe to spend great langage
On her history long thereon to abide,
Purposed him nothing for to hide
Of the substance, but tell all the great
And superfluite of the remenaunt to leat:
Which was reherced by him in his youth
When he was toward Robert of Cecyle
King of Jerusalem the storye is not couth,
Yet in his book he list it compyle,
And it reherce by full sovereign style
Like in that court as it was to him told
By one Bulgare called in slauaine old.
The said Bulgare was a marynere
With him also was a Calabrien
Called Constantine, which full many a year
Travailed had and sundry things seen
In diverse countries there he had been,
Monge other things seen in days old
This was a story which Bulgare told.
Duke of Calabre Robert by his name
By his father Charles the mighty king
Had in commandment, y^ storye says the same
Gain Frederike to make a strong ryding:
Which by force proudly usurping
Took upon him to be lord of that isle
Which called was the kingdom of Cicyle.
Depranne in sothe called was the town
Where duke Robert his pauyllions pight,
Rode armed through his hie renown
Gain Frederike for the land to fight,
And to withstand him plainly if he might,
And so be fill the morrow before prime,
The dukes wife of childing bode her time.
Violaunt men did that lady call
In her time a famous great duchess,
Destitute of other women al
When her child was borne in that distress,
To give it souke the story does express:
Save for mischefe Philipot was fet nere
Of Cathenoyse the dukes chief laundere.
By a fysher which was her husband
A child she had living by their travail,
Which fro the sea unto the court by land
Day by day carried vitaile,
And in this case be cause it might avail
Philipot was brought in this great straytnesse
To be norice unto the duchess.
Where she was cherished after her desires,
Each thing ready when that ever she sent,
With the duchess among other chambrers
In to Naples I find that she went,
Till Atropose froward of intent
Made of this child there is no more to say,
The lives threde for to break in tway.
With king Charles of who^ I spoke toforne
As mine au^tour remembers in his book,
Was one Raymond of Champayne borne,
Which with the king was called master coke
And on a day his journey he took
Toward the sea, a pyrate as I find,
Sold him a child which was bornei^ Inde.
Like Ethiopiens was his color,
For who^ this coke Raymonde has devised
For in his notable diligent labor
Made him christen and so he was baptized,
Gave him the name and also practysed
Him to promote, that he upon him took
By his doctrine to be master coke.
For he sone after took the order of a knight,
The Ethiopien wext a good officere
Gate such grace in the kings sight
To be about him more nere
By process he was made wardyopere,
And though he was black of his visage
To Cathenoyse he was joined in marriage.
Wexte malyperte and of presumpcion
To be made knight y^ king he began requere,
Which of fredom and great affection
Is condiscended to grant his prayere,
But to declare plainly the manner
In this time Violaunt the duchess,
Before remembered dyed of sickness.
After whose death books does certifye
How duke Robert of Naples the cite
Wedded a Lady that called was Sausye,
To whom Philipot as fill to her degree
With diligence and great humilite
To please her did so her deuer,
That of counsel there was none so nere.
Ever ready at her commandment
Wrought atyres plesaunt of delight,
With holsom waters that were redolent
To make her skyn by washing sote and white:
Made confections to serve her appetyte:
By her husband, the story who list se,
The same Philipot had children three.
She was connyng and of her port prudent,
Chosen by favor for to be maystresse
To fair Jane young and innocent
Which daughter was to the great duchess
Of Calabre, and furthermore to express
Her husband the Ethyopyen withal
Of Charles household was made seneschall.
O lord (quod Bochas) spoke of hie disdain
What meneth this fortune for to make chere
With her favor to raise up a forayne
Upon her whele with bright feathers clear,
But of custom it is aye her manner
Fairest to appear with chere and countenance
When she will bring a man unto mischau^ce.
For he that was a boy the last day,
An Ethiopien borne, and horrible of sight
And before time in the kechyn lay
Among the pottes, with baudy cote anight,
Now of new has take the order of knight
With king Charles is now seneschall,
Such sudden climbing asks a sudden fall.
He and Philipot his wife fro pouerte
Be enhaunced and rissen to great richesse,
Two of their sons stately married be,
And he for favor more than worthynesse
To order of knight, and in his most highness
Their father died whose feast funeral
Was solempnysed and hold full royal.
Thus can fortune change as the moon,
Her bright face derked with a sky:
His eldest son dyed after sone
The second left up his clergy.
To be made knightlgan him self apply,
Stood of his father plainly as I read
In his office, by favor to succeed.
Thus by process fro Philipot anonright
Death of her husband and her sons twain
Fortune in party eclypsed has the light,
Of her welfare, and began at her disdain:
Yet even like as when it does rain
Phoebus after shows more clerenesse,
So she fro trouble, rose to more nobles.
I mean as thus, rehersyng no virtue
In her person that men could espy,
But only this by title of this issue
When Charles daughter on that party
Was to the king wedded of Hungrye
Called Andree, a man of great courage
He said his wife but right tender of age.
The same Jane not without vice
As is rehearsed somewhat by mine auctour,
To whom Phylipot whylom was norice
As ye have herd and by full great labor
Of the said Jane Robert made governor
Son of Phylipot for a great reward,
Made of Cecyle and of that land steward.
This favor done to Philipot Cathenoyse
Caused in that land great indignacion,
Whose daughters weddi^g caused great noise
Married to charles the great earl of Marchon
which gave to folk great occasion
To deem amysse about in each country
That all y^ land was governed by tho three
By queen Jane and Phylipot Cathenoyes
And the said Robert steward of Cecyle
Son to Philipot, this was the common vois,
The Queen and Robert by their subtle wyle
Had of assent used a long while
The hateful sin of aduoutry,
Rose in Cecyle and went up to Hungry.
For Queen Jane began no manner thing
But Cathenoyse assented were thereto,
The execucion and fully the working
Brought to conclucion by Robert al was do:
And in this time rose a great strife also
Disclaunderous and a froward discord,
Atwene the queen and him that was her lord.
Hard to proceed upon suspection,
Sclaunder is swift lightly takes his flight,
For which men should eschew the occasion
Of fame and noise of every manner wight,
By providence, remembered in his sight
When the report is through a land run
Hard it is to stint it when it is begone.
Withstand principles occasions to decline,
Lest unawarely there follow great damage,
To late comes the salve of medicine
To festred sores when they be incurable*
And in case very resemblable
To eschew sclau^der who list not for to spare,
May not fail to fall into the snare.
Thus for a time the slander was kept close
Albeit so it did for a while abide,
Another mischief full pitously arose
Which afterward spread abroad full wide,
Aduoutry to murder is a very gyde:
Set at a priefe mine auctour does record
The king Andre was strangled with a cord.
Out of his chamber raised a great heyght
By a coniected false conspiracion,
He was entreated, brought down by sleyght
After strangled as made is mention,
Whose death to punish by commission
Hugh earl of Anelyne by a patent large
To be judge took upon him the charge.
Of this murder rose up a great noise
By evidence full abominable,
Philipot called Cathenoyse
Her son and daughter that they were culpable:
Dome was give by Judges full notable,
And to conclude shortly their judgment,
With chains bound at stakes they were brent.
Lenuoy*
This Tragedy before rehearsed here
Tells the damage of presumption,
By experience rehersyng the manner
When beggars rise to dominacion
Is none so dredeful execucion
Of cruelte, if it be well out sought,
Than of such one as came up of naught.
Record on Philipot that with humble chere
By sudden favor and supportacion,
Which was to fore a simple small landere
Of no value nor reputacion,
By fortunes gery tra^smutacion
Shed out her malice testate when she was brought,
List not consider how she came up of naught.
Where is more disdain or more daungere
Or more froward communicacion,
More vengeable venim does appear,
Nor more sleyghty false supplantacion
Nor more conspired unware collusion,
Nor undermining done covertly and wrought,
Than of such folk as come up of naught.
Fortunes chaunges and meuinges circulere
With her most stormy transmutacion,
Now one set up full hie in the sphere,
Enhaunceth vices and virtues put down:
Record on Philipot whose venomous treason
Compassed aforne in her secret thought
The deed shows yt she came up of naught.
Noble princes with your bright eyes clear
Advertise in your discretion
That no flaterer come in your court so nere,
By no fraud of false disception,
Always remembering before in your reason
On this tragedy and on this treason wrought,
By a false flatter that came up of naught.
The.xxxvi. Chapter.
How king Sauses was slain by his cousin which was brother unto the king of
Aragon.

THe that time came of this travail
Bochas dempt holding for the best
This noble Poet of Florente and Itayle
To make his pen a while for to rest,
Closed his book and shut it in his chest,
But or he might sparre it with the key
Came three princes and mekely began him prey
Among other remembered in his book
Their greuaunces briefly to declare,
Wherewith Bochas began cast up his look
And of compassion beheld their pitous fare:
Thought he would for no slouthe spare
To their requests goodly condiscende
And of his book so for to make an end.
Here began first rehearse by writing
In his complaynt full pitously he made
Touching the fall of the great king
Called Sauses, which his soiour had
The place named was Astrociade
And as he writ, a little there beside
Was alytle I Will called Emaside.
Both these Isles together knit in one
Where Sauses had his dominacion,
Living in peace enemy had he none
In long quiet had possession:
Whose kingdom hole, as made is mention
In the vulgar mine auctour write the same
Of Malliogres plainly bare the name.
There is also another smaller isle
Called Maylorge, and of both twayn
The said king was lord a great while,
Keeping his estate notable and sovereign:
Having a cosyn began at him disdain,
Which was brother as made is mention
Unto the king that time of Aragon.
In the yles remembered by wryghtinges
When the people went in to battle,
Was the usage found up first of stinges
With cast of stones their enemies to assail:
They had of shot none other apparayle
In that time, arblast nouther bow,
Perauenture was tho but little know.
All these countries were called but one land
Where Sawses held possession,
Till his cosyn with strong and mighty hand
With great power suddenly came down,
Brought people out of Arragon,
Fill on king Sawses feeble of diffence
Gate that kingdom by knightly violence,
The balaunce was not of even peys
Atwene these cosyns, who list take heed,
For in his conquest the Arragoneys
Of cruelte has smytten of the head
Of king Sawses quakinge in his dread,
Though it stood so they were nygh of alye
There was that day showed no curtesy.
The.xxxvii. chapter.
How Jews king of Jerusalem and Cecile was put down.

AFter this Story told in words few
And king Sawses slain by tyranny,
There came a prince and began his face show
Called Jews lord of Trynacry,
The same isle in that party
Called Cythane the story tells thus,
After the name of king Siculus.
Trinacry a country merueylous
Took first his name of famous hills three,
The chief of them is called Pe^orus
The next Pathmus the third Lyllybe,
Not far from Ethua the said hills be
Beside a sea full perilous and ylle,
With two dangers Caribdis and Scille.
The said Jews king of Jerusalem
And of Cecile the book makes mention,
Which was chased and put out of his realm
By another Jews and put down,
Ended in pouerte for short conclusion:
This last Jews of pite did him grace
Till he died to have a dwelling place.
The.xxxviii. Chapter.
How king John of France at Poyters was taken prisoner by prince Edward, and
brought into England.

NExt of all and last of euerychone,
Cursyng Fortune with all her variaunce,
Making his complaynt; to Bochas came king John,
Told his tale how he was take in France
By prince Edward for all his great puissau^ce,
And after with strong and mighty hand,
He was fro Poyters brought into England.
Before distroyed his castles and his towns
And overthrown manly in battle,
His princes slain, their baners and penouns
Nor broad standers might them not avail:
The trace out sought spoiled of plate and maile
Maugre his might king John was prisoner,
In England after abode full many a year.
Set afterward to full great raunson
The worthy slain on the French party,
The same time in Brutes Albion
There floured in such noblesse and chyualry,
With high prudence and prudent policy:
Mars and Mercury above each nation
Governed that time Brutus Albion.
Mars for knighthode their patron i batraile
And Mynerua gave them influence
Meynt with brightness of plate and mayle,
To stour in clergy and in hie prudence
That prince Edward by marciall violence
That day on live one the best knight
Brought home king John maugre all his might.
Though Bochas gave him favor by la^gage
His heart inclined to that party,
Which unto him was but small advantage
Word is but wind brought in by envy,
For to hinder the famous chiualrye
Of English me^, full narow he began him think
Left spear and shield fought with pen and ynke.
Though the said Bochas floured in Poetry
His parcial writing gave no mortal wound,
Caught a quarrel in his melancoly
Which to his shame afterward did rebounde:
In conclusion like as it was found
Again king John a quarrel began to take
Cause that he would of English men be take.
Held them but small of reputacion
In his report, men may his writing see,
His fantasy nor his opinon
Stood in that case of none authorite:
Their king was take, their knights did flee,
Where was Bochas to help the^ at such need?
Save with his pen he made no man to blede.
Of right wisnesse every croniculer
Should in his writing make no exception,
Indifferently convey his matter
Not be perciall of none affection,
But gyf the thank of mortal guerdon
His style in order so egally observed,
To every party as they have deserved.
Laud of king John was that he abode,
In that he quit him like a manly knight,
His lords slain some away they rode,
Most of his meyny took them to the flight:
This journey take for king Edwardes right,
The feelde y won have this in memory
Trouthes hold has gladly the victory.
Of king John what should I write more
Brought to this land with other prisoners?
Upon which the realm complained sore
By rehearsayle of old Croniclers,
Died in England within a few years,
Led home again after their writings
Lies at S. Denis with other kings.
Lenuoye.
OF Bochas book the last tragedye
Compendiouslye put in remembrance
How prince Edward with his chiualrye
Fought at Poiters with king John of France,
And through his mighty Marciall puysau^ce
Grounded his quarrel upon his fathers right,
Took him prisoner full like a manly knight.
By collusion king John did occupye
Set out of order the royal aliaunce,
Scepter and crown with all the regalye
Was down descended to Edward i^ substance,
Conveyed ye branches by lineall concordaunce:
For which title grounded upon right
Prince Edward fought like a manly knight.
His claim and quarrel more to fortify,
In token y^ god his quarrel would auaunce
Discomfiture was made on that party,
Upon king John by violent vtraunce
An heavenly sign by influent purueyaunce
Sent from above to show Edwardes right
For which ye prince fought like a ma^ly knight.
Noble princes your hearts do apply
Justly to way this matter in balaunce,
All thing paysed ye m^ it not deny
If ye consider every circumstaunce
In right Judges may be no variaunce:
The field d^rreyued deem who has right
For which ye prince fought like a ma^ly knight.
Thing of assent put in ieopardy,
And committed to Gods ordinance,
There may be after no contrauersy
Atwene party, quarrel, nor distaunce,
Who shall rejoice, and in this case stood France
Since at Poyters declaring who has right
Prince Edward fought like a manly knight.
Here Bochas makes a rehearsayl how Fortune has made high estates unawarely
to discende.
LEt folk of wisdom consider in their wit
Gather up a sum and count in their reason
To all estates how Fortune has her quit,
To popes prelates gyn first in Rome town,
To cardinals most sovereign of renown,
When they sat hiest could them not defend
Again Fortune by no proivsion,
But with a turn she made them to diseend.
After in order call to remembrance,
The state imperial of famous emperors,
Which as Appollo through their puyssaunce
Their fame up blow to Jupiters tours,
And forget not these old conquerours
Above Mercury cast them to ascend,
Till that fortune with her froward shours
Most suddenly made them to discende.
Kings and princes of diverse regions,
In Asye, Europe, Affrike, and Cartage,
Of Ethiope the marciall champions,
Monsters of Inde hydous of visage,
Athlas, Hercules, i^ their most furious rage,
Against whose might no man could hi^defe^de
What followed from their highest stage?
Fortune unawarely made them to discende.
Priests, prelates, and well fed fat persons,
And patriarchs that had great soueraynte
Reken up religions with al their broad crowns
Bishops, abbottes, confyrmed in their see,
Behold of fortune the mutabylite
Seculere chanons with many great prebende,
when they sat highest in their felycite
How suddenly she made them to discende.
All yt is written is written to our doctrine,
One courbeth low another gothe upright,
Some be vicious some in virtue shine,
Phoebus now clipsed sometime shyneth bright,
Sometime cloudy sometime sterlight,
Some folk appayre some does amend,
Show of Fortune the power and the might
One goth upward another does discende.
Some man holy increases in virtue,
Another rechelesse of froward wilfulness,
One is perfect and stable in Christ Jesu,
Another braydeth upon frowardness,
One increases with treasour and richesse,
Who list thrive to labor must attend
Maugre the world Fortunes doubleness
Does one arise, another does discende.
One is busy and sets ail his labor
Early to arise his good to multiply,
Another spends, and is a great wastou^
Some tree is barayn some tree does fructifye,
One can say sothe another can well lie,
One can gather another can dispende,
Unto fortune this matter does apply
She makes one to arise, another to disce^de
All these matters combined into one
Of which this book makes mention,
Void the wede, of virtue take the corn
As reason teaches in your discrecion:
And for to make a short conclusion
In a brefe sum this b(...)o comprehend,
Fortunes whele by reuol^^ion
Does one clymbe up, another to descend.
The words of the translatour.
W(...) letters and leaves this little book tre^bling
Pray to the prince, to have on the pity,
V^^^e of all picture and enlumynyng
W^^^h have of Cicero no curious dyte,
(...) of his gardayne no flowers of beauty,
(...)grant grace thy rudeness not offend
(...)high noblesse and magnanymyte
(...)s presence, when thou shall ascend.
And for my part of one heart abiding
(...)de of change and mutabylite,
(...) present this book with hand shaking
Of hole affection knelyng on my kne,
Praying the lord one, two, and three,
Whose magnificence no clerk may co^prehe^de
Send you might grace and prosperity
Ever in virtue to encreace and ascend.
To kiss y^ steps of the^ that were furtheri^g
Laureat poets which had soueraynte
Of eloquence, to supporte thy making:
And pray all tho that shall this process se
In thine excuse that they list to be,
And where it is amysse for to amend
Set thy ground upon humylite
Unto their grace that thou may ascend.
In a short clause thy content rehersyng
As one up clymbeth to great prosperity,
So another by expert knowlegyng
From great richesse is brought to pouerte:
Alas (O book) what shall I say of the?
Thy tragedyes through all y^ world to send.
Go forth I pray excuse thy self and me,
Who loves most virtue highest shall ascend.
Black be thy wede of co^playnt and mourni^g,
Called fall of princes from their felycite,
Like Chaunteplure now singing now weping,
Woe after mirth, next joy aduersyte,
So entremedled there is no suerte:
Like as this book does praise and co^prehende,
Now on the whele now set in low degree,
Who will encreace by virtue must ascend.
The end of Bochas Volumes.

