Numb. 2^^ Mercurius Publicus: COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence;
WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland; and Ireland. For
Information of the People. Published by Order. From Thursday July 5. to
Thursday July 12. 1660.
Westminster.
HIs Majesty has been pleased to make Sergeant Tho. Twisden a member of this
Parliament, one of the Justices of the Court of the Kings Bench, a person for
his learning and loyalty sufficiently known to the Nation, in consideration
whereof his Majesty was also graciously pleased to confer upon him the honor
of Knighthood.

Blaye, June 30. 1660.
The 27 instant, their Majesty's at their coming out of Bourdeaux, passing
before Boury, a great number of Guns were shot off. About two in the afternoon
they arrived here, and were received with the like shooting off our Cannon,
both of the Town, and of the Ships that are upon our road, and with great
acclamations of the people, who were ravished to see the King and the Queen,
who is admired wheresoever she comes. The Duke of St. Simon our Governor
presented unto them upon the Port the Mayor and the Magistrates, who made a
speech to the Princess, the King and the Queen Mother, giving her in all places
where they came, all the honors and respects of the people. The said Duke
presented likewise to his Majesty the keys of this place, which the King gave
him again presently, with expressions of esteem and trust suitable to his
fidelity and service. The Cardinal Mazarin being come an hour after, he was
likewise received by our Governor upon the Port, and accompanied to the
Castle, where he had his lodgings. The Duke did most magnificently entertain
the whole Court. The next day about five a clock in the morning, the King with
the Cardinal went for Brouage, our Governor went with them as far as one of
his own houses, where he gave the King the divertisement of hunting, and the
Queens took their journey by the way of Jonzac and Xaintes, to go to St. Jean
de Angele, where the King is to meet them.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Leather Portmanteais lost at Sittingburn or Rochester, when his Maje^ty came
thither, wherein was a suit of Camolet de Holland, with 2 little lace^ in a
s^am^g^ pair of white loves, and a pair of Does lether, about twenty yards of
(...) colored Ribbon (...) penny broad, and a whole pit of black Ribbon ten
penny broad (...) cloth lead colored cloak, with store of linen, a pair of
shoes, slippers, d Montero, and other things; all which belong to a Gentleman
(a near Servant to his Majesty) who has been too long imprisoned and
Sequestered, to be now robbed, when all men hope to enjoy their own. If any can
give notice, they may leave word with Mr. Samuel Me^^^ his Majesty's
Book-binder, at his house in Little-Britain, and they sh^ld be thankfully
rewarded.

Sir John VVitterong, who had disbursed several great sums of money upon many
of his Majesty's pictures, to preserve them from worse hands, did lately
present them all to his Majesty gratis.

Mr. Combs lately restored to his Majesty Land belonging to the Crown, which
he had purchased at a considerable value at Hemsted in Hertfordshire. The like
was done by the Town at the same time that had purchased the other part. His
Majesty was pleased to make Mr. Combs Steward thereof.

There is a particular List given unto his Majesty of the names of all such as
have bought his Majesty's Lands, and what they bought, whereby it may fairly be
expected that they will be as just to his Majesty as those honest Gent. of
Hertfordshire have been.

Hamburgh, June 17.
The Swede and Pole make themselves ready to fall on the Muscovite, who is much
distressed by the incursion of the Tartar, who falling into Russia, gave the
Muscovite a great overthrow, sacked and harras'd the Country, and carried away
many thousand slaves. On the other side the Cossacks are fallen in, destroying
all they meet with. The Muscovites that are hemmed in at Lochwith, it is thought
cannot get off without great loss, though the Muscovite dreins all his
Garrisons to make a body to relieve their Army there. The white Russians have
made a confederacy to join with the Pole against their Lord and Emperor of
Russia, as soon as the Pole shall march into the Field with a considerable
Army. The Polish General Carnetzky has defeated the Muscovy General Cowingzky,
and cut him off 7000 men, who is retreated with the rest toward the Wilda at
Lachowitz. There is a discourse here, that the Swede having yet his Fleet that
was kept in by Vice Admiral de Ruyter at liberty, will join with others at
Landscrown and Gottenburgh to infest Arch-Angelo and destroy the Muscovite
there. The Poles have taken Buckowa, which cost the Muscovites so many years
siege, so that Muscovy is now reduced to a very sad condition. They thirst
after peace, which if not granted them, they threaten to cut their Governor
Nassorkin in pieces, and extirpate his whole Generation.

Whitehall.
On Wednesday the fourth of July, the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and capital
Burgesses of the corporation of Doncaster, in the County of York, having the
honor to be introduced to his Majesty by the Earl of Dun freeze* Lord
Castleton, and Sir John Dawney, for a demonstration of their loyalty, duty and
affection to his Majesty, humbly presented by the hands of Thomas Bradford
their Mayor, a congratulatory Address, wherein they returned all possible
thanks to Almighty God, who had been graciously pleased to restore his Majesty
to his people, and his people to his Majesty's Government, engaging themselves
to defend his Majesty's sacred person and Government against all opposers, and
therewith the Mayor tendered a surrender of a Fee-farm rent of 74 l. 13 s. 11
d. ob per annum, an ancient Flower of the Crown, which being in these times
exposed to sale, they had redeemed out of other hands, and now joyfully
restored them to his Majesty, both which his Majesty was pleased very
graciously to accept of, and returned them thanks, with many particular
expressions of affection and favor to that Town. The same day Doctor Byam, a
person of great learning and integrity, who attended his sacred Majesty in his
troubles, as long as his age did enable him to travel, was this day sworn
Chaplain Extraordinary to his Majesty.

On Thursday his Sacred Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament* were
entertained by the City of London at Guild Hall* the unseasonable weather took
off much of the solemnity which was intended to be performed, so that his
Majesty went into London attended only by his own household guards, which
proceeded in this order, Adjutant General Miller rode before at some little
distance to make way after whom went Sir William Thr^okmo^n, now
Knight-Marshal, his footmen and servants ^raiting ^n either side of him, before
six Trumpets, then a Kuttle-Drum, another Class of seven Trumpets, six Maces,
the Heralds in rich coats, the pages and footmen, and next his Majesty's Coach
with six horses, guarded on both sides with his Majesty's Royal Band of
Pensioners (walking on foot with their pistols in their hand, under the Command
of the most noble and val^ant E. of Cleaveland their Captain) the Equires and
several of his Majesty's servants, next them came the Yeomen of the Guard, then
the Lord Chancellor in his Coach* the Duke of Buckingham in his, and so all the
Nobility in their order. The Speaker of the House of Commons in his Coach and
six horses, attended by a troop of horse that were upon their guard that day*
and after him the House of Commons in Coaches. In London several of the
pent^houses and windows were adorned with Tapestry, a lane* made by the
Liveries of the several Companies, and many Pageants in the streets. In St.
Paul's Churchyard, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and several others of the City
richly accounted met his Majesty, and from thence conducted him to Guild Hall.
The Gentlemen of the Artillery led by the most valiant and learned John Lord
Lucas, at Cheapside opened to the right and left* and guarded both sides of the
way whilst his Majesty passed through. Being come to Guild Hall, Carnets were
spread from the Hall down to the Council Chamger for his Majesty to tr^d on.
Before dinner Sir William Wild the Recorder made a Speech to his Majesty,
declaring the great honor that his Majesty was pleased to bestow on them in
deigning formerly to send to them his most gracious Letter and Declaration, and
now to add to that kindness, by affording them his Royal presence, etc. At the
upper end of the great Hall, the Hosting toward the West was raised three
ascents, where was placed a Chair of State, and a rich Canopy, where his
Majesty and his two Royal Brothers dined, where his Majesty's servants, and
several Aldermen and Common Council-men attended.

The House of Peers, and House of Commons dined at other tables in the great
Hall, attended likewise by Aldermen and Common-Council-men; at the sound of the
loud music the whole service was set on the Table, and during the whole dinner
time they were entertained with variety of music, both instrumental and vocal.

After dinner was a very costly banquet, and then an interlude, where a Rustic
was represented, to the content of his Majesty, and the rest of the spectators.

After this his Majesty retired him into a withdrawing room, where he was
pleased to confer the honor of Knighthood on Alderman Reynoldson, Mr. Cleyton,
the Chamberlain of London, and Col^nel Player his son.

On Friday July 6. The Mayor and Citizens of the ancient City of Lincoln,
having drawn up an humble Address to his Majesty, together with a resignation
of their Fee-farm rent of 81 l. per annum under their Common Seal, did send the
same by Robert Marshal Esquire and William ^outh Gent. unto Sir Tho. Meres and
John Monson Esquire who now serve in Parliament for the said City, which was this
day delivered.

After a Speech first made by Sir Tho. Meres unto his Sacred Majesty, in behalf
of the City of Lincoln, representing unto his Majesty how often and how much that
City had suffered in the late War, and how loyal and faithful, the Citizens
thereof do continue unto his Majesty, and that as the want of his Majesty's
Government was their decay, so he being peaceably reestablished, they hope to
repair their losses under his protection and savor, he delivered his Majesty
this Address.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
YOur Majesty's most obedient Subjects, the Mayor, Sheriffs, Citizens and
Commonalty of your Majesty's ancient City of Lincoln, do humbly prostrate
themselves before your Majesty, acknowledging that through the general
defection of your Majesty's Subjects in this your Kingdom from their
Allegiance, occasioned by the prevalency of the late pretended powers, they
were therein involved with the rest of your Majesty's Subjects; and therefore
do most humbly and submissively apply themselves, and lay hold on your
Majesty's most gracious Pardon, and through and under your Majesty's gracious
favor and clemency do with all humility, as a body incorporate, present to
your Majesty their sense and apprehension of Gods mercy to your Majesty's
Subjects (giving God the praise) that Divine Providence has not only
preserved your sacred person in the midst of many and eminent dangers, but
likewise has made restoration of your Majesty in peace to your Subjects, and
of them to their Allegiance to your most gracious Majesty, as their undoubted.
Sovereign, next they present their hopes and prayers for prosperity and
blessings from Almighty God upon your sacred Majesty, and your Government over
them as their King, and beg your protection of their persons and estates by the
ancient and known Laws of your Kingdom, and your Majesty's aforesaid City of
Lincoln, and the incorporate body thereof do with all humble submission to your
Majesty acknowledge, that during the prevalency of the late pretended powers
over them, and the rest of your Subjects, to avoid the mischiefs and pressures
which in all probability might have occurred, i^ the (...) from your said City
had come into the hands and power of (...) have made use of the purchase of it,
to have inv^ded their (...) and interests. Your aforesaid City upon the account
of inevitable (...), and self-preservation, were constrained to borrow the sum
of seven hundred pounds, wherewith to purchase the aforesaid Fee-farm of eighty
and one pounds per annum.

Now may it please your most Excellent Majesty, your aforesaid Subjects, the
Mayor, Sheriffs, Citizens and Comonalty of the City of Lincoln, do hereby for
themselves and their Successors, freely and humbly surrender and resi^n unto
your most Sacred Majesty, all the right and interest which they have or may
pretend to the said Fee-farm rent, by reason of the aforesaid purchase: And do
also humbly declare, That your said City will yearly render to your Majesty, as
your undoubted right and due, from time to time, as it becomes payable; and
will further with all readiness ^^^ely do or make any further Declaration or
public Act* (...) but Majesty's Learned Council shall devise, for
confirmation of th^se presents, or contents of them.

And in testimony of the unanimous, full and fre^ consent of the whole body
incorporate of your Majesty's said City, they have caused to be put to their
common Seal, the six and twentieth day of June, in the twelfth year of your
Majesty's most gracious Reign over England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
(...)*


His Majesty was pleased most graciously to receive the Address, with several
expressions of favor* and then Sir Tho. Mores did a second time humbly upon
his (...) beseech his Majesty hereafter to vouchsafe his favor to that ancient
City* which his Majesty granted accordingly, and as an earnest thereof gave
them the honor of his Majesty's ^and.

At his Excellencies Quarters at the Cockpit.
His Excellency makes it his whole business to settle the Army, as may be most
to his Majesty's Service, and in order ^hereunto has removed several Officers,
and put others in their places. He has lately removed Capt. Pease and Capt.
Charleton of Col. Alson's Regiment* belonging to the Garrison of Dunkirke, and
put Capt. Pope and Capt. Richard ^owel in their places.

There is a very confident report that M. Scot, one that sat in the pretended
High Court of Justice, for trial of his late Majesty of ever-blessed memory, is
now Prisoner at Dunkirke.

This day Tho. Terryll of the Inner Temple, and Christopher Turner of the
Middle Temple Esqs; were made Sergeants at Law.

Advertisements of Books, newly Printed and Published.
The dignity of Kingship asserted, etc.

The English Episcopacy and Lyturgy Af^e^^ed by the great Reformers abroad, and
the glorious and Royal Martyr King Charles the First, etc.

Solomon's Blessed Man, in a Sermon Preached at Newark upon Trent, May 29 1660.
being the Birthday of our S^v^raign Lord King Charles the Second. By Samuel
Bru^^sel, R^ctor of Bingham in Notinghamshire.

(...) sold by Henry Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.

A Book called the Fanatic History, or an Exact Relation of the old
Anabaptists, and the new Quakers, being the sum of all that has been yet
discovered about their most blasphemous Opinions, dangerous Practices, and
malicious Endeavors to subvert all Civil Government, both in Church and (...)
together with these and ^imle^ Pranc^^, and their ridiculous Actions and
Gestures, enough to amaze any sober Christian. Published with the Approbation
of diverse Orthodox Divines. Sold by John Symes at the sign of the Cross-Keys in
Paul's Church yard.

The Beatitudes, or a Discourse upon part of Christ's Famous Sermon on the
Mount. By Tho. Wa^son, Minister of the Word at ^. Stephens W^^brook in the City
of London. Sold by Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange.

The Idea of the Law, wherein is Charactered, the Form of Justice in all
Courts; whereunto is added the Idea of Governments (...) and Episcopal, and the
Idea of Tyranny explained and amplified by Oliver Cromwell, is now published,
for the satisfaction of all Gen^lemen of the Universities, Inns of Court and
Chancery. By the Author John Heydon Gent. and useful for all; it has been of
late privately preserved in the hands of the Loyally Noble, for fear of
Tyrants* but is now published, and to be sold in St. Dunstans Churchyard and
in Fleetstreet.

The Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which have lain dead for many years,
now taken by b^th Hou^es o^ Parliament, and (...) Offic^^s and Soldiers, and
are to be taken by all those that fear God, and honor the King, with some brief
Observations upon the said Oaths, for the humbling of those that are guilty of
the Breach of them, the q^^lling of Rebellious ^rinciples, and Excitement unto
the duties of Obedience and Subjection, according to the Tenor of the said
Oaths.

A Collection of Sundry Petitions presented to the late Kings most excellent
Majesty* as also to the two most honorable Houses assembled in Parliament,
signed by most of the Gentry, Ministers and Freeholders of several C^ua^ies, in
behalf of Episcopacy, Liturgy and Supportation of Church Revenues, and
suppression of Schismatics; collected by a faithful lo^er of the Church, for
the comfort of the dejected Clergy, and all moderately affected Protestants.
Both sold by William Shears at the Blew Bible in Bedford-street in Covent
Garden.

Milan the 16 of June 1660.
The Duke of Savoys forces lent to the Republic of Venice, passing upon the Po
through this State, the Duke of Sermonesa our Governor, has published a
Proclamation, forbidding, under very great penalties, to give any assistance or
relief to such soldiers as shall run away from their Colors. And until the
Express does return, which he has sent to Naples to hasten the money he is to
receive from thence, he has delivered his Orders for the Estapes for part of
the forces of the Milanez that are to be shipped at Final, and to pass into
Spain against the Portugal.

Old Aberdeen, July 2. 1660.
As Soon as the good news came to us of His Majesty's restoration, the Masters
and members of the Kings College in this University of Aberdeen, did testify
their Joy by singing of Psalms, ringing of Bells, Bonfires, and such other
jollities as are usual. But knowing that they were not only tied to his Majesty
as their lawful Sovereign King, but also by a nearer relation, as being only
Patron of that House, they thought it incumbent on them to give a more full
testimony of their real joy and praise to God for bringing home their Patron;
and therefore did a second time, being accompanied with the Provost, Bailiffs
and Council of Aberdeen, Sheriff and Commissary, with the Ministers and
Students, with many other Gentlemen, go to the great Church, which was of old
the Cathedral of Aberdeen, and there reverently hear their own Minister preach
a learned Thanksgiving Sermon, with great contentment to all the hearers. After
Sermon they all came by way of Procession from the Church to the College,
singing Psalms: Then one of the Professors of Divinity made an Oration in the
common School. The Magistrates of Aberdeen, with all other persons or quality,
were set in the middle of the Court near to the Fountain* before a Theater hung
all about with the Hangings which King James the Fourth bestowed upon the
College, with other Ornaments and Garlands, and Crowns of flowers of all
sorts, the Picture of the King was in the middle, and upon his left hand his
Excellency General Monck,, because the Speakers had in their Orations something
to speak as to them: The Stairs about, the Windows, and all the Court below,
were so full of Spectators, that I thought there had scarcely been so many
people in the parts about us. Upon this Theater were set all the Masters and
Students in order in their Gowns. In the first place, the Principal prayed and
praised God, and did show the hearers, that there were five young men, Students,
to speak in that place one after another; which was accordingly done; and
indeed they did it very gravely and reverently. The subject of their Oration
was as follows.

The first spoke of the great happiness which Scotland enjoyed under Kings,
since the days of Fergus the First, until the time of the late troubles. The
second spoke of the miseries the Nations suffered by the late Kings murder,
the present Kings removal from His just Rights and Dignities. The third spoke
of the praises due to his Excellency for restoring the King to His Kingdoms.
The fourth spoke of the great happinesses, and many favors bestowed upon the
University by Kings, and of the losses sustained by the interruption of Kingly
Government. The fifth had a gratulatory Oration for the Kings return. After
they had ended, there was a Latin Hymn of about eighty lines, very harmoniously
and cheerfully sung, and at the end of every fourth line, Vivat Rex, Carolus
vivat.

It is incredible to know how joyful the people of all ranks were, who were
present; the people of this poor Town did testify their unspeakable joy all
the night with Bonfires, ringing of Bells, playing on Musical Instruments, and
Dancings, yet without the least debauchery of drinkin; such an influence has
His Majesty's sobriety upon the people. All things were so carried, as best
showed their real duty to His Majesty, and good discipline of this place. Much
of the honor of this (though all were active enough) is due to that truly
learned Dr. More, Professor of Medicine here.

Advertisments of Books newly Printed and Published.
A Profitable and well grounded Concordance, both fitted for the meanest
Capacity, and very useful for general good; wherein may be readily found, the
chiefest words contained in the Scriptures, of 1^ 6 d Price.

Sau^day no Sabath, or the Seventh days Sabbath proved to be of no force to
the believing Gentiles, in the times of the Gospel, by the Law of Nature,
Moses, Christ, being our (...) of several Disputacion^ held at (...)-Chapel by
Paul's London, of 1 s. 6 d price. All sold by Francis Smith at the Elephant and
Castle without Temple Bar.

Advertisements.
ABout seven weeks since one Robert Witbread went away from his Master Thomas
Saywell Glafier, living at Chelmsford in Essex about 18 years old, Pretty thick
set, brown haird, his Clothes of a dark gray, his B^eches being patched
behind, he has on a whitish hat and a mingled pair of Stokings. Give notice to
Ab Church l^ne at the Kings head, and to Chelmsford aforesaid, and the persons
shall be well rewarded.

LOst on Thursday the 28 of June 1660. between 7. and 8. a Clock in the
morning, between the Blew Bores head in Kings street Westminster, and the
Bowling Alley. A waved R^pler with a black threded Hilt, (a great wire) silver
handle: If any person shall give notice thereof to Major Alsop Swood c^^l^^ at
the Cross keys below Fleet Cunduit, they shall be well rewarded for their p^in^.

AT Metealf Robinsons Esquire a Member of Parliament, on Whitson Monday last at his
Park at Newby in Yorkshire, these with their Accomplices, attempted to steal
his Dear, and killed his Keeper, viz. William ^^man, a tall slender black man
30 or 40 years old, Christopher Fish a tall big black man about the same age,
Marmaduke Horsemen, a slender Youth with fl^xen Hair, about 20 years old, they
lived in Ripp^n or near. Whosoever can apprehend them, or either of them, and
give notice to Metcalf Robinson Esquire as above, or to Edmond Rozers house at the
late Post in Sherbone-lane London, they shall be well rewarded for their pains.

LOst out of William Kinghams ground at West green in the Parish of Tat^am High
Cross, one brown b^y Gelding, having all his paces, a white blaze in the
Forehead, la^^ eared, some white on all his Feet, and on the Saddle place,
fourteen ^^nd high, six or seven years old. Give notice to Henry Goldsmith (the
owner) at Evershot in Bedfordshire, or to William Kingham aforesaid, or to
William Hopkins at the three Scags in Wapping, and the party shall be well
satisfied.

IF any one can secure or being Tidings of one Philip Meor, a Boy of sixteen
yea^s of Age, with long l^n^ bright hair, shor^ of stature, freckle faced, with
a Gray French Hat, who ran away from his Master, and is supposed to be gone
toward Gravesend, or to lie lurking about Town privately. If any can apprehend
him, they are desired to bring word to Mr. Place a Stationer at Grays- Inn G^,
and he shall receive Twenty shillings for his pains besides charges.

An Advertisement.
GEntlemen, You are defined to take notice, That Mr. Theophilus Bu^^worth, who
for some years past permitted, and gave directions to his Brother Mr. Edmond
Buckworth, to make and expose to sale, for the public good, those so famous
L^zanges or Pectorals, approved for the cure of Consumptions, Cough^* Catarcht,
Asthma's, Ho^r^ness, Strongness of Breath, Colds in general, Diseases incident
to the Lungs, and a sovereign Antidote against the Plague, and another
contagious Diseases and obstruction^ of the Stomach does now himself (being the
Anchor and first compounder of them) make them at his House on Mile-end Green.
And for more convenience of the people, constantly leaves them sealed up with
his Coat of Arms on the papers, with Mr. Rich. L^wr^^es (as formerly) at the
sign of the White Lion near the little North door of Paul's Church, Mr. Henry
Scile over against Dunstans Church in F^eetstreet, Mr. William Milwa^d at
Westminster Hall-Gate, Mr. John Pla^^^ at Furnivals-Inn Gate in H^lbo^n, and
Mr. Robert H^ra at the Turks-head near the entrance of the Royal Exchange,
Booksellers, and no others.

This is published to prevent the designs of diverse Pretenders, who counterfeit
the said Lozenges to the disparagement of the said Gentlemen, and great abuse
of the People.

Heidelbergh, June 23. 1660.
We are much rejoiced here to understand of the good agreement between the King
and Parliament, desiring the continuance of Gods blessing upon them; and to
that purpose his Electoral Highness has appoin^ed a day of Thanksgiving to be
kept through his whole land, July 3. and after the Sermons, here, and at
Frankendal, and Caub, all the Cannon to be shot off, and all the Citizens and
Soldiers to do the like with their Muskets.

From Rochel, July 3.
The 29 of the last month the King, with Cardinal Mazarine and some other
grandees, arived at Bourage, and the next day his Majesty went to dinner in the
Castle of Oleron, and afterward went to see the ships that were in the River
of Sendre, and returned about night to Bourage.

From the Hague, June 29.
The Lord Frederick van Alefelt of Seeguard, Counselor of State, and
Deputy Governor of the Dukedomes of Sleswig and Holstein, to his Majesty the
King of Denmark, goes in quality of Extraordinary Ambassador of the said King,
to congratulate his Majesty of Great Britain, and is already on his way hither,
intending to take shipping at the Brill or Flushing, as soon as wind or weather
shall serve; so that you may expect him in England within few days.

Westminster, July 5.
On Monday, Sergeant Tyrrel was conducted to the Common Pleas Bar, by Sergeant
Glanvile and Sergeant Littleton; where being come, the Lord Chancellor declared
the reasons that induced his Sacred Majesty, to make choice of him to be one of
the Justices of that Court; to which when Sergeant Tyrrell made a modest reply,
speaking of his unfitness amongst so learned men, to undertake so great a
charge, etc. the Lord Chancellor caused the Patent to be read; after which the
Sergeant being in Court, he first took the oath of Supremacy and Allegiance,
and then the oath as Justice of that Court; which being ended, the Lord
Chancellor went away, leaving the Sergeant to act in his place as one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas.

On Tuesday the Lord Chancellor sitting in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
Sergeant Turner came to the Bar of that Court. The Lord Chancellor laid down
the reasons why his Majesty was pleased to call him to be Baron of his Court of
Exchequer, in that he had been unbiassed and constant in his Judgment, and had
Acted nothing prejudicial to his Majesty, or contraty to his trust, etc. After
a reply in excuse of himself, his Majesty's Patent to constitute him one of the
Barons of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, was read, and being afterward sworn
in Court, he sat as one of the Barons of the said Court.

Whitehall, July 7.
This day His Majesty conferred the place of Lord Almoner on that most Pious
and Reverend, Brian, Lord Bishop of Salisbury, who was his Majesty's Tutor when
he was Prince of Wales.

His Majesty was pleased to restore that ancient Honor of the Dominion and
Government of the Isle of Man, to the Right honorable Charles Earl of Derby,
which has been kept from that Noble Family ever since the murder of the Noble
and Valiant James Earl of Derby: A Family that for their loyalty and fidelity
to the Crown have suffered as deep as any of His Majesty Subjects of this
Nation. Great care is also taken by the Earl of Derby for settling the
Church Government both in Doctrine and Discipline, as it has been formerly
accustomed in that Island.

Also William Lord Craven is made Governor of the Castle of Shrewsbury, in
which County his Lordship has ample Revenues, which till now, without the
least pretense or color of Justice, have been detained from his Lordship, but
now are restored to him with all Arrears; and his Lordships Deputy Governor is
Sir William Whitmore Baronet, a Family that have suffered very much for their
Loyalty and Allegiance.

The Lord Charles Howard, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, is
also made Governor of Carlisle.

That Loyal Gentleman, Sir Richard Basset, is made Governor of Cardiff Castle.

Sir Jordan Crosland, who from the beginning of these Wars, did his Majesty
such good service in the North, is now made Governor of Scarborough Castle.

Col. Tho. Blague, who so long kept the Castle of Wallingford when Governor
thereof (being one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber) is now made
Governor of Yarmouth and Langher Point.

Captain William Lennard, a Gentleman of a Noble Family, and tried courage, is
made Governor of the Forts of Tilbury and Gravesend.

Cap. Increased Collins, having a former Patent from his late Majesty, and
continuing Loyal, is now confirmed by his Majesty, Governor of Moats Bulwark.

Major Waterhouse, a person of whose courage and fidelity his Majesty
understands so much, is now Deputy Governor of Garnsey.

Letters are lately sent down to Scotland to Judge Moseley, and the other
English that were Commissioned as Judges there, to forbear to act any further
in their former capacity, and to repair into England.

And now (after all these Castles and Commands bestowed on persons of Honor and
Loyalty) be pleased to take notice, That the Marquess of Ar^gyle, the Marquess
of Antrim, Sir Arthur H^sierigg, Sir Henry Vam, are arrested of High Treason,
and commi^ted clos^ Prisoners to the Tower of London. When Sergeant Char^ock
went to apprehend the Marquess of Antrim, he, wa^ denied entrance; but the
General beforehand, having furnished him with three files ^f Musquetriers, he
forced two doors, and found the Marquess si^ting on his Bedside, it was about
two a clock last Sund^y morning. The Sergeant civilly offered him to rest there
all night, where he would give his attendance. The Marquess afterward went to
Bed, but upon consideration rose again, and was conveyed privately to the Tower.

The Marquess of Argyle was got through the Guard Chamber and Presence,
intending (as he says) to have spoken with His Majesty, but was soon observed,
and upon Information, a Warrant was granted to apprehend him. In his passage
through Cheapside, he desired he might go and speak with an eminent learn^d
Minister at Aldermanbury, Sergeant Charnook told him, That his Lordship might
send for that, or any or other Minister to the Tower, but at the present he
could not permit him thither. We could tell you many observable particulars of
this Marquess, but at present may it suffice to acquaint you, That this was the
day whereon formerly his Lordship, in a friendly manner had invited the Lord
of Mac-Nachton, to his House to Dinner, and there seized upon him with much
less civilty, then the Sergeant did his Lordship; but Mac-Nachton seeing his
life in danger, found means to escape, and is still alive to receive the reward
of his Loyalty and Valor, being the last Commander that bore arms for the King
in Scotland, and (in the judgment of all parties) a person of as high merit and
excellent Conduct, as any Gentleman of that Nation.

We have not room to insert more particulars of the two Knights, Sir Arthur and
Sir Henr^, but must conclude with a desire, That you would consider how of all
persons in England, Scotland, and Ireland, these four were the grand
Instruments of the four different Interests, and till now could never meet
together.

There are other Prisoners committ^^ to the Black-R^d, whose names with more
particulars you may have in the next.

London* Printed by J: Macock, and Tho. New^omb, 166^.


