Numb. 34. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday August
18. to Monday August 20. 1660.
Amsterdam, August 8.
THe States of Zealand have so far declared themselves, that they are willing
to own the Prince of Orange as their Admiral General, when he shall be Eighteen
years of Age, and for that purpose, they promise to communicate their intention
with the other States, and endeavor to bring them to one consent with them,
some of which show themselves not very unwilling to this Proposition, they
intend the Prince a yearly maintenance of 100000 ^^ders* The Navigation in the
Baltic Sea begin^ now to flourish again, and the people are generally well
satisfied with the peace in the North, and the happy effects thereof*

Elsenore, July 21.
The Swedish forces are transported from this place almost day and night, and
it is hoped, that before this night, they will be all gone.

It is advertised from Breslaw in Silesia, that some Officers were there
arrived out of Transylvania, having been but three days upon their journey, who
relate, that all Transylvania except two places, had put themselves under the
protection of the Great Turk, to enjoy their free exercise of religion under
him, but the young Prince Rag^tzi has submitted himself to the Emperors
protection.

Whitehall.
On Monday August 13. several Proclamations were given by his Majesty Against
fighting of Duels: For calling in and suppressing Books of John Milton and John
Goodwin, and for publishing a former Proclamation of the 30th of May,
entitled, A Proclamation against Vicious, Debauched, and Profane persons.

In the Proclamation against Fighting Duels, His Majesty does now, having
formerly in a Declaration published at Brussels November. 24. 1658. manifested
his dislike of impious and unlawful Duels, strictly command all his subjects
whatever, that they do not by themselves or any others, either by Message,
Word, Writing, or other ways or means, challenge, or cause to be challenged,
any person or persons to fight in Duel, nor to carry, accept, or conceal any
challenge, nor actually to fight, or to be a second to any therein.

His Majesty does thereby further declare, That every person that shall offend
against the said Command, shall not only incur his Majesty's highest
displeasure, but shall be incapable of holding any Office in his Majesty's
service, and never after be permitted to come to the Court, or preferred,
besides the suffering of such punishments as the Law shall inflict on such
offenders.

All persons likewise that accept, or know of such challenges, and do not
reveal the same to one of his Majesty's Privy Council, or the next Justice of
the peace, shall be liable to the same penalties, and to be pleaded against
according to Law.

In the conclusion of the said Proclamation, His Majesty does forbid any
intercession to be made for such offenders; declaring that his Pardon shall not
extend to them.

On Tuesday August 14. His Majesty set forth a Proclamation, strictly charging
and commanding all persons who either have, or know in whose custody there are
any of the Plate, Jewels, Housholdstuff, Cabinets, Statues, Inscriptions,
Pictures, Drawings, Sculptures, Rings, Stones, ancient Coyns, Medals, Books,
Manuscripts, pieces of Art, or any other Goods and Chattels which did belong to
his Majesty's late Father, his Majesty's mother the Queen, or Himself, which
have been purloyned and imbezilled, or upon pretenses seized, disposed into
several hands, and are yet detained and concealed, to deliver them, or make
discovery thereof to the right Honorable Edward Earl of Sandwich, Master of his
Majesty's Great Wardrobe, in or before the 29 of September next, under the
penalty of his Majesty's high displeasure, and as they will answer the contrary
at their peril; And in case of refusal and nonperformance, his Majesty does
declare, That he will not only look upon the disobedience of such persons, but
take a speedy course against them according to Law.

His Majesty does further declare, That those which shall discover any of those
Goods wilfully concealed, shall receive a reasonable re^^^d.

In the other Proclamation, all persons are commanded to deliver up these Books
within ten days after the publication hereof, viz. Two books written by John
Milton, the one Entitled, Johannis Miltoni Angli pro Aopulo Anglicano
defensio, contra Claudii Anonymi alias Salmas^i Defensionem Regiam. And the
other in answer to a Book Entitled, The Pourtr^icture of his Sacred Majesty,
in his solitude and sufferings: As also a third Book, Entitled, The
Obstructors of Justice, written by John Goodwin, containing wicked and
Traitorous principles. The Authors being fled, or obscuring themselves from
legal Trial. If any person in whose hands the said Books are, or shall be, do
live in any City, Borough, or Town incorporate, he is commanded upon pain of
his Majesty's high displeasure, and the consequences thereof, to deliver them
to the Mayor, Bail^ffs, or chief Magistrate there; if living out of a City,
then to the next Justice of the Peace.

The Lord Francis Hawley (who ever since the Isle of Ree has had command in
the Armies of his Majesty and his glorious Father) having now that Regiment
which was Col. Hackers, has been in Cheshire and Lancashire to order and
settle his Regiment, which he has performed with such noble discretion, by
purging out the unsound, and fixing honester men in their places, besides those
encouragements given to all such as he found well disposed, that we may clearly
say, there is not a Regiment in the Kings Dominions more absolutely devoted to
his Majesty's service.

The like care is taken for ordering other Regiments, as the Earl of
Northampton's, Lord Ossory's, Lord Herbert's, Col. Norton's, and Col.
Fairfax's; for all which, Commissions are issued forth under the Great Seal for
administering the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance to all Officers and Soldiers
in the respective Regiments, which they are ready to receive, since (if there
were need) those Noble persons who now command them, would quickly convince
them of the Benefit as well as the Security of those Legal Obligations. More
particularly, the most Noble and Valiant Earl of Northampton, whose Lieut. col.
is Sir Tho. Sands, and his Major Richard Barker.

The Noble Lord Ossory, to whom Col. Thomas Sheffield is Lieut. colonel, and
Sir James Smith Major.

The Lord Herberts Lieut. col. is Tho. Pury, and Tho. French Major.

Col. Charles Fairfax, whose Lieut. col. is Charles Roge^^, and Baily Major.

Col. Norton, who has obtained for his Lieut. col. that approved good
Commander Col. Robert Leg, and his Major is Richard Fincher, whom the Rumpers
committed prisoner to the Tower.

Where fairly we may observe how forward great Officers are to serve his
Majesty; when some who heretofore were Major-generals, condescend to be Majors,
and Lieutenant-colonels to become private Lieutenants, as in the Regiment of
that Noble Lord Ossory, Sir James Smith and Lieut. col. Weeks verify that
assertion.

The Lord General himself in his tender care to his Majesty's service, has
ordered all Irish Officers to repair to their respective commands, whereof
those whom Adjutant General Miller, appointed by his Excellency for that
purpose, cannot yet speak with, may be pleased hereby to take present notice.

Here we cannot but advertise you, how that foolish lying spirit, that for many
years has f^ill'd this great City with contradictions and forgeries* did this
week begin to peep forth again, particularly a paultry Paper, called
(forsooth) a Petition of one Rich lately a servant to Mr. Cleypoole, which
pretends that some servant belonging to Charles Lord Gerard, had unduly seized
upon his Horse; but whether the Horse was his, or Mr Cleypooles, or Mr
Cleypooles Father-in-law's, is now so manifest, that Rich himself, for his
ridiculous lying Paper, must give his Appearance for so impudent a scandal
against a Peer of the Realm.

And (since we mention Libels) take notice that the most impudent, dull, and
senseless Pamphlet that even London it self has known, crept yesterday upon a
stall, by the help of Livewell Chapman (possibly acquainted with Praise God
Barebone) telling you Tragical stories of Frogs, Dogs, Toa^es, Men some
suddenly dead, and yet alive, for reading Comon-prayer at Oxford; which
pitiful Design, under pretense of piety, spread about such pretty, bottomless,
impossible fictions, as those very Saints (if they knew how) would Blush at.
But half a line, is too much by half, (though but in a News-book) to spread
upon it.

From Brussels, July 31.
The Prince of Ligny having received Orders from the King of Spain by a
Courrier express, to go for London in quality of Ambassador Extraordinary, to
complement the King of England, concerning his restitution to his Kingdom, is
now preparing of a splendid Equipage for that purpose.

We are informed, that his Catholic Majesty has likewise named the Baron of
Bateville to reside as Ambassador in ordinary at the English Court, who also
endeavors to appear with a noble train, befitting a person of his quality.

Riga in Liefland, July 10.
The Duke of Courland having been magnificently treated by our Governor and
Magistrates, departed hence the seventh of this month with all his Family and
Retinue to go for Libaw; he was met and received by the way by a Captain, in
the head of a Troop of 300 horse.

Dantzick, July 16.
The Diet at VVarsovia ended the sixth of this month, the States having
ratified the Treaty of Peace concluded on at Oliva, and resolved to continue
the War against the Moscovites; other Affairs are deferred to the next Assembly
of the States of that Kingdom, which is to be held in December next. There was
no mention at all made of naming a Successor to the Crown of Poland, as being
an unheard of thing, which was never yet done during the Life of the King.

Naples, July 3.
Our Viceroy having received the news of the consummation of the marriage of
his most Christian Majesty of France with the Infanta of Spain, caused the Te
Deum to be sung in the Royal Chapel of the Palace, and all the canon to be
discharged round the castle; which was seconded at night with all the marks of
exceeding joy and cheerfulness. This night we might perceive a huge flame and
ashes in such a quantity, to soar up from the mount Vesuvius, that it put all
the neighboring parts into a terrible fright.

Venice the 10. dito.
The Prince Almeric d' Este, after he had taken a view of all those rarities
which are to be seen in this city, where he was splendidly entertained at the
cost of this Commonwealth, departed hence the sixth of this month in a brave
vessel that was prepared for him, accompanied by a number of other vessels
laden with many Officers, and two famous Engineers, and store of provision. So
soon as this Prince is arrived at Zante, he is to imbarque those Auxiliaries
which attend him there, and to proceed on his voyage for Candia: From which
place word is sent us, that the Turks are in such a manner astonished at this
march, that although their army consists of 2000 horse and 8000 foot, yet they
think themselves not sufficient to maintain their places; the which obliges
the Bashaw to reinforce the Garrisons of all those places which they hold
there. The Duke of Mantua, at his return from Vienna, staid in this city three
days incognito, after which he took his way to his capital city. The Cardinal
Barbarigo is likewise arrived here from Rome, to go to his Bishopric of
Bergame; and the Marquis of Cerini is come hither from Vienna, to reside here
in quality of Ambassador ordinary for his Imperial Majesty.

Madrid, July 14.
His Majesty is returned hither in perfect health, after he had assisted the
first Ceremonies of the marriage of the Infanta with the most Christian King,
concerning which such rejoycings have been observed here, that it is easy to
judge, this happy and most important alliance must needs be of great advantage
to both the Crowns who by it enjoy a wished for (and it is hoped) a lasting
Peace. The 12 of this month which was the Birthday of the young Infanta, who
entered into the 10 year of her age, was solemnised with all the Gallantry and
expressions of joy imaginable The Deputies of those Kingdoms and Cities that
have voices amongst the States of Castil, are arived here, in order to a
convention which will be speedily held in presence of his Catholic Majesty. We
are informed by our last Letters from Barcelona, of the 7 instant, that the
Prince of Montesarchio made some stay in that Haven with those Vessels and
Soldiers he brought with him from Naples, upon a report spread abroad, that 22
English Frigots lay in wait for him in the Straits

From Marseilles, 27 Dito.
The Messenger his Majesty sent to Funis, came back hither to this town on the
21 of this month, bringing only 40 Slayes with him, touching whose liberty he
was to treat there; for those Infidels had answered him, that they could
resolve on nothing, till they had sent word to Constantinople about this
affair. We have news from the Levant, that our squadron of ships which set sail
from Toulon under the command of Cavalier Pol, was arived at Zant the 10 last
past, and that the same was to go thence the next day to join with the Venetian
armado in Candi^, which was computed to be this year of 200 sails, as well
Galeasses as Galleys, Vessels, Barges, Frigates and other boats; so that it was
hoped there would out of them be landed about 1200 men, a sufficient number to
ch^se the Turks out of the Isle of Candia, which seem to be very much alarmed
at these great preparations of the Commonwealth of Venice, assisted by other
Christian Princes and Republiques.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.
ON Thursday the 16th of this instant August, between Breadstreet London, and
Lincolns Inn fields, was lost a small Picture with a Crystal and Case of G^ld;
Those that will bring it to Mrs. Bourns house Book s^ller, at the south
entrance of the Royal Exchange, shall have five pounds for their pains,

Books lately Printed and Published.
THe Most glorious Star, or Celestial Constellation, app^aring and shining
most brightly in a Miraculous manner in the face of the Sun at noon day, at the
Nativity of our Sacred Sovereign King Charles ad. Presaging His Majesty's
Exaltation to future Honor and Greatness, transcending not only the most
Potent Princes in Europe; but by Divine designement ordained to be the most
Mighty Monarc^ in the Universe ^e Never any Star having appeared before at the
birth of any (the highest Humane Hero) except our Savior. By Edward Matthew of
the Middle Temple, Esquire Sold by John Stafford and Edward Thomas, in Smithfield,
and at the Ad^m and Eve in Little Britain.

THE LEAGUE ILLEGAL, Wherein the late Solemn League and Covenant is seriously
Examined, Scholastically and solidly Confuted; for the right informing of weak
and tender consciences, and the undeceiving of the Erroneous. Written long
since in Prison by DANIEL FEATLY, D. D. never till now made known to the world.
Sold by R. Roiston, at the Angel in Ivy Lane, 1660.

The Royal and happy Poverty, Or a Meditation on the Felicities of an Innocent
and Happy Poverty: Grounded on the fifth of Matthew, the third Verse. And
addressed to the late and present Sufferers of the Times. Sold by Giles
Calvert, at the Black spread Eagle, at the West end of Paul's.

A Breviate of our Kings whole Latin Grammar, vulgarly cal^ed Lillies,
(Analytically disposed.) Or a brief Grammatical Table thereof, to facilitate
the Apprehension, strengthen the Memory, and to increase the benefit of young
Learners. Made for the use of all Philologists; by the labor and pains of Jos.
Brookbank, lately Schoolmaster in Fleetstreet, London, and Minister of Gods
Word. Sold by Richard Thrale, at the Cross Keys at St. Paul's Gate.

The Strong man ejected by a Stronger then he: in a Sermon Preached at
Gloucester, the 15th. of May, 1660. Being the day his Royal Majesty, King
CHARLES the Second, was proclaimed. Sold by Richard Thrale at the Cross Keys,
at St. Paul's Gate, entering into Cheapside.

Hamburg, August 3.
Field Marshal Eberstein went yesterday on a sudden for Copenhagen, upon an
Order from his Majesty of Denmark, to what intent is not known. The Swedes have
discharged several Officers in the Dukedom of Bremen, and completed their
Regiments to the number of a thousand men. The Confederate Forces are now
suddenly to leave Ho^stein, and to take their match through Mecklenburg and
Pomerania, except six hundred men, who are yet to continue a while in the
Country.

Hamburg, August 9.
Last night a little before the Gates of this City were shut up, arrived here
Christina Queen of Sweden, with a great Train of Followers, it is said she
intends to make some stay here, but of that there is no certainty. The
Con^ederate Forces in Holstein and Pomerania (as the report goes) are like to
lie yet a month longer in their Quarters. Letters from Copenhagen intimate,
that affairs were put there into a quiet posture, the Danes being now at some
ease, since the Swedes have quitted their Islands, and are all gone over into
Schonan, who^e transportation being much furthered by the Holland Vice Admiral
de Ruyter, his Majesty of Denmark has given him many thanks, besides a noble
present. This Vice Admiral is now in readiness to repair with his Fleet into
Holland with the first opportunity. They write from Dantzick, that the several
Ratifications of peace were brought thither, but were not yet mutally
interchanged, The Plague begins to be brief again in those parts.

Dantzick, July 29.
The Polish Army being drawn together about Lablin, to their general
Rendezvous, their number was found to be above seventy thousand, of which his
Majesty being advertised, he resolved to repair thither on the thirteenth of
this month; especially since certain Intelligence was brought him, that the
Muscovian Czar was in person on his march toward the Ukrain with an Army of an
hundred thousand men, the Avantguards whereof were already arrived in the
Territory of Wollin not far from Olita. At the Diet at Warsovia it is agreed
on, that the Crown of Poland is to keep the City of Elbingen, and that his
Highness the Elector of Brandenburg is to have possession of the City of
Meser^z in Great Poland. Elbingen is now shortly to be delivered up by the
Swedes, many of their Officers and Soldiers being already gone in two ships
thence for Stockholm, whom the rest are suddenly to follow. The Duke of
Courland is gone from Riga to Bauske, to take possession of that Castle from
the Swedes, the Polish Governor of Milan will not surrender that place, till
he receive express order for it from his General P^lubinsky. In Finland every
sixth man is summoned to take up Arms; the commanded Forces are sent to Narva,
where they are mustered. The Boors in the Territory of Kakenhuysen begin to
rebel against the Muscovites.

Hamburg, August 11.
Queen Christina arrived in this City on wednesday night last, and it is
believed she will continue here some time. It is reported, that the Confederate
Forces in H^lstein will break up the thirteenth present, and are to have their
Rendezvous at Oldeslo on the twen^ieth. Letters from Stockholm mention, that
Writs were gone out for the summoning of a Parliament to be held in November or
December next; though it is believed by some, that it will not be a full
Parliament, but only a Convention of Deputies of the several States, and before
that be over, the time of the deceased Kings funeral will not be certainly
known. There is much spoken of an extraordinary Embassy to go for England, but
who is to be the person to be employed in it, is not yet known.

Elseneur, August 4.
Count Uhlefeld and his Lady are for certain carried prisoners to Bornholm,
where they arrived on Saturday last, when they were brought to the water side,
there was such a concourse of people, that they had stoned them to death if
they had not been strongly guarded. The King of Denmark intends to bring the
said Earl to a Legal trial, and I believe, he had rather be now in Schonen,
then where he is, for if he had stayed there but one day longer, the Swedish
Field-Marshal Steinbock had Orders from Stockholm to release him.

Hamburg, August 12.
Last Wednesday night her Majesty Christina Queen of Sweden arrived here, with
a retinue of eighteen persons: The French Ambassador Monsieur Trelon, and Mr.
Sidney went about half a League out of this Town to meet her Majesty, and
waited on hither in her Coach. It is thought her Majesty will abide here some
weeks, but what her chief design is, and whether or no she will go in person
for Sweden, is not known. The Imperial and Brandenburghs forces are to remove
their Quarters out of Holstein the thirteenth instant, and to have their
general Rendezvous at Oldesloe on the twentieth. The Imperialists in
Mecklenburg give out, that they have likewise received Orders to be gone out of
that Country the seventeenth present. The Ratifications of peace in Poland was
to be performed on the seventh of this month, the Instruments the^eof having
been on all sides perused and found authentic. Letters from Dantzick make
mention of a new great Victory the Poles have obtained against the Muscovites,
but the particulars and certainty thereof are as yet more fully expected. The
King of Poland is now in Ukrain, whether or no he will be able to appease and
reduce to his party the rebellious Cossacks there, time will discover. The late
peace of the North being now fully executed in Denmark, there passes but
little worth communication. It is confirmed from all hands, that the King of
Denmark has sent the Earl of Uhlefeld prisoner to Bornholm, after he had made
an escape from Malmoe in Schonen in a disguise, where (it is thought) he will
be brought to a Legal trial. The Convention of the States in Sweden is
appointed on the two and twentieth of September next, and the Funeral of the
late King is to be in October following. The Hollands Ambassado^r Slingeland
has expedited his Negotiation in Sweden to his content and satisfaction.

Hague, August 1^.
The differences between the Bishop and City of Munster do still continue, and
hostilities are used on both sides, notwithstanding the endeavors of the
Deputies of these States with the Bishop to condescend to a cessation of Arms,
the which to obtain, application has been made to Monsieur Triquet, Resident
for his Imperial Majesty here, to persuade the said Bishop, and prevail with
him to come to an Agreement with the City; what effect it is like to take will
be known ere long. It is conceived the Extraordinary Embassies for Spain,
England, and France, will be delayed yet a while, until the Assembly of the
States have produced a certain resolution touching those Memorials delivered by
the Princess Royal, and the Government of these Provinces for the time to come.

Westminster.
That Noble and accomplished person Francis Lord Newport, Baron of High- Arcal
(who with his whole Family has done and suffered so much for his Majesty, as
well out, as in the Tower of London) is now made Governor of his Majesty's
Castle at Ludlow, where his Lordships own Company of Foot are assigned, besides
what other Command his Lordship has over the County.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
An Expedient for taking away all Impositions, and for raising a Revenue
without Taxes. By Francis Cradock Merchant. Printed for Henry Seile, His
MAJESTY'S Stationer.

An Hawking Bagg, wherein was some small Linen, a Letter-Case, and Letters,
with other Writings, was lost more Grantham, in Lincolnshire, If any have found
it, and bring it to the George at Stanford, or to the Naggs head in James's
street Covent Garden, he shall receive ten pounds for his pains.

We are commanded to give notice again, That His MAJESTY for diverse weighty
Reasons (as well as the extraordinary heat of the season) will forbear touching
any more of those who have the Evil, till further Order; of which we shall give
you timely Advertisement.

We must now acquaint you with a particular from Ireland, which had we it not
from unquestionable credit, we should not mention. In the Town of Dundalkchin
(n English Castle-Town) in the County, of Louth; there is a chief and very
ancient Seat belonging to the Noble Family of Bellew, Sir Christopher Bellew
being the four and twentieth Knight of that Family lineally descended, all
faithful Subjects to the Crown. About this House and Town were many Ash-Trees,
wherein many thousand Rooks did constantly breed, but when the late troubles
began, about eighteen years since, all the Rooks quitted the place, which had
been their constant habitation Winter and Summer, for above three hundred
years, and were never since discovered in that place till the end of April last
(when our Gracious Sovereign's Restoration was visible) (...) which (...) many
thousand Rooks came again to the same place, though the Trees were most of them
cut down; where for want of Trees to rest on, the greater part ^a^^ upon
Hedges, and Banks of Ditches, spreading themselves upon the Mo^e-hill, whereof
all the Country took notice, and remembering when they ^led, concluded their
return to be an Omen of his Majesty's speedy and happy Restoration.

Whereas the enemies of Episcopacy have traduced (...), (Chaplain to the late
Primate of Ireland, and n^w Elect Bishop of Waterford) a^ guilty of some
misdemeanors in Preaching a Funeral Sermon in St Margarets, Westminster, at the
Funeral of M^. ^^ristopher Walker, in which Church the said Mr. Baker never
preached, nor was there present that day.

We whose names are subscribed, do hereby certify that we were present at the
Funeral of Mr. Christopher Walker, solemnized at St. Margarets Church,
Westminster, the 19 of July last past, where there was a Sermon which was not
Preached by Mr. George Baker, Chaplain to the late Lord Primate of Armagh, as
has been sl^nderously reported, but by another Minister, nor did we see the
said Mr. Baker that day, or of diverse days before or after, In testimony
whereof we have s^t our hands this fourth day of August, 1660.

Tho. K^^k, Bryan Barnaby, Adam Prince, John Belchamber, Bartholomew Balman,
George Walker, Joyce Walker, widow of the deceased, with diverse of that Parish.

London.
You may remember when the Rump last lifted up it self, a Person adventured to
blot out that monstrous Inscription which the bloody Rumpers had caused to be
set over the place where stood the Statue of that glorious Martyr King Charles
the first; several persons assumed that honest Enterprise to themselves, as
there will never want such as will own a good action when crowned with success*
Know therefore, that it was Mr. Michael Darby now Painter to the Company of
Mercers, who hearing how three eminent Members of that Society were troubled to
behold that ^nfamous Superscription: the said Mr. Darby freely offered himself
to blot it out, engaging to do it before he slept, and accordingly performed it
at a full afternoons Exchange time; who as soon as he had finished it, with a
loud voice said, God save King Charles the second; for which Act of Loyalty he
has had the Honor to beautify the Statues of our gracious King and his
glorious Father, with the Inscriptions under written.

CAROLUS PRIMUS, Monarcharum Mag. Britanniae Secundus, Franciae and Hiberniae
Rex, Martyr ad Coelum missus penultimo, Jan. Anno Dom. MDCXLVIII. The Scepter
in his right Hand, A Church in his left Arm, A Globe at his left Foot, and on
his Shield, MAGNA CHARTA. CAROLUS SECUNDUS. Monarcharum Mag. Britanniae
Tertius, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Aetat. suae Anno. tricessimo, Regni
duodecimo, Restaurationis primo, Anno Dom. MDCLX. The Scepter in his right
Hand, In his left the Globe, and on his Shield, AMNESTIA. From Lempster.
Major Theophilus Heart, Major to the Earl of Sandwich drew together four Troops
of Horse of his Lordships Regiment near Litchfield, where after he had at large
declared the weight and importance of a solemn Oath, he tendered to them the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which they all took with very much alacrity.
Thence he rode to the other two Troops then at Kedderminster, where after the
like Exhortation, they all with like cheerfulness took the foresaid Oaths.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.


