Numb. 30. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs ^ow in Agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday July
16. to Monday July 23. 1660.
Advertisement.
WHereas by Commission from His most Sacred Majesty under his Great Seal of
England, bearing date the fifth of this instant July, as also by his Majesti's
Letters Patents dated the ele^enth following, Sir W^^l^am ^^hrockmorton was
constituted and appointed Knight Marshal of his Majesti's Household* and Count
of Marshal s^y: He the said Sir William ^^hro^kmorton does declare. That for
the ease of his Majesty's Subjects in their du^^ proceedings in the said Courts
of Ju^tice* that the Fees pa^able upon every Arrest, shall be abated Two
shillings sixpence, and that for the future p^eventing those high misdemeano^s
and (to ^uptious which have been commented by several subordinate Off^ce^s or
counter^e^^ pretenders to that Court to the great vexation and oppr^ssion of
his Majesty's good people; That he the said Knight-Marshal, as Judge in the said
Court, will frequently appear therein, to hear and receive all Grievances and
Complaints that can be presented against any of the O^ficers or Counterfeits as
aforesaid, and then and there to inflict most exemplary punishment according to
Law, upon all Transgressors or Offenders whatsoever.

Westminster.
The Guards at last are discharged from their attendance on the two houses of
Parliament, who being now upon the performance of their duty to his Majesty as
Loyal Subjects, and the true service of their Country in their
Representatives, need no other security then the hearts and affections of the
People.

Whitehall.
The Regiment that was lately Colonel Streaters, is now conferred upon the
Right Honorable John Lord Belasese; who by his wounds and imprisonment has
sufficiently testified his Honor and Loyalty to his Majesty.

His Lieutenant Colonel is that gallant Gentleman Colonel Anthony Gilby.

The Major is Colonel John Streater, who so resolutely attempted the Pass near
Daventry when Colonel Lambert was taken.

Lieutenant Colonel George Welden, and Robert Smith are two of his Captains.

Colonel Charles Fairfax, though very aged, was never known to do any thing
unbefitting a Soldier, and for his eminent service in the late happy change,
and particularly at Hull, has not only a continuance of his Regiment; but for
ever an hundred pound per annum out of the Customs of Hull.

Col. Edward Harloe eldest son of Sir Robert Harloe, is now Colonel of a
Regiment of Foot, Captain of Horse, and Governor of Dunkirk.

His Brother Major Robert Harloe is now Colonel of a Regiment of Horse in
Dunkirk, a Person whose abilities are not unknown, as a member of Parliament,
or of the Army.

Major Tobias Bridges has well merited to continue still Major of the same
Regiment.

On Monday July 16. His Majesty and his two Royal Brothers, with diverse Lords
and Personages of Honor, were entertained by Sir William Wale at his house in
Throckmortonstreet. This is that Sir William Wale that entertained his Grace
the Duke of Albemarlie, when it was agreed the Secluded Members should be
admitted to re-^it. For which and other late services, he has obtained to be
Purveyor of his Majesty's Wines.

If the City knew her own happiness, they may now see the difference betwixt
the presence of a King, and the Tyranny of an Usurper, where the known Laws and
the established Religion are not causes of plunder and imprisonment; and there
is no strife betwixt the City and the Country, but who shall show most duty to
the King.

We have not told you of any places of civil jurisdiction conferred by his
Majesty upon any of his good Subjects, contenting our selves to let you know
how the Militia and Army Officers have been disposed, as the thing of more
present consideration and necessity; however we dare promise you when the List
and settlement of the Army is all finished, ^o give you upon occasion an
account how Officers in his Majesty's Household, in Courts of judicature, as
well as in other places, are filled and supplied.

Whereas in some Prints there is mention made of the manner of the reception of
Monsieur Pelnitz, and particularly that he was conducted to Audience in his
Majesty's own Coach; we must ^nform the Reader, that it was not his Majesty's
Coach, but the Coach of the Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlaein of his
Majesty's household.

On Wednesday the 18 instant, the Earl of St. Albans went to Gravesend, and so
forward on his voyage toward France, what is the cause and purport of his
journey, we need not tell you.

His Majesty, notwithstanding all discouragements by the hot weather, and the
multitude of sick and infirm people, abated not one of his accustomed number,
but touched full two hundred that had the Evil, an high conviction of all such
Physicians, Surgeons or Apothecaries that pretend self-preservation, when
the languishing Patient requires their assistance.

More Prisoners are committed to the Black Rod, particularly Acton (his
Christendom we know not) who is notorious enough by the name of Acton,
Postmaster of Basingstoak, with whom also are, Cap John Griffith, and Cap.
Edward Alcock, who we may safely swear, are unknown to us by their virtues.

Major Waring is committed hither also: this is the son of the old Cash keeper
Waring, and brother in Law to major Salway: this major Waring will find better
usage at the Black Rod, then he gave to the Gentlemen ^f Shropshire, where he
was Oliver Cromwels Triennial Sheriff (Pa^don us for calling him Sheriff, who
rather was the Jailer of that County) and was the best Representative of the
Commit of Safety, whose Confident he was.

The last of the Prisoners is C^l. Henry Bradshaw, eldest brother to that
monster, John Bradshaw, whom we scorn to honor so much as to rail at, if it
were manners to ra^l at the Devil.

And while we mention the name of Bradshaw we can tell you, that his Majesty
has given leave unto Henry Williams, alias Cromwell, of Ramsey in the County
of Huntingdon Esquire to leave out the alias Cromwell. It is therefore desired you
would take notice, that this Mr. Henry Williams is Grandchild to Sir Oliver
Williams, and son to Colonel Williams a Comm^nder in his late Majest^^s Army,
to whom only (with his family) this favor is granted: And (to deal clearly) in
those black days of the Protectordom, this Gentleman was not only civil to all,
but made it his endeavor to assist and relieve all honest and loyal persons.
It is his due, and 'twere base to deny it.

From Warsovia, July 3.
Yesterday the Deum laudamus was in these Churches sung, in presence of his
Majesty, for the great Victoy which it has pleased God to bestow on the Army
of this Crown, which has caused exceeding joy in all people, of which Victory
that you may have the better information, take this following Account: After
General C^arnesky had joined his Forces with those of the Lithuanian General
Sapicha, General Czarnesky caused the whole Army to be drawn up into a Ring, in
the midst whereof he made a very grave and serious speech, telling them in what
a sad condition this Crown was at present in, of which it could not be
delivered but by the Courage and Valor of this Army, not doubting, but God
would certainly punish the Insolency, and outrage of this Grand Enemy, who put
his only confidence in the number of his Forces; and that they might no ways
doubt of his (the Generals) courage he was even now ready to lead them the way
in battle' and conduct them on all occasions, assuring himself they would not
forsake but manfully follow him, there being nothing so dear to him (even to
his very life) which he would not most willingly venture with them: withal
desiring, if there were any that had not a stout heart or courage enough to
engage with him, they would come and give him notice of it, that he might
voluntarily dismiss them. Whereupon the whole Army gave a loud shout, and
declared they would engage and fight under him to the last man, and the last
drop of there blood, and no ways forsake him. This their cheerful Acclamations
being seconded and concluded with a fervent prayer, they all took horse and
advanced the next day, viz. the 24 day of June toward Stonin but in regard
some Troops of the Moscovites of above 800. had their quarters in that place,
and were advertised of the coming of our Army, they did what they could to put
themselves into a posture of defense, having beforehand forced all the
Lithuanian Gentry which was then at Stonin, and had put themselves under their
protection into the Synagogue of the Jews, with a barbarous intention, to set
it on fir^^ and cons^ all, which they had endeavored several times, but
without effect, the fire being still quenched by a strong ^owre of Rain.
Whilst they were about this our General Czarnesky commanded his Dragoons to
fall upon Stonin which they entered successfully, killed all those 800
Mosco^^tes that were in it, and relieved the Lithvani^^ (...). The same day he
moved still forwards as far as Lochowi^z, where he arrived the 27, of June.

The Muscovian General Chowans^y having Intelligence of the march of our Army,
instantly raised the siege before Lochowitz, leaving only in the Trenches about
Two thousand men, and advanced toward our Army, almost five Leagues, having
under his commandin^ less then 8000 select Foot, and a hundred forty six Troops
o^ Horse, which were accounted at least to amount to the number of 14000. in
all ^2000 fighting men. But being come to a convenient pl^^e which he thought
would serve for a pitched b^rrel, he put his Army with the best advantage into a
battle array un^^^ the ^^nduct of several Foreign Commanders. Which being
^^formed, he sent to General Czarnecky (who was as yet A pretty distance from
him) intimating to the said General, (...) was glad of the present occasion of
meeting with him, (...) much spoken of his former Achievements, (...) give him
battle, which pr^ffer of his, General Czarnecki seemed to decline with a
modest excuse that his Army was not of equal strength with the Enemies, neither
had he any Ammunition or Pieces of Ordnances, but only some small Fieldpieces,
and therefore desired to defer this Engagement till another time; but
notwithstanding this seeming unwillingness of his, he advanced farther and
farther till both A^mies encountered one another near at hand, where our
General now likewise began to put his army into Battle array, and himself
commanded the left Wing. The Moscovites had an excellent train of Artillery,
consisting of forty pieces of great Cannon, which was commanded by a Hollander,
who was killed in the Engagement. General Czarnecki having ordered all
according to Martial Discipline, and given charge to each Officer what to do,
he feigned to betake himself to flight, leaving in all haste the main of his
battle, retiring in a wood that was not far off. Whereupon the enemy pressed
on our main body, thinking to bring it to disorder, but General Czarnecki had
left order, that, so soon as the Moscovites should begin to move, one Sudieky a
Knight of Malta should rush in with 3 Troops of Horses upon the Enemies
Ordnances, which accordingly was performed with no less courage then celerity,
though not without some loss, notwithstanding which they chased the Moscovites
away from their Ordnance, and whilst this was a doing, General Czarnecki fell
in upon the Enemies Foot out of the Wood with all his Force being constrained
to make use only of their hand-armes, which served them to cut down alll those
of he Enemy that came in their way. As many of the Enemies Foot as were able to
mrke a retreat, went into the Woods and there Fortified themselves with boughs
and trees.

But the Polish Dragoons were commanded to fall in amongst them to clear the
Passages, which cost ours 120 men, which were killed with Poleaxes. So soon as
ours had entered the Woods, they cut down all that made opposition, and the
horse only being left to their shifts, ours forced them to flight, and pursued
them, yet so that in the pursuit they turned thrice and were still worsted. The
Moscovian Geneneral Cowansky escaped himself with a hunder^d horse, after whom
an earnest pursuit is made, not without hopes to overtake him. The Moscovian
Lieutenant General Severbati is taken prisoner, and another General name^
J^^ova is killed. Seze^bati being brought before our Gene^al Czernecki, uttered
these words; Our great Czar has lost us and it is to be feared, he will ruin
himself because he would not follow our advice. This Sezerbati is to be brought
hither with many Bayarrs and other Foreign Commanders, together with Colors
taken.

Ours have got all the Enemies baggage, Ammunition, and 40 Great Pieces of
Ordnances, as likewise a great quantity of Provision, all which ou^ General
caused to be destri^uted amongst the Soldiers. This is the Relation which was
brought yesterday to his Majesty by a Captain of a Troop of Horse; from General
Cza^necki, who also brought along with him the Monsieur Czar his own Colors,
embroydered with Gold and Pearls in Sky Colors, and a letter from General
Czarnecki to his Majesty written with Black-Lead and dated the 28 of June in
the Camp, on horseback among the dead. So was the Subscription. There was also
this Postscript; at this very instant I intend to move farther, hoping to
advance yet four Leagues this day. The said General has commanded a competent
number of men to march toward Lucowitz, to relieve that place, in regard,
there are yet 2000 Moscovires who keep that besieged. This battle continued
above 3 ho^^es. The Samogest^an Forces under the command of General Pack are
now to join with that party before Lachow^tz, which ^s ^t supposed will
afterwar^s a^taque the City of Wilda, bu^ Czarnec^i is said to march directly
unto War^^via to make a diversion there. His Majesty is to remove hence to
C^zint^iz the 12 of July, where the Army of (...) Lubom^^sky is to be in
readiness and hence to march by the way of Lublin and (...) into Ukrine.

Advertisements of Books.
The Sage Senator delineated: or, a discourse of the qualifications end^wments,
parts, external and internal, office, duty and dignity of a perfect (...): with
a discourse of Kingdoms, Republiques, and States-popul^r: As also of Kings and
Princes; to which is annexed the new Models of M^dern Policy by ^. G. Gent.
Sold by Sam. Speed, at the Sign of the Pr^^ting-Press in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Moor's Arithmetic in two books: The first treating of the vulgar Arithmetic
in all its parts, with several new inventions to ease the memory, by Napiers
Rods, Logarithms, Decimals, etc. fitted for the use of all persons. The second
of Arithmetic in Species or Algebra, whereby all difficult Questions receive
their Analytical Laws and Resolutions, made very plain and easy for the use of
Scholars, and the more curious: To which are added two Treatises. 1. A new
Contemplation Geometrical upon the Oval Figure called the Ellipsis. 2. The two
first books of Mydergius bis Conical Sections, analized by that Reverend Divine
Mr. W. Oughtred, Englished and completed with cuts by Jonas Moor, Professor of
the Mathematics. sold by Nath Brook at the Ango in Cornhill.

Featlaei (...); or, Doctor Daniel Featley revived; proving, That the
Protestant Church (and not the Romish) is the only Catholic and true Church:
In a Manual preserved from the hands of the Plunderers, with a succinct History
of his Life and Death, by John Fea^lty, Choplain to the Kings th^st Excellent
Majesty. Sold by Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill.

HAPA'AAHAA; or the Loyal Subjects Exultation for the Royal Exiles
Restoration, in the parallel of King David and Mephiboshith on the one side,
and our gracious Sovereign King CHARLES, and his loving Subjects, on the other;
set forth in a Sermon preached at All Saints Church in Northampton, June 28.
1660. being the day appointed for solemn Thanksgiving for his Royal Majesty's
happy Restitution, by Simon Ford. Sold by Sam. Gellibrand at the Sign of the
Golden Ball in St. Paul's Churchyard.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
A white high, mettled N^g, a little saddle backed, mealed mouth, wall eyes, a
white flat hoof, always carries a full belly, was stolen on Sunday night from
H^nl^y, distant six miles from Worcest^r, by one John Kings, a middle statute,
so^^what big bodied, and of a black countenance. If any one can give notice to
Mr. Gabriel Bedel Bookseller at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, or John
Allen Bookseller at the Cross in Worcester, they shall be well rewarded for
their pa^^s.

A black Gelding, with a Star in his forehead, the far eye is a wall eye, seven
y^ars old, fourteen hands and two inches high, trots very well, and gal^ops
badly, two Malinde^s upon his two forelegs in the joints, the hair cut off*
and not well, was lost on Sunday ^ast July 15. If any one can bring tidings o^
him unto Mr. William Wilmot in Abington i^ Barkshire, or to Edmund Bou^ter in
Red-Lyon Court in Wat^ing-street, London, shall have twenty shillings for their
pains.

If any person has taken up a Gold Seal, being a Coat of Arms cut in a piece
of Gold, in the form of a L^zenge, fastened to a black Ribband to tie about the
wrist, which was l^st on Thursday, July 12. near Wallingford (...), let the
party bring it to Mrs. Maylard a Bookseller in Westminster Hall, and he shall
receive the weight of it in gold, and a reward for his pains.

Hamborough, July 10.
Here is at this present little worth the communication. The Emperial
Commissiary General Truth desired of the City for the Emperor his Army the sum
of 15000 Rixdollers, instead of the provisions formerly insisted upon; but no
more then 6000 Rixdollers are granted unto him; whether or no he will be
contented wi^h that sum, I shall be able to give an account wi^h the next.
Field Marshal Eberstein, after having mustered his Forces upon the Isle of
Femeren, is gone from thence for Copenhagen, whether or no at his return he
will bring Order for the Reduction of these Forces time will show. The allied
Army in Holstein, as also the Emperialists in Mecklenburgh, lie still in their
old Quarters, but it is credibly reported that within three w^eks they will
march away, and quit those places adjoining to our neighboring Principalities
in Zealand. The ratifications of peace betwixt the two Northern Crowns are
already exchanged, and on the Swedish side eight Regiments of German horse are
disbanded, the foot-souldiers are for the most part kept still in service,
except some few Regiments which are reduced. The Swedes have hitherto been very
earnest and careful about the transporting of their forces, but the Danish
Commissioners themselves desi^ing the Swedes to take their leisure, by reason
of want of ships, they must impute the delaying of this transportation to
themselves. Letters this day come out of Prussia do bring the confirmation of
the overthrow given the Moscovites by the Poles, the muskets, pistols, and
other warlike Instruments bought up here for the Moscovites, are with the
first wind to be shipped away for Archangelo.

Copenhagen, July 7.
This Post, Orders was sent from his Majesty to his Ambass^dors Extraordinary
at the Hague for their coming home, as l^kewise to his Majesty's Resident
there, to hasten his return to this Court so soon as possibly. The Swedish
forces are not quite withdrawn out of this Island, and it is supposed they will
hardly quit Cronenburg this next week.

From Stockholm, June 27. it is certified, that his Excellency the Lord
Hannibal Seasted had put a good conclusion to the negotiation committed to him
by his Majesty of Denmark, concerning the Isle of Bornholm, he being in hopes
to return to this place within eight days, and to give a relation of his
proceedings by word of mouth. The Governor of Schonen, Count Steinbock, is not
yet arrived here in person, as was reported last Post, but his Excellencies
Lady, with diverse Swedish Officers and Ladies of quality are here present, and
many of the common soldiers of the Swedes are suffered to come into this City,
part of them being disbanded, and some still continuing in the Swedish service,
which has given occasion to the Governor to cause the Guards to be doubled to
keep all in good order, and to prevent all manner of confusion. This day and
yesterday there has been so great a storm out of the North and North-west,
that it makes me believe the transportation of the Swedes in the Sound to be
not a little thereby incommodated.

St. Iago de la Vego in the Island of Iamaica, April 7.
The Negro's (of whom we daily reduce some to obedience) being taken, become
our good friends, and serviceable to us in what they are capable: Colonel Tyson
was lately commanded forth with eighty Officers and soldiers, and twenty one
Negro's (who are very dexterous in catching the enemy after they are beaten)
who after a tedious march over the mountains, found Don Christopher lying in a
Morross with 133 in Arms with him, commanded by an old Soldier of Spain, who
had double pay allowed him, and was to succeed the Spanish General; in our
fa^ling on, this Major received a wound by a Lance in his belly, of which he
died in two hours, but their General Don Christopher being too nimble for us,
saved himself by flight. The Officers which were took prisoners, and the
Commissioners that came in to treat for their General, confessed there were
about sixty Officers and Soldiers slain. Thence the Party marched to the
Chererose at the Sea side, in order to the sel^ing a ship which the Spaniards
had formerly taken from us, and did now m^me^^ly supply them with provisions
from Cuba, such as Cassader bread, sweetmeats, Chocolates, and other
conveniences. The security of this Vessel was so well managed by Scouts, that
there was no taking her by Land without them: We therefore first lay in wait
for the Scouts, whom when we had took in several parties, and made our own, in
eleven days time we took the ship, with twenty Officers and Soldiers in her.

And now (according to promise) we give you a List of his Highness the Duke of
Yorks Regiment, whereof very many, if not most (by the pleasure of his
Highness, as well as his Grace the Lord General) are still continued in their
place, whom therefore we shall only name.

Sir Allen Ansley (a gentleman of known merit for his intellectuals, as well as
his courage and loyalty, which have made him eminently of his Majesty's
household) is Captain Lieutenant to his Highness. Henry Slingsby (we need only
to tell his sir name, in testimony of his loyalt^) is Coronet. George Courtney
Quartermaster. Thomas Viscount Falconberge is Colonel under his Highness, and
Captain of a Troop. Charles Bellassys Lieutenant. John Bellassys Coronet. John
Woodward Quartermaster. Anthony Buller (formerly a Colonel in the West Indies)
is a Captain. Rich. Dounton Lieutenant. Hugh Stukely Coronet. Allen Wharton
Quartermaster. Thomas Howard, son to the Earl of Berkshire (as well pleased to
command one of his Highness Troops as formerly his own Regiments, wherein he
never expressed the least want of skill or courage.) Hugh Bradshaw Lieutenant.
Edward Sanders Coronet. Christopher Hull Quartermaster. Captain John Sydenham
(son to Sir Ralph Sydenham, who has manifested his courage in France as well
as England) commands a Troop. William Noy Lieutenant. George Collingwood
Coronet. Thomas Cooper Quartermaster. Sir John Talbot (a Member of this present
Parliament) commands one of his Highness Troops. Rich. Beke Lieutenant, Bacon
Coronet, Nic. Lampon Quartermaster.
Next be pleased to take a List of the Officers of his Highness the Duke of
Glocesters Regiment.

His Highness Troop is commanded by Phil. H^ward, son to the Ear^ o^ B^^k^hire.
Simon Musgrave (we need not tell you what family he is of) is Coronet, Francis
Moore is Q^arterm^ster. Sir Ralph Knight (one whose name became his Honor,
upon his Majesty's happy return, wherein his endeavors were very useful) is
Colon^l, Tho. Bourne Lieutenant, Rich. Hooker Coronet, Ralph Daws
Quartermaster. Phil. Prime (very eminent for his manhood) is Major, William
Hodgkinson Lieutenant, Ant. Mitchell Coronet, Christ* Mallock Quartermaster.
The. Co^lson Captain, Ed. Austin Lieutenant, Robert Brownlow Coronet, James
Craf^s Quartermaster. Henry Ogle Captain, Tho. Ogle Lieutenant, Tho. Ogle
Coronet, Lancelot Struthes Quartermaster. William Goodwin (who has done good
service both at Sea and Land) i^ Captain. Sir Hugh Middleton (son of Sir
William Middleton) imprisoned and plundered by the Rump, not ambitious of
great command, but to do his Majesty and his Highness service is Lieutenant.
John B^ll is Coronet, Fran. Su^ley Quartermaster.
With these Regiments we will take in the Castle of St. Mawes in Cornwall, now
under the command of Sir Richard Vivian Gent of the Privy Chamber to his
Majesty, a person that has remained unshaken in his loyalty in the midst of
all his sufferings.

On Saturday last his Majesty gave audience to Francisco Bernardi, Resident for
Genoa, the particulars whereof, and of the Portugal, as also several Presents
from Plymouth, Exeter, and other places, you will have at large in the next.

This day was presented to his Sacred Majesty an Address from the Governors
and Commanders of the Castle of the ancient City of Chester.

To his most Excellent Majesty, King CHARLES the Second, our most gracious
Sovereign.
The humble Address of the Officers in the Castle of Chester, in the name of
themselves, and of the Soldiers of that Garrison.
WIth such a thankful acknowledgement of the goodness of God in settling your
Sacred Majesty on the Throne of your Ancestors, as becomes good Christians and
loyal Subjects, we renew in these rude lines the humble tendry of our bounden
duty, wherein we continue to own your most Excellent Majesty for our undo^b^ed
Sovereign Lord and King, hereby seconding our first ac^ings, wherein we, as
soon as other Garrisons, freely yielded our selves to follow (as duty did bind
us) the Noble ex^mple of his Excel^ency the Lord Gener^l, under whose
auspicious conduct that great breach our sins had made, is happily made up
again: And your Majest^ having given us so many signal tokens of your admirable
virtue and goodness in your gracious Declaration set forth before you came into
your Kingdoms, your pious Proclamation against Debauchery, and virtuous
deportment since you came into your Imperial City, we find so much cause to
believe that you will become another I^si^h, in restoring the worship of God,
settling the Church in peace after so long a time as she has sit mourning with
torn garments upon her, as our hearts rejoice in expectation to see such a
complete settlement of peace and truth, as the Laws of God, and the good Laws
of the Land require, hoping that a due restraint will be put to profaneness,
superstition, and libertinism. Lastly, we shall not by the grace of God recede
from our bounden duty, but remain your Majesty's loyal Subjects and faithful
Soldiers, manifesting upon all occasions our readiness to hazard our lives for
the maintenance of your Royal Person, Crown and Dignity, expressing our selves
alwa^es your Majesty's most loyal Subjects and obedient Servants.

R. Venables. Ia. Iollie. Tho. Baskervile. John Wedder. Henry Moore.



His Majesty since his Return having touched for the Evil near 1700 persons,
and there being at present above 1000 more in London come from several Parts
attending for the same, his Majesty is graciously pleased to dispatch all that
are already come, and (for several weighty reasons) resolves to defer the rest
to a more seasonable opportunity.

We are therefore by His Majesty's Command to give notice hereof, That none of
his good ^ubjects may engage themselves (till further Order) in chargeable and
unnecessary Iourneys. And we are further to give notice, That all from the
Countries now attending in London the Cure of the Evil, do repair to Mr. Knight
his Majesty's Chyrurgion, who lives in great Bridges-street at the Sign of the
Hare in Covent Garden, on Tuesday and Thursday next being the 24. and 26 of
this instant July, when and where they shall receive Tickets for the Wednesday
and Friday, which two days his Majesty is pleased to set apart for this so
pious and charitable Work.

We can give you but a thin account of Persons committed to Custody since our
last: For the Black-rod has but one Pri^oner more whose name is Portington; We
cannot tell you his good actions, and there are too many will tell you his bad.

But in Scotland are committed Sir James Steward Provost of Edinborough, of
whose good deeds we never told you, and fear we never shall; and Sir John
Che^sley, whom 'twas easier to make a Knight than make him good. These two were
the eminent Remonstrants against his Majesty, but have thousands to remonstrate
against them, now they are in Ed^nborough Castle.

There are more to be committed if they did not disappear, though some have the
forehead to approach the Court in England, of which number is the Lord
Swinton, one of Oliver Cromwell's Counselors and Judges, who of late
(forsooth) would needs turn Quaker, and has reason to be so in earnest, since
he is now apprehended and committed to the Gate-ho^se.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.


