Numb. 97. An Exact Account, COMMUNICATING The chief Transactions of the Three
Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland. With the daily Votes and Resolves in
both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Also Particular ADVICE from the OFFICE of
INTELLIGENCE. Published by AUTHORITY. From Friday June 1. to Friday June 8.
From Westminster, 1 June.
THis day his Royal Majesty accompanied with his Brothers the Dukes of York and
Gloucester, the Lord Chancellor Hide with several other persons of quality went
by water from Witehall unto the Paliament Stairs, where being landed they came
up the great stairs unto the lords House, his Majesty having taken his place
with the Dukes of York on the one side of him, and the Duke of Gloucester on the
other side; his Majesty sent the Black Rod unto the Commons to acquaint them
that his Majesty was come unto the House of Peers, who immediately thereupon
adjourned, and with their Speaker came unto the House of Lords, where being
come, his Majesty in a short Speech acquainted them with the reasons wherefore
he sent for them, viz. for the passing some Bills, which he understood they had
prepared for him: whereupon the Clerk of the Crown was called, who having read
the Bills, his Majesty passed them according to the usual manner: the first
whereof was (...) the owning of this to be a Parliament du^y (...); the second
for putting the powers in Execution contained in an Ordinance of both Houses
for the raising of seventy thousand pound a month for three months; the third
for the continuance of p^^t of Easter Term, and continuations of all
proceedings at Law: after which the Lord Chancellor Hide in an excellent Speech
acquainted both Houses with his Majesty's ^eadinesse in passing these Acts, and
willingness to pass any others which might tend to the advantage and benefit
of his people, witha^l declaring that his Majesty di^^m^ss another B^^l, viz.
That for the General Pardon, which his Majesty wish^d had been ready, that he
might have pass^d it at this time* requiring them to expedite it with what
speed ^hey could, and that it might be so large and so full as to comprehend
and bury in (...) all doubts an^ fears that might a^^se by reason of the late
differences, withal taking notice of the wonderful providence in effecting of
this great change, which was no less then a Miracle, that those who were most
to be feared would have withstood the present settlement in his Majesty's
re^tauration, should p^ove so isntrumental in bringing him into his Kingdoms,
and all this to be performed without shedding of Blood, which is still to be
wondered at: and thereupon again pressed them to expedite the B^l^ for the
General Pardon; after which the House of Commons being dismissed, his Majesty
returned again by water unto Whitehall.

After which the lords House being adjourned, the lord Cha^cellor Hide went
into Westminster Hall, and heard several causes in the Co^^t of Chancery, as
formerly was accustomed; at the same time Judge Elliot sitting in the Court of
the Kings Bench, Judge Hide and Judge Foster in the Court of Common Pleas, and
Sir O^lando Bridgeman Chief Baron in the Court of Exchequer.

At the House of Commons.
This day upon a motion in the behalf of Sir Edward Fitz-Harris and Mr. Johnson
who were committed by the House for speaking some words touching the Irish
Rebellion, it was

Ordered, That Sir Edward Fitz Harris and Mr. Johnson now in Custody, be
referred to the Committee who are to examine the business touching Mr. Thurloe,
with power to hear all things alleged against them, to ^end for persons,
papers and writings, and report their opinions herein to the House.

The House being acquainted that his Majesty was come unto the House of Pee^s
and had sent for them, they adjourned and went with the Speaker unto the House
of lords where having staid some time they returned, and the Speaker having
taken his Chair, they proceed in the Bill for a General Pardon, and passed many
clauses thereof, after which adjourned until to morrow e^ght of the clock.

The Earl of Manchester's Speech to his Majesty.
THat this day may prove happy to your Majesty, is the hope, the expectation,
and the earnest desire of my Lords the Peers, whose commands are upon me to
make this humble Tender to your Majesty, of their loyal joy for your Majesty's
safe return to your native Kingdom, and for this happy restaura^ion of your
Majesty to your Crown and Dignity, after so long and so severe a suppression of
your just Right and T^t^e.

I shall not reflect upon your Majesty's sufferings, which have been your
peoples miseries; yet I cannot omit to say that as the Nation in general, so
the Peers with a more personal and particular sense have (...) the stroke that
cut the Gordian knot which fastened your Majesty to your Kingdom, and your
Kingdom to your Majesty.

For since those strange and various fluctuations and discomposures in
government, since those horrid and unparalled violations of all order and
justice, Strangers have ruled ^ver us, even with a rod of iron: But now with
satisfaction of heart, we own and see your Majesty our native King, a son of
the vvi^e, a son of the ancient Kings, whose hand holds forth a golden Scepter.

Great King! Give me leave to speak the confidence, as well as the desires of
the Peers of England: Be you the powerful Defender of the (...) Protestant
Faith, the just Assertor and maintainer of the Laws and Liberties of your
subjects; so shall judgment run down like a River, and justice like a mighty
stream; and God, the God of your mercy, who has so miraculously preserved you,
will estab^^sh your Throne in Righteousness and in Peace.

Dread Sovereign! I offer no flattering Titles, but speak the words of Truth:
you are the desire of three Kingdoms, the strength and the stay of the Tribes
of the People, for the moderating of Extremities, the reconciling of
Differences, the satisfying of all Interests, and for the restoring of the
collapsed Honor of these Nations. Their eyes are toward your Majesty, their
tongues with loud Acclamations of joy, speak the thoughts and loyal intentions
of their hearts, their hands are lift up to Heaven with Prayers and Praises:
and what Oral Triumph can equal (...) your Pomp and Glory?

Long may your Majesty live and reign; a support to your Friends, a Terror to
your Enemies, an Honor to your Nation, and an example to Kings, of piety
justice, prudence and power; that this Prophetic Ex^^ession may be verified in
your Majesty, King Charles the second shall be greater then ever was the
greatest of that Name.

The Kings Answer thereunto.
My Lord,
I Am so disordered by my Journey, and with the Noise still sounding in My
Ears (which I confess was pleasing to Me, because it Expressed the Affections
of My People) as I am unfit at the present to make such a Reply as I desire;
Yet thus much I shall say unto you, That I take no greater Satisfaction to My
Self in this My Change, then that I find My Heart Really set to endeavor by
all means for the Restoring of this Nation to their Freedom and Happiness,
And I hope by the Advice of my Parliament to effect it. Of this also you may be
confident, That next to the Honor of God, from whom principally I shall ever
Own this Restoration to My Crown, I shall study the Welfare of My people; And
shall not only be a true D^fender of the Faith, but a just Asse^tor of the
Laws and Liberties of my Subjects.

Saturday, 2. June, at the House of Lords.
The Lords received a Proclamation from the House of Commons, requiring all
those who sat as Judges upon his late Majesty to surrender themselves by a
certain day, or otherwise to forfeit Life and Estate, unto which their
Lordships returned that they would send answer by Messengers of their own.

At the House of Commons.
The House returned an account from Cornwall, that Mr John Carey whose true
name is Carew being apprehended in that County, and through mistake, that he
pleading that his name was not so, was let go by the Constable who apprehended
him.

A Report being made to the House that William Lilly had in Print declared,
that he knew who was the KING'S execution the House thereupon O^de^ed, that
William Lilly be taken into safe custody by the Sergeant at Arms attend^ng the
House, u^till he reveal who was the person that committed the horrid murder
upon his late Majesty.

Monday, 4 June, at the House of Lords.
The Lords read the Proclamation requiring all those who sat as Judges upon
his late Maj^stie to appear by a certain day, or otherwise to forfeit both Life
and Estate, the which they passed.

At the House of Commons.
The Marquess of Ormund, Lord Steward of his Majesty's Family, according to
the order of the House, on Saturday attend^d in the Lobby, where a Table being
placed, he tendered the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, the which the Members
took before they went into the House.

The Speaker having taken the Chair: a Report was made concerning the
Elections of L^st^vell in Cornwell, and Rippon in Yorkshire unto which the
House agreed: and

Resolved, That the Members who si^ at present for those places, are duly
returned, and ought to attend the service of the Parliament accordingly.

The House received an account, that the Lords had assented unto the
Proclamation for those who sat as Judges upon his late Majesty to appear by a
certain day.

They also Ordered, That a thousand pound formerly due unto Major General
Massey with Interest for twelve years be charged upon the Exc^se, and paid in
course unto the said Major General, and his (...) for the receipt thereof shall
be a sufficient discharge.

Mr William Lilly the Astrologer was brought in custody by the Sergeant at
Arms into the Lobby, but by reason of the great affairs of the House he could
not be examined.

The Lord General Moncks Regiment of Horse with Col. Cloberies and Col.
Knights Regiment being Rendezvouzed in Tuttle Fields; His Highness the Duke of
York came thither to see them, who was entertained with shootings and great
acclamations.

From Dub^^n, May 24.
The Convention have Ordered a Committee to Sequester the Estates of Sir
Hardresse Waller, Mi^es Corbet, Gregory Clement, Edmond Lu^low, John Cook
Solicitor in the Trial against his late Majesty, Col. Hunkes, Col. Axtall,
Col. Woogan, Col. Ireton, Col. Hewson, Col. Barrow, Col. Jones, and Lieut. Col.
Phray.

Tuesday, 5. June. At the House of Lords.
This day their Lordships read several private Petitions, and passed some
Orders relating unto particular affairs.

At the House of Commons.
A Report was made to the House that Mr. John Carew, one of those who sat as
Judges upon his late Majesty was apprehended in Devonshire, and sent prisoner
into Plymouth.

Ordered, That the Sheriff of Devonshire do bring in safe custody unto this
House Mr. John Carew, and that the Mayor of Plymouth do deliver him unto the
Sheriff to be brought up accordingly.

A Report was made to the House of the whole proceedings of the pretended High
Court of Justice, and of those who were present and pronounced sentence of
Death upon his late Majesty.

Resolved, That Major General Harris^^, one of those who sat and pronounced
sentence of Death in the pretended High Court of Justice upon his late Majesty
of happy memory, be exempted from the benefit of the Act for a general Pardon
and Oblivion.

The House read a Letter from Colonel Hutchinson, wherein be acknowledges his
guiltiness in his being concerned in that horrid murder committed on his
Sovereign, humbly imploring the intercession of the House unto his Royal
Majesty in h^s behalf, withal begging liberty from his Imprisonment upon his
Paro^^, the which the House granted unto him accordingly.

Dublin, 28 May.
The Convention of Estates ordered, that all Laws against Sabbath-breaking,
Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness and all Debauchery, be put in execution, and
commanded the chief Magistrates to see the same executed.

White Hall, 5 June.
The Heads of the several Colleges and Halls in Cambridge, with some Masters
of Arts, all in their formalities, presented themselves to his Majesty, where
Dr. Love made a Latin Oration to his Majesty, unto which his Majesty returned a
gracious answer, and they all had the honor to kiss his hand.

Wednesday, 6 June.
By a Letter from Mr. Will^am Thory of Wisb^^ch, unto Mr. Michael Morsel, we
understand the great sorwardnesse of that Town in manifesting their duty in the
Proclaiming of his Majesty, which they performed with so great ceremonies,
rejoicing, and acclamations, that few places can compare with them, the which
did sufficiently manifest the affections which they bore unto His Majesty, and
the content they took in the doing there of: the States Arms after they had
been contemptiously dragged through the Streets, was the same evening bu^nt in
a great Bonefire made for that purpose; the evening was concluded with ringing
of Bells, Bonefires, etc. There was present so great a confluence of people,
that in the memory of men the like has not been seen: they have likewise sent
unto this City to have his Majesty's Arms curiously carved and gilded, the
which by the care of Mr Morsel will be performed accordingly. Mr. Thory
further certifies, that they understanding his Majesty would make his entrance
into London the 29. of May, which was his Birth day, for Joy thereof they made
it holy day, using all Demonstrations of rejoicing, as ringing of Bells,
Bon-fires, etc. they also placed a Drum with several Musketeers on the Church
Steeple, the like they did upon Mr. John Thurloe's stately house, who by their
Beating and firing in an orderly manner, each unto other, made the work of the
Day more pleasing.

At the House of Lords.
The Lords took into consideration the Lands consigned unto the Queens Majesty
as her Joynter; and after came to some Resolv^s concerning the same, and sent a
message unto the House of Commons for a conference presently to beheld; which
was assented unto, and at the said conferences they delivered their Resolutions
for the restoring of her Majesty's Joynter, with their reasons thereupon, after
which they adjourned.

At the House of Commons.
A Report was made to the House concerning the securing of Mr. Cook and some
others by the Convention in Ireland, who were concerned in the murder of his
late Majesty.

The House assumed the debate upon the Bill for a General Pardon. and

Resolved, That Thomas Scot one of those who sat and pronounced Sentence of
Death upon his late Majesty, be exempted from the Benefit of the Act for a
General Pardon.

The House passed the like Resolves concerning Mr. Say, Col. John Jones,
Cornelius Holland, Mr. John Lisle, late one of the Commissioners for the Great
Seal, and Col. John Barkstead late Lieutenant of the Tower of London.

The House received a message by the Judges from the H^use of Lords for a
Conference to be held immediately, unto which the House assented, and appointed
a Commit^ee to manage the same. After which the House adjourned until to
morrow eight of the clock.

Upon a Report unto his Majesty's privy Council of several persons who were
pretended Friends, but betrayers of his Cause and Interest; Orders were issued
forth to apprehend several particular persons, some being al^e^dy taken and
sent unto the the Tower of London, in order to a speedy trial for their
treacherous Actings.

A Committee being appointed to examine Mr. William Lilly, touching the person
who committed the horrid murder upon his late Majesty, Reports, that he had
informed them that one George Joyce commonly known by the name of Cornet Joyce
wos the person who performed that (to be abhorred) action.

This day His Majesty by the advice of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, set forth a Proclamation, wherein he commanded all those that sat
and condemned the late King Charles the First, of happy memory, to come and
submit themselves within 14. days, or otherwise to have no benefit of the
general Pardon, and all who shall harbor or conceal them, to be in danger of
petty Treason.

Thursday 7 June. At the House of Commons.
The House read a Bill for nulling and making void all pretended High Courts of
Justice and all proceedings by them which was committed.

They also made a further progress in the Bill for a gene^al pardon.

Resolved, That Andrew Broughton one of the Clerks to the pretended high C^urt
of Justice be excepted from the benefit of a general pardon

R^solved, That Edward Dendy Sergeant at Arms to the pretended High Court of
Justice be excepted from the b^nefit of the Act for a general pardon.

The House read the Examinations of John Co^k Soliciter to the pretended High
Court of Justice, which was taken by the Recorder of the City of Dublin, and
sent unto the House, he having refused to answer any questions relating to the
Trial of the King, or to sign the examinations.

Resolved, That John Cook Soliciter to the pretended High Court of Justice be
excepted from the benefit of the Act for a general Pardon.

Resolved, That th^s House does accept of his Majesty's gracious offer of
Pardon and Indemnity to themselves and the Commons of England.

The H^use read the examination of a certain person which mentions that Hugh
Peter's did commit that horrid murder in cutting off the Kings Head, but upon
other informations 'twas conceived that he was not the person which did perform
it.

Ordered, That George Joyce commonly known by the name of Cornet Joyce, and
Hugh Peter's be taken into custody, and that the Sergeant at Arms attending
this House do take the said George Joyce and Hugh Peter's into safe custody
accordingly.

Resolved, That the persons who were concerned in Cutting off the Head of His
late Majesty of glorious memory be excepted from Pardon.

The Committee appointed to withdraw reports their considerations to the House.

Resolved, That this House does accept of His Majesty's gracious offer of
Ind^mpnity and Pardon.

Resolved, That this House with the Speaker do wait upon his Majesty, thereby
to te^tifie their joyful acceptance of His Majesty's Royal Pardon and
Indemp^ity to themselves and all the Commons of England.

The House Read a Letter from the Duke of Gloucester acknowledging their favor
in the Present of mo^^es, withal testifying that he should study to
acknowledge their favors, which he did est^em above all Treasury; the like
Letter the House yesterday received from the Duke of York.

London, Printed by John Redmayn in Paternoster Row.


