Numb. 34 Mercurius Publicus, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence: WITH
The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For Information
of the People. Published by Order. From Thursday August 16. to Thursday August
23. 1660.
White Hall.
THis following Address was presented to His Majesty, in the Closet at
White Hall, on Friday the tenth of August, 1660. by George Wild Doctor of
Divinity, accompanied with Sir William Haward Knight, Gentleman in Ordinary of
His Majesty's Privy Chamber, and these of the Clergy, Doctor Pearson, Rich.
Randall, Tho. Mulcaster, Tho. Packenham, Edw. Lorkin, and Jo. Worthington.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. The most humble and joyful Congratulatory
Address of diverse Rectors, Vicars, and others of the Clergy in the County of
Surrey.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty.
THe present Mercies we enjoy through the Infinite Go^dness and Bounty of our
God, are wonderful in our eyes! No Power but Omnipotency could extricate us out
of those woeful Confusions, and lamentable Labyrinths of Ruin, into which our
National and Personal sins had so deeply and deservedly plunged us. For whereas
we were not long since despairing of ever beholding Your Majesty's blessed Face
in Peace, and our troubled thoughts were, That there was no path for Your
Majesty to walk unto Your Royal Throne but blood and fire, and pillars of
smoke; Lo, now to our very amazement, it has pleased the great King of Heaven
and Earth [of whom Your Majesty's Person is an express Image, and lively
character in Your Kingly Power and Sovereign Authority] to make way thereunto
without shedding in the Field one drop of precious Christian blood. Nay, he
has caused those very Swords, which were lately unnaturally and violently
drawn against the life of Your most Excellent Majesty, to be ready and willing
to be drawn now for You, and has constrained Your most Implacable Enemies to
submit to Your Majesty's Mercy.

And now we hope, that as the Lord has sweetly inclined Your Majesty's heart,
like Your Father of ever blessed Memory, to pass by every Insolency committed
against Your Princely Sacred Person: so he will give every misled and undutiful
Subject a relenting spirit, to mourn heartily for their wicked disloyalties,
and to supplicate as to God's infinite Mercy, so likewise for Your Majesty's
most Gracious Pardon, which as we humbly begged by the late Act of the Commons
in Parliament; so we do by this our Address signify our joyful acceptance
thereof at Your Majesty's most Clement and Gracious Hands. And henceforth we
shall strive in our Prayers with the most High God, to grant to every Soul
within Your Majesty's Dominions, true grace to manifest their fear of him, by
their Honor and Obedience toward you.

And as we heartily desire to show our selves Your dutiful Subjects, so we do
not doubt of finding Your Majesty an Indulgent Nursing Father, to carry us in
Your Bosom, to Cover us with Your Wings of Protect^on, to Rule us with Your
Scepter of Righteousness, to Defend us with Your Sword of Might, to Lead us by
Your most Holy Princely Ex^mple to all Piety and Virtue, that we may be an
happy People under a most Blessed and Glorious KING.

And now the Mighty Counselor from above inspire Your Majesty's Royal heart,
and make you as wise as a glorious Angel, that You may discern between Good and
Evil, and be able with your great Wisdom, to heal the Sores, and cures the
Wounds of these Your distracted Kingdoms; that You may with an Invincible
Courage, under God, Instrumentally finish the great and Miraculous Work that he
has begun for Your Majesty and your people, in Restoring Your Royal Person to
all Your Hereditary and due Rights; Your Parliaments to their known Privilege;
Your Subjects to their Charters and just Liberties; the Church and Clergy to
their ^andient Leg^l Government, Or^er, Beauty, Dignity, and Splendour* That all
Posterities to come, as well as this present Generation, may rise up to call
You CHARLES The Blessed King.

Now the Lord Love You, Delight in You, give You length of Days, with an
Un-interrupted Prosperity, Protect Your Sacred Person from all secret
Conspiracies, discover and convert Your Enemies, Increase and Multiply Your
Friends, Set Your Throne in the Hearts of all Your People, Bless Your
Government; and when Your Majesty's long and most Happy Reign shall expire,
grant that there may not be wanting u^e of the Royal L^^e to Sit on Your Throne
after You, and receive Your Immortal Soul into His Heavenly Kingdom, there to
wear an Immarcelcible Crown of Glory.

This is, and shall be the continual, hearty, zealous, fervent, loyal Prayer of
us Your Majesty's most faithful, most obedient, and most loving Subjects,
Thomas Turner, Rector of Fetcham. S. T. D. John Hacket, Rector of Cheame. S. T.
D. George Wild, L L. D. etc. John Pearson, D. D. Ralph Cook Rector of
Burstow, S. T. D John Harris, S. T. B. And many others.



Westminster.
That Noble and accomplished person Francis Lord Newport, Baron of High- Arcal
(who with his whole Family has done and suffered so much for his Majesty, as
well out, as in the Tower of London) is now made Governor of his Majesty's
Castle at Lualow, where his Lordships own Company of Foot are assigned, besides
what other Command his Lordship has over the County.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
An Expedient for taking away all Impositions, and for raising a Revenue
without Taxes. By Francis Cradock Merchant. Printed for Henry Scile, His
MAJESTY'S Stationer.

An Hawking Bagg, wherein was some small Linen, a Letter-Case, and Letters,
with other Writings, was lost near Grantham, in Lincolnshire, If any have found
it, and bring it to the George at Stanford, or to the Naggs head in James's
street Covent Garden, he shall receive ten pounds for his pains.

We are commanded to give notice again, That His MAJESTY for diverse weighty
Reasons as well as the extraordinary heat of the season) will forbear touching
any more of those who have the Evil, till further Order; of which we shall give
you timely Advertisement.

We must now acquaint you with a particular from Ireland, which had we it not
from unquestionable credit, we should not mention. In the Town of Dundalkchin
(^n English Castle-Town) in the County of Louth, there is a chief and very
ancient Seat belonging to the Noble Family of Bellew, Sir Christopher Bellew
being the four and twentieth Knight of that Family lineally descended, all
faithful Subjects to the Crown. About this House and Town were many Ash-Trees,
wherein many thousand Rooks did constantly breed, but when the late troubles
began, about eighteen years since, all the Rooks quitted the place, which had
been their constant habitation Winter and Summer, for above three hundred
years, and were never since discovered in that place till the end of April last
(when our Gracious Sovereign's Restoration was visible) at which time many
thousand Rooks came again to the same place, though the Trees were most of them
cut down; where for want of Trees to rest on, the greater part sa^e upon
Hedges, and Banks of Ditches, spreading themselves upon the Mote-hill, whereof
all the C^untry took notice, and remembering when they fled, concluded their
return to be an Omen of his Majesty's speedy and happy Restoration.

Whereas the enemies of Episcopacy have traduced George Baker, (Chaplain to the
late Primate of Ireland, and now Elect Bishop of Waterford) as gu^lty of some
misdemeanors in Preaching a Funeral Sermon in St Margarets, Westminster, at the
Funeral of Mr. Christopher Walker, ^^ which Church the said Mr. Baker never
preached, nor was there present that day: The Certificate of the Inhabitants of
St Margarets Westminster.
WHereas at the Funeral of M. Christoph. Walker late of S. Margarets
Westminster, deceased, solemnized at the said Church July 19 last, there was a
Sermon then preached by Mr. Baker of Maribone. We whose names are hereunto
subscribed do testify, that we were present at the preaching of the said
sermon, and that M. Baker of Maribone did preach the same, and not M. Geo.
Baker, Chaplain to the late Lord Primate of Armach, as has bin slanderously
reported. In testimony whereof we have hereunto put our hands this fourth day
of August 1660.

Tho. Kirk, Bryan Barnaby, Adam Prince, John Belchamber, Bartholomew Pylman,
Will. Blagrave, Tho. Kirk junior, George Walker, Joyce Walker, widow of the
deceased.




London.
You may remember when the Rump last lifted up it self, a Person adventured to
blot out that monstrous Inscription which the bloody Rumpers had caused to be
set over the place where stood the Statue of that glorious Martyr King Charles
the first; several persons assumed that honest Enterprise to themselves, as
there will never want such as will own a good action when crowned with success:
Know therefore, that it was Mr. Michael Darby now Painter to the Company of
Mercers, who hearing how three eminent Members of that Society were troubled to
behold that infamous Superscription: the said Mr. Darby freely offered himself
to blot it out, engaging to do it, before he slept, and accordingly performed
it at a full afternoon Exchange time; who as soon as he had fin^shed it, with a
loudly voice said, God save King Charles the second; for which Act of Loyalty he
has had the Honor to beautify the Statues of our gracious King and his
glorious Father, with the in^criptions under written.

CAROLUS PRIMUS. Monarcharum Mag. Britanniae Secundus, Franciae and Hiberniae
Rex, Martyr ad Coelum missus penultimo, Jan. Anno Dom. MDCXLVIII.

The Scepter in his right Hand, A Church in his left Arm, A Globe at his left
Foot, and on his Shield, MAGNA CHARTA.

CAROLUS SECUNDUS. Monarcharum Mag. Britanniae Tertius, Franciae and Hibernia
Rex, Aetat. suae Anno. tricessimo, Regni duodecimo, Restaurationis primo, Anno
Dom. MDCLX.

The Scepter in his right Hand, In his left the Globe, and on his Shield,
AMNESTIA.

From Lempster.
Major Theophilus Heart, Major to the Earl of Sandwich drew together four Troops
of Horse of his Lordships Regiment near Litchfield, where after he had at large
declared the weight and importance of a solemn Oath, he tendered to them the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which they all took with very much alacrity.
Thence he rode to the other two Troops then at Kedderm inster, where after the
like Exhortation, they all with like cheerfulness took the foresaid Oaths.

Hamburg, August 9.
Last night a little before the Gates of this City were shut up, arrived here
Christina Queen of Sweden, with a great Train of Followers, it is said she
intends to make some stay here, but of that there is no certainty. The
Consederate Forces in Holstein and Pomerania (as the report goes) are like to
lie yet a month longer in their Quarters. Letters from Copenhagen intimate,
that affairs were put there into a quiet posture, the Danes being now at some
ease, since the Swedes have quitted their Islands, and are all gone over into
Schonen, whose transportation being much furthered by the Holland Vice Admiral
de Ruyter, his Majesty of Denmark has given him many thanks, besides a noble
present. This Vice Admiral is now in readiness to repair with his Fleet into
Holland with the first opportunity. They w^^e from Dantzick, that the several
Ratifications of peace were brought thither, but were not yetmutally
interchanged. The Plague beg^ns to be brief again in those parts,

On Saturday the 18 instant, his Majesty gave his Royal assent to an Act for
the continuation of the levying and payment of the Imposition called Excise (as
also all Arrears thereof from Farmers since 1657. and from Merchants and other
persons since March 25. 1658.) by and to Nathaniel Manton, Benjamin Goodwin,
Thomas Lenthal, and Edward Wingate Esquires, appointed Commissioners for the
Grand E^cise, from the 20 of August 1600. inclusively to the 5 of December next
following. The ^ame Act does appoint Sir Rich. Brown, Sir Will. Dawley, John
Bi^ch, Will. Prynne, Edward King, and Robert Scawen Esquires, Commissioners for
Appeals and regulating the Excise.

Provided all sorts of Oils, Wines, Tobacco's of the English Plantations,
Silks, Tapes, Inckles, Linnens, Pan-Tiles, Playing Cards, Girdles, and Cabinets
of all sorts, Copperice, Hops, Lace, imported after the 24 of July, be
discharged of that duty.

Riga in Lie^land, July 10.
The Duke of Courland having been magnificently treated by our Governor and
Magistrates, departed hence the seventh of this month with all his Family and
Retinue to go for Libaw; he was met and received by the way by a Captain, in
the head of a Troop of 300 horse.

Advertisement.
MOst Excellent and approved Dentrifices, to scowre and cleanse the Tee^h
making them white as Ivory, preserves from the Toothache, so that being
constantly used, the parties using it, are never troubled with the Toothach? It
fastens the Teeth, sweetens the Breath, and preserves the Gums and Mouth from
Cankets and Imposthumes, and being beaten to powder, and drunk in Wine, or any
other drink, is a good remedy for any flux or Lask. Invented and made by Robert
Turner, the only Author of them, and are only to be had at the House of
Thomas Rookes, Stationer, at the Holy Lamb at the East End of St. Paul's Church,
near the School, in Sealed Papers.

LOst out of a Pasture-ground from Lathbury by Newport Pagnel, the tenth of
August, a black Gelding of Henry Andrews Esquire about fifteen hands high, six
years old, blows more then ordinary in his Trotting: If any can give notice to
Mr. Anthony Bercher at the Black Swan in Cheapside, or to Mr. Richard Fooks in
Newport-Pagnel, they shall be well satisfied.

A White Gelding about fourteen handfuls high, ten years old, somewhat hollow
eyed, a coller-gall cross his breast, a little heated in the f^refeet, has all
his paces complete, stolen or strayed from the Marsh near Fox-Hall, on
Thursday night the sixteenth instant: If any one can give notice to Mr. Tho.
Spence at the Grass-hopper in the Strand, an Upholster or to Mr. Hendricks at
the Portcullis and Swan at Lambeth, he shall have Twenty shillings for his
pains.

From Candia, July 16.
The Bashaw Governor of Canea, perceiving the time to draw nigh that a siege
would be laid to this place, he has caused all the Arms to be taken away from
the Inhabitants, fearing lest they might keep secret Intelligence with the
Venetians; He has likewise shipped away many little and unserviceable persons.

From Vienna, July 30.
His Imperial Majesty has been hunting of Stags about Gratz, where he killed
about 100 of them. His Najesty is now to go with a small retinue into
Carinthia, and Craine, to take homage of those Countries, the rest of his
followers are to return hither. From Upper Hungaria it is certified, that the
Count of Serin has received orders from his Imperial Majesty to withdraw his
Forces from the Fort of Canischa; But the Turks are not minded to quit
Transylvania, till those 500000 Florens, which Barchay had raised from the
States of that Country, be repayed them, the most part of which sum he has
disburst upon Levies and Ammunition for the War, and therefore does yet desire
more of the Country. The Hungarian and the Ragozian Garrison in Great Waradin
solicits earnestly for a speedy relief, at least, that they could be provided
but with 3 or 4 expert Gunners, because the Turks are fully resolved to lay
siege to that place, whereof notice has been given to his Imperial Majesty at
Gratz by a Courrier. At the beginning of August his Majesty intends to set his
Journey forwards for Carinthia, in order whereunto all necessary provision is
made, Horses and Mules for Carriages being appointed to attend his Majesty at
Gratz. The Colonels Stellmacher, Sparre and Priami have received orders to
advance with their Regiments out of Bohemia toward Lintz, whence it is
thought, they will proceed on their march hitherwards, and so for Hungaria,
where, (in regard the Turks have sat down with their maine Body before
Great-Woradin) the Imperialists have likewise taken their Headquarters and
begin to encampe themselves, being found at their last muster about Ratkomatz,
to be of the number of ten thousand men, there has nothing as yet passed
between these two Armies, save only, that the parties on both sides do now
and then encounter one another.

Since our last News from the Army, be pleased to take this account of two
Regiments belonging to two persons of Honor; the first is that Regiment, which
formerly belonged to Col. Herbert Morley and is now commanded by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Peterborough, whose Capt. Lieutenant is Benjamin
Ruddierd, and his Lieutenant Colonel is that Loyal Gentleman Sir John Ogle.

Captain Robert Goffe Lieutenant William Farley Major Thomas Watson Lieutenant
Fil^bert Vernatti Ensign Thomas White Captain Francis Archer Lieutenant Martin
Haward Ensign Edward Haward Captain Thomas Adams Lieutenant Gilbert Micher
Ensign (...) Mordant Captain William White Lieutenant Nicholas Sheppard Captain
Henry Cullingham Lieutenant John Child Ensign Cuthbert Carre Captain Henry
Eastern Ensign Sir Edward Richards Captain William Greenaway Lieutenant
Richard Bannister Ensign John Height Captain George Salter Lieutenant William
Gellabrown Ensign
And the other Regiment which formerly belonged to Col. Pury, is now conferred
on Henry Lord Herbert, whose Captain Lieutenant is, Tho: Nawfan Nathaniel Cole
Ensign Thomas Pury Lieutenant Colonel John Matthews Lieutenant Edward Charleton
Ensign Tho: French Major John Thomas Lieut. Alexander Coats Ensign Col. Roger
Whitley, who has done and suffered sufficiently for his Majesty, is Captain to
Captain Phillips late Company and Captain Griffantius Phillips Lieutenant.
Thomas Barnes Ensign William Coats Captain (...) Boon Lieut: Robert Dashfield
Ensign Thomas W^llward Capt. (...) Jeanes Lieutenant (...) Compton Ensign John
Grove Captain Thomas Jackson Lieutenant Arnold Whiffin Ensign Edward Winter
Captain of Capt. Ellis late Company. (...) Witterne Lieutenant Henry Lester
Capt. to Capt. Greens late Company. John Green Lieut. Tho: Drake Ensign Richard
Badeley Surgeon Jenkin David Quartermaster and Marshal. Richard Basset Capt.
of William Neast his Company. Gabriel Holmes Lieutenant Luke Thomas Ensign


Advertisement.
WHereas diverse Riots have been committed by persons disguised in the night, in
the Forest of Duffeild Frith in the County of Derby, upon the Inheritance of
John Heal Esquire (a Member of Parliament) and William Smith Esquire both Gentlemen of
his Majesty's Privy Chamber. These are to give notice, that whoever will
declare the Authors, Actors, or Abettors of those Riots to Mr. George Gregson
of Turneditch, or to Mr. Henry Smith of Denby near Duffeild, they shall not
only be remitted if they were Actors, but requited for the discovery, there
being a Decree in the Exchequer, before the Lord Chief Baron (upon full hearing
of Council on both sides) against German Poole, George Poole, Miller, etc. the
16 of July last, and the former Decree in the Duchy Court confirmed, whereof
it was thought fit to give notice that none hereafter may run into future
inconveniences*

Advertisement.
WE are desired to give notie that William Hall about 17 years old, is run away
from his Master Major Dennis and has taken with him the sum of 29 pounds. He
is in Footmans habit of Gray Serge, edged with red, brown hair curld, not very
long, and of pale complexion. If any can give notice of him, they may leave
word with Mr. Samuel Mearne his Majesty's Bookbinder in Little Britain, and
they shall be thankfully rewarded.

From Argileshire in Scotland Aug. 13. 1660.
Here is very much rejoicing at the Imprisonment of the Marquess of Argile: for
though this Country bears his name, there are too many Families which he has
endeavored to ruin, the woeful experience whereof will be evidenced by the
Clandowgals, Clan Leans, Mac Donnals, and Mac Waughtons, besides the unnatural
and unhumane usage of many hundred poor souls sent by him into the Island of
Jura, where they all perished. Whether he has practiced murder, and taking
possession, you will hear ere long: I assure you that thousands are glad of
what is done, who, although you yet have not their hands in this Letter, yet
neither hands nor hearts will be wanting to preserve his Majesty's peace in
Argileshire against all opposers whatsoever.

Hull.
His Majesty having been pleased to Constitute the Lord Belasyse Lord
Lieutenant of the East Ryding in Yorkshire, his Lordship summoned the Country
to appear before him at Beverley the 13. of this instant August, together with
his Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, and chief Constables; where
being met, they gave order for the raising the Trained Bands, being 3000. men,
into three gallant Regiments, Commanded by Sir Francis Boynton, Sir John
Hotham, and Mr. Wharton, as Colonels; and Sir Robert Hilliard Commands the
Horse. These will all muster (in Bodies) before his Lordship within fifteen
days after their Harvest is over; the example whereof will be of great
consequence to other Counties, toward the settlement of the Ancient Legal way
of Trained Bands for the security of the Kingdom.

Saturday August 18. 1660,
This afternoon his Royal Highness the Duke of York was pleased to bring with
him the Duke of Gloucester, the Duke of Albemarle, and several other persons of
Honor, to the house of his Servant Captain Edmond Warcupp in Durham Yard, to
accept the entertainmen^ of a C^^^ation.

After so many Changes of Officers in several Regiments, you may now take a
List of all the Officers in his Excellencies own Regiment, both Horse and Foot,
wherein there is no mutation, his Grace having chosen such approved Officers as
require no alteration.

George Monck Duke of Albermarle etc. Captain General of all his Majesty's
Forces ^n England, Scotland and Ireland, Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, his
Captain Lieutenant is,
John Paynter Ralph Butcher Ensign Ethelbert Morgan Lieut: col. and captain.
Tho: Goodwin Lieut: Richard Rewcastle Ensign. Francis Nichols Major and Captain
John Saunders Lieu: John Cobb Ensign John Miller Captain Adjutant General
Robert Cooper Li^ut: Edward Basenet Ensign. William Downs captain William
Underhill Lieut: Michael Adderses Ensign Robert Winter Capt: James Hubbard
Lieut: John Clerk Ensign Tho. Mansfield captain John Rook Lieut: Daniel Court
Ensign John Collins captain John Harrison Lieut. Tho. Figg. Ens. John Peter's
Capt. William Brangman Lieu. William Mackerith Ens. John Mottlow Capt. Tho.
Feiges Lieu. John Balder Ens. John Price Chaplain. Nich. Predy Chyturgion Rich.
Collins Quartermaster and Marshal.
His Excellencies Regiment of Horse.
Philip Wilkinson, Capt. Lieu. John Maynard Cornit. Nicholas Hudson
Quartermaster* Tho Johnson Major. John Cogan Lieut. Joh. Smith Cornet. Tho.
Aldy Quartermaster. Tho. Symnall Capt. Tho. Roper Lieut. Tho. Gallant Cornet.
Hugh Whittle Q. m. Ant. Nowers Capt. Walter Partridge Lieut. Dan. Smith Cornet.
Benjamin Sergeant Q. m. Peter Wilmot Capt. William Grout Lieut. Daniel Dalton
Cornet. Joseph Hurandal Q. m. John Paddon Capt. Tho. Buller Lieut. John Britain
Cornet. Obadiah Boole Q. m. Tho. Reeves Chyrurgion.
Yesterday August 21.) the Gentlemen of the Artillery-ground for the City of
London, having invited their Highnesses the Dukes of York and Gloucester, they
were accordingly entertained with the Duke of Buckingham, at Merchant Tayle^s
Hall. Sir John Robinson Lieut. of the Tower of London, leading them th^ther
from St. Paul's Church, where they had a Sermon.

His Grace the Duke of Albemarle etc. is by the special favor of His Majesty
declared Lord Lieutenant of the Kingdom of Ireland.

His Grace the Duke of Alheniarle has sent Letters by His Majesty's command to
the English Commissioners in Scotland to cease any ^^^ther acting as
Commissioners after the 22 of this instant ^ugust, the Government of Scotland
being to be reduced to its ancient course.

His Excellency notwithstanding his constant abode at Court, has as constant a
watch and eye upon his Majesty's Army, and therefore taking notice that some
Officers are too often absent from their Commands, whereby the wonted
discipline of the Army will in time be much impaired, and several incident
disorders committed by Soldiers in the absence of their Commanders, has for
prevention thereof sen^ Orders to the Commissiary General of the Musters to
take care that no Troops or Companies be mustered, where two
Commission-Officers are not present, who upon examination have not continued at
their respective charges; whereof we are commanded to give notice, that no
Officer may pretend ignorance.

His Excellency has given express order, that no new men Officers or Soldiers
be taken into any Troop or Company, or continued (be they of never so ancient
standing) that have not or shall not take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
to his Majesty; wherein his Excellency is resolved to take strict account,
being informed that some new Officers and Soldiers are privately listed who had
not taken the said oaths; the several Muster masters being to pass none but
such, whom they are assured have taken the said oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho: Mewcomb, 1660.


