Numb. 29. Mercurius Publicus: COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence;
WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For
Information of the People. Published by Order. From Thursday July 12. to
Thursday July 19. 1660.
Thursday July 12.
THis day dyed that eminent Servant of his Majesty, John Lord Culpepper Master
of the Rolls, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, whose
incomparable Abilities and readiness at all great Debates are sufficiently
known to all that ever heard him or had discourse with him; who for his
Loyalty, Courage, and Wisdom (more particularly in the Battle at Edge^^il, as
far as concerned this Noble Lord) had the honor to be styled by his late
Majesty (when he made him a Peer of England) Praecipuum Coronae nostrae
fulcimentum.

Hague, July 8. 1660.
Our Letters from Heydelberg intimate, that on Tuesday the 13 instant will be
kept a day of Prayers and Thanksgivings in Heydelberg, Worms, Frankend^le,
Heylbron, and through all his Electoral Highnesses Dominions of the Palatinate,
for the happy Restoration of His Sacred Majesty of Great Britain. In the great
Church of Heydelberg will be a Sermon, whose Text is to be taken out of the
second Book of Samuel, the 19 Chapter, and the 14 and 15 Verses, And he bowed
the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man, so that they
sent this word unto the King, Return thou and all thy servants. So the King
returned, and came to Jordan; and Judah came to Gilgal to go to meet the King,
to conduct the King over Jordan.

Before the Townhouse therein, there is erected a stately Fountain adorned
with all sorts of Fruits and Flowers, from whence shall spring several sorts
of Wine, the rest of the day after the Sermon, is to be spent in Feasting and
Jollity, with sounding of Drums and Trumpets, and at night many curious
Fireworks are to be performed.

London.
On Wednesday the 11 instant, between one and two in the morning, happened a
fire in Thread needle-street, between the Exchange and St. Bennet Finck Church,
by the Alley commonly called Sweetings rents, several houses were consumed by
it. It is said to have been first perceived in a wall between the Cock and a
Scriveners house next adjoining to it, but in which house it began we have no
certain information.

Whitehall.
His Majesty in consideration of the eminent loyalty and signal services of
that great Warrior and faithful Subject his Excellency the Lord General Monck,
has been graciously pleased to confer these high titles of honor on him.

George Duke of Albemarlie, Earl of Torington, Baron Monck of Potheridge,
Beauchamp, and Teyes, Captain General and Commander in chief of all his
Majesty's Forces in his Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Master of
his Majesty's horse, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of
his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.

And as a further addition yet to this most Noble personage, give us leave to
tell you of that honor which God himself has bestowed on him, in making him
the chief Instrument in restoring his Sacred Majesty, and in his Majesty Peace,
plenty and happiness to the three Kingdoms.

On Friday the 13 instant, his Grace, accompanied by the Duke of Buckingham,
and other personages of high quality, went to take his place in the House of
Peers.

In the Army you will find some alterations of Officers, yet such, as that the
private soldiers may rejoice in having the Nobles to govern them; and the rest
of the Officers (who by their constant adherence to his Excellency, have
preserved themselves free from the least suspicion, and do still continue in
command) do now take it for an honor to go a step back to make room for such
noble Chieftains.

Whereof first that most honorable personage Aubray Vere Earl of Oxford has
the Regiment that was lately Col. George Smithsons, his Capt. Lieutenant is
that loyal Knight, Sir William Blakeston.

Geo. Smithson late Colonel, is now Major of the same Regiment.

Tho. Lilburn late Major, now eldest Captain.

Francis Wilkinson Captain.

William Rhoads Captain.

William Wheatley Captain.

Thomas Fairfax formerly Capt. Lieutenant, now Lieutenant to Major Smithson.

For the Regiment of Foot that was lately Col. Fagg's, you have John Viscount
Mordaunt Col. and Sir Tho. Woodcock Lievt. Col. of the same Regiment, who were
both brought before the same High Court of Justice.

Henry Needler late Lievt. Col. is now made Major of the same Regiment.

Ier. Harrison late Major, now eldest Captain.

Hartgill Baron Captain.

The Lord Herbert commands now as Colonel that Regiment that was lately Col.
Pury's.

And Tho. Pury late Colonel, is now Lievt. Col. of the same Regiment.

Tho. French late Lievt. Col. now Major.

William Nest late Major, now eldest Captain.

Major General Sir Edward Massey is now Colonel of that Regiment that was
lately Colonel Geo. Twisleton's.

Geo. Twisleton late Colonel, now Lievt. Col. of that Regiment.

Sam. Barry late Lievt. Col. now Major.

Dennis Tailor late Major, now eldest Captain.

John Gainsford Captain of that Company late Captain Sowton's.

William Parker Captain.

Ant. Welden Captain.

Tho. Gl^dstone Captain of the Company late Captain Thompsons.

William Seymor Captain.

John Bowler Captain of the Company late Captain Shaftoe's.

Besides these Officers of the Army, there is Major Edward Strange, who (for
his faithful service to his Majesty, from the beginning to the end of the War)
is now made Governor of Hurst Castle.

There now stands committed to the Black-Rod Sir John Thoregood, who had been
one of the High Court of Justice* which put to death that Heroic Lord Capel,
etc. and endeavored as much for the brave Earl of Norwich, and Sir John Owen.

Sir William Row of Higham-hills in Essex is also committed thither.

So is Mr. Samuel Moyer, unknown to no man that has but heard of Haberdashers
Hall, where he filled the Chair and his own purse.

Mr. George L^ngham, a Citizen of London.

Mr. William Wiburn, as good a Citizen as the former.

Colonel Richard Downs, you know whose Judge he was, and that l^^r^ed,
merciful Judge, M. Richard Keebl^, who (for his advantage) in Chancery knew not
how to deny any thing, and in a High Court of Justice how to grant any thing.

And after all these, there is one Bowen that belonged to St. Paul's m^rk^^
(formerly a Churchyard, till that worldly Saint Alderman Titchbourn turned it
to a market) who not content to rail at the Bishops (who one would think have
been slandered long enough) broke out into such impudent language against the
House of Peers now sitting, as a man would scarce have thrown at the other
House, for which and other enormities he is now honored with an imprisonment,
though Bowen to^d the Wi^nesse, that for all this he hoped to see another Turn,
but what he means by another Turn, a little time will show.

Besides these mentioned under the Black-Rod, there are three more sent lately
to the Tower, particularly Col. Hacker, who carried a Partizan and commanded
the Guards when our late Sovereign was put to death, where this Colonel was on
the Scaffo^d, but on Thursday last was for High Treason committed to the Tower.

And yesterday July 12. Colonel Axtell was sent thither, who commanded the
Irish Foot for the Committee of Safety, and is the most injured person alive if
he have not killed forty times more in cold blood then in hot; but how he got
the Lord Montgarrets Estate, or how that Noble Lord came to lose it, we need
not tell you.

And (after all) the same day was committed M. Thomas Scot (not long since
c^^l'd Secretary Scot) who was sent prisoner out of Flanders, being one of the
seven excepted from pardon, a person (in the opinion of the people of England)
not to be matched in Scotland, nor any where else but where he now is: And (for
the satisfaction of all good men) both Scotland and Ireland, as the Letters
thence assure us, are as quite as England, and (maugre all little inventions)
are like so to continue*

Constantinople, May 15.
One part of this City called Galata, is lately consumed by fire, except only
the Covent and Church of the Jesuits.

Here is dreadful news come from the Isle of Cephalonia, where by an
Earthquake two Territories called Argustoly and Paloty were destroyed, and
above 2000 Inhabitants miserably perished.

From Cashaw, June 18, and 20.
The Corpse of the deceased Prince Ragotzkie was carried to Oetschr the 18. of
this instant, to which place the Princess his mother (with the Court) removed,
expecting the coming of an Ambassador from Vienna. This Princess submits her
self, with the residue of the Army, ammunition and provision, to the Devotion
of his Imperial Majesty. And in regard the Grand Seignior threatens to keep the
two Jurisdictions, pretending to have won them by the Sword, and will not allow
they should do homage to the Emperor, or if they do, he will utterly destroy
them with Fire and Sword, (in pursuance whereof he has commanded thither a
considerable Force) of which advertisement being given to ours, the Prince
Palatine, Genesis Susa, and the President of the Chamber of Hungary, are with all
speed gone from Experies, Genesis Heyster with his forces being advanced before
them, and continuing their march daily by break of day, that they may put a
Garrison into those two Jurisdictions before the Turks arrive. The Castavian
Vice-General Pethoe Sigmund is likewise marched thither from Tockhay the 18
instant with 700 Hussars, but ours arrived the same day at Tockhay. The
Palatine is in good health, Genesis Susa was somewhat ill-disposed, but is now
fully recovered. The news of the taking of Waradin does not continue,
notwithstanding it still remains besieged. Sackmar is taken, and strengthened
by Barckay with 2000 Turks.

Dantzick, June 21.
The Moscovites are totally routed about Grodno by the Polish General
Czarneckie, there being killed about 7 or 8000 men. The Moscovites
Field-Marshal Chowatzkie is begirt with the Poles about Lockwitz; his party
uses all endeavors to relieve him, but will hardly effect any thing. The
Tartars and Cossacks make a fearful havoc in Moscovie and White-Russia; so
soon as the (...) forces come nearer those places, they (...) to put themselves
under the Poles (...) Bischaw, a strong Fort, is by a (...) by the Poles, the
King himself goes to the Camp with all his Nobles. Here is a report, as if the
Lithuanian Army should have taken the Town of Welda, but not the Castle.

Warcovia, July 3.
The Moscovites consisting of 22000 men advanced betwixt Slonnin and Miszow,
where they were met by the Polish Generals Sapicha and Cznarneckie, the
Moscovites endeavoring to take their passage over a ditch, were attaqued with
so good success on the Polish side, that they were presently brought into
disorder, their whole Infantry consisting of above 8000 men being defeated, and
their Horse, which is thought to amount to the number of 16000. being forced to
retreat to the woods. The Poles have taken 40 pieces of Ordnance, 100 Colors,
with all the baggage and part of the ammunition, the Moscovian Genesis Chowanzky
having put fire to the rest of the powder, and himself taking his flight
shamefully for Vilna. It is thought he will fall into the hands of Obosky, who
comes with an Army out of Samogitia. The Polish Genesis Czarnecky (after so great
a Victory is now gone for Lockewiz, which is still besieged by 2000 Moscovites,
whose qu^rters he intends to beat up. From Transylvania it is certified, that
Prince Ragotzky was slain in the battle with the Turks, whose mother has
delivered to the Emperor the Hungarian Counties with the sum of 100000
Rixdollers, upon which the Turks are retreated.

Koningsbergh, June 14. 1660.
The Elector of Brandenburgh is expected here within very few days, it being
reported that he is chosen for a Mediator betwixt the King of Poland, and the
grand Duke of Moscovy, who seems to be inclinable to that accommodation, though
the contrary may be judged by his great preparations, being resolved to enter
Lithuania at the head of 20000 men: This has caused the Nobility of Poland,
who seemed to be ready to fall into division among themselves, to unite again
more strictly then ever against the Moscovites, and to engage to his Polish
Majesty to afford him either men to strengthen his Army, or money to support it.

Elsenor^, June 17. 1660.
The Swedish men of War formerly detained by Vice Admiral Ruyter, under the
command of the Canon of Copenhaghen, and released since the subscribing of the
Treaty, are now in this harbor, where they are to remain until all the Swedish
forces be drawn out of Zealand* In the mean time the Swedes are busy
themselves about the demolishing of the fortifications of Cronenburgh, and are
transporting off all the Palissado^s into the Province of Schonen.

Wismar, July 20. 1660.
The Imperial and Brandenburgish forces do keep still the places they had taken
in Pomerania and Meckleburgh, but we hear that for certain the first have
received order to remove by the ^8 instant, and to march into Bohemia. In the
mean while the Swedes are making some preparations here and at Stralzund, it
being reported that their design is to bring the City of Bremen wholly under
their obedience* The men of War they do keep before Warnemunde, having taken a
ship going to Copenhaghen, in which were three Deputies of the City of Bostock,
whom they keep prisoners.

Berlin, Inn 17. 1660.
The Elector of Brandenburgh is to go from hence this week, for Koningsbergh in
Prussia, to mediate a Peace between Poland and the grand Duke of Moscovy, being
resolved, In case the last do refuse such reasonable Propositions as shall be
offered unto him, to join his forces to the Polish Army against him.

Hague, July 1. 1660.
The 26 of the last month, M. Coyet, Extraordinary Envoy of Swedeland, made a
visit to the Ambassadors of Denmark, who returned the same civility the next
day after. The same day M. Herbert, one of the Deputies of the States General
to his Danish Majesty, arrived here; M. Beverweert is gone for England, and is
to be very speedily followed by the other Ambassadors, who are sent to
congratulate the King of England, in the name of the States, who seem to be
willing to send likewise some Commissioners to Munster, to end the difference
between that City and their Bishop. The Royal Princess, and the Prince of
Orange her son, are yet at Harlem, where they have been sumptuously treated by
the Magistrate.

Aix, June 28. 1660.
The Bishops of Uzez, Viviers, and Nismes, have each of them set out two
hundred men, to hasten the demolishing of the fortifications of Orange, for
fear of a contrary order, they being very earnest to have the Protestants
deprived of that place of refuge. The number of the workmen that are employed
about the Citadel of Marseille has been likewise doubled, and the same is so
forwards, that some pieces of Ordnance are already mounted upon the Bullworks,
The Edicts formerly spoken of to have been passed for this Province, were about
the Soap, whereby that which does cost now five Livers, would have cost twenty
five, and that called of the Franc Salle, concerning the Gabell of the Salt,
the rarley whereof had been given to the Cardinal Mazarin's Secretary, with
power to demand the arrears of it as far as twenty years back, which would have
produced a very vast sum of money. As to the business of the Domaine, the
Originals of the Grants made by the Counts of Provence having been demanded by
the Court, only those excepted that were made to the Officers of the Sovereign
Courts, and to the persons of Quality, the first President would not carry them
to the Chamber, to avoid the rumor, but caused them to be signed by two of his
Confidents, and adding thereunto the names of such of the Counselors as he
thought to be his friends, he caused them to be registered, but he has been
since disowned by the Counselors, and the Greffice declared that he was
compelled by force to register them.

Paris, July 10. 1660.
Chevalier de Treslon, Ambassador for the King in the North, has sent M.
Blerman his Secretary with the Articles of the Treaty between Swedeland and
Denmark, to be subscribed by his Majesty. Made moiselle coming from Court has
staid a while at Champigny. The Abbot of Richelieu has complained to the
Assembly of the Clergy against the Bishop of Autun, for inserting in his new
history of the Cardinals, something prejudicial to the reputation of his Uncle
the late Cardinal de Richelieu, in the business of M. de Marillac, and of the
late Queen Mother his Benefactrix. The said Bishop to prevent the desire of the
Assembly for taking those pieces out of his book, offered to do it of himself,
saying it was a stone he had found in his way which he threw at his enemies
head, but withal desired the Assembly to give liberty to the Historians to
write the truth. We have news here that the Court is to be at Fontainebleau the
16 instant, and intends to come hither by the 25. Great have is making to
prepare all at the Louver. Few days after the Court is to remove to Compiegn,
from whence the Cardinal Mazarin will go to la Fere with the Count de
Fuensaldagne, there to end the difference between Savoy and Mantua.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
There is a fair and pleasant house in Acton in the County of Middlesex, set
about with Elm trees, with Gardens, Orchards, and all sorts of pleasant fruits,
it contains twenty fair rooms completely furnished, and water to every Office,
Coach house Barn Stable, and a Close to keep horses in, to be let f^r t^^a^m of
y^a^^ (the bedding and household stuff to be sold) Enquire at the Golden (...)
in Thread needle-street, or of G^^^man ^ib^^, who lives over against the s^id
Mo^se in Acton, and you may be further informed.

Lost on Tuesday night July 10. 16^0. at the Swan at Hockly, a bald face, brown
bay h^^se, ^b^ut fourteen handful high, trots and gallops, paces a little, If
any one can give notice hereof unto Mr. George Tru^shaw, at the Pinder of
Wakefield (...) Gra^es-Inne-lane, or unto Mr. Richard Gilpin at the Swan in
Hockly, they shall have twent, shillings for their pains.

A (...) ^awney bound, with a white breast, a bald face, a cut tail, and a scar
on his farther leg behind, was lost o^ Monday last the 9th day of July; if any
one can bring him to Mr. Looder a Tailor, at his house in the Blackfriars near
the old Playhouse, or to Mr. G^eens a Cook at the Queens Arms in Holborn, he
shall be well rewarded for his pains.

I^ any one has houses in London or the Suburbs, to the value of 100 150. or
200 l. per annum, or a College Leaf of the value of 100. or ^00 l. per annum,
in the Counties of Bucks, Bedford, Hampshire, or Wilts, good title, which he
would put to sale, if he repair to Mr. Samuel Mearne, his Ma^esties Book-binder
in Little-Britain, he shall be informed of one that will deal with him for such
a purchase.

Whereas in some p^ints there is mention made of the manner of the reception of
Monsieur Pelnitz, was particularized that he was conducted to audience in his
Majesty's own Coach; we must inform the Reader, that it was not his Majesty's
Coach, but the Coach of the Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's household.

Advertisements of Books.
Newly reprinted, with very large and profitable additions, Via recta ad vitam
longam; A Treatise wherein the right way and best manner of living for
attaining to a long and healthful life, is clearly demonstrated, and punctua^ly
applied to every age and constitution of body; by Tob. Venn^r, Doctor of
Physic in Bathe; with a very necessary and compendious Treatise of the famous
^ath^ ^f B^the: Also an accurate Treatise concerning Tobacco, by the same
Author. Printed for Abel Roper at the Sun against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet.

The Fanatic history; or an exact Relation and Account of the old Anabaptists,
and new Quakers, being the sum of all that has been yet discovered about their
most blasphemous Opinions, dangerous practices, and malicious endeavors to
subvert all civil Government both in Church and State; together with their m^d
mimick pra^ks, and their ridiculous actions and gestures, enough to amaze any
sober Christian, which may prove the death one burial of the ^a^atick Doctrine.
Sold by J. Siens, at the Gross-keys in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Speculum Patiu^^: A Looking-glass of the Fathers, wherein you may see each of
them drawn, characterized, and displayed in their colors: To which are added
the characters of some of the chief Philosophers. Historians, Grammarians,
Orators, and P^ets. By Edward La^kin* Sold by Henry Ev^sden as the Grey-bound
in St. Paul's Churchyard. The price 2 s. 64.

Cromwell's bloody slaughterhouse; or his damnable designs laid and practiced
by him and his Negro's, in contriving the murder of his sacred Majesty King
Charles the first, discovered by a person of honor. Sold by H. Eversden at the
Greyhound in St. Paul's Churchyard. The price is 12 d.

Natura Prodigtorum: or a discourse touching the nature of Prodigies: Together
with the kinds causes, and effects of Comets, Eclipses, and Earthquakes; with
an Appendix touching the Imposturism of the commonly-received Doctrine of
Prophecies, Spirits, Images, Sigils, Lamen^, The Crystal, etc. and the
propugners of such opinions by John G^dbury (...). Sold by F. C^ssinet at the
Anchor and Mariner in Tower-street, and Tho. Ballet in St. Dunstans Churchyard
in Fleetstreet.

David's Deliverance and Thanksgiving: A Sermon preached before his Majesty at
Whitehall on the day of Thanksgiving, June 28. 1660. by G. Shel^on, D. D. and
Dean of his Majesty's Chapel Royal. Published by his Majesty's special
Command. Sold by T. Garthwait at the little Northdoor of St. Paul's.

The Pens gallantry; a Copy book containing sundry. examples of all the curious
hands new is use; the second Impression, with the additions of Court-hand
Copies, exquisi^^ly performed by the Author Edward Cocker, living on the South
side of St. Paul's Church, where he teaches the Arts of Writing and Arithmetic
in an extraordinary manner. Sold by William Place in Grayes-Inne-gate in Holb
urn and Thomas Rooks at the Holy Lamb at the East end of St. Paul's Churchyard,
London.

A Black ^mith, and no Jesuit: or a true relation how* I William Houlbrook
Blacksmith of Marlborough was betrayed by Cornet George Joyce, who carried the
King prisoner from Hol^by* and of the unjust in prisoning of me, and my several
examinations before Bradshaw, and his bloody crew, with my answers unto all of
them, as you may read in the following discourse. Written in the time of my
imprisonment and now put to public view. Sold by Francis L^sh, next door to
the Pauls-head Tavern at Pauls-Chain.

London.
On Wednesday the 11 instant, between one and two in the morning, happened a
fire in Thred-needle-street, between the Exchange and St. Bennet Finck Church,
by the Alley commonly called Sweetings rents, several houses were consumed by
it. It is said to have been first perceived in a wall between the Cock and a
Scriveners house next adjoining to it, but in which house it began we have no
certain information.

Whitehall.
His Majesty in consideration of the eminent loyalty and signal services of
that great Warrior and faithful Subject his Excellency the Lord General Monck,
has been graciously pleased to confer these high titles of honor on him.

George Duke of Albemarlie, Earl of Torington, Baron Monck of Potheridge,
Beauchamp, and Teyes, Captain General and Commander in chief of all his
Majesty's Forces in his Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Master of
his Majesty's horse, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of
his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.

And as a further addition yet to this most Noble personage, give us leave to
tell you of that honor which God himself has bestowed on him, in making him
the chief Instrument in restoring his Sacred Majesty, and in his Majesty Peace,
plenty and happiness to the three Kingdoms.

On Friday the 13 instant, his Grace, accompanied by the Duke of Buckingham,
and other personages of high quality, went to take his place in the House of
Peers.

In the Army you will find some alterations of Officers, yet such, as that the
private soldiers may rejoice in having the Nobles to govern them; and the rest
of the Officers (who by their constant adherence to his Excellency, have
preserved themselves free from the least suspicion, and do still continue in
command) do now take it for an honor to go a step back to make room for such
noble Chieftains.

Whereof first that most honorable personage Aubray Vere Earl of Oxford has
the Regiment that was lately Col. George Smithsons, his Capt. Lieutenant is
that loyal Knight, Sir William Blakeston; Geo. Smithson late Colonel, is now
Major of the same Regiment; Tho. Lilburn late Major, now eldest Captain; Fran.
Wilkinson Captain, William Rhoads Captain, William Wheatley Captain, Thomas
Fairfax formerly Capt. Lieutenant, now Lieutenant to Major Smithson.

For the Regiment of Foot that was lately Col. Fagg's, you have John Viscount
Mordaunt Col. and Sir Tho. Woodcock Lievt. Col. of the same Regiment, who were
both brought before the same High Court of Justice; Henry Needler late Lievt.
Col. is now made Major of the same Regiment; Ier. Harrison late (...), now
eldest Captain, Hartgill Baron Captain.

The Lord Herbert commands now as Colonel that Regiment that was lately Col.
Pury's, and Tho. Pury late Colonel, is now Lievt. Col. of the same Regiment,
Tho. French late Lievt. Col. now Major, William Nest late Major, now eldest
Captain.

Major General Sir Edward Massey is now Colonel of that Regiment that was
lately Colonel Geo. Twisleton's, Geo. Twisleton late Colonel, now Lievt. Col.
of that Regiment, Sam. Barry late Lievt. Col. now Major, Dennis Tailor late
Major, now eldest Captain, John Gainssord Captain of that Company late Captain
Sowton's, William Parker Captain, Ant. Welden Captain, Tho. Gl^dstone Captain
of the Company late Captain Thompsons, William Seymor Captain, John Bowler
Captain of the Company late Captain Shaftoe's.

Besides these Officers of the Army, there is Major Edward Strange, who (for
his faithful service to his Majesty, from the beginning to the end of the War)
is now made Governor of Hurst Castle.

There now stands committed to the Black-Rod Sir John Thor^good, who had been
one of the High Court of Justice, which put to death that Heroic Lord Capel,
etc. and endeavored as much for the brave Earl of Norwich, and Sir John Owen.

Sir William Row of Higham-hills in Essex is also committed thither.

So is Mr. Samuel Mayer, unknown to no man that has but hear^ of Haberdashers
Hall, where he filled the Chair and his own purse.

Mr. George Langham, a Citizen of London.

Mr. William Wiburn, as good a Citizen as the former.

Colonel Richard Downs, you know whose Judge he was, and that learned,
merciful Judge, Mr. Richard Keeble, who (for his advantage) in Chancery knew
not how to deny any thing, and in a High Court of Justice how to grant any
thing.

And after all these, there is one Bowen that belonged to St. Paul's market
(formerly a Churchyard, till that worldly Saint Alderman Titchbourn turned it
to a marker) who not content to rail at the Bishops (who one would think have
been slandered long enough) broke out into such impudent language against the
House of Peers now sitting, as a man would scarce have thrown at the other
House, for which and other enormities he is now honored with an imprisonment,
though Bowen told the Witness, that for ^ll this he hoped to see another Turn,
but what he means by another Turn, a little time will show.

Besides these mentioned under the Black-Rod, there are three more sent lately
to the Tower, particularly Col. Hacker, who carried a Patrizan and commanded
the Guards when o^r late Sovereign was put to death, where this Colonel was on
the Scaffo^d, but on Thursday last was for High Treason committed to the Tower.

And yesterday July 12. Colonel Axtell was sent thither, who commanded the
Irish Foot for the Committee of Safety, and is the most injured person alive if
he have not killed forty times more in cold blood then in hot; but how he got
the Lord Montgarrets Estate, or how that Noble Lord came to lose it, we need
not tell you.

And (after all) the same day was committed M. Thomas Scot (not long since
called Secretary Scot) who was sent prisoner out of Flanders, being one of the
seven excepted from pardon, a person (in the opinion of the people of England)
not to be marched in Scotland, nor any where else but where he now is: And (for
the satisfaction of all good men) both Scotland and Ireland, as the Letters
thence assure us, are as quiet as England, and (maugre all little inventions)
are like so to continue.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.


