VIRGIDEMIARVM Six Books.

First three Books, Of Tooth-lesse Satyrs. 1. Poetical. 2. Academicall. 3.
Moral.



LONDON Printed by John Harison, for Robert Dexter. 1602.

His Defiance to Envy.
Nay: let the prouder Pines of Ida fear
The sudden fires of heaven: and decline
Their yielding tops, that dared the skies whilere:
And shake your sturdie trunks ye prouder Pines,
Whose swelling grains are like be gald alone,
With the deepefurrowes of the thunder-stone.
Stand ye secure, ye safer shrubs below,
In humble dales, whom heauns do not despite:
Nor angry clouds conspire your overthrow,
Envying at your too-disdainfull hight.
Let high attempts dread Envy, and ill tongues,
And cowardly shrink for fear of causles wrongs
So wont big Oaks fear winding Yuy-weed:
So soaring Egles fear the neighbor Son:
^o golden Mazor wont suspicion breed,
deadly Hemlocks poisoned Potion,
So Adders shroud themselves in fairest leaves:
So fouler Fate the fayrer thing bereaues.
Nor the low bush fears climbing Yuy-twine:
Nor lowly Bustard dreads the distant rays.
Nor earthen Pot wont secret death to shrine:
Nor subtle Snake does lurk in pathed ways.
Nor baser deed dreads Envy and ill tongues,
Nor shrinks so soon for fear of causeless wrongs.
Needs me then hope, or does me need mis-dread:
Hope for that honor, dread that wrongful spite:
Spite of the party, honor of the deed,
Which wont alone on lofty objects light.
That Envy should accoast my Muse and me,
For this so rude, and recklesse Poesy.
Would she but shade her tender Brows with Bay,
That now lie bare in careless wilful rage:
And trance her self in that sweet Extasey,
That rouzeth drouping thoughts of bashful age.
(Tho now those Bays, and that aspired thought,
In carelesser age, she sets at worse then naught.)
Or would we loose her plumy pineon,
Manicled long with bonds of modest fear:
Soon might she have those Kestrels proud out gone,
Whose flightie wings are dew'd with weeter air;
And hopen now to shoulder from above
The Eagle from the stayrs of friendly Jove
Or list she rather in late Triumph rear
Eternal Trophies to some Conqueror,
Whose dead deserts slept in his Sepulcher,
And never saw, nor life, nor light before:
To lead sad Pluto captive with my song,
To grace the triumphs he obscured so long.
Or scour the rusted swords of Eluish knighes,
Bathed in Pagan blood: or sheath them new
In misty moral Types; or tell their fights,
Who mighty Giants, or who Monsters slew.
And by some strange enchanted spear and shield*
Vanquished their foe, and wan the doubtful field.
May be she might in stately Stanzaes frame
Stories of Ladies, and aduenturous knights,
To raise her silent and inglorious name,
Unto areach-lesse pitch of Praises hight.
And somewhat say, as more unworthy done.
VVorthie of Brass, and hoary Marble stone.
Then might vain Envy waste her duller wing,
To trace the aerysteps, she spiting sees:
And vainly faint in hoplesse following
The clouded paths her native dross denies.
But now such lowly Satyrs here I sing,
Not worth our Muse, not worth their envying.
To good (if ill) to be exposed to blame:
Too good, if worse, to shadow shamlesse vice.
Ill, if too good, not answering their name:
So good and ill infickle censure lies.
Since in our Satyr lies both good and ill,
And they and it, inuarying readers will.
Witness ye Muses how I wilful song
These heddy rimes, withoute^ second care:
And wished them worse, my guilty thoughts among:
The ruder Satyr should go raged and bare:
And show his rougher and his hairy hide:
Tho mine be smooth, and decked in careless pride.
Would we but breath within a wax-bound quill.
Pans seuenfold Pipe, some plaintiue Pastor all:
To teach each hollow grove, and shrubby hill,
Each murmuring brook, each solit arie vale
To sound our love, and to our song accord,
VVearying Echo with one changelesse word.
Or list us make two striving shephards sing,
With costly wagers for the victory,
Under Menalcas judge: whiles one does bring
A caruen Bole well wrought of Beechen tree:
Praising it by the story, or the frame,
Or want of use, or skillful makers name.
Another lays a well-marked Lamb,
Or spotted Kid, or some more forward Steer;
And from the Payle does praise their fertile dam:
So do they strive in doubt, in hope, in fear,
A waiting for their trusty Vmpires doom,
Faulted as false, by him that is overcome.
Whether so me list my lovely thought to sing,
Come dance ye nimble Dryads by my side:
Ye gentlewood- Nymphs come: and with you bring
The willing Faunes that might your music guide
Com Nimphs and Faunes, that haunt those shady groves
VVhiles I report my fortunes or my loves.
Or whether list me sing so per sonate,
My striving self to conquer with my verse:
Speak ye attentive swaynes that heard me late,
Needs me give grass unto the Conquerers.
At Colins feet I throw my yielding reed:
But let the rest win homage by their deed.
But now (ye Muses) since your sacred hests
Profaned are by each presuming tongue:
In scornful rage I vow this silent rest,
That never field nor grove shall hear my song.
Only these refuse rymes I here mispend,
To chide the world, that did my thoughts offend.
De suis Satyris.
Dum Satyrae dixi, videor dixisse Satirae
Corripio; aut istaec non satis est Satyra.
Irafacit Satyram, reliquum Sat temperat iram;
Pinge two Satyram sanguine, tum Satyra est.
Ecce nouam Satyram: Satyrum sine cornibus! Euge
Monstra noui monstri haec, and Satyri and Satyrae.
VIRGIDEMIARVM.
LIB. I.
Prologue.
I First adventure, with foole-hardie might,
To tread the steps of perilous despite:
I first adventure, follow me who list,
And be the second English Satyrist.
Envy waits on my back, Truth on my side:
Envy will be my Page, and Truth my Guide.
Envy the margent holds, and Truth the line:
Truth does approve, but envy does repine.
For in this smoothing age who durst indite,
Has made his pen an hired Parasite.
To claw the back of him that beastly lives,
And pranck base men in Proud Superlatiues.
Whence damned vice is shrouded quite from shame
And crowned with Virtues meed, immortal Name:
Infamy dispossessed of native due,
Ordained of old on looser life to sue:
The worlds eye bleared with those shameless lies,
Masked in the show of mealy-mouthed Poesies.
Go daring Muse, on with thy thanklesse task,
And do the ugly face of vice unmask:
And if thou can not thine high flight remit,
So as it might a lowly Satyr fit,
Let lowly Satyrs rise a loft to thee:
Truth be thy speed, and Truth thy Patron be.
SAT. I.
NOr Ladies wanton love, nor wandering knight,
Legend I out in rimes all richly dight.
Nor fright the Reader with the Pagan vaunt
Of mighty Mahound, and great Termagaunt.
Nor list I Sonnet of my Mistress face,
To paint some Blowesse with a borrowed grace,
Nor can I bide to pen some hungry Scene
For thick-skin ears, and vndescerning eyne.
Nor ever could my scornful Muse abide
With Tragic shoes her ankles for to hide.
Nor can I crouch, and writhe my fauning tail
To some great Patron, for my best avail.
Such hunger-staruen Trencher Poetry,
Or let it never live, or timely die:
Nor under every bank, and every Tree,
Speak rymes unto my oten Minstralsie:
Nor caroll out so pleasing lively lays,
As might the Graces move my mirth to praise.
Trumpet, and reeds, and socks, and buskins fine,
I them bequeath: whose statues wandering Twine
Of Yuy, mixed with Bays, circlen around
Their living Temples likewise Laurell-bound.
Rather had I, albee in careless rymes,
Check the mis-ordered world, and lawless times.
Nor need I crave the Muses mid-wifry,
To bring to light so worth-lesse Poetry:
Or if we list, what baser Muse can bide,
To sit and sing by Grantaes naked side?
They hunt the tyded Thames and salt Medway,
Ere since the same of their late Bridal day.
Naught have we here but willow-shaded shore,
To tell our Grant his banks are left for lore.
SAT. II.
VVhilome the sisters nine were Vestall maids,
And held their Temple in the secret shades.
Of fair Parnassus that two-headed hill,
Whose ancient fame the Southern world did fill.
And in the stead of their eternal fame,
Was the cool stream, that took his endless name,
From out the fertile hoof of winged steed:
There did they sit and do their holy deed,
That pleased both heaven and earth: till that of late,
Whom should I fault? or the most righteous Fate?
Or heaven, or men, or fiends, or ought beside,
That ever made that foul mischance betide?
Some of the sisters in securer shades.
Defloured were:
And ever since disdaining Sacred shame.
Done ought that might their heavenly stock defame.
Now is Pernassus turned to a stews:
And on Bay-stocks the wanton Myrtle grewes.
Cytheron hill's become a Brothel-bed,
And Pyrene sweet, turned to a poisoned head
Of cole-blacke puddle: whose infectious stain
Corrupts all the lowly fruitful plain.
Their modest stole, to garish looser weed,
Decked with loue-fauors: their late whordoms meed.
And where they wont sip of the simple flood,
Now toss they bowls of Bacchus boiling blood,
I marvelled much with doubtful jealousy,
Whence came such Litturs of new Poetry;
Me thought I feared, least the horse-hoofed well
His native banks did proudly ouer-swell
In some late discontent, thence to ensue
Such wondrous rablements of Rime-sters new:
But since, I saw it painted on Fames wings,
The Muses to be woxen Wantonings.
Each bush, each bank, and each base Apple-squire,
Can serve to sat their beastly lewd desire.
Ye bastard Poets see your Pedigree
From common Trulls and loathsome Brothelry.
SAT. III.
With some Pot-furie ravished from their wit,
They sit and muse on some no-vulgar writ:
As frozen Dung-hils in a winters morn,
That void of Vapors seemed all beforne,
Soon as the Sun, sends out his piercing beams,
Exhale out filthy smoke and stinking steames:
So does the base, and the fore-barren brain,
Soon as the raging wine begins to reign.
One higher pitched does set his soaring thought
On crowned kings that Fortune has low brought:
Or some vpreared, high-aspiring swain
As it might be the Turkish Tamberlaine.
Then weeneth he his base drink-drowned spright,
Rapt to the threefold loft of heaven hight,
When he conceiues upon his fained stage
The stalking steps of his great personage,
Graced with huf-cap terms, and thundering threats,
That his poor hearers hair quite upright sets.
Such soon, as some brave minded hungry youth
Sees fitly frame to his wide-strained mouth,
He vaunts his voice upon an hired stage,
With high-set steps, and princely carriage;
Now soouping in side robes of Royalty,
That erst did skrub in lousy brokerie.
There if he can with terms Italianate,
Big-sounding sentences, and words of state,
Fair patch me up his pure Iambick verse,
He rauishes the gazing Scaffolders:
Then certes was the famous Corduban
Never but half so high Tragedian.
Now, least such frightfull shows of Fortunes fall,
And bloody Tyrants rage, should chance appall
The dead stroke audience, midst the silent rout,
Comes leaping in a selfe-mis formed lout,
And laughes, and grins, and frames his Mimik face,
And iustles straight into the princes place.
Then does the Theater Echo all aloud,
With gladsome noise of that applauding crowd.
A goodly hoch-poch; when vile Russettings,
Are match with monarchs, and with mighty kings.
A goodly grace to sober Tragic Muse,
When each base clown, his clumbsie fist does bruise
And show his teeth in double rotten-row,
For laughter at his selfe-resembled show.
Mean while our Poets in high Parliament,
Sit watching every word, and gesturement,
Like curious Censors of some doughtie gear,
Whispering their verdit in their fellows ear.
Woe to the word whose margent in their scrole,
Is noted with a black condemning Cole.
But if each periode might the Synod please,
Ho, bring the Iuy boughs, and bands of Bays
Now when they part and leave the naked stage,
Gins the bare hearer in a guilty rage,
To curse and ban, and blame his likerous eye,
That thus has lauisht his late halfe-penie.
Shame that the Muses should be bought and sold,
For every peasants brass, on each scaffold.
SAT. IIII.
TOo popular is Tragic Poesy,
Strayning his tip-toes for a farthing fee,
And does besides on Rimelesse numbers tread,
Vnbid Iambicks flow from careless head.
Some brauer brain in high Heroic rimes
Compileth worm-eate stories of old times:
And he like some imperious Maronist,
Coniures the muses that they him assist.
Then strives he to bumbast his feeble lines
With farre-fetcht phrase:
And makes up his hard-betaken tale
With strange enchantments, fetched from darkesome vale
Of some Melissa, that by Magic doom
To Tuscans soil transporteth Merlins toombe:
Painters and Poets hold your ancient right:
Write what you will, and write not what you might:
Their limits be their list, their reason will.
But if some Painter in presuming skill,
Should paint the stars in center of the earth,
Could ye forbear some smiles, and taunting mirth?
But let no rebel Satyr dare traduce
The Eternal Legends of thy Faerie Muse,
Renowned Spencer: whom no earthly wight
Dares once to emulate, much less dares despite.
Salust of France, and Tuscan Ariost,
Yield up the Laurel garland ye have lost:
And let all others willow wear with me,
Or let their undeserving Temples bared be.
SAT. V.
ANother, whose more heavy hearted Saint
Delights in naught but notes of rufull plaint,
Urges his melting Muse with sollem tears
Rhyme of some drerie fates of lucklesse peers.
Then brings he up some branded whining Ghost,
To till how old misfortunes had him tossed.
Then must he ban the guiltless fates above,
Or fortune frail, or unrewarded love.
And when he has parbrak'd his grieved mind,
He sends him down where erst he did him find,
Without one penie to pay Charons hire,
That waits for the wandering ghosts retire.
SAT.
ANother scorns the homespun thread of rimes,
Matched with the lofty feet of elder times:
Give me the numbered verse that Virgill sung,
And Virgill self shall speak the English tongue:
Manhood and garboiles shall he chaunt with changed feet
And headstrong Dactils making Music meet.
The nimble Dactils striving to out-go
The drawling Spondees pacing it below.
The lingering Spondees, laboring to delay,
The breath-lesse Dactils with a sudden stay.
Who ever saw a Colte wanton and wild,
Yoakt with a slow-foote Ox on fallow field?
Can right areed how handsomely besets
Dull Spondees with the English Dactilets?
If Jove speak English in a thundering cloud,
Thwick thwack, and Riffe raffe, rores he out aloud.
Fie on the forged mint that did create
New coin of words never articulate.
SAT. VII.
GReat is the folly of a feeble brain,
Ore-rulde with love, and tyrannous disdain:
For love, how-euer in the basest breast,
It breeds high thoughts that feed the fancy best.
Yet is he blind, and leads poor fools awrie,
While they hang gazing on their mistress eye.
The loue-sicke Poet, whose importune prayer
Repulsed is with resolute despair,
Hops to conquer his disdainful dame,
With public plaints of his conceived flame.
Then powers he forth in patched Sonettings,
His love, his lust, and loathsome flatterings:
As tho the staring world ha^gd on his sleeue,
When once he smiles, to laugh: and when he sighs, to grieve.
Cares the world, thou love, thou live, or die?
Cares the world how fair thy fair one be?
Fond wit-wal that would lode thy wit-lesse head
With timely horns, before thy Bridal bed.
Then can he term his durtie ill-fac'd Bride
Lady and Queen, and virgin deified:
Be she all sootie-blacke, or berie brown,
She Is white as morrows milk, or flakes new blown.
And tho she be some dunghill drudge at home,
Yet can he her resign some refuse room
Amids the well-knowne stars: or if not there,
Sure will he saint her in his Calendere.
SAT. VIII.
HEnce ye profane: mell not with holy things,
That Sion Muse from Palestina brings.
Parnassus is transformed to Sion-hill,
And Iury-palmes her steep ascents done fill.
Now good S. Peter weeps pure Helicon,
And both the Mary's make a Music moan:
Yea and the Prophet of the heavenly Lire,
Great Solomon, sings in the English Quire,
And is become a new found Sonetist,
Singing his love, the holy spouse of Christ:
Like as she were some light-skirts of the rest,
In mightiest Ink-hornismes he can thither wrest.
Ye Sion Muses shall by my dear will,
For this your zeal, and farre-admired skill,
Be straight transported from Jerusalem,
Unto the holy house of Bethleem.
SAT. IX.
Envy ye Muses, at your thriuing Mate,
Cupid has crowned a new Laureat:
I saw his statue gayly tired in green,
As if he had some second Phoebus been.
His Statue trimd with the Venerean tree,
And shrined fair within your Sanctuary.
What, he, that ea^st to gain the riming Goal
The worn Recitall-post of Capitol,
Rimed in rules of Stewish ribaldrie,
Teaching experimental bauderie?
Whiles th'itching vulgar tickled with the song,
Hanged on their unready Poets tongue.
Take this ye patient Muses: and foul shame
Shall wait upon your once profaned name.
Take this, ye Muses, this so high despite,
And let all hateful lucklesse birds of night:
Let Scriching Owls nest in your razed roofes,
And let your sloore with horned Satyrs hoofes
Be dinted and defiled every morn:
And let your walls be an eternal scorn.
What if some Shordich fury should incite
Some lust-stung letcher: must he needs indite
The beastly rites of hired Venerie,
The whole worlds universal bawd to be?
Did never yet no damned Libertine,
Nor elder Heathen, nor new Florentine,
Tho they were famous for lewd liberty,
Venture upon so shameful villainy
Our Epigrammatarians old and late,
Were wont be blamed for too licentiate.
Chaste men, they did but glaunce at Lesbias deed,
And handsomely leave off with cleanly speed.
But Arts of Whoring: stories of the stews,
Ye Muses, will ye bear, and may refuse?
Nay let the Devil, and Saint Valentine,
Be gossips to those ribald rimes of thine.
FINIS.
VIRGIDEMIARVM.
LIB. II.
Prologue.
OR been the Manes of that Cynick spright,
Clothed with some stubborn clay and led to light?
Or do the relic ashes of his grave
Revive and rise from their for saken cave?
That so with gall-weet words and speeches rude,
Controls the manners of the multitude.
Envy belike incites his pining heart,
And bids it sat it self with others smart.
Nay, no despite: but angry Nemesis,
Whose scourge does follow all that done amiss:
That scourge I bear, albe in rude fist,
And wound, and strike, and pardon whom she list.
SAT. I.
FOr shame write better Labeo, or write none,
Or better write, or Labeo write alone,
Nay call the Cynick but a witty fool,
Tnence to abjure his handsome drinking bole:
Because the thirsty swain with hollow hand,
Conveyed the stream to weet his dry weasand.
Write they that can, tho they that cannot, do:
But who knows that, but they that do not know.
Lo what it is that makes white rags so dear,
That men must give a teston for a queare.
Lo what it is that makes goose-wings so scant,
That the distressed Semster did them want,
So, lavish ope-tyde causes fasting-lents,
And starueling Famine comes of large expense.
Might not (so they where pleased that been above)
Long Paper-abstinence our death remove?
Then many a Lollerd would in forfaitment,
Bear Paper-fagots ore the Pauement.
But now men wager who shall blot the most,
And each man writes. There Is so much lobour lost,
That Is good, that is great: Nay much is sildome well,
Of what is bad, a littl's a great deal.
Better is more: but best is naught at all.
Less is the next, and lesser criminal.
Little and good, is greatest good save one,
Then Labeo, or write little or write none.
Tush but small pains can be but little art,
Or lode full drie-fats fro the foreign mart.
With Folio-volumes, two to an Ox hide,
Or else ye Pamphleter go stand a side,
Read in each School, in every margent coted,
In every Catalogue for an autour noted.
There Is happiness well given, and well got,
Less gifts, and lesser gains I weigh them not.
So may the Giant rome and write on high,
Be he a Dwarf that writes not their as I.
But well fare Strabo, which as stories tell,
Contrived all Troy within one Walnut shell.
His curious ghost now lately hither came.
Arriving near the mouth of luckie Tame:
I saw a Pismire struggling with the lode,
Dragging all Troy home toward her abode.
Now dare we hither, if we durst appear,
The subtle Stithy-man that lived while ear:
Such one was once, or once I was mistaught,
A Smith at Uulcans own forge up brought,
That made an Iron-chariot so light,
The coach-horse was a Flea in trappings dight.
The tame-lesse steed could well his wagon wield,
Through downs and dales of the uneven field.
Strive they laugh we: mean while the black story
Passes new Strabo, and new Straboes Troy.
Little for great: and great for good: all one:
For shame or better write, or Labeo write none.
But who coniur'd this bawdie Poggies ghost,
From out the stews of his lewd homebred coast:
Or wicked Rablais dronken reuellings,
To grace the mis-rule of our Tauernings?
Or who put Bays into blind Cupids fist,
That he should crown what Laureats him list?
Whose words are those, to remedy the deed,
That cause men stop their noses when they read?
Both good things ill, and ill things well: all one?
For shame write cleanly Labeo, or write none.
SAT. II.
TO what end did our lavish ancestors,
Erect of old these stately piles of ours?
For threadbare clearks, and for the ragged Muse
Whom better fit some cotes of sad secluse?
Blush niggard Age, and be ashamed to see,
These monuments of wiser ancestrie.
And ye fair heaps the Muses sacred shrines,
(In spite of time and envious repines)
Stand still and flourish till the worlds last day,
Vpbrayding it with former loves decay.
Here may you Muses, our dear Soneraignes,
Scorn each base Lordling ever you disdaines,
And every peasant churl, whose smokie roof
Denied harbor for your dear behoof.
Scorn ye the world before it do complain,
And scorn the world that scorneth you again.
And scorn contempt it self that does incite
Each single-sold Squire to set you at so light.
What needs me care for any bookish skill,
To blot white papers with my restless quill:
Or poare on painted leaves: or beat my brain
With far-fetch thought, or to consume in vain
In latter Even, or midst of winter nights,
Ill sinelling oils, or some still-watching lights.
Let them that mean by bookish buisinesse
To earne their bread: or hopen to profess
Their hard got skill: let them alone for me;
Busy their brains with deeper bookerie.
Great gains shall bide you sure, when ye have spent
A thousand Lamps: and thousand Reames have rent
Of needless papers, and a thousand nights
Have burned out with costly candle lights.
Ye palish ghosts of Athens; when at last,
Your patrimony spent in witless wast,
Your friends all weary, and your spirits spent,
Ye may your fortunes seek: and be forwent
SAT. III.
Who doubts? The laws fell down from heavens height,
Like to some gliding star in winters night.
Themis the Scribe of God did long agone,
Engraue them deep in during Marble-stone,
And cast them down on this unruly clay,
That men might know to rule and to obey.
But now their Characters depraved bin,
By them that would make gain of others sin.
And now has wrong so maistered the right,
That they live best, that on wrongs off all light;
So loathly fly that lives on galled wound,
And scabby festers inwardly unsound,
Feeds fatter with that poysnous carrion,
Then they that haunt the healthy lims alone.
Woe to the weal where many Lawiers be,
For there is sure much store of malady.
It Was truly said, and truly was foreseen
The fat kine are devoured of the lean.
Genus and Species long since barefoote went,
Upon their ten-toes in wild wanderment:
Whiles father Bartoll on his footcloth rode,
Upon high pauement gayly siluer-strowd.
Each homebred science percheth in the chair,
While sacred arts grouell on the groundsell bare.
Since pedling Barbarismes began be in request,
Nor classicke tongues, nor learning found no rest.
The crowching Client, with low-bended knee,
And many Worships, and fair flattery,
Tells on his tale as smoothly as him list,
But still the Lawyers eye squints on his fist:
If that seem lined with a larger fee,
Doubt not the suite, the law is plain for thee.
Tho must he buy his vainer hope with price,
Disclout his crowns, and thank him for advice.
So have I seen in a tempestuous stowre,
Some bryer-bush showing shelter from the shower,
Unto the hopeful sheep, that feign would hide
His fleecie coat from that same angry tide.
The ruthlesse breere regardlesse of his plight,
Lays hold upon the fleece he should acquit,
And takes advantage of the careless pray,
That thought she in securer shelter lay.
The day is fair, the sheep would fare to feed:
The tyrant Brier holds fast his shelters meed,
And claims it for the fee of his defense:
So robs the sheep, in favors fair pretense.
SAT. IIII.
VVOrthie were Galen to be weighed in gold,
Whose help does sweetest life and health uphold
Yet by S. Escnlape he sollemne swore,
That for diseases they were never more,
Fees never less, never so little gain,
Men give a groate and ask the rest again.
Groats-worth of health, can any leech allot?
Yet should he have no more that gives a groate:
Should I on each sick plliow lean my breast.
And grope the pulse of every mangie wrest:
And spy out maruels in each Vrinall:
And rumble up the filths that from them fall,
And give a Dosse for every disease,
In prescripts long and tedious Recipes:
All for so lean reward of Art and me?
No Horse-leach but will look for larger fee.
Mean while if chance some desperate patient die,
Com'n to the Period of his destiny:
(As who can cross the fatal resolution,
In the decreed day of dissolution:)
Whether ill tendment, or recurelesse pain,
Procure his death; the neighbors all complain,
Th'unskilfull leech murdered his patient,
By poison of some foul Ingredient.
Hereon the vulgar may as soon be brought
To Socrates-his poisoned Hemlock-drought,
As to the wholesome Iulap, whose receat
Might his diseases lingering force defeat.
If nor a dram of Triacle sovereign,
Or Aqua vitae, or Sugar Candian,
Nor Kitchin-cordials can it remedy,
Certes his time is come, needs might he die.
Were I a leech, as who knows what may be,
The liberal man should live, and carle should die.
The sickly Lady, and the gowtie Peer
Still would I haunt, that love their life so dear.
Where life is dear, who cares for coined dross?
That spent, is counted gain, and spared, loss:
Or would conjure the Chymick Mercury,
Rise from his hors-dung bed, and upwards fly:
And with glasse-stils, and sticks of Juniper,
Raise the Black-spright that burns not with the fire:
And bring Quintessence of Elixir pale,
Out of sublimed spirits mineral.
Each powdered grain raunsometh captive kings,
Purchases Realms, and life prolonged brings.
SAT. V.
Saw thou ever Siquis patched on Paul's Church door,
To seek some vacant Vicarage before?
Who wants a Churchman, that can service sey,
Read fast, and fair, his monthly Homiley?
And wed, and bury, and make Christen-soules?
Come to the left-side Alley of Saint Poules.
Thou servile Fool, why could thou not repair
To buy a Benefice at Steeple-Faire?
There moughtest thou for but a slender price,
Aduowson thee with some fat benefice:
Or if thee list not wait for dead men's shoon,
Nor pray each morn th'incumbents days were done:
A thousand Patrons thither ready bring,
Their new-falne Churches to the Chaffering,
Stake three years Stipend; no man asks more:
Go take possession of the Church-porch-doore:
And ring thy bells; luck stricken in thy fist:
The Parsonage is thine or ere thou wist.
Saint Fools of Go^am, might thy parish be,
For this thy base and servile Symonie.
SAT. VI.
A Gentle Squire would gladly intertaine
Into his house, some trencher-Chaplaine:
Some willing man that might instruct his sons,
And that would stand to good conditions.
First that He lie upon the Truckle-bed,
Whiles his young master lies ore his head.
Second, that he do, on no default,
Ever presume to sit above the salt.
Third, that he never change his trencher twice.
Fourth, that he use all common courtesies:
Sit bare at meals, and one half rise and wait.
Last, that he never his young master beat,
But he must ask his mother to define,
How many ierkes she would his breech should line.
All these observed, he could contented be,
To give five marks and winter liuerie.
SAT. VII.
IN th'heauens universal Alphabet.
All earthly things so surely are foreset,
That who can read those figures, may foreshew
What ever thing shall afterward ensue
Feign would I know (might it our Artist please)
Why can his tell-troth Ephemerides
Teach him the weathers state so long beforne:
And not foretell him, nor his fatal horn
Nor his deaths-day, nor no such sad event
Which he might wisely labor to prevent?
Thou damned mock-art, and thou brainsick tale,
Of old Astrology: where did thou veil
Thy cursed head thus long: that so it mist
The black bronds of some sharper Satyrist.
Some doting gossip among the Chaldee wives,
Did to the credulous world thee first derive:
And superstition nursed thee ever sense,
And published in profounder Arts pretense:
That now who pares his nails, or libs his swine,
But he must first take counsel of the sign.
So that the Vulgars count for fair or foul,
For living or for dead, for sick or whole:
His fear or hope, for plenty or for lack,
Hangs all upon his New-yeares Almanac.
If chance once in the spring his head should ache:
It was foretold: Thus says mine Almanac.
In th'heauens High-streete are but dozen rooms,
In which dwells all the world, past and to come:
Twelve goodly Innes they are, with twelve fair signs,
Ever well tended by our Star-diuines.
Every man's head Innes at the horned Ram,
The whiles the neck the Black-buls guest became:
The'arms by good hap, meet at the wrestling twins,
The heart in the way at the Blew-lion innes.
The legs their lodging in Aquarius got,
That is the Bride-streete of the heaven, I wot.
The feet took up the Fish with teeth of gold:
But who with Scorpio lodged, may not be told.
What office then does the Star-gazer bear?
Or let him be the heavens Ostelere:
Or Tapsters some: or some be Chamberlaines,
To wait upon the guests they entertain.
Hence can they read, by virtue of their trade,
When any thing is mist where it was laid.
Hence they divine, and hence they can devise:
If their aim fail, the Stars to moralize.
Demon my friend once liuer-sicke of love,
Thus learned I by the signs his grief remove.
In the blind Archer first I saw the sign,
When thou receiu'dst that wilful wound of thine:
And now in Uirgo is that cruel maid,
Which has not yet with love thy love repaide.
But mark when once it comes to Gemini,
Straight way Fish-whole shall thy sick liver be.
But now (as th'angrie Heavens seem to threat
Many hard Fortunes, and disastres great:
If chance it come to wanton Capricorn,
And so into the Rams disgraceful horn,
Then learn thou of the ugly Scorpion,
To hate her for her foul abusion:
Thy refuge then the Balance be of Right,
Which shall thee from thy broken bond acquit:
So with the Crab, go back whence thou began,
From thy first match: and live a single man.
FINIS.
VIRGIDEMIARVM.
LIB. III.
Prologue.
Some say my Satyrs ouer-loosely flow,
Nor hide their gall enough from open show:
Not riddle like, obscuring their intent;
But packe-staffe plain, vttring what thing they meant:
Contrary to the Roman ancients,
Whose words were short, and darkesome was their sense.
Who reads one line of their harsh poesies,
Thrice must he take his wind, and breath him thrice.
My Muse would follow them that have fore-gone,
But cannot with an English pineon,
For look howfarre the ancient Comedy
Past former Satyrs in her liberty:
Sofarre must mine yield unto them of old.
It Is better be too bad, then be too bold.
SAT. I.
TIme was, and that was termed the time of Gold,
When world and time were young, that now are old.
(When quiet Saturn swaid the mace of lead,
And Pride was yet unborn, and yet vnbred.)
Time was, that whiles the Autumn fall did last,
Our hungry sires gapte for the falling mast of the Dodonian oaks.
Could no vnhusked Akorne leave the tree,
But there was challenge made whose it might be.
And if some nice and licorous appetite,
Desired more dainty dish of rare delight,
They scaled the stored Crab with clasped knee,
Till they had sated their delicious eye:
Or searched the hopeful thicks of hedgy-rowes,
For brierie berries, or hawes, or sowrer sloes:
Or when they meant to fare the fin'st of all,
They lickt oake-leaues besprint with honey fall.
As for the thrice three-angled beech nut-shell,
Or chestnuts armed husk, and hid kernel,
No Squire durst touch, the law would not afford,
Kept for the Court, and for the kings own board.
Their royal Plate was clay, or wood, or stone:
The vulgar, save his hand, else had he none.
Their only seller was the neighbor brook.
None did for better care, for better look.
Was then no playning of the Brewers escape,
Nor greedy Uintner mixed the strained grape.
The kings pauilion, was the grassy green,
Under safe shelter of the shadie treen.
Under each bank men laid their lims along,
Not wishing any ease, not fearing wrong:
Clad with their own, as they were made of old,
Not fearing shame, not feeling any cold,
But when by Ceres huswifrie and pain,
Men learned to bury the reviving grain:
And father Ianus taught the new found vine,
Rise on the Elm, with many a friendly twine..
And base desire bad men to deluen low,
For needless metals: then began mischief grow.
Then farewell fairest age, the worlds best days:
Thriuing in ill as it in age decaies.
Then crept in Pride, and peevish Couetise:
And men grue greedy, discordous and nice.
Now man, that erst Hail fellow was with beast,
Woxe on to ween himself a God at least.
No aerie foul can take so high a flight,
Tho she her daring wings in clouds have dight:
Nor fish can diue so deep in yielding Sea.
Tho Thetis-selfe should swear her safety:
Nor fearful beast can dig his cave so low,
All could he further then earths center go:
As that the air, the earth, or Ocean,
Sold shield them from the gorge of greedy man.
Has utmost Inde ought better then his own?
Then utmost Inde is near, and rife to gone.
O Nature: was the world ordained for naught,
But fill man's maw, and feed man's idle thought?
Thy Grandsires words sauor'd of thriftie Leekes,
Or manly Garlic, But thy furnace reekes,
Hot steams of wine: and can a loofe descrie
The drunken draughts of sweet Autumnitie.
They naked went: or clad in ruder hide:
Or homespun Russet, void of foreign pride:
But thou can mask in garish gauderie,
To suit a fools far-fetched liuerie.
A French head joined to neck Italian:
Thy thighs from Germany, and breast fro Spains:
An Englishman in none, a fool in all:
Many in one, and one in several.
Then men were men, but now the greater part
Beasts are in life, and women are in heart.
Good Saturn self, that homely Emperor?
In proudest pomp was not so clad of yore,
As is the vnder-groome of the Ostlerie,
Husbanding it in work-day yeomanrie.
Lo the long date of those expired days,
Which the inspired Merlins word fore-saies:
When dunghill Pesants shall be dight as kings,
Then one confusion another brings:
Then farewell fairest age, the worlds best days,
Thriuing in ill, as it in age decaies.
SAT. II.
GReat Osmond knows not how he shall be known
When once great Osmond shall be dead and gone:
Unless he rear up some rich monument,
Ten furlongs nearer to the firmament.
Some stately tomb he builds, Egyptian wise,
Rex Regum written on the Pyramid:
Where as great Arthur lies in ruder oak,
That never felt none but the fellers stroke.
Small honor can be got with gaudie grave:
Nor it thy rotten name from death can save.
The fairer tomb, the fowler is thy name.
The greater pomp procuring greater shame,
Thy monument make thou thy living deeds:
No other tomb then that, true virtue needs,
What? had he naught whereby he might be known,
But costly pilements of some curious stone?
The matter, Natures, and the workmans frame,
His purses cost; where then is Osmonds name?
Deseru'dst thou ill? well were thy name and thee.
Were thou inditched in great secrecy,
Where as no passenger might curse thy dust,
Nor dogs sepulchrall sat their gawning lust.
Thine ill deserts cannot be graued with thee,
So long as on thy grave they ingraued be.
SAT. III.
THe courteous Citizen bad me to his feast,
With hollow words, and ouerly request:
Come, will ye dine with me this Holy day?
I yielded, tho he hoped I would say Nay:
For had I mayden'd it, as many use:
Loath for to grant, but loather to refuse.
A lack sir, I were loath, Another day:
I should but trouble you: pardon me, if you may.
No pardon should I need; for, to depart
He gives me leave: and thanks too, in his heart.
Two words for money, Darbishirian wise:
(That Is one too many) is a naughty guise,
Who looks for double biddings to a feast,
May dine at home for an importune guest.
I went, then saw, and found the great expense:
The fare and fashions of our Citizens.
Oh: Cl^lopatricall: what wants there
For curious cost, and wondrous choice of cheer?
Beef, that erst Hercules held for finest fare:
Porke, for the fat Boeotian, or the hare
For Martial: fish for the Venetian,
Goose-liuer for the likorous Roman,
The Athenians goat, Quail, Iolans cheer,
The Hen for Esculape; and the Parthian Dear,
Grapes for Arcesilas, figs for Platoes mouth,
And Chestnuts fair for Amarillis tooth.
Had thou such cheer, were thou ever there before
Never: I thought so: nor come there no more.
Come there no more; for so meant all that cost:
Never hence take me for thy second host.
For whom he means to make an often guest,
One dish shall serve; and welcome make the rest.
SAT. IIII.
Were yesterday Polemons Natals kept
That so his threshold is all freshly steept
With new-shed blood? could he not sacrifice
Some sorry morkin that unbidden dies:
Or meager heifer, or some roten Ewe:
Rut he must needs his Posts with blood embrew,
And on his way-doore fix the honned head,
With slowers, and with ribbands garnished?
Now shall the passenger deem the man devout.
What boots it be so, but the world must know it?
O the fond boasting of vaineglorious man:
Does he the best, that may the best be seen?
Who ever gives a pair of velvet shoes
To the holy Road: or liberally allows:
But a new rope, to ring the Couure-feu Bell,
But he desires that his great deed may dwell,
Or graven in the Chancel-window-glasse,
Or in the lasting tomb of plated brass.
For he that does so few deserving deeds,
TO were sure his best sue for such larger meeds.
Who would inglorious live, inglorious die,
And might eternize his names memory?
And he that cannot brag of greater store,
Must make his somewhat much, and little more.
Nor can good Myson wear on his left hond,
A signet ring of Bristol-diamond:
But he must cut his glove, to show his pride,
That his trim Jewel might be better spide:
And that men monght some Burgess him repute,
With Satin sleeves has graced his sackeloth sure.
SAT. V.
FIe on all Courtesy, and unruly winds,
Two only foes that fair disguisement finds.
Strange curse! But fit for such a sickle age,
When Scalpes are subject to such vassalage.
Late travailing along in London way,
Me met, as seemed by his disguised array,
A lusty Courtier, whose curled head,
With abron locks was fairly furnished.
I him saluted in our lavish wise:
He answers my untimely courtesies.
His bonnet veiled, ere ever he could think,
The Unruly wind blows off his Periwinke.
He lights, and runs, and quickly has him sped,
To overtake his ouerrunning head.
The sportfull wind, to mock the Headless man,
Tosses apace his pitched Rogerian:
And straight it to a deeper ditch has blown:
There must my yonker fetch his waxen crown.
I looked, and laughed, whiles in his raging mind,
He cursed all Courtesy, and unruly wind.
I looked, and laughed, and much I meruailed,
To see so large a Caus-way in his head.
And me bethought, that when it first begone,
It Was some shroad Autumn, that so barred the bone.
Is It not sweet pride, when men their crowns must
With that which ierks the hams of every jade
Or floor-strowd locks from off the Barbers sheares?
But waxen crowns well gree with borrowed hairs.
SAT. VI.
WHen Gullion di'd (who knows not Gullion?)
And his dry soul arrived at Acheron,
He fair besought the Feryman of hell,
That he might drink to dead Pantagruel.
Charon was afraid least thirsty Gullion,
Would have drunk dry the river Acheron.
Yet last consented for a little hyre,
And down he dips his chops deep in the mire,
And drinks, and drinks, and swallows in the streeme,
Until the shallow shores all naked seem.
Yet still he drinks, nor can the Botemans cries,
Nor crabbed oars, nor prayers make him rise.
So long he drinks, till the black Carauell,
Stands still fast grauel'd on the mud of hell.
There stand they still, nor can go, nor retire,
Tho greedy ghosts quick passage did require.
Yet stand they still, as tho they lay at rode,
Till Gullion his bladder would unload.
They stand, and wait, and pray for that good hour:
Which when it came, they sailed to the shore.
But never since dares the Feryman,
Once intertaine the ghost of Gullian.
Drink on dry soul, and pledge sir Gullion:
Drink to all healths, but drink not to thine own.
Desunt nonnulla.
SAT. VII.
See thou how gayly my young master goes,
Vaunting himself upon his rising toes,
And pranks his hand upon his daggers side,
And picks his glutted teeth since late Noontide?
It Is Russio: Trow'st thou where he dined to day:
In sooth I saw him sit with Duke Humfray.
Many good welcoms, and much Gratis cheer,
Keeps he for every straggling Caualiere:
An open house haunted with great resort,
Long service mixed with Musical disport.
Many fair yonker with a fether'd crest,
Chooses much rather be his shot free guest,
To fare so freely with so little cost,
Then stake his Twelue-pence to a meaner host.
Had thou not told me, I should surely say,
He touched no meat of all this liue-long day.
For sure me thought, yet that was but a guess,
His eyes seem sunk for very hollownesse,
But could he have (as I did it mistake)
So little in his purse, so much upon his back:
So nothing in his maw: yet seems by his belt,
That his gaunt gut, no too much stuffing felt.
See thou how side it hangs beneath his hip?
Hunger, and heavy Iron makes girdles slip.
Yet for all that, how stiffly strits he by,
All trapped in the newfound bravery.
The Nuns of new-woon Cales his bonnet lent,
In lieu of their so kind a Conquerment.
What needed he fetch that from farthest Spain,
His Grandame could have lent with lesser pain?
Tho he perhaps never past the English shore;
Yet feign would counted be a Conqueror.
His hair French like; stares on his frighted head,
One lock Amazon-like disheueled:
As if he meant to wear a native cord,
If chance his Fates should him that bane afford,
All British bare upon the bristled skin,
Close noched is his beard both lip and chin:
His linen collar Labyrinthian-set,
Whose thousand double turnings never met:
His sleeves half hid with elbow- Pineonings,
As if he meant to fly with linen wings.
But when I look and cast mine eyes below,
What monster meets mine eyes in humane show?
So lender wast with such an Abbots loyne,
Did never sober Nature sure conioyne.
Like a strawne scar-crow in the new-sowne field,
Reard on some stick, the tender corn to shield:
Or if that semblance suite not eueric deal,
Like a broad shak-forke with a slender steal.
Despised Nature suit them once aright,
Their body to their cote: both now mis-dight:
Their body to their clothes might shapen be,
That nill their clothes shape to their body.
Mean while I wonder at so proud a back,
Whiles th'emptie guts loud rumblen for long lack,
The belly enuieth the backs bright glee,
And murmurs at such inequality.
The back appears unto the partial ^ine,
The plaintiue belly pleads they bribed been:
And he for want of better Advocate,
Does to the ear his injury relate.
The back insulting ore the bellies need,
Says: thou thy self, I others eyes must feed.
The maw, the guts, all inward parts complain
The backs great pride, and their own secret pain.
Ye witless gallants, I beshrew your hearts,
That sets such discord twixt agreeing parts,
Which never can be set at onement more,
Until the mawes wide mouth be stopped with store.
THE CONCLUSION of all.
THus have I writ in smoother Cedar tree,
So gentle Satyrs, pend so easily.
Henceforth I write in crabbed oake-tree rindes
Search they that mean the secret meaning find.
Hold out ye guilty, and ye galled hides,
And meet my far-fetch't stripes with waiting sides.
FINIS.

