THE Life and Death of the merry Devil of Edmonton.

With the pleasant prancks of Smug the Smith, Sir John, and mine Host of the
George, about the stealing of Venison.

By T. B.

Mine Host of the George. Sir John. Smug. Smug pursude by the keepers for
stealing of venison, Got upon the white horse to escape his catching.


Printed by T. P. for Francis Faulkner dwelling over against St. Margarets hill
in Southwarke. 1631.

Smugs Ghost.
WHen with the ayrie essence sempiterne,
You might a body (now is dust discern)
I was of many set by for my mirth:
Good company I loved with all my heart,
And like a boon companion playde my part,
(It was fore-spoken at my hour of birth)
Hart-^ating sorrow nere with me remainde
While I your shape (as I have said retainde
My cogitations were all ayrie, light:
I near loved hoorder, nor the hoording sin
That coin my labor brought me one day in
I spent in pleasure ere the next days night.
Mad Master Peter, and my red faced Host
My dapper Parson, whom of all I most
Entirely loved for his merry vain:
And Bancks the miller that poor thin che^k'd knave
That help to bear my body to the grave,
were men of mettle: of a perfect strain.
These men and I, made up a matchless crew
For merry meetings till the ground looked blew,
We Would sit and send our soaking healths about,
Weed sometime theeue together in the dark,
To fetch a feast of Venison from the Parcke.
Then grant my ghost this, though our bones be rotten
Our names may live and never be forgotten.
FINIS.
The Induction, with a Description of Master Peter Fabell.
Master Peter Fabell, otherwise called the merry Devil of Edmunton (for the
many excellent ieasts he did) was a man of good descent: and a man, either for
his gifts external, or internal, inferior to few. For his person he was
absolute. Nature had never shown the fullness of her skill, more in any then
in him* For the other, I mean his great learning (including many mysteries)
he was as amply blessed as any.

Uery pleasant, kind, and free-harted was he, to, or with his familiars: very
affable, and courteous to strangers, and very liberal, full of Commisseration
and pity to the poor and needy: both abroad from his purse, and at home from
his Table. In his time very well known to him, and sometime (in pastime) very
familiar with him, were these men: Oliver Smug, Sir John the merry Parson,
Bancks the Miller, and mine Host of the George: in whose companies many times
for recreation, he would spend some hours. In Edmonton he was borne, lived and
died in the reign of King H. the 7.

How Master Peter deceived the Devil with a Candles end.
AT the first entrance of M. Peter into the Art of Magic, by charms, spells,
and incantations, he raised a spirit, and with the spirit concluded* that if he
would be obedient to him, serve, help, and ^^rther him, at such times, and in
such things, as he should comma^nd, his soul should be his reward. This
Firebrand of Hell (with great sign of rejoicing) yielded and served him (as
his slave or vassaile) with very great diligence, in many matters and
employments. UUhen this offictious ser^ant thought he had been at his
command long enough, (for no term or time was set at the contract) he
demanded his commanders soul, as the reward of his p^ynes. UUhy (said
Master PETER) I have ma^e thee a promise, thou should have it, and thou shall
have it, but not yet: when it has left my body (by my death) take it to thee,
till then thou may not have it, so rest thee contented. Then the spirit
began to threaten, and terrify him to make him set a time of payment for his
pleasure: and so affrighted him, that he knew not what or how to answer him.
Come (quoth the Devil) be brief, for Lucifer every minute, looks for that
soul of thine. Is there no remedy (quoth Master Peter) will thou allow me no
time, to set my business in order, and take my leave of my friends ere I go?
allow me some small time for that, and do thy will. Why how long time (quoth
the Devil? desire thou I should allow thee? why in faith (quoth master Peter
no long time: spare me but till this inche-long end of candle (pointing to the
Candle burning in his study) and take my soul. UUell (quoth the Devil) though
by my charge I can hardly stay a minute, I Will stay so long: about it presently.
If I neglect or ore-slip my time (quoth. M. Peter) take thou the advantage of it:
yet one request more thou must grant me. What is that (quoth. the devil) Marry
this (quoth. M. Peter) to confirm thy promise with an oath: I am very loath to
trust thee on thy bare word for all the world reputes thee but a knave*
therefore come swear to forbear me till this candle is burned. By Hell I
will (quoth. the Devil) and by great Lucifer, As I hope to draw down thousand
souls to the deep Abisse (the place of my abode) I will forbear thee till
that candle is burned. Then Master Peter, presently after his hellish
protestation, put the candle out, and into his pocket: look here (quoth he)
till this is burnt, thou may not claim my soul: I Will keep this safe enough
from burning out and so keep that thou lookst for safe enough. Go I command
thee, and tell thy proud Lord Lucifer, how finely I have ouerreached thee.

When the Devil saw he was so cunningly deceived by Master PETER, with many
bitter execrations he left him.

How Master Peter deceived the Devil again.
Not long after the Devil had bin thus deceived by the merry Devil, Master
Peter Fabell, he went again to him, and finding him a sleep, took the end
of the candle (before spoken of) out of his pocket, and awaked him: when he had
so done, he showed him the end of the candle.

Look here (said he) here is that thou keptst to keep me from my right
(thy soul I mean) when this is burnt, thy soul must burn with mine: I Will
quickly burn it now (I Will warrant thee.)

When Master Peter saw he had lost his candle, (upon the loss of which lay
the loss of his soul, if his policy had not once more helped him out) he
entreated him to spare him a little longer.

No, no (said the Devil, all intreates are vain, thou have deceived me once,
thou shall deceive me no more. It Is a good world, when men are so cunning in
deceit* as to deceive the Devil: but it is no matter, thou art so much the
redier for me.

Yet here me speak (quoth Master Peter) and as thou likest my speech so
deal with me.

Well be brief then (quoth the Devil) what have thou now to say?

No more but this (quoth. Master Peter) if thou will spare till my timely death,
put that thou seek into thy hands, I Will labor all the time I have to live for
Hells advantage: I Will bear more souls along with me to Hell then twenty of
^our cunnings^ Devils shall.

Shall I once more trust thee (quoth the Devil) on thy word? well, swear, Why
(said Master Peter) by the black river, Lucifer thy Lord swears by, I swear
I will: and when I am buried, either within the Church, without the Church, in
the Church porch, Churchyard Street, field, or high way, take thou my soul.

Well (quoth the Devil) in hope thou will gain me many souls to thine, take
thy rest, and so he left him.

Many years after when Master Peter Fabell by his white hairs, weakness,
aches, and such like signs perceived he could not live long: he went and digd
his deathbed in the Church wall, and there rested day and night hartyly praying
and repenting him of all the evil he had committed.

When the hour was well nigh come, that should separate his soul and body,
the Devil went to him again and blamed him for neglecting his business by
promise, and withal told him he was come for his soul. When Master Peter
heard that word, he presently started up and charged him to depart, my soul
(said he) thou come too soon, and yet to late to have it: he that redeemed
my soul has took't to keep, thou can not have it.

Did thou not swear (quoth. the fiend) that I should have thy soul at ye hour
of death? thou did, and I will have it. I (said Master Peter) when I am
buried either within the Church, without the Church, in the
Church-porchChurch-yard, street, field, or highway, take thou my soul.

See foolish fiend thou art deceived again, this hole is my grave, If this be
either within the Church, without the Church, in the Church porch Church yard,
street, field, or highway, my soul is thine: thou see it is not. therefore
I charge thee (so deceived) depart. Still the Devil was very eager on him for
his soul, till at last, by his earnest praires and zealous Inuocations he
forced him to run roaring to hell again without it.

How Master Peter Fabell, punished a Friar and his Lemon for their knavery.
Master Peter Fabell one morning very early, walking the fields (as his
custom was, to meditate by himself) spied a Friar at prayers upon his beads,
very deuotly, when Master Peter saw him so earn^st in his prayers he went to
him, and demanded of him what his reason was, that his chamber would not serve,
for his prayers as well as that place. Oh! sir (said the Friar) all places are
alike to me for this business, and all times, for I pray when the prick of
conscience commes upon me, in what place, or at what time soever. I commend
thee much (quoth Master Peter) thou art an honest fellow, and so for that time
they parted.

The next morning Master Peter went again: and again found this Friar in the
place where he left him, ye morning before so devoutly praying, but not at that
holy exercise, ye spirit did not move him, unless the evil spirit moved
him, for instead of his book and beads, he had got a wench, and sat colling
her so close, and kissing her so thick, kiss upon kiss, yt she could hardly
fetch her wind for him. A good while stood M. Peter behind a hollow tree
unseen, seeing them ticke and toy together, at last to fright them from their
venery, he went into the tree and with a heavy hollow voice, cried ^ut to the
Friar in this manner: Friar, Friar, Friar, the Friar hearing a voice, presently
started up, and looked round a bout him to see if he could find the Master of
that tongue yt called him: but in vain he stood looking for he stood far
enough from his eye, though he were close to his ear. When the Friar had stood
a good while looking about him, first on ye one side, then on the other, and
could spy no body, like a kind letcherous bald-pate, very handsomely, or rather
very knauishly, he went to his wench again. He was no sooner laid down, but
Master Peter ye second time, cried out (to disturb him) Friar, friar, Friar.
At this second call the Friar half affrighted, started up again, and looked
about him (a tiptoe) to see if he could find a body to that voice: but he
found none.

Now our Lady defend us (quoth the Friar to his wench) what voice is this that
calls on me so often? Did not thou hear it? yes faith sweeting (quoth she) I
heard some body call to thee: can thou not see him?

No faith chucke (quoth the Friar) I can see no man: and yet surely this voice,
is the voice of a man. But it is no matter, let it be what it will, if we
cannot see it sure we cannot feel it. Come chucke let us busse and be merry, be
o^ good comfort and cross thy self, and I warrant thee safe for a farthing,
down lay old bald-pate again: b^t before he could give her three kisses, the
voice raised him the third time, crying as before, Friar, Friar, Friar. Then
the Friars face began to bewray his fear: he had no more color in his face,
at that time, (though at all other times he had color enough) then one of
these fine whay faced oate-meale eaters, or a wench troubled with the green
sickness.

Friar, friar, friar, (said Master Peter) (still keeping himself close in the
hollow tree) he that sees thee now, unseen of thee, sees at all times, in all
places, and all these thy actions.

Here yesterday I saw thee at thy prayers very deuotly, with thy book and
beads is this the book thou bring to pray on now? does the prick of
conscience move thee to do this? speak thou black sinner. There thou have
red thy damnation without present repentance, and penance. Therefore
presently, both of you, if you respect more the good of your souls, then of
your bodies, by the penance I shall appoint you, purge your selves: when the
Friar and his wench heard these words, they wore verily persuaded in their
minds that it was the voice of an Angel they both kneeled down, very
reverently together, and said, thy will be done: appoint our penance, and we
are ready (with all willingness) to endure it. Then (said Master Peter) you
both shall presently be whipped, from this place (the place where you offended)
into the Town and about the town. This suffer and desire you to be done by the
next man comes ^eere you, and this sin is forgiven you, refuse this, and
despairi^g die damd wretches.

This or what else it shall please thee to inflict or lay upon us, for this
sin (quoth the Friar) we will patiently suffer.

Then Master Peter presently stepped out of the hollow tree, and went (very
cunningly) round about on the backeside of a hedge, and came directly upon
them, as if he had meant to pass by them.

As soon as ever they saw him, they very humbly on their knees told him, that
in that place they had offended, and for that offense, they were by the voice
of an Angel, commanded to take present penance, or their souls could not be
saved.

And what (said Master Peter) is the penance commanded?

Marry this sir (said the Friar) to be whipped by the next man came near us,
from this place (the place where we offended) to the town, and about the
town, and this sin should be forgiven us. If we refuse this (this was our
heavy sentence) to live in despair, and die damd wretches.

This therefore is our request sir (you being the man, by the Angel appointed)
that you would perform your part appointed, while we (very patiently) bear
the reward of our wickedness.

Well (quoth Master Peter) though I am loath to play the beadle, I Will do thy
request, you shall not be damd for want of a whipping.

To be short, Master Peter tied the right hand of the friar, and the left hand
of his wench together, and having so done (with a sound smarting rod of willow)
Ierkt them to the town before him.

There in the view of all the people, he lasht them from one end of the town
to the other, telling them at every second or third stripe, of the haniousnesse
of their fault. When he had thus soundly whipped the lecherous bald-pate, and his
Lemman, with most pitiful bloody backs, he left them, and loosing their
hands, he gave the Friar this caveat.

Take heed good Friar, Of Venus fire, You see the hire, Of foul desire.
And so farewell, I have done your request, if at any time you have occasion to
use me, in such a piece of service, command me. Away went he very heartily
laughing, and the Friar and his wench, very heavily weeping.

How Smug woone a wager of Master Peter Fabell by a trick that he did.
AS one day Master Peter Fabell, (an excellent Scholar and well seen in the
Art of Magic) was conferring with certain of his friends, about certain
business and employments, Smug being in the hearing of them, between druncke
and sober (for he had been plying the pitcher in Master Peter's sellar) ran
nodding in amongst the^, and the very first word he spoke to them was, how do
you my Masters. They being in very serious talk, unwilling to be disturbed
wit^ his foolish ba^ling, with very fair words, requested him to leave them
a little, and within half an hour (or such a thing) they would give him the
hearing of that he had to say to them. But he (like an importunate beggar)
told them he would not leave them till he had spoke his mind to Master Peter.

When they saw there was no remedy, but he would have his will, come (said
Master Peter) honest Oliver, be brief, utter thy ignorance roundly, what have
thou to say to me now? Marry quoth Smug, Master Peter, I here say you are a
very cunning Gentleman, and that you have done as many fine tricks and feats
in your time as ere a Iugler in all Europe has done, what will you say now, if
a plain fellow, a hard-handed laborer, a poor leatherne-apron-wearer, do ^uch
a ^unning trick, as you M. Peter with the help of all your great gogle ^ide,
bottle ^osd, blobber^lipt, bladder cheekd, beetle-browed, ore headed,
detestable Devils, cannot do the like. Why honest Smug quoth. M. Pet^r who or
where is he that will do this? marry (quoth. Smug) I am he. Art t^ou he quoth M.
Peter? who would think thou had such tricks in thy budget? I prithee Smug
tell m^, do not thou (as thou say I do) use the help of some infernal?
have thou no Devil in thy trick? come tell me: Devil (quoth. Smug) marry God
bless me M. Peter, I cannot endure to look upon these filthy foule-mouthed
fire-spitters, no Master Peter, what I do, I will do of my extraordinary wit
and invention. Well let us (hear quoth. M. Peter) what is it you will do? Marry
this I Will do quoth. Smug, I Will set a candle burning in the midst of this room
where we all are, open and eas^e to be seen as my hand: This candle M. Togood
shall see M. Dauby, M. Doutv, Mistress Friskin, and my man Ralph here yet you
shall not see it, mass Smug (quoth M. Peter) if thou can do such a trick,
thou putst me down indeed. Come begin, let us see it done, nay first (quoth
Smug) let us have a lay upon it, I Will not show my skill for nothing. Agreed (quoth.
M. Peter) what shall the wadger be? why faith (quoth. Smug) M. Peter you know my
mind for that, I love always when I make a wager, rather to have it wet then
dry, for you know M. Peter I am dry of my self, and ye say ye word, the wager
shall be a dozen of double ale, you know I am merry Smug, and merry Smug must
have his merry go down, or else he is no body. Well I agree (quoth. M. Peter) h^ere
is my hand, if thou perform'st what thou have said, I Will loose and I Will pay it.
Then Smug called for a candle and a candle stick which when he had, he placed M.
Peter in ye middle of the room, and set the candle-stick with the candle
burning in it upon his head: now M. Peter said* he do you see this candle, why
no (quoth. M. peter) how should I see it? is it possible for a man to see the
crown of his head? you cannot see it then quoth. Smug, no, I cannot see it said
he. Then Smug demanded of the rest (before named) whether they did s^e it or
no, they all answered I, asking how they could choose but see it, why look you
(quoth Smug) al these see it, and yet you cannot see it, they say they cannot
choose but see, and yet you say it is impossible for you to see it.

Come Master Peter, you know what you have los^? and there had been a Kingdom
laid on it, when Master peter saw how prettily Smug had over reached him, he
(smiling) sent for his losses, and in pastime made Smug take* his well won
liquor, so soundly that he lay by the walls for ye night.

HOw Smug when He was mad drunk, would needs go to fight with the shadow of a
sword and Buckeler.
SMug one day being angered amongst a company of true drunkards (like himself)
came chafing out of the Alehouse, like a mad man (as you know Drunkards and
mad men are not much unlike) vowing to be revenged, or he would never drink
draught of good drink again, as long as he had a day to live, and so chafing,
reeled homeward, as fast as his legs would give him leave.

This reeling infirmity, threw poor Smug from post to post and from wall to
wall, here he knocked his face against one stock, there against another, till
half the wild blood in his body, was run out at his nose.

Still on he staggered, till he came to a seat (near his home) under a sign
of the Sword and buckler: where he sat a while to rest him, and as he sat
like an honest man, careful to keep both ends together, cast up (as near as
he could without either pen or counters) what he had received in the day before.

But all his casting could not cast the remembrance of his quarrel out of his
mind: for still he sat railing against his pot companions most greiuously,
calling them Scoundrels, Scabes, Slaves, Knaves, and perpetually dambd drunken
Rogues.

As he sat thus fretting and chafing, vowing to be revenged* he spyed (as he
thought) the instruments of ^euenge lying before him: For it was a fair
Moone-shine night, and the shadow of the sign he sat under, seem to him to
be no less then that it came off, the very sword and buckler that hung over
his head, unseen or unthought off.

Now you Rogues and Raggamuffins (quoth. Smug) I Will ticle you in faith, I Will eene make
no more a do, but take up my tools, and to them again, by Pharoh, by this
Sun that shines, sai^e he (and looked up to the Moon) I Will kill them all,
though every one of them, had as many lives as a Cat: presently stooping to
take up his supposed sword and buckler, he fell flat on the ground (for his
head was so heavy, that when he had put it downwards, he could not raise it up
again for his life.) There lay he sprauling and groping about, to get his
Sword and Buckler into his hands, so long, that he fell fast a sleep, and
waked not till morning he was fetched home by a couple of his honest neighbors.

How Smug laid a wager with certain Shoomakers, that he was a shoemaker,
proved it, and wone the wager.
THree or four honest good fellows of the gentle craft, trau^lling together
with Sir HVGHES bones at their backs to get work, passing through EDMONTON,
went to an Alehouse (ye very next door to Oliver Smugs) to drink, where when
they had sitten a quarter of an hour, or there a bouts, drinking healthes
(very kindly and courteously) one to another, and to all good fellows of their
crafts and acquaintance, to make themselves merry, they sung a song in three
parts very orderly and well

Smug (as he was at his work) hearing them sing so merrily, presently left
his work and went to them again, bearing in either hand a full Cann of the
best liquor.

Here my old Lads of mettle (quoth he) heeres to you, and to all good fellow
Shoo-makers in Europe, of which number, (for want of a better) I my self make
one.

Wh^ sir (quoth one of them) are you one of the gentlecraft? faith (quoth. Smug) I
am as I tell you, an honest good fellow* and a shoemaker, and for the love I
hear to all kind shoomakers, I have made thus bold to come and drink with
you.

They all (very courteously) welcomed him into their company, and made him sit
down amongst them.

When they had sitten a pretty while together drinking and singing very
merrily, one being a mad wag amongst them (above all the rest) suspecting Smug
to be (as he was indeed) a Smith, looked very earnestly upon him, and about
him, to find something about him that might truly tell him whether he was as
he said he was, yea or no.

At last prying very narrowly, he spied his hammer hanging underneath his
appron, in a great round brass ring.

Then half angry with Smug, because he toulde him he was a Shoemaker and
was not, he begann to jest flout and scoff at him, showing to the rest of
his fellows and companions, the hammer that hung under his apron.

Why (said another of them) my honest friend, came you hither to flout us?
wherefore have you told us you are that you are not? Why (quoth Smug) what did
I tell you that I was? why (quoth he) you did tell us you were as we are, a
Shoemaker, I did indeed (quoth Smug) I toulde you so, and again I tell you
so, and will make good my word upon a wager with the best of you all, agreed
(quoth one) what shall the wager be?

Why in faith (quoth Smug) I think you do intend to travel no farther then
this Town to night, and you say the word the Wager shall be a shot of five
shillings to be spent in sheare drink: what say you sirs are you contented
with it? If you be strike hands and a match.

A match (said they) I know (said one of them) you are a Townesman, and
therefore we shall not need to go far for a touchstone to try you.

Presently came a Serving man into the Alehouse to SMUG, and desired him for
Gods sake to give over his drinking and to go to work, for his Masters Horse
staid for shoes: What do you now think my Masters (quoth Smug) you see I am
now sent for, and m^st go presently to put on a pair of shoes, will you
yield you have lost? why look you here then my mad bullies, here is a shoe
(pulling a horse shoe out of his pocket) of mine own making, what say you
now? am I a Shoemaker yea or no? A Shoee-maker (quoth one of them) here is a
shoe indeed, but it is a Horse shoe, nay (quoth Smug) i will prove it to be a
Shoe and no Horse shoe, for I made it for Moss his Mare of ENFIELD, but be
it Mares Shoe or Horse shoe, a shoe it is, and I the maker, Ergo, I am a
Shoo-maker because I made it.

Therefore come, deliver your pursses of a five shillings piece, or so many
small pieces as a mounts to so much, and let us stand close to our liquor, for
I think long till I see it.

The shoomakers for all this would not yield they had lost would needs have him
into the Town for further trial: But all gave Judgment on Smugs side, that
he was a shoemaker, and had wone the wager. Then the shoo-makers, when they
saw there was no remedy, turned back with Smug to their old ho^esse, and paid
their loss^s, with the loss of their wits for that night.

How merrily Smug answered one that gave him good counsel.
SMug one day being set in the midst of his merry mates, swaggering and
swilling very quick in carousing and calling in for more, as if he had had
Fortunatus his purse in his pocket, was by an honest well governed man, that
sat by, (and noted his humor) sharply reproved, and after reprehension
kindly admonisht, with the^e ensewing verses.

If thou the name, of husband good would have,
Then toil to get, and getting, getting save:
For he, his gettings cannot wisely keep,
Shall wake with care, when sauers soundly sleepe^
To which Smug merrily and very readily, made this answer.

Alas good sir, good husbands name,
My dad near had before me:
For me to have it then, t'weare a shame,
As long as Kate will scorn me.
(As parson plie-pot, counsels here)
I Will freely take my liquer,
It makes good blood, the sight more clear:
And a dull wit grow quicker.
And so fell to his liquer again, til (contrary to his merry answer) it made
his quick wit grow duller: For within one half hour or more, he had not one
wise word to spare, though he might have had a Kings ransom for it.

How Smug was frighted by the Nuns of Chestone, thinking them to be spirits,
and how afterward he frighted them by his sudden appearance.
SMug on a time, as he was steali^g venis^n, hearing the Keeper in the Pa^ke,
got up into a tree, to keep out of sight till he were past by him, which he
did: Scapi^g the Keepers eye, and so consequently his hand very hansomely. But
sitting there a little while, prying and peeping between the branches (like an
Owl in an Iuy bush) to see if the coast were clear, he spied the Mother Nun
of Chestone, with three or four young ones, (attired in white long robbes,
with railes and tippets, as they used to wear) coming toward him with a
little bell ru^g before them, sprinkling holy water, and praying upon their
beads very devoutly: withal the circumstances of that ceremony they used when
they received a sister into that holy order.

The very sight of these holy creatures, made Smug quiver, quake, and shake
like the leaves of the tree he sat upon, for he thought verily they had been
Spirits Furies, Fiends or Hobgoblins, that had come thither a purpose to carry
him away for stealing of Uenison, but they (poor souls) meant no more harm to
him, then he to them, but past by, not casting so much as a look upon him.

When they were past him, his heart (that till then was as heavy as a poor
pitifully paind spittle-mans) was as light as a Morris dauncers: And very
lightly (from knot to knot,) got he from the top of the tree, thi^ki^g to
have run to his fellows that stayed for him: but by that time he was gotten
from the bows to the root, the Nuns was turned back again upon him.

When he saw t^ere was no way to get from them, suddenly he stepped right
before them, and (upon his knees with a streatcht throat (like an old
bawling broome-man) desired them for Gods sake not to hurt him and he would
never walk so late a Deare-stealing again while he lived, and still he
yawled, and bawled (with his hands claspt together in very pitiful manner) as
though he would have rent his winde-pipe.

This good old Nun, so suddenly incountred, by such a roaring raggamuffin,
knew not what to do, but ran as fast from him as ere she could, and all her
young ones after her like so many young ones after the dam, she run not so
fast one way to leave him, but he run as fast the other ways to leave her, and to
find out his fellows. When he had found them, he told them (in boasting
manner) how he met with a company of Spirits in the park, and they durst not
abide the sight of him. Therefore be of good cheer my Masters (said he) if
Spirits be afraid to look upon me, and run so fast from me, I hope the
sneaking Keeper dares not abide my fury, and so they past on again to their
theeuing pastime.

How Smug, presuming upon his courage, after this exploite, (frighting, these
supposed spirrits) would needs go the next evening, again a Dear stealing:
and how dear he paid for it.
THe next evening SMUG and his fellows went again a Dear stealing, but it
was a dear Deare-stealing to him and the rest of his companions, for they had
not been in the Park above a quarter of an hour privily peaking about for
their prey, but they spyed the Keeper well weaponed with his great mastiue dog
at his heels. Now out alas said the Parson, what shall we do my masters?
what shall we do? good Bancks, as thou art an honest Miller, and would have
me pray for the for the forgiveness of tole-dish sin, tell me what I shall
do.

Why alas good sir John (quoth the Miller, what should I tell you, I know
neither what to do nor say for my self, what say thou Smug? thou see we
are all in danger: I preethe good Oliver, as thou love a good fellow, and
good fellowshipe, as thou love that, thou know we all love good liquor,
give us some good counsel, and good Smug be brief, for thou see our
destruction is at hand.

Why alas my Masters (said Smug) what would you have me say or do? By Vulcan
I protest, I know not what to say to you: I would I were at my Forge, you
good Sir John, a sleep in the bell^ frye, and Bancks in his Mill, or I would
we were all there, that we might be as safe as a thief in the Mill.

As they stood there prating and talking the one to the other, they saw the
Keeper coming directly toward them: Oh now Smug, (quoth Sir John) stick to
us, all my trust is in thee, I prithee good Smug show thy self as valiant now
against this keeper, as thou did against the Spirits, and Hobgoblings thou
meetest here the last night.

If thou be remembered, thou gave us words of comfort then, and did bid
us all be of good cheer, and fear nothing* for thou said thou would make
the s^eaking keeper fly from thee, as fast as thou madst them fly. Now hon^st
Oliver, be as good as thy word, make them ^lie and de^end us, and I even I Sir
John your mad-merry Parson, will pray to God for thy health and welfare, as
long as I have a day to drink in: Why content you Sir John (said Smug) I Will
see what I can do, go you two and lie close behind that hedge: If I have but
as good luck against this scuruie keeper, this night as I had against my
little long taild-hobgoblins the last nig^t, we will not leave the Parcke,
without that we came for. They (as Smug to^ld them) went behind the ^edge and
left him alone to deal with the keeper: but alas for all his big looks and
brauing words, the Keeper thwackt him so soundly that he made him lie
sprawling on the ground, and so left him.

When the Miller and the Parson (peeping through the hedge) saw the Keeper
gone, and poor Smug lie in such a pitiful case, they went to him, now alas
poor Smug (said sir John) how is it? what cheer man? I perceive your furious
looks could not fright away the Keeper, as it did the Spirits you told us of.

Oh Sir John (said Smug) this Keeper is a Devil, he has paid me in faith, and
yet all these blows grieve ^e not so much Sir John as that you and my
neighbor Miller did not stay to take part with me, for you would have had your
share in the venison as deep as I, and I had thought he had been worse to
deal withal then Spirits, the Devil should have dealt with him ere I would
have come into his clutches.

Smug had no sooner spoke this word, but the Keeper was upon them again, and
mightily enraged against them all, gave the Miller and the Parson as much as
he had given SMUG, and sent them all halting home together.

How Smug was revenged upon a Barber, (his rival) that made him kiss his tail
AS honest Smug loved (as he loved his life) the society of his bearded
associates, so in like manner, loved he (sometime) to be mad merry, amongst a
mad company of his bare-chind boon companions, his little wanton wagtailes:
his sweet and twenties: his pretty pinckineyd pigsnies etc. as he himself
used commonly to call them.

Amongst all the kind lasses he used to keep company withal, one (above
all) he best loved, and by that one (above all) he was least loved: for ^ine
Philippe the Barber had so labored in trimming his best beloved Barbara (for so
she was called) that he when he came to her, was as welcome as water into a
ship, bad news to a fore grieved person, or the shadow of a man to the
longing mistress, of a long kept maidenhead.

To be short, one evening Smug went to see his sweet Barbara, but when he was
come where he thought to have been very kindly welcome, to the house of his
best beloved, to his great grief he found the doors locked, bard, or boulted
against him: she he looked for, lookd not for him, nor any other at that time:
For she (as any kind whore will be) was content with one at once, and one she
had: The Devil had put the Barber and she together, and she was very loath
that any man should put them a sunder. A good while Smug stood knocking, but no
body would stir to let him in then he went to the window, and there he kept a
whewing, and a whistling to raise her, but all would not do: Then he fell to
knocking with his knockles against the casement, and at last raised the Barber
out of Barbaras bed, not in his own likeness, but in the likeness of Barbara
his best beloved: for the Barber like a subtle knave slipped on his bed fellows
peticoate, night rail, and head tire, which became his haire-lesse face, as
well as hers it was made for, and so went to the window in Barbaras apparel,
he spoke Barbaras voice as near as he could, and past as currantly, with Smug
in conference, as could be wished. After many loving words, Smug desired he
might have a kiss ear he parted, for the Barber (for Barbara, had told him
he might by no means be let in at that time)

This kind he-she, very lovingly yeeldes. I preethe sweet Smug, (quoth. this
fine counterfeit) come busse me through this broken pane, that I will, in faith
(quoth. Smug) with a good will as ear I came from School, or went to the
Alehouse: then I preethe sweet Smug (quoth the Barber come smake me quickly,
that I may to bed again, and to morrow I Will meet thee where thou will appoint
me: why come sweet heart (quoth. Smug) I am ready, and thrust his lips as far as
he could into thorough the broken pane: Against Smugs lips, the Barber instead
of his lips turned his A R. his lips I should have said: Smug smackt, and
smackt that sweetly five or six times together, ere he could tell what he kissed.
At last he perceived he was played the knave withal and by whom: yet in
policy very patiently put it up, and with these words took his leave.
Farewell sweet Barbara, for the kindness thou have shown me at this time, for
all thy former kindness, and these sweet kisses, I rest by thee to be
commanded, whenever, wheresoever, and in whatsoever thou please, and so
sweet Barbara for a while God be with thee.

To bed went the Barber again, and Smug, as fast as he could foot it
homewards: as late as he was when he came home, he found all his folks hard
at work, and a heat in the fire ready to be stricken out. Smug presently took
the iron out of the fire (sparkeling hot) and ran as fast as ere he could,
back again to Barbaras window, and there very hastily called for his sweet
Barbara: de^iring her most heartily to let him have one busse more, and he^d
raise her no more that night: the Barber presently started up to ye window
again as he had don before, and (as he had done before) set his buttocke close
to the broken pane, thinking that Smug (as he had done before would have kissed
them: but instead of kissing, or putting his lips too, he put his hissing hot
iron to him, and made him fly from the window, as fast, as if the great Devil
himself, and half a dozen little ones had been at his tail. Now (quoth. Smug)
my neat trimmer, I have trimd you about the hips, as well as you have trimd me
about the lips: as you like this, play the knave with me another time, and so
farewell good plaster-maker, hie the home, and clap a plaster to it quickly,
or thou't feel me when thou do not see me. When Smug had thus revenged
himself upon his rival, he left him crying and fretting, and went laughing
home again roundly.

How Smug Foxt the fellow that went to cornute him in the Fox chamber.
TWo brothers (young gallants in Edmonton) who had often made them selves merry
with Smugs company, had an equal desire to cornute* or in plain terms, to
cuckold honest Smug, een^ on that night his wedding day, not so much drawn to
it by her beauty (for she was but a homely Smug less) or any part or quality
in her, as a desire they had to do him that wrong, and especially upon that
night: privy strife was between them, plotting and contriuing the one to
deceive and prevent the other. Upon the wedding day, as opportunity served, the
elder brother got the bride into a corner, where he spent many perswasiue words
to win her to accord to his as he called it) loving request: many of poor
Smugs faults and imperfections he laid open, and withal his purse, with very
large proffers to draw her on the more easily: but all could not do. She
liked never ye worse of her Smug (whom she had taken that morning for better,
for worse,) for the dispraising of him, nor the better of him for all his large
proffers: and therefore wild him to give over his dishonest suite, and be
packing: for she was not a woman (how soever she seemed in his eye) of that
unchaste disposition. This and many such like answers she made him, as very
willing to be rid of him, but could not: for he, (scorning to show a bashful
blush) came upon her still, after her cross answers, with a fresh supply of
smooth words, and left her not, till he made her (with the appointment of place
and minute (make him promise yt he should have his desire, but alas, y^ promise
past: not from herhe art, for she was of a settled conscience, yt no means
might move her, neither proffer, person, or any other induceme^t whatsoever,
to prove false to her Oliver.

When he had thus received his answer, and was gone, his younger brother privily
set upon her to the same purpose, and with the answer he had was sent away very
pleasant, but his expected pleasure was his pain in ye end. For she as soon
as ever they had left her, acquainted her groom or her Bridegroom with their
purpose and told him that ten a clock was the hour, and the Fox chamber the
place appointed, wishing him for that night to lie there alone in her stead,
ready to receive the^, or any of them. When Smug understood by his wife (thouh
he was almost past understanding) the knauerie that was practiced against him,
after two or three smacking busses and thanks for her kindness in telling it,
he began to talk to himself in this manner: A ha, my little mad Iinglespurs
would you be nibling? would you in faith Lads? i will have a bate shall bate your
bouldnes a little, i will fox you in faith, come to the fox chamber as soon as
y^u will.

To be short, a little before the time appointed, Smug got him to bed in the
Foxe-chamber against they or one of them should come: about the hour
appointed, both the Brothers met in the dancing room, or Hall, for they must
pass through that to the Fox prepared to perform their promises: but this
unhappy meeting had almost marred all for neither of the^ durst enter in the
other sight.

By and by, before a minute of the prefixed time was past, the younger slipped in
whilst the elder stood talking amongst the dauncers, and to bed he went. He
was no sooner got into his Hostess (as he thought) but Smug stepped out, and
with an old dry boot he had (laid ready for that purpose) so be labored this
young Mutton: monger in his shirt, that he had been as good have had a sound
whipping as that basting.

A ha quoth Smug, i will fox you in faith boy, do thou think mine host of the
George had a whore to his wife? no thou lecherous Babone, Smug is better liked
off in his frize or Sheepe-skin, by his own smug less, then ere a spruce
sleeked gallant of you all.

Why I preethe good Smug (quoth the youngster) be contented, if I have made
thee a fault, I will make thee amends: Nay alas (quoth. Smug) it is ^o fault, I
rather account my self, (for the kindness you would have shown to me) in
your debte, but I Will pay you ere you and I part, and about him he laid again:
Then Smug made him slip on his clothes, and beat him out a doors. When the
elder Brother (who all the while he was as he thought) in the Fox chamber with
Smugs wife, saw how ^e was guld by her, and baffed by him, he smilde to
himself, to think how well he was rewarded for his forwradnesse, and how
cleanely he himself had escaped that scouring.

Why how now Brother (said he) what is the matter? has your Bedfellow beat
you? is she such a Devil? how chance you pleased her no better? please her
(quoth he) the Devil please her and him to, they have pleased me a plague on
them, but it would have pleased me better Brother, if you (as it was your
desire this evening) had had my place.

Why Brother you may see (quoth the elder) what it is to be so forward in
seeking to deceive your elders.

Well, come Brother, lets go home and sleep honestly, for we see what is got by
tempting honesty, he has taught thee, and thou have taught me to take heed
how we enter into any such action again. Then home they hied them hand in
hand, one smiling and jesting, and the the other fretting and chafing, cursing
poor Smug, his wife, and the Foxe-chamber extremely.

How Smug being drunk, lost his fellows in the Park, and how when they got
together by whooping and hollowing, he took them for thieves, and would by no
means know them till he was soundly thawackt by them and made to know his
friends from his foes.
ANother time, Smug was fetched out of ye Alehouse by sir John, the Miller,
and mine host of the George, in such a case as it had been fitter he should
have gone to bed to sleep, then to the Park a Deere-stealing, but drunk as
he was they would have him along with the^, for without him they were no body,
he must needs go, though he could hardly stand alone.

Well, to ye Park they got him with what great ado, consider of the case he
was in, and imagine: when they were entered into the Park, and were ready to
enter upon their business, they served themselves every one to his appointed
standing, with their weapons for that purpose, as Crosse-bowes, Long-bowes and
staves.

Smug he was set (because he was not in case to take a steady aim) to watch
that the Keeper came not upon them before they were aware, but while they were
close at their business, their centinell (honest Smug) forgetting both where he
was, and also what charge he had taken in hand, went reeling down y^ Park,
clean out of sight and hearing. When sir John, the Miller, and the mad Host
had struck the stroke, made the^ all glad men, and bound their prize up
hansomly together, they went to fetch their centinell, but when they were come
to ye place where they set him, he was not to be found: body of me (quoth. sir
John) what shall we do? kind neighbors and friends, what shall we do? honest
Sm^g with his head full of liquor is gone god knows whether, I pray love, he
be not fallen into some of these ditches, y^ I hope he is not (quoth. mine host) he
was wet enough before* w^^ what a mad knave is this Smug (quoth. ye Miller (he is
sure asleep some where, faith then (quoth. sir John) we were best give over
seeking for him by eye, and try what we can do by the voice. Then they ^ell to
whooping and hollowing, as loud as they could, that Smug might hear and answer
the^: a good while they went whoping and hollowing, but Smugs ear was to far
off for their voices to reach, they could by ^o means hear y^ answering
hollow: the babbling Echo answered every whoope they made, but Smug not one. So
long they walked whoping and hollowing up and down, that the discouerer of
every bad action, y^ morning was ready to discover theirs, and yet Smugs hollow
could not be heard. At last when they had given over hollowing: and were going
without him, they heard him whoop, hush (quoth. sir John) I think I hear his
voice, from whence comes it? mass and I hear it to (quoth. mine Host) but from
whence I know not. Why the^ (quoth. the Miller) we were best by our hollowing to
keep him hollowing still, and so we shall come to him I Will warrant you: They
did as the Miller counseled them, and within less then a quarter of an hour
had sight of him.

When they were come near together, sir John (out of the love and good will he
bare to Smug, stepped forward before his fellows, and with an outstretched arm
and smiling countenance would have embraced him,

But Smug in his drunken humor (not knowing him to be sir John) nor ye Miller
and mine Host that followed him, to be his old honest familiar copes-mates,
took him such a knock ore the pate, that he made M. Parson stagger like
himself, though their causes were much unlike why how now Smug (quoth. the fiery
faced Host) will thou fight with thy friends? friends (quoth. Smug) Foot you rogues
do you come to rob me? keep out, keep out I advise you, and you mean to go
home again to see your wife and children (if you have any) keep out, by
Pharaoh you all die else.

Why I prithee Smug (quoth. the Miller) put down thy weapon, we are all thy
friends, I prithee Smug (quoth. mine Host) put thy staff on thy shoulder, and
lets go home together, do thou not know me? come give me thy hand. That I
will (quoth Smug) there, and knocked him ore the pate with his staff: there is a
hand for thee, and still stood striking at them, laying about him like a mad
man.

When they saw he would by no fair entreaty come to the knowledge of them,
they all laid at him, and well and soundly basted his sides: and by that time
they had thwackt him soundly indeed, his wits were come to him.

Then he knew his friends from his foes, and desired them very kindly, (every
man by his name) to hold their hands, and very orderly and well, helped his
fellow thieves to bear home their booty.

How Smug was deceived of his red cap by his wife, and by that deceit forced to
leave his swaggering company, and go with her home to his labor.
AMongst diverse Articles that were agreed upon betwixt Smug and his wife, to be
kept unviolated on either part, this was one.

That day that Smug had his red cap on, (which cap he called his cap of
maintenance) he was like a Lord of misrule, to have rule and dominion over his
wife, both at home, and abroad, that day he had to spend at his own pleasure:
to card, dice, drink, drab, domineere, and do all that it pleased him to do,
without any inturruption, or contradiction. But without that cap, he might do
nothing, but what stood with her good will and liking.

If any time he were gaming, drinking, domineering etc. without this cap of
authority, if his wife came into the place where he was, and did but hold up
her finger, he was presently to give over his company, obey, and follow her
home to his business.

One morning betimes, Smug was called from his work by a company of true tospots
(like himself) to go a foxe-catching, forth he went with his red cap upon his
head, swaggering, and swearing amongst his most abominable boon companions,
like the captain of a gally Foi^t.

First they tasted liquor in one house, then in an other, then an other, and so
from house to house, till they had not left an Alehouse in all Edmonton
untasted.

At last when their brains began to be dizzy, with running so long in this
maze of good fellowship, (as one evil leads to another (they went all as wise
as Woodcocks to a house of iniquity, and there they drank and swaggered helter
skelter: and to make them leap more the lustily, they sent for a noise of
minstrels, and after that pitiful noise, the treble and the Bag-pipe, they
daunst all out of measure. One while this creeking music would go creeping
after them like a tired follower after his leader, and another while it would
run so fast before them, that they were feign to run more then a Lackey pace to
overtake it*

In the midst of this merry pastime, came Smugs wife fretting and chafing into
the room to fetch him home, but he by no means would give over his pastime:
it was his day, and he would spend it at his pleasure.

When she saw he was so far in, that he could hardly be got out, she fell to
entreating, desiring him very kindly, to go along home with her, but the more
she entreated, the more he stood against her.

Why thou confounding Cockatrice (said he) do thou not see my Cap of
maintenance, my scarlet colored Cappe. Am not I to do my pleasure without
check or control so long as this Cap is on my head? away. be gone, or by the
life of Pharaoh i will be bumble thee, I tell thee, so long as this Cap is on my
head I will not be crossed in mine humor. Then she perceived it was but a folly
to seek by entreaty to get him home, and yet she was very loath to leave him
behind her in that disordered company.

A good while she stood musing with her self, what she were best to do to get
him along with her, in vain she studied not, for her study begat a trick that
effected her will, and that was this.

She took her man Ralphs gray cap from his head, and very hansomely when she
saw her husband was busy in talk (and had lost the sense of feeling) she
took his red cap off, and put the gray cap on in the stead of it.

When she had so done, she placed her self right before him again, and held
up her finger (for as is before said) at the holding up of her finger, he was
to fulfill her pleasure, his red cap being from him.

When Smug saw her finger up again (little thinking of her subtilitie) he was
very angry, and out of his anger said thus unto her.

How dare thou presume to hold up thy finger? and see this (poynting to his
red cap as he thought) down with that finger, or I Will set down finger and body
and all, by the life of Pharaoh, now by broad chek'd Bacchus that sweet
swilling God of good fellows, I will, shall I be crossed in my humors? if my red
cap were at home, and I here, I would obey thee, but being both here I will
not.

Why you are deceived (quoth. she your red cap is not here and therefore you
must and shall along with me, look here, is this your red cap (said she) and
took it from his head to show it him) I pray you look upon it well.

When Smug had lookd upon it well himself and had asked the Millers and the
merry Priests Judgment of the color of his cap, and found it to be a gray cap,
he looked as pale as a poor dispairing debtor, at the sight of a Sergeant, or
his Cut-throate creditor: and presently yielded, made a low leg, took his
leave of his company as hansomely as he could, and reeld home with his wife,
very lovingly.

How Smug was taken by the watch, and set in the stocks for abusing of them,
and how he kept such a coil with whooping, and hollowing under a sick woman's
window, that the Constable was feign to set him at liberty, and glad to be so
rid of him.
Drink and good fellows, had kept Smug out so late one night, that the Watch
as he walked homewards had him in exammination, both where he had bear and
about what business.

Smug half fusseld, or (as many term it) some what rugged, answered every
demand very crosly, where upon the watchmen (as men in authority will) taking
it for a great presumption that he should answer them so unhappily, grew very
chollericke, and in their heat of anger, stroke him, and heau'd him, and
shoued him between them, as they would have shook him to fitters. But as
before this rigorous usage, he could not well brook their words, he could
now well worse brook their blows, and therefore resolved as before, he had
given them one cross word for a another (I and perhaps returned them with the
vantage) seeing they were so ready to give blows, to give them blow for blow.

So long as he laid about him with his hammer, (for yt was his Morglay) that
scarce two of half a dozen that began with him, would stay to make an end with
him. By and by came the Constable with the bloody runnawaies, to bear Smug to
the stocks (which stood under the Constables window) with much ado, they dragd
him to them, and with as much ado got in his leg. When they had thus set him
fast, they left him, and every man returned to his place again. Being thus left
alone, he fell to singing, to pass away time as merrily in ye stocks, for once
as he had done in the Alehouse many a time and often: He was as well furnished
with odd pieces of ba^dy ballets and dr^nken catches as a man of his
profession might be; with so roundly trould out as he sat, that the Constables
wife was feign to send down her maid, to desire him to sit quietly and hold
his tongue: How, hold my tongue (said Smug) no though master Constable have a
trick, to force me to hold my legs still, he wants a trick to make me hold
my tongue still.

But I prithee wench, tell me from whence or from whom come thou, to bid me
hold my tongue? marry (said the maid) I dwell here, you sit under the
chamber window, where my mistress who (sent me) lies very ss^ke: how sick?
(quoth Smug) I prithee tell me less who is thy mistress? marry quoth. she the
Constables wife, (how said Smug) the Cons^ables wi^e? what his wife that set me
here? I, even his wife, (quoth. the maid) therefore I prithee good fellow be
quiet: O I will I will (said Smug) go tell thy mistress I will not sing one sone
more to disturb her: I prithee do not good fellow (quoth. the maid) and so went
up again to her mistress, she was scarce in the chamber with her mistress,
delivering his answer, but he was as loud and far louder then he was before,
though not in the same manner, because of his promise: for he had turned from
bawling, like a ballet singer, to shouting, whooping, and hollowing, like a
forrester. Such a noise he made as he sat, with hollowing and whoping, (as if
he had been a hunting) that master Constables sick wife, could by no means,
take a minutes rest by him.

Twice or thrice she sent her maid down to him again to desire him to be
quiet: but as often as she sent, he strained himself to raise his voice higher.

Nay in faith (quoth. Smug) your husband set me here, I thank him, and do you
thank him if I be a trouble to you, for setting me so near you: blame not me
for (in faith) I must be doing some what to make my self merry: when he had thus
told her his mind, he fell to whoping and hollowing again.

Then she sent for her husband, thinking by his presence to still him, but he
being with him, Smug was ten times worse, then when he was from him (for he
played the knave so on purpose to cross him.

When master Constable saw, that neither fair means nor foul, could make
him hold his tongue, and that by the ^oise he made, his wife grew worse and
worse, he commanded his beadle, (or some other under Officer) to let him out,
and dersied him, very kindly, to go quietly home to his dwelling.

Thus honest Smug by's knavery,
Got's heel^s again at liberty.
How knauishly Smug was dealt with, by three or four
of his fellow drunkards: and how he
broke the glass that showed him the
shadow of his own face*
SMug in his time had played many mad pranks by many, and one day it was his
chance to light into the company of three or four mad consorts, that played
the knave as well with him, as ever he had played the knave with any.

When they had spent a fore-noone in quaffing together, and filled him with
liquor: (which he was very easily entreated to take) and so full filled him, that
he was to heavy to stand or go, they led him out of the Alehouse into the
Church Porch: and there laid him all along on his back upon a bench.

Under his head, (instead of a Cushion or a Pillowe) they put a Cricket, or a
little Joint stool, (such as children use to sit on in the chimney corner) and
under his f^ete, a great rough hewed free stone.

Yet as hard as they laid him, he slept as soundly, as if he had been laid
down upon a bed of down: and lay with such a grace, as few smithes (I can
tell you) can ly: for he had upon his head, his red cap, his cap of
maintenance, bottoned up before, with a fair feather of a peacocks tail in
it, bound about with a carnatio^ silk ribben his leather apron tur^d roun
together, and wound about his middle, his hammer hanging (hanger like) by his
side, and both his hands in his pockets.

Thus lay Smug at length, like the Image of Duke Humphry, over his long ago
consumed carkas, or his dust earth and ashes.

Had honest Smug (thus lying) been grated about with some pitiful Epitaph, or
a deaths head, and Mementomorie, and his sleep lasted as long as the sleep of
one of the seven sleepers, I am persuaded he would have had more spectators
then the richest monument that stands either in Saint Paules-Church or
Westminster.

But to the matter when (as he lay thus) the mad crew^ that laid him so, saw
he was as deep in sleep as drink, they began to work their wills upon him
in this manner.

They got a good handful of small coals, which they beat to powder, and
having beat them to powder, put them into a dish of fair water: When they had
well mingled (like right daubing painters) their small-coale powder, blacking
and water together, and made a perfect coale-blacke, without either size or any
such like settling stuff, they laid it on his face which was reasonable
black before, not leaving so much white or red to be seen as a small pinnes
head will cover.

When they had thus be blackes and besmouched him, with his Devils look, they
left him (snorting on the Porch-bench) till he should either wake of himself,
or be ^aked by the Sexton, or some other kind of bald^^ted Officer.

There he slept soundly three or four hours without moving: Till at last
with a remoone, that removed him from the bench to the ground, he waked, and
after long stretching, reaching, and yawing, got up upon his feet.

But alas, when with much ado he was got ^p, he had as much ado to stand,
yet out of the Church Porch he made a shift to stagger, and up into the street.
When he was there (reeling homewa^ds to his own-house) the boys at play in the
street, spied him at ye first sight half afraid of his black face, they ran
apace away from him, yet at last when a great company of the^ were gathered
together, they turned to him again, and followed him close, shouting and
crying after him, Devil, devil, devil.

When Smug as druncke as he was, heard them call him Devil, devil, devil, he
maruailed much in his mind wherefore they called him so (for alas he knew not)
had they called him drunckard, It would never have green'd him, for that he
knew to be his ordinary title. Still followed the boys at his heel, crying
(as they begun) Devil, devil, devil, throwing old shoes, bones, and pibble
stones after him.

So long they followed him, that they made him (whole drunk) half mad, yet
all he could do he could not mend it: the boys loved him so well, they would
not leave him till they saw him at his door.

His wife (busy within) hearing the noise and shoute the boys made, looked
out, and spyed her own sweet husband in that sweet taking presently she got
him in a doors, and there began (very prittily) to make use of her tongue to
him. After many brabling words between them, she showed him a glass, in
which he saw the shadow of his face in that most pitiful case. Then Smug
began to swear (not like a Smith I can tell you) gogs no^nes, foot and nails
thou most abominable whore, dos^ thou show me the Devil to fright me from
that little store of wit which I have? An thy Devil were ten devils, I am not
afraid of him, and that thou shall quickly see: with that he took his hammer
from his side (still seeing his own sweet shadow in the glass, which he
took to be the Devil) struck at it, and with one blow clattered the glass
all in pieces.

Now you whore (said he) where is your devil now? I think I have mauld him
in faith: bring your Devils to me do thou? you do whore thou? Alas sweet
Smug (quoth she) seeing him so very much moved, be patient I preethe sweet
chucke, and showing him the cracked frame* look here here is no Devil,
therefore I preethe sweet Oliver be quiet.

Nay (quoth Sm^g) i will ticle your Devils, in faith, and your Devils come to
molest me within mine own house upon mine own ground, i will devil them.

Come good sweet heart (quoth. she) now thou have b^aten the Devil away let us
go to bed. After a quarter of an hours fretting, with very good words she got
him to bed. In the morning when she knew his sleep had made him ^ober, she
showed him his black face again in another glass, which when he saw, and
knew well what he saw, he blushed, but the best was it could not be seen till
his visard was taken off with fair water and soape, then he confessed himself
faulty, promised amends, and went very close to his labor.

How cunningly Smug escaped the Keeper and others that pursued him, and made
them run up and down from place to place to seek him in vain.
SMug and his mad crew of Uenison-eaters, one night being at their business,
were suddenly set upon by their old enemy, the K^eper and two or three more,
that after they had taken great pains to get their prey, and bound it up
hansomely, ready to bear it away, they were forced to fix and leave it behind
the^ for fear of a further mischief. The Miller he ran one way, and nimble
Sir John in his buckram cassock another way, and Smug another way, as fast as
if they had been traind up to running all their life time. They had not time
to take their leaves one of another, or appoint a place of meeting.

As these Deere-stealers took several ways to run, so the keeper and his
consorts, severed themselves to pursue them, one ran after the Miller, another
after sir John, and two or three after Smug, for he was the only man they
looked for, though all of them were known to the keeper well enough. The
Miller he ran not far ere he was staid with a good pat on the pate: sir John's
followers followed so close, that he was driven to leap for his liberty over a
ditch over he should have leapt, but indeed a short leap laid him all along in
the ditch, and so he was staid and taken up with never a dry thread on him: Smug
he ran directly homewards, followed at the heels by the keeper and another,
yet they could not ouer-take him.

When he was got to Edmonton with running to and fro, up one lane and down
another, he got out of ye sight of his pursuers, but it was so late he could no
get into any house to hide him, save his own, and into that he durst not go,
fearing they would go thither to seek him.

A pretty while he stood studdying which way to shift for himself, resolving
one while to do this thing, another while that, another while another. At last
standing thus in a brown studdy, turning his eyes first one way, then another
way, one while up, another while down, he spied ye sign of the white horse
(not painted upon a board, as they use to be here in the City) but fashioned
out of timber, and set gallantly over the sign post. Mass (quoth. he) I care not
greatly if I get up and bestrid this white horse* and make another S. George
here in Edmonton, I Will do it in faith, it may be I may sit safer so then any way
else, if I do, I do, if I do not I know ye worst on it, it is but wearing two
stocks upon one leg, and I am as well able to endure it now as ere I was. Up to
the white horse he got, and backed him bravely with his arm stretched out, his
hamer hand instead of a sword, and the lippet of his red cap tied under his
chin, which stood for his helmet most featly.

While he sat thus gallantly strutting upon his wooden horse (yet no hobby
horse) the keeper yt followed him so close to have gotten him into his keeping
(with the the other that was with him) went peaking and preying in every corner of
the street to find him, twice or thrice backward and forward) they went under
him, and yet could not see him, but he saw them well enough.

When they had lost an hours labor or there abouts, in seeking after him
without doors, they resolved another while to seek him within, come said ye
keeper to the other let us go search the Innes, and first this, this white
horse is his daily haunt, and therefore it may be we shall find him here this
night, com let us in.

As ye keeper was going into the white horse (vndr Smug) his fellow looking up,
bad him stay, stay (quoth the keeper) wherefore should I stay? why look you
(said the other) this is not the white horse as you take it to be, this is the
George, mass (quoth. the keeper) it is the George indeed, come, lets over to the
white horse. When they had crossed the way (as they thought to the white horse)
they found y^ George again* Zoundes (quoth. the keeper Jack, this is the George
too. What have we two Georges in Edmonton. Foot man where are we? if this be
Edmonton, here was but one George yesterday, and the white horse over against
it, now here are two Georges one against another: this is strange, it is very
strange indeed (quoth. the other) bones man, are we not at Hodsdon, for thou
know the two georges are in Hod^do^, mass thou say true Jack, and by
these signs this should be Hodsdon. Come, come, (quoth. the other) we mistook our
way in the dark, this is Hodsdon, come lets up to Edmonto^. Content (quoth. the
keeper) and together they ran as fast as they could to Hodsdon to find
Edmonton.

When Smug who heard all their talk, and sat laughing ready towray himself with
laghter saw them trudging toward Hodsdon, he gat down from his white horse,
and went to bed, leaving them in their wild Goose-chase to seek him. When
they were come to Hodson, there they saw the two Georges too (for there ye
signs stood indeed) the^ they chafed, swore and stamped like mad men, cursd
poor Smug and his company, and vowed to be the death of him, if ere they could
take him hansomely, their they took up their lodging for that night, and the
next mor^ing went home to their business.

How Smugs wife locked him in a doors, when he would have gone abroad a
swaggering and what shift he made to get out and amongst them.
SMug one day very early, prepared himself to go abroad (according to promise
ye day before) a drinking, and to go hansomly to it, he tricked himself up in
his holly day suit, put on a clean band and his red cap, yt he might go
through stitch with his business, without cross or controlement, but (alas eene
as he was ready to go down the stairs, his wife perceiving his intent,
presently (to cross him) stepped out of the chamber before him, pulled the door
after her, and locked him in, now (said she) and you be hot with anger, walk up
and down and cool your self, if your walk tire you, lie down and rest you,
for you shall rest upon no ale-bench this day.

This cross deed, and these cutting words of hers vexed him that he was almost
in as bad a case with fretting, as he had bin ye day before with drinking, yet
he saw there was no remedy but patience, for neither fair words nor foul
could make her turn the key to let him out.

From the time he rose, till almost dinner time, he walked up and down in his
chamber, cha^ing, fretting and mumbling like poor Tom of Bedlam in his ^arne
or bowsing Inn.

At last to cross his wife, (as well as she had crossed him, he took an empty
Can that stood by upon a little table, tied it to the end of a long string, and
put it out at his chamber window, where it hung dangling like the poor men's
box at Ludgate, and he himself like y^ bawling box man, stood peeping through
his Lattice, crying for the Lords sake, for ye Lords sake good people pity a
poor prisoner, making his can dance at the end of his whip-cord, with drawing
it up and down as nimbly as one of the little thread P^ppits in the lamentable
motion of Dives and Lazarus. Well there he stood in this ma^er bawling and
yawling, till he had drawn as great a company of people together as the babbling
of a cheating mountebancke or ye foul furd throat of an itchy ballad singer in
a fair or market time. To conclude when his wife saw such a company of people,
men, women and children gathered about him, she (poor wretch) ashamed to hear
him, and vexed at those y^ stood gaping about him, in a chaf^ng heat as she
locked him in, let him out, and was glad to be so rid of him.

How Smug was revenged on his wife for locking him in a doors.
THe day succeeding this unkind cross, Smug rose agai^e very early, and put on
working day apparel, with his old sheep russet button cap, and went to work
as hard as if he had wrought for a wager, he labored at the Forge, (but it was
to forge a piece of knavery) till his sweaty face reeked again.

All ye day long wrought he thus hard without any stop, stay, or hinderance,
nay, which is more to be wondered at, he drank not above thrice all day, and
that was but as he used to call it, small comfort* commonly called small beer.

His wife to see him work so close (as she very well might) meruailed, and
gave him as kind words as he could wish for, and swar by the faith of her body,
she was glad to see such a sudde^ alteration. He still plying his work, gave
her good words for her good words very kindly. When his labor had brought on
ye evening (which brings an end to labor) he very kindly requested his wife to
walk with him to nip themselves alittle in ye evening, for it was a very fine
frosty moonlight evening, she very kindly took his kind request, and went
with him.

Uery loving walked they together, ar^e in arm, out at towns end, one while
this way, and another while y^, eue^ as it ^leased him (her most venterous
leader) to lead her. They walked thus lovingly up and down together so long,
that there was not candle burning, nor one eye open in all y^ Uillage, then
home apace he hyed him, when he was come to the door, ready to enter, he sent
his wife on a sleeueles errand, to ye turning style to his honest neighbor
Noddamus, while she poor woman was about his bidding, mistrusting no knavery
to be done against her, he presently turned the key on the out side to let
himself in, and on y^ inside to lock her out. When she was returned from ye
place aforenamed, and found the door locked, and the key sticking in ye in^ide,
she knocked* and with her knocking called, but honest Smug lay snug, and would
neither rise to let her in, nor make her any answer. Then she knew not what to
do, but (as women do wanting their wills) sat and cried to ease her stomach;
his resolution was set to make her sit all that night, to knock her heels and
blow her nails at the door, like a poor back-bitten-stal-creeper, never did
she chatter better with anger, then she did at that time with the coldness of
the weather that made her teeth go faster then her tongue.

When she saw y^ neithar reasonable knocking, nor unreasonable calling could
raise him, she took up a great flint stone and beat against the door as
though she wo^ld have beat it down. Then Smug started up to ye w^ndow in his
shirt, and very strangely asked who it was kept such a bounsing at the door?
marry good man drunkard (quoth. she) it is I that knock, wherefore have thou locked
me out? Nay first (quoth. Smug answer me, wherefore did thou lock me in? it was
so lately don, I am sure thou have not forgot it, or if thou have thou see I
have ^ot.

Thou lokdst me in, I have locked thee out,
Good Ag^is walk, go walk about.
So, talk no longer, for I swear by my red cap, and by Bacchus the God of good
liquor, I mean to keep thee out all night, as thou kepst me in all day, and so
sweet Agnis till between seven and eight in the morning farewell.

To bed went he again and left her to shift for her self til morning: how
they agreed when they came together, I know not, but you may judge she scarce
took it patiently.

How Smug quarreld with his fellows, and was ready to fight about the singing
of a Catch: and how till they turned it to his mind, he would not be quieted.
SMug one day being very merry, with his honest swilling associates from
drinking, fell to singing, and amongst all the od Alehouse catches they had up,
this was one I Will ty my Mare in thy ground: this I Will ty my Mare in thy ground
was tossed so long to and fro, between Smug the Miller and the merry Parson, ye
Smug had forgot he was singing a Catch, and began to quarrel with the Parson,
thinking verily, he had meant, (as he said in his song) to ty his Mare in his
ground: Will you ty your Mare in my ground? (said Smug) the Parson he sung
still, I Will ty my Mare in thy ground: In my ground? (said Smug:) still went ye
Parson forward with his Catch, I Will ty my Mare in thy ground, etc. Then Smug
began to swagger indeed and swore, if he tied his Mare in his ground, he would
make his cap and scull cleave together: besides he would give his Mare such a
drench yt after yt drink, she should never eat more. The Parson seeing Smugs
rage increasing, with very good words, entreated him to be patient, and cast
away choler for as I am an honest sir John, and a boon companion meant no
harm in the world: I did but sing the Catch, as the Catch was. But all these
kind words and entreaties, could not win Smug to patience, till M. Parson
turned his song, and himself in singing from him to the Miller: Then they were
as good friends as could be, and (in kindness) went again to drink together
till they were all laid to sleep together.

How Smug being drunk in bed pist upon his wife through a Cullender instead of
a Chamber pot.
Laboring at ye liquor al day, many times tired Smug far worse then his labor
at ye forge, as it was often seen by him: but most especially, at this time
that I ^a now to speak of: for at this time he had labord so hard (and no body
blame him) for he cast not from morning til night yt his legs were not able to
bear him to bed: but what he could not do himself for himself, the helping
hands of some kind neighbors and friends did: in bed they laid him and so left
him to get that sleeping that he lost waking.

There lay he grunting and growning like a hog in a sty, turning two and fro,
from one side of the bed to ye the other: for the liquor wrought so within him yt
he could not sleep as he used to drink (soundly) for ye life of him. Within
half an hour after he had lien thus tumbling and tossing, as if he had lien
upon nettles, his wife went to bed to him, to rest her after her (indeed) true
labor, but (poor woman) she found less rest there the^ in her labor: for he
kept such a re^ching and stretching himself, such a hunching and punching with
his legs and elbowes, that she might have lien better at ease between too mad
men, then by him in that taking. As he lay thus laboring (laden and over laden)
with the liquor he had taken* ye liquor lay laboring within him for vent:
Which, though he could very hardly rise to give it hansomly, yet he did his
good will, and reachd out of the bed for a pispot, but instead of a pispot, he
took a cullender, (that stood close by his bed side upon a settle) and
kneeling up right in his bed, let his ill-digested liquor run as freely into
it, and through it, upon his (slumbring wife, as a coduite pipe at waste.

She presently (feeling her self warm wet) start up, and began to brabble
with him, and cry shame upon him for doing such a beastly deed. Why thou whore
(quoth. Smug will thou not give me leave to piss? if thou crosest my humor but
with two cross words more, I Will break the pisse-pot about the pate of thee,
therefore be quiet.

But for all his threatening she would not hold her tongue y^ she kept walking
still, til Smugs fists walked about her ears. There was such a sore battle in
ye bed between them as think near was seen between bed fellows before,
and had not a ca^dle and a clean ^aire of sheets, been^ quickly carried up to
part them, there would have bin great bloodshed.

Finis.
Tho: Brewer.


