THREE SPEECHES OF The Right Honorable, Sir Francis Bacon Knight, then his
Majesty's Solicitor General, after LORD VERULAM, Viscount Saint Alban.

Concerning the POST-NATI Naturalization of the Scotch in England Union of the
Laws of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

Published by the Authors Copy, and Licensed by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Badger, for Samuel Broun, and are to be sold at his
shop in St. Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the white Lion and Ball.

1641.

15. May. 1641.
At a Committee appointed by the Honorable House of Commons in Parliament for
examination of books, and of the licensing and suppresing of them, It is
ordered that these three speeches or treatises be published in print.

Edward Dering.

The Argument of S r. Francis Bacon Knight, His Majesty's Solicitor general,
in the Case of the POST-NATI of Scotland, in the Exchequer Chamber, before the
Lord Chancellor and all the Judges of England.
May it please Your Lord-ships,

THis Case Your Lord-ships do well perceive to be of exceeding' great
consequence. For whether you do measure that by place, that reaches not only
to the Realm of England, but to the whole Island of Great-Brytaine; or whether
you measure that by time, that extends not only to the present time, but
much more to future generations, Et natinatorum, et qui nascentur ab illis:

And therefore as that is to receive at the bar a full and free debate: so I
doubt not but that shall receive from your Lord-ships a sound and just
resolution according to law and according to truth. For my Lords, though he
were thought to have said well that said that for his word, Rex fortissimus;
Yet he was hought to have said better, evenin the opinion ofa King him self
that said, Veritas fortissima et pravalet. And I do much rejoice to observe
such a Concurrence in the whole carriage of this cause, to this end that truth
may prevail. The case no fained, or framed case; but a true case between true
parties.

The title handled formerly in some of the Kings Courts, and Freehold upon it:
used indeed by his Majesty, in his high wisdom to give an end to this great
question, but not raised: occasio, as the Schoolmen say, arrepta non porrecta.

The case argued in the Kings Bench by M. Walter with great liberty, and yet
with good approbation of the Court. The persons assigned to be of Counsel on
that side, inferior to none of their quality and degree in learning; and some
of them most conversant and exercised in the question.

The Judges in the Kings Bench have adjourned it to this place, for conference
with the rest of their brethren. Your Lord-ship, my Lord Chancellor, though you
be absolute Judge in the Court where you sit, and might have called to you such
assistance of Judges as to you had seemed good: yet would not forerun or lead
in this case by any opinion there to be given; but have chosen rather to come
your self to this assembly, all tending (as I said) to this end, whereunto I
for my part do heartily subscribe, ut vincat veritas, that truth may first
appear, and then prevail. And I do firmly hold and doubt not but I shall
well maintain, that this is the truth, That Calvin the plaintiefe is Ipso Iure
by the law of England a natural borne subject, to purchase Freehold and to
bring real actions within Eugland. In this case I must so consider the time,
as I must much more consider the matter. And therefore though it may draw my
speech into further length; yet I dare not handle a case of this nature
confusedly, but purpose to observe the ancient and exact form of pleadings,
which is,

First, to explain or induce. Then, to confute, or answer objections. And
lastly, to prove, or confirm.
And first for explanation. The outward question in this case is no more, but
whether a child borne in Scotland since his Majesty's happy coming to the
Crown of England, be naturalized in England or no? But the inward question or
State of the question evermore begins, where that which is confessed on both
sides does leave.

It is confessed, that if these two Realms of England and Scotland were united
under one Law and one Parliament, and thereby incorporated and made as one
Kingdom, that the Post-natus of such an union should be naturalized.

It is confessed, that both Realms are united in the person of our Sovereign;
or (because I will gain nothing by surreption, in the putting of the question)
that one and the same natural person, is King of both Realms.

It is confessed, that the Laws and Parliaments are several. So then, whether
this privilege and benefit of Naturalization be an accessory or dependancy up
on that which is one and joint, or upon that which is several, has been and
must be the depth of this question. And therefore your Lord-ships do see the
State of this question does evidently lead me by way of inducement to speak of
three things. The King, the Law, and the privilege of Naturalization. For if
you well understand the nature of the two Principals, and again the nature of
the Accessory; Then shall you discern, to whether Principal the Accessory does
properly refer, as a shadow to a body, or Iron to an Adamant.

And there your Lord-ships will give me leave in a case of this quality, first
to visit and open the foundations and fountains of Reason; and not to begin
with the positions, and eruditions of a Municipall Law; for so was that done in
the great Case of Mines; and so ought that to be done in all cases of like
nature. And this does not at all detract from the sufficiency of our laws, as
incompetent to decide their own cases; but rather adds a dignity unto them
when their reason appearing as well as their authority, does show them to be as
fine moneys, which are current not only by the stamp because they are so
received, but by the natural metal, that is the reason and wisdom of them.

And Master Littleton himself in his whole book does commend but two things
to the professors of the law by the name of his sons; the one the inquiring
and searching out the reasons of the law, and the other, the observing of the
forms of pleadings. And never was there any case that came in Judgment, that
required more that Littletons advice should be followed in those two points,
then does the present case in question. And first of the King.

It is evident that all other commonwealths (Monarchies only excepted) do
snbsist by a law preceedent. For where authority is divided amongst many
officers, and they not perpetual, but annual or temporary, and not to receive
their authority but by election, and certain persons to have voice only to
that election, and the like: These are busy and curious frames: which of
necessity do presuppose a law precedent written or unwritten to guide and
direct them. But in Monarchies, especially hereditary, that is when several
families, or Ilneages of people do submit themselves to one line, Imperial or
Royal, the submission is more natural and simple, which afterward by laws
subsequent is perfected and made more formal: but that is grounded upon
nature. That this is so, it appears notably in two things, the one, the
platformes and patterns which are found in nature of Monarchies, the original
submissions, and their motives and occasions. The platformes are three.

The first is that of a father, or chief of a family: who governing over his
wife by prerogative of Sex, over his children by prerogative of age, and
because he is author unto them of being; and over his servants by prerogative
of virtue and providence, for he that is able of body, and improvident of mind,
is Natura servus) that is a very model of a King. So that is the opinion of
Aristotle, Lib. 3. Pol. Cap. 14, where he says: Verum autem regnum est, cum
penes unum est rerum summa potestas: quod regnum procurationem familia imitatur.

And therefore Lyeurgus, when one counseled him to dissolve the kingdom and
to establish another form of estate, he answered, Sir begin to do that which
you advise first at home in your own house noting that the chief of a family
is as a King; and that those that can least endure Kings abroad; can be content
to be Kings at home, and this is the first platform, which we see is merely
natural.

The second is, that of a Shepherd and his flock; which Zenophon says, Cyrus
had ever in his mouth. For shepherds are not owners of the sheep, but their
office is to feed and govern: no more are Kings, proprietaries, or owners of
the people, for God is sole owner of people. The nations, as the Scripture
says, are his inheritance: But the office of Kings is to govern, maintain,
and protect people. And that is not without a mystery, that the first King that
was instituted by God, David, (for Saul was butan untimely fruit) was
translated from a shepherd, as you have it in the 78. Psalm. Et elegit David
servum suum, de gregibus ovium sustulit eum, pascere Jacob Servum suum Israel
hereditatem suam. This is the second platform, a work likewise of nature.

The third platform is the government of God himself over the world, whereof
lawful Monarchies, are a shadow. And therefore both amongst the heathen, and
amongst the Christians the word ( sacred) has been attributed unto Kings,
because of the conformity of a Monarchy, with the divine Majesty; never to a
Senate or people. And so you find it twice in the Lord Cooks Reports: once in
the second book, the Bishop of Winchesters case; and his first book. Cawdries
case, and more anciently in the 10. of H. 7. fo. 18. Rex est persona mixta came
Sacerdote; an attribute which the senate of Venice, or a Canton of Swisses, can
never challenge. So we see there be presidents, or platformes of Monarchies,
both in Nature and above Nature: even from the Monarch of heaven and earth; to
the King (if you will) in an hive of bees. And therefore other States are the
creatures of the law; and this State only subsisteth by Nature.

For the original submissions, they are four in number: I will briefly touch
them: The first is Paternity or Patriarchy, which was when a family growing so
great as it could not contain it self within one habitation, some branches of
the descendents were forced to plant themselves into new families, which second
families could not by a natural instinct, and inclination, but bear a
reverence and yield an obeyseance to the eldest line of the ancient family,
from which they were derived.

The second is, the admiration of virtue, or gratitude toward merit, which is
likewise naturally infused into all men. Of this Aristotle puts the case
well, when it was the fortun of some one man, either to invent some Arts of
excellent use toward man's life; or to congregate people that dwelt scattered,
into one place, where they might cohabite with more comfort; or to guide them
from a more barrenland to a more fruitful, or the like: Upon these deserts, and
the admiration and recompense of them, people submitted themselves.

The third, which was the most usual of all, was Conduct in war, which even
in nature induces as great an obligation, as Paternity. For as men owe their
life and being to their Parents, in regard of generation: So they owe that also
to Saviors in the wars, in regard of preservation. And therefore we find in
the 18. Chap. of the book of Judges, verse 22. Dixerunt omnes ^iri ad Cedeon
Dominare nostri, tu et filij tui, quoniam servasti nos de manu Madian. And so
we read when it was brought to the ears of Saul that the people sung in the
streets, Saul has killed his thousand, and David his ten thousand of enemies; he
said straightwaies: Quid ei superest nisi ipsum regnu^? for whosoever has the
military dependence, wants little of being King.

The fourth is an enforced submission, which is Conquest, whereof it seemed
Nymrod was the first president, of whom it is said, Ipse caepit potens esse in
terra, et erat robustus venator coram Domine. And this likewise is upon the
same root, which is the saving or gift as it were of life, and being, for the
Conqueror has power of life and death over his Captives, and therefore where
he gives them themselves, he may reserve upon such a gift, what service and
subjection he will. All these four submissions are evident to be natural and
more ancient than law.

To speak therefore of Law, which is the second part of that which is to be
spoken of, by way of inducement. Law no doubt is the great Organ by which the
sovereign power does move, and may be truly compared to the sinews in a
natural body, as the Sovereignty may be compared to the spirits, for if the
Sinews be without the spirits, they are dead and without motion, If the
spirits move in weak sinews it causes trembling: so the laws with out the
Kings power, are dead; the Kings power except the laws be corroborate, will
never move constantly, but be full of staggering and trepidation. But toward
the King himself, the law does a double office or operation: The first is to
entitle the King, or design him; and in that sense Bracton says well. Lib. 1.
fol. 5. and Lib. 3. fol. 107. Lex facit quod ipse sit Rex, that is it defines
his title, as in our law, that the kingdom shall go to the issue female: That
it shall not be departable amongst daughters: That the half blood shall not be
respected, and other points differing from the rules of common inheritance. The
second is (that whereof we need not fear to speak in good and happy times,
such as these are) to make the ordinary power of the King more definite or
regular, for it was well said by a Father, plenitudo potestatis, est pleuitudo
tempest at is. And although the King, in his Person, be Solutus Legibus; yet
his Acts and Grants are limited by Law, and we argue them every day.

But I demand, Do these offices or operations of law evacuate or frustrate the
original submission, which was natural? or shall it be said that all
allegiance is by law? No more than it can be said, that potest potest^^ patris,
the power of the Father over the Child, is by Law: and yet no doubt Laws do
diversely define of that also; the Law of some Nations having given Fathers
power to put their Children to death; others, to sell them thrice, others to
disinherit them by testament at pleasure, and the like. Yet no man will affirm,
that the obedience of the child is by law, though laws in some points do make
it more positive. And even so it is of allegiance of subjects to hereditary
Monarchs, which is corroborate and confirmed by law, but is the work of the
law of nature. And therefore you shall find the observation true, and almost
general in all states, that their lawgivers were long after their first
Kings, who governed for a time by natural equity without law; So was Theseus
long before Salo^ in A^h^m: for was E^^iti^^ and (...) long before Lycurgus in
Sparta. So was Romulus long before the Decemviri. And even amongst our selves,
there were more ancient Kings of the Saxons; and yet the Laws ran under the
name of Edgars Laws. And in the refounding of the Kingdom in the person of
William the Conqueror, when the Laws were in some confusion for a time, a man
may truly say, that King Edward the first, was the first Lawgiver, who
enacting some Laws, and collecting others, brought the Law to some perfection.
And therefore I will conclude this point with the Style which diverse Acts of
Parliaments do give unto the King: which term him very effectually and truly,
Our Natural Sove, reign Liege Lord. And as it was said by a principal Judge
here present when he served in another place, and question was moved by some
occasion of the title of Bulleins Lands: That he would never allow, that Queen
Elizabeth. (I remember it for the efficacy of the phrase) should be a Statute
Queen, but a Common Law Queen: So surely I shall hardly consent, that the King
shall be esteemed or called only, Our Rightful Sovereign, or Our Lawful
Sovereign, but our Natural Liege Sovereign; As Acts of Parliament speak:
For as the common Law is more worthy than the Statute Law: So the Law of Nature
is more worthy than them both. Having spoken now of the King and the Law: it
remains to speak of the privilege and benefit of Naturalization it self,
and that according to the rules of the Law of England. Naturalization is best
discerned in the degrees whereby the Law does mount and ascend thereunto. For
it seems admirable unto me, to consider with what a measured hand, and with
how true poportions our Law does impart and confer the several degrees of
this benefit: The degrees are four.

The first degree of persons, (as to this purpose) that the Law takes knowledge
of, is an Alien Enemy: that is such a one as is borne under the obeisance of a
Prince or State that is in hostility with the King of England. To this person
the Law gives no benefit or protection at all, but if he come into the Realm
after war proclaimed, or war in fact, he comes at his own peril, he may be
used as an enemy: For the Law accounts of him, but (as the Scripture says) as
of a Spy that comes to see the weakness of the land. And so it is 2. of Ric.
the 3, fo. 2. Nevertheless, this admits a distinction. For if he come with
safe conduct, otherwise it is. For then he may not be violated, either in
person or goods. But yet he must fetch his Justice at the fountain head, for
none of the Conduit pipes are open to him, he can have no remedy in any of the
Kings Courts: but he must complain himself before the Kings Privy Council:
There he shall have a proceeding summary from hour to hour, the cause shall
be determined by natural equity, and not by rules of Law, and the decree of
the Council shall be executed by aid of the Chauncery, as is 13. Edw. 4. An
this is the first degree.

The second person, is an Alien friend, that is such a one as is borne under
the obeisance of such a King or State, as is confederate with the King of
England, or at least not in war with him. To this person the Law allotteth this
benefit, that as the Law accounts that the hold it has over him, is but a
tranfitory hold (for he may be an Enemy) So the Law does indu^ him, but with a
transitory benefit, that is of moveable goods and personal actions. But for
freehold, or lease, or actions real, or mixed: he is not enabled, except it be
in auter droit And so it is 9, E. 4, fo. 7. 19. E. 4; fo. 6. 5. Ma. and diverse
other books.

The third person is a Denizon, using the word properly; (for sometime it is
confounded with a natural borne subject.) This is one, that is but Subditus
insitivus, or adoptivus, and is never by birth, but only by the Kings Charter,
and by no other mean; come he never so young into the Realm, or stay he never
so long. Mansion or Habitation will not indenise him, no nor swearing obedience
to the King in a Leete, which does in-law the subject; but only (as I said) the
Kings grace and gift. To this person the Law gives an ability and capacity
abridged, not in matter but in time. And as there was a time, when he was not
subject: So the Law does not acknowledge him before that time. For if he
purchase freehold after his Denization, he may take it; but if he have
purchased any before, he shall not hold it: So if he have children after, they
shall inherit, but if he have any before, they shall not inherit: So as he is
but privileged a part post, as the Schoolmen say, and not a part ante.

The fourth and last degree, is a Natural borne subject, which is evermore by
birth, or by Act of Parliament; and he is complete and entire. For in the Law
of England, there is nil ultra, there is no more subdivision or more subtle
division beyond these: And therein it seems to me that the wisdom of the
Law (as I said) is to be admired both ways, both because it distinguishes so
far, and because it does not distinguish further. For I know that other Laws
do admit more curious distinction of this privilege; For the Romans had
besides (...) Civitatis, which answers to Naturalization, Ius Suffragii. For
although a man were naturalized to take lands and inheritance; yet he was not
enabled to have a voice at passing of Laws, or at election of Officers. And yet
further they have Ius Petitionis, or Ius Honorum. For though a man had voice,
yet he was not capable of honor, and office. But these be the devises commonly
of popular or free estates, which are jealous whom they take into their number,
and are unfit for Monarchies: But by the Law of England the subject that is
natural borne, has a capacity or ability to all benefits whatsoever; I say
capacity or ability. But to reduce Potentiam in actum, is another case. For an
Earl of Ireland, though he be naturalized in England, yet has so voice in
Parliament of England, except he have either a call by Writ, or a creation by
Patent, but he is capable of either. But upon this quadripartite division of
the ability of persons, I do observe to your Lordships three things, being all
effectually pertinent to the question in hand.

The first is, that if any man conceive that the reasons for the Post-nati
might serve as well for the Ante-nati; He may by the distribution which we
have made, plainly perceive his error. For the Law looks not back, and
therefore cannot by any matter ex post facto, after birth, after the state of
the birth; wherein no doubt the Law has a grave and profound reason, which is
this in few words, Nemo subito fingitur; aliud est nasci, aliud fieri: We
indeed more respect and affect thse worthy Gentlemen of Scotland whose merits
and conversations we know: but the Law that proceeds upon general reason and
looks upon no men's faces, affects and priviledgeth those, which drew their
first breath under the obeisance of the King of England.

The second point is, that by the former distribution, it appears that there
be but two conditions by birth, either Alien or natural borne ( nam tertium
penitus ignor amus.) It is manifest then, that if the Post. nati of Scotland,
be not natural borne, they are alien born and in no better degree at all, than
Flemmings, French, Italians, Spanish, Germans, and others; which are all at
this time Alien friends, by reason his Majesty is in peace with all the World.

The third point seems to me very worthy the consideration, which is, that
in all the distribution of persons, and the degrees of abilities or capacities,
the Kings Act is all in all, without any manner of respect to Law or
Parliament. For it is the King, that makes an Alien enemy, by proclaiming a
war, wherewith the Law, or Parliament intermeddles not: So the King only grants
Safe-conducts, wherewith Law and Parliament intermeddle not. It is the King
likewise that makes an Alien friend, by concluding a peace, wherewith Law and
Parliament intermeddle not. It is the King that makes a Denizon, by his Charter
absolutely of his prerogative and power, wherewith Law and Parliament
intermedle not. And therefore it is strongly to be inferred, that as all these
degrees depend wholly upon the Kings act, and no ways upon Law or Parliament:
So the fourth, although it cannot by the Kings Patent, but by operation of Law:
yet that the law, in that operation, respects only the Kings person, without
respect of subjection to Law or Parliament. And thus much by way of
explanation, and inducement: which being all matter in effect confessed, i^ the
strongest groundwork to that which is contradicted or controverted.

There follows the confutation of the Arguments on the contrary side.

That which has been materially objected may be reduced to four heads.

The first is, that the privilege of Naturalization, follows Allegiance, and
that allegiance follows the Kingdom.

The second is drawn from that common ground, Cum duo jura concarrunt in una
persona, aquum est, ac si essent in duobus; a rule, the words whereof are taken
from the Civil Law; but the matter of it is received in all laws; being a
very line or rule of reason to avoid confusion.

The third consists of certain inconveniences conceived to ensue of this
general naturalization ipso jure.

The fourth is not properly an objection, but a preoccupation of an objection
or proof on our part, by a distinction devised between Countries devolute by
descent, and acquired by Conquest.

For the first, it is not properly to observe that those which maintain this
new opinion, whereof there is altum Silentium in our books of Law, are not
well agree in what form to utter and express that: for some said that
allegiance has respect to the Law, some to the Crown, some to the Kingdom,
some to the body politic of the King, so there is confusion of tongues
amongst them, as it commonly comes to pass in opinions, that have their
foundations in subtilty, and imagination of man's wit, and not in the ground of
nature. But to leave their words and to come to their proofs, they endeavor
to prove this conceit, by three manner of proofs. First by reason, then by
certain inferences out of Statutes, and lastly, by certain booke-cases
mentioning and reciting the forms of pleadings.

The reason they bring is this; That Naturalization is an operation of the Law
of England, and so indeed it is, that may be the true genus of it.

Then they add (that granted) that the Law of England is of force only within
the Kingdom and Dominions of England, and cannot operate, but where it is in
force. But the Law is not in force in Scotland, therefore that cannot endure
this benefit of Naturalization by a birth in Scotland.

This reason is plausible and sensible, but extremely erroneous. For the Law
of England, for matters of benefit, or forfeitures in England, operateth over
the World. And because it is truly said, that Respublica continetur poena, and
praemio. I will put a case or two of either.

It is plain that if a Subject of England had conspired the death of the King
in foreign parts, it was by the Common Law of England treason. How prove I
that? By the Statute of 35. of H. 8. ca. 2. wherein you shall find no words at
all of making any new case of treason which was not treason before, but only
of ordaining a form of trial, Ergo it was treason before. And if so, then the
Law of England works in foreign parts. So of contempts, if the King send his
Privy Seal to any Subject beyond the Seas, commanding him to return, and he
disobey; no man will doubt, but there is a contempt, and yet the fact enduring
the contempt was committed in foreign parts.

Therefore the Law of England, does extend to Acts or matters done in foreign
parts. So of reward, Privilege or benefit we need seek no other instance;
then the instance in question, for I will put you a case that no man shall
deny, where the Law of England does work and confer the benefit of
Naturalization upon a birth neither within the Dominions of the Kingdom, nor
King of England. By the Statute of 25. E. 3. which, if you will believe Hussy,
is but a Declaration of the Common Law, all children borne in any parts of the
World, if they be of English Parents, continuing at that time, as liege
Subjects to the King, and having done no act to forfeit the benefit of their
allegiance are ipso facto naturalized. Nay if a man look narrowly into the Law
in this point, he shall find a consequence, that may seem at the first
strange, but yet cannot well be avoided; which is that it diverse Families of
Englishmen and women plant themselves at Middleborough or at Roane, or at
Lysoone, and have issues, and their deseendents do intermarry, amongst
themselves without any intermixture of foreign blood; such descendents are
naturalized to all generations, for every generation is still of liege Parents,
and therefore naturalized. So as you may have whole tribes, and lineages of
English in foreign Countries.

And therefore it is utterly untrue that the Law of England cannot operate, of
confer naturalization, but only within the bounds of the Dominions of
England.

To come now to their inferences upon Statutes. The firstis out of this Statute
which J last recyted. In which Statute it is said, that in four several
places, there are words; borne within the allegiance of England; or again
borne without the allegiance of England, which (say they) applies the
allegiance to the Kingdom, and not to the person of the King. To this the
answer is easy: for there is not trope of speech more familiar then to use the
place of addition for the person. So we say commonly the line of York, or the
line of Lancaster, for the lines of the Duke of York or the Duke of Lancaster.

So we say the possessions of Sommerset or Warmick intending the possessions of
the Dukes of Sommerset, or Earls of Warmick. So we seeEarles sign, Salisbury,
Northampton, for the Earls of Salisbury or Northampton. And in the very same
manner, the Statute speaks, allegiance of England, for allegiance of the King
of England. Nay more if there had been no variety in the penning of that
Statute, this collect - on had had a little more force, for those words might
have been thought, to have been used of purpose, and in propriety; but you may
find in three other several places of the same Statute, Allegeange and
obeisance of the King of England, and specially in the material and concluding
place, that is to say, children whose Parents were at the time of their birth,
at the faith and obeisance of the King of England, so that is manifest by this
indifferent and indifferent use of both Phrases, the one proper, the other
unproper, that no man can ground any infere^ce upon these words without danger
of cavillation.

The second Statute out of which they infer, is a Statute made in 32. of H.
8. ca. touching the policy of strangers trades men within this Realm. For the
Parliament finding, that they did eat the Englishmen out of trade, and that
they entertained no Apprentizes, but of their o vne Nation, did prohibit that
they should receive any. Apprentize, but the Kings Subjects. In which Statute
is said, that in 9. several places, there is to be found this context of
words, Aliens (...) (...) of the Kings obedience; which is pregnant (say they)
and does imply that there be Aliens borne within the Kings obedience. Touching
this inference I have heard it said Q^i haeret in litera, baeret in cortice,
but this is not worthy the name, of Cortex, it is but muscus (...), the moss
of the bark. For it is evident that the Statute meant to speak clearly and
without equivocation, and to a common understanding. Now then there are aliens
in common reputation and aliens in precise construction ofLaw, The Statute then
meaning not to comprehend Irish-men, or Ge^sie-men, or Calize-men, for
explanation sake, left the word alien might be extended to them in a vulgar
acceptance, added those further words, borne out of the Kings obedience? Nay,
what if we should say, that those words according to the received Laws of
Speech, are no words of difference or limitation, but of declaration or
description of an alien, as if it had been said with a videlicet, aliens; that
is such as are borne out of the Kings obedience: they cannot put us from that
construction. But sure I am, if the bark make for them, the pyth makes for us,
for the Privilege or liberty which the Statute means to deny to Aliens of
entertaining Apprentizes is denied to none, borne within the Kings obedience,
call them Aliens or what you will. And therefore by their reason a post-Natus
of Scotland shall by that Statute keep what stranger Apprentizes he will, and
so is put in the degree of an English. The third Statute out of which inference
is made, is the Statute of 14. E. 3. ca. solo, which has been said to be our
very case, and I am of that opinion too, but directly the other way, therefore
to open the scope and purpose of that Statute. After that the title to the
Crown of France, was devolute to K. E. 3. and that he had changed his Style,
changed his Arms, changed his Seal, (as his Majesty has done) the Subject
of England (says the Statute) conceived a fear that the Realm of England
might become subject to the Realm of France, or to the K. as K. of France. And
I will give you the reasons of the double fear, that it should become subject
to the Realm of France they had this reason of fear: Normandy had conquered
England; Normandy was feudall of France, therefore because the superior
Seignery of France was now united in right with the Tenancy of Normandy, and
that England, in regard of the conquest might be taken as a perquisite to
Normandy, they had propable reason to fear, that the Kingdom of England might
be drawn to be subject to the Realm of France. The other fear that England
might become subject to the K. as K. of France grew no doubt of this
foresight, that the Kings of England might be like to make their mansion and
seat of their estate in France, in regard of the Climate, wealth, and glory of
that Kingdom; and thereby the Kingdom of England might be governed by the
Kings mandates and precepts issuing, as from the King of France. But they will
say what soever the occasion was, here you have the difference authorized of
subjection to a K. generally, and subjection to a King, as K. of a certain
Kingdom, but to this I give an answer threefold.

First, it preffeth not the question; for does any man say that a Post-natus of
Scotland is naturalized in England, because he is a subject of the King, as K.
of England? No, but generally, because he is the K. Subject.

Secondly, the scope of this Law is to make a distinction between Crown, and
Crown; But the scope of their argument is to make a difference between Crown
and person. Lastly, this Statute (as I said) is our very case retorted against
them, for this is a direct Statute of separation, which presupposes that the
Common Law had made an union of the Crowns in some degree, by virtue of the
union in the Kings person ^ if this statute had (...) been made to stop and
cross the course of the common Law in that point, as if Scotland now should be
suitors to the King, that an Act might pass to like effect, and upon like
fear. And therefore if you will make good your distinction, in this present
case; show us a Statute for that. But I hope you can show no Statute of
separation between England and Scotland. And if any man say, that this was a
Statute declaratory of the Common Law, he does not mark how that is penned:
for after a kind of Historical declaration in the Preamble, that England was
never subject to France, the body of the Act is penned thus: The King does
grant and establish, which are words merely introductive novae legis as if the
King gave a Charter of Franchise, and did invest by a Donative, the Subjects of
England with a new Privilege or exemption, which by the Common Law they had
not.

To come now to the booke-cases which they put: which I will couple together
because they receive one joint answer.

The first is 42. of E. 3. fo. where the book says: exception was taken that
the plaintiff was borne in Scotland at Rosse, out of the allegiance of England.

The next is 22. H. 6. fo. 38. Adrians Case, where it is pleaded that a woman
was borne at Burgis, out of the allegiance of England.

The third is 13. Eliz. Dyer fo. 300 where the case begins thus: Doctor Story
qui notorie dignoscituresse subditus regni Angliae. In all these three (say
they) that is pleaded that the party is subject of the Kingdom of England, and
not of the King of England.

To these books I give this answer, that they be not the Pleas at large, but
the words of the Reporter, who speaks compendiously and narrative, and not
according to the solemn words of the pleading. If you find a case put, that it
is pleaded, a man was seized in Fee. simple, you will not infer upon that,
that the words of the pleading were in fe^do simplici; but sibi and haeredibus
suis. But show me some president of a pleading at large of Natus sub legeantia
Regni Angliae; for whereas Mr. Walter said that pleadings are variable in this
point, he would feign bring it to that; but there is no such matter: For the
pleadings are constant, and uniforme in this point; they may vary in the word
fides, or legeantia, or obedientia, and some other circumstances, but in the
form of Regni and Regis, they vary not: neither can there, as J am persuaded
be any one instance showed forth to the contrary. See 9. Eliz. 4. Baggots
Assize, f. 7. where the pleading at large is entered in the book; There you
have, alienigena natus extra legeantiam domini Regis Angliae. See the
presidents in the Book of Entries, Pl. 7. and two other places; for there be
no more, and there you shall find still sub legeantia domini Regis, or extra
legeantia^ Domini Regis. And therefore the forms of pleading, which are things
so reverend, and are indeed toward the Reasons of the Law, as Palma, and
Pugnus, containing the Reason of the Law, opened or unfolded, or displayed,
they makeall for us. And for the very words of Reporters in books, you must
acknowledge and say, Ilicet obruimur numera. for you have 22 Ass. Pl. 25. 27.
(...). the Pryor of Ske^^es case Pl. 48. 14. H. 4. f. 19. 3. H. 6. f. 35. 6. H.
8. in my Lord Dyer, fol. 2. In all these books, the very words of the
Reporters have the allegiance of the King, and not the allegiance of England.
And the book in the 24. of Eltz. 3. which is your best book, although while
it is tossed at the Bar, you have sometimes the word allegiance of England, yet
when it comes to Thorpe chief Justice to give the rule, he faith; we will be
certified by the Role, whether Scotland be within the allegiance of the King.
Nay that further form of pleading beats down your opinion. That it
suffices not to say, that he is borne out of the allegiance of the King, and
stay there, but he must show in the affirmative under the allegiance of what
King, or state he was borne. The Reason whereof cannot be because it may
appear, whether he be a friend or an enemy, for that in a real action is all
one: not it cannot be because issue shall be taken thereupon; for the issue must
arise on the other side upon indigena pleaded and traversed. And therefore it
can have no other reason, but to apprise the court more certainly, that the
country of the birth is none of those, that are subject to the King. As for
the trial, that it should be impossible to de tried; I hold it not worth the
answering; for the ovenire facias, shall go either where the natural birth is
laid, although it be but by fiction, or if it be laid according to the truth,
it shall be tried where the action is brought, otherwise you fall upon a maine:
Rock, that breaks your Argument in pieces, for how should the birth of an
Irishman be tried, or of 2 Gersie man? Nay how should the birth of a subject
be tried that is borne of English Parents in Spain or Florence, or any part of
the world? for to all these the like objection of trial may be made, because
they are within no Counties, and this receives no answer. And therefore I will
now pass on to the second maine Argument.

It is a rule of the Civil Law, say they, cum duo jura, etc. when two rights
do meet in one person there is no confusion of them, but they remain still in
eye of law distinct, as if they were in several persons, and they bring
examples of one man Bishop of two Seas, or one person that is Rector of two
Churches. They say this unity in the Bishop, or the Rector does not create any
privity between the Parishioners or Dioceseners, more then if there were
several Bishops, or several Parsons. This rule I allow (as was said) to be a
Rule not of the Civil Law only, but of common reason, but receives no forced
or coined, but a true and sound distinction, or limitation, which is, that it
evermore fails and deceives in cases, where there is any vigor, or operation
of the natural person; for generally in coporations the natural body is but
suffulcimentum corporis corporati, it is but as a stock to uphold and bear out
the corporate body, but otherwise it is in the case of theCrown, as shall be
manifestly proved in due place. But to show that this rule receives this
distinction, I will put but two cases. The statute of the 21. Hen. 8. ordains
that a Marquess may retain six Chaplains qualified, a Lord Treasurer of
England four, a Privy Counselor three. The Lord Treasurer Paulet was
Marqueffe of Winchester, Lord Treasurer of England and privy counselor all at
once. Question was whether he should qualify 13. Chaplains. Now by the Rule
cum duo Iura, he should; but adjudged, he should not. And the Reason was
because the attendance of Chaplains concerned and respected his natural
person, he had but one soul, though he had three Offices. The other case which
I will put, is the case of Homage, a man does homage to his Lord for a Tenancie
held of the manor of Dale, there descends unto him afterward a Tenancie
held of the manor of Sale, which manor of Sale is likewise in the hands of
the same Lord. Now by the Rule cum duo jura, he should do homage again, two
Tenancies and two Seignories, though but one Tenant, and one Lord, aequum est
ac si esset in duobus. But ruled that he should not do homageagaine: nay in
the Case of the King, he shall not pay a second respect of Homage, as upon
grave and deliberate consideration it was resolved, 24. H. 8. and Vsus
Scaccarii; as is there said accordingly. And the Reason is no other but because
when a man is sworn to his Lord, he cannot be sworn over again, he has but
one Conscience, and the Obligation of this Oatli, trencheth between the
natural person of the Tenant, and the natural person of the Lord. And
certainly the Case of Homage and Tenure, and of Homage Liege, which is one
case, are things of a near Nature, save that the one is much inferior to the
other, but it is good to behold these great matters of State in cases of lower
Element, as the Eclipse of the Sun is used to be in a paile of Water.

The third maine Argument conteyneth certain supposed inconveniences, which may
ensue of a general Naturalization ipso jure, of which kind three have bin
specially remembered.

The first is the loss of profit, to the King upon Letters of Denization, and
purchases of Aliens.

The second is the concourse of Scottishmen into this Kingdom, to the
infeebling of that Realm of Scotland in people, and the impoverishing of this
Realm of England in wealth.

The third is, that the reason of this case stays not within the compass of
the present case; for although it were some reason that Scottishmen were
naturalized being people of the same Island and language, yet the reason which
we urge, which is, That they are subject to the same King, may be applied to
persons every way more estranged from us then they are, as if in future time in
the Kings descendents, there should be a match with Spain, and the Dominions
of Spain should be united with the Crown of England by one reason (say they)
all the West Indies should be naturalized; which are people not only,
alterius Soli but alterius Caeli. To these conceits of inconvenience, how easy
it is to give answer, and how weak they are in themselves, I think no man
that does attentively ponder them can doubt; For how small revenue can arise of
such Denizations, and how honorable it were for the King to take escheats of
his Subjects, as if they were forreyners (for seizure of aliens Lands are in
regard the King has no hold or command of their persons, and services) every
one may perceive. And for the confluence of Scottishmen, I think we all
conceive the Springtide is past at the Kings first coming in. And yet we see
very few families of them, throughout the Cities and Boroughes of England. And
for the naturalizing of the Indies, we can readily help that, when the case
comes; for we can make an act of Parliament of separation if we like not their
consort. But these being Reasons politic, and not legal (and we are not now
in Parliament, but before a Judgment Seat) I will not meddle with them,
specially since I have one answer which avoids and confounds all their
objections in Law, which is that the very self-same objections do hold in
Countries purchased by Conquest. For in Subjects obtained by Conquest, it were
more profit to indenizate by the Poll, in Subjects obtained by Conquest, they
may come in too fast. And if King Hen. 7. had accepted the offer of Christopher
Columbus, whereby the Crown of England had obtained the Indies by conquest or
occupation, all the Indies had bin naturalized by the confession of the adverse
part. And therefore since it is confessed, that Subjects obtained by Conquest
are naturalized, and that all these objections are common and indifferent, as
well to case of Conquest, as case of descent, these objections are in
themselves destroyed.

And therefore to proceed now to overthrow that distinction of descent and
Conquest. Plato says well, the strongest of all authorities is, if a man can
allege the authority of his adversaries against him self, we do urge the
Confession of the other side, that they confessed the Irish are naturalized,
that they confess the Subjects of the Isles of Gersie and Garnsey, and Barwick
to be naturalized, and the subjects of Calice and Tourney when they were
English were naturalized, as you may find in the 5. E. in Dyer, upon the
question put to the Judges by Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper.

To avoid this, they fly to a difference, which is new coined, and is (I
speak not to the disadvantage of the persons that use it; for they are driven
to it tanquam ad ultimum refugium, but the difference it self) it is I say
full of ignorance and error. And therefore to take a view of the supports of
this difference, they allege four Reasons.

The first is, that Countries of Conquest, are made parcel of England;
because they are acquired by the Arms and Treasure of England. To this I
answer, That it were a very strange Argument, that if I wax rich upon the
Manor of Dale, and upon the Revenue thereof purchase a close by it, that it
should make that parcel of the Manor of Dale. But I will set this new
Learning on ground with a question or case put. For J oppose them that hold
this opinion with this Question, if the King should conquer any Foreign
Country by an Army compounded of Englishmen and Scottish-men, as it is like
whenever Wars are, so it will be. I demand whether this Country conquered
shall qe naturalized both in England and Scotland, because it was purchased by
the joint Arms of both? And if yea, whether any man will think it reasonable,
that such Subjects be naturalized in both Kingdoms, the one Kingdom not
being naturalized toward the other? These are the intricate consequences of
Conceits.

A second reason they allege, is, that Countries won by Conquest become
subject to the Laws of England, which Countries Patrimoniall are not, and that
the Law does draw the Allegiance, and Allegiance Naturalization.

But to the Major proposition of that Argument, touching the dependancy of
aliegeance upon Law, somewhat has bin already spoken, and full answer shall be
given when we come to it. But in this place it shall suffice to say, that the
Minor proposition is false, that is, that the Laws of England are not
superinduced upon any Country by Conquest; but that the old Laws remain un
till the King by his Proclamation or Letters pattents declare other Laws, and
then if he will, he may declare Laws which be utterly repugnant, and
differing from the Laws of England. And hereof many ancient Presidents and
Records may be showed; that the Reason why Ireland is subject to the Laws of
England is not ipso jure upon conquest; but grew by aCharter of K. John, and
that extended but to so much as was then in the Kings possession, For there
areRecords in the time of King. S. 1 and 2 of diverse particular Grants to
sundry Subjects of Ireland, and their Heirs, that they might use and observe
the Laws of England.

The third Reason is, that there is a politic necessity of intermixture of
people in case of subjection, by Conquest to remove alienations of mind, and to
securo the Stato, which holds not in case of descent. Here I perceive Mr.
(...) has read somewhat in matter of State, and so have I likewise, though we
may both quickly lose ourselves in cause of this Nature. I find by the best
opinions, that there be two means to assure and retain in obedience
Countries conquered, both very differing, almost in extremes the one toward
the other.

The one is by Colonies, and intermixture of people, and transplantation of
families, which Mr. Walter spoke off, and it was indeed the Roman manner but
this is like an old relic, much reverenced and almost never used. But
the other which is the modern manner, and almost wholly in practice and use, is
by Garrisons and Citadelles, and Lists or Companies of men of War, and other
like matters of terror and bridle.

To the first of these (which is little used) it it true that naturalization
does conduce, but to the latter it is utterly opposite, as putting too great
pride, and means to do hurt, in those that are meant to be kept short and low.
And yet in the very first case of the Roman proceeding, Naturalization did
never follow by Conquest, during all the growth, of the Roman Empire, but was
ever conferred by Charters, or Donations, sometimes to Cities, and Towns,
sometimes to particular persons, and sometimes to Nations, until the time of
Adrian the Emperor, and the Law in Orb Romano, and that Law or constitution
is not referred to title of Conquest and Arms only, but to all other titles;
as by the Donation and Testament of Kings, by submission and dedition of
States, or the like. So as this difference was as strange to them, as to us.
And certainly I suppose it will sound strangely in the hearing of foreign
Nations, that the law of England should ipso sacto, naturalize subjects of
Conquest, and should not naturalize Subjects, which grow unto the King by
descent; that is, that it should confer the benefit and privilege of
naturalization upon such, as cannot at the first but bear hatred and rancor to
the state of England, and have had their hands in the blood of the Subjects of
England, and should deny the like benefit to those that are conjoined with them
by a more amiable mean: And that the law of England, should confer
naturalization upon slaves and vassals ( for people conquered are no better in
the beginning) and should deny it to Freemen: I say it will be marvelled at
abroad, of what complexion the laws of England be made, that breeds such
differences. But there is little danger of such scandals; for this is a
difference, that the law of England never knew.

The fourth reason of this difference is, that in case of Conquest, the
territory united can never be separated again. But in case of descent, there
is a possibility, if his Majesty's line should fail, the Kingdoms may severe
again to their respective heirs, as in the case of 8. H. 6. where it is said,
that if Land descend to a man, from the Ancestor, on the part of his Father,
and a rent issuing out of it, from an Ancestor, on the part of the mother, if
the party dye without issue, the Rent is revived. As to this Reason, I know
well the continuance of the Kings line, is no less dear to those, that
allege the reason, then to us that confute it. So as I do not blame the
passing of the reason; but it is answered with no great difficulty; for first
the law does never respect remote and foreign possibilities, as noteably
appeared in the great case between Sir Hugh Cholmley, and Houlford in the
Exchequer, where one in the remainder, to the end to bridle tenant in tail
from suffering a common recovery, granted his remainder to the King, and
because he would be sure to have it out again, without charge or trouble, when
his turn was served; he limited it to the King, during the life of tenant in
tail. Question grew whether this grant of remainder were good, yea or no. And
it was said to be frivolous and void, because it could never by any possibility
execute; for tenant in tail cannot surrender, and if he dyed, the remainder
likewise ceased. To which it was answered, that there was a possibility, that
it might execute, which was thus; Put case that tenant in tail should enter
into Religion having no issue: then the remainder should execute, and the King
should hold the land during the natural life of tenant in tail,
notwithstanding his civil death. But the Court una vate exploded this reason,
and said, that Monasteries were down, and entries into Religion gone; and they
must be up again ere this could be, and that the Law did not respect such
remote, and foreign possibilities, and so we may hold this for the like; For I
think we all hope, that neither of those days shall ever come, either for
Monasteries to be restored, or for the K. line to fail, but the true answer
is, that the possibility subseque^t, remote, or not remote does not alter the
operation of law for the present. For that should be, as if in case of the Rent
which you put, you should say, that in regard, that the rent maybe severed, it
should be said, to be in esse in the mean time, and should be grantable, which
is clearly otherwise. And so in the principal cafe, if that should be (which
God of his goodness forbid) cessante causa, cessat effectus, the benefit of
naturalization for the time to come is dissolved. But that alters not the
operation of the Law. Rebus sic stantibus. And therefore I conclude, that this
difference is but a devise full of weakness and ignorance: and that there is
one, and the same reason of naturalizing subjects by descent, and subjects by
conquest, and that is the union in the person of the King; and therefore that
the (...) of Scotland is as clear, as that of Ireland, and they that grant the
one, cannot deny the other. And so I conclude the second part, touching
confutation.

To proceed therefore to the prooses of our part, your Lordships cannot but
know many of them must be already spent, in the answer which we have made to
the objections. For corruption unius, generatio alterius, holds as well in
Arguments, as in Nature, the destruction of an objection begets a proof. But
neverthelefse, I will avoid all iteration, least I should seem either to
distract your memories, or to abuse your patience; But will hold my self only
to these proofs, which stand substantially of themselves, and are not
intermixed with matter of confutation. I will therefore prove unto your
Lordships, that the post-natus of Scotland is by the Law of England nat^rall,
and ought fo to be adjudged by three courses of proof.

1. Bi^^t upon point of favor of Law. 2. Secondly, upon reasons and
authorities of Law. 3. And lastly, upon former presidents and examples.
Favor of Law, what mean J by that? the Law is equal, and favors not: It
is true, not persons: but things or matters it does favor. Is it not a common
principle, that the Law favors three things, Life, Liberty, and Dower? And
what is the reason of this favor? This, because our Law is grounded upon the
Law of Nature. And these three things do flow from the Law of Nature,
preservation of life Natural, Liberty, which every Beast or Bird seeks and
affects naturally, the society of man and wife, whereof Dower is the reward
natural. It is well, does the Law favor Liberty so highly, as a man shall
infranchise his bondsman, when he thinks not of it, by granting to him, Lands
or Goods? And is the reason of it, quia natura omnes homines erant liberi? and
that servitude or villenage, does cross and abridge the Law of Nature? And
does not the selfsame reason hold in the present case; For my Lords by the
Law of Nature, all men in the world are naturalized one toward another, they
were all made of one lump of earth, of one breath of God, they had the same
common Parents. Nay at the first they were, as the Scripture shows, unius
Labii, of one Language, until the curse, which curse (thanks be to God) our
present case is exempted from. It was Civil and National Laws, that brought
in these words, and differences of Civis and Exterus, Alien and Native And
therefore because they tend to abridge the Law of Nature, the Law favors not
them, but takes them strictly, even as our Law has an excellent rule, that
customs of Towns and Burroughes shall be taken and construed strictly and
precisely, because they do abridge and derogate from the law of the land. So
by the same reason all National Laws whatsoever, are to be taken strictly and
hardly in any point wherein they abridge, and derogate from the law of Nature.
Whereupon I conclude that your Lordships cannot judge the law for the other
side, except the case be Luce clarius. And if it appear to you but doubtful,
as I think no man in his right senses but will yield it, to be at least
doubtful, Then ought your Lordships (under your correction be it spoken) to
pronounce for us because of the favor of the Law. Furthermore as the law of
England must favor Naturalization, as a branch of the law of Nature: so it
appears manifestly, that it does favor it accordingly. For is it not much to
make a Subject Naturalized? By the law of England, it should suffice, either
place or Parents, if he be born in England, it is matter no though his Parents
be Spaniards, or what you will. On the other side, if he be borne of English
Parents, it skilleth not though he be borne in Spain, or in any other place of
the World. In such sort does the Law of England open her lap to receive in
people to be Naturalized, which indeed shows the wisdom and excellent
composition of our law. And that it is the law of a Warlike and Magnanimous
Nation, sit for Empire. For look, and you shall find that such kind of estates
have been ever liberal in point of Naturalization: whereas Marchant-like and
envious estates have bin otherwise. For the reasons of law joined with
authorities, I do first observe to your Lordships, that our assertion or
affirmation is simple and plain: that it suffices to naturalization, that
there be one King, and that the party be, natus ad sidem Regis, agreeable to
the definition of Littleton: which is. Alien is he which is born out of the
allegiance of our Lord the King. They of the other side speak of respects, and
quoad and quatenus, and such subtilties and distinctions. To maintain
therefore our assertion, J will use three kinds of proofs.

The first is, that allegiance cannot be applied to the Law or Kingdom, but to
the person of the King, because the Allegiance of the Subject is more large and
spacious, and has a greater latitude, and comprehension, then the Law or the
Kingdom. And therefore it cannot be a dependency of that, without the which it
may of it self subsist.

The second proof which I will use, is, that the Natural body of the King
has an operation and influence into his body politic, as well as his body
politic has upon his body Natural, And therefore that although his body
politic of King of England, and his body politic of King of Scotland be
soverall and distinct: Yet nevertheless, his Natural person, which is one,
has an operation upon both, and creates aprivity between them.

And the third proof is the binding text of five several statutes.

For the first of these I shall make it manifest, that the allegiance is of a
greater extent, and dimension, then Laws or Kingdom, and cannot confist by
the laws merely, because it began before laws, it continues after Laws, and
it is in vigor where Laws are suspended, and have not their force. That it is
more ancient then law, appears by that which was spoken in the beginning by
way of inducement where I did endeavor to demonstrate, that the original age
of Kingdoms was governed by natural equity, that Kings were more ancient then
Lawgivers, that the first submissions were simple, and upon confidence to the
person of Kings, and that the Allegiance of Subjects to hereditary Monarchies,
can no more be said to consist by laws, then the obedience of Children to
Parents.

That Allegiance continues after laws, I will only put the case, which was
remembered by two great Judges in a great Assembly, the one of them now with
God, which was: that if a King of. England should be expalsed his Kingdom, and
some particular subjects should follow him in flight, or exile in foreign
parts, and any of them there should conspire his death, that upon his
rocoveryof his Kingdom; such a subject might by the Law of England be
proceeded with; for Treason committed and perpetrated at what time he had no
Kingdom, and in place where ethe Law did not bind.

That Allegiance is in vigor and force, where the power of Law has a
cessation appears notably in time of Wars, for silent leges inter arma. And
yet the Sovereignty, and Imperial power of the King, is so far, from being
then extinguished, or suspended; as contrariwsse it is raised, and made more
absolute, for then he may proceed by his supreme authority, and Martial Law
without observing formalities of the Laws of his Kingdom. And therefore
whosoever speaks of Laws, and the Kings power by Laws, and the Subjects
obedience, or allegiance to Laws, speak but of one half of the Crown. For
Bracton out of Justinian does truly define, the Crown to consist of Laws and
Arms, power Civil and Martial, with the latter whereof the Law does not
intermeddle, so as where it is much spoken that the Subjects of England are
under one Law, and the Subjects of Scotland are under another Law, it is true
at Edenborough or Sterling, or again in London, or York; But if Englishmen
and Scottishmen meet in an Army Royal before Calice. I hope then they are
under one Law. So likewise not only in time of war, but in time of
peregrination: If a King of England travail, or pass through foreign
territories; yet the allegiance of his Subjects follows him, as appears in
that not able case which is reported in (...), where one of the train of K.
Ed. I. as be past through France from the Holy Land, imbezelled some silver
Plate at Paris, and Jurisdiction was demanded of this crime by the French Kings
Counsel at Law. (...) (...), and demanded likewise by the Officers of K. Edw.
ratione personae, and after much solemnity and contestation and interpleading,
it was ruled and determined for King Edward, and the party tried and judged
before the Knight Marshall of the Kings house, and hanged after the English
Law, and execurion in St. Germans meadovves: and so much for my first proof.

For my second maine proof; that is drawn from the true and legal distinction
of the Kings several capacities; for they that maintain the contrary opinion,
do in effect destroy the whole force of the Kings natural capacity, as if it
were drowned and swallowed up by his politic. And therefore I will first
prove to your Lordships, that his two capacities are in no sort confounded; and
secondly, that as his capacity politic works so upon his natural person,
as it makes it differ from all other the natural persons of his Subjects: so e
converso, his natural body works so upon his politic, as the corporation
of the Crown utterly differs from all other Corporations within the Realm.

For the first I will vouch you the very words which I find in that notable
case of the Duchy, where the question was, whether the grants of King Ed. 6.
for Duchy lands should be avoided in points of nonage. The case, as your
Lordships know well, is reported by Mr. Plowden, as the general resolution of
all the Judges of England, and the Kings learned Counsel, Ruswell the
Solicitour, only except, there I find the said words, Comment. fol. 215. There
is in the King not a body natural alone, nor a body politic alone, but a
body natural and politic together, ^^^pus corporatum in corpore naturali,
and corpus natural in corpore corporato. The like I find in the great case of
the Lord Barkeley set down by the same Reporter, Comment fol. 234. Though
there be in the King two bodies, and that those two bodies are conjoined; yet
are they by no means confounded the one by the other.

Now then to see the mutual and reciprocal intercourse, as I may term it, or
influence, or communication of qualities that these bodies have one upon the
other. The body politic of the Crown indueth the natural person of the King
with these perfections. That the King in Law shall never be said to be within
age; that his blood shall never be corrupted; and that, if he were attainted
before, the very assumption of the Crown purges it. That the K. shall not take
but by matter of Record, although he take in his natural capacity, as upon a
gift in tail. That his body in Law shall be said to be as it were immortal,
for there is no death of the King in Law, but a demise as it is termed; with
many other the like Privileges, and differences from other natural persons
too long to rehearse, the rather because the question labors not in that
part. But on the contrary part, let us see what oporations the Kings natural
person has upon his Crown and body politic: Of which the chiefest and
greatest is, that it causes the Crown to go by descent, which is a thing
strange, and contrary to the course of all Corporations, which evermore take in
succession, and not by descent, for no man can show me in all the Corporations
of England, of what nature soever, whether they consist of one person, or of
many: or whether they be Temporal or Ecclesiastical, any one takes to him and
his heirs, but all to him and his successors; And therefore here you may see
what a weak course that is, to put cases of Bishops and Parsons, and the like,
and to apply them to the Crown. For the King takes to him and his heirs in
the manner of a natural body, and the word successors is but superfluous, and
where that is used that is ever duly placed after the words heirs. The King,
his heirs and Successors.

Again no man can deny but vxor and filius sunt nomina naturae. A Corporation
can have no wife; nor a Corporation can have no son; how is it then, that it
is treason to compass the death of the Queen, or of the Prince. There is no
part of the body politic of the Crown in either of them, but it is entirely
in the King. So likewise we find in the case of the Lord Barkeley, the question
was whether the Statute of 35. H. 8. for that part which concerned Queen
Katherine Pars jointure were a public act or no, of which the Judges ought to
take notice, not being pleaded: And judged a public Act. So the like question
came before your Lordship, my Lord Chancellor, in Sergeant. Heales case:
whether the Statute of 11. of Ed. 3 concerning the intayling of the Dukedom of
Cornwall to the Prince were a public Act or no; and ruled likewise a
public Act. Why? no man can affirm, but these be operations of Law,
proceeding from the dignity of the natural person of the King: for you shall
never find that another Corporation whatsoever of a Bishop or Master of a
College, or Major of London, works any thing in Law upon the wife, or
son of the Bishop or the Major. And to conclude this point and vvithall to
come near to the case in question, I will show you where the natural person
of the King has not only an operation in the case of his wife and children,
but likewise in the case of his Subjects, which is the very question in hand:
As for example, I put this case, can a Scottishman who is a Subject to the
natural person of the King, and not to the Crown of England, can a
Scottishman, I say, be an enemy by the Law to the Subjects of England, or must
he not of necessity, if he should invade England, be a Rebel, and no enemy not
only as to the King, but as to the Subject? Or can any Letters of Mart or
reprisall be granted against a Scottishman, that should spoil an Englishmans
goods at Sea, and certainly this case does press exceeding near the
principal case, for it prooveth plainly, that the natural person of the King,
has such a communication of qualities with his body politic; as it makes the
Subjects of either Kingdoms stand in another degree of privity one toward the
other; then they did before. And so much for the second proof.

For the five Acts of Parliament which I spoke of which are concluding to this
question?

The first of them is, that concerning the banishment of Hugh Spencer in the
time of King Ed. 2. In which act there is contained, the charge, and accusation
whereupon his exile proceeded. One Article of which charge is set down in
these words. Homage and Oath of the Subject is more by reason of the crown,
then by reason of the person of the King. So that if the King does not guide
himself by reason in right of the Crown, his lieges are bound by their oath
to the Crown to remoove the King.

By which act does plain'y appear the perilous consequence of this distinction
concerning the person of the King, and the Crown. And yet J do acknowledge
Justice, and ingeruously a great difference between that assertion and this,
which is now maintained: for it is one thing to make things distinct, another
thing to make them separable, Aliud est distinctio, aliud separatio, and
therefore J assure my self, that those, that now use and urge that diftinction
dee as firmly hold, that the subjection to the Kings person, and to the
Crown, are inseparable, though distinct, as I do. And it is true that the
poison of the opinion, and assertion of Spencer is like the poison of a
Scorpion, more in the tail then in the body: For it is the inference that they
make which is, that the King may be deposed or removed, that is, the treason
and dislayalty of that opinion: But by you leave the body is rever a whit the
more wholesome meare, for having such a tail belonging to it: therefore we see
that is Locus lubricus, an opinion from which a man may ea^ly slide into an
absurdity. But upon this act of Parliament, I will only note one circumstance
more, and so leave it, which may add authority unto it in the opinion of the
wisest, and that is, that these Spencers, were not ancient nobles or great
Patriots that were charged and prosecuted by upstarts and favorites: for then
that might be said that it was but the action of some flatterers, who use to
extol the power of Monarchs to be infinite, but it was contrary; a
prosecution of those persons being favorites by the Nobility, so as the
Nobility themselves which seldom do subscribe to the opinion of an infinite
power of Monarchs. Yet even they could not endure, but their blood did rise to
hear that opinion: that subjection is owing to the Crown, rather then to the
person of the King.

The second Act of Parliament which determined this case, is the act of
recognition in the first year of his Majesty, wherein you shall find, that in
two several places, the one in the Preamble, the other in the body of the Act,
the Parliament does recognize, that these two Realms of England and Scotland
are under one Imperial Crown. The Parliament does not say under one Monarchy
or King which might refer to the person, but under ono Imperial Crown,
which cannot be applied but to the Sovereign power of Regiment, comprehending
both Kingdoms. And the third act of Parliament is the Act made in the fourth
year of his Majesty's Reign for the abolition of hostile Laws, wherein your
Lordships shall find likewise in two places, that the Parliament does
acknowledge, that there is an union of these two Kingdoms already begun in his
Majesty's person. So as by the declaration of that act, they have not only one
King, but there is an union in inception in the Kingdoms, themselves.

These two are Judgments in Parliament by way of declaration of Law, against
which no man can speak. And certainly these are righteous and true Judgments
to be relied upon; not only for the authority of them, but for the verity of
them, for to any that shall well, and deeply weigh the effects of Law upon this
conjunction, it cannot but appear, that although parts integrales of the
Kingdom (as the Philosophers speak) such as the Laws, the Officers, the
Parliament are not yet commixed; yet nevertheless there is but one, and the
selfsame fountain of sovereign power depending upon the ancient submission,
whereof I spoke in the beginning, and in that sense, the Crowns and the
Kingdoms are truly said to be united.

And the force of this truth is such, that a grave and learned Gent. that
defended the contrary opinion, did confess thus far: That in ancient times
when Monarchies (as he said) were but heaps of people, without any exact form
of policy, that the Naturalization and communication of Privileges did follow
the person of the Monarch. But otherwise since States were reduced to a more
exact form: So as thus far we did consent; but still I differ from him in
this, that those more exact forms wrought by time, and custom, and Laws, are
nevertheless still upon the first foundation, and do serve only to perfect
and corroborate the force and bond of the first submission, and in no sort to
disanullor destroy it.

And therefore with these two acts do J likewise couple the Act of 14. Ed. 3.
which has been alleged of the other side. For by collating of that Act with
this former too, the truth of that we affirm will the more evidently appear,
according unto the rule of reason: Opposita juxta se posita magis elucescunt.
That act of 14. is an act of separation. These two Acts formerly recited are
Acts tending to union. This Act is an act that makes a new Law, it is by the
words of grant and establish, these two Acts declare the common law, as it is,
being by words of Recognition and Confession.

And therefore upon the difference of these laws you may fubstantially ground
this position. That the Common Law of England upon the adjunction of any
Kingdom unto the King of England, does make some degree of union in the
Crowns, and Kingdoms themselves: except by a special Act of Parliament they
be dissevered.

Lastly, the 5. Act of Parliament, which I promised is the Act made in the 42.
of E. 3. cap. ^. 10. which is express decision of the point in question. The
words are, Item, (upon the Petition put into Parliament by the Commons,) That
Infants borne beyond the Seas in the Seignories of Callice, and elsewhere
within the lands and Seignories that pertain to our Sovereign Lord the King
beyond the Seas, be as able and inheritable of their heritage in England, as
other Infants borne within the Realm of England, it is accorded that the
Common Law and the Statute formerly made be holden.

Upon this Act, J infer thus much, first that such as the Petition
mentions, were naturalized, the practice shows; Then, if so, it must be
either by Common Law, or Statute; for so the words report, not by Statute; for
there is no other statute, but 25. of E. 3. and that extends to the case of
birth out of the Kings obedience, where the Parents are English, Ergo it was by
the Common Law, for that only remains. And so by the Declarations of this
statute at the Common Law. All Infants borne within the Lands and Seignories
(for I give you the very words again) that pertain to our Sovereign Lord the
King, it is not said, as are the Dominions of England, are as able and
inheritable of their heritage in England, as other Infants borne within the
Realm of England: what can be more plain? And so I leave Statutes, and go to
Presidents; for though the one do bind more, yet the other sometimes does
satisfy more. For presidents in the producing and using of that kind of
proof, of all others it behooves them to be faithfully vouched; for the
suppressing or keeping back of a circumstance may change the case, and
therefore J am determined to urge only such presidents, as are without all
color or scruple of exception, or objection, even of those objections which I
have, to my thinking fully answered and confuted. This is now, by the
Providence of God the fourth time that the line, and Kings of England have had
Dominions and Seignories united unto them, as Patrimonies, and by descent of
blood; four unions I say there have bin inclusive with this last. The first
was of Normandy in the person of William commonly called the Conqueror. The 2d.
was of Gascoyne, and Guienne, and Anjou in the person of K. Hen. the 2d. in his
person I say, though by several titles. The 3. was of the Crown of France, in
the person of K. Edw. the third. And the 4th. of the Kingdom of Scotland in
his Majesty. Of these I will set aside such, as by any cavillation can be
excepted unto. First, J will set aside Normandy, because it will be said, that
the difference of countries accruing by conquest, from countries annexed by
descent in matter of Communication of privileges holds both ways, as well
of the part of the conquering Kingdom, as the conquered. And therefore that
although Normandy was not conquest of England, yet England was a conquest of
Normandy, and so a communication of privileges between them. Again, set aside
France, for that it will be said, that although the King had a title in blood,
and by descent, yet that title was executed and recovered by Arms: So as it is
a mixed title of conquest and descent, and therefore the President not so clear.

There remains then Gascoyne and Anjou, and that president, likewise I will
reduce and abridge to a time to avoid all question. For it will be said of
them also, that after they were lost and recovered in ore gladii, that the
ancient title of blood was extinct and that the King was in upon his new title
by conquest, and Mr. Walter had found a book case, in 13. of H. 6. abridged by
Mr. Fitz-Herbert, in title of protection, placito 56. where a protection was
cast, ^uia profecturus in Gasconiam with the Earlo of Huntingdon, and
challenged because it was not a voyage royal, and the Justices thereupon
required the sight of the commission, which was brought before them, and
purported power to pardon Felouies, and treason, power to coin money, and power
to conquer them that resist, whereby M. Walter finding the word conquest,
collected that the Kings title at that time was reputed to be by Conquest,
wherein I may not omit to give Obiter that Answer, which Law and Truth
provideth, namely that when any King obreyneth by war a Country, whereunto
he has right by Birth, that he is ever in upon his Ancient Right, not upon
his purchase by Conquest; and the Reason is, that there is as well a Judgment
and recovery by War and Arms, as by law and course of Justice; for war is a
tribunal seat, wherein God gives the judgment, and the trial is by battle,
or Duel, as in the case of trial of private right, and then it follows, that
whosoever comes in by eviction, comes in his remitter: so as there will be
no difference in Countries whereof the right comes by descent, whether the
possession be obtained peaceably or by war, but yet nevertheless, because I
will utterly take away all manner of evasion, and subterfuge, I will yet set
apart that part of time in and during, the which, the subjects of Gascoyne and
Guyenne might be thought to be subdued by a reconquest. And therefore I will
not meddle with the Prior of Shellies case, though it be an excellent case;
because it was in that time, 27. of E. 3. neither will I meddle with any cases,
records, or presidents, in the time of King H. 5. or King H. 6. for the same
reason, but will hold my self to a portion of time, from the first uniting of
these Provinces in the time of King H. 2. until the time of K. John. At what
time those Provinces were lost, and from that time again unto the 17. year of
the Reign of K. Edw. 2. at what time the Statute of proerogativa Rogis was
made, which altered the law in the point in hand.

That both in these times, the Subjects of Gascoyn and Guyenne, and Anjou, were
naturalized for inheritance in England by the laws of England. I shall
manifestly prove, and the proof proceeds, as to the former time (which is our
case) in a very high degree, a minore ad majus, and as we say, a multo fortiore
For if this privilege of naturalization remained unto them when the Countries
were lost, and became subjects in possession to another King: much more did
they enjoy it, as long as they continued under the Kings subjection.

Therefore to open the State of this point. After these Provinces were through
the perturbations of the State in the unfortunate time ofK. John lost, and
severed, the principal persons which did adhere unto the French were attainted
of Treason, and their efcheats here in England taken and seized. But the people
that could not resist the tempest, when their Heads and Leaders were revolted,
continued inheritable to their possessions in England, and reciprocally the
people of England inherited and succeeded to their possessions in Gascoyne, and
were both accounted, ad fidem utriusque Regis, until the Statute of
Proerogativa Regis, wherein the wisdom and justice of the Law of England is
highly to be commended. For of this law, there are two grounds of reason, The
one of equity, The other of policy. That of Equity was because the common
people were in no fault, but as the Scripture says in a like case, quid
fecerunt oves iftoe? It was the cowardice and disloyalty of their Governors
that deserved punishment, butwhat had these sheep done, and therefore to have
punished them, and deprived them of their lands and fortunes had bin unjust.
That of policy was, because if the law had forthwith upon the loss of the
Countries by an accident of time pronounced the people for Aliens, it had been
a kind of Cession of their right, and a diselaymer in them, and so a greater
difficulty to recover them. And therefore we see the Statute, which altered the
law in this point, was made in the time of a weak king, that, as it seemed,
despaired ever to recover his right, and therefore thought better to have a
little present profit by escheats, then the continuance of his claim, and the
countenance of his right by the admitting of them to enjoy their inheritances,
as they did before.

The State therefore of this point, being thus opened, it rests to prove our
assertion that they were naturalized; for the clearing whereof, I shall need
but to read the authorities, they be so direct and pregnant. The first is the
very text of the Statute of Praerogativa Regis. Rex habebit escaetas de terris
Normannorum cujuscunque feodi fuerint, salvo servitio, quod pertinet ad
capitales dominos feodi illius, and hoc similiter intelligendum est, si aliqua
haereditus descendat alicui nato in partibus transmarinis, and cujus
antecefsores fuerunt ad fidem Regis Franciae, ut tempore Regis Iohannis, and
non ad fidem Regis Angliae, sicut contigit de Baronia Monumetae, etc.

By which Statute it appears plainly that before the time of King John, there
was no color of any Escheare, because they were the kings Subjects in
possession, as Scotland now is, but only it determines the Law, from that time
forward.

This Statute if it had in it any obscurity, it is taken away by two lights,
the one placed before it, and the other placed after it, both authors of great
credit the (...) for ancient, the other for late times. The former is (...) in
his Cap. de exception(...), lib. 5. fol. 427. and his words are these, Est
etiam and alia exceptie quae tenenti competitex persona petentis propter
defectum Nationis, quae dilatoria est, and nonperimit actionem, ut si qnis
alienigena qui fuerit ad fidem Regis Franciae, and actionem instituat versus
aliquem qui fuerit ad fidem Regis Angliae, tali nonrespondeatur saltem donec
terrae fuerint communes.

By these words it appears, that after the loss of the Provinces beyond the
Seas, the Naturalization of the Subjects of those Provinces was in no sort
extinguished, but only was in suspense during time of war and no longer; for
he says plainly, that the exception which we call plea to the person of Alien,
was not peremptory but only dilatory, that is to say, during the time of war,
and until there were peace concluded, which he terms by these words, donec
terrae fuerint communes, which though the phrase seem somewhat obscure is
expounded by Bracton himself in his fourth book, fol. 297. to be of peace
made and concluded whereby the Inhabitants of England, and those Provinces
might enjoy the profits and fruits of their lands in either place communiter,
that is respectively, or as well the one as the other: so as it is clear, they
were no Aliens in right, but only interrupted and debarred of Suites in the
Kings Courts in time of War.

The authority after the Statute, is, that of Master Stamfords, the best
Expositor of a statute that has bin in our law, a man of reverend judgment,
and excellent order in his writings, his words are in his exposition upon the
branch of that statute which we read before. By this branch it should appear,
that at this time men of Normandy, Gascoyne, Guienne, Anjou, and Britain were
inheritable within this Realm, as well as Englishmen, because that they were
sometimes Subjects to the Kings of England and under their Dominion, until K.
John's time, as is aforesaid, and yet after his time, those men (saving such
whose lands were taken away for treason) were still inheritable within this
Realm, till the making of this Statute, and in the time of peace between the
two Kings of England, and France, they were answerable within this Realm, if
they had brought any action for their Lands and Tenements.

So as by these three authorities, every one so plainly pursuing the other, we
conclude that the subjects of Gascoyne, Guienne, Anjou, and the rest from their
first union by descent, until the making of the Statute, of praerogativa
Regis, were inheritable in England, and to be answered in the Kings Courts in
all actions, except it were in time of war. Nay more (which is de abundante)
that when the Provinces were lost, and disannexed, and that the King was but
King de jure over them, and not de facto: Yet nevertheless, the privilege of
naturalization continued.

There rests yet one objection, rather plausible to a popular understanding,
then any ways forcible in law, or learning, which is a difference taken
between the Kingdom of Scotland, and these Dutchies, for that the one is a
Kingdom, and the other was not so, and therefore that those Provinces being of
an inferior nature, did acknowledge our Laws, and Seals, and Parliament
which the Kingdom of Scotland does not.

This difference was well given over by Mr. Walter, for it is plain, that a
Kingdom and absolute Dukedom, or any other Sovereign estate do differ
honor, and not potestate; For diverse Dutchies, and Countries that are now,
were sometimes Kingdoms; and diverse kingdoms that are now, were sometimes
Dutchies, or of other inferior Style, wherein we need not travail abroad
since we have in our own state so notorious an instance of the Country of
Ireland, whereof King H. 8. of late time was the first that writ himself King
the former Style being L. of Ireland and no more, and yet Kings had the same
authority before, that they have had since and the same Nation the same marks
of a Sovereign State, as their Parliaments, their Arms, their Coins, as they
now have, so as this is too superficial an allegation labor upon.

And if any do conceive, that Gascoyne and Guyenne were governed by the Laws
of England. First, that cannot be in reason, for it is a true ground, that
wheresoever any Princes Title unto any Country is by Law, he can never change
the Laws, for that they create his Title: and therefore no doubt those
Dutchies retained their own Laws, which if they did, then they could not be
subject to the Laws of England

And next again the fact or practice was otherwise, as appears by all
consent of Story and Record: For those Dutchies continued governed by the
Civil Law, their trials by witresses and not by Jurie, their lands
Testamentary, and the like.

Now for the colors, that some have endeavored to give, that they should have
been subordinate to the government of England, they were partly weak, and
partly such as make strongly against them, for as to that, that writs of Habeas
corpus under the great Seal of England have gone to Gascoyne, it is no manner
of proof, for that the Kings writs which are mendatory and not writs of
ordinary Justice may go to his Subjects into any foreign parts whatsoever,
and under what Seal it pleases him to use; and as to that, that some Acts of
Parliament have been cited, wherein the Parliaments of England have taken upon
them to order matters of Gascoyne, if those Statutes be well looked into,
nothing does more plainly convince the contrary, for they intermeddle with
nothing but that that concerns either the English Subjects personally, or the
territories of England locally, and never the Subjects of Gascoyne, for look
upon the Statute of 27. of Ed. 3. ca. 5. there it is said, That there shall be
no fore-stasting of Wines, but by whom? only by English Merchants, not a word
of the Subjects of Gascoyne, and yet no doubt they mighr be offenders in the
same kind.

So in the sixth Chapter it is said, That all Merchants, Gascoyoes may safely
bring Wines into what part it shall please them, here now are the persons of
Gascoynes, but then the place whether ^ into the Realm of England, and in the
7. Chap. that erects the Ports of Bordeaux and Bayonne, for the staple Towns
of wine, the Statute Ordaines that if any, but who? English Merchant or his
Servants shall buy or bargain other where, his body shall be arrested by the
Steward of Gascoyne, or the Constable of Bordeaux: true, for the Officers of
England could not catch him in Gascoyne, but what shall become of him, shall he
be proceeded with within Gascoyne? No, but he shall be sent over into England
into the Tower of London.

And this does notably disclose the reason of that custom, which some have
sought to wrest the other way, that custom, I say, whereof a form does yet
remain, that in every Parliament the King does appoint certain Committees in
the Upper-House to receive the Petitions of Normandy, Guyenne and the rest,
which as by the former Statute does appear could not be for the ordering of
the governments there, but for the liberties, and good usage of the Subjects of
those parts, when they came hither, or via versa, for the restraining of the
abuses and misdemeanors of our Subjects when they went thither.

Wherefore I am now at an end. For us to speak of the mischiefs, I hold it
not fit for this place, left we should seem to bend the Laws to policy and
not to take them in their true and natural sense. It is enough that every man
knows, that it is true of these two Kingdoms, which a good Father said of the
Churches of Christ: Si inseparabiles insuperabiles. Some things I may have
forgot, and some things perhaps I may forget willingly; for I will not press
any opinion or declaration of late time which may prejudice the liberty of this
debate, but ex dictis, and ex non dictis, upon the whole matter I prove
Judgment for the Plaintiff.


