Numb. 26. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order of the late Council
of State. From Monday June 11. to Monday June 18. 1660.
From St. John de Luz, June 8. Being a full Account of the Ceremonies of the
Marriage.
THe second instant the King of Spain came to Fontarabia; the first ceremony of
the Kings Marriage with the Infanta was performed the next day by the Bishop of
Pampolona, with the assistance of the Patriarch of the India's, in the Church
of that Town, the Ceremonies whereof you had in the last. I shall add only what
particulars of consequence that were then omitted. The Bishop of Frojus was
there to see the Ceremony, with Two or three hundred French Gentlemen,
Mademoiselle was there also, but incognito, and went for the waiting
Gentlewoman of the Lady No^illes, yet the King of Spaines guards had some
special respect for her, and kept her from being molested by the crowd, during
the Mass. Aafter the reading of the King's Proxy to Don Lewis d' Aro, the
renunciation made by the Infanta of any pretensions to the States of Spain was
also read, which she then confirmed by an Oath. The rest of the ceremonies used
then were not much differing from the ceremony is used at other marriages, but
only in point of stateliness. It was observed that the Infanta kneeled twice
before the King her Father, the first time to ask his blessing, and the second
before she gave her consent to the marriage. She did shed tears at first, but
soon after she appeared very resolute. The King of Spain who stood covered all
the while, took the Ring, as it was agreed the day before, and did put it on
his Daughter's finger. The ceremony being ended, the King of Spain showed her
all the respect due to such a Queen, and gave her the right hand, both at the
coming out of the Church, and in his own Coach. He likewise gave her his own
lodgings and took hers; and that new Queen, which as yet had not been seen in
public, dined there publicly in a large room, where Mademoiselle and all the
French there rushed in in a crowd. When the said Queen had dined, she smiled
upon Mademoiselle, and told her she very well knew the unknown Lady whom she
called into her own chamber, and gave her many testimonies of her affections,
after which Mademoiselle returned hither with much satisfaction. About two a
clock in the afternoon, the news of that ce^emony was brought to the King, who
received it with much joy, as did also the Queen mother, who looks upon that
marriage as her own work. That night there was a great Ball^t our Townhouse,
where the King daunced first with Mademoiselle; after whom Monsieur the King's
Brother took Mademoiselle d' Alencon, and danced with her, the Count d'
Armagnac with Mademoiselle de Valois, and other Lords and Grandees with the
Princess of Baden, the Duchess of Valentinois, and the other Ladies of the
Court, all richly aparelled and adorned with abundance of Jewels. The fourth
instant the Duke of Crequi, first Gentleman of the King's chamber, went with a
very great and gallant retinue, and abundance of Nobility accompanying him from
hence, to carry the presents to the new Queen, the particulars whereof you have
hereafter; she received them with all the demonstrations of joy that can be
imagined. The Marquis of Vardos complimented her likewise in the Kings name as
some days before the Count de Noailles Captain of the Kings lifeguard did.

The same day the Queen mother went to the Isle of the Conference, where she
came about 2 a clock in the afternoon, and soon after the King of Spain and the
Queen his Daughter with her Ladies of honor, came there in a Galliot, covered,
painted within and without, being followed with another wherein was Don Lewis
De Haro and several Spanish Grandees; after whom came a great number of small
Vessels, very gallant, wherein was the rest of the Spanish Court. The shore was
full of people, who admired the beauty of that Princess, which was much
advantaged by the great quantity of Diamonds that were upon her rich garments.
The King of Spain came ashore first, and took the Queen his Daughter by the
hand, and conducted her to the very door of the Chamber of the Conference,
where the Queen Mother of France, the Kings brother, and the Cardinal Mazarine
were: we hear not as yet what was done at that meeting, but they looked all to
bevery well satisfied at their coming out. During their Conference the K: of
France was incognito on horseback, within a musket shot, between a Riv^let and
a Hill, with the Prince of Conty; and the Counts of Soissons and Armagnac, and
diverse other Grandees of the French Court, intending to cross the River that is
about the Isle of the Conference, that he might see by the by the new Queen at
the Window, with the Queen Mother; but the Kings impatience made him change his
design, and he went alone by the door of the Gallery to the very door of the
Chamber, where he distinctly saw the King of Spain and the new Queeen his
Spouse. Don Lewis de Haro and the Cardinal Mazarine, who managed that business,
for his Majesty's satisfaction, stood by the door the better to conceal him
all the while he was there. His Majesty retired after with much satisfaction,
and declared to all that he had found the Queen very handsome.

Not content to have seen her there, the King went toward the shore, where he
had a full sight of her going again into the Galliot. From thence the Spanish
Court returned to Fontarabia, and their Majesty's came likewise hither. The 5
the King sent a Complement to the King and Queen of Spain by Mr. de Ballinghew
the first Gentleman of the Horse. The 6 the two Kings met together in Private
at the Isle of the Conference; and returned again thither the next day, with
their whole Courts. During the whole time of their Interview both the Kings
were still ^ncovered, that the Grandees of Spain might not have occasion to be
covered, and both swore the Peace, the most Christian King in the hands of the
Bishop of Bayonne, in the presence of Don Lewis de Haro; and the King of Spain
in the hands of the Bishop of Pampelona, in the presence of the Cardinal
Mazarine, who offered to the said King of Spain Mr. de Mancini for an hostage
for the restitution of Roses and the other places, but he refused to take him,
saying, That he would have no other assurances for it, but the word of his most
Christian Majesty. Then having delivered his Daughter into the Kings hands, the
Queen Mother took her in her Coach, and the two Kings pa^ted with all the
demonstrations of a perfect amity. The new Queen being come to St. John de Luz,
had the whole next day, being the 8 Instant, to wipe off her tears, The same
the Spanish begun their Journey toward Madrid. The King sent the Marquis de
Villequier, to complement the King of Spain before his departure. The 9 the
last Ceremony of the Marriage was performed, whereat Cardinal Mazarine
discharged the place of grand Almoner; Mademoiselle carried the Taper; and the
two Princesses of Alencon and Valois her Sisters carried the Queens Train, with
the Princess of Carignan.

At the Enterview where the two Kings swore the Peace there were only present
the Royal persons, the two chief Ministers, and the Secretarys of State of
both the Crowns. After the taking of the Oath, the two Kings signed it, and
afterward they embraced one another. The Guards on both sides gave two
Volleys; The French Guards were divided in three Squadrons, the first of the
Gensdarmes, the second the Lifeguard, and the third of the light horsemen, and
two foot Bataillons, the first of the Kings Musketeers, and the other of the
French and Switzer Guards, all in blew Casacks. The Spaniards were in five
Squadrons, and a great Bataillon, all in yeallow Coats, with the Spanish
Scutcheon before and behind, and St Andrew's Cross upon the sides.

A particular account of the Presents the Infanta has received from the French
Court.
First, a rich Cabinet garnished with Gold and Diamonds and the Kings Ciphers,
and her own with Royal Cowns.

In that Cabinet are six complete Suites of Jewels, viz. one all of Diamonds,
the Pendants, the Prestador, the Posy, the Knots for the sleeves, and to put
before, behind, and at the sides of the Gown, the small Chain, the picture
box, the Watch with the Chain, and the little Hook, all of Diamonds.

A like suit all of Pearls.

Another of Pearls and Diamonds mixed together.

Another of Diamonds and Rubies.

Another of Emerauds and Diamonds.

Besides a Watch of the same, with the Pictures following, viz. of the King and
Queen of Spain, of the Prince of Spain, and of the young Infanta, of the King
of France, and the two Queens, all garnished with Diamonds. And a Ring of a
great value, the whole being of a vast price, all sent the said Infanta by the
King. She is besides to have the use of all the Crown Jewels. which never went
out of the Kingdom.

A great Box full of gold and silver pieces, to make her liberalites.

Another with 80000 small gold Lewises.

Sent to the Infanta by the Queen Mother of France.

A string of Pearls worth 100000 Crowns, besides that which the King sent her.

A Bodkin of Diamonds, of a very great price.

Pendants worth 600000 Livres.

And a very fine Box for a Picture.

Sent her by Monsieur the Kings Brother.

A Cabinet garnished with Gold and Silver together, wherein were twelve Suits
of Diamonds, Pearls, Emerauds and Rubeis, Turquoises, Emerauds and Rubeis
together, Jacinths, Amethysts etc. and al in such great quantity, that there be
enough to lace her gowns, the stones being set in the form of a Lace.

Sent her by Cardinal Mazarin.

The worth of 1200000 Livres in Jewels.

A Diamond of an excessive bigness and price, which he entreated the Infanta to
keep with the Crown Jewels, which are never to go out of France, but for all
the rest she may dispose of as she pleases.

A Service of Gold, viz. Dishes, Plates, Basins, and all manner of Utensills
both for the Table and the Cup-board.

A Trunck full of Gloves, Fanns, Silk-stockings, Garters wrought with Gold,
night and morning Garments.

All sorts of Essences, Pomatums, and Perfumes, the most exquisite in Europe.

Two Calleches or Charetts, embroidered with Gold and Silver, the one Scarlet
Velvet, drawn by six Isabel color horses, come out of Moscovy; and the other
of Green velvet, drawn by six horses of a very Extraordinary color, drawing
toward Incarnation, sent by a Foreign Prince, not far from the Indias.

Marshal de Grammont presented her with a gold Fountain all set with Diamonds.

Never were finer Presents seen, nor so magnificent a Queen, and her Qualities
and Conditions are suitable, being very Royal indeed.

Monday, June 11. at the House of Commons.
It was resolved, That Dr. Reynolds be desired to carry on the work of
Thanksgiving before this House on Thursday come fortnight, the 28. of this
instant June, (being a day set apart to return thanks to the Lord for his
Majesty's safe return to his government and people) at S. Margaret;
Westminster.

Resolved, That the Lord General take care that the Oath of Supremacy and
Allegiance be administered to all the Officers and Soldiers of the Army. That
the Lord High Admiral of England do take care that it be administered to the
Commanders and Mariners of the Fleet.

That his Majesty be desired to issue forth a Proclamation, requiring all to
take the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, that are enjoined by Law so to do.

The House reassumed the debate of the Bill of Indemnity and Oblivion, and
read the Letter of Robert Wallop Esquire; as also the humble Petition of
Charles Lord St. John.

Resolved, That Robert Wallop be discharged from being a Member of this House,
and incapable of bearing any office of public trust in the Nation; and that he
be committed into the custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending the House.

Resolved, That Luke Robinson Esquire be discharged from being a Member of this
House.

Resolved, That Sir Henry Vane be one of the Twenty to be excepted out of the
General Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, to suffer such pains, penalties and
forfeitures (not extending to life) as shall be thought fit to be inflicted by
an Act hereafter to be made for that purpose.

Resolved, That William Lenthal Esquire be one of the Twenty to be excepted out of
the General Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, etc.

Tuesday, June 12.
The House ordered new Writs to issue for the election of Burgesses for the
respective places following, viz.

A new Writ to issue forth for the election of a Burgess for Yiverton in com.
Devon. Mr. Bampfield having waved the election thereof, to serve for Exeter.

A new Writ for a Burgess to serve for VVhitchurch in com. Southton, in the
place of Robert Wallop Esquire discharged from being a Member of this House.

Another for Nottingham town, in the place of Col. John Hutchinson discharg it.

Another for North-Allerton, in the place of Francis Lassels discharged.

Resolved, That the Bill for Sales be taken into consideration on Friday next.

Resolved, That the Bill for Ministers be taken into consideration on Saturday
next.

The Bill for Poll-money was read the first time.

The petition of several in slavery under the Turk, was read and referred to a
Committee.

Resolved, That the sad condition of the Lord Inchequin and his Son now
Captives under the Turk, be represented to his Majesty, and that his Majesty be
desired that some effectual course be taken for their redemption.

The House resumed the debate upon the Bill of Indemnity and Oblivion, and
ord^re^ that William Burton be one of the Twenty to be excepted, and to suffer
such pains, p^nalties and forfeitures (not extending to life) as shall be
thought fit to be inflicted on him by an Act hereafter to be made for that
purpose.

A Petition of Mrs. Love was read.

Wednesday, June 13. at the House of Lords.
Letters Patents from His most Sacred Majesty; constituting Sir Orlando
Bridgman Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Speaker of the House of Lords in
the absence of the Lord Chancellor, were read and agreed unto whereupon the
Lord Chancellor going away, Sir Orlando performed that office.

At the House of Commons.
The House resumed the Debate concerning the Bill of Indemnity and Oblivion,
and Ordered that Oliver St. John Colonel Sydenham Alderman Ireton Colonel
Disbrow Sir Arthur Hesibrigge
be of the Twenty to be excepted etc.

Whitehall.
Sir William Salkeld was lately sworn of the Gentlemen of the King; Privy
chamber in ordinary. And besides these formerly mentioned, the Marquis of
Hertford and General Montague received the honor of the most Noble Order of the
Garter.

The Lords sent a message to the Commons, desiring their concurrence to a
Petition to be presented to His Majesty from both ^ouses, for publishing His
Majesty's late Proclamation against debauched and profane persons, throughout
the Kingdom, which the Commons agree unto.

Mr. Speaker informing the House, that Mr Meyne, Col. Wait, and Col. Temple,
three of His late Majesty's Judges, had rendered themselves to him according to
the Proclamation, and that he had committed them to the Sergeant at Arms, the
House approved of their commitment.

Whitehal June 11.
The Bailiffs, Burgesses, and commonalty of the Town of Ipswich, upon the sixth
of this instant, as a Testimony of their Loyalty and good affection, after a
Speech delivered by Mr. Nathaniel Bacon their Recorder, presented his Majesty
with Six hundred pound in Gold, by Mr Emanuel Sorrel, one of their Bailiffs,
accompanied by Mr. Francis Bacon, Mr. John Sickbemore, Captain Robert Sparrow,
Mr. Fisher, Mr. Robert Clark, Lieutenant Thomas Wright, Mr. Henry Cosens, and
Mr. Benjamin Brunning Lecturer of the said Town, As a token of his Majesty's
gracious acceptance, he was pleased this day, to confer the Honor of
Knighthood, upon Mr. Emanuel S^rrel.

From Presburgh, May 13, 1660.
The Turks having spoiled all the frontier of Hungary, are come further into
the Country, which has so alarumed the Inhabitants, that every one is fled,
and even some small Towns are totally deserted, the people having found no
better expedient to avoid the cruelty of those Barbarians, set all a fire, and
burn whatsoever they cannot carry away; yet the Bashaw of Offen, who commands
them, does still profess to be unwilling to undertake any thing against the
Emperors Dominions, which is conceived to be out of policy, for fear of being
obliged to engage with the Imperial Forces, before he receives the supply he
is expecting (...) first Vizier, which being once arrived, (...) will be known,
which in (...) he will pe^^wade us to be only (...).

Danizick, May ^^ 1660.
The Swedish forces formerly at Mariemburgh are removed, and are now quartered
at Nogat, from whence they will not go, until all their arrears be paid them.
Those that were at ^^bing begin also to mutiny; threatening to plunder the
Inhab^^^nts, unless they be speedily satisfied. This has obliged Major
General Linden to go to Saphor, to acquaint the Swedish Commissioners with it,
but they could nor raise yet the 20000 Crowns, though they have offered to give
in pawn the Artillery they have here. The said Major General coming this way
has visited the Count of Koningsm^^k who is not to go from hence until the
Duke and Duchess of Curland be at liberty, which will be very speedily. The
affairs in Lithuania are still in a very bad posture, and there is a very
little likelihood to have them easily settled again, if what we hear be true,
that the Polish Army has been totally routed by the Moscovites, who are said
to have taken prisoner General Czarnesky who commanded it, and that in
consequence of that victory, part of their forces had marched toward Warsow,
and the rest toward Prussia, the confirmation whereof is daily expected. In
the mean time the people are very much alarumd at this news; it is reported
that the Elector of Brandenburgh intends to have all his forces now in Holstein
and Meckleburgh, to march this way.

Cronenburgh, May 30. 1660.
The Swedes seeing the obstinacy of those with whom they are treating, to show
their inclination to the peace, sent word lately to the Dutch Ambassadors, that
they were willing to quit their pretensions about the 400000 Crowns the King of
Denmark was to pay unto them, and even to yield the Bailiwick of Druntheim,
which having obliged the Commissioners to meet again, it is thought that all
things will be very speedily concluded; but the ten Swedish Men of War are kept
still by Vice Admiral Ruyter, who to hinder them to have communication one with
the other, has taken away all their shalops.

Copenbagen, May 31. 1660.
The conferences having been renewed between the Commissioners of both sides,
the last project of the Mediators was propounded for a Treaty betwixt the two
Crowns; but when all things were thought to be concluded, the Swedes declared
they would not accept of it, but upon such condition, that the places should
not be restored till six weeks after the ratification, and that the ten Men of
War belonging to them should be presently delivered to them again, without
staying for the said ratification. They likewise propounded some new
difficulties concerning the Treaty of Ell^^^g, but the Dutch Ambassadors told
them, that unless within two days they would give their consent to the last
Treaty, with the explanations added thereunto, for the immediate restitution
of the places after the ratification of the Treaty betwixt the two Crowns,
and the keeping of the ten Ships until all the differences were ended, the
Vice Admiral Ruyter had order after that time to use hostility against them,
which Declaration has so incensed the Swedish Commissioners, that they refused
to continue any further that negotiation. Yet after some conferences they had
with the Lord Hannibal Seestede, they were so well appeased, that few days
after most of the differences were decided, so that it is hoped the Treaty
will be speedily subscribed, being chiefly grounded upon that of Roschild, and
the project made at the Hague.

Berlin, June 1. 1660.
The Elector of Brandenburgh being returned hither two days since, has sent
his first Gentleman of the horse to the King of England to complement him upon
the occasion of his happy restoration.

Narbone, June 7. 1660.
Upon the advice come lately to the ships that are at Saint Tropez, that a
Turkish brigandine had taken fevv days before a bark of Genoa, laden with
wine and oil, they sent one of their vessels to pursue the Pycates, whom they
fought with such resolution, that they forced them to abandon their prize,
which was brought back again, with about eleven Turks that were upon her.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
Arnaldo, or, the injured Lover. An excellent new Romance; written in Italian
by the excellent pen of Girolamo Brusoni, made English by T. S. Sold by The
Dring, at the George in Fleetstreet, near St. Dunstant Church.

The accomplished Courtier; consisting of institutions and examples by which
Courtiers and Officers of State may square their transactions pru^^ntly, and in
good order and method. By H. W. Gent. Sold by T. Dring, at the George in
Fleetstreet, near St. Dunstans Church.

An iron gray Nag, price about seven pound, age between five and six, having
all his paces being newly dockt, lost at Worcester, June 6. If any person can
bring certain intelligence of him, to Richard Ashbey in Worcester, or unto
John Green, H^bberdasher on London Bridge, he shall have ten shillings for his
pains.

Hamborough, June 5. 1660. S. N.
This day we received the joyful news of the peace between the two Northern
Crowns, which was not only concluded the 27th of May, but also proclaimed that
very day; presently upon which the King of Denmark sent order to the Governor
of Gue^stad for the publishing of it, and for a cessation of all kind of
hostility. The Imperial and Brandenburghish forces in Holstein have also
published the peace lately concluded between them and the Crown of Sweden, but
it is not yet known when they will withdraw from thence; it is thought they
will stay there until the ratification of the Treaty (...) in Prussia be
received.

An extract out of Letters from Zealand, concerning the Peace and the Articles
there agreed on, dated the 28^h of May, 1660.
YEsterday at eight of the clock at night, the articles of peace were
subscribed by the Danes, Swedes, and the Lord Mediators the French, English,
and Hollanders, in the Tents set up for that purpose betwixt the Leaguer and
Copenhagen, after which, so soon as our Rix Senators with the Lord Mediators
were come into the Town, all the Guns upon the walls round about the Town, as
also upon the Hollands Fleet, were three ^imes discharged, besides there were
three volleys of Musket shot given by the Citizens and Soldiers; whereupon the
Swedes in their leaguer gave likewise three volleys of shot out of their
Canons; this lasted till ten of the clock in the night, and then the peace was
proclaimed by the Kings Herald, by sound of Trumpets and Kettle-drums through
the whole Town.

A brief extract out of the Articles of Peace.
Six weeks after the date hereof, the whole Swedish Army is to quit Denmark,
namely a fortnight after the ratification of the peace which is to be delivered
in Elsenore within four weeks.

1 The leaguer is to be evacuated four days after the date abovementioned.

2 Four days after this Nicoping, Falster, and Moen are to be quitted, and the
sa^^ day Tonningen, Husum, and Eyderstad in Holstein to be freed of all Danish
forces.

3 Eight days after this Nascow in Laland.

4 And eight days after Kocke in Zealand.

5 A fortnight after the ratification Corsor and Crone^^^rgh are to be quitted,
and at the same time the Duke of Holstein his Territories is to be freed of the
Danish forces.

His Majesty will use his best endeavors by the allied Armies, that they
likewise quit the Duke of Holstein his Territories at the limited time.

Art. 3. The Swedish ships shall freely pass thorough the Sound without being
visited or paying any customs.

Art. 6. The King of Denmark is to give yearly toward the keeping of the
fire-beacons behind He^singo^ 3^0 Rixdolors, and this to be paid at two several
terms to the Swedish Minister residing at Helsingor, which done, Sweden is to
maintain the fire, without any pretense to the customs in the Sound.

Art. 10. The salt which remains yet due, and not satisfied, found aboard the
three ships formerly ^^^en, is to be paid at Han-borough within a year.

Art. 13. The Nobility in Schon^n are to have present possession of all their
lands and movables, and to take the oath of fidelity to Sweden.

Art. 16. The King of Denmark shall be free from giving any s^^^sfaction for
the for^^^ying of Koege and Co^sor.

Art. 17. The Duke o^ Holstein, according to the treaty of Copenhagen, is to
keep the Jurisdiction of S^^bstad, and half part of the Chapter of Sleswig, and
the Sovereignty.

Art. 28. Gottorf is (...) evacuated after the Danish places in Zealand are
quitted.

Art. 29. The letter of renouncing Drontheim is to be brought in upon the
delivery of the letters of ratification of the peace, and the Crown of Denmark
is to enjoy Drontheim in perpetuum.

Art. 30. France, England, and Holland, take the Guaranty upon them to see all
this performed.

Art. 31. The Crown of Swedeland is to possess the Isle of Ween in perpetuum,
and the Queen of Denmark to have the revenues thereof during her life.

Art. 32. Bornholm is to remain in the Danes possession for a year, and then to
give an equivalent for it to the Swedes.

In all the other Articles, the Rotskilds peace is to remain in its full vigor.

Thursday, June 14 at the House of Lords.
The House this day read several private Petitions, and referred them to a
Committee: They had likewise under their consideration several things belonging
to his Majesty's Revenue.

At the House of Commons.
The Petitions of Bulstrode Whitlock, and Sir Robert Reynolds, were this day
read.

The whole Election for the Borough of Wilton in the County of Wilts, upon
report made, was voted void, and new Writs were thereupon ordered to be issued
forth for a new Election there.

Res. That Daniel Axtell be one of the twenty to be excepted out of the general
Act of Indemnity and Obli^io^, to suffer such pains, penalties, and
forfeitures, not extending to life, as shall be inflicted on him by an Act
hereafter to be made for that purpose.

Friday 15: At the House of Lords.
This day the Lord Purbeck, by virtue of an Order of this House, was taken into
the custody of the Black Rod.

At the House of Commons.
The House ordered two Bills to be brought in for the continuing of the
Customs and Excise for six months longer, to commence from Midsummer next.

The House upon a former information of certain words pretended to be spoken by
Col. White, in relation to the death of his late Majesty of blessed memory,
referred the same to be examined by a Committee, and the examinations being
this day reported,

It was resolved, that the said Col. White was not in the least guilty of
speaking any such words as were laid to his charge.

Mr. Speaker acquainted the House that Alderman Pennington, one of his late
Majesty's Tryers, had rendered himself to him according to his Majesty's
Proclamation, and that he had put him into the custody of the Sergeant at Arms,
till the pleasure of the House was further known; whereupon the Hou^e approved
of it, and ordered him still to remain in custody.

The Question being put whether Major General Butler should be one of the
twenty to be excepted out of the Act of Indemnity and Oblivioe, etc. it was
carried in the negative.

Resolved, that John Blackwell, late Treasurer of War, be one of the twenty to
be excepted out of the general Act of pardon and Oblivion, to suffer such
pains, penalties, and forfeitures, not extending to life, as shall be inflicted
on him by an Act hereafter to be made to that purpose.

Saturday 16. At the House of Lords.
The Lord Purbeck was this day brought to the Bar of the House by the Black
Rod, who has him still in custody.

At the House of Commons.
Resolved, That his Majesty be humbly moved to call in Milion's two books, and
John Goodwins, and order them to be burnt by the common hangman.

That the Attorney General do proceed against them by Indictment, or otherwise.

Mr. Speaker informed the House that Alderman Tichbourn, Colonel George
Fleetwood, and Colonel Temple, three of the Judges of his late Majesty, had
rendered themselves to him, and that he had put them into the custody of the
Sergeant at arms, till the pleasure of the House was further known, whereupon
the House approved of their commitment, and ordered them still to remain in
custody.

The House resumed the debate of the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, and read
the Petition of Frances, wife of John Lambers, whereupon they ordered, etc.

That Colonel John Lambers be one of the twenty to be excepted out of the
general Act of Pardon and Oblivion, to suffer such pain:, penalties, and
forfeitures, not extending to life, as shall be inflicted on him by an Act
hereafter to be made to that purpose.

The Question being put, whether Alderman Christopher Pack should be of the
twenty to be excepted, etc. It was ordered, That Alderman Christopher Pack be
one of the twenty to be excepted out of the general Act of Pardon.

The like O^der was made concerning Sergeant Ri. Keeble, that he be one of the
twenty, etc.

Whitehall, Friday 1^.
His Majesty set forth a Proclamation for recalling all Commissions at Sea
granted out by his Majesty, or his Royal Brother, the Duke of York, before the
first of May last, willing and commanding every of them to forb^^r further
execution of the said Commissione, upon pain of such punishments as may legally
be inflicted on pirates; and likewise requiring all his Subjects employed in
Sea affairs by any foreign Prince, to repair home to his Majesty's service.

The same day the heads of the University of Oxford, with several Doctors in
Scarlet, and many Masters of At, were conducted by the Earl of Southampton
(who by reason of the indisposition of health of the Marquess of Hertford their
Chancellor, did that civility for them) and the Burgesses serving in Parliament
for the University to his Majesty, where Doctor Conaught the Vice Chancellor
made a speech to his Majesty, after which they had all the honor to kiss his
Majesty's hand.

This day also the Town of Kingston upon Hull, who as they have not yielded to
any in expressing and solemniz^ng among themselves in the best manner their joy
upon the several occasions of the happy Return, and the proclaiming of his
Majesty, so for a further demonstration of their loyalty, duty, and affection
to his Majesty, did this day by the hand of their Members in Parliament, and
some others, persons of Quality in that place, who had the honor to be
introduced by his Excellency, present to his Majesty their humble address, in
congratulation of that gracious providence by which his Majesty has been
restored to his people; and therewith they ^endered also under the Seal of
their Corporation, a Release of certain Fee-farms there, which being in these
times exposed to (...) ^hey had redeemed out of other hands for twelve hundred
pounds, and now joyfully restored them to his Majesty, both which were by his
Majesty graciously received, and with particular expressions of favor to the
said Town.

On Saturday the 16. his sacred Majesty accompanied by his two Royal Brothers,
the Duke of York, and Duke of Gloucester, as also several of the N^bility and
Gentry was pleased to sup with the Lord Mayor of London at his house. Before
supper the Lord Mayor brought to his Majesty a napkin dipped in Rose Water, and
off^^ed it kneeling, with which when his Majesty had wiped his hands, he sat
down at a Table (...) by an ascent, the Duke of York on his right hand, and the
Duke of Gloucester on his left; they were served with three several courses, at
each course the Table-cloth was shifted, and at every dish which his Majesty,
or the Dukes tasted, the napkin. A^ another table in the same room sat bare
(...) Excellency the Lord G^nera, the Duke of Buckingham, the Marquess of
Ormond, the Earl of Oxford, Earl of Norwich* Earl of Saint Albans Lord De la
VVare, Lord San^s, Lord Bercley, and several other of the Nobility, with
Knights and Gent^e^^n of great quality Sir John Robins^n, A (...) of London
began in health to his Majesty, which was pledged by (...) Table standing. His
Majesty was all the while entertained with variety of music, and one that
represented a Country man, with whom his Majesty seemed to be w^ll pleased. His
Majesty con^^^red the honor of Knighthood on Alderman John Lawrence, and Mr.
^utler, two loyal Citizens, the two first that his Majesty bestowed the honor
on in the City of London; on the (...), as a memorial of his particular favor,
he was pleased to bestow his own Sword.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Thomas Newcomb, 1660.


