THE Infancy of the Soul: OR, The Soul of an Infant. A Subject never yet
treated of by any. Which shows the infusion thereof whiles that the Infant
rests in the Womb: The time when, with the manner how. Gathered from the
boosome of Truth; Begun in Love, and finished in the desire to posit others.
The Contents are in the next Page following.

Ciprian. tractatu. con Deem. Qui ad malum inotus est mendatio fallentes
Multo magis ad bonum mouebitur veritate cogente.
WILLIAM HILL.

Imprinted at (...) W. W. for C. Knight, and are to be (...) in Paul's
Churchyard at (...) the Holy Lamb. 1605.

The Contents of this Book.
1 The Excellency of Man's Nature. 2 The order how the Auntients confuted
Heretics. 3 The Dogma of Poets touching the Soul. 4 The inference by
collection from them. 5 The opinion of Philosophers. 6 The inference by
collection from them. 7 The Consent of Physicians. 8 The Collection. 9 The
Doctrine of the Fathers. 10 The ground of the Cannon Law. 11 The inference from
the Doctors and Law. 12 The Doctrine of the Scriptures. 13 The inference from
it. 14 Two Objections drawn from Gods omnipotency are answered. 15 Shows
that Children borne still, ought to be buried in Christian burial, with the
authority of Ceremonies.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND MY ESPECIAL FRIEND M. ROBERT BARKER Esquier:
Towneclarke of the ancient liberty of Co^lchester in Essex, and Serieant at
the Law: prosperity and peace.
MAECENAS favoring Lerning, was in high esteem with Honorable personages then
living; but remains aeternized by the memorable monumentes of men of virtuous
qualities now dead: So as this honor after so many hundreds of years, being
proper then unto him self; remains now common unto all those whose minds
are inclined unto Learning; or unto the patronage of her professors. Which
honor, least you should loose (deserving so well from me and my impouerished
Father) I prostrate this my Infant unto your Patronage. It is the only
recompense of poor Scholars to follow their friends with honest
Commendations: the which your just desert claymes from me; and which my duty
promises in humility to put in practice for you, that after your death, the
title of Honored Maecenas, may be engraven upon Brass or Marble over your
Tomb. Accept this favorably; so shall your respective countenance both
encourage and enable me to some greater performaunce.

Your devoted Orator, William Hill.

TO THE ENVIOVS OR CVRTEOVS READER SVCH HEALTH as they desire unto others.
PERSIVS the Pagan wrote, Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire (...). Augustine
the Christian wrote, Qu^ se negat scire, quod sit ingratus est. And least I
should incur this last ^anger by being silent, having had the knowledge of a
new error; the which might like a Farcie infect the whole body: I have for the
instruction of the simple, and destruction of the simple arrogant, put forth
this Treatise; following rather the counsel of wise Sirach, who wills us
not to keep back Counsel when it may do good: which being neglected, might
happily cause the Author to publish into the ears of his brainsicke hearers,
more follies: whose flatteries consenting thereunto, might work in his head an
excellent maisterie to the confusion of Concord, and the overthrow of Verity;
which it may be, his mind aims at, though his mean parts cannot purchase it.
It is a world to see the secret practices and subtle inventions that the
Ignorant follow to atchiue applause unto their prating. As first, to please
the appetite of the hearer not respecting the cause. Secondly, to invent new
errors, rather then to admit of the simple truth. Thirdly, to run over a
thing negligently, eschewing whatsoever is Philosophical. Their Custom
inuerteth all things: their Error destroveth all things: and Negligence
curses such m^n. If the Discipline of Philosophers were used amongst us, he
should be crowned for a Fool, expulsed from the College of judicial minds,
and suffer those corrections as best befit his invented follies. But to prevent
such their further idle and witless inventions, though not with so great
applause as Samson unto the Israelites, for burning the 'Philistines Corn: yet
with as great zeal in defense of Gods truth and his Church, have I blown
this Fierbrand, to burn and consume the Darnell and Cockle which the Envious
man has sown, whiles the ouer-weeried Labourer took his rest. The truth of
the cause shall defend me from the different censures of the envious; and my
loving affections unto my native house, procure in the minds of the good, such
lyking, as that beginning to read, they will defer their judgment vutill
they come to the end: And then, either subscribe unto the truth, or else
confute that with better reason, which I have with great probability and
consent of Judgments, concluded. So I leave this Treatise to the Readers, and
them to the direction and protection of the God of truth.

William Hill.

THOMAS CHITHAMVS LONDINENSIS LVDIMAGISTER: In Authoris Librique Laudem.
THe banckes of Hellicon where Muses dwell,
Afforde not stuff with this to be compared.
Truth in her Cullers here does far excel
Gross errors Newcome-in. So has it fared
Continually: For Truth shall sit aloft,
When Ignorance shall with disgrace be scoft.
The Alps and Pyrene Mountains are but low,
In lie'w of this well seated flagrant HILL.
Hence nowrishment for Conscience fast does flow:
Never thirsting liquor does this Lymbecke still.
HILL, for thy pains, if each man yield thy due,
They can not choose but say thou have spoken true.
Philosophers, Physicians, Poets eake,
With great Ichouah (Reader) thou shall find,
By way of Apologue hereof to speak:
All these in Truths defense are strong combin'de:
Then yield to Truth; (for Truth applaud does gain)
At leastwise, thank the Author for his pain.
Thomas Chitham.

THE INFANCY OF THE SOVLE: OR, THE SOVLE OF AN INFANT.
The Excellency of Man's nature. SECTIO PRIMA.
MAN, the best of Gods creatures, for whose sake the World was made, under
whose supreme government all things (in the same Created) are subjected,
though through sin committed by him the first day of his birth, his dignity
was mightily impeached; yet was he not utterly thereof deprived; but (as with
the Supersedias of mortality) his worth was abreuiated: Yet remaining entirely
such a one, upon whom God would bestow many blessings; and from whom he would
detract no favor that might either further his Dignity, exalt his Majesty,
or continue his former Supremacy. But as in the beginning all things were for
Man, (yet not so fully as after his fall); So still, and unto the end, he does
and will bring such things to pass, as that (above all creatures) Man shall be
under him, sole and supreme King and commander, not only to serve, obey, and
sacrifice; but bind, let loose; to reteyne, and set at liberty; to kill and
eat; and to do all things that either the wit or will of man thinks meet,
convenient, or necessary. But this goodly fabricature of God (as well as the
Fabricator himself) undergoes many boisterous storms: yet like unto a strong
Fort built upon a firm Rock undergoes all, and is not overcome, by any
assault whatsoever; whether it be of storm, of tempest, wave or wind (always
environed) yet in the greatest perrils is most safe; in the deapth of
distress, in least danger: and where there is no suspicion of relief, and no
hope of refuge, then is he especially protected, and (by him whose power is
manifested most in weakness) most strongly defended. This excellent work of
Gods hand, has had his nakedness (which by reason of Nature deserves some
excuse) too much discovered. Some utterly (with open mouth) condemning the
same, as most loathsome; not weighing the cause, or considering the nature
thereof. Others (though not so grossly, yet as ignorantly) have imagined (or
rather enforced) arguments (of subtle persuasions) to induce the ignorant to
think them selves (in their estates) to be far inferior unto the brute
beasts of the field: And not so only, but worse. Tully the Prince of the
Academicks, was possessed with this persuasion, and therefore does he exclayme
against Nature, tearming her a Stepmother, for bringing us into this world
naked, frail, and weak. But his words weigh lighter then the wind: and in
this ought his authority no more to be regarded, then the blaze of a Maeteor,
which by the motion or the wind (in the upper Region of the air) is
dissolved; and in the dissolution vanishes: For that the same Tully (with all
his adherents, and all other contemners of God and Nature, in his glorious
work of Creation and Generation of Man) is not only confuted by a more
indifferent censurer of Nature and her works. Lact. intius in his book De
Opificio Dei; and that which they have made for them, unto the worser: He in
the true consideration proportioneth the thing with the desert; and then in the
comparatiue respects of both contraries, contemns the Fathers of these
conceits, as men injurious unto Nature; and gives unto both parties their due:
That is, unto Beasts, and their defendants, beastlynesse; and unto Men, and
their defendors, worthiness. This Man (which not without good respect) was of
the best Philosophers, called a Little World; for that there is nothing in the
Great world contained, but that either externally in his body; or internally in
his mind, there is to be found either the same, or a similitude. I speak not
here of this inferior Orb, the Earth only, but of both: comprehending
(under these two words Great World) whatsoever is in Heaven or Eearth. If we
respect the beauty of the Earth (outwardly) in her best prime; what is she in
this comparison, unto the face of Man? If inwardly her Mines, and all things
therein contained; what is there, but that there is some similitude of the same
in the bowels and inward parts of Man? If we respect either the swift motion,
or long continuance of the Heavens; what is this unto the imagination of Man,
which is swifter then the swiftest wind? Or, unto the Mind of man? which in
continuance is immortal. If you look unto the Sun, and other Planets which
receive their light from it; and of this desire a similitude in man; Man has
in the forepart of his head two Eyes, which give light unto his whole body: And
in this is the work of God as much maunder, not only to serve, obey, and
sacrifice; but bind, let loose; to reteyne, and set at liberty; to kill and
eat; and to do all things that either the wit or will of man thinks meet,
convenient, or necessary. But this goodly fabricature of God (as well as the
Fabricator himself) undergoes many boisterous storms: yet like unto a strong
Fort built upon a firm Rock undergoes all, and is not overcome, by any
assault whatsoever; whether it be of storm, of tempest, wave or wind (always
environed) yet in the greatest perrils is most safe; in the deapth of
distress, in least danger: and where there is no suspicion of relief, and no
hope of refuge, then is he especially protected, and (by him whose power is
manifested most in weakness) most strongly defended. This excellent work of
Gods hand, has had his nakedness (which by reason of Nature deserves some
excuse) too much discovered. Some utterly (with open mouth) condemning the
same, as most loathsome; not weighing the cause, or considering the nature
thereof. Others (though not so grossly, yet as ignorantly) have imagined (or
rather enforced) arguments (of subtle persuasions) to induce the ignorant to
think them selves (in their estates) to be far inferior unto the brute
beasts of the field: And not so only, but worse. Tully the Prince of the
Academicks, was possessed with this persuasion, and therefore does he exclayme
against Nature, tearming her a Stepmother, for bringing us into this world
naked, frail, and weak. But his words weigh lighter then the wind: and in
this ought his authority no more to be regarded, then the blaze of a Maeteor,
which by the motion of the wind (in the upper Region of the air) is
dissolved; and in the dissolution vanishes: For that the same Tully (with all
his adherents, and all other contemners of God and Nature, in his glorious
work of Creation and Generation of Man) is not only confused by a more
indifferent censurer of Nature and her works. Lactantius in his book De
Opificio Dei; and that which they have made for them, unto the worser: He in
the true consideration proportioneth the thing with the desert; and then in the
comparatiue respects of both contraries, contemns the Fathers of these
conceits, as men injurious unto Nature; and gives unto both parties their due:
That is, unto Beasts, and their defendants, beastly nesse; and unto Men, and
their defendors, worthiness. This Man (which not without good respect) was of
the best Philosophers, called a Little World; for that there is nothing in the
Great world contained, but that either externally in his body; or internally in
his mind, there is to be found either the same, or a similitude. I speak not
here of this inferior Orb, the Earth only, but of both: comprehending
(under these two words Great World) whatsoever is in Heaven or Eearth. If we
respect the beauty of the Earth (outwardly) in her best prime; what is she in
this comparison, unto the face of Man? If inwardly her Mines, and all things
therein contained; what is there, but that there is some similitude of the same
in the bowels and inward parts of Man? If we respect either the swift motion,
or long continuance of the Heavens; what is this unto the imagination of Man,
which is swifter then the swiftest wind? Or, unto the Mind of man? which in
continuance is immortal. If you look unto the Sun, and other Planets which
receive their light from it; and of this desire a similitude in man; Man has
in the forepart of his head two Eyes, which give light unto his whole body: And
in this is the work of God as much minifested, as the other. Yea the due
considerations of these small Creatures, have brought the wisest Aegiptians of
the earth into the deepest amazements of Gods power. For the Philosopher was
more confounded in considering the small body of the Fly, with her parts, then
he was by the view of the body of the great Elephant with his members. If this
high and mighty Monarch of the earth Man, had no better similitudes then this;
to be compared with the Heavens and Earth, yet could not the adversaries of his
estate (in the right respect) so exclayme; for that the thing it self is not
so loathsome as the cause thereof; which has turned our glory into shame; and
has caused our best estate to be our chifest reproach. But when we ascend, in
due comparison of our inward part the Soul, unto God the Creator of all: one
that is not circumscribed, (that is the Centure of every circumference;) and
yet not limited or bound unto any place: and find in this principal part of
Man, a princely similitude, and perfect image of the aeternall Trinity;
evermore to be adored and worshipped in the Unity: not of the person, or
trinity of the Godhead, but in the unity of the Godhead, and trinity of the
persons. It being a created substance invisible, bodilesse, and immortal,
most like unto God; having the image of his creator: being a substance capable
of reason; apprehending all things created, but not filled therewith: for
whatsoever is less then God, cannot fill it, because it is capable of God: the
original of which is not to be sought for, in the earth; having in it self
nothing that is either mixed or concrete; or what may seem to be made or
fashioned of the earth: nothing moist, nothing ayrie, nor fiery: for there is
nothing in these natures which may have the force of memory, understanding, or
imagination; which remembers things past, foreseeth things to come, and
apprehends things present. Which things are only divine; neither can it be
found from whence it should proceed, but from God. So that then the being of
the soul, there is nothing more certain then the beginning, (unto those men
which speak not by the sudden motion) as if they were begirt with the
inspiration of the holy Ghost at all instants) nothing in the hidden secrets of
nature, with more facility may be discovered: Of the which we are bound to
speak nothing but reverently; and of the which all but A thiests are persuaded
to the immortality. Of the being or substance of the soul (in which point
some have grossly erred) imagining it to be a body, but as sincerely by the
wise rejected; nor yet of the immortality, which not only reason affirms,
but experience proves) I do not intend to discourse; but only of this part,
where the soul is infused into the body, and this will I prove to be done,
before the infant comes out of his mothers womb. Which one of reverend place
(but of small parts, and as light regard) affirmed not long since, not to be
in the child until it did draw breath from the air. Unto this will I limit
the time when: confuting his error by the consent and judgments of Poets,
Philosophers, Physicians, and approve what I affirm not only by them, but
also by the Fathers of the Church, by the laws Cannon, by reason, and
Scripture. Then concluding, show my further mind in performing the ceremonial
funeral of an infant which never drew breath.

SECTIO. 2.
THE order I use herein condemn not, for it is the praise of Pliny not to have
read any thing, but thereof to have made some use: who was wont to say, Nullum
librum tam malum esse, vt non aliqua ex part prodesset; that there was no
Book so bad, but that he did from some part receive profit: Nor no opinion,
which he did not either reform, or bring out of frame. But rather request you
with S. Hierome: Vt sobrie legantur; vt eorum authoritas non preiudicet
rationi. That you read them with discretion; least for want thereof, some
seems contrary unto reason: In the which, you are to use the same industry
that the Laborer does, who working amongst Thorns, escheweth the Pricks. We
be like Bees, and suck our sweetest Honney from those Flowers, from the which
the Spider draws her strongest poison. We be like the best Warriers,
wounding our Adversaries with their own weapons. Prophana legimus, Sacrisque
intert eximus: We read profane works; but disrobing them of their hew, we
mix them with holy things, whereby they become with the holy things holy.
Origin the great, confuted the Arch-heriticke Clesus; and with his own poison
which he sucked from the boosome of Philosophy, did he give him his bane. In
like sort did Iustine Martyr and Ireneus choke Valentinian Martion like the
first begotten son of the Devil. And the wicked Scholar of the wicked
Schoole-maister C^rdo, had his throat cut with the same knife, with the which
he had thought to have slaughtered the Christians, by that great and obscure
Clarke Tertullian. And that which Libanius did think to make the ruin of
Christianity, that honney-mouthed Chrisostom made the downfall of Libanius.
The good Orator Prudentius by Oratorie overthrew the great Orator Sunnachus.
And the Apostles themselves did reprove the errors and lies of the Gentiles,
by the authority of the Gentiles: And by those means did they couple many to
be embracers of the truth, which otherwise would not only have rejected it,
but also persecuted it; and have been as obstinate as the Papists in their
professions. But to cut off the error of the Ignorant, which despises these
things, I say as the holy Father Hierome once said: Ama Scientiam; et carnis
vitia non amabis: Love Knowledge, and thou shall hate the sin of the flesh:
Not reject the body, nor despise thy soul, for the sin thereof; but wilt
seek to correct the faults of the one, and to amend the errors of the other;
and in the end, subscribe unto the truth, howsoever it be delivered unto thee;
and to embrace the same, for the truths sake.

The Proofs of the Poets. SECTIO. 3.
LVcretius the Epicure, who according unto that sect, placed Felicity in
Voluptuousness (an enemy unto the Author of the Soul) with the Atheist: And
a confounder of the Immortality, with the Saducie; In his third Book De
natura rerum, says,

Praeterea gigni pariter cum Corpore et vna,
Crescere sentimus pariterque Senescere mentem.
Furthermore, we perceive the Soul to be begotten together with the body, and
in like sort with the body to grow old. For as the body through age does grow
weak: So,

Claudicat ingenium, Doelirat linguaque Mensque
Omnia Deficiunt: atque vno tempore Desunt.
The wit does wax feeble: both tongue and understanding doat. All things do
fail, and in one time are not: The which he explayneth according to his gross
meaning, when a little further he says:

Quapropter fateare necesse est, quae fuit ante
Interijsse et quae nunc est nunc esse creatam.
Wherefore it is necessary to confess that to have perished, which was
before; and that to be now created with the body (that is the Soul) which is
at this time. But Iuuenall in a better regard distinguishes the worth of our
estates (when in his 15. Satyr) from beasts, he says:

Sensum a Celesti Demissum traximus arce,
Cuius egent prona, et terram spectantia: mundi
Principio indulsit communis conditor; illis
Tantum animas; nobis quoque animum.
We have drawn Sense, descending from a heavenly Tower; of which, Creatures
whose faces be downward, and looking upon the earth, do stand in want. The
common Creator of the world in the beginning, gave unto them only a Soul by
which they should live: But unto us a Soul to live, and by which we be
reasonable, and of understanding. Claudian, De quarto consulatu Augusti, under
the fixion of Prometheus, acckowlegeth the Author, and the Immortality.

Illa cum corpore lapso,
Interijt, haec sola manet bustoque superstes euolat:
That Soul by which we grow and increase, and by which we with the Beasts
have sense, dies with the body: but that by which we understand, (suruiuing
the other) does ascend from the grave. But Boethius in his 6. Meter 3. Book
like a Christian, acknowledging God to be the Father of all things, and sole
Creator of every thing: Says,

Hic clausit membris animos,
Cella sede petitos.
This Father has included our Souls in our bodies, being fetched from a very
high seat. Meaning thereby Heaven: For as the Body is from the Earth, so is
the Soul from Heaven.

The Inference. SECTIO. 4.
THVS by the mouths of these four witnesses, though the one an Epicure; and
like a Beast, deceived in the diminishing of the substance of the Soul; and
like a Dog, abandoning the immortality thereof, being ignorant of the
beginning of it; for that in the first verse he imagines it to be begotten and
produced with the Seed; in the last, confesses it to be Created: yet (with
me) he subscribeth unto a truth, (though not in the same manner,) that the
Soul is in the Infant in the Womb of the mother. The mortallitie whereof he
proves two ways: First, by the deminishing of the substance of the Soul:
Secondly, by the increasing of the qualities. But Tertullian, (though with him
deceived in the Conception of the Soul) yet confuteth he the deminishing, or
increasing of the substaunces: Saying, that it is not to be thought (Animam
Substantia crescere aut Decrescere, atque ita Defectura credatur;) That the
Soul does either increase or diminish in substance, least thereby it shoule
be thought to die. But for the diminishing of the quallities or increase
thereof, it is of no more force to prove the mortallitie, then when we have
found a Mass of Silver or Gold; and the same (being fined) becomes less;
should by the deminishing of the quantity, deny the substance. But Iuuenall
being better instructed by Nature, acknowledging God to be the infuser and
creator of the Soul, denies the conception, and affirms the same to be in
our bodies: but being ignorant of this secret (when infused) by the comparison
of the souls of Beasts and Men, grants us the principallitie. Claudian, he
affirms that the body could not be a work of moment, nor half so honorable
as it is, unless being made a man by uniting the soul; nor the body be at
all, without this life: and Boethius truly, that God placed the Soul in the
body. By which I gather, that as there being an instrument prepared to receive
any thing; that instrument cannot be called Continens; an instrument containing
sine contento, without the thing contained. So God cannot be said to shut the
Soul in the body before the body be perfected in his members, and so enclosed
indeed. Now reason shows us, that it is a body in the womb, and the womb
the prison in which the Soul is imprisoned. And that body is the receptacle of
the Soul which is not begotten with Lucretius; but given from above with
Iuuenall: and with Claudian, united unto the body; not when it is brought out
or delivered from the womb, (at which instant it draws breath) but long
before; which is manifest by the Collections which I have from the
Philosophers, both profane and Christian: who though they differ in the first
time, yet they all agree in the being of the Soul of the Infant, before such
time as it is borne into the world.

The Proofs of the Philosophers. SECTO. 5.
PLATO (for his godly sayings surnamed the Divine Philosopher) with his
followers, affirm the Soul to be more ancient then the Body, for that it
made aboade in Heaven in the company of God, until such time as Nature
indewed the same with these instruments of the Body. But Aristotle flatly
denying the aeternitie of the Soul, (whether of set purpose, or no, to cross
his Master in all things) says; that it has a beginning, but can not tell
where, nor from whence; yet flatly denies it to be produced from the Parents,
and says that it is the first moouer of the Body. By which it is evident, that
a Body is capable of the Soul in the womb. Unto this I add Pererius,
Magirus, Hauenrenterus, Scaliger, and Cordane, which in their several Books of
Nature, and misterics of Nature, affirm and agree, that there restes in the
Body of man one Soul; and that same they term Reasonable: and affirm it to
be the original of whatsoever we do or effect. Plat^o may not be excused;
neither do I hold him blameless for the proposition of the Souls aeterniti^,
the rather for that Santius Porta affirms him to have read the five Books of
Moses, and to have heard the Prophet Esaias, and to have conferred with him
concerning the Creation of the World and Man: Though he did force the same very
often, thereby to prove the same immortal: The which if he had not granted,
could not (as he thought) have proved it to be but mortal: for it is the
ordinary axiom both of Plato and Pliny, that whatsoever had a beginning,
should have an end: unto which Pliny did subscribe, and therefore denies the
immortality of the Soul, because Man's beginning is his breath, and end his
death: yet does he by the words being without beginning, Pli. His. na. lib. 1.
cap. 1.
approve the immortal continuance of the same.

The Inference. SECTIO. 6.
FFom Platos aeternitie (though it be false) and from Aristotle his first act
and moouer, or perfection, I gather that the Soul reasonable is in the Infant,
being in the mothers womb: for nothing can live without the thing from which
it receives life: Nothing can be, without that from which it receaueth his
being: nothing can move, without a moouer: nothing can be fully formed,
without forma. But the Soul is the first moouer, the first act; it is the
life of the Body, and it is forma hominis, the form of Man. But all these are
most certainly in the Infant being in the womb: For these being the proper
actions of life, and the Soul being the cause of it; it cannot be but that the
Soul should be in the Infant. For that action is not so common as true Anima
dat esse Hominem, It is the Soul that gives power to be a Man, and not the
Body: for he is not a Man or Woman, before the Soul be united unto the Body:
And the Body cannot be called after either sex, if it be once deprived of the
Soul; but rather a Body or Carcass.

Plato might have found in the Book of Genesis, that God first made the body
of Adam of the Earth (I had rather for the understanding of the mystery, said
Instrumentalized the Body of Adam) before he Created the Soul. The which being
perfected in the necessary proportion of the members, God immediately creates
the Soul, of nothing; and does breath into his face the breath of life: the
which self same thing does still continue; save that now, it is Man that
begets the Body; and in the last disposing thereof, God creates the Soul; and
in the creation infuseth it into the Infant, whereby it is truly called a Man,
or Woman.

The Proofs of Physicians. SECTIO. 7.
NExt in order does follow the Physicians, which cannot be truly called so,
without the knowledge of Philosophy. They having occasion to treat of the
procreation and generation of Man, can not rightly speak thereof unless they
likewise treat of the Soul, and the powers thereof. And first, to begin with
Galen, (whom all his followers do reverence as the perfecter of their broken
Art) He wondering to see so marvelous a frame as the Body of Man, the number
of his seu^rall parts, the seating, figure, and use of every one; (...) to
conclude, that it was impossible that the vegitable Soul, not the temperature,
could fashion a workmanship so singular. Yet for all this, could he not
persuade himself, but that the reasonable Soul was corruptible and not
immortal. For he seeing (often times by experience) that it is altered so
easily by heat, by cold, by moisture, and by drougth; and principally
considering that the same departes from the Body by overmuch heat; or when a
man gives himself excessiuely to Lasciviousness, or drinks Poison, and
such other bodily alterations, which bereave the life. For if it were bodilesse
and spiritual (as Plato taught him) heat being a quality, could not make the
same to loose his powers, nor set his operations in such a garboyle. These
reasons brought Galen into a confusion: and though he had knowledge of the
Evangelical doctrine, could not receive it. Yet for all that doubted not to
say, that it was in the body of an Infant; for that it could not well work
without it: utterly depriving the Soul vigitable, or sensitive, of any power
in so glorious a frame.

Hipocrates (as Scaliger reports) held that the Soul was sorged of Water and
Air. How he means, I as yet understand not, by reason he breaks off in the
rehearsal of his opinion: yet I am enforced to think, that Hipocrates indged
the Soul to be an Ayerie substance: For that Bartholomeus in his Book of
Natural things, says: that the Soul (taken as the ancient Physicians did)
is a certain Substance subtle and ayerie; that by strength of heat
multiplying in man's body; and by the Arteries, Veins, and Pulses, gives to
Beasts breath, life, and working; and voluntary moving and strength. By the
means of Sinews and Muscles in Bodies that have Souls, it is engendered by
heat, working in the blood, and by turning unto the Heart, and by moving and
smyting the parts of the Heart, the Spirit is made more pure; and is turned
into a more subtle kind; and is called of the Physicians, Spiritus vitalis
vitale; or, Lively faculty. And by the working in the Liver, it is called
Spiritus naturalis, Natural faculty. And working in the Head, it is Spiritus
animalis, Animal faculty. But we must not think this Spirit to be man's
reasonable Soul, but to be more truly the Chair and vpholder of the same, and
proper instrument: For by the nature of such a Spirit, the Soul is joined to
the Body: and without the service of such a Spirit, the Soul cannot exercise
any act perfectly in the Body: And therefore if the Spirits be deminished or
let in any work, the accord of the Soul and Body is resolved, and the
reasonable Soul hindered from her works in the Body. As for example: In Men
that be amazed; if the Spirit be comforted, the Soul is comforted: If one
infeebled, they be both, touching the ruling of the Body. But to add unto
these, Men of more understanding.

Fornelius no less praised then praise worthy: In his 7. Book and 13. Chapter
De Procreatione, says: That the Soul created by the most excellent Creator of
all things, does enter into, inhabit, and abide, in the whole prepared and
ordered body of the Infant, even in the moment of time; and that is, in the
fourth Month: in which time, the Heart and Brain are finished. From whence
John Rieslanus his Commentator dissenteth not, yet more deuinely: If in the
fourtith day, or in the fourth month, or in the last formation, it cannot, nor
may not be defined by a mortal creature, for they are the hidden secrets of
Gods wisdom: the knowledge whereof, the God of Gods has not imparted to the
inferior Gods. Also Luodnicus Bonnaccolus in his Eneas muliebris 4. Cha. says:
That the body is in 47. days fashioned or fully figured: days notwithstanding
be added, and subtracted: But then at that instant, Anima rationalis a sublimi
Deo creatur; creataque infanditur: the reasonable Soul is created of the high
God, and is infused into the Body. And adding further, says: Etfi cum corpore
non desinint, cum corpore saltem incipiunt: Although they die not with the
body, yet have they their beginning with the Body. Ambrosius Pareus in his 10.
Cha. De generatione Hominis, denying the traducing of the soul from our
Parents, or of others from Adam. Says Credendum est in ipso articulo,
conformati foetus: adeo creari; et in foetum in funai: It is to be believed,
that the soul is created by God in the very article of time, in which the
Young one is framed; and to be infused into the Child. Creando infunditur, et
infundendo creatur: In the Creating it is infused; and in the infusion it is
created. So that it is Tota in toto, et tota in qualibet part, not divided
into parts, but that it is a perfect Soul in the whole Body, and yet whole in
every part: and yet does it not show forth all her powers, either our
original sin in which we be borne; or for our natural weakness. In his 11.
Chapter, he says: That it is a perfection which moves it self in us: the
first moving of our natural faculties, the true form of Man; and that it is
united unto the Body, because it gives life.

Wickerus likewise in his Sintaxes 91. Page, says: That the Soul is a
certain Divine substance, incorporall, beautiful, simple, impassible, and
immortal; infused into man's body: and is seperable by the dissolution and
death of the body, without which, Man cannot be perfect. This reasonable Soul
at first generation of Man, is plunged and infused Multo humore a quo vires
offenduntur, calligantur et obtenibrantur: with much moisture, from the which
the powers be hurt, blinded, and made dark; no otherwise then the clear flame
is dimmed by the moystnesse of much green wood. By which it happens that
Infants seem to be void of reason at the first birth. But those humors in
time deminishing, and the Body being made more dry, it shows further power.
This caused one to say, That if the Seed, and Menstruall blood, which be the
two material principles of which we be fashioned, were cold and dry, as they
be hot and moist, that Children should be able for to reason.

SECTIO. 8.
BY the authority of these, I have showed the Soul to be in the Infant while
that it is in the Mothers womb: Neither may the difference of the time of the
infusion be any may me unto this proposition: for they all agree in this; That
it is in the Body before it is brought forth the womb: The only difference
is, the instant When it should be infused: which one conceales as a mystery
belonging to the hidden secrets of God.

Adding one thing very necessary out of Wickerus: De Secretis: Cap. 5. That
neither our Souls, nor the Souls of our Parents, were before their Bodies.
Neither did their Bodies live or move without the Soul. I come unto the
Fathers of our Faith, and defendors of our Religion.

The Proofs of the Fathers. SECTIO. 9.
LActantius an utter enemy unto Athiesme and Epicurisme, in his 19. Chap. of
his little Book De opificio Dei, In which he preserreth the weak birth of
Man, with his nakedness, before the strength of Beasts with their clothinges:
treating of the Soul, says. That a Body may be borne of bodies, because some
thing is conferred from both: But, De animis anima non potest: that a Soul
cannot bring forth a Soul, because nothing can separate a thing that is
thin and incomprehensible: And therefore our Souls are not traduced from our
Fathers, but are from one and the self same Father, God of all. But in his 17.
Chap. he shows the Creation and infusion, and says flatly, that Anima non
est aer ore conceptus, quia multo prius gignitur anima, quam concipi aer ore
possit: The Soul is not the air or breath received at the mouth, for that the
Soul is created a long time before breath can be drawn in at the mouth:
neither is it put into the Body after the breath, Sed post conceptum protinus,
forthwith after the conception, when Nature (which in that place he calls
Necessitatem Deuinam) has framed the Child in the womb. Therefore was the
Soul falsely called of the Gentiles Spiritus; for that by their opinion it was
wind and breath: for that we by drawing wind and air at the mouth, do seem
to live. But this is false; for that the Body receaueth not life from the
breath, which has his original o^ seat in the Lunges, but from the Soul
which is whole, not by parts dispersed into the whole body: for it lives being
in the Mothers womb. It is called Soul, for that it gives life. It is called
Spirit, because it bath in it spiritual, animal, and kindly life; and for
that it makes the body for to breath.

Anima and Animus, are both one in substance and nature, though they differ in
name by supposed quallities: Anima leads by Reason: Animus by Counsel. It
is called Anima, while it gives life; Men's while it has a Mind: Animus while
it has Counsel: Ratio, while it judges: Spiritus, while it breaths:
Sensus, while it feels: Et ista non differunt in substantia, quemadmodum in
nominibus: quoniam omnia ista vna anima est: And these differ, not in
substance as they differ in name, because all these is but one Soul; as
Augustine affirms in his Book De Spiritu et anima. Cap. 24.

Lactantius in his 17. Chap. De opificio Dei, says: That Ratio et natura
animi, percipi non potest: The reason and nature of the Soul cannot be
understood. For in deed, the Soul of man, (above all Creatures) does most
perfectly represent the image of God; whose immortal and infinite being, is
as incomprehensible as himself; and so unsearchable, as that his wisdom and
understanding, makes the wisdom of man foolishness and plain dotage: Yet
has he made himself familiar with us in our own nature, flesh, and
infirmity (sin only excepted) and has openly revealed him self unto us,
so far as the nature of man can endure.

He is said to be muisible: and in this does our Soul represent in us his
image: For what man has at any time seen the Soul of man? Certainly it
cannot be seen or felt: and yet it is in the whole Body, and in every part
thereof; which gives life unto one member, and so unto all.

Tertullian, dreaming (in his Book De Resurrectione carnis) of a certain
corpulencie of the Soul, having a certain proper kind of substance and
massiuenesse, did thereby prove (as himself thinks) sufficiently, in his
Book De anima, the traducing of the Soul from the seed of our Parents;
affirming that as Euah received from Adam her flesh and bones, so likewise that
she received her Soul from Adams. But to banish Tertullian with his error,
(as he was most gross in what he erred) and to embrace him with his truth (as
in what he wrote truly, he wrote most deuinely.) Adam when as he saw that God
had given him a follow, imparted unto her as well his nature as name; and said:
This is flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bones; she shall be called Woman,
because she was taken out of Man. He being taught by God, knew well that she
had no part nor portion of his Soul: for if she had, he would have said: that
this is bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, and Soul of my Soul, But leaving
the last, he teaches us, that the Soul is not a natural substance begotten
by the effusion of Seed, (as Tertullian imagines) but a subaunce which at
that instant when the Body is fully framed, is created of nothing; and at that
instant infused into the Body. But to excuse Tertullian by his reasons: as they
be sharp to condemn him in all things; for that he did contradict the
Scriptures sometime, I esteem it a great folly, But so to esteem of him, as
an excellent scourge of Heresy, and confuter of Hereuques. In Christian
charity I acknowledge thus much; that Nemo omnibus horis sapit: especially in
those of affliction: which duly considered in him, being learned, and broken
by the tyranny of Rome, shall redound unto his praise; and make us more wise in
our own follies.

But to make some use of Tertullians anima, that with us affirms both the
resurrection of the Soul and Body; and has excellently confuted the Stoics
and Epicures in denying the immortallitie, in his Book De anima. Chap. de
conceptu animae; rejecting the corporalitie of the Soul, and traducement: you
shale find matter of great moment, sharp wit, and sufficient proof, both by
the experience of the Mothers, and reason of our selves, That the Infants in
their wombes have life. If life, of necessity Souls; for it is the life it
self: Nay not any other strange or contrary liveliness then their own
Mothers, but the same life with them hi motus gaudia vestra, speaking unto
their Mothers, and such as be Childbearing women, says: These motions be your
joys, and these be your manifest security, that so thou may believe the
Infant to live and play. The places of Scripture I refer unto their proper
places: and desire the Reader, that can with Aesops Cock find a Pearl; or
with Virgill make any golden use of Aennius dounge, to peruse that Chap. and
Book: In which they shall find Thorns that will prick; and sweet Flowers,
which have a most fragrant sent.

Anselmus upon the Corinthians says: That it is united unto the body, and
gives life unto it in the Mothers womb; and that without it, it cannot live,
being brought forth.

Chrysostom in his Book De Recuperatione lapsi, says: Non anima pro corpore,
sed corpus pro anima: nec corpus in anima, sed anima in corpore sita est: That
the Soul was not made for the Body, but the Body for the Soul: neither is the
Body placed in the Soul, but the Soul is placed in the Body. So that a man
may say, that the Body is a Circumference of the Souls substance; which is
infused (says he) into the Body before the breath, yet brought out of the
womb with the Body: not dying with the Body, but (the Body being deprived
thereof) reuertens aut glorificabitur aut in perpeticum apud inferos
cruciabitur: returning unto him that gave it; it shall be either glorified, or
else for ever and ever in Hell be tormented.

Sactius Porta, the imitator of the Sarbonistes, in his second Sermon Feria. 2.
Pentecostes. part. 2. says: That Anima in homine est forma dans totam or
dinem esse perfecti: Datenim viuere et moueri: The Soul in man is the form
giving the whole order of being perfect; for it gives power to move and to
live.

Zanchius in his most divine work of the Soul, says: That God in the
beginning Created the Body of Man: Now the Body is generated by the combination
of Man and Woman: But yet the creation of the Soul does continue as in the
first; and is infused (immediately from God the Creator thereof, without any
help of the nature of Father or Mother) into the Body, whenas the members are
fully finished, while the Child is in the Mothers belly.

Brentius with the rest affirm the reasonable Soul to be in Children in the
Womb: For (says he) else neither Jeremy nor John Bapiist, could have been
fanctified in the same: for there is no sanctification or making holy, but
after sin: For that which is sanctified, is holy unto God and us, by
imputation of righteousness unto that which before was sinful: Now there can
neither be sin, nor yet holiness, without a subject: And I say the Soul is
the subject of both, and after a second meaning is the Body also.

Children (say the Sorbonistes) could not be conceived and brought forth in
sin, unless before the birth of the Child the Soul were in the Infant.

And therefore John Chappius, a well nurtured bird of that ill favored
brood, in his explanation of Raymundus summus, says, (not denying the being
of the Soul, for why then should he with the rest of that rowt, that
attribute so much to inward grace unto the outward elelement, affirm? that
if any part of the Child appears out of the Womb, and some other part
remain in the same; yet that it ought to be baptized: yea if the part so
appearing be but the hand, or heel (in case that the woman be in danger of
death, and by hers the child:) And with such asseueration does he affirm it,
as that in no case to be any more Baptized: adding his reason, he says: That
because Baptizme is for the Soul, and not the Body: and the Soul is Tota in
toto, et toto in qualibet part Corporis.

And Raymundus himself says: Si puer egreditur matris ventrem moriturus.

Et nequeat nasci totus pars quae patet extra,
Si caput est ter aqua perfundatur velut astruos.
Imagining (with the grosse-heads their fellow brethren) that without Baptism,
they could not be saved. So depriving God (whose hand is most plentious in
giving salvation) of all grace, and power: and attributing so much grace unto
the dumb ellement, as that Delet omne peccatum, it abollisheth all sin: Why
then, be Children deprived of the full fruition of God?

But this is my faith and belief, That Infants in the Womb, which die in the
birth, shall rise in the last day, and be partakers either of life or death: be
either in Heaven or Hell. I acknowledge not any third or fourth place: but the
blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, to be the one and sole Purgation of the
sins both of our Soul and Body.

SECTO. 10.
GRatian in his second part of the Decree Consta. 2. quest. Capit. 5.
consuluisti: to prove him a Murderer that slays a Child of one days age;
forms an argument, A minore ad maius. Si ille qui conceptum in vtero per
abortum deleuerit homicidia est quanto magis: If he be a Homicyde that kills
a Child in the Womb by abortion (which he grants,) how much more he that
kills such a Child? The gloss upon the same place acknowledges not only
him to be a Homicide, but also Qui procurat venena sterilitatis.

But Stephanus in the latter end of Consuluisti, (allotting punishment unto
another kind of offense) says: Homocida dicatur qui conceptum in vtero
deliuerit: He must be called a Homicide, that kills a Child in the Mothers
womb, whether it be by blow or potion: for the foundation or ground of the Law
is this: That if the Soul be infused, and an Abortiue caused; then there is
murder committed: But if the Soul be not infused, then the Law will not
grant such Abortions to appertain unto Homicide: Nec deput auit tale quod
geretur in vi^ro hominem: Neither has it judged such a thing as is borne in
the belly to be a Man: For Lexnoluit adhomicidium pertinere, quod nondum
dicipotest anima viua, in eo corpore quod sensu caret: For the Law will not
have that belong unto Murder, which cannot be said to be alyuing Soul in that
Body which lacks sense.

Decreti pars. 2. causa. 32. quest. 5. Capite quod vero: and in the immediate
Chapter; following Moses, he proves by the authority of Moses, That if the
Body be fully framed, then the Soul is infused. And by the creation of Adam;
whose Body was first framed and distinguished by members, and immediately the
Soul infused; which he affirms in the generation of Man still to continue:
the Body being fully formed, the Soul to be created; and in the creation
infused.

Calvin with the rest affirm, That if a man strike a woman with Child, and
the Child die, or be borne dead; that is Murder or Homicide: which surely
cannot be enacted without the deprivation of life: nor no deprivation of life,
without the reasonable Soul; for it is the Soul that gives life.

The Interpretors of the Books of Moses, divide Murder into two parts: The
one is Homicidium; and that is present death, among the Jews: The other is,
Infanticidium, The murder of an Infant: For this, were they not put to death
until the cause were tried before the Judge, and adjudged by the Magistrate;
who having found the Infant so to be killed, before perfect in all his members,
without which there was no loss; for the loss or deprivation of which, by his
blow, he was likewise to pay his life: so that had it not been fully formed and
fashioned in the members and parts of the Body, he that did so strike the
Woman, should redeem his life with a portion of Money: But if otherwise, he
should be condemned unto death, and no satisfaction to be taken for the life of
the Babe, but the death of the murderer.

And by this reason of rendering life for life, S. Augustine proves the
being of the Soul in the Body of the Babe before it be borne, or brought
forth into the world.

SECTIO. 11. The Inference.
THus it is made most manifest by the assent of the best Writers, which do
meet in one, with the ground of the Cannon Law; and approved by the arguments
of Sanctification and Resurrection, that the Soul is in the Infant being in
the Mothers womb, before he be brought forth into the world.

But if any bace bredd Brownist, or untimely Puritan, should scorn these
authorities, affirming them the blasts of pride; and that the Scripture had
been sufficient. To such I say: Pharisees, first pull out the Beam in your
own eyes. And as I found the Scripture unable to satisfy the copious
capacity of the Author, being of the blantnesse of the rest of that Crewes
understanding, being as unable to understand, as Scholars well lettered, are
to teach them. But to seal these Authorities with the signet of Gods own
mouth; I leave them still to kick against pricks, and come to the Sriptures.

SECTIO. 12. The Proofs of Scripture.
MOSES in Exodus 21. Chap. 22. and. 23. verse. sets down a Law, upon which
all the former consents are grounded.

Job in his 3. Chap. 11. verse, expostulating his cause with God, says: Why
dyed I not in the birth? or why dyed I not when I came out of the Womb? See
here is Life before Death: and that cannot be without the Soul reasonable.

Job in his 10. Chap. and 10. verse, speaking of his Generation and Conception,
says: Have not thou powered me out as Milk, and turned me out as Cheese?
Thou have clothed me with skin, and joined me together with bones. Thou
have given me life: Animasti. Iunius annot. 13.

Job. 32. 4. The spirit of the Lord has made me: and the breath of the
Almighty has given me life.

Psalm 139. 14, 15, 16, verses: In which Verses, the whole work of Gods
proceedinges are set down.

Luke 1. 13. Thy wife Elizabeth shall bear a son, and thou shall call his
name John.

Luke 1. 41. The Babe sprang in the womb.

Luke 1. 44. The Babe sprang in the womb for joy.

Genesis 25. 22. But the Children strove together within her: Therefore she
said, Why am I thus?

Verse 26. And after came his Brother out, and his hand held Esau by the heel.

Gensis 38. 28. But when the time was come that she should be delivered, behold
there were Twins in the Womb.

Verse 29. He plucked his hand back again, and lo, his Brother came out
first.

1. Cor. 15. 25 The first man Adam, was made a living Soul.

SECTIO. 13. The Inference.
THus by God his strict commandment in repaying of Murder: and by Iobes
expostulating, it is manifest, that Babes have life in their Mothers womb; but
no life without the Soul: which is showed by the description of the
Conception, and Generation; and of the infusion of the Soul. Thou have clothed
me: that is, Thou have framed me in the Womb. Thou have given me life; that
is: A Soul.

More plainly does he express the infusion of the Soul, by the breathing of
the Almighty. Chap. 32. 4.

David likewise shows the mystery or secret of our Conception: and by his
words of continuance of time, he declares that the reasonable Soul is not
infused so soon as the Seed of man is efused; neither in the commixion of the
Seed with the Menstruall blood; but when the body is in every part and member
fashioned: which being added unto Jobs saying, Thou have clothed me with
Skin, and joined me together with Bones and Sinews; is then so evident, as
that no darkness can appear in this light.

By the motion of the Child in Elizabeth's womb, my proposition is most plain,
the evidence most certain; for that Elizabeth acknowledges her Babe to have
done it for joy.

Affections; such as Mirth, Sorrow, Joy, Coffeehouse, Gladness, and
Lamentation, cannot be said to be in a body, which has not a reasonable Soul.

And I may truly say: That as he was sanctified in the womb, according unto
the word of the Angel; so likewise being a reasonable Man, had (by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost) some perceauance of Mary's Salutation; or rather
that her mouth uttered forth his Prophecy: for she spoke not before he
sprang: Exultat Elizabeth, Johannes intus impulerat: Glorificat Dominum Mariae:
Christus intus instruxerat: Elizabeth reioyseth, but John inwardly inforceth.
Marie does glorify the Lord; but Christ (being in her) did inspire her. And
therefore does Theophilactus the Breuiarie of Chrysostom say: That what socuer
Elizabeth spoke prophettically, not to be the words of Elizabeth, but the
words of the Infant: and he that showed the people the Messtas with his
finger, in the world; does reverence him; they both being in their Mothers
womb.

But if any shall say, This is extraordinary: Then let them look back and
behold Esau and Jacob: whose mother with the pain she endured with them being
in her womb, does not only acknowledge them to live, but before they are
borne, to be at strife one with another; and there to war for the supremacy.
Puto iam non animae solummodo probantur infantium, sed et pugna: I think
(says Tertullian in his Book De Anima) the Souls of Infantes are not only
proved, but also their conflictes. So that we may not only grant unto
Children in the womb reasonable Souls, but likewise affections of gladness
and sorrow, peace and strife; which is further declared in the birth of Pharez
and Zarah: For Zarah at first appeared, and because the Midwife would know the
one from the other, tied a redd Thread about his hand; turns back his hand,
and Pharez is first borne.

But Paul explayneth all this, when he says, not the first man Adam was made
a living Tree, Beast, or Stone; but a Mau, that received life from the Soul.
The creation of whom, is plainly declared Genesis 2. where Moses says: That God
made Man of the dust of the ground: Yet mark, He is not a Man, before he is
made; but is called Dust: nor perfectly made, before he had a Soul: And
therefore is God said, to breath into his face the breath of life: and then he
is made a living Soul.

Iunius in his 20. Annot. says, That by the power of the aeternall Spirit,
without any elementall matter, he did breath into the elementall Body, that
lively Soul, which is the simple form of Man; that she might use the same
Body as an instrument.

In the first Creation, God having finished the Body, like a good Architect,
accomplisheth his work in glory, in making it living, by breathing into it
the living Soul. But now observe this difference, in the Generation of man
now; and the Creation of man then: In the Generation now, the Body does
increase in the womb, and grows perfect by the power it receives from the
life of the Parent: and being perfected, has the Soul in the very article of
time infused into the Body: and then by the power thereof, it increases daily
until it may show forth the brightness thereof. But in the Creation, the
Body was only perfected in members, formed in shape, or instrumentalized a
Body of perfect stature before the infusion of the Soul; and increased not
after it had received it; but was able immediately to reason, understand, and
know the will of God: which Infants that be borne cannot do: First, by reason
of the sin of Adam: then by reason of the natural moystnesse, which drowneth
the understanding part; the which in time, being by little and little dried
up, attayneth unto the full measure of understanding and knowledge: Thirdly,
because we are not borne such able men, as Adam was created; but in time
gathering our forces, we become strong; and with our strength, our
understanding increases. As in the Creation Adam was not called Man, until he
was fully framed, and had his Soul infused: So likewise the Angel, and Moses,
calls not that which Elizaheth, Rebecca, and Thamar, bare in their wombes; a
thing without form, or shape: but a Son, a Babe, a Boy, Children, and
Brother. Now I give you further to understand, that those three which are
called Souls, are indeed not truly so called; but ought rather to be termed
Virtues, or Powers of life.

The first virtue is Vegitable; and that gives life, and no feeling: and this
power is in Plants and Roots. The second, is Sencible: and that gives life
and feeling, but not reason: and that is in beasts. The third is Rational,
and that in my judgment ought to be so termed, only for that it gives life,
feeling, understanding, and reason; and that is in men only.

The virtue Sensible that gives feeling, is a certain ayerie substance, more
subtle and more noble then the virtue Vegitatiue, that gives life; and less
noble then the Soul reasonable, that gives Reason.

The beginning and the working of the power Sensible, is dependant of the Body
that it is in; and makes it perfect: and therefore when the Body dies, the
being or working thereof dies also with the vegitatiue: But whiles they be in
a Body, they have noble virtues and powers: as in Plants to grow and increase:
in Beasts to grow, increase, and defend them selves from storms. But the
Soul Rational, that neither begins with the Body, nor dies with it, which
though it has his beginning after, yet not from the Body, nor ends with it;
but suruiuing, is immediately possessed either with pleasure or pain: And in the
last day, returning unto her own Body; they both together for ever remain
inseparable, either in the one, or other.

Now it restes that I answer unto his similie, which came blustering from his
weak brain like a Northern wind: and so I will with few words close up this
Treatise.

SECTIO. 14.
Objection.
GOD is a Work-maister, and may destroy the Body; or cause it to return to
dust: and like a Carpenter that buyldeth a house, pull it down when he has
built it again: yea when it is fully finished.

Answer.
This Simile holding: the which if it did, yet Similes prove nothing in
Logic: The reason; because there is a greater dissimile, then Simile, in GOD
and Man: The one is impotent, unable to do any thing by him self. God is
omnipotent, able to do all things of himself, without the help of any; yea
of nothing.

Man is said to be impotent, because he is weak, unsteadfast, and as unconstant
as his buildinges; which often times are overthrown more unwillingly then
willingly. Be the Buildinges never so strong, one blast of wind will overthrow
it: and one stroke of Death proves Man's strength more vain then vanity it
self.

But God is said to be Omnipotent, not for that he buyldeth and pulls down,
but because he can do all things; and being once done, cannot destroy them
again; which in him would rather be noate of Impotencie, then Omnipotency.
Look Tertullian contra Praxeam: Ambroso. lib. 6. Epistolarum. Epi. 37. ad
Chromatium. Augustine De Ciuitate Dei. lib. 5. Cap. 10. and you shall see what
God can do, and how far he differs from Man: and what his Omnipotency is,
he himself being unable to do any thing that imployeth contrarieties.

Answer. 2.
GOD cannot build and pull down, as Man may. Sibilla Eritherea (as I have
seen it translated) says: That

God can do all things, save only this;
To undo that, that once done is.
The reason why he cannot do and undo, is; because he is not mutable in his
actions: who if he were, then he should be subject unto passionate affections,
and so in the end prove Mortal, and no better workmaister then miserable
Man: But to think this is idle, abominable, blasphemous. O GOD deliver us
from such similies of Puritans.

SECTIO. 15.
NOw the Burial of the Child that is borne still into the world. The Papists
allot unto them, and also unto Children that die unbaptized, a place to be
buried, and the burial. But this admyred man would hardly allow a place: but
not all the ordinary Ceremony, because he doubts of the resurrection.

O rare invention, fit for innovation, a wise man of a thousand, In ordine
Sapientum octanum: Ignorant in the works of nature; yet a Controwler of
natures government: not resolved of the generation of man, yet an underminer
of Gods Church.

The Resolution upon the Burial.
THe general consent of a Commonwealth, in the orderly burying of Infants
borne dead, ought rather to be followed; then upon a doubt in a perverse
ignorance, to break that universe concord which is offensive; and sufficiat
authoritas Ecclesiae, nec nouationem aliam aut hic aut alibi queramus quae
desidia matter esse solet: says Beatus Rhenanus. For the fashion of the world
is wonderfully, and naturally inclined to embrace whatsoever is contrary unto
order, decency, or Religion. It is better to be praised with Doctor
Whittakers, to be a follower of the old continued Doctrine, then to be a
founder and brother of new fancies: Et melius est errare cum vniuerso, quam
haereticare cum vno: It is better to err with all, then to be an heritike
with one: says Saint Augustine. Errare possum; haereticare nolo: And I say
with Erasmus in his (...) malo cum illis insanire, quam cum lanii^ esse
Sobrius: I had rather be esteemed, or in decde stark mad with these holy
men; then to be counted sober and wise with such slaughtor men: which butcher
the souls of more men with their false Doctrines; then the greatest Kill-Cow
that is, may or can kill beasts. Certe non obsunt populo ceremoniae, Sed
prosunt, Siniodus in eis Seruetur: et caueamus ne (...) loco habeantur. Surely
says Beatus Rhenanus, Ceremonies are not hurtful but profitable, if there
be any measure observed in them; and if we be careful not to place in them
the chiefest godliness

As Saint Jerome therefore wrote unto Lucinius, so write I unto all such
hayre-braynes, that think nothing good, but their own inventions: Ego illud
te breuiter admonendum puto traditiones Ecclesiasticos presertim quae fidei non
officiant ita obseruandas vt a maioribus traditae sunt nec aliorum
consurtudinem aliorum contrario more subuerti: If I knew, or were assured,
says Seneca: Deos ignoscituros, and homines ignorituros adhuc propter peccati
villitatem peccare dedignarem: That GOD would pardon me, and men forget my
disloyalty: yet would I not work wickedness, for the lothsomenesse of
wickedness: but do well, for the excellency of goodness.

For to deny the execution of any Act established, before a simple multitude,
is privately to undermine an old State; and publicly to build a new.

Then Innovation there is nothing more dangerous to a Commonwealth: Sed ad
hanc insaniam venimus belligerantur hodie non modo prophani sed and
Ecclesiastici: The woeful experience of our State in ancient times still
witness the ancient ruins both of Towns and houses. The remembrance of
whose beauty in one, and virtue in the other, do oftentimes distill tears
from the eyes of their inhabitants.

So concluding with my prayers for every Christians peace, and increase of
knowledge, I commit this to your censures: comprehending the sum of the whole
work in these few Verses, very ancient.

Tres in lacte Dies, tres sunt in sanguine trini
Bisseni carnem, terseni membra figurant,
Post quadraginta dies, vitam capit hic animamque.
And your censures with your selves, to the God of peace.
FINIS.

