Numb* 101. An Exact Account, COMMUNICATING The chief Transactions of the Three
Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland. With the daily Votes and Resolves in
both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Also Particular ADVICE from the OFFICE of
INTELLIGENCE. Published by AUTHORITY. From Friday June 15. to Friday June 22.
1660.
Friday, 15 June. At the House of Commons.
THe House ordered that two Bills should be brought in, the one for the
continuance of the Customs, and the other for the continuance of the Excise.

Mr. Speaker informs the House that Isaac Pennington, late Lord Mayor and
Alderman of the City of London, one of those who sat as Judge upon his late
Majesty in the pretended High Court of Justice, according to his Majesty's late
Proclamation had rendered himself into his custody, and that he had committed
him nto the hands of the Sergeant at Arms attending the House, the which was
approved of by the House.

There appearing nothing as was alleged against Colonel White, he was cleared
by the Houses and the Gentleman released which was ^mprisonment concerning him.

The House read the Petition of Mrs. Penruddock wife of Mr. Penruddock, who was
put to death in the West.

They also assumed the Debate upon the residue of the Persons to be excepted
out of the Act for General Pardon: and

Resolved, That Captain Blackwell be one of the Twenty to be excepted out of
the General Act of Pardon and Oblivion, to suffer such pains, penalties and
forfeitures as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed.

The House had a long Debate concerning Col. Butler one of the late Protectors
Major Generals, and it being put to the Question, whether he should be one of
the Twenty persons to be excepted out of the Act for General Pardon* it was
carried in the Negative.

The H^use adjourned the further Debate thereof until to morrow eight of the
clock in the morning.

Saturday, 16. June, at the House of Commons.
Mr. Speaker acquaints the House that Alderman Tichbourne, Coll. George
Fleetwood and John Temple had rendered themselves into his custody according to
his Majesty's late Proclamation, and that he had Committed them to the Serjant
at Arms attending the House, which was approved off.

The House Resolved, that his Majesty be desired by his Proclamation to call in
all such scandalous Books as the Parliament should nominate, as some which are
written by Mr. John Goodwin and John Milton, and ordered that those Books be
burnt by the hand of the Hangman, and that the Authors be taken into safe
Custody.

Ordered, that all Woods which are cut down or have been felled since the 25.
of April, on any of the Kings or Queens Lands with such other Woods or timber
so cut, which are not really sold be seized upon.

The House being informed that one Cheney had secured some Goods belonging unto
Colonel Downs.

Ordered, that Cheney be taken into safe custody, and those Goods belonging to
Coll. Downs be taken out of his possession, and that a Committee do examine
matter of fact herein, and Report their opinion to the House.

They also assumed the Debate upon the twenty persons to be excepted out of the
Act for General Pardon, and

Resolved, that Colonel John Lambert be excepted out of the Act of General
Pardon, and to suffer such pains, penalties and forfeitures as shall be
specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed.

The like Resolves passed touching Alderman Pack* Mr. Keeble the Elder, after
which the House were in Debate concerning Sir Roberts, whether he should be
excepted out of the Act for General Pardon, which being put to the Question
passed in the Negative.

This week the Earl of Manchester Lord Chamberline of his Majesty's House,
received his Commission to be High Steward of West-Minster.

Monday, 18 June. At the House of Commons
The House read the humble Petition of Sir Henry Mildmay Knight, des^^^ing by
reason of his indisposition of body the favor of the House to remain in the
custody of the Sergeant at Arms, the which the House ordered according to his
desire.

The House read the Bill for naturalizing Peter and John Lapeen, alias Petees,
and received a gracious Letter from his Majesty for expediting the Act for
General Pordon and Oblivion, as the only thing to settle and compose the minds
of persons touching the late troubles.

The House Ordered a Committee to consider of all persons who are in the
Hospitals of the Savoy and Ely House, and who are ^itting to be removed from
thence into other places in the Country, and to report their opinion to the
House.

A report was made concerning the Examination of one Hulet, now in the Tower,
upon suspicion of committing that execrable murder on his late Majesty, that he
himself did give such doubtful answers unto such questions which were asked
him, that caused him to be the more suspected, besides a Gentleman was ready to
testify upon Oath that he heard him say he was the person that did commit it.

An information was likewise given into the House concerning Hugh Peter's, that
formerly when he came over from Ireland, and lay dangerously sick at Plymouth,
did confess in that his sickness, that he and Oliver Cromwell, when the said
Cromwell went from the Parliament unto the Army in 1648. in a field on this
side Ware, none being present besides, did then contrive and design the Death
of his late Majesty with the change of the Government.

The House assumed the debate upon the twenty persons to be excepted out of the
Act for General Pardon, besides those who sat and gave Sentence of death upon
his late Majesty, not extending to life, but to suffer such pains, penalties
and forfeitures as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed:
and

Resolved, That Charles Fleetwood late Lieutenant General be one of those who
are so excepted: the like Resolve passed touching Colonel Pine, Capt. Dean,
Major Creed, Mr. Philip Nigh, Mr. John Goodwin, and Col. Cobbet, so that the
names of the twenty persons as abovesaid are as follows, William Lenthall
Esquire, late Speaker. Sir Henry Vane. William Burton, Bailiff of Yarmouth.
Major Creed. Charles Fleetwood, late Lieutenant General. Col. John Lambert.
Alderman Pack. Sir Arthur Hesilrig. Col* Syd^^ham. Col. Disbrow. Alderman
Ireton. Col. Axiell. Mr. K^^ble. Capt. Blackwell. Col. Pine. Col. Cobbet. Capt.
Dean. Oliver St. John, late one of the Justices in the Common Pleas. Mr. Philip
Nigh, Ministers. Mr. John Goodwin, Ministers.


The House appointed a Committee to consider of the impropriations late in the
hands of the Trustees for maintenance of Ministers, with power to send for
persons, papers, etc. and to do what is sit to be done in that affair, and
report their opinions to the House.

Mr. Speaker acquaints the House, that Sir John Bourchier, Colonel Owe^ Roe,
Colonel Robert Lilburn, three of thos^ who sat as Judges in the pretended
High Court of Justice, upon his late Majesty, had rendered themselves unto him,
and that he had put them into the Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending
the House, which the House approved of.

Resolved, That William Hulet and Hugh Peter's be excepted out the Act of
General Pardon and Oblivion.

This day Sir Francis Lloyd Knight was sworn and admitted one of the Gentlemen
of his Majesty's privy Chamber in ordinary; and to receive and enjoy all the
rights, privileges and preheminencies belonging to that place, etc.

Tuesday 19. June.
This day his Majesty's gracious Proclamation in pursuance of his former
Declaration and Letters to both Houses of Parliament* and according to the
desire of the House of Commons, wherein they did in behalf of themselves, and
of all the Commons of England, lay hold upon his Majesty's free and general
pardon, as it was granted in his Declaration and Letters (excepting only such
notorious offenders as should be excepted by Parliament) as it is more at large
therein expressed was this day by Order of his Majesty's Privy Council in most
solemn manner by the Herald at Arms, proclaimed in the usual places at
Westminster.

At the House of Commons.
Mr. Speaker acquaints the House that Augustine Garland, Adrian Scroop, Henry
Smith and Col. Edmund Harvey, four of those who sat as Judges in the pretended
High Court of Justice upon his late Majesty, had rendered themselves unto him,
and that he had put them into the Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending
the House, the which the House approved of.

The Lord Montague one of the Generals at Sea and Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter, this day came and took his place in the House; whereupon
the House in consideration of his eminent service in conveying his sacred
Majesty from Holland into England,

Ordered, The hearty thanks of the House to be given unto him, and that he be
desired to give the Thanks of the House unto all the rest of the Officers in
the Navy for their services performed herein. The which Mr. Speaker in an
eloqu^nt Speech performed accordingly.

The House being informed that Colonel John Downs one of them that sat as
Judges in the pretended High Court of Justice upon his late Majesty was taken,
they O^dered the Sergeant at Arms attending the House to take him into safe
Custody.

The House read the Bill for General Pardon and Oblivion, and Committed it to a
Committee with Order that it be brought in to morrow morning.

They also read the Bill for the Continuance of Excise the first time, which
was c^mmitted.

They likewise read the Bill for continuance of the Customs the first time,
which they likewise committed.

They had under consideration the continuance of Tunnage and Poundage, and

Ordered, That a Bill be brought in for the settling of Tunnage and Poundage
according to the Book of Rates upon his Majesty during his life.

The Spanish Merchants delivered a Petition to the House, which was referred to
a Committee to consider of.

A more perfect account of the Address of the University of Oxford to his
Majesty, on Friday June 14.
THe Vice chancellor, Doctors, Proctors and Masters above the number of 120.
all in their formalities came from Darby House, accompanied by the Earl of
Southampton (by reason of the indisposition of their Chancellor the Lord
Marquess of Hertford) to Whitehall, where the Vice Chancellor humbly saluted
his Majesty with a Speech, and presenting a book of Verses upon his happy
Return, found a gracious acceptance, and they had the honor to kiss his
Majesty's hand.

These are to signify, that many of that University are much injured in the
mangling and mis-printing their Verses.

Wednesday 20. June at the House of Commons.
The Speaker acquainted the House that Sir Hardrosse Waller and Sir Henry
Martin, two of those that sat as Judges upon his late Majesty, had rendered
themselves to him, and that he had put them into the custody of the Sergeant at
Arms, which the House approved of.

Likewise he acquainted the House that Col. Dixwell had petitioned him, that
being sick and not able to render himself by the time limited in the
Proclamation, that notwithstanding he might not lose the benefit thereof, and
it was ordered that upon surrendering of himself, he should enjoy the freedom
limited in the Proclamation.

The House received the Report from the Committee of Privileges touching
Elections, and passed several, only the election of W^gon was referred back to
the Committee to examine some particulars newly alleged touching the election.

A Report being made to the House touching several sums of money which are
now to be paid out of the Receipt of the Exchequer unto particular persons, to
which it was thought convenient that a stop should b^ made: the House thereupon

Resolved, That no further p^ym^nts (...) made unto any particular person (...)
Receipt of the Exchequer until the (...) what they are and upon what (...) were
contracted: and that the (...) House of Lords be desired herein.

The Committee appointed to consider of the Queens Joynter, made their Report
that by reason of the sales which have been made of those Lands her Majesty
could no be presently supplied thereby, upon which the House

Ordered, That the sum of twenty thousand pound be given unto her Majesty for
her present supplement: and that it be issued forth of those moneys which come
in by the Ordinance of seventy thousands pounds a month, and that the
concurrence of the Lords be desired thereunto.

The House approved of Doctor Nicholas to be Governor of St Nicholas Hospital
in Bristol.

A Bill for the continuance of the excise, and likewise the Bill for Tonnage
and Poundage was reported, and afterward committed, whereupon the House

Ordered, That the duties of the excise etc. be paid unto the present
Commissioners, and that they do receive the same: which Order is to continue
for one month from the expiration of the present powers, and ordered that the
concurrence of the Lords be desired hereunto, after which the House adjourned
until eight of the clo^k.

His Majesty the last night was nobly entertained by the Earl of Pembroke at
Baynards Castle, where was pr^sent diverse other Persons of Quality.

Thursday 21. June. At the House of Lords.
This day Alderman Fowke with several other Aldermen and Common Council of the
City of London attended their Lordships, who being informed that they were at
the door, Ordered, that they should be called in; who being come unto the Bar,
Alderman Fowke in the names of the rest, acquainted the House that they had
been with his Majesty and his Brothers, the Dukes of York and Gloucester, to
invite them to honor the City of London with their presence at a Dinner on
Thursday, the 5. of July next ensuing; the which his Majesty with his Brothers
were graciously pleased to accept: that they were now commanded to attend their
Lordships in the name of the Lo^d Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council assembled, and to desire that their Lordships would
likewise be pleased to honor the City with their company upon the same day at
Dinner: who being withdrawn, and called in again, Sir Orlando Bridgeman in the
name of the House acquainted them that the House did kindly accept of their
invitation, and should come accordingly.

At the House of Commons.
Mr. Speaker acquaints the House that the Lord Mounson and Lieu. General
Ludlow, two of those who sat as Judges in the late pretended High Court of
Justice upon his Majesty had rendered themselves according to his Majesty's
Proclamation into his custody; and the House being informed that the Lord
Mounson was a prisoner in the Kings Bench upon execution.

Ordered, That he be committed unto the same prison, and that the Marshal of
the prison at all times do see that he be forth coming, Lieutenant General
Ludlow was committed into the hands of the Sergeant at Arms attending the
House.

The Committee of Privileges reports the Election of Scarborough* in which the
House agreed with the Committee, and

Resolved, That Mr. Thomson is duly elected, and ought to attend the service of
the House accordingly, and Ordered the Bailiff of Scarborough to be sent for in
safe custody.

They also Reported the Election of Northampton, in which the House likewise
agreed with the Committee, and

Resolved, That the right of Electing is in the popularity, and that Sr John
Norris is rightly Elected, and Mr Harvy unduly Re^urned, and thereupon ordered
Sr John Norris to attend the House accordingly.

The House read the Bill for Pole Money, and had a long debate thereupon, and
afterward committed it to a a g^and Committee of the whole House.

They being informed that diverse Aldermen were at the Door, they were called
in, being come to the Bar, in the name of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen etc. invited
the House to attend his Majesty with the House of Peers, and to take a Dinner
at Guil^-Hall on Thursday the 5th of July next ensuing, the which the House
kindly accepted of.

The House read the Bill for confirmation of all proceedings at Law, and
committed it, with order that the Committee do bring it in to morrow morning
the first business nothing to entervene.

Yesterday in the afternoon the Lord Pel^^ts Gentleman of the Horse unto his
Electorall Highness of Brandenburgh, and extraordinary Envoy for his said
Highness unto his Royal Majesty, was by the Master of the Ceremonies
conducted unto his audience, where in a most eloquent Oration in the name of
the Duke his Master, he did congratulate his Majesty's happy restoration to
his Kingdoms and Government, who was very kindly received by his Majesty, and
afterward conducted back again.

This evening the Duke of Buckingham at his House, so well known by the name of
VVallingford-House, gave a noble entertainment unto his Royal Majesty, the
Dukes of York and Gloucester, besides several other Peers, which stately
entertainment, besides extraordinary rare Music, was ended with an interlude
to his Majesty's great satisfaction.

This day Thomas Scot, another of the Judges that sat in the pretended High
Court of Justice, and condemned his late Majesty of blessed memory, was brought
to Westminster: He was, as is reported, taken at Gaunt in Flanders, and sent
to Dunkirk.

LONDON, Printed by John Redmayne in Lovell^ Court in Paternoster Row. And are
to be had at the Office of Intelligence. 1660.


