Numb. 32. Mercurius Publicus, COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence:
WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For
Information of the People. Published by Order. From Thursday August 2. to
Thursday August 9. 1660.
Amsterdam, August 2. S. N.
WE have express news here from Genes, that four Hollands ships having
rencountred five Turkish Pirates and engaged them, the Holland Vessels had
gotten the Victory, and taken three of them, on board of which there were ^ound
nine hundred Turks, whom they took prisoners, the other two Vessels were sunk.
We hear that the Bishop of Munster is gone with an Army of 5000. men to lie
down before that City; but in regard this place is very strong, and provided
with all necessaries, it is thought the Bishop will only keep it blocked up
with eight Forts, which he causes to be raised, on each of which he has
planted ten pieces of Cannon.

Toulouse, July 4.
Here is no talk almost but of the great Earthquake which happened the 11. of the
last past, of which it seems this place, Bordeux, Montau^an, Ca^ors, Limages,
Angouleme, and other places farther off, have felt but the back-blow: At
Bayonne it passed over but sl^ghtly, but at Pau it flung down most part of the
chimnies, and at Bagnieres in Bigorre situated on the top of the Pyrenean
Mount, many houses are overthrown, and all those that were within crushed in
pieces: A Mount of an extraordinary great height being opened above, rent
asunder, and became a pit of infinite depth. The Valleys of Crampan about the
said Town of Bagnieres, which of all the Country were most inhabited, have
suffered great hurt, especially the Convent of the Capuchins of Nostre Dame of
Medoux, where some of the Fathers dyed, and others that escaped, are sorted to
hide themselves in some place or other thereabouts. That which is most
remarkable in this accident, is, that those warm Baths which are at Bagnieres,
were by a strong vent of a subterranean fire in such a measure enflamed, that
those who lived thereabouts, were constrined to retire thence. They write from
Rousillon, that Belver and Sea^ d'Urgel, are restored to the Spaniard the 22.
last past, and Roses and Cap de Cuiers the 26.

Whitehal.
His Majesty having June 22. received a congratulatory Letter from the Prince
Elector Palatine, which was brought by that worthy Gentleman Christopher Cl^s
of Keyembergh, Captain of his Highness Life guard of Horse; he had audience,
and was kindly received by His Majesty, who told him he would take care to
render an answer to the Prince Elector Palatine, which was done with such
dispatch, that August 2. he set forward on his journey.

Tho. Sumptner Alderman, and Mr Nicholas Sudell of the Common Council of
Preston in Lancashire, being favored with the company of Sir George Booth, Sir
Robert Binglosse, Sir Ralph Ashton, Sir Gilbert Ireland, and Colonel West,
presented his Majesty a surrender of a Fee-farm Rent purchased by that Town for
the preservation of their Liberties in the late time of distraction. Take their
own words.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most obedient subjects, The Mayor, Bailiffs, and Burgesses
of your Borough and Town of Preston in Amoundernesse in the County Palatine of
Lancaster, do most humbly make this public Representation of our joyful and
thankful acknowledgement of that universal happiness and satisfaction which God
has brought us, in the repossession of the Throne by your most (...) Majesty;
of which happy revolution, as we cannon (...) present administration of the
most eminent (...) of the indubitable and inviolably Sacred Title of your
Majesty, and the comfortable hopes that are bound up therein, o^ future
security and satisfaction to all good men, through that famous prudence, piety,
and sweetness of your most excellent d^sposition, and Royal spirit, so we do in
all humility assure your Majesty, of our unfeigned fidelity and affection to
your Sacred Person, Crown, and Government, from our fealty and allegiance, from
which no powers or pretense shall withdraw us; and for the support whereof in
its full security, splendor, and establishment, we shall freely sacrifice the
dearest things, of liberty, life, and fortune.

We must confess, in those invasions made upon authority in these unhappy
times, which have had so deep a reflection upon all the comforts of your Sacred
Majesty, we find our selves involved, in the procurement thereof, by the
contribution of our particular sins and failings; and therefore do humbly
prostrate our selves before your Royal Grace, as being well assured, that your
people shall not more desirously implore, then your Majesty impart your
Princely pardon, and knows how to consider the necessities and temptations of
the times that we have lived under. We do therefore humbly pray your most
Excellent Majesty to receive this Borough Town and Incorporate Body, into your
Royal Favor and Protection, and to be a support and preservation to such just
Liberties and Privileges as have been granted to them by your Royal
Predecessors of blessed memory, and not to suffer any consideration of such
fatal accidents of War as have fallen out in this place, or any mis-report
thereof, to deprive us of that persuasion of our loyalty in your Majesty's
thoughts, which we shall endeavor to preserve for ever, by the utmost
contribution of our all to the service and devotion of your Crown and
Government. And whereas through the exigency of the late times, your foresaid
subjects were enforced for the preservation of this place from being invaded
upon in those rights granted to us by your Royal Predecessors, to purchase of
those that pretended to have authority to dispose thereof, the Fee-farm Rent of
fifteen pounds per annum due from this Town to your Majesty; We do now in all
humility, freely and cheerfully surrender and resign the same into your
Majesty's hands, with all Title or Right which may any way be claimed or
pretended to the same, humbly beseeching your most Excellent Majesty to accept
thereof, as also of the whole contents of this our most submissive
Congratulation and Address, which as the unanimous cheerful act of each of us,
we have caused to be Sealed with the Common Seal of this Borough, and Signed
by our Mayor, for and in the name of the whole Commonalty, the 13 of July, in
the twelfth year of your Majesty's Reign over England, Scotland, Fran^e and
Ireland.


His Majesty was pleased to accept it with expressions of his affe^t^ons to
that Town, and those Gentlemen that came with them.

Thomas Clifford and Thomas Chaff Esqs; Members of Parliament, accompanied by
Mr Christofer Maynard, and Mr Gilbert Eveleigh Aldermen of the Borough of
Totnes in the County of Devon, presented an Address to his Majesty, with an
hundred pieces of Gold in a Gold-wrought Purse. The Address follows: To the
KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Town and Borough of
Totnes in the County of Devon.
Most gracious Sovereign,
THe rejoicings of our hearts, for the eminent appearing of the hand of God for
your Majesty in such late miraculous revolutions, by overturning and
overturning and overturning, even until he had as it were with his own finger
chalked out a path for your Majesty's happy Restoration to your Fathers
Throne, cannot be confined within our own breasts. We therefore humbly crave
leave to express our Congratulations, to offer the inwardness of our hearts for
your Majesty's concerns* and to profess our ready obedience to your Royal
Scepter.

Though we are of the least among the Tribes, yet will we boast (as we may our
antiquity) our entire Loyalty with the chiefest; of which there was lately a
clear testimony, when this County, within which we are, appeared for and
demanded a Free Parliament (which was also a leading case to the rest of the
Kingdom, and was then the likelyest way for your Majesty to acquire your
Rights, and we our own Privileges) we then were so far engaged as to resist
even unto blood, two of our Inhabitants loosing their lives in the dispute.

And as an Evidence of our still constant and affectionate Fidelity, we
likewise tender by the hands of our Representatives a free and willing
Offering, though but a small one, such another as we presented to your Majesty
when you departed from us in the year 1646. when we could no longer protect
you, but your prevailing enemies (...) you as a Partridge on the mountains. The
general decay of Trade since your Majesty's most unfortunate abscision from us
has disabled us from greater performances at present; but we are now in hope of
enlivening and quickening beams from your Majesty's gracious return, that may
have also influence even on foreign Commerce and Trafique, and cause it again
to flourish, by which we may be empowered more amply to express our affections:
A peace with Spain we suppose will much conduce to the effecting of this.

Pardon we humbly beseech your Majesty our presumption in mentioning these
particulars; we shall forbear all other, and acquiesce with confidence in your
Majesty's pious proceedings and determinations in the settlement both of Church
and State, and that they may tend to the honor of God, your prosperous Reign
here, and everlasting glory hereafter, shall ever be the prayer of

(Sacred SIR) Your most loyal and obedient Subjects.




This being after a short Speech made by Mr Clifford ^ead to his Majesty, he
received it graciously, giving them assurance of his especial care to encourage
foreign Commerce, and vouchsafed them the honor of his hand.

ADVERTISEMENT. To all Ministers, Churchwardens, Constables, Head-b^^o^g^s,
and all other Officers whom it may concern*
WHereas there happened a great loss by fire at the Town of ^^ken^am in the
County of Norffolk upon the Eleventh day of April 1659. to the value of 508^.
l. And upon Petition of the poor Inhabitants to His Majesty, it has pleased
the King with the advice of His Counsel to grant His Gracious Letters Patents
under the Great S^al for a Collection to be made in certain Counties of
England, bearing ^ate at Westminster the Ninth day now of July last past.

Since which time, some idle Vagabonds, and Rogues have stole or gained a Copy,
and have induced some Printer to print the same, and are gone into some parts
of the Counties with those Papers, and have caused, sums to be collected, as
at Putney and (...) nea^ London. Therefore it is desired; That if any person
whatsoever shall come to any place with any such B^ief not having the broad,
Seal, that he or they may be apprehended and carried before a Justice of the
Peace, to answer to his (...) their Offense, no Bail to be taken for them: He
that takes them or any of them shall have Twenty shillings for his pains,
besides what charges he is out, to be paid at the House of Mr Hugh Low at the
White-Hare in Botolph lane near Billingsgate in London. August 6, 1660.

The Reader may be pleased to take notice, that in the preceding News book of
Aug. 6. there was a mistake in line ^. of this Advertisement, viz. July 4. for
July 9.

Since our last, you have this alteration in the Army.

George Duke of Buckingham, is Col. of the Regiment that was Col. Gibbons.
Arthur A^scot Capt. Lieut. Hen. Washington Lieut. Col. Hen. Norwood Maj. John
Gibbons Capt. Edw. Barh^m Capt. Tho. Paulden Capt. (...) Hampden Capt.

With these we will join th^ee other Companies of the same Regiment, which
being constant to his Excellency, and appe^ring with him in Scotland, have not
had the least change, viz.

John Waller Capt. B^rth. Henderson Lieut. William Knight Ensign.

William Richardson Capt. Joseph Cl^^^ Lieut. William Pearson Ensign.

Ios. Horsley Capt. Phineas Grooke Lieut. Well Ensign.

The Letters from Scotland tell us nothing of Import, save only that Capt.
^^ffi^ late Collector of the Shire of Air, is committed Prisoner to Edinburgh
Castle.

Though there has been great industry used for the apprehending of several
persons by the Black Rod, yet they keep themselves so private, that besides
those formerly mentioned, none has yet been taken* but Colonel Croxton.

We have formerly acquainted you, That His Majesty would, not touch any after
the times formerly mentioned for the Evil, till further notice was given; And
now lest any one should put himself to an unnecessary expense in attending that
Cure, we are again* commanded to tell you, That His Majesty will touch no more
till about Michaelmas, of which we shall give you timely Advertisement.

Rotterdam, August 9. S. N.
By Letters from Hamburg it is certified, That the Danes Forces in Holsteyn are
not yet disbanded, nor is there any likelihood thereof, the report going that
they daily entertain more soldiers.

By Letters from Dantzick is confirmed the total Rout of the Muscovian Army
near Grodno by General Czarnecki, where were six or seven thousand slain on the
Muscovian side, and a great number of Prisoners taken, with all their
Ammunition, Bag and Baggage; and that the Tartars and Cossacks have jointly
invaded Muscovia; and also that the Poles have taken Bichow (a very
considerable place) by stratagem.

From Copenhagen we are informed, that the Island of Zealand is not yet wholly
cleared of the Swedes, although our Vice Admiral de Ruyter uses his utmost
endeavors for their Transportation.

From France we are advertised, that their Majesty's the King and young Queen
of France, are not as yet come to Paris, but remain at Fontainbleau, until all
things are fitted for their Reception, which will be most splendid and
magnificent. They make mention likewise of a great Earthquake that happened in
some parts of that Kingdom, which has made a great spoil, slaughter, and
devastation in several places, throwing down of Houses, whereby many were
crushed to death, opening Mountains, and was in some places so extraordinary
violent, that many of the Inhabitants were enforced to wander from their wonted
habitations.

We have a report that four of our ships meeting with five Turkish Pirates,
engaged with them, and after a long dispute, sunk two of them, and took the
other three, with about 900 prisoners.

Advertisements.
A White Spaniel Bitch called Duce) with a red Ear and a red spot on her right
Side, belonging to his Grace the Duke of A^bemarle, was lost last February. He
that shall bring her to any Off^cer of the Army, shall receive five pounds for
his pains. If any Officer shall receive information of her, he is desired to
give notice of it to his Grace at the Cockpit.

A Bay Maire thirteen hand and a half high with four white feet, a blaze over
the face, and a long tail, she was lost from Hide Park on Thursday the first of
this instant August, who ever can bring ^idings of her, to the Chequer-Inn near
Charing Cross, shall have good content for their pains.

TWo white Coach Goldings, stolen from Richard Peacock Esquire on Monday night the
sixth of August, from ^inchley in the County of Middlesex, one of them has a
lop ear on the near side, ^ayl^s down t^ their knees, one seven years old, the
other eight, the youngest horse a little galed on the side of his back. If any
one can give notice to Mr. Grigge a Goldsmith at the Black boy over against St.
Dunstans-church in Fleet Street, shall be well rewarded for their pains.

An Advertisement to all Sheriffs, Just^ces of the Peace, Attorneys,
Sollicitors Clerks, Serjean^s, Bailiffs, etc.
ALl so^ts of Blank bonds, with Conditions for payment of money at a place
certain, and without; Counterbonds for money, and Bonds for performance of
Covenants, for Arbitraments with Umpire and without Umpire; for ^ppearances in
any Court of Record, Counterbonds upon the same, Replevins, and Bonds upon
Replevins, Bailiff^ Bonds to the Sheriffs for their true performance of their
Offices Bills of Sale, Bonds of Redemption, General Rel^a^es, Licenses for Ale
houses. All sorts of warrants upon mean Process, County Court Warrants, etc.
Warrants for Justices of the Peace, Indentures of Apprenticeship. And also the
best and fairest pieces Text, and flourishing for Letters Patents, Fines,
Recoveries, and other Exemplifications. Are to be sold by John Bellinger in
Cliffords-Inn lane, Fleetstreet, London.

And by him is also to be sold, That most incomparable piece of Court-hand,
which (of it self alone, without other Master) is completely fitted to teach
all Clerks, and others, perfectly, and exactly to write the same hand, and to
read ancient Records, and abreviate words.

From Lisbonne, July 18.
As soon as news came to this place from the Ambassador in England De
Francisco De Mello, that his Majesty King Charles the second was safe in his
Palace at Whitehall, in quiet and peaceable possession of his Hereditary
Kingdoms, and welcomed with so great excess of Joy that from all parts the
Nobility, Gentry and Commons, came flocking to Congratulate his Arival and kiss
his hand. His Majesty the King of Portugal presently gave order that the same
night all the great Guns of the Castle of this Town, and of all the Forts and
Castles of this Harbor, should be fired in sign of his joy and contentment,
which was accordingly performed, and at the same time all the Navy-ships and
Merchantmen in the Port, shot all their Canon. All that night the whole City
was adorned with Luminaries. In every window of the Kings Palace two great
torches of white wax, the Ambassadors house was set out in the same fashion,
besides in the streets there were made very many Bonfires, rare artificial
Fireworks and other inventions expressing the alacrity of the Court and people
very much expressed by the Continual noise of Trumpets, Weights, and all sorts
of musical Instruments. The next morning their Majesty's with the Infanta went
forth in solemn manner attended by all the Nobillity and Gentry of the Court
and City, in a rich and splendid equipage to the Church of St Antony of the
Capuchins, and returned to the Palace in the same Pomp, all the bells of the
town ringing the while. By which it is plainly seen with what real joy and
satisfaction the People of this Court and Nation received this welcome news,
whereof I thought good to give you notice. We have also news that some days
since, on the Frontire of Alentejo, our General of Horse Alfonso Turtudo,
meeting with a Brigade of the Enemies Horse nigh Badajox, fought and defeated
them, killed and took 400 of them, amongst the Prisoners there are 4 Captains
of Horse.

The next day Antonia de Souca who lived many years in London resident, and
acted so fervently for the King of England, as the Parliament sent him home,
sent for many of the Chief English Merchants, and gave them a treatment which
cost him 500 Crowns, with the greatest expressions of joy immaginable.

We have hitherto showed you how several Regiments in the Army have been
disposed, we shall now give you some small account of the settling of the
Militia, and at this time only of the County of Somerset, where the Right
honorable the Marquess of Hertford is his Majesty's Lieutenant* as likewise for
the County of Wilts: his Lordship has appointed for his Deputy-Lievtenants for
the County of Somerset, John Lord Paulet Sir John Stawell Sir Henry Berkley Sir
George Horner Sir Tho: Bridges Col. Edmund Windham Edward Philips of Montagne
Esquire Hugh Smith of Long Ashton Esquire William Waldron of Wells Esquire


The Colonels of the Militia for that County, are Sir Maurice Berkley Colonel
of Horse, Sir Hugh Windham is Major of the same Regiment. John Pawlet son of
the Lord Pawlet. George Stawell Son of Sir John Stawell. Colonel Coventry.
Colonel Tho. Piggot. Colonel Sir Francis Windham.


We shall not need to give any character of these Persons, whose merits are as
well known throughout the whole Kingdom, as their own County.

Whitehal.
August 8. 1660. This day Tho: Tompkins and Herbert Perrot Esqs; elected
Burgesses to serve in Parliament, for the Borough of Weebly in the County of
Hereford, having taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, were admitted
into the House of Commons.

This day his Majesty was graciously pleased to confer the Honor of Knighthood
on John Stapeley a Member of Parliament for Lewis in Sussex, a Person that has
given sufficient evidences of his Loyalty, by his early appearing in the
several Engagements that tended to the settling of his Majesty in his Kingdoms.

The same day the Mayors and Bailiffs of his Majesty's Cinque Ports, two
ancient Towns, humbly applied themselves to his Highness the Duke of York, Lord
Chancellor and Warden of the Cinque Ports in this their humble Petition.

To the most Illustrious James Duke of York, Lord High-Admiral of England, Lord
Warden, Chancellor and Admiral of the Cinque ports, two ancient Towns and their
members: The humble Petition of the Mayors, etc.
Shows,
THat next unto that never to be forgotten mercy of restoring your Petitioners
the Breath of their nostrils and Joy of their lives, His Sacred Majesty their
gracious Sovereign, your Petitioners are filled with joy in the sense of their
extraordinary favor which His Majesty has been graciously pleased to confer on
your Petitioners in granting your Highness the office of Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, etc.

Whereby so great a door of hope is opened to your Petitioners, that in their
own thoughts they seem to be in actual possession of their ancient, but of late
infringed Liberties and Privileges, and dare not let a dist^ustful thought
surprise their spirits, but hope that by the interposition of your Highness
with his Majesty (which they humbly pray of your Highness) his Majesty will be
pleased to confirm and renew unto your Petitioners the Charters of the
Cinque-p^rts two ancient Towns and their members, granted, confi^med and
renewed by his Majesty's noble Progenitors; and also that his Majesty will be
graciously pleased to give speedy and effectual relief to your Petitioners in
the several grievances in the Schedule thereunto annexed.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.


His Highness having received their Petition, was pleased to introduce them to
his Majesty, where being come, they presented his Majesty their humble
Congratulation and Address, viz.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Congratulation and Address of your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects,
the Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurates and Commons of your Majesty's Cinque Ports two
ancient Towns, and their members, in Brotherhood and Guestling assembled, 24
July 1660. in the 12. year of your Majesty's most happy reign.
Shows,
THat with all possible gratitude, we do adore the wise and gracious Providence
of Almighty God, in the peaceable restoration of your Sacred Majesty, to the
exercise of your Kingly Government, within all your Majesty's Dominions and
Territories, and as we do upon the bended knees of our hearts, offer up our
sincere thanks to God for the same, so we earnestly implore your Sacred Majesty
to receive this our Address (though but an Evening Obligation in respect of
others (the accustomed time of our Convention not sooner happening) as the
effect of that Duty, Loyalty and Subjection, which we acknowledge by the Laws
of God, Man and Nature, to owe and yield to your Majesty, and we do take the
humble boldness; to assure your Majesty, that in the midst of the greatest
defection from your Majesty's Government, our hearts were never tainted with so
great disloyalty, as by any Address or Application whatsoever, to testify our
Assent to any Government imposed upon us, but faithfully retained (though
forced to lie hidden in their own ashes) those lively sparks of Loyalty, Love
and Affection toward your Majesty, as our only Supreme Sovereign, which by
your Majesty's happy return and presence do enliven all our hearts, and break
forth into flames, never to be extinguished, but to be daily revived and
renewed in our Supplications at the Throne of Grace, for your Majesty's
preservation, and long and happy reign over us, which is, and shall be the
incessant prayer of etc.

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, the Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurats and Commons
of the Cinque Ports, etc.


His Majesty was pleased to receive this Address with many gracious expressions
of his Royal favor and Princely intentions to confirm unto them the ancient
Privileges they enjoyed under his Majesty's Predecessors, with what else might
be desired conducible to common good.

We shall now proceed according to our usual custom, to give you a further
account of the disposing of the Army, looking upon it as a matter of great
import, and that which (as our own experience has taught us) is either the
support or ruin of a Kingdom.

We shall therefore go on with that Regiment of which we told you Thomas Earl
of Ossory was Col. and Tho. Sheffeild Lieut. Col. in whose company Martin
Clifford is Lieut. and Weems Ensign.

Sir James Smith Major, Tho Potter Lieutenant, George Philiskirke Ensign. Rober
Sheffield Capt. James Walworth Lieut. Robert Sheffield Ensign. Henry Crisp
Capt. John Peel Lieut. John Tailor Ensign. John Northcot Captain. James
Halybread Ensign. William Herbert Captain. John Thompson Lieut. Edward Bayley
Ensign. Hampden Capt. Robert Manscrike Lieut. Edmond Sheffield Captain of the
company late Captain Hookers. Dawning Capt. of the company that was Captain
Burrels.
Next we shall acquaint you with the Lord Widderingtons Regiment.

William Lord Widderington Coll. and Governor of Berwick. Tho. Mayer Captain
Lieutenant. Christopher Blont Ensign. John Mayer Lieut, Col. and Deputy
Governor of Berwick. William Mayer Lieutenant. Moses Smith Ensign. Peter
Banaster Major. William Geary Lieut. Adam Edwards Ensign. Jeremiah ^olhurst
Capt. and Governor of Newcastle* Henry West Lieutenant. Matthew Dowling Ensign.
Edward Villers Esquire, Captain and Governor of Tinmouth. (...) Honywood Lieut.
Richard Dobson Ensign. Edward Widderington Esquire Captain. William Bufton
Lieutenant. George Jones Ensign. Jonathan Atkins Esquire Captain. William Woodvile
Lieutenant. (...) Might Ensign William Elmes Captain. Thomas Bradley
Lieutenant. Richard Smith Ensign. William Dike (...) Thomas Lover (...). Hen.
Iackson (...) Christopher Orde Captain. Henry Shell Lieutenant. Aaron Smith
Ensign.
There are besides these, other Regiments in the Army disposed of to such
Persons, who have by their act^ngs and sufferings for his late Majesty of
blessed memory, made such proof of their loyalty and courage, that no doubt can
be made but that by their settlement the Army will be so modelled as may be
most for the service of his Majesty, and the peace and quiet of the Kingdom.
Such are the Right honorable the Earl of Cleveland, and others, of whose
Regiments we shall give you an account in the next.

A Commission under the great seal of England was issued forth, impowering Dr.
Barrow and his Deputy to administ^^ the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance to
the Soldiery in Scotland.

By Letters from Scotland we are informed, that that Kingdom is generally well
satisfied, and express their great joy for the happy restoration of his
Majesty to his people, by whose gracious concessions they are in great hopes to
enjoy their ancient Rights and Privileges in as great measure as ever they had
formerly.

The Letters from Ireland say, that the people there remain in a very quiet and
peaceable posture; That those Persons to whom the management of affairs there
is entrusted, do carry on business with such prudence and moderation, as gives
a check to all spirits; yet that they are in daily expectancy of a Lord
Lieutenant or Lord Deputy.

There is no question but by this time they have heard how His Majesty has
been pleased to appoint the Lord Roberts to execute that great Trust, which
doubtless will give as great satisfaction to the people there, as their
Commissioners here, who look upon that Election as the greatest happiness that
could befall that Kingdom.

London, Printed by John Macock and Tho. Newcomb, 1660.


