Numb. 25. Mercurius Publicus: COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence;
WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For
Information of the People. Published by Order of the Council of State. From
Thursday June 14 to Thursday June 21. 1660.
Naples, May 15. 1660.
DOn Emanuel Caraffa, Field-Marshal-General of the N^apolitan foot, has
mustered his men this week, in order to ship them away upon the Prince of
Montosarchio, being designed for the service against Portugal. In consequence
of the Peace betwixt the two Crowns, our Viceroy has set at liberty all the
French that were prisonere of War in several places of this Kingdom, and has
so favorably used them, that they have reason to be very well satisfied of him.

Rome, May 2^. 1660.
The 15 instant, the Pope came again hither from Castle Gandolphe, and the next
day, being the White-Sunday, he held Chapel at the Quirinal, where the Mass
was sung by the Cardinal Barbarin.

Venice the same date.
By the Letters from our Fleet, we have no confirmation of the reducing of the
Isle of Negroponte, but they say only that Seignior Bembo, the General of
Candia, has sent thither four ships, with some Companies of Soldiers, to
hasten the taking of the same. A great quantity of Biscuit is preparing here for
the forces that are to pass from Provence into Candia for the service of the
Republic.

Vienna the same date.
The Emperor having received the confirmation from his Ministers in Prussia,
of the subscribing of the Treaty of Oliva, has sent advice thereof to all the
Princes of the Empire. He has likewise dispatched two Expresses, the one to
the Grand Seignior, and the other to the Bashaw of Offen, to complain of the
hostilities exercised by the Turks in Hungary, enquire into their design, and
declare unto the said Bashaw, that unless he will speedily draw off his Army,
his Imperial Majesty will endeavor with his own to force him out. In the mean
while, the Turks continuing their devastations in the Country, order has been
sent to the General of the Imperial Forces quartered about Cassubia, to be
ready to march, and in case of need to join with Prince Ragotzky, to whom a
Gentleman has been also sent, to con^ult with him about the means how to make
a stout resistance to those Infidels, and hinder them for the future to make
any irruption into Hungary, whither the 500 horses lately come from Bohemia
have been sent, for the use of the Artillery.

Rome, May 24. 1660.
The Pope is returned hither from Castle Gandolphe in much better health, then
he was gone from hence, yea, and is now better then he has been in a long
time. The French here are very much displeased at the design which he shows to
have to transfer the Chapel which the College of the Cardinals holds every
year in the Church of St. Ives, to that of the Sapience. The Queen of Sweden
has sent already part of her Retinue, and is to follow shortly.

Stetin, May 29. 1660.
The Swedish Commissioners in Prussia having sent advice to the Governor of
Wismar of the conclusion of the Treaty of Oliva, he caused the same to be
published in the said Town, together with the cessation of Arms, which is also
very punctually observed by the Imperialists; and yet General Wurts our
Governor has lately caused much cattle to be carried away by his men out of
the lower Pomerania.

Flensburgh, May 30. 1660.
The Danes do still very much annoy the Town of Tonningen, having yet lately
burned two fire-houses thereabouts, because the Inhabitants had with their
Canon forced two Ships to retire, which General Eberstein had caused to come
near the place to block it the straighter; and unless the Commiss^rie^a^
Gluckstad, where they are still assembled, do speedily agree, it is feared they
will come to greater hostilities.

Lubeck, June 4. 1660.
The 26 of the last, the Governor of Wismat having shipped eight hundred men,
they landed in the Isle of Fameren, which is divided from Holstein by a small
arm of Sea, and having chased some Danish horse, and forced the foot to run to
their forts, they begun to plunder the Travelers; but an Imperialist Captain,
with the Militia he could gather coming upon the Swedes, they retired in such
haste, that they could not secure their booty. It is feared that irruption may
cause some obstruction in the Treaty between Swedeland and Denmark, the
ratification whereof was expected.

Genoa, May 29. 1660.
A ship arrived this week from Lisbone, does confirm the great preparations
that are now making in Portugal against the Spaniards, and that they were
working with great assiduity about the fortifications of the said Lisbone, as
well as of Evora, Villa Viciosa, and other places upon the ^iver Guadiana.

Turin, June 5. 1660.
Their Royal Highnesses have made choice of the Count of ^a Trinite to go and
complement the Duke and the Duchess of Parma, who as we heard from thence
lately, were preparing to go and assist at the Christening of the Duke of
Modena's Son, who was lately present incognito with his brother Prince Almeric,
to all the rejoicing made in the said place of Parma. The forces which our
Prince is to afford to the Republic of Venice, are to go march very suddenly,
expecting only the Commissary that is to come from thence with the necessary
^^rks and provisions; but not above three troops of ho^^e, each of fifty men,
could be made up of the ten that were remaining on foot, the rest having been
disbanded, upon their refusal to serve in Candia, whither they were designed.

Ierpignan the same date.
Yesterday, the Kings Order for the restitution of Boses, Cap de Quieres, Sean
d' Urgel, and Belvore, arrived here. The subjects shall remain in the
Boussillon, where the Bishop of Orange, and Don Michel Salva^, the Spanish
Commissioners are expected, for the regulating of the limits of Cerdagne, and
of the 35 villages that are to remain to the French.

Aix, June 8. 1660.
The third Squadion of ships going to the assistance of the Venetians, is ready
to set forth to Sea, with the rest of the supplies prepared for them, being of
seven or eight hundred men. The Duke of Merco^ur has sent a Gentleman in the
Kings name to Tunis, to demand the liberty of the French slaves there. He took
occasion for that, of favorable conjuncture of our Ships upon the
Mediterranean, who do much alarm the said Tunis, and it is thought that
consideration will induce those Infidels to release them sooner then otherwise
they would have done.

Thursday, June 14 at the House of Lords.
The House this day read several private Petitions, and referred them to a
Committee: They had likewise under their consideration several things belonging
to his Majesty Revenue.

At the House of Commons.
The Petitions of Bulstrode Whitlock, and Sir Robert Reynolds, were this day
read.

The whole Election for the Borough of Wilton in the County of Wilts, upon
report made, was voted void, and new Writs were thereupon ordered to be issued
forth for a new Election there.

Res. That Daniel Axtell be one of the twenty to be excepted out of the general
Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, to suffer such pains, penalties, and
forfeitures, not extending to life, as shall be inflicted on him by an Act
hereafter to be made for that purpose.

Friday 15: At the House of Lords.
This day the Lord Purbeck, by virtue of an Order of this House, was taken into
the custody of the Black Rod.

At the House of Commons.
The House ordered two Bills to be brought in for the continuing of the
Customs and Excise for six months longer, to commence from Midsummer next.

The House upon a former information of certain words pretended to be spoken by
Col. White, in relation to the death of his late Majesty of blessed memory,
referred the same to be examined by a Committee, and the examinations being
this day reported,

It was resolved, that the said Col. White was not in the least guilty of
speaking any such words as were laid to his charge.

Mr. Speaker acquainted the House that Alderman Pennington, one of his late
Majesty's Tryers, had rendered himself to him according to his Majesty's
Proclamation, and that he had put him into the custody of the Sergeant at Arms,
till the pleasure of the House was further known; whereupon the Houie approved
of it, and ordered him still to remain in custody.

The Question being put whether Major General Butler should be one of the
twenty to be excepted out of the Act of Indemnity and Oblivioe, etc. it was
carried in the negative.

Resolved, that John Blackwell, late Treasurer of War, be one of the twenty to
be excepted out of the general Act of pardon and Oblivion, to suffer such
pains, penalties, and forfeitures, not extending to life, as shall be inflicted
on him by an Act hereafter to be made to that purpose.

Saturday 16. At the House of Lords.
The Lord P^rbeck was this day brought to the Bar of the House by the B^k Rod,
who ^r^^h him still in custody.

At the House of Commons.
Resolved, That his Majesty be humbly moved to call in Milton's two books, and
John Goodwins, and order them to be burnt by the common hangman.

That the Attorney General do proceed against them by Indictment, or otherwise.

Mr. Speaker informed the House that Alderman Tichbourn, Colonel George
Fleetwood, and Colonel Temple, three of the Judges of his late Majesty, had
rendered themselves to him, and that he had put them into the custody of the
Sergeant at arms, till the pleasure of the House was further known, whereupon
the House approved of their commitment, and ordered them still to remain in
custody.

The House resumed the debate of the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, and read
the Petition of Frances, wife of John Lambert, whereupon they ordered, etc.

That Colonel John Lambert be one of the twenty to be excepted out of the
gener^l Act of Pardon and Oblivion, to suffer such pains, penalties, and
forfeitures, not extending to life, as shall be inflicted on him by an Act
hereafter to be made to that purpose.

The Question being put, whether Alderman Christopher Pack should be of the
twenty to be excepted, etc. It was ordered, That Alderman Christopher Pack be
one of the twenty to be excepted out of the general Act of Pardon.

The like Order was made concerning Sergeant R^. Keeble, that he be one of the
twenty, etc.

Whitehall, Friday 15.
His Majesty set forth a Proclamation for recalling all Commissions at Sea
granted out by his Majesty, or his Royal Brother, the Duke of York, before the
first of May last, willing and commanding every of them to forbear further
execution of the said Commissions, upon pain of such punishments as may legally
be inflicted on pirates; and likewise requiring all his Subjects employed in
Sea affairs by any foreign Prince, to repair home to his Majesty's service.

The same day the heads of the University of Oxford, with several Doctors in
^rler, and many Masters of Art, were conducted by the Earl of Southampton (who
by reason of the indisposition of health of the Marquess of (...), did that
civility for them) and the B^rge^ses se^ving in Parliament for the University
to his Majesty, where Doctor Conaught the Vice Chancellor made a speech to his
Majesty, after which they had all the honor to kiss his Majesty's hand.

This day also the Town of Kingston upon H^ll, who as they have not yielded to
any in expressing and sole ^miz^ng among themselves in the best manner their
joy upon the several o^casions of the happy Return, and the proclaiming of his
Majesty, so for a further demonstration of their loyalty, duty, and affection
to his Majesty, did this d^y by the hand of their Members in Parliament, and
some others, persons of Quality in that place, who had the honor to be
introduced by his Excellency, present to his Majesty their humble add^es^, in
congratulation of that gracious providence by which his Majesty has been
restored to his people; and therewith they tendered also under the Seal of
their Corporation, a Release of certain Fee-farms there, which being in these
times exposed to sale, they had redeemed out of other hands for twelve hundred
pounds, and now joyfu^ly resto^ed them to his Majesty, both which were by his
Majesty graciously received, and with particular expressions of favor to the
said Town.

On Saturday the 16. his sacred Majesty accompanied by his two Royal Brothers,
the Duke of York, and Duke of Gloucester, as also several of the Nobility and
Gentry was pleased to sup with the Lord Mayor of London at his house. Before
supper the Lord Mayor brought to his Majesty a napkin dipped in Rose Water, and
offered it kneeling, with which when his Majesty had wiped his hands, he sat
down at a Table raised by an ascent, the Duke of York on his right hand, and
the Duke of Gloucester on his left; they were served with three several courses,
at each course the Table-cloth was shifted, and at every dish which his
Majesty, or the Dukes casted, the napkins. A^ another table in the same room
sat hare his Excellency the Lord General, the Duke of Buckingham, the Marquess
of O^mond, the Earl of Oxford, Earl of Norwich, Earl of Saint A^bans Lord De la
VVare, Lord Sands Lord Bercley, and several other of the Nobility, with Knights
and Gentlemen of great quality Sir John Robinson, A^derman of London, began an
health to his Majesty, which was pledged by all at the Table standing. His
Majesty was all the while entertained with variety of m^sick, and one that
represented a Countryman, with whom his Majesty (...) to be well pleased. His
Majesty (...) the honor of Knighthood on Alderman John Lawrence, and Mr.
Cutler, two loyal Citizens; the two fi^ that his Majesty bestowed that honor
on in the City of London; on the latter, as a memorial of his particular
favor, he was pleased to bestow his own Sword.

Wednesday, June 30 1660. The Manner of the University of Oxford's Address to
His Majesty.
The Vice Chancellor of the University of Oxford came to London with diverse
Doctors, Bachelors of Divinity, the Proctors and Masters of Arts, with their
public Officers to present solemnly the service of that University unto the
Kings most Excellent Majesty.

They first agreed to meet the next day in the Temple-Church, about 4. a clock,
whence they went orderly in rank by two and two according to their Seniority to
Essex House, to wait on the most Noble Marquis of Hertford Chancellor of the
said University; where order was taken for the manadgement of the Address that
was to be made to his Majesty on the Friday. The place thought fittest to put
on Academical Hab^s was Derby House, propounded and procured by Dr. Lewis Du
Moulin, where about three of the clock the said Friday met the persons here
under named, who went in order with the six Squires and Yeomen Bedels of that
University, having their staves and three of them wearing their Golden Chains,
and the Verger before them.

Dr. John Conant Rector of Exeter College, Vice Chancellor of the University of
Oxford, and Doctor of the Chair or Regius professor of Theologia there.

Then two Honorable Members of Parliament were in their Cloaks, one at the
right hand the other at the left hand of the Vice Chancellor, viz. Dr. Thomas
Clayton Doctor of the Chair or Regius Professor Medicinae, and Dr. John Mills
Doctor of the Civil Law and one of the Collegiat Prebendaries of Christ-Church,
being both Burgesses serving in Parliament for the University of Oxford.

Dr. Edmond Staunton President of Corpus Christi College.

Dr. Edward Reynolds one of his Majesty's Chaplains and Dean of Christ-Church.

Dr. Henry Wilkinson Senior, one of the Collegiat Prebenbaries at
Christ-Church, and public professor of Divinity for the Lady Margaret in
Oxford.

Dr. Henry Langley one of the Collegiat Prebendaries of Christ-Church and
Master of Pembrook College.

Dr. Michael Roberts sometime Principal of Jesus College ejected by Oliver
Cromwell for his Loyalty to his Sovereign.

Dr. Henry Savadge Master of Bailiol College.

Dr Henry Wilkinson Junior Principal of Magdalen Hall.

Dr. John Wallis, Sir H. Savills Professor of Arithmetic and Geometry, and
Custos Archivorum of the University.

Dr. Seth Ward, one of Sir Henrys Professors of Astronimie and President of
Trinity College.

All these Doctors in Divinity.

Next Dr. Lewis Du Moulin Doctor of Physic, Professor of History, Son of the
famous Peter Du Moulin, Dr. Jonothan Godard Doctor of Physic, Warden of Morton
College, and public Professor of Gresham College London.

Dr. Ralph Bathurst Doctor of Physic and fellow of Trinity College.

Dr. Lewis De Bourgongne of Lambermont Doctor of Physic.

Doctor Joshua Cross Doctor of the Civil Law, Fellow of Magdalen College and
public Reader of the natural Philosophy Lecture in Oxford.

Doctor Thomas Jones, Doctor of the Civil Law, and Fellow of Morton College.

Doctor Thomas Jones Doctor of Physic Fellow of Magdalen College.

Doctor (...) Hodges sometime Doctor of Physic Student of Christ Church.

All the Doctors above mentioned were in their Scarlet Robes, and distinguished
by the several Scholastical Habits belonging to their Faculty.

Afterward both the Proctors of the University, viz. Mr. Tanner Fellow of New
College, and Mr. Dod Student of Christ Church, were in their black Gowns and
Ministers Hoods. Then followed the Batchelers of Divinity and Masters of Arts
wearing their Gowns, Hoods, and Caps, according to their Degrees about the
number of 100. more or less.

These came from Chanon-Row into Whitehall through the Garden, the Stone
Gallery, and so passed through the Court, the Guard Chamber, the Chamber of
Presence, and so along to the long Gallery toward the Park Stairs, where they
made a stop for some considerable time until they were fairly conducted into
the Privy Gallery, having very cheerful reception in their passing through the
several Guards which were richly furnished with persons of remarkable
Gallantry.

A Chair of State being placed in that same Gallery for his Majesty, the
Oxonians stayed not long there till they had notice of his Majesty's coming,
the Right Honorable the Earl of Southampton supplying the Chancellors place;
his Majesty being entered, the Scholars bowed themselves very low several
times, and at due distance did kneel. When the Vice Chancellor was ready to
deliver his Speech kneeling, his Majesty signified to him that he should stand,
in which posture he did pronounce his Speech in Latin, his Majesty standing all
the time, being attended by the Right Honorable the Marquis of Oxmond, the
Earl of Manchester, the Lord General Monck, and many other persons of Honor.
The substance of the Speech was to acquaint his Majesty how highly pleasing to
the University his return to his Kingdom was, and that that University having
for so long time been honored with his Majesty's presence, they could not but
be more acquainted with his Princely virtues and so be more deeply sensible of
their and the whole Kingdoms sufferings in his so long absence. Next he humbly
signified to his Majesty that the eyes not only of the University but of the
whole Nation was toward him, wishing his Majesty a long and happy Reign, and
so to govern, that the Land may be preserved and Religion established. After
the Speech ended the Vice-Chancelor kneeling, presented his Majesty with the
Book of Verses of the University of Oxford, Congratulatinp his Majesty's
return to Us. ^he Speech being ended his Majesty thanked the Vice-Chancelor,
adding that upon all occasions he would protect the Universities. Then was the
Vice-Chancelor, the Doctors and all the said Scholars admitted to have the
honor to kiss his Majesty's royal hand.

After the Kings departure from thence, the Oxon^a ^s made some stay in the
place in expectance of presenting their services unto the most Illustrious the
Dukes of York and Gloucester, and when the Earl of Southampton brought notice
that the said Dukes were not then at Court, but were gone abroad to take the
Air, that Convocation of the University retired themselves in the some Order
from Whitehall to Derby House again.

Advertisements of Books newly Printed and Published.
There is newly come forth a very seasonable and useful Piece of Primative
Devotion, in the Feasts and Fasts of the Church of England, consisting of
Prose, Poems, Prayers, and Sculptures on the several Occasions; Dedicated to
the King. By Edward Spark B. D. And are to be sold ready bound or in Quires,
by Octavian Pul^en at the Rose, or Tho: Driver at the Bishops-head in St Paul's
Church Yard; as also by Edward Ecclestone, right against the Red Cross in
Sea-Cole-Lane, and by John H^m^rsham in Jerusalem Court in Fleetstreet, the
said Books being five shillings in Quires^ and but 500 of them.

The Accomplished Courtier: Consisting of Institutions and Examples, by which
Courtiers and Officers of State may square their T^ansactions prudently, and in
good order and method. By H. W. Gen^.

ARNALDO, or, The Injured Lover. An excellent new Romance, translated by T
Sa^usbury Gent.

The Learned man defended and reformed. A Di^course of singular politeness and
elocur^on; and is in opposition to the many enemies Learning meets with,
especially Ignorance and Vice. Written by P. Bartolus, and made English by T.
Salusbury Gent.

These three are sold by Tho. Dring at the George near S. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet.

Samuel in Sackcloth: Or, a Sermon assaying to restrain our Bitter Animosities,
and commending a Spirit of Moderation, and a right Constitution of Soul and
Behavior toward our Brethren. Upon 1 Samuel 15.35. By S S. Sold by Henry
Mortlock at the Phoenix in S. Paul's Churchyard.

Advertisements.
GEntlemen, You are desired to take notice, That Mr. Theophilus Buckworth who
for some years past permitted, and gave directions to his Brother Mr. Edmond
Buckworth, to make and expose to sale for the public good, those so famous
Lozanges or Pectorals approved for the cure or Consump^ions, Coughs, Catarrhs,
Asthma's, Hoarsness, Strongness of Breath, Co^^s in general, Diseases incident
to the Lungs, and a sovereign Antidote against the Plague, and also her
contagious Diseases, and obstructions of the Stomach, does now himself (being
the Au^hor and first co^pou^der of them) make them at his House on M^le end
G^^en And for more convenience of the people, constan^ly leaves them se^led up
with his Coat of Arms on the Papers with Mr. Richard ^^wades (as formerly) at
the sign of the White Lion near the Little North door of Paul's Church, Mr Henry
Sei^e over against Dunstan Church in Fleetstreet, Mr William Milward (...)
We^^minste^ Hall Gate, Mr. John Place at Furnivals-Inn Gate in H^l^orn, and Mr
Robert H^rn at the Turks head near the entrance of the Royal Exchange
Booksellers, and no others.

This is published to prevent the designs of diverse pretenders who counterfeit
the said Lozenges to the disparagement of the said Gentleman, and great abuse
of the people.

THese Books following, with several others, were la^ely lost from Mr. Tho.
Ashton, having his name in them, viz. Grotius his Ann^tations on the Bible,
three volum^s, Latin, Cambdens Britannia, English. Ma^lorat o^ part of the New
Testament, Latin. Thucidides his Hist^ry, E^glished by H^^^^ Bacons
Advancement to Learning, English. Flacii Clavis Scripturae, Lat. Basil.
Whateley on Genesis, Engl. London. Willets Hexapla on Genesis, Eng. London.
Shute's Sarah and Hagar, Eng. Land. Dr. Clarks Sermons, Eng. Daniels English
History, Eng. all in Folio. Piscator on the New Testament, 4o. 2 volumes. The
Septuagints Old Testament, 8o. French Bible, 8o. Tombs Works, etc. If any one
shall give notice of all, or any of them, at the Eagle and child in the Strand,
the party shall be thankfully rewarded for his pains.

A White Mare somewhat fleabitten, betwixt 14. and 15 hands high, with a
brand-mark two I.I. in pitch, was taken away on Tuesday night from about
Holloway. The person suspected to take her away, was one Willam Dua, of a ruddy
color, flaxen hair, middle-siz'd, of about twenty years of age. If any one
bring in the Mare, or Man, to the Red Heart in Fetter-lane, or to the White Lion
in Islington, he shall receive Twenty shilling^ for his pains.

June 17. Strayed out of the grounds near the Horse ferry in Westminster in the
County of Middlesex, one white gray Gelding about 14 hands high, (...) short
bob-tall, most of his mane shorn, about 8 years old, both pa^e and trot. Whosoever
shall give notice of him to Sir Robert Pie Knight, at his house in S. Stevens
Court near the New Palace in Westminster aforesaid, shall be well rewarded for
their pains.

Monday, June 25.
This day was published a Proclamation of his Majesty's gracious pardon in
pursuance of his Majesty's former Declaration, declaring that his Majesty does
graciously accept of the Address of the House of Commons, wherein they did in
behalf of themselves, and every of them, and all the Commons of England, lay
hold upon his Majesty's free and general pardon, as it was granted in his
Maj^sties Letters and Declaration, (excepting only such a^ should be excepted
by Parliament) and will willingly and freely give his Royal Assent to the Act
of general pardon when presented to his Majesty by the two Houses, leaving it
to his Subjects to sue our part^cular pardons in such manner as they shall
think fit; and to that purpose, appointing the Secretaries of Sta^e to present
War arts for his Majesty's Signature directing the Attorney General to prep^re
B^lls for pa^ng pardons to such as desire the same: In the issui^g out of
which, ^are shall ^e taken that no pardon pass to any of the no oa^ous
Off^nders excepted by Pa^^iament.

Sir Henry Mildmay pe^i^ioned (...), that they would be pleased to dispense
wi^h his commitment to the Tower: whereupon it was ordered; that he be
committed to the Sergeant at Arms.

A Committee was ^ppointed to consider of the Impropriations late in the hand
of the Trust^es for maintenance of Ministers, and what is fit to be done in
that aff^ir.

Mr. Speak ra^quai^ted the House, that Sir John Bourchier, Col. Owen R^e, and
Col. Robert Lilburn, three of the Judges of his late Majesty, had rendered
themselves to him, and that he had put them into the custody of the Sergeant at
Arms: which the House approved of.

His Majesty sent a Message in writing to the House, to desire them to hasten
the Bill of indemnity: whereupon they resu^ed the debate, and resolved, That
Charles Fleetwood, John Pyne, Maj. Creed, John Goodwin, Ri. Dean, Philip Nigh,
Col. Cobbet,
be of the twenty to be excepted out of the general Act of Pardon and
Indemnity, to suffer such pains, penalties and forfeitures, not extending to
li^e, as should be inflicted on them, by an Act hereafter to be made for that
purpose.

Resolved, That William Hulet and Hugh Peter's be excepted out of the general
Act of Pardon and Oblivion.

Tuesday, June 9.
The Speaker made a report to the House, That Adrian Scroop, Augustine G^rla^d,
Colonel Harvy and Mr. Smith, who sat as Judges upon the late King's Majesty,
had according to the Proclamation rendered themselves to (...), and that he had
committed them to the Sergeant at Arms: Of which the House approved.

The House ordered, that thanks be given to the Lord Montague, K^ight of the
most No^le Order of the Garter, for the Eminent services which he has
perf^rmed to his Majesty and the Kingdom.

O^ered, that Colonel John Downs, one of the King's Judges, seized upon by
Ord^r from the General, be committed to the Sergeant at Arms.

The House resumed the debate o^ the Bill of Pardon and Oblivion, and orde^ed
it to be recommitted, and br^ught in again^ tomorrow morning.

A Bill ^e^ a longer c^ntinu^tion of Customs and ^xcise, was read this day the
second time; and upon the deba^^ was recommitted.

O^dered, That our age and P^unda^e be g^anted to his M^esty during his ^e, and
it i^ referred to a Commit^e^ to pr^pare a B^l^ accordingly, and, to consider
how it may be disposed at present till the Bill be d^spatched, and the Book of
Rates agreed.

A Petition of the Merchants Trading to Spain, was referred to a Committee.

Mr. Robert Rolls who served in Parliament for the Borough of Kellyton in
Cornwall, being deceased, the House ordered Writs to be issued for a new
Election of a member to serve in Parliament for that Borough.

Wednesday, June 10.
A Report being made from the Committee for Privileges and Elections,
concerning Truro in Oornwal, it was resolved that Mr. Boscowen is duly elected
to serve in Parliament for that place.

The Bill for continuance of the Custom and Excise was read this day, and
referred to a Committee who are to consider the qualifications of Officers to
be employed in the Excise.

Resolved, That the payment of Public Debts contracted from the 5. of
Decem^er 16^8, till the 22. of February 1659. other then those of the Army and
Navy, be stopped till ^urther Order.

Resolved, That 10000 l. be charged upon the Assessment of 700000 l. per men's.
to be paid ^o such person or persons as the Queens Majesty shall appoint for
her p^^sent supply.

The Bill for Tunnage and Poundage was this day repotted, twice read, and
referred to a grand Committee.

The Speaker acquainted the House, that Sir Hard^ess Waller had rendered himself
to him; whereupon it was ordered that the Sergeant at Arms take him into
custody.

The Speaker informed the House, that he was petitioned by a relation of Col.
Dixwells, that he being sick, and therefore not able to render himself by the
time limited in the Proclamation, that he might not lose the benefit thereof;
whereupon it was ordered, that upon the surrendering of himself he should not
lose the benefit of the Proclamation.

The Speaker acquainted the House, that upon the surrender of Henry Martin one
of the Judges of the late King, he had committed him to the Sergeant at Arms,
which the House approved of.

Resolved, That Adrian Scroop be discharged from his Commitment, upon his
engagement to appear when required thereunto.

From his Excellenies Quarters at the Cockpit.
A Commission under the Great Seal of England empowered Dr. Mills Judge
Advocate to see that the oath of Allegiance and Supremacy be taken by all the
Officers and Soldiers about London before him, as also to empower Ralph King to
see the same done by the Officers and Soldiers of the Army about Dublin.

On Monday a L^tter from Liev^. Colonel Richard Yardley to an Officer of the
^rmy was Communicated to his Excellency, containing the solemnity of
Proclaiming his Majesty in the Isle of Jersey.

His Excellency being informed that his savors j^stly bestowed upon Dougall
Mack Pherson a Scotch G^ntleman, was by some that envied the merit of that
person endeavored to be represented as the reward of some Intelligence that
should b^ given to his Excellency by him, or his means, did for the just
vindica ^on of the said Dougall Mack Pherson and to stop the mouths of such
slauderous people, give a C^r^ificate under his hand and Seal.

On Tuesday, Col. Faggs Regiment, by his Excellencies orders, drew out in S.
Georges fields, and there took the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy.

His Excellency is by the Corporation of Trinity-House chosen Master, and has
appointed Sir William Batten to be Deputy.

His Excellency has lately disposed several ^ommands in the Army, and g^ve^
these ^ommissions following, viz. To the Earl of Northampton to be (...) of the
^egiment late Col. Lenthals, and to Sir Tho. Sards to be his Lieutenant c^l.

To the Lord Fall^land to be Colonel of the Regiment late Col. Sanders, and to
Ble^e^^d Morgan to be Major.

To Maj^r Jeremiah Ha^^i^on to be Major in the place of Major Scot.

To Major Harley to be Major instead of Major Izod of Sir Anthony Ashley*
Co^pers Regiment.

Sir Francis Vincent Knight and Baronet, is made Governor of Dover-castle.

Sir Richard Basset Govern^r of ^ardiff.

Col. Freeman Governor of Tenbigh.

Col. Walter Slingsby Governor of Sandha^ Castle.

Major Robert Holmes Governor of Vpner Castle.

Col R^bert Leg Deputy Governor of Por^smouth under Col Norton.

Capt. John Harvey Governor of Sandgate Castle.

Whitehal 20.
The Lord Mayor the Aldermen, and the Common Council of the City of London went
on Monday l^st to Whitehal, and being conducted up to the matted Gallery, his
Majesty came to them, where the common Sergeant made a Speech to his Majesty,
representing the affection of the City to him, and their humble desire that his
Majesty would be pleased to honor them wi^h his company at Dinner, which his
Majesty was graciously pleased to accept of, and g^ve to each of them the honor
of kissing his Majesty's hand. The day appointed for that entertainment, is
Thursday the Fifth of July next.

The same day, Sir James Barry accompanied by the Commissioners from Ireland,
delivered himself in a Sp^ech to his ^ajesty, wherein he expressed the great
so^row and joy of that ^ation: Their sorrow for the Sufferings and Murder of
h^s ^a^e ^aj^sty of Blessed Memory, and their joy for his Majesty's happy
rest^^a^ion; a^^uring his Majesty of the constant Loyalty of his Subjects in
Ireland, of which he acquainted his Majesty, that the Lord Broghil, Sir Charles
Coote, and Sir Theophilus Jon^s had given such large Testimonies by their
eminent Services for his Majesty. At the clause of the Speech he presented his
^a^est^ with a B^ll of 20000 l. accepted by Alderman Thomas Viner, formerly
orde^ed to be pres^nted to his Majesty by the said Convention. His Majesty
accepted of it gave them thank^ for the^ Loyalty, and an assurance of his
Majesty's favor to that Nation, after which, they all kissed his Majesty's hand.

The same day, the Ministers and Elders of the French, Dutch and Italian
Churches, waited upon his Majesty at Whitehall. Mr. Stoop, the Minister of the
French Church, made a Speech, to which his Majesty made a gracious answer, and
gave them assurance of his Royal protection. The next day, the said Churches
waited upon the Dukes of Y^rk and Gloucester, who received them with many
expressions of their affection.

Tuesday last, the Earl of Pembroke gave a noble Entertainment to his Majesty*
the Dukes of York and Gloucester, at B^inards castle.

On Tuesday l^st, b^ing the 19. of this month, Major Hagedot who brought by Mr
John Carew, one of those that sat in Judgment upon King Charles the First,
delivered him by old^r of the Speaker to the S^rjeant at Arms

London, Printed by John Macock and Tho: Newcomb, 1660.


