A SERMON Against the ANTI-SCRIPTURISTS. ALSO Another concerning the
Sinfulness, Danger, and Remedies OF INFIDELITY. Preached at WHITE HALL. BY SETH
Lord Bishop of Sarum.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for James Collins, at the King's Head in
Westminster Hall, MDCLXX.

Against the ANTI-SCRIPTURISTS. A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, February 20.
1669/70. BY SETH Lord Bishop of Sarum.

Printed by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for James Collins, at the King's Head in
Westminster Hall, MDCLXX.

2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God.
IN the verse preceding, it is said concerning the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, that they are able to make a man wise unto salvation, (...) (by the
faith which is in Jesus Christ): And it follows immediately, All Scripture, etc.

(...) (the Faith) is often by a Metonymy taken for the Gospel, which is the
Object of the Faith of Christians. We read often of the Gal. 1.23
Preaching, and 3.25.
Hearing of Faith; of the Romans 12.6.
Analogy of Faith, Tit. 1.4.
the common Faith Jud. 3.
which was once delivered to the Saints (in the preaching of Christ, and the
Writings of his Evangelists and Apostles) and so I conceive it is to be taken
in this place. So that the meaning of the whole is this, The Old Testament
understood and expounded according to the Analogy of the New, is able to make a
man wise. And the Penmen of the Canonical Books of the Old Testament (wherein
Timothy had been instructed (...)) and of the Books of the New Testament (which
except those of S. John were extant before the writing of this Epistle) were
inspired and directed by the Spirit of God.

The words of the Text are an entire Proposition, asserting the Divine
Authority of the Canon of Scripture; and my endeavor shall be at this time to
prove the truth of that Proposition. Wherein, that I may proceed with all
plainness and clearness, I shall premise two words by way of Petition,
Precaution.

1. By way of Petition, I suppose and take for granted; 1. The great principle
of the power of God, and his providence in governing the world. 2. That our
Body of Canonical Books of the Old Testament, is the same with that which was
in Use in the time of Christ and his Apostles, And our body of the New
Testament the same which was anciently received in the Church. So that what
shall be proved of those, is applicable to the Original Scripture used in our
time. 3. That those Books of New Testament whose Authors were not anciently
questioned, were Written by those Authors whose Name they bear. And that those
few others which were sometimes questioned by some particular Churches, and
afterward Universally received, contain in them no one point of Faith or
Manners dissentient from the Contents of those Books which were never
questioned.


2. By way of Precaution and Admonition I must entreat you to take notice, that
I shall not now meddle with the Controversies concerning Apocrypha,
Translations, Keri and Chetib, Hebrew points, various Lections, dubious Authors
or parts of Scripture.

But my endeavor at this time shall be to Assert the Divine Authority of the
body and substance of the Original Books of the Canon of the Old and New
Testament: And this not in the way of common place, but in a particular
Examination or Refutation of the most dangerous Opinions of the
Anti-scripturists, which are these.

I. Of those who pretend to believe the truth of the New Testament, and yet
they deny the Divine Authority of the Old.

II. Of those who pretend to believe the truth, but deny the divine Authority
of the New Testament.

III. Of such as pretend to believe matters of fact to have been truly related
in the New Testament, but do not believe the truth of the Doctrinal parts
relating to Faith and Manners.

IV. Such as deny the truth of the Relation of matters of Fact in the New
Testament, and in consequence reject the whole Body of Scripture. Of these as
briefly and plainly as I can.

I. The first Opinion is of those, who pretending to believe the Truth of the
New Testament, deny the Divine Authority of the Old Testament. The Severians,
and the Manichees, Basilides, and Carpocrates of old: The Catabaptists of later
times, some Anabaptists, Antinomians, and other Fanatical Sectaries amongst our
selves.

In opposition to these, I shall show, that supposing the truth of the New
Testament, the Divine Authority of the Old Testament is to be acknowledged:
Because the Divine Authority of the Old Testament is asserted by Christ and his
Evangelists and Apostles in the New.

1. Next to the Redemption of the world, the great business which Christ had to
do upon Earth, was to Convince men that he was the Messiah, and so to assert
his Legislative Authority. And the great Argument which he used for the
conviction of the world was this.

All the Marks and the entire Character of the Messiah, and of his Actions and
Passions, were prefigured and foretold by the Law and the Prophets, and the
Psalms, i. e. in the Volume of the Old Testament.

And all things foretold or prefigured concerning the Messiah, were
accomplished by himself.

So that though the great Works of Christ, and the purity and excellency of his
Doctrine, and of his Life were of themselves sufficient to justify the
Introduction of his Law into the World, yet he was pleased to resolve (as it
were) his own Authority into the Divine Authority of the Old Testament, and to
make use of those other manifestations of himself, in a coordination with that
principle.

And therefore we find him still pressing the Jews with this, that if they did
believe the Writings of Moses, and their other Scriptures, they must of
necessity believe him also.

Joh. 5.46.
Moses wrote of me (says he) wherefore, did ye believe Moses, ye would believe
me. The Scriptures testify of me, therefore search them diligently, (...).
Joh. 5.39.
For the attaining of everlasting life he refers the Lawyer to the Law, Luke
10.26
What is written in the Law? how read thou? For the avoiding of the place of
torments, Luke 16.29
he makes Abraham refer the Relations of Dives to Moses and the Prophets.

In all his Disputations with the Pharisees and Sadduces, the Lawyers and the
Scribes, he makes his appeal to the Scriptures of the Old Testament. And lest
any one should think that in all this he did only argue ad homines (that
disputing with the Jews he only proceeded upon their own Hypothesis) we find
him in the course of his Ministration positively asserting, Mar. 14.49 Joh.
10.35
that the Scriptures must be fulfilled; Mat. 3.31.
that they cannot be broken; that he came not to destroy the Law and the
Prophets, Mar. 5.18.
but to fulfill them; and that Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before one jot
or tittle of these should perish, until all was fulfilled. Thus he asserted the
Authority of the Old Testament before his death.

And after his Resurrection he made a real demonstration that the Old Testament
was given by inspiration of God; for on the day of his Resurrection, falling
into company of two of his Disciples, going to Emmaus: Luke 24.27
He began at Moses and all the Prophets, and expounded to them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself.

And afterward when the Eleven were come together, as a recapitulation of this
his method, and that he might instruct his Disciples in it, he said unto them,
44.
These were the words which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you, that
all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses, and in
the Prophets, and in the Psalms (in the Volume of Old Testament) concerning me.
He opened their understandings, and said, thus it is written, and thus it
behoved: And as a short Idea of wh^t they were to do, he tells them, and ye are
Witnesses of these things.

2. In pursuance of this method we find the Evangelists very curious, and very
frequent in observing the accomplishment of the Prescriptions of the Old
Testament, reciting sometimes the speeches of Christ, saying, that he did such,
or such a thing, to the end that the Scriptures might be fulfilled: I will not
eat of the fruit of the Vine till all things be fulfilled.

Sometimes in their own Persons observing the accomplishment of particulars,
and noting either particular portions of Scriptures which were fulfilled, or
the fulfilling of the Scriptures cited at large, without any particular
Quotation. Thus the Evangelists writing of the Mat. 1.22.
Conception, Mat. 1.22.
Nativity, Mat. 1.22.
Name of Christ, Mat. 2.15
of his coming out of Egypt, Mat. 2.23
dwelling at Nazareth, 4.14.
migration to Capernaum, 21.4.
riding to Jerusalem: Say that these things were done that the Scriptures (or
the saying of the Prophet) at large might be fulfilled: So likewise for the
circumstances of his Passion, the Mat. 26.56.
flight of his Disciples, 27.35. Joh. 19.24
casting lots upon his Garments, Joh. 19.29.
Vinegar given him to drink, Joh. 37.
piercing his side, Joh. 36.
bones remaining unbroken, etc.

Other times they note the particular Prophet, Christ Mat. 8.17
healed Diseases, Mat. 13.15.
spoke in Parables, and that the saying of Isaiah the Prophet might be
fulfilled. Mat. 2.17
When Herod slew the Children, then was fulfilled that which was spoken by
Jeremy the Prophet, Rachel weeping for her Children, etc. and once we find a
quotation of the second Psalm, and the like: This for the Evangelists.

3. Lastly, the Divine Authority of the Old Testament is asserted by the
Apostles: Whom we find every where in their Writings, citing the Testimonies of
the Gal. 3.10
Law and the ^ct. 7.42.
Prophets, and the Act 1.2^. and 13 33.
Psalms; appealing to them, Romans 4.3.
what says the Scripture? Gal. 3.22.
the Scripture has concluded so or so: A^guing out of them, often times
directly; thus not only the Apostles but Acts 18.24.28.
Apollos mightily convinced the Jews, sometimes ab absurdo, Jam. 4.5.
do ye think the Scripture speaks in vain?

In a word, the Apostles followed the way and method which their Master taught
them; they asserted that the Gospel was Romans 1.12
promised by the Prophets, Romans 3.21
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets: Act. 13.18. and 10.43.
by all the Prophets. Affirming of themselves, that they believed Act. 24.14.
all things written in the Law and in the Prophets: and that they continued
testifying and saying Act. 26. ^^.
no other things than the Prophets and Moses did say should come.

Finally, lest any place should be left for doubting concerning any part of the
Old Testament, the Apostles have expressly asserted concerning the Romans 7.12.
Law, that it is holy, just, and good; Act. 3.21.
that the Prophets are holy, and Tim. 3.15
the Scriptures holy; that they are the Romans 3.2*
Oracles of God, Act. 7.38
lively Oracles; that Act. 3.21*
God spoke by the Prophets; 2 Pet. 1.21*
that holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Lastly, (in
the Text) that the 2 Timothy 3.15.
(...), wherein Timothy had been instituted by his Mother, were given by
inspiration of God.

This is the sense of the New Testament concerning the Old Testament; supposing
therefore the Truth of the New Testament, the Divine Authority of the Old
Testament is to be acknowledged, contrary to the first Opinion of the
Anti-scripturists.

II. The Second Anti-scriptural Opinion is of those who pretend to believe the
Truth, but they deny or doubt the Divine Authority of the New Testament, either
of the whole body of the New Testament, or at least of that part which delivers
the Speeches and Writings of the Apostles.

Of this sort there are said to be many, who by the power and influence of
their Education are restrained from denying or dis-believing the Truth of the
New Testament, and yet through the infelicity of corrupt conversation are
fallen from that Veneration which is due to writings supposed to be of Divine
Authority.

For the History of the New Testament they have the same respect which they
have for Tacitus or Salust, or some such other History; for the Mystery of the
Gospel, the same which they have for some parts of Plato, or remnants of
Pythagoras. For the practical parts, the same which they have for some parts of
Cicero or Seneca, or Epictetus. All which writings they believe to be true, but
no man believes them to be Divine. And some there are who pretend a great
veneration for the speeches of Christ, but have a meaner esteem for the words,
and writings of the Apostles.

In opposition to these Opinions, I shall show, that supposing the words of
Christ and the Apostles to be True, it will follow, that they are to be
esteemed to be of Divine Authority.

Because Christ and the Apostles did profess and declare, that what they
delivered to the world, was of Divine Authority.

And because our Lord Christ did undertake not only for himself, but for the
Inspiration of his Apostles also.

1. In the examination of the next Opinion, I shall be obliged to lay before
you some of the evidences of Divine Authority in Christ and his Apostles, here
it is sufficient to produce their assertions of it.

The time of our Lord Christ's ministration (betwixt three and four years) was
spent in preaching and working, and his Authority was often questioned.

In Luke 20.1. and in the Mat. 21.23. Mar. 11.27
parallel places, While he was in the Temple teaching the People, and preaching
the Gospel, the Chief Priests and the Scribes and the Elders came upon him,
saying, tell us by what Authority thou do these things (preachest to the
people) and who gave thee that Authority?

Knowing the perverseness of their minds, he was not pleased to gratify them at
that time with a direct answer, but confounded them with a question concerning
the Baptism of John.

But at Other times, upon Other occasions, we find the Divine Authority of his
teaching abundantly declared and asserted by him.

Joh. 14.6
I am the way, the truth and the life: Joh. 6.63
The words which I speak unto you they are spirit, and they are life. Joh.
14.10*
The words which I speak I speak not of my self, but of the Father which
dwells in me. Joh. 7.16
My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. Joh. 8.2^
I do nothing of my self, but as my Father has taught me so I speak. Joh.
12.49.
I have not spoken of my self, but the Father that sent me, he gave me a
Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak. Joh. 12.50.
Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.
Mat. 24.35.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.

Thus did our Savior assert the Divine Authority of his Words.

2. And so likewise the Apostles are very frequent in asserting the Divine
Authority of the things which they delivered.

In the 15. of the Acts, we find them assembled about the question of
Circumcision; and they accounted it no robbery to entitle their Decrees to the
Holy Ghost, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, v. 18.

Nor do they pretend to revelation when gathered in Council only, but each one
severally for himself.

S. Peter professes of himself, that he was a 1 Pet. 5.1
partaker of the glory which was revealed: And of his Gospel, that it was 1
Pet. 1.5.
revealed from Heaven.

S. John declares that he had 1 John 1.3.
(...) with the Father and the Son; as for his other writings, that they
contained the things 1 John 1.1.
which he had heard and seen with his eyes, which he had looked on, and his
hands had handled of the Word of life.

As for the Apocalypse, he professes, that being in the Spirit in the Isle of
Patmos he received it, Apoc. 1.9, 10.
and was commanded to write it in a Book. Ib. 19.


The greatest writer among the Apostles was S. Paul, and the greatest Question
has always been (amongst Unbelievers) concerning his Calling and the Authority
of his Gospel.

He knew this very well, and therefore we find him asserting both his Calling
and his Gospel with abundant care and diligence.

He affirms himself to have been an Apostle not Gal. 1.1.
of man, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father; That by Romans
1.1. 2 Timothy 1.11 Phil. 1.17.
God himself he was separated to preach, constituted a Preacher, an Apostle,
and a Defender of the Gospel. As concerning his Gospel, he professes to have
Ephesians. 3.1.
received it by Revelation of God.

As for the Spirit wherewith he wrote and preached, he professed himself 2 Cor.
13.3.
ready to give a proof of Christ speaking in him. He appealed to the Prophetic
Spirit then in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.37.
If any man think himself a Prophet or Spiritual, let him acknowledge the
things which I write to be the Commandments of God.

Out of this assurance it was that he enjoined his Epistles to be read in the
Churches of Col. 4.16.
Coloss, Ibid.
Laodicea, 2 These. 3.14.
Thessalonica, and i excommunicates such as should be disobedient in that
particular.

And lest any one should here repeat the Objection made against our Savior,
Thou bear witness of thy self, thy witness is not true.

S. Paul speaking of all the Apostles, affirms that God had Ephesians 4.11
set them in the Church, and that 3.5.
the Mystery of the Gospel was revealed to the holy Apostles by the Spirit.

Particularly, notwithstanding that dispute betwixt S. Peter and S. Paul (from
the Porphyr. Hier. Prooem. Galat. and in c. 2. Celsus.
first Ages of the Church to our own Times, objected by Unbelievers to the
prejudice of Religion) it is remarkable, that, in the same place where S. Paul
gives an account how Gal. 2.
Peter was to be blamed, and how and wherefore he withstood him to his face at
Antioch, he does expressly affirm, that the Gospel of the Circumcision was
committed to Peter, and that God wrought effectually in Peter to the
Apostleship of the Circumcision.

On the other side S. Peter, in that very place, where he may seem to complain
of the 2 Pet. 3.15
(...) of S. Paul, yet even there he owns him as his beloved Brother,
acknowledges his Wisdom to have been given him of God, and numbers all his
Epistles, inter (...), amongst the other Scriptures.

3. Lastly, for such as would put a difference of degrees betwixt the Authority
of the words of Christ, and the writings and Sermons of the Apostles, they may
take notice, that the Authority of these, resolves it self into the veracity of
Christ himself.

He it was who being to leave the World, promised his Disciples again and
again, that he would Joh. 15.26.
send down upon them the Holy Spirit, that should 14.26.
instruct them and teach them all things, that should 16.13.
Lead them into all truth, 14.26.
Bring to their remembrance all things which he himself had spoken, that should
16.13.
show them things to come, that with this Spirit they should not be lightly
dashed, or sprinkled, but that they should be Act. 1.5.
Baptized, and as it were plunged into it.

How all these Promises were performed, and how the Assertions of the Divine
Authority of the Words of Christ, and the Apostles were proved to be true, I am
next to show. In the interim I conclude, that supposing the truth of the words
of Christ and his Apostles, they are to be esteemed of Divine Authority.

III. The third Opinion is of such as pretend to believe matters of fact to
have been truly related in the New Testament, but they do not believe the truth
of the Doctrinal parts relating to Faith or Manners.

Of these there have always been too great a number, not only pretenders, who
under a form of Christianity deny the power thereof, but generally all sorts of
Heretics. When Porphyrius had revolted from Christianity to Platonism, and had
bent all his Forces against the Scripture-History, he was refuted not only by
Lactantius, and Methodius, men Orthodox in Doctrine, but by Eusebius and
Apollinaris; and of late days, Socinus and others have well asserted the truth
of the Scripture-History who yet have been offended at the dogmatical parts of
the Gospel, and concerning the Faith have made shipwreck.

In Opposition to these I shall endeavor to demonstrate, that, Supposing
Matters of Fact to be truly related in the New Testament, it is unreasonable to
suspect the truth of any of the Doctrines delivered by Christ or his Apostles.

Amongst the various fancies concerning Religion, wherewith the whole world
has been always embroiled: Two things there are wherein all the Sons of Adam
have agreed; namely, 1. That that is to be believed which has received the
testimony of God. And 2. That this testimony is to be gathered from instances
of supernatural Wisdom and Power.

In the study of natural and Philosophical Theology, the Speculativi amongst
the Greeks and Romans, and other Nations, sought after Wisdom, ( Reason, and
Demonstration. But) to reduce the People to the forms of religious Rites and
Sacrifices prescribed them, they were made to believe the Epiphanies of the
Gods, and the manifestations of their Wisdom, and Power, by Oracles and Works
supernatural.

To these even Mahomet pre^^^^ded though his great Argume^^ (...) the Sword:
and of the Jews I need not speak.

For a Foundation of Religion, and in our inquisition after that, short of this
Testimony we ought not to stay; further we cannot go: And herein is the utmost
of humane wisdom to consider well those Evidences upon which we adventure the
interest of our eternity.

To this evidence therefore we appeal in asserting the Doctrine of our Lord
Christ, and his Apostles; Namely to the instances of Supernatural Knowledge and
Supernatural Power, whereby their Doctrine was attested.

I shall not here wave the force, but I shall decline the repetition of what I
have formerly spoken concerning the attestations given to it by Visible Signs,
Audible Voices, Apparitions of Angels, Fulfilling the Prophecies, Evidences of
Christ's Resurrection, Mission of the Holy Ghost.

In Joh. 7.15. the Jews wondered at Christ that he knew any thing: How knows
this man Letters, seeing he never learned them? but if we mark the Scriptures,
we shall find that he knew all things, and that nothing was withdrawn from the
reach of his understanding.

He knew the Joh. 11.11.
sickness and death of Lazarus, though absent and at a distance; 4.17.
He saw Nathaniel under the Fig Tree, and convinced him that he was the Son of
God, and the King of Israel: Joh. 4.29
Come see a man (said the Woman of Samaria) which told me all things that ever
I did, is not this the Christ?

He was (...): The secret Joh. 6.6^ 64.
murmurs at his hard sayings, the inward 16.19.
desires to ask him Questions; the Luke 9.47
Reasonings and Dialogisms of the hearts of his Disciples; Mat. 12.15, 25.
the secret Councils of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mar. 2.8.
their evil surmisings, Luke 6.8.
their treacherous intentions to entrap him, Luke 11.17.
their mental Blasphemy, were all naked and manifest before him.

He knew what was in man, Joh. 2.24 25.
and needed not that any one should tell him; Mat. 17.21.
He knew the various Kinds of Devils, and how they were to be ejected: Mat.
17.21
This Kind comes not out but by Prayer and Fasting. He knew the Fishes of the
Sea, Mat. 17.27
and where they were, and what was in them.

He knew not only things past and present, but to come; Joh. 18.4
He foresaw all things that were to come upon him, 11.11.13.11.
who it was that should betray him, he foretold his Disciples all the
circumstances of his Passion, Mat. 20.18.
how he was to be Betrayed, Mar. 10.23.
Condemned, Mat. 16.21.
delivered to the Gentiles, Joh. 14.28.
mocked, scourged, spit on, killed and Crucified at Jerusalem.

Behold, says he, I tell you before; Luke 19.44.
Let this saying sink into your hearts. He Mat. 26.34.
forewarned Peter of his denial, Mat. 31.
and the Disciples of their flight.

Luke 21.20.
He foretold things to come after his death, the time and manner of the
destruction of Jerusalem: The success of his Gospel, the Effect (unlikely) of
his Crucifixion, Joh. 12.32.
that it should draw all men after him, Mat. 24.14.
that it should be preached and believed in the whole world Mat. 13.31.
spreading it self like Leaven, and like a grain of Mustard Seed, Luke 10.18.
that Satan's Kingdom should be destroyed suddenly like lightning;
notwithstanding the Mat. 24.25.
false Christ's and false Prophets which should arise.

These and many more were instances of the supernatural knowledge of Christ:
And for his power, the time would fail me to insist upon the many and various
instances mentioned in the Gospels.

I shall omit the exercise of his dominion over the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
Plants, and Animals, Earth, and Water, the Wind and the Sea, and briefly mind
you of those which concerned the bodies of men; how he 1. Fed their hunger, 2.
Healed their distempers, 3. Raised their dead, and 4. Cast out Devils.

He fed Mat. 14.19.
4000 at one time, and Mat. 15.36.
5000 at another, with 5 or 7 Loaves, and a few little Fishes.

He healed the Mat. 15.30.9.27.4.23.
blind, d lame, e deaf, f dumb, g maimed, Mat. 8.14
feverish, Mat. 14.4
hydropical, Mat. 4.13
paralitic, Mat. 17.12.
leprous, and Mat 4.23
lunatic persons. He cured not Luke 22.51.
green wounds only, but ancient inveterate Maladies of Mat. 9.20
12, of Joh. 5.5.
38 years continuance, one that was born blind.

He used no Plasters nor Potions, no Telesmans or other Charms, but performed
all these things by a Multos.
touch of his Hand or of his Mat. 9.20
Garment. He healed Mat. 8.6.
absent persons as well as present, Joh. 5.5.
he spoke the word only and they were healed.

He raised to life the Daughter of Mar. 5.41
Jayrus, the Luke 7.11
Widows Son at Naim, his Friend Joh. 11.39.
Lazarus, and Mat. 27.52.
many bodies of the Saints. Many of which healed and raised persons lived till
about Trajan's time, Eus. Eccl. H. l. 4. c. 3.3.37.
as Quadratus a Disciple of the Apostles affirmed in his Apology to Hadrian the
Emperor. Annot. p. 81


Like a strong man armed he cast out Devils, whatever kind they were of he
quickly dislodged them; Mat. 17.18.
that foaming and tearing Devil which withstood the power of his Disciples, and
threw down and tore the possessed person, even as he was yet coming to Christ
himself; he presently rebuked, and healed the child, and delivered him to his
Father.

Neither their long possession, nor their numbers could secure them, he cast
Mar. 16.9
seven at once out of Mary Magdalen, and an Luke 8.27
whole Legion out of a certain man of the Country of the Gadarens, who had been
possessed by them a long time.

Moreover, for attestation to the truth of his Gospel, he delegated all this
power to others, to the Mat. 10.7 Luke 9.3.
12 Apostles, to the Luke 10.1. -- 9.
70 Disciples: Mat. 16.17.
He bequeathed it to Believers at his death, and they also received and
exercised this supernatural power.

I have given a few instances of the Supernatural Wisdom and Power of Christ
solitarily considered: The History of the Gospel affords us many Examples
wherein they were gloriously combined.

By his Knowledge Mat. 16.21.
he foretold his Resurrection, he Mat. 28.2.
performed it by his Power. By his Divine Understanding he Joh. 16.16, 28.20.17.
foresaw his Ascension, and by the Power of his Divinity he Luke 24.57.
ascended.

He ascended, and by his Power he fulfilled the Predictions and Promises which
he had made. He Act. 2.4.
sent down the Holy Spirit, and shed forth the gifts of supernatural Wisdom and
Power upon his Apostles.

Not to mention the Apparition of Angels, and of Christ himself, the Acts 9*
Bath. Kol. the Acts 10.10.22.17.
Ecstasies, Acts 16.9
Dreams, Visions, and 16.6, 7.
Impulses which were given them for their own assurance: That they might be
enabled to preach the Gospel to all Nations, and deliver to the world those
Scriptures whereof we are speaking, they had Cor. 1^.9
the word of Knowledge and of Wisdom and of Faith, and the gift of diverse
Tongues, and interpretation of Tongues bestowed upon them.

And to justify their Doctrine to the Ages present and to come, they had the
Gifts of Prophecy, and of Healing, and of Miracles.

Ap. 4.1.
John (the beloved Disciple) heard a voice as it were of a Trumpet, talking
with him, which said, Come up hither, and I will show thee things which shall
be hereafter; and immediately he was in the Spirit, and received the Revelation.

Act. 27.10, 22.
Paul an Apostle (though born out of due time) came to Visions and Revelations,
he twice foretold what should happen to the Ship wherein he was carried
Prisoner to Rome. He foretold the 2 These. 2.
Apostasy of the latter times, the rising of Antichrist, 2 Timothy 3 1
the perilous times which should come upon the world in the last days. Act.
11.8.
Agabus a Believer at large foretold the Famine which was to come upon all the
world, Act. 21.10.
Act. 5.13.
and the binding of Paul at Jerusalem, etc.

But the Instances of supernatural Power exercised in healing of Diseases,
raising the dead, g confounding the Opposers of their Doctrine, and in several
other kinds by the Apostles, and their Companions and Adherents, the Preachers
and Writers of the Doctrine of the Gospel, are so abundantly delivered in the
New Testament, that I shall not offer at particulars.

In the 4. of the Acts we find all the Apostles praying (...), that God would
stretch forth his hand to heal, and that signs and wonders might be done by the
Name of his holy Child Jesus. And immediately the place was shaken, and they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and with Power.

The particular Miracles of particular persons are recorded. In one word, they
went and preached every where the Doctrines which are written in the Gospel;
the Lord working with them, and confirming their words by mighty signs and
wonders, and gifts of the Holy Ghost.

This is the state of the matter of Fact, as it is propounded in the New
Testament: I conclude therefore, that supposing matters of Fact to be truly
delivered in the New Testament* there is no reason to doubt of the Doctrines
delivered by Christ or his Apostles, relating to faith or manners* And I come
to the consideration o^ the last and extreme Opinion of the Anti-scripturists.

IV. The last Opinion, is of those who deny the truth of the Relation of
matters of Fact delivered in the New Testament, and in consequence reject the
whole body of the Scriptures.

I could wish there were no such as these, and that what I have yet to say were
altogether needless for that reason.

But what means then the public Rumors which we hear? and whence is an Opinion
gone into the world, that some great Philosophers and men of generous reason
are dissatisfied concerning the truth of Scripture, and believe the Authority
of it to be wholly derived from the Magistrate.

In reference to these I shall endeavor,

1. Briefly, to show that the ground upon which these Wisemen and Philosophers
reject the Scriptures, is contrary to the Reason of mankind.

2. To evince, that the belief of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures is
most agreeable to Reason.

1. As for the Argument and ground of those (amongst us Christians) that reject
the body of the Scriptures, I do not remember to have heard of other than this.

They have often called upon Believers, Pastors perhaps, or Doctors in the
Church, for a clear and undeniable evidence of the truth of the story of the
Gospel, and they have not afforded it: therefore they conclude, the Scriptures
are to be rejected.

But is this the reasoning of generous Wits? and men of mighty deeds in
Disputation, of men pretending to the depths of Reason and Philosophy?

To give a man a clear and undeniable evidence of any thing, there are but two
ways, viz. To convince either his Senses or his Understanding; the former
whereof is to be done by Experiment, the later by Demonstration.

Would they have now an Experiment whether such or such a thing were done 16 or
1700 years ago? Would they have a demonstration of particulars, in their nature
indifferent to be done or not to be done, depending upon the liberty of Causes?

Well were it for the world, if these Beaux Esprits would have the patience,
and endure the fatigue of acquainting themselves with the ways of knowledge
(Experiment and Demonstration) it would not then be troubled with the dangerous
Impertinency of such Pretenders.

Then these men would not call for Experiment in a subject incapable of it, and
(being instructed that Demonstration is only of Universal Propositions in
materia necessaria, whose contrary Positions imply a contradiction) they would
know, that to demand this kind of evidence of the truth of the story of the
Gospel, is to be absurdly injudicious, and to act contrary to the Reason of
mankind.

For seeing we may not with civility suppose this principle to be advanced only
for the destruction of Religion, and the ruin (or at least undeniable hazard)
of the Souls of men; We ought to believe that these Philosophers intend this as
a general Maxim; that (in matters at least of moment) men ought not to
adventure to act, but upon clear and undeniable evidence, and ( speaking
properly) that wise men ought to believe nothing at all. Wherefore let us
suppose this for a general principle, and consider what will follow.

Setting aside the knowledge of the Affections of a few Lines and Numbers, is
not all learning to be cast away? Must not the Civil World of mankind be
brought to swift confusion? must not mankind it self, in a few days come to an
end?

Suppose a Subject should not yield his Obedience, or a Tenant his Rent, till
Titles be made out by Experiment or Demonstration. Suppose the Husbandman and
the Merchant, the Artificer, the Soldier, Arist. polit. l. 7. c. 8.
the Banker, and the Judge should not adventure, but stay for the assurance of
Experiment or Demonstration, would not the whole world be confounded?

Suppose men should not marry, nor take Physic, nor eat or drink till they
should have clear and undeniable evidence, that all these things are what they
suppose, and shall succeed according to expectation, would not mankind quickly
be spent, and brought to an end?

If the management of all humane concernments, Political, Oeconomical,
Personal, proceed upon the grounds of Belief and Hope, and rational (but not
demonstrative) inference. If neither these Philosophers (if they would
consider) nor any other Person, either ever did, or possibly could, perform any
one action, upon such evidence, as these men require concerning the truth of
the stories of the Scripture; then to reject them for want of such evidence, is
repugnant to the Reason of mankind.

I proceed therefore to my second assertion, that the Belief of the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures is most agreeable to reason.

That the Divine Authority of all the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
are undeniably concluded from supposition of the truth of the Relation or
History of matters of fact in the New Testament, I have already shown. And that
the rejection of all History is against the Reason of mankind is evident,
because all mankind receive some History or other: wherefore I shall briefly
show,

1. That the History of the New Testament has all those advantages whereof any
History is capable.

2. That it has greater advantages than any other History.

1. The Arguments inducing men to the belief of any historical Relation, are
all of them

Either Ab intra, Internal, from the 1. Credibility and Scibility of the
Object. 2. The Knowledge and Integrity of the Writers. 3. The way and manner of
writing. Ab extra, External, The 1. Reception of it in the world. 2. Concurrent
testimonies of strangers. 3. The Concessions of Adversaries, and the like.


In all which particulars, no History in the world can justly pretend any
advantage above that of the New Testament.

1. For the Credibility, Object, and Cognoscibility of it.

1. To say that instances of supernatural Power and Wisdom are impossible, Ob.
sol.
is to deny the power of God and his providence in governing the world: And to
say that such things are incredible, as are and have been actually believed, in
all times, and by all sorts of persons, Jews and Gentiles, Christians and
Mahometans (a few Atheistical persons only excepted) is an absurdity.

The History that we speak of, pretends to no Intrigues or Cabalistick
Counsels, or Mysteries of State, but conteins it self within the limits of
things Visible and Audible, things that were done or spoken; so that no History
can have advantage over it, respectu Objecti.

2. As for Knowledge in the deliverers, I shall show it by a brief Induction.

The whole New Testament consists of the Books of the Revelation, Epistles,
Acts of the Apostles, and the Gospels.

The Authors of the Epistles and the Revelation, in the Narrative parts of
them, deliver the things done or spoken to or by themselves, and could not be
ignorant of their own experiences.

The Book of the Acts contains some things done by or to the rest of the
Apostles, but chiefly the concernments of Paul; and it was written by Luke, who
was an individual Companion of Paul, and intimately conversant with the rest of
the Apostles.

For the things Related in the Gospel of S. Luke, he says they were delivered
to him by those who from the beginning were Eyewitnesses of the works, and
Ministers of the Word, and his History agrees with the other Evangelists.

The Gospel of S. Mark has nothing which is not in S. Matthew or S. John, and
was dictated by S. Peter, the Head of the Apostles.

S. Matthew was an Apostle, and S. John the Bosom Apostle of Christ. The
Apostles were chosen by him for Witnesses of his Words and Actions, they were
with him from the beginning of his Ministry, continued with him till his death,
conversed with him till his Ascension; That which they had heard, which they
had seen with their Eyes, which they had looked on, which their hands had
handled of the word of life, that they delivered in writing to the World: And
more than this no Writer or Relater of History can pretend to.

2. For Arguments of their sincerity, they have left Cor. 5.8.6.4.8.
Precepts of Veracity, Phil. 4.8.
and Jam 3.14
prohibitions of lying, under pain of Hell torments, Ephesians. 4.25.
the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone: Apoc. 21.8.27.22.15.
They have 2 Pet. 1.16 2 Cor. 2.17
protested that they did not follow cunningly devised Fables; that they did
things sincerely as in the sight of God.

They have appealed to the searcher of hearts: The God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ knows that I lie not. The things which I write unto you, behold,
before God I lie not, Gal. 1.20. says S. Paul.

1 These. 2.3.4.
They have left behind them various instances of their simplicity and godly
sincerity in representing their failings to the world, and of candor and
ingenuity in distinguishing the dictates of their own Reason from the
inspirations of the Holy Spirit: I speak by permission, not by commandment of
the Lord: This say I, not the Lord; Thus it is according to my judgment, etc. 1
Cor. 7.

But besides all this, let the matter be estimated acccording to common reason:
If these men did devise a Fable and impose it upon the world, what end could
they propound to themselves in so doing? was there any profit in being
destitute of all things? or pleasure in being persecuted, afflicted, and
tormented? or honor in being counted Fools and Madmen.

Before they began to publish the Stories whereof we speak, their Master was
gone, and all worldly hopes were gone away with him: If they were not bound in
Conscience, and in Spirit, what obligation had he laid upon them to labor and
suffer for his honor as they did?

To omit the severity of his behavior to them, He called them off from their
Vocations; Peter, and Andrew, James, and John from their Fishing, Mat. 9.9.
Matthew from his Customers place, the rest accordingly.

They forsook their Nets, Mat. 4.20.22.
their * Ships, their Relations, and all their interests, and followed him.

And this they did ( clearly and plainly) believing that he was to be a Great
Temporal Prince, and in hopes of Preferment under him. In this Expectation they
continued to the last minute of his conversation with them upon Earth, and he
permitted them so to do.

Their last words to him were delivered in this question, Act. 1.6.
Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom unto Israel? Of the thing it
self they never doubted, they only desire to be informed of the time,

Now after so long expectation? Consider his Answer.

His Answer was this, It is not for you to know the times, etc. but ye shall
receive power when the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses
of me unto the utmost parts of the earth; and immediately he vanished away.

Was this an answer to their Question? or a satisfaction to their expectation?
Was this an Obligation laid upon them? If he had not sent down the Holy Ghost,
this would have moved them indeed, but it would have been to rage and
indignation; this would have obliged them indeed, but it would have been to
detest and abhor the name and memory of him that had abused them. But for the
honor of his name, not their own, they did and suffered all things, and
gloried in it. An irrefragable argument of their sincerity in the things which
they delivered.

3. Of the internal Arguments for the belief of History, there remains only the
Consideration of the way and manner of writing.

Histories then carry their own credentials in them, when the principal parts
of them are delivered with such circumstances of times, places, and persons, as
may render them liable to Examination, and Refutation, if they contain any
falsehood in them.

And in this particular, no History has any advantage over that History
whereof we are speaking, as will be evident to him that considers it thorowout.

Concerning John the Baptist, it is recorded, that he was born some few Months
before Christ, Luke 1.5.
that his Mother was Elizabeth, that his Father was Zachariah, a Priest of the
Course of Abia, that they lived in the Hill-Country.

He began to preach in the 15. of Tyberius, Pilat being Governor of Judaea,
Herod Tetrarch of Galilee, Luke 3.1.
his Brother Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the Region of Trachonitis, and
Lysanias Tetrarch of Abilene. Punctual and particular.

Soon after this he was Imprisoned and Beheaded by Herod, Mat. 14.3. Vide
Joseph. Ant. 18. c. 9.10.
for reprehending him about Herodias, all which were matters of Fact, very
easy, Luke 2.1.
if false, to have been refuted.

Concerning Christ, his birth is stated to have been at a time the most
remarkable that ever was, when the whole world was taxed by Augustus, in the
days of Herod, when Cyrenius was Governor of Syria; the place easy to be
enquired of, it was in a Manger, Mat. 4.6.
in an Inn, in a Town that was a little one among the thousands of Juda, Mic.
5.2.
easy to be examined.

When he was about 30 years old, he was Baptized of John, Luke 3.23.
and within a few days after he called his Apostles; and in less than four
years space he performed all his mighty Works, whereof I shall mention only
some few particulars.

At Cana in Galilee he turned Water into Wine, Joh. 2.1.11. Mat. 9.18.
at a Wedding, where was much company. He raised the Daughter of Jayrus, Mat.
8.6.
the Ruler of the Synagogue, there was but one in that place, she was his only
Daughter, and about 12 years Old. Luke 7.^.
He healed the Servant of that Centurion that had built a Synagogue. Can any
thing be more particular?

Joh. 11.18
At Bethany, 15 Furlongs from Jerusalem, a few days before his death, he raised
Lazarus after he had been dead four days. Could any thing be more examinable?

His death was at Jerusalem, at the time of the Passover, a time of greatest
annual concourse in the world, and then it is said, that the Sun was darkened,
the Veil rent, the Rocks torn apieces, the Graves opened. Can any thing be more
refutable than these things, if they had been false?

So likewise for the Apostles. Acts 9.33.40.10.1.
The healing of Aeneas at Lydda, raising of Dorcas at Joppe, the passages with
Cornelius Captain of the Band called the Italian Band at Caesarea, and many
other acts of Peter. The increpation of Barjesus at Paphos, 13.6.
in the presence of Sergius Paulus the Governor. 14.13.
The healing of a Cripple at Lystra, in the presence of the Priest of Jupiter,
besides many other acts of Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, are so
circumstantiated in the History, that if false they might have been very easily
contradicted.

But besides all these, this History contains a Narration of things done and
said, not only by persons well affected, but by Herod and Pontius Pilate, and
the Roman Governors, by the Pharisees, the Scribes, the High Priests, and the
Sanhedrim; all of them Enemies both to the Historians and the History; and if
any of these things had been convicted of falsehood, would not the credit of the
whole Gospel have (at once) been utterly overthrown?

I conclude therefore, that in respect of internal Arguments for belief, no
History has, or indeed can have any advantage above the History of the New
Testament.

2. As for External Arguments, I can but name them. Though the whole world
interessed themselves against the story (so examinable as you have heard)
though the Books were extant, while the memory of things was recent, Matthew
within seven years, Mark within eleven, Luke about twenty four, post mortem
Christi; the Epistles of Peter and Paul within thirty years, all the rest,
intra unius hominis aetatem, yet no man could ever convince them of falsehood.

The stories were received by men of the greatest Wisdom, Learning, and Virtue
amongst the Greeks and Latins. Many of the hardest passages were attested and
confessed by Enemies and Unbelievers.

The Cyrill c. 10. c. Jul.
Authors owned by Julian: the Orig. c. C.
Miracles confessed by Celsus: the Eusebius.
checking of the operation of the Devil by Porphyrius: Tertio Historiarum,
Citat. a Julio Afr. 3. Chronograe Orig. c. c. l 3.
the Darkness and Earthquake at the death of Christ by Thallus and Phlegon
Trallianus: 15.44. Annalium.
the Crucifixion of Christ (by Pilat under Tiberius) by Tacitus: And in one
word, The entire Volume of the Scriptures, the very same which our Church
receives (by virtue of the belief of the History of the Gospel) Athanas. Synops.
before any general Council, or the time of Constantine, Constable. ad p.p. Niceae,
Vide Theodoret. l. 1. c. 6. Gr-Lat. Pan.
without any Convocation of the Clergy, or imperial Edict for that purpose, was
instinctu quodam Christiano, generally received by all Christians, and the
world made Christians.

In respect of all these Arguments, internal and external, I might have justly
said, that the History of the Gospel has the advantage of any other History;
but seeing there are some particulars wherein the advantages are super-eminent,
I shall speak a little of that distinctly by it self, and so conclude.

2. These advantages I shall reduce to two heads, Testimonium Rei. Testimonium
Dei.


1. For the Testimonium Rei, consider, 1. Opposition to the Gospel. 2.
Prevailing of the Gospel.


1. Never any story was so much opposed as the Books and History of the New
Testament, by Jews and Gentiles, by the World and by the Devil.

The beginnings and propagation of the Gospel was by the Jews maliciously and
strenuously opposed in the times of Christ and his Apostles, and in all
succeeding Generations.

Lest all men should believe in Christ (because of his Miracles) the Rulers
took counsel to destroy him, Joh. 11.48
the People cried out to have him Crucified.

Lest the last error (as they called it) should be worse than the first, Mat.
27.64
they sealed up his Sepulcher, and set a watch upon it; and lastly, suborned
the Soldiers to say, that his Disciples came by night while they were sleeping
(how could they know this?) and stole him away.

That the first Miracle wrought by Peter and John might not spread among the
People, Act. 4.6.
the Rulers and Elders and Scribes, Annas and Caiaphas, and John and Alexander,
and all the Kindred of the High Priest, laid hands upon them, and put them in
hold, and threatened and commanded them not to speak at all in the Name of Jesus.

When Stephen had uttered his testimony, Act. 7.57.
the people cried with a loud voice, and stopped their Ears, and ran upon him
with one accord, and cast him out of the City, and stoned him.

Act. 9.2.
Wherever they met with Believers, Men or Women, they haled them into Prison,
breathing out threatenings and slaughter. Wherever they met with the Preachers,
they opposed and blasphemed, Act. 13.45 14.2. 13.50.
they tumultuated, they stirred the Gentiles, they enraged the chief men of the
Cities and the honorable women against them.

The instances of their malicious opposition, in all ages of the Church, are so
many as are not to be numbered in a few Minutes, but would require many days
only to name them.

They first stirred up Nero to persecute the Christians, Eus. l. 4.15.
they contrived the death of Polycarpus, they stood by, and insulted over the
dying Martyrs; in a word, whoever shall read the stories of primitive times, he
will find that the Jews were generally the Setters and Informers against the
Martyrs, and the Brokers for their Goods after Execution: And the Histories of
our own and other Nations will show us the height of their malice, and the
continuance of it.

Now, beside the little Nation of the Jews, the rest of the whole world, when
this History began to be published, and the Books written, were Heathen,
universally devoted to the Devil, whom therefore our Savior styles, the Prince
of this world.

And now that feud which had depended betwixt the seed of the Serpent and the
seed of the woman 4000 years, was by the preaching and writing of these things
brought to a Crisis.

The professed and declared design of the Gospel, was to drive the Devil out of
his Dominion; Notwithstanding the antiquity of his possession, the universality
of his Church, and the consent of all Nations, whereby he held his title.
Notwithstanding his Empire was supported by Governor; and Laws, and fortified
by the Arms and actual strength of all the world, he saw, that if the Gospel
were not suppressed, a little time would spoil the pride of all his glory, that
in a moment he should fall like lightning from Heaven.

That he should be exorcised out of the bodies which he possessed: That his
famous Oracles should soon be put to silence: Deuteronomy. 7.
his gorgeous Temples and Images should be torn down, his Mysteries and lying
wonders set at naught: That Prayers and Vows would be made to him no more, and
he should cease to be celebrated in the Songs of his Poets, and Hymns of his
Hierophantae.

That his revelling Festivals would be turned to mourning, no more gifts would
be presented, no beasts, nor children, women or men sacrificed upon his Altars.

The Contention was de rerum summa (pro aris and focis) and his rage was
kindled accordingly: He summons together all his wiles and stratagems, he
musters all his forces, he sounds an Allarm to the world, stirs up young and
old, rich and poor, all ages, sexes, conditions, the people wise and unwise,
the Common Soldiers and Commanders, Orig. c. C. l. 1.
Counselors and Judges, Senate and Emperors, by suppressing these Books, and
destroying the Believers of them, to erase the memory of the Gospel, and
abolish it for ever.

The people were enraged against the Believers, as against the common Enemy of
mankind, and pro solenni suo, they slandered them with unthought of wickedness,
they imputed to them all the calamities of the world: And required them to
death: Si Tiberis ascendit in moenia -- Christianos ad Leones --

Against these Books, the Learned employed their Learning, and the Witty
employed their Wit. Celsus, Porphyrius, Jamblichus, Hierocles, and other
Philosophers, endeavored to dispute them out of the world. Symmachus and
Libanius, and other Rhetors to declaim them away. Julian and Lucian and other
Scoptick wits, endeavored to jeer and droll away the credit of them.

Mean while the Senators and Lawyers employ themselves to destroy the Books, by
stretching against them the ancient Laws against bringing in Foreign Religions,
and against Magical and Fatidical Books: And to destroy Books and Believers by
New Laws made for that purpose, against Plin. Ep. 10.97.
Combinations (Heteriae) Sacrilege, Treason, the Law that none should buy or
sell, or draw water without Thurification to the Gods, and the like.

By force of these they persecute the Believers, as Enemies to the
Commonwealth, and Traitors to the Emperor, as sacrilegious persons, and
contemners of Religion.

The people sometimes rising upon them without any Edict, sometimes by virtue
of Edicts Imperial or Proconsular.

From the beginning of the Gospel to the end of Dioclesian and Maximian, this
was the state of Believers.

Their Scriptures were forbidden to be read, and required to be burned; their
Oratories and ( obscure) Churches were pulled in pieces; their Estates were
plundered and confiscate; their bodies were imprisoned and tormented; Fire and
Sword, hot Iron Chairs and Coffins, Gridirons, and Cauldrons, Hooks, Stakes,
and Gibbets, the Teeth of Lions, and Tigers, etc. were their portion.

It cannot be showed, that ever any Book or Story met with equal Opposition.

2. Consider then how it prevailed, how quickly and largely, how deeply and
effectually, although the Precepts were not contrived to solicit the
Affections, nor the Doctrines to court the Reason of men.

At one Sermon of Peter 3000, Act. 2.41.
at another 5000 were converted: Within a few years after the death of Christ
we find by S. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.1.
that the Gospel was preached throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,
Bithynia; and Paul had planted it from Jerusalem round about to Ilyricum:
Besides what was done by other Apostles, Act. 15.
in the Provinces assigned them at the Council of Jerusalem.

Within 66 years this grane of Mustard seed was become a Tree, Lib. 10.
Pliny Proconsul of Bithynia (to whom the care of Religion, Epist. 97.
ex officio, did appertein) appointed by Trajan to suppress the Christians, he
writes to him, that this Belief was Long lateque diffusa Civitates, Vicos,
Agros, impletos Christi cultoribus.

During the second Century, it had shot out great branches, the boughs of this
Tree were stretched out, Hesterni sumus and vestra omnia implevimus. Tertullian
reckons up the known parts of the World, Adv. Judaeos, c. 7, 8.
in quibus omnibus Christi nomen regnat, and concludes, ubique porrigitur,
creditur, colitur, regnat, adoratur.

And lastly, During the third ( a morte Christi) the Fowls of the air, and
Beasts of the field lodged under the shadow of it: The Net drew good and bad to
shore; the Roman Emperor and Empire declared themselves Christians, i.e.
Believers and Assertors of these Books: So mightily grew the word of God and
prevailed.

It went on conquering and to conquer, not by the Spirit of the Sword, but by
the sword of the Spirit; the powers of the Earth, and the gates of Hell could
not withstand it; it drove the Devil away with all his Temples, Idols, Oracles,
Priests, Sacrifices, Services, like lightning: So fell the Dragon, the old
Serpent that deceived the World, he was cast out with all his train.

So fell Lucifer the Son of the morn, his Friends and his Followers lamenting.

How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer the Son of the morning! Desolata
Templa rarissimus Victimarum emptor! Some complain of people forsaking of the
Gods, Pliny.
others of the Gods forsaking their Oracles and Temples, Porphyr.
and becoming useless to the World: He said I will ascend into Heaven, and
exalt my Throne above the Stars, but he was soon brought down to Hell.

For the Gospel like Leaven or Fire from Heaven, seized upon all that stood
before it; it leavened Cities, Islands, Castles, Tert. Ap. 37
Councils, Camps, the Tribes and Decuries, the Palaces, Senate, Pleading-places.

It took possession of the Learned, and the Wise, the greatest and noblest Wits
of the Eastern and Western Nations: It raised up Philosophers to confound the
Philosophy, and noble Orators to confound the Rhetoric wherewith it was
opposed.

Against Celsus it excited Origin, against Porphyrie, Apollinarius, and
Methodius; against Porphyrie and Hierocles, Lactantius and Eusebius (besides
what was written sparsim by Jerome, Augustine, Cyril, etc.) It set up Chrysostom
against Libanius, Prudentius against Symmachus and the Rhetoricians.

And as it spread it self large and high, so where it took possession, it took
a deep possession, Quantum vertice -- tantum radice: Those that received it
truly, received it in the love thereof, it took possession of their hearts: it
penetrated their spirits, and took its lodging in the inmost recesses of the
soul. The Contents of these Books was their most precious Pearl, and they hid
it in their heart. The Books themselves were their greatest worldly treasure,
and rather than they would deliver them to be burned, they chose to suffer the
loss of honor, liberty, estate, Wives, and Children, nay even life it self.
When Dioclesian required the Scriptures that they might be burned, In one
Province ( Egypt) in one Month, 17000 persons chose rather to dye than to
deliver them: Eus l. 8. c. 3
In comparison of these they counted not their lives dear to them; the love of
them was stronger than Death, many waters could not quench it, neither could
the floods drown it. This was Testimonium Rei, and an advantage above all other
Histories, or Writings in the World.

2. Moreover they had Testimonium Dei. Indeed all that is already spoken is an
evidence of a Divine assistance: But more particularly, God gave Testimony to
these Books, by

1. Their operation upon Believers of them.

2. His cooperation with Believers of them.

1. The Gospel which they contein, was the power of God to every true Believer.
That which no Institution in Philosophy, nor Initiation in the Mysteries of any
of the Gods, was ever able to accomplish, Vide Orig. C. Cells. l. 3.
that was every where achieved by the belief of the Gospel, in a moment. Like
a charm from Heaven, it stilled the passions, and mortified the lusts of men.
What a Beadroll does Paul reckon up in the Corinthians: 1 Cor. 6.9.
But ye are washed (says he) but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

Notwithstanding all the calumnies thrown upon Believers, Lact. de falls. sap.
l. 3. c. 26.
and the prejudice wherewith they were loaded, the unpropitious and relucting
world were forcibly convinced that the Believers of these Books were
effectually taught to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world: through the cloud of ignominy
wherewith they were encompassed, their innocence broke forth as the light, and
their just dealing as the noon day; the piety, loyalty, justice, charity,
magnanimity, patience, meekness, and purity of Believers of these Books,
convinced the unbelieving world, that God was in them of a truth: for they
teach as having Authority and Power, and not as the writings of other Scribes.

2. But beside the operation of these Books upon the Believers, God was pleased
to give testimony to them by his cooperation with them in signs and wonders,
and mighty deeds.

The History of the Gospel tells us, that when Christ was even now leaving the
world, he left this Legacy to Believers for confirmation of the truth of the
Gospel; These signs (said he) shall follow them that believe; In my name they
shall cast out Devils; Mar. 16.19
Speak with new tongues; Take up Serpents; If they drink any deadly thing, it
shall not hurt them; They shall lay hands on the Sick, and they shall recover.

Now that this was made good, and that these signs (so long as there was need)
were continued among Believers, we have as good assurance as we can have of any
thing beyond our own memory or experience.

They have been delivered to us by a Cloud of Witnesses; by men of the greatest
Wisdom and Learning in their Generations, by persons of such integrity, that
they laid down their lives in testimony of their veracity; delivered not by
hearsay, but upon their certain knowledge; delivered in their Disputations
with, and Apologies to the Adversaries of Christianity, with a challenge to the
examination of the truth, or a conviction of the falsehood of them. Instances
are very numerous, I shall produce only a very few.

Justin the Martyr (who suffered Anno 165) affirms to Trypho the Jew, Dial. cum
Tryphone.
that these supernatural gifts were found in his time among Christians.

Irenaeus an Auditor of Polycarp, who was a Disciple of S. John (suffered circa
206) affirms upon his own knowledge, that the gift of Prophecy was then
frequent in the Church, Iren. l. 22. c. 56. Eus. b. 5. c. 7 item c. 20.
that many had the gift of tongues, ipsi audivimus; Others cast out Devils,
Others healed Diseases, Others raised the dead; and those raised persons
continued many years amongst them, pro certo.

Tertullian in his Apologetica adversus Gentes, affirms that Jam de vobis
Daemonas ejiciunt.

Origin against Celsus, says, L. 3.
that he himself had seen by invocation of God, and the Name of Jesus very many
that were delivered from grievous maladies, (...) ( alienatione mentis) (...).

Not to mention others, S. Augustine in his Book de Civitate Dei (begun about
410, but many years in writing) l. 22. c. 8. gives an account of very many
Miracles done at Hippo, Carthage, and other places, of no great distance,
noting times, places, persons, occasions, appealing to the Country, delivering
them under terms of the greatest assurance; Scio ego; cognosco ego; nos
interfuimus, and oculis nostris aspeximus: And in his Retractations, Ea quae
cognoscimus neque refer neque enumerare possumus.

Other Histories and Writings, and the Authors and Believers of them can
pretend no higher than to the testimony of men, these have the testimony of God
also: If we believe the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater. I
conclude therefore, that there is greater Reason to believe the History of the
New Testament than any other History in the world.

The sum of all is this, The Divine Authority of the Scriptures is the great
fundamental and comprehensive Principle of Christianity, which being admitted
it stands, and being removed it presently falls to the ground.

Against this therefore the great Enemy of Religion in these later days (under
pretense of Reason and Philosophy) directs his Forces, and is said to have
found a success very pernicious and deplorable.

I humbly conceive that the Resolution of the belief of the Divine Authority of
the Scriptures into the Decrees of Popes, or Determinations of Councils with
those who call themselves Roman Catholics, into private impulses and dictates
of the Spirit with the Enthusiasts, and into the Laws and Edicts of Princes and
Magistrates with our new pretenders to Reason and Philosophy, is that engine
whereby the Devil has prevailed to scandalize the world and cast it into
Antiscriptural infidelity.

It is for this cause that I have conceived it requisite (after many others who
have done worthily) to have recourse (once more) to the Original Reason of
things, Vide Philos. Essay.
and the common grounds whereupon mankind does proceed in matters of this
nature.

Where (hoping that I have escaped the absurdity of begging the matter in
Question, discoursing in a circle, and the inconveniences of some other
methods) I have endeavored to demonstrate: That supposing the truth of the New
Testament, both 1. The Old Testament, and 2. The New Testament are to be
received as of Divine Authority.

3. And supposing matters of fact to be truly related, the Doctrinal parts are
to be believed.

4. For the Historical Relation of matters of fact, that there is no ground to
dis-believe it.

That for the Reception of it, it has 1. All the advantages whereof an History
is capable.

2. Far greater advantages than any other History.

Wherefore I conclude, that All the Scriptures (i. e. the Canonical Books of
the Old Testament and the Books of the New Testament) were given by inspiration
of God. Quod erat demonstrandum.

FINIS.
CONCERNING THE Sinfulness Danger Remedies
of Infidelity. A SERMON Preached at Whitehall, Feb. 16. 1667/68. BY SETH Lord
Bishop of Sarum.

LONDON, Printed for James Collins, at the King's Head in Westminster Hall. 1670.

THE SINFULNESS OF INFIDELITY.
Heb. III. 12. Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you, an evil heart
of unbelief, in departing from the living God. -- Exhort one another daily. --
I Shall not spend time in a disputation concerning the Author of this Epistle,
viz. whether it were Paul, or Barnabas, or Luke, or Clemens, or Apollos, etc.
but shall with the Church of England, suppose S. Paul to have been the Author
of it.

If the Author of it be not infallibly known, this ought not to detract from
its Authority.

Most of the other Epistles have been acknowledged to be of divine Authority,
because they were known to have proceeded from Apostolical writers.

This (on the contrary) has been concluded to be an Apostolical Epistle,
propter (...) Characterem, by reason of that divine and Apostolical Spirit,
which to those who have had their Senses exercised, has manifestly appeared in
it.

If it were lawful (in this sense) to compare spiritual things with spiritual;
I should not fear to affirm, that this Epistle has in it some peculiar
advantages; Compared with some other of the Epistles. ( Advantages, I mean, of
usefulness, not of Authority, seeing all of them issued from the same Spirit.)

The design of it is General, Fundamental, Comprehensive, not Private,
Circumstantial, Occasional; And it has peculiarly conveyed to the Church two
great treasures. 1. A Complete Model, or System, of Christian Divinity. And 2.
the Way of that Analogy, and manner of ratiocination, whereby the true Spirit,
and meaning of the Types and Prophesies of the Old Testament is to be found out
and applied.

It was directed to the Hebrews; That is, to those of the Jewish Nation, who
had received the Gospel, and made a Profession of Christianity. And the main
Scope and design of it, is to preserve the Professors of Christianity from
Apostasy and Infidelity.

The means used to this purpose; are partly Didactical, and partly
Protreptical; Demonstrating the truths of the Gospel, and then urging the
Professors of those truths, to be steadfast in the faith, and to beware of
Infidelity.

The Method here used is a mixed method of Doctrine and Application; Dogmatical,
truths and pathetical Exhortations continually interwoven.

He begins with the Great foundation of our faith. Christ is the Son of God,
Chap. 1.
the brightness of his glory; better then the Angels. Chap. 2.
Wherefore if the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast, how shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation?

Chap. 3.
From the Comparison of Christ with Moses, he concludes against Hardness of
Heart and Infidelity.

5.6.7 8.
He demonstrates the Priesthood of Christ to be more Excellent then that of
Aaron; and in the midst of his argument, ^^ 6.
he falls into an Application, or Corollary, concerning the dreadful Condition
of them that fall away.

This is his design, and method, thorowout the Epistle; Whatever Doctrine he is
upon, this is still the drift and aim of all his Applications, namely to
preserve the Professors of Christianity, from Apostasy and Infidelity.

The words, which I have chosen, are a Reiteration or Reinforcement of an
Application, or Corollary, arising from the Consideration of the Excellency of
Christ above Moses. 3.5.
Moses was faithful in the house as a Servant; Christ as a Son, over his own
house. This house are we if we hold fast our faith.

Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says,

Harden not your hearts -- Take heed brethren, lest -- I say, the words are an
Use of Exhortation, and in them are considerable,

1. The Persons to whom directed: Professors of Christianity, expressed in the
Word Brethren.

2. Matter or Object about which it is conversant, Unbelief: heart unbelief.

3. Form of Exhortation by way of Caveat. (...) take heed.

Now every Caveat implies,

1. Evil in the thing.

2. Danger of the thing.

3. That there are ways and means to prevent it. This is employed in the
Caveat, and expressed in words following.

My design, at this time, will be to enforce the Exhortation of the Text: And
seeing that every Application is a Consequence or Corollary arising from some
Antecedent Proposition, and the force of it is finally resolved into the truth
and evidence and concernment of that Antecedent: Therefore it will be necessary
to draw out that Antecedent by reflecting briefly upon the Text as it lies in
the Series of the Epistle.

I. Then, ^or the Persons. They are here styled Brethren, and elsewhere, Holy
Brethren, 3.1. 5 4.
Partakers of the heavenly Calling. ^hey were (...), baptized into the
Profession of the Gospel, they had tasted of the Word of God, and the power of
the world to come.

II. The Matter. Unbelief, or rather Disbelief, ( not Negative Infidelity, but
a positive Revolting from the faith which they had professed) Generally, a
Disbelief of the Word of God; Particularly, a Disbelief of the Gospel, as to
the Doctrines, or Promises, or Threatenings thereof.

III. For the Form that which is here expressed by (...) (look to it) is in the
other forms of Exhortation, thorowout the Epistle, expressed by terms of the
greatest Emphasis and earnestness imaginable, Let us Fear lest we fall short,
4.1.

Labor to enter, 4.11.

Use diligence, not be slothful, 6.11, 12.

Press earnestly, draw near, hold fast, 10.22.

(...). Let us give more diligent heed lest by any means we should let it slip,
2.1.

So that the Sum of the Apostles Argumentation is this: The last resolution
of all the Obligation of men, is into reasons of Duty and of Interest.

If there be Wickedness in Infidelity, it is matter of Duty, if there be Danger
in it, and Danger of it, it is matter of Interest and Concernment to Beware of
it.

This Heart of Unbelief is an Evil heart ((...)) there is Wickedness in it. It
grieves the Spirit of God; It provoked him So, that he swear in his wrath, that
he would take Vengeance for it: there is Danger in it. Yet it was a thing
Ordinary and common amongst the Fathers of these Hebrews, it was neque Novum,
neque Rarum, There is Danger of it.

It is the Duty and Concernment of every one Professing Christianity to take
heed lest there be in them an heart of Unbelief; and to use all means to
prevent it. This is the Antecedent.

Wherefore take heed brethren, etc. -- (which is the Exhortation by way of
Caveat; -- Exhort one another daily, etc. which is the way to prevent it.

So then for the enforcement of the exhortation upon the whole matter, I am to
speak I. Of the Evil of Infidelity. II. Of the Danger of falling into it. III.
Of the means of preventing it. And then to conclude with IV. The Exhortation
of the Text.


1.
In speaking of the Evil of Infidelity, I shall not discourse at large, but
confine my self to an enquiry into two pretenses (Which having been broached in
the late times of Infidelity toward the King, are said to have operated very
far toward a general Apostasy from the faith, and the production of Infidelity
toward God) both which appealing to the tenor of the Scriptures; must be
examined by them.

3.
The first is of a famous Author, and it is this, That the Scriptures do not
make Infidelity to be a Sin, at the time of the delivery of the Scriptures.

The second is of a Writer more obscure, but in it self, 2. C.W.
so agreeable to the disposition of the present generation, that it has
possessed the minds of many; it is this, that

Although Infidelity (according to the Scriptures) in the times of Christ and
his Apostles, were sinful, and inexcusable; yet in our times, it is excusable.
These are the pretenses to be examined.

The Substance of the Gospel, as it immediately relates to Christian duty, is
summarily reduced to the Doctrines and Injunctions of our Lord Christ, and his
Apostles.

The Author of Leviathan (cap. 42. page 286.) tells us in plain terms, that We
do not read any where (in the Scriptures) that they which received not the
Doctrine of Christ, did therein Sin.

And again, that the Injunctions of Christ, and his Apostles, men might refuse
without sin.

Now concerning this assertion* I cannot choose but say, that had I not been
acquainted with the works of that author (especially those relating to
religion) I should exceedingly wonder at it, because it supposes men never to
look into their Bibles, which is the thing it would persuade.

Mat. 21.42.
In the 21. of Matthew. Our Savior asks the Jews this question, Did ye never
read in the Scriptures such a thing? a question which I must repeat to the
Assertors of this doctrine. Did they never read in the Scriptures the
Sinfulness, the Danger, the Heynousness of Infidelility? Luc. 9.41.
Surely he that runs may read it.

before his death, did oftentimes vehemently rebuke his Disciples, for
Infidelity, "O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I endure you?
( Quousque tandem abutemini patientia nostra) And after his Resurrection, 24.25.
he calls them fools and slow of heart, for unbelieving: Did they never read
these Increpations?

Author of this Epistle, and the rest of the Apostles, do every where
vehemently and earnestly dehort from Unbelief. Did they never read these
Dehortations?

John, Christ tells the Jews, that if they believe not, Jo. 8.24.3.36.
they shall die in their Sins. That the wrath of God abides on them, that he
that believes not, is damned already. Did they never read these Denunciations?

Yes! these last, it seems this Author had read, and as his manner is, thinking
he could accommodate an answer to these, he has pronounced securely of all the
rest: To these he says that they import only a non-remission of the sins
committed aganst the laws of their Country; (that they should die in them;) but
that they do not evince, any sinfulness to be in Infidelity; Wherefore I must
crave license to proceed.

Apostle in the 21 of the Revelations, R. 21.8.
give a Catalogue of such sinners as are of the bigest rank, Such as are most
abominable in the eyes of God, Such as are to have their portion in that lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, and he puts Unbelievers in the head of
this Regiment The fearful and Unbelievers, and Abominable, and Murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Liars shall have their portion in that lake.

Obj. 1.
But it may be, perhaps; that the Scripture does not in plain and express
terms, affirm Infidelity to be Sinful!

Res. 1.
The Text tells us plainly and expressly, that an heart of unbelief is (...) (not
(...) but (...), not incommodious but wicked.)

Obj. 2.
But Philosophers and Mathematicians; (pretending Strictness and demonstration
in discourse) regard not general words; but have recourse to the Definitions of
things, and from thence proceed to affirm or deny the Attribution which is
under question. Res. 2.
Let us therefore have recourse to the definition of Sin.

Those who have spoken most accurately concerning the nature of Sin, they have
resolved, that the formal notion of it, consists in a departure from God. it is
Aversio a Deo, and Conversio ad creaturam.

Jer. 2.12.
In the second of Jeremy, and 12. we find the Prophet as it were in furore sacro
(in a prophetic rage) breaking forth into this Exclamation. Be astonished, O ye
heavens, be ye horribly afraid, be very desolate says the Lord! What ailes the
Prophet to cry so loud? to make the heavens resound his Exclamation? my people
(says he) have committed two Great evils, they have Forsaken me, that is the
first. An heart of unbelief, is an evil heart, in departing from the living God.

It is true that the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, does not usually descend
to Logical accuracy, to the quatenus, or Causality, to the observation of the
rules of (...).

And this makes it oft-times, harder to deal with men of perverse minds, then
many do imagine. But the more rare this is, the more you will take notice of
the Providence, when you shall consider, how accurately, and how fully, the
Scripture has determined that which is in Question.

In the 16. of Joh. 8. our Savior tells them, Ioh. 16.8.3.18.19.
that the Spirit shall rebuke the world of Sin, of righteousness, of judgment:
Of Sin, Because they believe not on him. Joh. 3.18. he that believes not is
Condemned, because he believes not. (...), the rejection of the Gospel is said
to be the very Condemnation, So expressly is, the (...), delivered to us, (by
Causal and Identical propositions) in the Scripture; Who is it now, that can
persuade us, that the Scriptures do not affirm, any Sinfulness to be in
Infidelity?

Yes verily! the Scriptures not only teach us, that unbelief is a sin, but
they teach us likewise

6. The Heinousness and Aggravation, the Sinfulness and Punishment of this Sin.

It was this that brought all other sin into the World; and every Premeditated
sin arises from it. It hardens the heart, and sears the Conscience, and makes
it bid defiance to the Lord of Glory.

Concerning David we read in the Psalms, that once he said in his Have that all
men are liars, did he revoke it when he was at leisure? No, the more he thought
of it, the higher he proceeds, and becomes the more assured in this charge;
Surely (says he) Men of low degree are Vanity, and men of high degree are (not
liars but) a Lie. Ps. 62.9.
Yet if one gives the lie to one of these liars, it is the utmost provocation;
it is the stated word of defiance, Neh. 23.1^.
concluded fit to justify the Duel or the Stab. On the other side, God glories
in this, that he is not a man that he should lie, that the strength of Israel
will not lie, yet infidelity gives him the lie. He that believes not God makes
him a Liar. (1 John 5.10.)

7. I desire to know what is that (...), whereby the Heinousness of any sin is
to be estimated.

Is it the denunciation of Future Vengeance? Th. 1.7.
The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, taking Vengeance upon Unbelievers, and they shall be punished
with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord and from the
presence of his power.

Is it Old or New, Past, or present Instances of Vengeance? To. 11.20.
Were not the body of this people newly cut off for unbelief? And of ancient
days, whose were the Carcasses that fell in the Wilderness; and to whom did
God swear in his wrath, that they should not enter into his rest, Heb. 3.
but to them that believed not?

Consider but the story, from whence the Exhortation of the Text arises. How
God was provoked through unbelief. The text tells us* that he was Moved, he was
Tempted, he was Grived, he was Provoeked, till he swear in his wrath --

The words are taken out of the 95 Psalm, Ps. 95.
to which the 78. is parallel. They were (says the Psalmist) a stubborn and
rebellious Generation; They tempted God, and spoke against him, Therefore the
Lord heard this and was wroth: So a fire was kindled against Jacob and anger
against Israel; Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his
Salvation -- When God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel, he
gave way to his Indignation, wrath, anger, displeasure and Jealousy.

I conceive, now the first Question to be stated, viz. Whether (according to
the tenor of the Scripture) Infidelity were sinful and dangerous, in the time
of the delivery of the Scriptures: I proceed to the second Question, viz. (
However it was in ancient times.)

2. Whether Infidelity, be not in such times as ours Excusable?

My meaning is this: Whether (speaking according to Scriptural grounds, and
reason) Now that Miracles, extraordinary gifts and Prophesies are ceased,
Infidelity be not become Excusable (however it might be Sinful and inexcusable
during the time when Prophesies and Miracles were in use?)

The first verse of this Epistle (to the Hebrews) tells us what powerful and
noble motives to believe, God had afforded to the Fathers.

God himself was pleased to speak to them, (...), at sundry times, and in
diverse manners.

In the Times of the Patriarchs, Judges, Kings, and Prophets by the Ways of
Visions, Dreams, Voices, ^imilitudes, Vrim, and by diverse miracles and wonders.

So likewise, for those that are here exhorted; About the time of the Writing
of this Epistle; God had spoken to them by his Son (the brightness of his
Glory, the image of his person) And by the Apostles, to whom also he bare
Witness, by mighty signs and wonders, by diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy
Ghost.

Now that Such men as these, who had so great advantages to bring them to
believe, should be severely punished for Infidelity, I am persuaded there is
hardly any man, but thinks it very just and reasonable.

That such as had seen the wonders of God, in Egypt and the Wilderness, so
manifestly miraculous, so often repeated, and yet for all this would not
believe, that their Carcasses should fall in the Wilderness.

That Ananias and Sapphira who had known the miracles which had been done by
the Apostles, should think to Cosen the Apostles: it deserved the Judgment
that befell them.

As for our selves had we lived in the times of Miracles or Prophesies, we
doubt not but we should have believed. Or, as Philip said, show us the father,
and it suffices. Could we but once see a miracle, or talk with one returning
from the dead; it should suffice, we would believe.

But seeing it is now many hundreds of years, Since these things are ceased,
and we have nothing left us, Praeter miraculorum famam; If we shall not believe
the Gospel; by some it is openly pretended, and by many it is secretly
iamgined, that, in this case we may be Excused.

I could wish that the time would serve, Clearly to rid away this phantasm; In
order to it, I shall briefly do three things.

1. Show that this Fantastical imagination is no new invention but that it
has of old, 1.
been the conceit of Abominable Hypocrites.

2 ly. I shall inquire a little into the grounds of this Conceit, 2.
and show the mistake of those suppositions, into which it is resolved.

3 ly. I shall show, that our Savior (Knowing the thoughts of men) has taken
particular care to prevent this Imagination; 3.
and has clearly decided the matter in Question.

I. Though the present age be fruitful in inventions tending this way, yet this
has been Anticipated by the Wits of former times.

Luc. 11.47.
In the 11 of Luke 47. We find the Scribes and Pharisees, building the
Sepulchers of the Prophets, whom their fathers had killed.

If we would know, what they pretend^d, Mat. 23.30
in so doing, we shall find it in the parallel place of Matthew. They said, if
we ha^ been in the days of our f^thers, we would not have been partakers with
them, in the blood of the Prophets.

That these men, did not believe the Prophets, it is manifest; Christ tells
them, if they had believed the Prophets, they would have believed him: for they
wrote of him,

But that they would have believed the Prophets, (and not have murdered them)
had they lived in their times, this they pretend: and it is very probable they
had that opinion.

Yes Verily! had they lived in the days of Miracles and Prophesies, they would
have believed, the very conceit wnich is now Pretended!

But the Truth is, these men were abominable Hypocrites, and the cause of their
Unbelief, was not the want of miracles and Prophesies but Carnal prejudice, and
interest, and the Vile affections of their hearts. Did not Christ work
miracles? Was not he that Prophet which was to come? Yet they took him, and
with wicked hands they slew him, and brought upon themselves the blood of all
the Prophets.

But 2 ly. If we shall examine the bottom of this fancy, and resolve it into
its Principles, we shall find that it supposes these things.

1. That the want of the sight of miracles, is sufficient to Justify unbelief.

2. That to live in the very age of miracles, is apter to create belief, then
to be born and educated, in a believing nation, after the world has been
convinced by the miracles of former times (which is our Case.)

3. That the bare sight of miracles, is of it self alone, sufficient to create
belief, in every person that should see them.

Of which suppositions, the first is contrary to common Reason, and the two
later are contrary to Scriptural Reason, and to the experience of the world.

1. If the want of the sight of miracles were enough to justify Infidelity,
then for every Dogma to be believed, Every Individual person, were to expect
the sight of miracles; which if it should happen, the wonder would cease, and
miracles become No miracles, by the frequency of the performances of them, and
so they would be inept to create belief.

Every work of nature, is in it self a miracle; Who would not think it easier
to recover a man, (who had all his parts and humors already formed,) from the
dead, then from that liquid principle whereof Job speaks, to raise up flesh
and skin, Job. 10.1^.
bones and sinews: to Advance an understanding creature, capable of Adoring or
blaspheming the maker of him? Yet that is a miracle, and this is none, only
through the rarity of one, and frequency of the other.

Again, if every one were to see miracles, Io. 20.29.
the merit of faith would be taken away. Jesus said unto Thomas, because thou
have seen -- thou have believed, B^essed are they that have not seen, yet have
believed. This for the first supposition.

2. The second is this, that to live in the very age of miracles, is apter to
create a belief, then to live in a believing nation a good time after the times
of Miracles.

But, contrary to this, we have instances both in Jews and Gentiles. After near
4000 years. How pertinaciously do the Jews adhere to Moses, against whom their
fathers Murmured* and rebelled, notwithstanding the sight of all his miracles;
and when he had wrought that great miracle upon Corah and for his rebellion,
the next day they rebelled again.

And we find now the whole world, (especially the wiser part) Converted to
Christianity, whereas the Apostles complain of the paucity of professors, and
the Infidelity of the Jews, in the Age of Christ and his Apostles, was so great
and resolute that it has a fatal operation upon that nation unto this day.

I am sensible, that in the Comparison of later ages with the days of
miracles, I may be thought (...), and to advance a paradox, where that I may
not lean on my own understanding, I beseech you to Consider, our Saviors
decision of the Question which we have in hand.

I suppose, I may take it for granted, that the Condition of the Jews in our
Saviors time, was in respect of Moses, the same (as to the matter in Question)
with our Condition in respect of Christ.

The tradition of the law, was accompanied with mighty Signs and wonders. And
so was ^ikewise the tradition of the Gospel.

In the times succeeding Moses, God for a Season continued the sensible
manifestation of his presence, by miracles. So he did likewise in the times
succeeding Christ.

But before the time of our Savior both miracles and Prophesies had a long
time ceased. Psalm 74, 9.
We see not our Tokens (says the Psalmist) there is not one Prophet left; as
it is with us at this day.

Only, they had the books of Moses and the Prophets, Just so Conveyed and
propounded to them, as our Scriptures have been to us.

So that, if the Question be proposed concerning those J^ws; whether the
present miracles of Christ, or the complexion of Motives which they had, to
induce them to believe the writings of Moses, were apter to create belief, It
is the same with our Question, Whether the liveing in The time of Miracles, or
our Motives; are more powerful to believing. To determine which Question; we
may observe; That the Apostles after the sight of all our Saviors miracles,
Continued in unbelief, till he had opened unto them the Scriptures, of Moses
and the Prophets. That after many miracles, he refers the Jews to the searching
of the Scriptures; (bringing them a notiori ad ignotius.) And in the the 5 of
John and the 47. he decides this Question by another, Jo. 5.47.
if ye do not believe the writings of Moses, how shall ye believe my Words?

Thus much concerning the 2 supposition.

3. The 3 is this, that the sight of miracles, is of it self alone, sufficient
to bring every person to believing.

We ought indeed to own it, to the eternal Glory of our Blessed Redeemer, that
the Faith of Christians is founded upon his Miracles as well as on his
Doctrine, and example. And he himself tells the Jews, that if he had not done
miracles they should not have had sin ( i. e. the Sin of Infidelity.) But Now
to dream of miracles, and hanker after them; or to think to Excuse our
Infidelity, for want of the sight of them, ( as if that alone would certainly
make believers of us all,) it argues that we have been sloathful readers of the
Scriptures.

It happened to our Saviors miracles as it did to his Preaching; according to
his parable of the sower. Some of them lighted upon hearts that were honest and
good, and brought forth the fruit of believing. Others fell by the way side, or
upon stony places, or among the Thorns.

The prepossession of their minds, by an expectation of a temporal Messiah, in
the Rulers; The fear of persecution by them in the People; The Cares of the
World, and deceitfulness of riches, The pleasures and lusts, to which the
Austerities of the Gospel-rules, were opposite; and Many other prejudices,
deeply rooted in the hearts of a pervers and froward Generation, prevailed
against the sight of miracles; and None were more pervers and resolute
unbeleivers, then some of those, who had the Advantage of this great argument
for believing.

If the sight of Miracles alone, were sufficient to produce belief, in all
kinds of Spectators, certainly the Scribes and Pharisees, (who by their
learning were able to Judge of a miracle,) the Countrymen and Kinsmen of Christ
( with whom he was most Conversant,) should have been most Eminent in believing.

But behold the enchantment of prejudice and Carnal Interest! Luc. 5.21.
In the 5. of Luke 21. The Pharisees and Doctors saw the miracles of Christ,
and yet they concluded him a Blasphemer. And when he had healed, him that was
borne blind; they (hypocritically) bad the man give Glory to God, and said they
knew that Jesus was a sinner.

Joh. 9.2^.
They turned his miracles into wantonness, feigned themselves Just men, that
they might tempt him, i. e. put a trick upon him. demanding a sign for a sight,
Luc. 20.20.
only to satisfy their wanton Curiosity.

As for his Country men, this Prophet had no honor there, he did not many
miracles, Ma. 13.58.
among them, because of their unbeleef. Mar. 3.21. Jo. 7.5.
His friends said he, was beside himself, and went to lay hold on him.

As for the People, In the 6 of John we find, Jo. 6.10.
that Christ fed 5000 men with 5 loavs and 2 small fishes, so that they said
this is of a truth that Prophet. But the Very next day ( ver. 22.) the Very men
that had eaten of the loaves (26) Said unto him what sign show thou that we
may believe? what do thou work! (30.) as if a miracle had not been a Sign!

He wrought a miracle among the Gadarens, Ma. 5.17.
and they besought him to be gone. Others were offended at him, and cast him
out of their City. The issue of all his miracles, was this; Jo. 7.12.
Some said he was a good man, Others Nay! Jo. 10.20.
but he deceives the people. And many said he had a Devil and was mad.

Nay! when he hung upon the cross they acknowledged his miracles, and jeered
him with them; He saved others, himself he cannot save; let him do one more
miracle, let him come down from the Cross, and we will believe him: So Vain is
the pretense of those, who think to excuse their Infidelity, because they
cannot see a miracle! So false are the Grounds of that opinion.

3. Briefly! 3.
to bring this Argument to an issue.

If it were granted to these persons, to see a miracle, what kind of miracle
would they choose, to convince their understandings, and settel them in
religion? We are here I confess in loco Conjecturali, and no man can tell what
miracle another man would choose, but I am persuaded, that which most men would
agree upon, as most conducing to that purpose whereof we are speaking would be
this; that to assure them of the Immortality of the Soul and of the rewards and
punishments of the world to come, and to satisfy their Curiosity in some other
doubts and scruples; They might once be allowed to see and converse with some
one, that might rise from the dead who might resolve their Questions,
concerning the condition of those that are in Hades.

3. I say then, that our Savior who knew, what was in man, and needed not that
any one should tell him foreseeing this Fantastical conceit, has showed the
folly of it, and preoccupated this vain resort.

Luc. 16.23.
In the 16 of Luke 27. Dives makes it his request to Abraham; that he would send
Lazarus from the dead; to testify to his brethren, those things which these men
dream of.

Abraham refers them to the Scriptures, which were in the same manner
recommended to them as our Scriptures are to us. They have Moses and the
Prophets, etc. let them hear them.

He says unto him, Nay father Abraham, but if one went to them from the dead,
they would believe.

And he (Abraham) said If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

This I take to be a clear and a full determination of the matter in Question;
And if any one should imagine, that this determination was but Conjectural,
Ioh. 12.
Our Savior afterward tries the Experiment, and raises another Lazarus from
the dead.

What was the effect of this man's coming from the dead, did it Convert the High
Priest or the Scribes the rulers or the people; nay, but from that very day
they took counsel together how they might put Jesus to death. 53.
And the Chief Priests Consulted, how they might put Lazarus to death Also.

Upon these Considerations; we may infallibly Conclude, that Infidelity in Such
times as ours, is no more excusable, then it was in the days of Christ or his
Apostles; the times of miracles and phrophesies.

So much of the first Supposition, in the Caveat of the text, the Sinfulness of
Infidelity, in General at all times, And the Inexcusableness in our times,
which makes it our Duty to take heed of it;

II.
I pass to the second supposition, concerning the Danger of falling into it,
which makes it our concernment and Interest to beware of it. For if this be
clear, the Exhortation will be powerful, take heed brethren, etc.

Now, the Danger of falling into infidelity, is in it self so conspicuous, and
made so sensible by every day' s experience, that I wish the proof of it were
difficult, so as to Justify a studious and laborious demonstration of it.

At once, to shorten my discourse, and to remove the suspicion of any Satirical
reflection upon those that hear me; I shall show, that the Greatest Advantages,
have not preserved the best of men, from sometimes falling into Infidelity.
Take heed therefore brethren.

The greatest Helps and Advantages against unbelief. I conceive to be these
ensueing.

1. Evidences of Gods Presence. 2. Or these lighting on a good understanding.
3. At least upon the Ablest of men. 4. Such as have held Communion with God. 5.
Or have been eminent for the habit and exercise of faith. 6. or these with
warnings to prevent the Danger of falling. 7. And those reiterated. Yet all
these, have not preserved good men from sometimes falling, A word of each.

1. First then, to begin with the persons in the Context, What greater
Evidences of the Presence of God can be Imagined, then they enjoyed; In Egypt
in their passage over the red Sea, in the Wilderness, my presence, says God,
shall go along with you, They were conducted by a Pillar of a Cloud, etc. they
were Supported, and Corrected by Visible and palpable instances of Gods power
and presence. Yet they tempted and grieved the Spirit of God, by their
Infidelity, for they believed not for all his Wondrous Works.

2. But these Jews were a dull and stupid people. If God should once manifest
himself, to a wise and understanding person (Such as we take our selves to be)
We may think it impossible to fall into unbelief.

I suppose it will be no disparagement to these Objectors, to say, that Solomon
might be as Wise and Knowing, as Wary and Philosophical as they. And as for the
manifestation of Gods presence, the Scripture tells us Expressly, Kin. 3.3.
that God appeared to him at Gibeon. Where he made a promise to him which he
performed.

Yet Solomon fell into the grossest Infidelity: to think there were Gods and
Goddesses, Kin. 11.5.
To worship Asteroth, the Goddess of the Sidonians, and Milcom the Abomination
of the Ammonites.

3. But it may be yet Objected, that Solomon did this in the Dotage of his
years, and his Dotage upon his Idolatrous wives, which turned away his heart,
but that it could not have preceeded from him, before his understanding was
empayred.

Behold then a greater then Solomon! even Adam in his full strength when he was
newly made after the similitude of God, a little lower then the Angels. God
several times appeared to him in the Garden; Yet he fell through unbeleif, and
drew all his posterity into his ruin.

4. But Adam though he had perfection of Nature yet he wanted Grace, whereby he
might have held Communion with God, which having been once enjoyed, would for
ever have kept him from infidelity, or deliberate sin, which always proceeds
from it.

Consider then the case of David! Sam. 16.13. Psalm. 89.4.
of whom it is said, that the Spirit of the Lord God came upon him; That God
himself made a Covenant with him, and Swear unto him by his holiness, that he
would not fail him.

And as for David who was like unto him, for Devotion and Zeal, for spiritual
Communion and intercourse with God? He was the sweet singer of Israel; and how
often do we find, his Spirit inebriated, and transported, in the Celebration of
his divine and ravishing enjoyments.

Yet we find him falling from all this height; and great and terrible was his
fall; he went mourning for it all his days, and bowed down his head continually.

5. But perhaps it may be thought, that though David was an Excellent man, yet
seeing his Eminency lay not in the gift of Faith, but in Zeal, or in some other
Grace, the danger may not yet be so very considerable.

Behold then even Abraham: the Darling of the almighty, who conversed with God
as a man converseth with his Friend: to whom God communicated his presence in
Dreams, in Visions, in Apparitions, (...).

He was imbued with the Habit of Faith* he exerted it in the noblest exercise;
he manifested it in the heroical degree; so that he became the Father of the
Faithful.

Yet once we find him offending (tripping) at this stone of stumbling;
Aequivocating through unbelief.

6. But all these instances were during the Ancient Dispensation, when the
Communication of the presence of God was more Obscure; before the fullness of
time was come, when the word was made flesh and dwelt amongst men; and they saw
his glory as the glory of the only begotten Son of God.

Besides! we do not find that they were particularly and distinctly warned of
their danger, which may lessen the Wonder of the fall.

Consider then the Case, of Peter, the first of the Apostles. He had been
closely conversant with Christ during all the time of his Ministry. Was a
witness of his miracles, saw his Transfiguration, Heard the Voice which came to
him from the Excellent glory, Psalm 1, 19.
saying this is my beloved Son --

As for his faith, he it was, that made that Confession, upon which the the
Christian Church is founded. And Christ had prayed for him that his faith
should not fail.

He was a Valiant man; and he Undertook that though he died, he would neither
forsake, nor deny, his Master.

When Christ forewarns him, plainly and punctually, that his faith would fail
him. That very night, before a certain hour; So that it was impossible he
should be surprised.

You know his Undertakings and of his Failings it is unnecessary to speak.

7. I know nothing now that can be alleged, against the general propensity of
all men to Unbeleif, but this, that Peter was now single and alone, that he
failed only this time; when he was environd with Bills and Staves and in
Danger of his Life.

Wherefore let us call to mind the Case of all the Apostles, in the great
Foundation of our Faith the Article of Christ's Resurrection. When these
temptations were away.

The resurrection of the dead was in those times so commonly believed, that it
was conceived of Christ, that he was one of the Old Prophets risen from the
Dead, and Herod said he was John the Baptist risen from the dead.

Of the resurrection, the Apostles had seen Experiments, in Lazarus, and in the
bodies of the Saints which arose.

Concerning Christ's resurrection, how plainly and often were they forewarned,
After he was risen, how often were they told of it. Yet how grosely and often
did they fail.

In the 8 of Mark 31 Christ tells his Disciples, that he should be killed, Mar.
8.31.
and the 3 day he would rise again. 32. Mar. 2.7.62
He spoke this saying Openly; Mat. 26.31.
So Openly that the Jews took notice of it ( this deceiver said that the third
day he would rise again) moreover he promised them plainly that after he was
risen, Mar. 16.11
he would go before them into Galelie, 13.
and appointed them a certain Mountain where they should see him.

Yet after he was risen; Mary Magdalen told them that he had appeared to her.
But they believed not Mary Magd. Joanna, and Mary the Mother of James, told
them the same, But their Speech seemed to them as Idle tales.

The 2 Disciples told the rest, that he had appeared to them going to Emmaus,
but they believed them not.

He appeared in the midst of ten of them at once, showed them his hands and his
side, But they believed not for joy.

Luc. 24.41. Mat. 28.7.
Christ when appeared to the Women, bade them tell the Disciples and Peter, that
according to his promise, they should see him in Galilie.

17
And the 11. Disciples went into Galilie, to a mountain which Jesus had
appointed them, And when they saw him, they Worshipped, But some doubted.

Mar. 16.14
So that Christ, almost in his last words, Upbraided them with their Unbelief --
because they believed not them who had seen him, after he was risen.

So prone are even the best of men, after their highest atteinments, under the
best advantages, to fall sometime into Infidelity! So great is the danger of
Unbelief!

It is true indeed, that all these, might say with the Prophet, Mic. 7.8.
Rejoice not against me O mine enemy, for though I fall, I shall arise again.
Yet " all these things are written for our learning, that he that thinks he
stands, may take heed least he fall. If these things have been done to the
green tree, what may be done to the dry? If the worthies and the mighty have
fallen (how have the mighty fallen?) ought not the feeble to take care? Yes
certainly they ought.

And to use all means to prevent their falling, which is the third thing, III.
supposed in the Caveat, and expressed in the words following "Take heed
brethren least, etc. Exhort one another daily --

Now the Means to prevent the falling into Infidelity are the Arguments
evincing the truth of the Gospel which are very numerous. Whereof I cannot now
speak particularly.

The Apostle in this Epistle makes use of 2. sorts viz. 1. From Scriptures of
the Old Testament. 2. From Common Reason whereof I shall speak a little.


The Argument from Reason is delivered in the 2. Chap. v. 3.4. The Gospel was
delivered by the Lord, and confirmed ( to us) by them that heard him.

God also bearing them Witness with Signs and wonders, and diverse miracles and
gifts of the Holy Ghost,

God bare witness to Christ the Author of the Gospel: And to the Apostles, the
Promulgers of the Gospel. Wherefore it is to be believed.

The Antecedent of this Enthymem is the sum of what I shall deliver.

Io. 8.13.
When the Pharisees said unto Christ, thy Record is not true, because thou
bear record of thy self. I am one (says Christ) that bear record of my
self, and the Father that sent me, bears witness of me.

18.15.26.27.
Moreover he tells the Disciples that the Comforter should testify of him. And
ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning.

So that beside the Witness of the Apostles, the Gospel had the Attestation of
all the persons of the Trinity: viz. 1. Of the Father, 2. Of the Son, 3. Of the
Holy Ghost.


1. God the Father bore witness to his Son; and that he did, by 1. Visible
Signs, and 2. Audible Voices, 3. by Mission of Angels, 4. by Cooperating in
his Miracles, etc.

1. At his Nativity, a new Star appeared. At his Baptism they saw the heaven
opened, and the Spirit sent from the Father in the visible shape of a Dove and
lighting upon him. Before his Passion, he was transfigured in their sight. And
At it the Sun was eclipsed when the Moon was full, the Vail, the Rocks, rent,
So that the Centurion said, Surely this man was the Son of God, Bodies of
Saints were seen of many, all these were visible signs.

2. As for the (...) (the daughter of the Voice) In his Baptism Lo! Mar.
3.17.17.5.
a voice from heaven, Saying, This is my beloved Son -- At his Transfiguration
a Voice came out of a cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son -- hear him. A
little before his death, as he was Praying "Father, glorify thy Name, Io. 12.2^
There came a voice from heaven, Saying, "I have both glorified it, and will
glorify it again.

3. For mission of Angels by the Father, We find them still ready upon all
occasions from before his Coming down, to the time of his Ascension into Heaven.

Before his Conception, Luc. 1.16.19. Mar. 1.20.
the Angel Gabriel appeared to Zachary and to Mary, before his Nativity to
Joseph saying fear not Joseph. Luc. 2.9 31. Mar. 2.13 1.9.20.
At the time of his Nativity a whole Chorus appeared to the Sheapheards. In his
Infancy an Angel appeared twice to Joseph, admonishnig him of his going to
Egypt and his return from thence.

4 11.
In his Adult age they ministered to him in his hunger; Luc. 22.43 Mar. 28.2.
Before his death, they strengthened him in his Agony Mar. 16.6.
; After it, Io' 20.12,
they rolled away the stone from his Sepulcher; They declared his resurrection;
Ac. 1.16.
And in his Ascension, they stood by, and foretold his coming again to
Judgment. Ye men of Galalie why stand ye gazing? This same Jesus --

4. The Father cooperated with him, according to that of our Savior the father
works hitherto and I work. -- etc.

These are some of the Attestations of the Father.

2. Christ bore witness of himself. 2.
And this he did, by proveing himself to be the Messiah; viz. by fulfilling all
the Prophesies relating to the Person or Offices; The Life, and the Death of
the Messiah.

His Generation was such as cannot be declared, he was born at Bethlem, of the
tribe of Juda, of the Family of David, about 490. years after the return from
Captivity. When the Scepter was just now departed from Juda.

He performed not only the Substance of the Prophesies but all the
Circumstances foretold, Concerning the Life and Death of the Messiah.

He was to be a Prophet, and So he was. The Spirit of the Lord anointed him to
preach, and he spoke as never man spoke. He foretold many things to come, they
all bare him witness.

2. He was to be a King and so he was. His Name was Wonderful; his Power was
shown througout the universal System of the World, the Angels good and evil,
the Heavens, Elements, Plants, Fishes, Brutes, Health and Sickness, Life and
Death, were all obedient unto his Word.

3. He was to be a Priest and so he was. He made an Atonement by his
Obedience, and by his sufferings to the least punctilio (to the taking of a
little Vinegar) and when all things were fulfilled, He cried with a loud voice
(...) it is finished, and he bowed his head and gave up the Ghost.

Moreover, for the Justification of his Gospel ( and that he might leave no
place for Infidelity;) he rose again from the dead, appeared to many Convinced
them by all their senses; They saw him, They heard him, they felt his hands and
his side, They Eat and Drank with him; They Conversed with him 40. days; He
was seen by more then 500. at once; and (lastly,) in the sight of Many of them,
he Ascended Visibly into Heaven.

These were some of the Testimonies, which our Lord Christ bore to himself.

3. The time would fail me, if I should speak of all the Testimonies given by
the Holy Spirit.

In his Conception, to Mary, fulfilling the Promise of Gabriel.

Before his Nativity to Zachary and Elizabeth, in his Infancy to Simeon and
Hanna, In his Baptism to John. I knew him not, says John, but he that sent me
to baptize, said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and
resting on him, that is he: and I saw the Spirit descending: Throughout his
whole Ministry, till his Death, the Spirit gave witness to him.

Moreover, In his Resurrection he was declared the Son of God, Romans 1.
with power by the Holy Ghost. After his Ascension, the Holy Ghost fulfilled
all his undertakings, In that Grand Manifestation at Pentecost; at the time and
place which Christ had undertaken for; A manifestation made to all the Senses,
and to men of every nation under heaven, Act. 2.5*
Parthians -- besides a Multitude of other Instances.

Such were the Attestations given to Christ (the Author and finisher of our
faith).

2. And for the Apostles (the Promulgers of it) Besides the Change of their
Spirits from darkness to light, Whereby they were led out of Ignorance and
Infidelity, into all Truth. And from torpid and pusillanimous persons, during
the life of their Master, they became, when he was dead, the most active and
magnanimous in the world. ( I say, besides this Change) They had bestowed upon
them, All things necessary (either for their, 1. Own Assurance, Or for the 2.
Conviction of the World. ( Concerning the truth of the Gospel which they
delivered.)

I. As for themselves, Besides the Conversation with their Master before and
after his Resurrection; they had 1. Apparitions of Angels. And to one of them
Christ himself appeared after he was ascended to his father.

2. They had the Bath Kol. (Voices from Heaven) In the 9 of the Acts, We find
a Voice from Heaven maintaining a Dialogue with Paul; and at another time, a
voice saying to Peter, Arise Peter, Kill and Eat.

3. They had extatical Visions. Peter was in a trance (Act. 10.10, 19.) Paul
rapt up to the third heaven. Act. 22* 17


4. They had monitory Dreams, Paul saw a man in a Dream, saying unto him, Come
into Macedonia and help us.

5. They had Impulses of the Spirit; Act. 16 9.
So Paul was forbid by the Spirit* to preach the Word in Asia:

II. And for the Conviction of the unbelieving World

They had diversities of gifts and Different Administrations. Cor. 1.2.
To one was given the Word of Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge, to
another Faith, to another the gift of Healing, to another Miracles, Prophesies,
Discerning of Spirits, The gift of Tongues.

As it is in the words which I quoted, God bare them witness with gifts of the
Holy Ghost, and with Signs and Wonders; and that he did, so far, that I shall
be justified by Christ himself, if I shall affirm, that the Apostles after his
death* did greater miracles then he himself did in his life.

Of the same kind with our Saviors, some they performed, by means, having an
appearance of greater strangeness, (Christ healed by his touch, his word his
spittle, Peter by his shadow, Paul by Handkerchiefs taken from his body.) But
one great thing there was, wherein they exceeded; The Great and Manifest, and
frequent Effusions of the Spirit, The Reception of it upon themselves, the
communication of it to others, by Prayer, Preaching, Laying on of Hands; By
these it was that the unbelieving world was conv^nced, and even Simon Magus
himself, It is by the power and Virtue of those effusions that we are here met
together at this time, that the World continues Christian at this day. And
these are some of those standing means and Arguments, whereby the Proneness of
our hearts to Infidelity may be overcome; and faith may be begotten, confirmed,
recovered at this day: These are therefore to be revolved, Exho^t one another
daily. To come therefore to a Conclusion.

My text it self is an Application, by way of Exhortation, Exhortations are
enforced by Reasons of Duty and Concernment, and these I have ^itherto
endeavored to lay before you.

If indeed there were no Sinfulness in Infidelity, Or, If in such times as
ours, it were excusable. If there were no danger of falling into it, or no
means left to remedy or prevent it; It would then indeed be to little purpose
to Exhort men to beware.

But if the state of all these things is otherwise, if that be plain and
evident; agreeable to Scripture, to Reason and to Experience; If the Speaker
has not beaten the Air, nor the hearers been careless and inattentive, I know
not what can be required, to enforce and sharpen the exhortation.

If the time would suffer it, and I were speaking to a Common or Injudicious
Auditory, I might think my self concerned, after all that has been spoken to
the understanding, to Apply my discourse to your affections, I should take unto
me the various forms of Application used in this Epistle. I would Reprove,
Rebuke, Exhort; I would cry aloud, and would not spare. I would lift up my
voice like a Watchmans trumpet, warning you from the Lord, concerning that
Spirit of irreligion and infidelity which is said to have overspread the land.

I would take to my self a Lamentation, yea it should be for a Lamentation, for
the Professors of Infidelity, and the Infidelity of Professors, every where.
But I may not now be permitted to enlarge upon these things. I may only pray
to God to give you understanding in all things, and beseech you earnestly to
consider what has been spoken, Concluding in the words of the Text, Take heed
brethren, lest there be in any of you, an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God. Exhort one another daily --

FINIS.
Two Books newly printed for James Collins.
A seasonable Recommendation and defense of Reason in the Affairs of Religion.
Against Infidelity, Skepticism and Fanaticism of all sorts, 4o

A Discourse of the Forbearance of Penalties which a due Reformation Requires,
by Herbert Thorndike, one of the Prebendaries of Westminster, 8o.


