Numb. 27. Mercurius Publicus: COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign Intelligence;
WITH The Affairs now in Agitation in England, Scotland, and Ireland. For
Information of the People. From Thursday June 28. to Thursday July 5. 1660.
To the Kings Most Excellent MAJESTY.
The humble Petition of the Nobility and Gentry of the Six Counties of
North Wales.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners being fully assured of the dutiful affections of their
Neighbors and Countrymen of the British Nation in the Six Counties aforesaid,
do in all humility and thankfulness to God and your Majesty, on behalf of our
selves and them, acknowledge those happy fruits of your Majesty's most Gracious
Government whereof we have already tasted, in that security and freedom we
enjoy in the liberty of our persons and property of our Estates.

And though we cannot make the least doubt (being convinced thereunto by your
Majesty's most pious and exemplary practice in matters of Religion) but that
your Majesty's first and chief care is for the resettlement of the Church upon
the Ancient Foundation of Truth and Peace; yet seeing we have suffered so
deeply in the contrary practice by some that of late have had he power over us,
who under the pretense of propagating the Gospel, have for a long time shut up
our Churches, converted the endowman^s of the Church to their own use, and sown
the seeds of false Doctrine and Schism among us.

Your Majesty's Petitioners think themselves in duty bound, to represent in all
humility this grievance to your Sacred Majesty, and as the best expedient for
the re-obtaining their form^r happiness in order to their eternal Salvation
(without which nothing can be happy to them) to beseech your Majesty, that out
of your pious and Princely care, you would be pleased to cause all those good
and wholesome Laws for uniformity in Religion, the Government of the Church,
and the maintenance of the Clergy, to be put in execution, which have been made
since the Reformation, whether by your Royal, Pre^ecessor, Queen Elizabeth, or
your Grandfather, and Father of ever happy memory.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. Subscribed by Herbert, H. Herbert, John
Salisbury, Thomas Middleton, Thomas Humphreys, and several other Gentlemen of
Quality.

By Letters from Edinborough of the 21, we have this further account of the
solemnity, That the Major General, after his remembrance of h^^ Majesty to the
Earl of Scaford, fired the great Cannon called Mounce Megg (a Cannon never
fired but on extraordinary occasions) after which followed all the Guns in
Edinborough Castle, (...) Citadel, and the ships in the Road. A plentiful
Largess was bestowed amongst the Soldiery to heighten them in their joye^;
about fifteen hundred bonfires were ma^e on Arthurs Seat, one or forty load of
coals, and at the Major Generals door one almost as big. After this was variety
of fireworks, some burned in the water, other fl^w in the air, two Castles
firing one against the other, then several sorts of boxes thrown into the air,
and falling in several shapes, which with diverse others, gave great content to
the spectators

My Correspondent there did further inform me, that what he writ concerning
Major Ahernthey, was too greedily taken up by him from ^ brisk report that
was raised by some ill people, and desires it may be amended in the next
P^^nt, which for his and the Readers satisfaction I have done accordingly. As
for Major Aberlu, my friend of the Intelligence Office, has not yet told me
where he lives, till which time I must desire that Gentleman's pardon.

Whitehall.
On Thursday, being the day appointed for the Thanksgiving for his sacred
Majesty's restoration in his Majesty's passage ^^^ween the Guard-chamber, and
his closet, stood a person nee^ up (...) will w^^h a drawn sword under his
cloak, which was not (...) discover^; (...) Majesty passing (...) George (...)
Se^jeant at A^^s, casting ^is eye about for the security of his M^jesties
(...), di^^overed the (...) Sword, and thereupon presently with his Mace seized
(...) the person ^ook from (...) the said naked sword, and upon view found the
s^m^ to be a (...) sword back ^ilted, ^^^ked half way down from the point, a
weapon ^it (...) a (...), but by the care and p^^denc^ of the (...), his
Majesty's (...) mischief was prevented, the person secured, and his Maj^^^^^^
(...) by a Right Honorable the Earl of Pemoroke, and the party remains under
examination.

Friday. His Majesty with his two Royal Brothers, the Dukes of York and
Gloucester, with several of the Nobility and Gentry, went to Copt-hall, where
they were highly treated by the Earl of Middlesex.

On Saturday his Majesty, with their Royal Highnesses his Brothers, his
Excellency, with diverse of the Nobility and Gentry, were highly entertained at
Roehampton.

From his Excellencies Quarters at the Cockpit.
On Monday his Excellency granted a Commission to Major Richard Fincher, to be
Major to Col. Nortons Regiment at Portsmouth. Also a Commission to Captain
Potts, son to Sir John Potts, to be a Captain in the same Regiment.

Sir John Men's having a Patent from his Majesty to be Governor of D^al
Castle, his Excellency ordered the present Governor forthwith to surrender it
to him.

William Bing Esquire having a Patent for Weymouth Castle, his Excellency ordered
the present Governor forthwith to surrender it to him.

His Excellency has by Commission given the Command of the Regiment which was
lately Col. Hackers, to Francis Lord Hawley, Viscount Duncannon. He has
likewise given a Commission to Sir Chichester Wrey, to be Major of that
Regiment, to Sir Francis Vincent Baronet, Sir Thomas Stukeley, James Muldiford,
and (...) Sherrard, to be Captains in the same Regiment.

On Friday his Excellency sat in the House of Commons, and took his leave of
them, having such Honors conferred on him by his Majesty, as puts him in an
higher capacity.

Major Abr. Holmes, Timothy Clare, Nicholas Lockyer, R. Jones, Anth. Spinach,
and (...) Gregory Captains, Commissary Everard, Lievt. Hendly, Lieutenant Goff,
and one Corporal Brown, formerly committed to the custody of the Marshal
General, and being no Officers in this present Army, were on Saturday by his
Excellencies Order discharged of their Imprisonment, upon giving security to be
true and loyal Subjects to our Sovereign Lord the King, and not to disturb the
public peace of his Majesty's Kingdoms.

London.
The Artillery Company meeting on Tuesday the 26 of June, 1660. at a general
Court then held in the Artillery garden did unanimously make choice of his
Highness the Duke of York to be their Commander in chief, and made choice of
twelve of the Court of A^sistants, to acquaint his Highness the ewith, and
desire his acceptance. On Saturday the 30th of June, the Lord Lucas, Sir John
Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, their Deputy President, with Col. Shepherd,
and others of the Assistants accordingly, went to Whitehall, to attend his
Highness, and being commanded by him to come into his Bed cha^^^^, the L. Lucas
acquainted the Duke that these Gentlemen of the Artillery Company were come to
tender their services unto his Highness, and to acquaint him what they had done
in reference to his Election to be their Commander in chief; then Col Shepherd
was desired to declare the mind of the Company, which he did in these words
following:

May it please your Highness,
WE are commanded by the Artillery Company to acquaint you, that at our General
Court your Highness was with one heart and one hand freely chosen to be our
Commander in chief; but we durst not have so presumed, had we not known that
your Highness was a Lover of Arms in general, and that in the year 1641. You
manifested so much love to that Company in particular, that you honored us so
far, as to enter your self to be a member of it; and it being the ancient
custom of our Company still to have liberty to make choice of one of the
members of it to be our Commander, we do humbly pray your Highness will pardon
our boldness, and be pleased to own us as your own Company, and to accept of
our earnest request to be our Commander in chief, and we shall be ready to
yield obedience to your Highness Commands.

And humbly pray for the increase of your Highness prosperity and happiness.


Upon which motion his Highness did very lovingly accept of it, and them, and
promised they should still continue their ancient privileges and customs, and
he would be ready to do what he could for them: Then he asked what number they
might be; it was answered, about four hundred or five hundred, and that they
hoped they should be above three hundred in Arms on Thursday next to attend
him, and if they were commanded, should be ready to wait upon him that very day
at Whitehall; and when the Company was drawn up, they should deliver unto him
their leading st^ff, according to custom: To which he replied, He would accept
of it, and returned them hearty thanks.

On Friday the 29th, a Committee of Aldermen and Common Council went to invite
the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council to dinner with them at Guild Hall,
July 5. the day appointed by his Majesty, which they were pleased to accept of:
They likewise made a particular invitation to the Lord Chancellor, and several
other persons of Honor, which they were pleased to accept. His Sacred Majesty
in consideration of the eminent services and constant loyalty of Sir John
Robinson Knight and Baronet, Alderman of London, made him Lieutenant of the
Tower, which on Friday he took possession of.

To morrow Doctor Reynolds is to preach before his Majesty in his Chapel at
Whitehall.

Venice, June 5. 1660.
We have received a confirmation of the taking of the Castle of Schiatto, by
Genesis Morosini, who has given leave to 300 Turks, that were there in Garrison,
to go out with their Families, and gave to the Aga that commanded them, a
Vessel to transport himself to the next Continent. After which exploit he went
to the Isle of Cerigo with his Army. M. Marco B^mb^, General of Candia, has
sent word hither, that the Turks having drawn their Forces within a Pistol shot
off the Outworks of the Metropolitan City of that Island, they found there
such resistance, that they were forced to retire with great precipitation and
loss of men: And that they were expecting with great impatience the supplies of
the Christian Princes, to recruite their Soldiers, above 900 of theirs being
lately dead of several diseases.

St. John de Laz, June 21. 1660.
The 12 instant, the Count of Fuenseldagne, Extraordinary Ambassador of Spain,
having been met at Aurogna by the Marshal de Cl^remb^ut and M. de Chabenas,
Bonnevil Introductor of the Ambassadors, who went to fetch him with the Kings
Coaches, followed by the Coaches of all the Lords of the Court, made his
entrance into this Town with a magnificent Retinue, as you have heard already.
He was conducted to the Lodgings prepared for him, and presently after v^sited
by the Duke of Crequi, in the name of the King; by M. de St. Ange for the Queen
Mother, by the Marquis of H^utefort for the Queen, by the Count of Va^llac for
Monsieur the Kings Brother, and by the Abbot of Par^bere for the Cardinal
Mazarin. Then the Count of Armagnac, great master of the Horse, with the said
M. de Bonnevil, went to fetch him with the Kings Coaches and brought him to his
audience. That night the Cardinal M^zarin feasted him at Supper, and the King
gave him the pleasure of a Spanish Comedy. The 13. the two Queens made their
Devotions at the Church of the (...). The same day Cardinal Mazarin met again
with Don Lewis d' Aro at the Isle of the Conference. The 14. then Majesty's
went to take the air upon the Seaside, and the 15 the whole Court went away
from hence for Bayonne.

Bayonne, June 22. 1660.
The 15 instant, the Queen made her entrance here with all (...). The King,
Monsieur his Brother and the Queen Mother came first into this C^ty. The
Princess arrived here in a very rich Coach, being accompanied by the Princess
Palatin^, and the Duchess of N^v^illes. There w^nt before her (...), all the
other Coaches for her household, with six Trumpets of the Kings, four of the
Chamber, and two others, at the head of the Gensd' arms and the Light
Horsemen. The Kings Lifeguard was about her Coach, and the Queen Mothers
Guards, and the Company of Musketeers on Horse back were at the Rear. When she
came to a Triumphant Arch erected out of the Gates, with a rich Canopy of red
Damask spread with Golden Flowers de Luce, she alighted, and ascended the
Throne prepared there, where being under the Canopy, with the Crown on her
Head, the Duke of Espernon, Governor of this Province, who was come hither
purposely to receive her Majesty in this first City both of his Governmenment
and of the Kingdom, presented to her the Officers of the Senechal and the
Jurat^, who made their Speeches to her Majesty; which done, he presented to her
Majesty, in a Bison, the Keys of the City. Then coming down from her Throne,
she was conducted by four Consuls under another Canopy of Cloth of Gold and
Silver to her Coach. She continued her Journey, two Ushers of the Chambers
going before her with the Maces, the four Consuls carrying the Canopy, and all
the Corporations of this City in their Formalities; At the sounding of the
Trumpets her Majesty came into the Town, through the streets hung with rich
Hangings, and strewed wi^h Flowers, and went to the Cathedral Church, the
Avenues whereof were lined by two Files of the Company of the 100 Switzers. Her
Majesty went in under the Canopy, and was received by our Bishop and his Clergy
with his usual Ceremonies, who conducted her to the great Altar, where the Te
Deum was sung.

From thence her Majesty went to the Kings Lodgings through some streets richly
adorned, and lined with M^squ^^ce^es, Gen^d^rms, and Light-Horsemen. At night
the Ceremony was ended by Bonfires lighted every where, with an infinite number
of Lights at the Windows, continual shooting of the Canons, and the Inhabitants
Muskets, by the reiterated acclamations of the people high and low, and by all
other tokens of an extraordinary joy, befitting the first City of the Kingdom
that had the honor to receive a Princess, to whom the Nation is engaged for
its tranquillity. The next day their Majesty's went to Mass to the same Church;
and having again received the Complements of our Consuls, they went that night
to Aqs. The Count de Fuenseldagn has bin feasted at B^dache by Marshal Duke de
Grammont, with his ordinary sumptuousness and neatness; which has given great
satisfaction to the said Ambassador, who could not but admire the beauty and
richness of that House, where nothing is wanting that can contribute to the
ornament of a House of pleasure.

Amsterdam, June 24. 1660.
The 21 instant, the Royal Princess having been entertained with rich Presents
by the Chamber of the East India Company, went away from hence toward Harlem.
The affairs of the Prince her Son go on very well in our Provinces, the States
of Zealand having appointed Commissioners to draw a List of the charges and
places formerly possessed by his Predecessors, and settle all things again as
they were in 1651.

Mont de Marsan, June 22. 1660.
Their Majesty's being come from Bayonne to Aqs, came on the 10 to B^zas, and
the next day arrived here. This Town was prepared to receive them with a
greater solemnity then was performed, because the King would not suffer it,
having bin pleased to accept of our respects, expressed to their Majesty's by
the speeches of the Corporations of Justice, and of the Town, and of our
affection test^fied unto them by the great and joyful acclamations of all ou^
people. The 20. their Majesty's went from hence for Bordeaux.

Narbone 25 June 1660.
The 21 instant about three a clock in the morning there was a great Earthquake
here, which did much affright us. We hear that the like happened at the same time
at Bourdeaux, Montpellier, Beziers and other places. Mr. de Merenville has
given order for drawing, with all possible diligence out of Roses and Cap de
Quiers, all the Artillery and Amunitions that were therein: The Spaniards being
already arrived to the Port of the said Roses, with all things necessary to
take possession of it.

Naples, June ^. 1660.
Mr. Elpidio Beneditti, Cardinal Mazarines Agent, is gone from hence to Rome,
being very well satisfied with the Viceroy, who presented him six brave
Horses. The occasion of his voyage was for the re-establishment of the Prince
of Monaco into all the Lands belonging to him in this Kingdom, according to
the Treaty of Peace. Besides the 2000. Italians, and 1000. Germans, lately sent
from hence into Spain, with abundance of Ammunitions and Provisions: The Forces
that are in the Milanez, being 5000. Foot, and 2000. Horse, are to be
transported also thither in the Galleys of this Kingdom, to be employed
against Portugal. Cardinal Filomarini's goods have been seized on.

Rome, June 7. 1660.
The Cardinal Maldachini, formerly fallen into the Popes disgrace, has been
recalled home by the mediation of Cardinal Antonio. But the Pope having chidden
him very bitterly, when he went to kiss his Toe, and make his submissions unto
him; the Cardinal took it so much to heart, and was so highly displeased at it,
that he has since withdrawn himself again from Rome.

Madrid, June 3. 1660.
The Marquis of Manzera, ordinary Ambassador of the Republic of Venice in
this Court, has been recalled, and is to discharge the same Fu^ction in the
Court of France. The Spaniards are very much incensed at the late invasion made
by the Portuguez upon the Spanish Dominions, (...) it is reported, that for to
be revenged of it, they are resolved to make incursions into Portugal, and to
make there as great havoc as they can, for which end, orders have been given
to fall on that Kingdom on all sides. The Marquis of Vianes, Governor of
Galicia, does march that way with 8000 Foot, and 800 Horse; and the Governor
of Camara marches another way with his Forces. We hear that those of Lisbon
are very much disgusted at the Queen of Portugal, and that the Council of the
Chamber has taken from her the management of the Affairs.

Turin, June 19. 1660.
The two Regiments of Foot that are sent to the supply of the Venetians, were
shipped away eight days since, upon the Po, but the Horse are not gone yet.
The Governor of Milan has demanded leave to raise some new Forces in Savoy.
Two French Pirates bearing the Flag of Savoy, have lately seized upon a Grecian
Vessel coming from Algier to Marseille, which is intended here to be restored
with all its lading. The King of France has desired that his Subjects should
pay no Toll at Villefranche, which not being granted, it has caused some
distaste; and we hear, that what comes from Dauphi^ into Savoy, is seized there.

Riga in Lifland, 31 May 1660.
The News being come hither how Vice Admiral Ruyter had seized on to Suedish
ships about Copenhagen; our Governor has likewise made an Imbargo upon all
the ships and goods belonging here to the Dutch, and does threaten a
Confiscation of them, unless the Peace be suddenly concluded.

Dantzick 12 June 1660.
All things are preparing for the Diet which is to be held at Warsow, about the
latter end of this month; but it is reported that the Nobility will not come
thither, till after the King of Poland has given them satisfaction upon their
demands. The Great Duke of Moscovy is so much alarmed by the peace concluded
between Sueden and Poland, that he has sent an Ambassador to the King of
Poland, to make some Propositions to him, much more advantageous then the
former, with order to repair to Warsow before the opening of the Diet, where the
States, after they have ended the business of the Ratification of peace, are
particularly to take into consideration how to expel the Moscovites out of
Lithuania, it being resolved to give the chief command of all the Forces to be
employed against them, unto General Czarnesky, and the Lieutenantship to the
Waywode Sapiha. The Count Koningsmarck has shipped away part of his Retinue
for Lubeck, whither he is to go as soon as the news comes of the restoration
of the Duke of Curland into his dominions.

Wismar, 15 June 1660.
Since the conclusion of the Peace between the Kings of Sueden and Denmark, we
enjoy here a perfect tranquillity, although the Imperial forces be not yet
removed from Macklenburgh and Pomerania, their Officers keeping such an exact
Discipline among them, that the Country is no way annoyed by them. A Suedish
ship riding before Warnemunde to receive the Toll of all the ships coming into
Rostock and going out from thence, was lately fired by a Thunderbolt that fell
upon her: All the Soldiers that were aboard her were consumed by the fire.

Collen 22 June 1660.
The 12 instant the young Prince, of whom the Duchess of Newburgh was brought
to bed two days before, was Christened at Duss^ldorp with great Ceremonies. The
differences betwixt the City of Munster and the Bishop are so far from an
accommodation, that at present both the parties have no other thoughts but to
put themselves in posture to right themselves by the way of Arms. That Prelate
who hops to have assistance from several Princes of the Empire, being
resolved not to abate any thing of his pretentions, and the City being resolved
to venture all for the preservation of their Privile^ges.

Advertisement of Books newly Printed and Published.
(...) Nasorah, Seu Critica Divina, Or A Synoptital Directory on the Sacred
Scriptures. The First part, Containing the several Canons of both Scriptures;
Namely, of the Old and New Testament. (As the same are distinguished in the
General Analysis, at the beginning of this Treatise.) By Ferdinando Parkburst
(...). Sold by G. Bedel, and T. Gollins, at the Middle Temple-gate,
Fleetstreet, and James Mag^^s, near the Piazza in Covent Garden.

There is a Book newly come forth in defense of Christ Jesus, Scriptures,
Ministry and Ministers, against some Principal Quakers. By Francis Duke of
Westminster. Sold by Miles Michael in Westminster Hall, the first sh^p on the
right hand.

The Silent Soul, with Sovereign Antidotes against the most Miserable Exegents,
or a Christian with an Olive Leaf in his mouth, when he is under the sharpest
Trials and Troubles, the sadd^st and da^kest Providence and Changes; and
Published by Thomas Brook, Preacher of the Gospel at Margaret Fish-street hill.

App^or of Gold for young Men and Women, and a Crown of Glory for old Man and
Weomen, or the happiness of being good betimes. By the same Author.

A String of Pearl, or the best things reserved till last; with a serious
discourse touching a well-grounded Assurance of Man's everlasting Happiness and
Blessedness.

A Book of Short-Writing, the most exact lineal, and speedy, that has been
published. By Theophilus Metcalf.

That Sheltons Shorthand Book in Latin, very useful for all Scholars, and
Foreign Nations, newly translated and cut in B^ass Plate.

All five sold by John Hancock in Popes head Alley, the first shop next
Cornhill.

We must call upon you again for a Black Dog, between a Greyhound and a
Spaniel, no white about him, only a streak on his Breast, and his Tail a little
bobbed. It is His Majesty's own Dog, and doubtless was stolen, for the Dog was
not born nor bred in England, and would never forsake His Master. Whosoever
finds him may acquaint any at Whitehal, for the Dog was better known at Court,
than those who stole him. Will they never leave robbing His Majesty? must He
not keep a Dog? This Dogs place (though better then some imagine) is the only
place which no body offers to beg.

Advertisements.
A Leather Portmantle lost at Sittingburn or Rochester, when his Majesty came
thither, wherein was a Suit of Camolet Holland, with two little laces in a
seam, eight pair of white Gloves, and a pair of Does leather; about twenty
yards of ski^-colour'd Ribbon twelvepenny broad, and a whole piece of black
Ribbon ten penny broad; a cloth lead colored cloak, with store of linen; a
pair of shoes, slippers, a Montero and other things; all which belong to a
Gentleman (a near Servant to His Majesty) who has been too long Imprisoned and
Sequestered, to be now robbed when all men hope to enjoy their own. If any can
give notice, they may leave word with Mr. Samuel Merne His Majesty's
Book-binder, at his house in Little Britain, and they shall be thankfully
rewarded.

A Black Mare 14 handful high, with a star in her forehead, with a long tail
never dockt, five years old. Lost out of a piece of a G^ound near
Cambden-house, Kinsing^on: If any one can give notice of her to Mr. Richa^d
Kellaways at the Rose in Knights-bridge, or to Mr. James Pierce at the
White-Hea^t in Long-acre, they shall be well rewarded for their pains,

Whitehal Wednesday the 27 of June.
This day the Mayor of St. Albans, accompanied with Mr. Foxwist the Recorder,
and some of the principal Burgesses his Brethren, as the Representative of the
said Corporation, made their Humble Address to His Majesty, the Recorder making
a short and pithy Speech by way of Congratulation of his Majesty's happy
Restoration to his Royal Throne; and assurance of their Loyalty and Allegiance
to his Majesty: and presented him with a Resignation of the Fee-Farm-rent
purchased by the Corporation in His Majesty's absence, and the Arrears incurred
in the mean time being a 100 l. in Gold, which His Majesty was pleased
Graciously to accept, and to express his kind acceptance thereof, and that the
Corporation should, as occasion required, participate of his Royal Grace and
Favor.

From Innerness, June 16.
I have as I acquainted you in my last, made inquiry into the business of Capt.
Roll, which was contradicted in some late Pamphlets, but upon discourse with
Sir James Smith and Mr. Calmady. I find that the said Capt. Roll was seized
for speaking words, and that Mr. Calmady giving too much credit to him that
brought the note, did in haste sign it.

Wednesday, Dr. Colladon, Deputy from the Commonwealth of Geneva, having
presented unto His Majesty the Letters of the Lords Syndicks and Magistra^es,
and of the Pastors and Professors of that place, congratulating His Majesty's
happy Return and Restoration to his Kingdoms; And demanded in their Name of
His Majesty, the continuation of His Royal Favor and good Affection toward
them. His Majesty was pleased to return them thanks for their expression of so
Cordial a respect, and to give to the said Deputies a very gracious and
acceptable Answer upon his Demand.

His Majesty having been pleased to bestow a Grant for the Degree and Honor of
Baronet upon Nicholas Steward of Hartly Mawditt, in the County of Southampton*
Esquire; A Patent passed under the Great Seal of England for conferring the
said Honor and Degree of Baronet upon the said Sir Nicholas Steward
accordingly.

Whitehal.
On Monday last Colonel Sir John Robinson, Alderman of London, and a Member of
this Parliament, was by his Majesty made Lieutenant of the Tower of London, an
action most acceptable not only to the City and Parliament, but indeed to the
whole Nation; the very prisoners themselves being glad of his company.

The Kingdom having for a long time, by reason of his Majesty's absence, been
troubled with the Evil, great numbers have lately flocked for Cure. His Sacred
Majesty on Monday last touched 250 in the Banqueting House, amongst whom, when
his Majesty was delivering the Gold, one shuffled himself in, out of an hope of
profit, which had not been stroak'd; but his Majesty presently discovered him,
saying, This man has not yet been touched. His Majesty has for the future
appointed every Friday for the Cure, at which time 200. and no more are to be
presented to him, who are first to repair to Mr. Knight, His Majesty's
Chyrurgion, living at the Cross-Guns in Russel street, Covent Garden, over
against the Rose Tavern, for their Tickets. That none might loose their labor,
it is thought fit to make it known, that he will be at his house every Wednesday
and Thursday, from Two till Six of the Clock, to attend that servic^: And if
any person of Quality shall send to him, he will wait on them at their lodgings
upon notice given to him.

On Tuesday His Majesty was pleased to be at Supper with the Lord Barcley,
where he was very highly entertained.

His Majesty has been graciously pleased, to make Sir William Compton, brother
to the Earl of Nothampton, Master of his Majesty's Ordnance; Col. William
Leg, Lieutenant of the Ordnance; Persons that have suffered with his Majesty
in all his troubles; and Major Francis Nicols Surveyor of his Ordnance* his
faithfulness in adhering to his Excellency in all these late Changes.

These following were restored to their Offices, being formerly put out for
serving his Majesty, viz. Edward Sherborne to his place of Clerk to his
Majesty's Ordnance, Mr. Marsh to his place of Storekeeper, and Mr. Clark
formerly Commissary General in his late Majesty's Army, to his place of Clerk
of the Deliveries.

His Majesty conferred on Mr. Hoar the Office of Comptroller of his Majesty's
Mint.

That the Soldiery may see the affection that his Sacred Majesty has for the
Army, he has been pleased to do them so much honor, as to take that Regiment
that was lately Col. Unton Crooks, for his own, which is now styled, The Royal
Regiment: What the Names of the Officers are, you may see in the next.

His Highness the Duke of York, has so far honored the Regiment of the Lord
Falconberg as to own it, which is now called, The Duke of Yorks Regiment, the
Lord Falconberg and the Officers being still continued.

From His Excellency Quarters at the Cockpit.
His Excellency ha^h been pleased, lately to change some Officers, and dispose
their commands to o^her^.

He has given the command of the Troop late Captain Shermans, in the Lord
Viscount Falklands Regiment, to Col. Henry Heylin.

The T^oop that was late Capt. Greenwoods in the same Regiment to Capt. Tho.
Mo^ley.

The company late Major Waterhouse's in Col. Daniels Regiment to Capt. Leonard
Aizay.

His Ex^ellency has likewise commissi^ned Major Adam Brown, Brother to Sir
Ambrose Brown, to be Major of Sir Anthony Ashley-Coopers Regiment, being about
to confer a greater honor on Major Harley.

London.
The Lord Major and Aldermen of London, upon a Message from the Lord
Chamberlain, delivered by Sergeant Charnock, concerning His Majesty's
Reception, have ordered the streets to be railed on one side; all the
Livery-men will stand in their Formalities, with Banners and Streamers,
distinguishing each Company; on the other side the Guards. The Guards to wait
on His Majesty by eight in the morning at Whitehal, where the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and City Officers in their Gowns, with about 600 of the several
Companies, are to attend in their Velvet Coats and Chains, and Footmen
following them; from whence they proceed in this order,

First, The Citizens in Velvet Coats and Chains, with Banners of
distinguishment; the Aldermen in their Gowns, next the Sergeants at Arms and
Heralds, after them immediately before the Kings Coach, the Lord Major bare
with the Sword; with Garter the King at Arms on the right hand, and His
Majesty's Gentlemen Usher on the left; after which, His Majesty's Coach guarded
on both sides with His Royal Band of Pensio^^^s and Querries; after His
Majesty's Coach, follow the House of Lords and Commons in their order; at
Cheapside they have appointed Pageants. Of this and other entertainment, you
may expect more in the next.

Westminster.
Phineas Pain that was lately committed upon misinformation given, that he was
the person that executed His late Majesty, is upon examination discharged.

London, Printed by J: Macock, and Tho. Newcomb, 1660.


