Numb. 103. An Exact Account, COMMUNICATING The chief Transactions of the Three
Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland. With the daily Votes and Resolves in
both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Also Particular ADVICE from the OFFICE of
INTELLIGENCE. Published by AUTHORITY. From Friday June 22. to Friday June 29,
1660.
Friday 22. June. At the House of Lords.
THeir Lordships received a Message with an Order from the House of Commons for
the paying of 10000 pounds unto h^s Excellency the Lord General Monck, out of
the Ordinance for 70000 l. a Month, unto which their Lordships gave their
assent.

At the House of Commons.
The House read the humble Petition of Major Burton, desiring the House would
be pleased to grant him liberty for his health sake, upon good and sufficient
security, to which the House assented.

The House agreed an Order for the paying of ten thousand pounds in part of the
20000 l. formerly given to the Lord General Monck out of the Ordinance for
70000 l. a month, and sent it to the Lords for their concurrence.

They also appointed a Committee to consider how the remaining part of the
20000 l. due unto the Lord General might be raised.

The House read the Bill for a general pardon and Indemnity, with the
amendments thereunto, which was approved of, and ordered to be engrossed.

They Ordered the Bill for confirmation of Sales, and the Bill for sa^erting
the Fundamental Laws, and confirmation of proceedings at Law, to be brought in
to morrow morning; After which the House adjourned.

This day Sir Io. Washington Knight was sworn and admitted one of the Gentlemen
of His Majesty's privy Chamber in ordinary; and to receive and enjoy all the
rights, privileges and preheminencies belonging to that place.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the humble Address of the Nobility and
Gentry of Lancashire and Cheshire, in and about London.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, out of the deepest sense of the
wonderful mercies of God in your Majesty's happy return, do with joyful
hearts congratulate the same; most humbly and heartily praying for your
Majesty's long and happy Reign over us: And do with all integrity prostrate our
selves, our lives, and fortunes for the preservation of your Majesty's Sacred
Person, Crown and Dignity.

In order whereunto, with all submission to your Majesty's great Wisdom, we
make it our most humble Petition, that your Majesty would be pleased, to
restore unto us the exercise of that happy Government, Ecclesiastical Civil and
Military, under all which, these your Majesty's Kingdoms so gloriously
flourished, in the Raigns of Royal Grandfather and Father of blessed memory.

Subscribed by Charles Earl of Derby. Earl Rivers. Lord Viscount Kilmo^rey.
Lord Mo^ley Mounteagle. Lord Gerrard. William Stanley. Charles Stanley. Thomas
Nedha^ Sir Robert Bin^los Baronet. Sir Tho. Middleton Bar. Sir Edw. Broughton
Bar. Sir Tho. Smith. Bar. Sir William Neal Bar. Sir Tho. Smith. Sir Gilbert
Ireland. Sir Roger Bradshaw. Sir Robert Cotton. Sir Philip Egerton. Robert
Townesend Esquire Roger Grovenor George Warbutton Thomas Cholmondley Esquire Francis
Cholmondley Esquire Henry Brook Esquire Richard Leigh Esquire John Booth Esquire Linor. Smith
Esquire Peter Leicester Esquire John Ardern Senior Esquire Peirs Leigh Esquire Edward Fleetwood
Esquire Henry Slater Esquire John Daniel Esquire John Ardern Junior Esquire William Masley Esquire
William B^^^ks Esquire Richard Brooks Esquire John Mollineux Esquire Gilbert Houghton Esquire
Henry Houghton Esquire Edward Leigh Esquire (...). W^ah Oldfield Esquire Thomas Ashton Esquire
John Shugburgh Esquire Sommerford Oldfield Esquire Everard Manwaring Esquire William Cowley
Esquire John Sho^incroft Esquire Nathaniel Booth Esquire John Booth Esquire Nathaniel West Esquire
Edward Rigbie Esquire Alexander Rigbie Esquire Thomas Swinton Esquire Alex. Dennington Dr.
in Phys. William Fyfe Dr. in Phys. Thomas Hunt Esquire Thomas Mannaring Esquire John
Mannaring Esquire Thomas Holt Esquire Robert Heywood Esquire William Berkenhead Esquire Thomas
Latham Esquire Henry Porter Senior Esquire Henry Porter Junior Esquire Christopher Parker
Esquire Peter Hatton Esquire Peter Adlington Esquire William Burgaine Robert Leonard.
Robert Clayton.

This Address was presented to his Majesty at White Hall the 23 of June, by
the Right Honorable the Earl of Derby, for, and in the name of all the
Subscribers.

Saturday, 24 June. At the House of Commons.
The House Ordered some particular Debts to be paid out of such moneys as are
in the hands of the late Trustees: and received an account from the Committee
of Concealments of several sums of money which they conceive now to remain
in the hands of the late Commissioners for Prize goods, viz. upon one account
the sum of 41495 l upon another account 26000 l. and like wise upon a third
account the sum of 11825 l. whereupon the House

Ordered, That the Treasurer do take care by some speedy course in the
Exchequer to bring in each of the former particular sums.

The House likewise ordered that a Bill be brought in for Discoveries of
concealed moneys etc. with a reward h^erein to be inserted for such as shall
discover the same.

Ordered, That all the Lands, Manors, houses, etc. which is part of her
Majesty's joynter, and in the hands of any of those who sat in the late
pretended high Court of Justice upon his late Majesty, or in the hands of any
of those twenty persons which are excepted out of the Act for General Pardon
and Oblivion, be restored unto her Majesty, and Ordered, that the lords
concurrence be desired hereunto: the House likewise

O^dered the Grand Committee touching the Court of Wards and Live^ies to sit on
monday at two of the clock in the afternoon, with power to send for all papers,
Records, etc,

They also read the Bill for confirmation of sales the first time, and
appointed to read it again on Wednesday next the second time, after which they
adjourned.

By a Letter of the 20 present from Derby we have this account, That the Mayor
and Aldermen of this Town, to express their further loyalty to his gracious
Majesty, let the inhabitants know, that if they pleased they might take the
Oath of Allegiance, whereupon betwixt 4 and 5 hundred with great alacrity and
expressions of joy took it. I hope this will be a good leading cast for other
places. These are the men that thought nothing so dear to them which might
conduce to the restoring of their native King from danger, and the people from
slavery, witness the adventuring of their lives and fortunes in that noble
enterprise of Sir George Booth. And it is very observable: that notwithstanding
all the revolutions and changes of government, they have continued the Emblems
of loyalty, their Mace being carried before their Mayors without the least
alteration, as it was in the time of Charles the first of blessed memory, with
C. R. and his Arms thereon. I believe this is that which few Towns of England
can say, and it is more to be admired in regard one of their Aldermen was one
of that cursed ^^ew we call the Rump, and did many times endeavor to alter
them, but by the industry of some loyal persons was prevented

This day many new Sergeants were called unto the Bar, and took their Oaths at
the Common pleas according to the usual custom, several of th^se who were
called in Oliver Cromwells tim^, were now again n^w sworn.

His gracious Majesty this day and yesterday touched many persons of the Kings
Evil, giving each of them a Medal of Gold.

Monday, 25 June, at the House of Commons.
The House read a Petition from the University of Oxford, which took up a long
debate, and was afterward referred to a Committee to consider further thereof.

There was also a complaint made touching a passage in a News-book reflecting
upon Major Beack, etc. whereupon the House Ordered the Printer thereof to be
taken into custody.

They also read the Bill for confirmation of proceeding at Law, etc. the which
they passed, and Ordered it to be engrossed: after which they adjourned until
to morrow morning eight of the Clock.

Advertisements.
WHereas there is a Pamphlet lately published styled The Mystery of the Good
Old Cause unfolded, with no name to it, wherein amongst many accusations of
diverse men, he does most falsely abuse Thomas Viner Alderman of London, in
saying that he (being Sheriff of London when his Prince was murdered) was then
present: that report is a most false aspersion, for he was not there, but on
the contrary did declare his abhorrencie and detestation of that most vile and
horrid act.

And whereas the Pampleteer says that the said Alderman Viner got well by
ordering of the Massy heaps of Plate for the Mint, that is also very false,
for he never had the ordering of any of the publicks Massy heaps of Plate for
the Mint, nor at any time fingered one penny of the publicks Money.

WHereas it was mentioned in the Parliamentary Intelligencer that came forth on
Monday the 25. of June, that on Saturday the 23 of June, one Capt. Fr. Roll of
Exon was seized on in Westminster Hall by Sir James Smith for speaking
traiterous words; These are to inform the Reader that it was a scandal cast
upon the said Fr. Roll occasioned by a mistake of a stander by at a discourse
between a member of the Parliament and the said Fr. Roll, the said member of
Parliament attesting un^er his hand that there were no traiterous words spoken,
nor tending thereto, as was informed, neither was he then seized on.

Josias Calmady, a Member of the House of Commons.

The said Pamphleteer in the beginning of the said book desires to be further
acquainted of the abuse put upon a Major lately Governor of Edenborough
Castle* he may take notice that the Son of the said Major now a Member of the
present Army, is resolved to take his Action at Law against the Printer or
Author of the said Scandal, printed in his Mercurius Publicus and
Parliamentary Intelligencer: for his other abuses then for the present we do
not hold them worthy a reply.

THe said Parliamentary Intelligencer in several of his Pamphlets was pleased
to asperse diverse persons of Quality, which is not to be wondered at, seeing
his lavish Pen casts dirt upon the Devonshire Gentry, when speaking of their
acting for a free Parliament, he contumeliously says that he believes their
drift was for the King, because they kept their meetings in Taverns, and made
them their Rendezvous: this though a great crime in it self, is yet but a
peccability in comparison of the high affront he puts upon his sacred Majesty
and his two illustrious Brothers, styling them in his 14. page, the pretended
King of England and the titular Dukes of York and Gloucester; many other such
stones has he like Shimei cast at his Majesty and those highborn princes; all
which to pick up is too great a labor, and would be nauseous to the Reader;
only this I shall hint, that these and many other such spurious products of his
brain he presumes to publish in contempt of my patent, by virtue of his so
often boasted Order of the Council of State, which he wilfully misdeems to be
still in force, and sticks not to prefer it before the grant which we have from
the late King of happy memory, thinking belike to defraud us from our right
due, which is no better then taking a lease over a man's head; by which the
world may judge how sitly qualified he is to be Nedhams Usher in the school of
juggling: having formerly professed to some of us, when taxt by us, that he would
never meddle with Intelligence if he thought it would be detrimental to us: but
though it be evident he can thus Nedham^z^, we hope in these better regulated
times he will want a Thur^o to support him in his unjust usurpations, he taxes
us for the Compesitors misplacing Cheney for Chancery, which shows that he
cannot yet forget his former pedant^ck whipping occupation, but in his fury
jerks one for another. In our (...) ((...) proceed to be contentious) we shall
take notice of some more of his transgressions, and exhibit him as a second
p^^^ of Priscianus verberans and vapulans.

Tuesday 26. June. At the House of Lords.
This day their Lordships upon a report from the Committee of Lords for
Petitions, referred the great Differences betwixt the inhabitants of the City
of Winchester unto the Earl of Southampton and the Marquess of Winchester to
reconcile the same.

The Return of the Writ for Northampton being amended, Sir John Norris was
admitted to sit in the place of Mr. Harvey.

Wednesday 27. June
There was read the Bill for Religion the first time, and also the Bill for
making void all Letters patents etc. since 1642.

After which the engrossed Bill for a General Pardon and Oblivion was read, and
referred Back again to the Commi^te^e to consider of some amendments thereunto.

Upon the Humble Petition of Michael Mor^el of Wisbich Gent. in the behalf of
himself and other the Inhabitants of the Isle of Ely, setting forth that one
Richard Harrison, formerly a Treasurer there, had deceived the country of
several great sums of money which he had received and converted unto his own
use.

The Committee taking notice of the heinousness of the fact,

Ordered, That the said Harrison do personally appear before them upon
Wednesday next, being the fourth day of July next ensuing, then and there to
give an account of such sums of money as he shall be charged with.

This day his Majesty's ^e^ter to the Levant Company was read in Court, therein
noting the recalling of Sir Thomas B^nd^sh, and recommending the Earl of
Winchelsey in his room Amhassadour for Constantinople.

Thursday, 28 June.
This Day being appointed to be set apart upon the humble desires of both
Houses by his Majesty's gracious Proclamation unto God to return thanks for his
Majesty's happy restoration unto his kingdoms and Government.

His Royal Majesty with both his Brothers the Dukes of York and Gloucester,
with many of the Nobility came unto the Chapel in White Hall, where Dr.
Sheldon preached before his Majesty, whose Text was out of the 18 Psalm and the
49 verse, the words were these, Therefore will I give thanks unto the Lord
among the heathen, and sing praises unto thy Name.

At the Abbey before the House of Peers preached Mr. Hodges of Kensington, whose
Text was Psalm 126, and the 3 verse, the words follow, The Lord has done great
things for us, whereof we are glad.

Likewise before the Honorable the House of Commons at St. Margarets Church
Westminster, preached Dr. Reynolds, who took his Text out of Zechariah, 4
chapter, 6 verse, the words whereof follow, Then he answered and spoke unto me
saying, this is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by my might
nor my power, but by my spirit says the Lord of Hosts.

The last evening the Honorable Sir Harebottle Grimestone Speaker to the House
of Commons, to manifest his great affections and loyalty unto his Royal
Majesty, gave him a noble entertainment, where were present at the Dukes of
York and Gloucester, with many other of the Nobility, the whole service being
performed with a great deal of handsomeness, and rare music, to the great
content of all who had the honor to be present.

From Smyrna 1 May 1660.
Mr. Jonathan Dawes and other Merchants advice from Constantinople, that at
Galata there happened an extraordinary great fire, burning all down, except
some few houses, all the English houses, who had some time to save the greater
part of their goods. The houses burnt are by calculation 35 if not 40 thousand.

London, Printed by John Redmayne in Lovells Court in Paternoster Row. And are
to be had at the Office of Intelligence. 1660.


