Numb. 99. An Exact Account, COMMUNICATING The chief Transactions of the Three
Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland. With the daily Votes and Resolves in
both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Also Particular ADVICE from the OFFICE of
INTELLIGENCE. Published by AUTHORITY. From Friday June 8. to Friday June 15.
Friday, 8 June. At the House of Commons.
THe Committee appointed to consider of his Majesty's Revenue, acquaints the
House that they were ready to report the matter of Fact touching the same;
whereupon the House ordered them to bring in the said Report on Tuesday morning
next.

The House resumed the debate upon the Bill for Pardon and Indemnity.

Resolved, That twenty more besides those who sat as Judges in the pretended
High Court of Justice upon his late Majesty, be excepted out of the Bill for
free Pardon and Indemnity, upon such penalties and forfeitures (not Capital)
as shall be declared by ah Act of Parliament for that purpose.

Ordered, That a Committee do bring in the names of such persons under the
aforesaid qualifications according to the said Resolves, and present them to
the House for their consideration.

Ordered, That a Committee do present the names of such persons who sat in
Judgment in the pretended High Court of Justice upon his late Majesty, yet did
not sit and give sentence the last day; after which the House adjourned till
three a clock in the afternoon.

Afternoon.
The House m^t and Ordered to go with the Speaker to Whitehall, there to attend
his Majesty: Accordingly the Speaker (the Mace being carried before him)
accompanied with all the Members of the House went on foot to Whitehall, and
being conducted to his Majesty, the Speaker made a spe^ch, relating to his
Majesty's Letter and Declaration, taking notice of his Majesty's gracious offer
of a free Pardon, and thereupon read the Vot^s of the House; wherein they did
in the name of themselves and of all the Commons of England accept of his
Majesty's gracious Pa^don and Indemnity: After which the Speaker, in the name
of the House, humbly desired his Majesty to issu^ forth his Royal P^^clamation
to all his Subjects of England, (...) to quiet their mind^s, in letting them
know his g^acious pleasure to grant such Indemnity, saving only to those who
shall be excepted out of the Act for free Pardons and did withal in the name
of the House, ^ender all humble and hearty thanks to his Majesty, for his
seasonable and gracious Proclamation against profaneness.

Unto which his Majesty replied, That as he had promised, so he was ready and
willing to perform, and that he should according to their desires, issue forth
a Proclamation to make the sam^ known for the q^^eting and contentment of all
his loving subjects, or words to that effect.

The Subcommittee appointed to consider of and state the Debts of the Nation,
as to whom, how, and by whom contracted, and to whom due, and what Debts are
due to the public, and by whom, and what Salaties have been paid by the
public, and to whom. And also what persons have received public moneys, the
which they are to be accomptable for, do sit in the Queens Court de d^e in
diem, at two of the clock in the afternoon.

His Majesty this morning rode to Hampton Court, and took a view thereof, after
which he returned and touched several persons afflicted with the Kings Evil.

Saturday, 9 June.
This day according to the desire of both Houses of Parliament his Majesty
published a Proclamation, appointing the 28 of June to be set a part for a day
of Thanksgiving throughout England, Wales, and the Town of Barwick, for His
Majesty's safe Return to his Government over these Kingdoms and Peoples and
that the said P^oclamation be read in all Churches some Sabbath-daies before
the said 28 of June.

At the House of Commons.
Mr. Speaker informs the House that Mr. Hevingham one of those who sat and
gave Sentence in the pretended High-Court of Justice against his late Majesty,
had rendered himself unto him according to the Proclamation.

Ordered, That William Hevingham be committed into custody unto the Sergeant of
Arm^s attending this House, and that the Sergeant do take him into custody
accordingly.

The House passed the Elections touching Plymouth.

They likewise renewed the Report from the Committee appointed to consider who
sat as Judges in the pretended High Court of Justice, and were absent when the
Sentence of Death upon his late Majesty was pronounced, viz. that the Lord
Mounson sat five times, Thomas Challone^ five times, Iam^s Challoner five
times, John Las^e five times, John Frey six times, Sir Gilbert Pickering three
times, Sir James Harrington two times, Sir Henry M^ldmay four times.

Resolved, that Thomas Challoner be excepted out of the Act of General Pardon
and Indemnity (not extending to Life) but to suffer such pains, penalties and
forfeitures as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed.

The like Resolve passed touching the forenamed persons.

Ordered, That Sir Henry Mildmay now a Prisoner at Dover be brought up in safe
custody to this House.

Upon the Petition of Col. Hutchinson, and in consideration of his Penitence,
and testimony of his vigorous Actings against those that did abjure KINGLY
government, it was

Resolved, That John Hutchinson Esquire in regard of his signal repentance, shall
not be within the clause of exception in the Act of General Pardon and
Oblivion, as to any fines or forfitures of any part of his Estate not purchased
of or belonging to the Public.

Ordered, That Robert Wallop Esquire, do appear on monday morning next before this
House, to answer such things as shall be objected against him.

Resolved, That John Phelpes one of the Clerks to the pretended ^igh Court of
Justice be excepted out of the Act for General Pardon (not extending to life)
but to suffer such pains, penalties and forfeitures as shall be specified in an
Act for that purpose to be passed.

Resolved, That Colonel Adrian Scroop pay one years fine so the mercy shown
him in his being Pardoned.

Resolved, That the Lord Gray be left out of the List.

The House adjourned the further Debate touching this affair until monday
morning eight of the Clock.

Monday, 11 June, at the House of Commons
A Report was made from the Commissioners appointed to administer the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supreamacie, that four hundred and fifty being all who sat at
present in the House had taken the said Oaths.

Resolved, That all Officers and Soldiers of the Army do take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and that it be administered unto them accordingly.

The like R^solve passed touching the Officers of the Navy.

Resolved, That all those who by law ought to take Oaths of Allegiance and
Supreamacie, be enjoined by His Majesty's Proclamation to take the same.

Resolved, That Robert Wallop Esquire be for ever discharged from being a Member
of this House, and from bearing any Office in this Kingdom.

Resolved, That the said Robert Wallop Esquire be excepted out of the Act for
General Pardon, not ex^ending to Life but to suffer such pains, penalties, and
forfeiture as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed, and
that he be committed into safe custody to the Sergeant at Arms attending this
House, and that the Sergeant take him into custody accordingly.

The Reader is to take notice of a mistake in a former Print concerning Mr.
Luke Robinson, who was not, as there incerted, one of those Judges of that
pretended High Court of Justice who condemned his late Majesty.

The House read the humble Petition of Luke Robinson who being called to the
Bar, with many tears and much sorrow acknowledged the heinousness of those his
actions.

Resolved that the said Luke Robinson Esquire one of the Members of this House, be
discharged from his present attendance as a Member hereof.

The House received the Report from the Committee appointed to consider of the
twenty persons besides those who sat as Judges upon his late Majesty, which
are to be excepted out of the Act for a General Pardon: and

Resolved, That Sir Henry Vane be excepted out of the Act for a General Pardon,
not extending to Life, but to suffer such pains, penalties, and forfeitures, as
shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed.

Resolved, That William Lenthall Esquire Speaker to the last Parliament, be
excepted out of the Act for General Pardon, not extending to Life, but to
suffer such pains, penalties, and forfeitures, as shall be specified in an Act
for that purpose to be passed.

Touching Advice from the Office of Intelligence.
For the present all Buyers and Sellers are desired to repair thither, where
they shall have due notice, and particulars, of such Purchases and Purchasers
as may best fit their occasions.

At the said Office is to be sold the right sort of that famous Powder known by
the name of the Countess of Ken^'s Powder.

Tuesday, 12 June, at the House of Commons.
The House Ordered Writs to be issued out for new Elections to be made to serve
in the places of John Hutchinson and Robert Wallop.

The House received the Report from the Committee of Privileges concerning
several Elections, which were passed accordingly.

They likewise read the B^ll for Pole Money the first time, and

Ordered it to be read the second time on Thursday morning next.

The House read the humble Petition of several Persons who had suffered Bondage
and slavery under the Turk, in relation to themselves and others now in bondage.

Ordered, That this Petition be referred to the Committee for discoveries, to
examine what moneys have been collect^d for the relief of Captives, and how and
by what orde^ it has been disposed of, and report their opinion to the House.

Ordered, That the Members of the House who are of his Majesty's Honorable
privy Council do acquaint his Majesty with the sufferings of the Lord
Inchequeen and his son, who were taken by the Pirates of Argler, and now in
bondage there, and recommend their Cases as the humble desires of this House
unto his Majesty for his serious consideration.

Ordered, That the Bill for confirmation of Sales be read on Friday morning
next, nothing to intervene, and the Bill for settling of Religion on Saturday
morning.

The House assumed the Debate touching the persons to be excepted out of the
Act of General Pardon.

Resolved, Tha^ William Burton Baily of Yarmouth be excepted out of the Act for
a General Pardon not extending to life, but to suffer such pains, penalties
and forfeitures as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed.

The House adjourned the further Debate touching the persons to be

A Letter from Newark, May 29.
THough it cannot be denied out that the promulgating of a Duty takes away
almost the honor concomitant; yet since the late small Actions of every p^tty
Borrough that has but the least tincture of a new acquired Loyalty, are still
with singular care and indu^^ry daily commended to the Press; why should then
these considerable demonstrations of Loyalty be w^apt up in Oblivion, that were
laid forth in the proclaiming of his Sacred Majesty in the famous County and
Town of Nottingham and the loyal Corporation of Newark. As Soon as the joyful
news came of the proclaiming of his Majesty at London, the Mayor of Nottingham
who for his early Loyalty had suffered imprisonment and banishment by the
barbarous fury of the Tyrannical Governor) without staying for Order, by
beating of Drums did convene all the Townsmen together in Arms, who were nigh
1000. shot, besides a Militia Troop; and then in all the usual places d^d
solemnly himself proclaim it, at every time with vollies of shot, and such
shouting of people as was to the wonderment of all, and astonishment of those
few Phanaticks in town. The like in every respect was at Newark, save that the
Deputy Mayor who proclaimed it was a Commissioner for Lambert, and a King-hater
as long as it was in fashion: but one solemnity was not sufficient for Newark
(a Town as early as any in Loyalty, and beyond all in perseverance; a Town that
proposed no other end but his Majesty's service, which was seen by enduring all
extremeties for his sake, and yielding (in order to his command) upon bald
terms for their own Town, where only for Original Sin, people were punished
in this world by one of the late Kings murderers who by a rump^ng Order robbed
some O^phans of 2500. l. for their Loyalty, the pretended sin of the
parents.) [ It Is hoped the Right honorable, the Lords will take this into their
consideration, and relieve them who by their means are reduced to pressing
penury; before they pass an Act of Oblivion, the Lord Lexinton is able to
inform further.] They thought it as fit likewise to keep a memorial of the
Kings coming into the World, in order to which May 29. in the morning one of the
Militia Companies drew into the field, where no sooner drawn up, but the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Vicar with the inhabitants came by in solemn procession with
singing of Psalms, and at the Towns end made a halt, that the foot might march
before them all the streets along were strewn with green Bouchs and Flowers,
to the Church, where was an excellent Sermon preached by one Mr. Brawell, who
took for his Text Eccles. 10. v. 17. the very choice of which is sufficient to
set forth the ingenuity of the Gentleman, there was one thing observable during
the sermon, that chose pathetick expressions conc^^ning the murder of the late
King, (which fetched tears from most of the Auditors eyes, yet could not fetch
off the ha^s of three or four feared Aldermen) after Sermon an Anthem 1'th
Organ-lo^^, with loud Music; at 3. of the clock they drew into the field
again, both the Horse and Foot of the M^litia, and a Company of Townsmen; where
after some pleasant skirmishing, which took up 2. or 3. hours they marched in
again, where being drawn round the Marketplace in a single File, they gave 3.
handsome vollies of shot: after this bon fi^e and much so well composed, that I
defy malice (nay the aforesaid Aldermen themselves) to say that there was
either Soldier or Officer seen drunk that night. The Horse was commanded by
Captain Air; the Foot by Captain Whaley the loyal Chief of a loyal Family; the
other one who never receded from Loyalty by bowing a knee to Baal; there were
present at the solemnity Squire, Leek and others, besides diverse Gentlemen of
quality, who riding as Volunteers, gave singular demonstration of their good
Affections that day.

Wednesday, 13 June. At the House of Lords.
This day their Lordships agreed on a Petition to be presented unto his
Maj^^^y, wherein they bless God for the seasonable Proclamation against
Debauchery and Profaneness, etc. humbly desiring that his Majesty would be
pleased by his Proclamation to enjoin all Ministers etc. in their several
parish-Churches to read it once a month, with order to dehort them from the
vices, and exhort them to the virtues therein mentioned, and this to continue
for six months, and sent it to the House of Commons for their concurrence.

At the House of Commons.
The House proceeded in the debate upon the twenty persons to be excepted out
of the Act for a General Pardon. and

Resolved, that Oliver St. John Esquire be excepted out of the Act for General
Pardon, not extending to Life, but to suffer such pains, penalties and
forfeitures as shall be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed.

The l^ke Resolve passed concerning Sir Arthur Hesiltig, Col. Sydenh^m, col.
Desbrow, and Alderman Iretont

The House received a message from the Lords with a Petition to be presented
unto his Majesty concerning his Proclamation against Debauchery, etc. for their
concurrence, which they assented unto.

They also received the report from the Committee appointed to examine Ellis
and the other person who were secured upon suspicion of being concerned in the
escape of Miles Corbet, it being found that they did not know thereof, nor had
any hand therein, they were discharged from their imprisonment.

Mr. Speaker acquaints the House that Col. Tho. Wait, -- Peter Temple and
Simon May^e, who sat in the pretended high Court of Justice upon his late
Majesty had rendered themselves into his hands according to his Majesty's
Proclamation in that behalf, whereupon the House Ordered that the Sergeant at
Arms at ending this House do take them into safe custody, the which he
performed accordingly.

Thursday, 14 June. At the House of Lords.
This day their Lordships had under consideration several things relating unto
his Majesty's Revennue, and also agreed some Orders touching good, belonging
unto his late Majesty in the hands of private persons, and likewise read diverse
private Petitions, which were referred unto the Committee of Lords ^o^
Petitions, sitting in the Painted Chamber, Sir Orland^ Bridgeman officiating as
Speaker pro tempore.

At the House of Commons.
The House passed some Elections, and proceeded in debate of the residue of the
twenty persons to be excepted out of the Act for General Pardon.

Resolved, That Col. Axtel be excepted out of the Act of General Pardon, not
extended to life, but to suffer such pains, penalties and forfeitures as shall
be specified in an Act for that purpose to be passed, they also had under
consideration several others, and adjourned the further debate until to morrow
morning eight of the clock.

This day there was brought unto Whitehall from Sheyne one of his late
Majesty's Palaces, several Boats laden with many rich and curious Effigies,
formerly belonging unto his Majesty, but since alienated, and now restored to
the right Owner.

This afternoon there was exposed to public view out of one of the Windows in
Whitehall formerly the lodgings of Sir Henry Mildmay, and now the Jewel Office,
the Effigies (which was made and shown with so much pomp at Sommerset House) in
Wax of Oliver Cromwell lately so well known by the name of Protector, with a
Cord about his Neck, which was tied unto one of the Bars of the Window.

LONDON, Printed by John Redmayne in Lovells Court in Paternoster Row. And are
to be had at the Office of Intelligence. 1660.


