VIRGIDEMIARVM The three last Books. Of biting Satyrs. Corrected and amended
with some Additions. by. I. H.



Imprinted at London for Robert Dexter, at the sign of the Brazen Serpent in
Paul's Church yard. 1599.

The Authors charge to his Satyrs.
YE luck-lesse Rymes, whom not unkindly spite
Begot long since of Truth and holy Rage,
Lie here in womb of Silence and still Night
Until the broils of next unquiet age:
That which is others grave shall be your womb,
And that which bears you, your eternal Toombe.
Cease ere ye gin, and ere ye live be dead,
And dye and live ere ever ye be borne,
And be not bore, ere ye be buried,
Then after live, since you have died beforne,
When I am dead and rotten in the dust,
Then gin to live, and leave when others lust.
For when I die, shall Envy die with me
And lie deep smothered with my Marble-stone,
Which while I live cannot be done to dye,
Nor, if your life gin ere my life be done,
Will hardly yield t'await my mourning hearse.
But for my dead corpse change my liunig verse.
What shall the ashes of my senseless vrne,
Need to regard the rauing world above.
Since afterward I never can return
To feel the force of hatred or of love?
Oh if my soul could see their Post-hume spite
Should it not joy and triumph in the sight?
What ever eye shall find this hateful scrole
After the date of my dear Exequies,
Ah pity thou my playning Orphans dole
That feign would see the sun before it dies:
It died before, now let it live again,
Then let it die, and bide some famous bane.
Satis est potuisse videri.

VIRGIDEMIARVM LIB. 4.

SAT. 1.
Che baiar vuol, bai.
WHO dares vpbraid these open rimes of mine
With blindfold Aquines, or dark Venusine?
Or rough-hew'ne Teretismes writ in th'antique vain
Like an old Satyr, and new Flaccian?
Which who reads thrice, and rubs his rugged brow,
And deep intends every doubtful row,
Scoring the margent with his blazing stars
And hundredth crooked interlinears,
(Like to a Merchants debt-role new defaced
When some cracked Manor crossed his book at last)
Should all in rage the Curse-beat Page out-riue,
And in each dust-heape bury me alive
Stamping like Bucephall, whose slackned raines,
And bloody fet-lockes fry with seven men's brains;
More cruel than the crauon Satyrs Ghost,
That bound dead bones unto a burning post,
Or some more strait-lac'd Iuror of the rest,
Impannel'd of an Holy-Fax inquest;
Yet well bethought stoops down, and reads a new:
The best lieslow, and loathes the shallow view,
Quoth old Eudemon, when his gout-swolne fist
Gropes for his double Ducates in his chist:
Then buckle close his careless lyds once more,
To pose the pore-blinde snake of Epidaore.
That Lyncius may be matched with Gaulards sight,
That sees not Paris for the houses height;
Or wily Cyppus, that can wink and snort
Whiles his wife dallies on Maecenas skort;
Yet when he has my crabbed Pamphlet red
As often times as PHILLIP has been dead,
Bids all the Furies haunt each peevish line
That thus have rackt their friendly readers eyne;
Worse than the Logogryphes of later times,
Or Hundredth Riddles shook to sleeue-lesse rimes;
Should I endure these curses and dispight
While no man's ear should glow at what I write?
Labeo is whip't, and laughs me in the face:
Why? for I smite and hide the galled place.
Gird but the Cynicks Helmet on his head,
Careshee for Talus, or his flayle of lead?
Long as the crafty Cuttle lies sure
In the black Cloud of his thick vomiture;
Who list complain of wronged faith or fame
When he may shift it to another name?
Caluus can scratch his elbow, and can smile,
That thrift-lesse Pontice bites his lip the while.
Yet I intended in that self devise,
To check the churl for his known couetise.
Each points his straight forefinger to his friend,
Like the blind Dial on the Belfrey end:
Who turns it homeward to say, this is I,
As bolder Socrates in the Comedy?
But single out, and say once plat and plain
That coy Matrona is a Curtizan,
Or thou false Cryspus chokd'st thy wealthy guest
Whiles he lay snoring at his midnight rest,
And in thy dung-cart did the carcass shrine
And deep intombe it in Port-esquiline.
Proud Trebius liu's for all his princely gate
On third-hand suits, and scrapings of the plate.
Titius knew not where to shroude his head
Until he did a dying widow wed
Whiles she lay doting on her deaths bed,
And now has purchased lands with one nights pain
And on the morrow woes and weds again.
Now see I fire-flakes sparkle from his eyes
Like a Comets tail in the angry skies,
His pouting cheeks puff up above his brow
Like a swollen Toad touched with the Spyders blow;
His mouth shrinks sideward like a scornful Playse
To take his tired Ears ungrateful place.
His Ears hang lauing like a new-lug'd swine
To take some counsel of his grieved eyne.
Now laugh I loud, and break my spleen to see
This pleasing pastime of my poesy,
Much better than a Paris-garden Bear,
Or prating puppet on a Theatere,
Or Mimoes whistling to his tabouret
Selling a laughter for a cold meals meat.
Go to then ye my sacred Semones,
And please me more, the more ye do displease;
Care we for all those bugs of idle fear?
For Tigels grinning on the Theater,
Or scar-babe threatenings of the rascal crew,
Or wind-spent verdicts of each Ale-knights view?
What ever breast does freeze for such false dread,
Beshrow his base white liver for his meede.
Fond were that pity, and that fear were sin,
To spare wast leaves that so deserved bin.
Those toothlesse Toys that dropped out by mis-hap,
Be but as lightning to a thunderclap:
Shall then that foul infamous Cyneds hide
Laugh at the purple wales of others side?
Not, if he were as near, as by report,
The stews had wont to be to the Tenis-court,
He that while thousands envy at his bed,
Neighs after Bridals, and fresh-mayden head;
While slavish Juno dares not look awry
To frown at such imperious riualrye,
Not tho she sees her wedding Jewels dressed
To make new Bracelets for a strumpets wrest,
Or like some strange disguised Messaline,
Hires a nights lodging of his concubine;
Whether his twilight-torch of love do call
To reuils of uncleanly Musical,
Or midnight plays, or Tauerns of new wine,
Hy ye white Aprons to your Landlords sign;
When all, save tooth-lesse age or infancy,
Are summoned to the Court of Venerie.
Who list excuse? when chaister dames can hyre,
Some snout-faire stripling to their Apple-squire:
Whom staked up like to some stallion-steede
They keep with Eggs and Oysters for the breed.
O Lucine! barren Caia has an heir
After her husband's dozen years despair.
And now the bribed Midwife swears apace,
The bastard babe does bear his fathers face.
But has not Lelia past her virgin years?
For modest shame (God wot) or penal fears.
He tells a Merchant tidings of a prise,
That tells Cynedo of such novelties,
Worth little less than landing of a Whale,
Or Gades spoils, or a churles funerale:
Go bid the baines and point the bridal day,
His broking Baud has got a noble prey,
A vacant tenement, an honest dowre
Can fit his pander for her paramoure,
That he, base wretch, may clog his wit-old head
And give him hansell of his Hymen-bed.
Ho! all ye Females that would live vnshent
Fly from the reach of Cyneds regiment.
If Trent be drawn to dregs, and Low refuse,
Hence ye hot lechour, to the steaming stews.
Tyber the famous sink of Christendom
Turn thou to Thames, and Thames ru^n toward Rome:
What ever damned stream but thine were meet
To Quench his lusting livers boiling heat?
Thy double draught may quench his dog-daies rage
With some stale Bacchis, or obsequious page,
When writhen Lena makes her sale-set shows
Of wooden Venus with fair limned brows;
Or like him more some veiled Matrons face,
Or trained prentise trading in the place:
The close adultresse, where her name is red
Coms crauling from her husbands lukewarm bed,
Her carrion skin bedaub'd with odours sweet,
Groping the postern with her bared feet.
Now play the Satyr who so list for me,
Valentine self, or some as chaste as he.
In vain she wishes long Alchmanaes night,
Cursing the hasty dawning of the light,
And with her cruel Ladie-starre vprose
She seeks her third roust on her silent toes,
Besmeared all with loathsome smoke of lust
Like Acherons steemes, or smoldring sulphur dust:
Yet all day sits she simpring in her mew
Like some chaste dame, or shrined saynct in show,
Whiles he lies wallowing with a westiehed
And palish carcass, on his Brothel-bed,
Till his salt bowels boil with poisonous fire,
Right Hercules with his second Deianire.
O Esculape! how rife is Physic made,
When each Brasse-basen can profess the trade
Of ridding pockie wretches from their pain,
And do the beastly cure for ten-groats gain?
Al these and more, deserve some blood-drawne lines:
But my six Cords been of too loose a twine.
Stay till my beard shall sweep mine aged breast,
Then shall I seem an awful Satyrist:
While now my rimes relish of the Ferule still,
Some nose-wise Pedant says; whose deepe-sene skill
Has three times construed either Flaccus ore,
And thrice rehearsed them in his Triuiall floare,
So let them tax me for my hote-bloodes rage,
Rather than say I doted in my age.
SAT. 2.
Arcades ambo.
OLD driueling Lolio drudges all he can,
To make his eldest son a Gentleman.
Who can despair that sees another thrive,
By lone of twelue-pence to an Oyster-wiue?
When a crazed scaffold, and a rotten stage,
Was all rich Naenius his heritage.
Naught spends he for fear, nor spares for cost:
And all he spendes and spaires beside is lost;
Himself goes patched like some bare Cottyer,
Least he might ought the future stock appeyre.
Let giddie Cosmius change his choice array,
Like as the Turk his Tents thirse in a day.
And all to sun and air his suites untold
From spitfull mothes, and frets, and hoary mold,
Bearing his paune-layd lands upon his back
As Snailes their shells, or Pedlers do their pack:
Who cannot shine in tissues and pure gold,
That has his lands and patrimony sold?
Lolioes side-cote is ^ough Pampilian
Gilded with drops that down the bosom ran,
White Carsy hose, patched on either knee,
The very Emblem of good husbandry,
And a knit nightcap made of coursest twine,
With two long labels buttoned to his chin;
So rides he mounted on the market day
Upon a straw-stuft panel, all the way,
With a maund charged with household merchandise
With eggs, or white-meate, from both Dayries:
And with that byes he roast for sunday-noone,
Proud how he made that weeks provision:
Else is he stall-fed on the worky-day
With browne-bread crusts softened in sodden whey,
Or water-grewell, or those paups of meal
That Maro makes his Simule, and Cybeale:
Or once a week perhaps for nouelty,
Reez'd Bacon: soords shall feast his family;
And weens this more than one egg cleft in twain
To feast some patron and his Chappelaine;
Or more than is some hungry gallants dole,
That in a dearth runs sneaking to an hole,
And leaves his man and dog to keep his hall
Least the wild room should run forth of the wall.
Good man him list nor spend his idle meals
In quinsing Plouers, or in wining Quales;
Nor toot in Cheap side baskets earne and late please
To set the first tooth in some nouell-cate.
Let sweete-mouth'd Mercia bid what crowns she
For halfe-fed Cherries, or green garden pease,
Or the first Artichoks of all the year,
To make so lavish cost for little cheer:
When Lolio feasteth in his reueling fit,
Some sterued Pullen scoures the rusted spitt.
For else how should his son maintained be,
At Ins of Court or of the Chancerie:
There to learn Law, and courtly carriage,
To make amends for his mean parentage,
Where he unknown and ruffling as he can,
Goes current each-where for a Gentleman?
What Brokers lousy wardrop cannot reach,
With tissued pains to pranck each peasants breech?
Could thou but give the wall, the cap, the knee,
To proud Sartorio that goes stradling by,
Were not the needle pricked on his sleeue
Does by good hap the secret watchword give?
But hear'st thou Lolioes son, gin not thy gate,
Until the evening Oule or bloody-Batt.
Never until the lamps of Paul's been light,
And niggard lanternes shade the Moonshine night,
Then when the guilty bankrupt in bold dread,
From his close Cabin thrusts his shrinking head,
That has been long in shady shelter pent
Imprisoned for fear of prisonment.
May be some russet-cote Parochian
Shall call thee cosen, friend, or countryman,
And for thy hoped fist crossing the street,
Shall in thy fathers name his God-son greett,
Could never man work thee a worser shame
Then once to minge thy fathers odious name,
Whose mention were alike to thee as leeue,
As a Catch-pols fist unto a Bankrupts sleeue;
Or an, Hos ego, from old Petrarchs spright
Unto a Plagiarie sonnet-wright.
There soon as he can kiss his hand in gree,
And with good grace bow it below the knee,
Or make a Spanish face with fauning cheer,
With the Iland-Conge like a Caualier,
And shake his head, and cringe his neck and side,
Home hyes he in hisf athers Farm to bid.
The Tenants wonder at their Landlords Son,
And bless them at so sudden coming on,
More then who vies his pence to view some trick
Of stranges Moroccoes dumb Arithmeticke,
Or the young Elephant, or two-tayl'd steer,
Or the rig'd Camel, or the Fidling Friar.
Nay then his Hodge shallleaue the plough and waine,
And buy a book, and go to school again:
Why might not he as well as others done,
Rise from his Festuc to his Littleton?
Fools, they may feed with words and live by air,
That climb to honor by the Pulpits stayre:
Sit seven yeates pining in an Anchores cheyre,
To win some parched shreds of Miniuere,
And seven more plod at a Patrons tail,
To get a gelded Chapels cheaper sail.
Old Lolio sees and laugheth in his sleeue,
At the great hope they and his state do give.
But that which glads and makes him proud'st of all,
Is when the brabling neighbors on him call,
For counsel in some crabbed case of law,
Or some Indentments, or some bond to draw:
His Neighbors goose has grazed on his Lea,
What action might be entered in the plea?
So new fallen lands have made him in request,
That now he looks as lofty as the best.
And well done Lolio, like a thrifrie sire,
It Were pity but thy son should prove a squire.
How I fore see in many ages past,
When Lolioes caytiue name is quite defa'st,
Thine heir, thine heirs heir, and his heir again
From out the loins of careful Lolian,
Shall climb up to the Chancell pewes on hie,
And rule and reign in their rich Tenancie;
When pearch't aloft to perfect their estate
They rack their rents unto a treble rate;
And hedge in all the neighbor common-lands,
And clodge their slavish tenant with commands,
Whiles they, poor souls, with feeling sighs co^plain
And wish old Lolio were alive again,
And praise his gentle soul and wish it well
And of his friendly facts full often tell.
His father dead, tush, no it was not he,
He finds records of his great pedigree,
And tells how first his famous Ancestor
Did come in long since with the Conqueror.
Nor has some bribed Herald first assigned
His quartered Arms and crest of gentle kind,
The Scottish Barnacle (if I might choose)
That of a worm does wax a winged goose;
Nathelesse some hungry squire for hope of good
Matches the churles Son into gentle blood,
Whose son more justly of his gentry boasts
Than who were borne at two pide painted posts;
And had some traunting Merchant to his sire
That trafiqu'd both by water and by fire.
O times! since ever Rome did Kings create,
Brass Gentlemen, and Caesar's Laureate.
SAT. 3. Fuimus Troes. VEL Vix ea nostra.
What boots it Pontice, tho thou could discourse
Of a long golden line of Ancestors?
Or show their painted faces gaylie dressed,
From ever since before the last conquest;
Or tedious Bead-roles of descended blood,
From Father Iaphet since Deucalions flood,
Or call some old Church-windowes to record
The age of thy fair Arms,
Or find some figures half obliterate
In rain-beat Marble near to the Church-gate,
Upon a Crosse-leg'd Toombe: what boots it thee
To show the rusted Buckle that did tie
The Garter of thy greatest Grand sires knee?
What to reserve their relics many years,
Their siluer-spurs, or spils of booken spears;
Or cite old Oclands verse, how they did weild
The wars in Turwin, or in Turney field?
And if thou can in picking strawes engage,
In one half day thy fathers heritage,
Or hide what ever treasures he the got,
In some deep Cockpit; or in desperate Lot
Upon a sixe-square piece of Iuorie,
Throw both thy self, and thy posterity?
Or if (O shame!) in hired Harlots bed
Thy wealthy heyre-dome thou have buried:
Then Pontice little boots thee to discourse
Of a long golden line of Ancestors.
Ventrous Fortunio his farm has sold,
And gads to Guiane land to fish for gold,
Meeting perhaps, if Orenoque deny,
Some straggling pinnace of Polonian Rye.
Then comes home floting with a silken sail,
That Seuerne shakes with his Canon-peale;
Wiser Raymundus in his closet pent,
Laughs at such danger and aduenturement;
When half his lands are spent in golden smoke,
And now his second hopeful glass is broke.
But yet if happily his third furnace hold,
Devoteth all his pots and pans to gold;
So spend thou Pontice, if thou can not spare,
Like some stout sa-man or Philosopher;
And were thy fathers gentle? that is their praise,
No thank to thee by whom their name decays;
By virtue got they it, and valourous deed,
Do thou so Pontice, and be honored:
But else look how their virtue was their own,
Not capable of propagation,
Right so their titles been, nor can be thine,
Whose ill deserts might blanke their golden line.
Tell me, thou gentle Trojan; do thou prise
Thy brute beasts worth by their dams qualities?
Say thou this Colt shall prove a swift-pac'd steed
Only because a Iennet did him breed?
Or say thou this same Horse shall win the prize,
Because his dame was swiftest Trunchefice,
Or Runceuall his Sire; himself a Gallaway?
Whiles like a tireling Jade he lags halfway;
Or whiles thou see some of thy Stallion-race,
Their eyes boar'd out, masking the Millers-maze,
Like to a Scythian slave sworn to the payle;
Or dragging froathy barrels at his tail?
Albee wise Nature in her providence,
Wont in the want of reason and of sense,
Traduce the native virtue with the kind,
Making all brute and senseless things inclined,
Unto their cause, or place where they were sown
That one is like to all, and all like one.
Was never Fox, but wily cubs begets,
The Bear his feirce-nesse to hi^ brood besets;
Nor f^arefull Hare falls out of Lyo^s seed,
Nor Eagle wont the tender Dove to breed;
Creet ^u^r wont the Cypress sad to bear,
Acheron banks the pal^sh Popelare;
The Palm does rifely rise in Jury field,
And Alpheus wa^ers naught but Olives wild.
Asopus br^ed^ big-Bul-rushes alone,
Meander heath; Peaches by Nilus grown^;
An English Wolf, an Irish Toad to see,
Were as a chast-man nursed in Italy.
And now when Nature gives another guide,
To humane kind that in his bosom bides:
Ab^ue instinct, his reason and discourse,
His being better, is his life the worse?
Ah me! how s^ldome see we sons succe^d
Their Fathers praise in prowess and great deed?
Yet certes if the Sire be ill inclined,
His faults befall his sons by course of kind.
Scaurus was covetous; his son not so,
But not his pared nail will he forgo:
Flori^n the sire ^id women love ali^e,
And so his son does too, all, but his wife:
Brag of thy Fathers faul^s, they are thine own;
Brag of his lands, if those be not forgone:
Brag of thine own good deeds, for they are thine,
More than his life, or lands, or golden line.
SAT. 4.
Plus beauque fort.
CAn I not touch some vpstart carper-shield
Of Lolio's son, that never saw the field^
Or tax wild Pontice for his Luxuries,
B^t straight they tell me of Tiresias eyes?
Or lucklesse Collingborns feeding of the crows,
Or hundredth Sc^lps which Thames s^ill vnderflowes?
But straight Sigalion nods and knits his brows,
And winkes and wa^tes his warning hand for fear,
And lisps some silent letters in my ear?
Have I not vowed for shunning such d^bate
(Pardon ye Satyrs) to deg^nerate?
And wading low in this pl^bei^n lake
That no salt wave shall froath upon my back,
Let Labeo, or who else list for me,
Go loose his ears and fall to Alchymie.
Only, let Gallio give me leave a while
To school him once, or ere I change my style.
O lawless paunch the cause of much despite,
Through raunging of a currish appetite,
When splenish morsels cr^m the gaping Maw,
Withouten d^ets care, or trencher-law,
Tho never have I ^alerne ^imes professed
To be some Ladies trencher-cri^icke guest;
Whiles each bit cools for the Oracle
Whose sentence charms it with a ryming spell;
Touch not this Coler, that M^lancholy
This bit were ^rie and hot, that cold and d^y;
Yet can I set my Gallios d^^ting,
Ape^tle of a Lark, or Plouers wing,
And warn him not to cast his wanton eyne
On grosser Bacon, or salt Haberdine,
Or dried Fli^hes of some smoked Beeue,
Hanged on a writ^en with since Martins eve,
Or burnt Larkes heels, or Rashers ^aw and green,
Or Melancholic liver of an H^n,
Which stout Vor^no brags to make his feast,
And claps his hand on his brave Ostrige-breast;
Then falls to praise the ^ardy Ianiz^r,
That sucks his horse side thirsting in the war.
Las^ly to s^ale up all that he has spoke,
Quaffes a whole Tunnell of Tobacco smoke:
If Ma^tius in boystrous Buffes be dressed,
Branded with Iron plates upon the breast,
And pointed on the shoulders, for the nonce,
As new-come from the Belgian garrisons:
What shall thou need to envy ought at that,
When as thou smellest like a Ciuet Cat;
When as thine oyled locks smooth platted fall,
Shining like varnisht pictures on a wall.
When a plumed Fan may shade thy chalked face,
And lawny strips thy naked bosom grace.
If brabling Make-fray at each Fair and Sise
Picks quarrel^ for to show his valianti^e,
Straight pressed for an hungry Swizzers pay
To thrust his fist to each part of the fray,
And piping hot puffes toward the pointed plain
With a broad Scot, or proking spit of Spain,
O^ hoyseth sail up to a sorraine shore,
That he may live a lawless Conqueror.
If some such desperate Hakster shall devise
To rouse thine Hares-heart from her cowardice,
As idle children striving to excel
In blowing bubles from an empty shell;
Oh Hercules how like to prove a man,
That all so rath thy warlike life began?
Thy mother could thee for thy cradle set,
Her husbands rusty iron corselet;
Whose iargling sound might rock her babe to rest
That never plained of his uneasy nest
There did he dream of drery wars at hand,
And woke, and fought, and won, ^re he could stand^
But who has seen the Lambs of Tarenti^e,
May guess what G^llio his manners been;
All soft as is the falling thistle-downe,
Soft as the fu^^e ball, or Morrians crown;
Now Gallio, gins thy youthly heat to reign
In every vigorous limme, and swelling vain,
Time bids the raise thine hedstrong thoughts on by
To valor and aduenterous chiualry;
Pawn thou no glove for challenge of the deed,
Nor make thy Quintaine others armed head
To Enrich the waiting Herald with thy shame
And make thy loss, the scornful scaffolds game^
Wars; God for^end; nay God defend from war,
Soon are Sonns spent, that not soon reared are:
Gallio may pull me roses ere they fall,
Or in his net entrap the Tennis-ball:
Or tend his Spar-hauke mantling in her mew,
Or yelping Begles busy heels pursue,
Or watch a sinking cork upon the shore,
Or halter Finches through a privy door,
Or list he spend the time in sportfull game,
In daily courting of his lovely dame,
Hang on her lips, melt in her wanton eye,
Dance in her hand, joy in her iollity,
Here Is little peril, and much lesser pain,
So timely Hymen do the rest restrain:
Hy wanton Gallio and wed betime,
Why should thou leese the pleasures of thy prime?
See thou the Rose-leaues fall ungathered?
Then hye thee wanton Gallio to wed:
Let Ring and Ferule meet upon thine hand,
And Lucines girdle with her swathing-bands,
Hy thee and give the w^^ld yet one dwarf more:
Such as it got when thou thy self wast bore:
Look not for warning of thy bloomed chin,
Can never happiness to soon begin;
Virginius vowed to keep his Mayden-head,
And eats cha^t Lettuce, and drinks Poppy-seed,
And smells on Camphyre fasting: and that done,
L^ng has he lived chaste as a vayled Nun,
Free as a new-absolued Damsel
That Friar Cornelius shriued in his Cell,
Till now he waxt a toothlesse Bacheler,
He thaw's like Chaucers frostie Ianiuere
And sets a months mind upon smiling May.
And dies his beard that did his age bewray;
Biting on Annis-^eede, and Rose-marine,
Which might the Fume of his rot lungs refine:
Now he in Charons barge a Bride does seek,
The maidens mock, and call him withered Leeke,
That with a green tail has an hoary head,
And now he would, and now he cannot wed^
SAT. 5.
Stupet Albius aere.
Would now that Math^ were the Satyrist,
That some fat bribe might greaze him in the fist,
^o^ which he need not braule at any bar
Nor kis^e the book to be a periurer;
Who else would s^orne his silence to have sold,
And have his tongue tied with strings of Gold?
C^rius is dead, and buried long since,
And all that loved golden Abstinence:
Might he not well repine at his old fee,
Would he but spare to speak of usury?
Hir^lings enough beside, can be so base,
Tho we should scorn each bribing varlets brass;
Yet he and I could shun each ^ealous head,
Sticking our thumbs close to our girdle-stead,
Tho were they manicled behind our back,
Another fist can serve our fees to take:
Yet pursy Euclio c^early smiling prayde,
That my sharp words might curtal their side trade;
For thousands been in every gouernall^
That live by loss, and rise by others fall.
What ever sickly sheep so secret dies,
But some foul Ra^en has bespoke his eyes?
What else makes N. when his lands are spent,
Go shaking like a threedbare malecontent.
Whose band-lesse Bonnet vailes his ore-grown chin
And sullen rags be wray his Morphew'd skin;
So^ships he to the woluish we^terne i will,
Among the savage Kernes in sad exile;
Or in the Turkish wars at Caesar's pay
To rub his life out till the latest day;
Another shifting Gallant to forecast,
To gull his Hostess for a months repast,
With some gal'd Trunck ballac'd with straw and ston^
Left for the paune of his provision;
Had F. shop lain fallow but from hence,
His doors close sealed as in some pestilence,
Whiles his light ^eeles their fearful flight can take,
To get some badg-lesse Blew upon his back?
Tocullio was a welthie v^urer,
Such store of incomes had he every year,
By Bushels was he wont to met his ^oyne
As did the old wife of Trim^lcion^
Could he do^ more that finds an idle room,
For many hundredth thousands on a Toombe?
Or who reares up four free-schooles in his age,
Of his old pillage, and damned surplusage?
Yet now he swore by that sweere Cross he kissed,
(That silver cross, where he had sacrificed
His coveting soul, by his desires own doom,
Daily to die the Devils Martyrdom)
His Angels were all flowne up to their sky,
And had forsook his naked Tresurie:
Farewell Astraea and her weights of gold^
Until his lingering Calends once be told;
Naught left behind^ but wax and parchment scroles
Like Lucians dream that silver turned to coles^
Should thou him credit, that nould credit thee?
Yes and may swear he swore the verity;
The ding-thrift heir, his shift-got sum misspent,
Comes drouping like a pennylesse penitent,
And beats his faint fist on Tocullios door,
It lost the last and now must call for more.
Now has the Spider caught a wandering Fly,
And drags her captive at her cruel thie^
Soon is his arrand red in his pale face,
Which bears dumb Characters of every case,
So Cyneds dusky cheek and fiery eye,
And hayre-les brow, tells where he last did lie;
So M^tho does bewray his guilty thought,
While his pale face does say, his cause is nought^
See thou the wary Angler trayle along
His feeble line, soon as some Pike too strong
Has swallowed the bate that scorns the shore,
Yet now nearehand cannot resist no more:
So lies he aloof in smooth pretense,
To hide his rough intended violence;
As he that under name of Christmas Cheer,
Can starve his Tenants all the ensuing year:
Paper and wax (God wo^) a weak repay,
For such deep debts, and down^ast sums as they;
Write, seal, deliver, take, go, spend and speed,
And yet full heardly could his present need
Part with such sum; For but as yester-late
Did Furnus offer pen-worths at easy rate,
For small disbursment; He the banks has broke,
And needs mote now some further plain ore loo^;
Yet ere he go fame would he be releast:
Hy yo^ ye Ravens, hy you to the feast;
Provided that thy lands are leften ^yre,
To be red^em'd or ere thy day expire;
Then shall thou tear those idle paper-bonds,
That thus had fettered thy pawned lands.
Ah fool! For sooner shall thou s^ll the rest,
Then stake ought for thy ^ormer Interest;
When it shall grind thy grating gall for shame,
To see the lands that bear thy Grand^i^es name,
Become a dunghill peasants sommer-hall,
Or lonely Hermits cage inhospitall;
A pining Gourmand, an imperious slave,
An hors^leech, barren womb, and gaping grave,
A legal thief, a bloud-lesse murderer;
A feind inca^nate, a false Usurer,
Albee such main extort s^orns to be pent
In the clay walls of thatched Tenement,
For certes no man of a low degree,
May bid two ghe^tes; or Gout, or Usury:
Unless some base hedge-creeping Collybist
Scatters his refuse scraps on whom he list,
For Easter-gloues, or for a shroftide Hen,
Which bought to give, he takes to ^ell again:
I do not mean some glozing Merchants feate,
That laugheth at the cozened worlds deceit,
When as an hundred stocks lie in his fist^
He leaks and sinkes, and breaks when he list.
But, Nummius cased the needy Gallants care,
With a base ba^gaine of his blown ware^
Of fusted hoppes now lost for lack of sail,
Or mo'ld browne-paper that could naught avail:
Or what he cannot utter otherwise,
May pleasure Fridoline for treble price.
Whiles his false broker lies in the wind,
And for a present Chapman is assigned,
The cut^throte wretch for their compacted gain,
Buys all for but one quarter of the main;
Whiles if he chance to break his deare-bought day^
And forfai^ for default of due repay
His late entangled lands: Then Fridoline,
Buy thee a wallet, and go beg or pine^
If Mammon self should ever live with men,
Mammon himself shall be a Citizen.
SAT. 6.
Quid placet ergo?
I Wot not how the world's d^g^nerate,
That men or know, or like not their estate:
Out from the Gades up to the Eastern morn,
Not one but holds his natiu^ state forlorn.
When comely striplings wish it were their chance,
For Cae^is dista^^e to exchange their Lance;
And we are curled P^riwigs, and chalk their face,
And still ^re poring on their pock^t-glasse^
Tired with pinned Ruff^s, and Fans, and partlet strips,
And Buskes, and Verdingales about their hips;
And tread on corked stilts (...) prison^^s pace,
And make their Napkin for their spitting-place,
And gripe their wast within a narrow span:
Fond Caenis that would'dst wish to be a man;
Whose mannish Hus-wiues like their refuse state,
And make a drudge of their vxorius mate,
Who like a Cot-qu^^ne freezeth at the rock,
Whiles his breach't dame does man the foreign stock.
Is It not a shame to see each homely groom^
Sit perched in an idle charriot-roome,
That were not meet some paunell to bestride
Surcingled to a galledg Hackneys hide?
Each Muck-worme will be rich with lawless gain,
Although he smother up mowes of seven years grain,
And hanged himself when corn grows cheap again;
Although he buy whole Haruests in the spring
And foyst in ^alse strikes to the measuring:
Although his shop be muff^ed from the light
Like a day-dungeon, or Cimmerian night:
Nor full nor fasting can the Carle take rest,
Whiles his George-Nobles rusten in his Chest,
He sleeps but once and dreams of burgla^^e,
And wakes and castes about his frighted eye,
And gropes for thieves in every darker shade,
And if a Mouse but stir he calls for aid.
The sturdie Plough-man does the soldier see,
All scar^ed with pide colors to the knee,
Whom Indian pillage has made fortunate,
And now he gins to loath his former state:
Now does he inly scorn his Kendall-greene,
And his patch't Cockers now despised been.
Nor list he now go whistling to the Carre,
But sels his Teeme and fetleth to the war.
O war to them that never tryde thee sweet!
When his dead mate falls groueling at his feet,
And angry bullets whistlen at his ^are,
And his dim eyes see naught but death and drere:
Oh happy Plough-ma^ were thy weal well known;
Oh happy all estates except his own!
Some dron^en Rimer thinks his time well spent,
If he can live to see his name in print:
Who when he is once fleshed to the Press,
And sees his handsell have such fair success,
Sung to the wheel, and sung unto the payle,
He sends forth thraues of Ballads to the sale.
Nor then can rest: But volumes up bodg'd rimes,
To have his name talked of in future times:
The brainsicke youth that feeds his tickled ear
With sweet-sauc'd lies of some false Tra^eiler,
Which has the Spanish Decades red a while;
Or whet^stone lea^ings of old Maundeuile,
Now with discourses breaks his midnight sleep,
Of his adventures through the Indian deep,
Of all their massy heaps of golden mines,
Or of the antique Toombs of Palestine;
Or of Damascus Magike wall of Glass,
Of Solomon his sweating piles of Brass,
Of the Bird Ru^ that bears an Elephant:
Of Mer-maids that the Southern seas do haunt;
Of head less men; of savage Cannibals;
The fashions of their lives and Gouernals:
What monstrous Cities there erected be,
Cayro, or the City of the Trinity:
Now are they dung hill-Cocks that have not seen
The bordering Alps, or else the Neighbor Rhene,
And now he plyes the newes-full Grasshopper,
Of voyages and ventures to enquire.
His land morgag'd, He sea-beat in the way
Wishes for home a thousand sithes a day:
And now he deemes his homebred fare aslee^e
As his parch't Biscuit, or his barreld Beef:
Mong'st all these sturs of discontented strife,
Oh let me lead an Academicke life,
To know much, and to think we nothing know;
Nothing to have, yet think we have enough,
In skill to want, and wanting seek for more,
In weal nor want, nor wish for greater store;
Envy ye Monarchs with your proud excess
At our low Sail, and our hye Happiness.
Lib. 4. Finis.
VIRGIDEMIARVM LIB. 5.

SAT. 1.
Sit paena merenti.
PArdon ye glowing ears; Needs will it out,
Tho brazen walls compas'd my tongue about,
As thick as wealthy Scrobioes quicke-set rows
In the wide Common that he did enclose.
Pull out mine eyes, if I shall see no vice,
Or let me see it with detesting eyes.
Renowned Aquine, now I follow thee,
Far as I may for fear of ieopardie;
And to thy hand yield up the Iuye-mace,
From crabbed Persius, and more smooth Horace;
Or from that shrew, the Roman Poetesse,
That taught her gossips learned bitterness,
Or Luciles Muse whom thou did stimitate,
Or Menips old, or Pasquillers of late,
Yet name I not Mutius, or Tigilline;
Tho they deserve a keener style then mine;
Nor mean to ransacke up the quiet grave;
Nor burn dead bones, as h^ example gave,
I tax the living, let dead ashes rest,
Whose faults are dead, and nailed in their chest;
Who can refrain, that is guiltless of their crime,
Whiles yet he lives in such a cruel time.
When Titios grounds, that in his Grand-sires days
But one pound fine, one penny rent did raise,
A sommer-snow-ball, or a winter-rose,
Is grown to thousands as the world now goes:
So thrift and time sets other things on flote,
That now his son soups in a silken cote,
Whose Grandsire happily a poor hungry Swayne,
Beg^d some cast Abbey in the Churches wayne
And but for that, what ever he may vaun^t,
Who knows a Monk, had been a Mendicant;
While freezing Matho, that for one lean see,
Wont term each Term the Term of Hibarie,
May now in steed of those his simple fees;
Get the fee-simples of fair Manneryes^
What, did he counterfeit his Princes hand,
For some streaue Lord-ship of conc^aled land?
Or on each Michaell, and Lady Day,
Took he deep forfaits for an hours delay?
And gained no less by such injurious braule,
Then Gamius by his sixth wives burial?
Or has he won some wider Interest,
By hoary charters from his Grandsires chest,
Which late some bribed Scribe for slender wage,
Writ in the Characters of another age,
That Ploydon self might stammer to rehearse,
Whose date ore looks three Centuries of years;
Who ever yet the Trackes of weal so tried,
But there has be^ne one beaten way beside?
He, when he lets a Lease for life, or years,
(As never he does until the date expeares;
For when the full state in his fist does lie,
He may take vantage of the vacancie,)
His Fine affor'ds so many trebled pounds,
As he agreethy ^ares to Lease his grounds:
His Rent in fair respondence must a^^se,
To double trebles of his one years price;
Of one bays breadth, God wot, a silly cote,
Whose that ched spars arefurr'd with sluttish soote
A whole inch thick; shininig like Black-moors brows
Through smok that down the head les barrel blows.
At his beds-feete feeden his stalled teme.
His swine beneath, his pullen ore the beam:
A starued Tenement, such as I guess,
Stand straggling in the wastes of Holdernesse,
Or such as shiuer on a Peake-hill side,
When Marches lungs beat on their turfe-clad hide:
Such as nice Lip^ius would grudge to see,
Above his lodging in wild West-phalye:
Or as the Saxon King his Court might make,
When his sides playned of the Neat-heards cake.
Yet must he hau^t his greedy Landlords hall,
With often presents at each Festival;
With crammed Caponseuery New-ye ares morn,
Or with greene-cheeses when his sheep are shorn
Or many Maunds-full of his mellow fruit,
To make some way to win his weighty suite.
Whom cannot gifts at last cause to relent,
Or to win favor, or flee punishment?
When griple Patrons turn their sturdie steel
To wax, when they the golden flame do^ fcelc;
When grand M^^cenas casts a glauering eye,
On the cold present of a Poefie:
And least he might more frankly take then give,
Grop^s for a french crown in his empty slee^e^
Thence Clod^us hopes to set his shoulders free,
From the light burden of his Nap^rie.
The smiling Landlord shows a sunshine face,
Faining that he will grant him further grace;
And lear's like Aesops Fox upon a Crane,
Whose neck he craves for his Chirurgian;
So lingers off the lease vnt^ll the last,
What recks he then of pains or promi^e past?
Was ever fether, or fond woman's mind,
More light then words; the blasts of idle wind^
What Is sib or fire, to take the gentle slip;
And in the Exchequer rot for surety-ship;
Or thence thy starued brother live and di^,
Within the cold Cole-harbour sanctuary?
Will one from Scots-banke bid but one grote more,
My old Tenant may be turned out of door,
Tho much he spent in th'rotten roofesrepayre,
In hope to have it left unto his heir;
Tho many a load of Marle and Manure led,
Reui^'d his ^^rren leas, that erst lay dead.
Were he as Furius, he would defy,
Such pilfring slips of Pety land-lordrye.
And might dislodge whole Collonies of poor,
And lay their roof quite level with their floor,
Whiles yet he gives as to a yielding fence,
Their bag and baggage to his Citizens,
And ships them to the new-nam'd Virgin-lond,
Or wilder wales, where never wight yet wond:
Would it not vex thee where thy syres did keep,
To see the dunged foldes of dag^tayled she^pe,
And ruined house where holy things were said,
Whose freestone walls the thatched roof vpbraid,
Whose shril Saints-bell hangs on his louerie,
While the rest are damned to the Plumbery?
Yet pure devotion lets the steeple stand,
And idle battlements on either hand;
Least that perhaps, were all those relics gone,
Furious his Sacrilege could not be known.
SAT. 2.
Heic quaerite Troiam.
HOus-keping's dead, Sat^rio: wot'st thou where?
For-sooth they say far hence in Brek-neck shire.
And ever since they say that fe^le and taste,
That men may break their neck, soon as their fast.
Certes, if Pity died at Cha^cers date,
He lived a widdower long behind his mate:
Save that I see some rott^n bedridden Sire,
Which to out strip the nonage of his heire^,
Is crammed with golden broaths, and drugs of price,
And each day dying liu's, and living dies,
Till once suruind his ward-ships latest eve,
His eyes are closd with choice to die or l^ue^
Plenty, and hee^ died both in that same year,
When the sad sky did shed so many a tear^.
And now, who list not of his labor fail;
Mark, with Saturio, my friendly tale:
Along thy way, thou can not but descry,
Fair g^ittering Hals to tempt the hopeful eye,
Thy right eye gins to leap for vain delight,
And surbeate toes to tickle at the ^ight^
As greedy T. when in the sounding mold
He finds a shining pot-shard tip't with gold;
For never Siren tempts the plea^ed ears,
As these the eye of fainting passengers;
All is not so that scemes; for surely than
Matrona should not be a C^rtizan,
Smooth Chrysalu^ should not be rich with fraud,
Nor honest R. be his own ^iues baude,
Look not a squint, nor stride a cross the way,
Like some demurring Alcide to delay.
But walk on ch^rely, till thou have espide,
Saint Peter's finger at the Churchyard side,
But will thou needs when thou art warned so well
Go ^ee who in so garish walls does dwell?
There find thou some stately Dorick frame
Or neat Ionicke work;
Like the vain bubble of Iberian pride,
That ou^r-croweth all the world beside^
Which rear^d to raise the crazy Monarchs fame,
Strives for a Court and for a College name;
Yet naught within, but louzy coul's does hold,
Like a scab'd Cuckoo in a cage of gold;
So pride above does shade the shame below:
A golden Periwig on a Black-mores brow.
When Mae^ios first pag^ of his poesy,
Nayl'd to an hundredth posts for nou^ltie,
With his big title, an Italian mot,
Lays siege unto the backward buyers grote.
Which all within is drastie sluttish geere,
Fit for the Oven or the Kitching fire:
So this gay gate adds fuel to thy thought,
That such proud piles were never raised for nought^
Beat the broad gates, a goodly hollow sound
With doubled Echoes does again rebound,
But not a Dog does bark to welcome thee,
Nor churlish Porter can thou chafing see:
All dumb and silent, like the dead of night,
Or dwelling of some sleepy Sybarite.
The marble pauement hid with desert weed,
With house-leeke, thistle, docke, and hemlock-seed,
But if thou chance cast up thy wondering eyes,
Thou shall discern upon the Frontispice,
OYLEIS EISITO graven up on hie,
A fragment of old Platoes Poesy:
The meaning is, Sir fool ye may be gone,
Go back by leave, for way here lies none.
Look to the towred chymne is which should be
The wind-pipes of good hospitality,
Through which it breaths to the open air,
Betokening life and liberal welfaire,
Lo, there th'vnthankfull swallow takes her rest,
And; fills the Tonue^^ with her circled nest,
Nor half that smoke from all his chymneies goes
Which one Tabacco-pipe drives through his nose
So rawbone hunger scorns the mudded walls,
And gin's to revel it in Lordly halls;
So^the black Prince is broken loose again
That saw no Sun save once (as stories feign)
That once was, when in Trinacry I ween
He stole the daughter of the harvest Queen,
And grip't the maw^s of barren Sicily^
With long constraint of pinefull penury;
And they that should resist his second rage,
Have penned themselves up in the private cage
Of some blind lane; and their they lurk unknown
Till th'hungry tempest once be ouerblowne;
Then like the coward, after his neighbors fray,
They creep forth boldly, and ask where are they?
Mean while the hunger-staru'd Appurtenance
Must bide the brunt, what ever ill mischance;
Grim Famine sits in their forepined face
All full of angles of unequal space,
Like to the plain of many sided squares,
That wont be drawn out by Geometars;
So sharp and meager that who should them see
Would swear they lately came from Hungary^
When their brass pans and winter couerled,
Have wipt the maunger of the Hoses^bread;
Oh me; what ods there seems twixt their chere,
And the swollen Bezell at an Alehouse fire,
That tonnes in gallons to his bursten panch,
Whoseslimy droughts, his draught can never stanch?
For shame ye gallants grow more hospital
And turn your needless wardrop to your Hall:
As lavish Virro that keeps open doors
Like Ianus in the wars,
Except the twelue-daies, or the wakeday-feast
What time he needs must be his Cosens guest,
Philene has bid him, can he choose but come?
Who should pull Virroes sleeue to stay at home?
All year besides, who meal-time can attend:
Come Trebius welcome to the tables end:
What tho he chires on purer manchets crown,
Whiles his kind client grindes on black and browne^
A jolly rounding of a whole foot broad,
From of the Mong-corne heap shall Trebius load^
What tho he quaffe pure Ambe^ in his bowl
Of March-brewd wheat^ yet slecks thy thirsting soul
With palishoat, ^roathing in Boston-clay
Or in a shallow cruse, nor must that stay
Within thy reach, for fear of thy crazed brain,
But call and crave, and have thy cruse again;
Else how should even tale beer gistred,
Or all thy draughts, on the chalked barrels head?
And if he list revive his hartles grain
With some French grape, or pure Canariane
When pleasing B^rdeaux falls unto his lot,
Some sow^^sh Rochell cuts thy thirsting throat,
What tho himself carueth his welco^e friend
With a co^ld pittance from his trenchers-end?
Mu^t (...) lip hang to ward his trencher side?
Nor kiss ^is fist to take what does betide?
What tho to spare thy teeth he emploies thy tongue
In busy qu^stions all the dinner long?
What tho the scornful way^er looks askile,
And pouts and frowns, and curses thee the while,
And tak^^ his f^rewell with a jealous eye,
At (...) morsel he his last shall see^
And, if but one exceed the common sise
Or make an hillocke in thy cheek arise,
Or if perchance thou should, ere thou wist,
Hold thy knife vprights in thy griped ^ist,
Or sit double on thy back-ward seat,
Or with thine elbow shad'st thy shared meat;
He laughs thee in his fellows ear to scorn,
And asks aloud, where Trebius was borne.
Tho the third Sewer takes thee quite away
Without a staff: when thou would ^enger ^tay
What of all this? Is It not enough to say,
I di^^'d at Virro his own board to day?
SAT. 3.
KOINA PHILON.
THe Satyr should be like the Porcupine,
That shoots sharp quils out in each angry line,
And wounds the blushing cheek, and fiery eye,
Of him that hears, and reads guiltily.
Ye Antique Satyrs, how I bless your days,
That brook'd your bolder style, their own dispraise,
And well near wish; yet joy my wish is vain,
I had been then, or they were now again!
For now our ears been of more brittle mold,
Than those dull earthen ears that were of old:
Since theirs, like anuilles bore the hammers head,
Our glass can never touch vnshiuered.
But from the ashes of my quiet style
Hence forth may rise some raging rough ^^cile,
That may with Eschylus both find and le^se
The snaky tresses of ^h' Eumenides:
Mean while, suffices me, the world may say
That I these vices loathed another day,
Which I have done with as devout a ^heer^
As he that rounds Poules^pillers in the ^are,
Or bends his ham down in the naked Queare.
It Was ever said, Frontine, and ever seen^,
That golden Clerks, but wooden Lawyers been;
Could eu^r wise man wish in good estate
The use of all things indiscriminate?
Who wots not yet how well this did beseem,
The learned master of the Academe?
Plato is dead, and dead is his d^uise
Which some thought witty, none thought ever wise;
Yet certes M^^ch^ is a Platonis^,
To all, they say, save who so do not list,
Because her husband a farre-trafique'd man,
Is a professed ^eripatecian,
And so our Grandsires were images past*
That let their lands lie all so widely wast,
That nothing was in pale or hedge ypent
Within some province or whole shires extent:
As Nature made the earth, so did it lie,
Save for the ^urrowes of the^^ ^u^bandrie;
When as the neighbour-lands so couched layne,
That al^^ore show of one fair Champian^^^
Some head-lesse cros^e they dug on their (...),
Or rol'd some marked M^ar^-stone in the way^
Poor simplemen^ For what mough^ that avail
That my fi^ld might not (...) neighbors payle
More than a pilled stick c^^ ^tand ^^stead,
(...) ^ynedo from his n^ighbours bed
M^re than the thr^d bare ^li^nts poverty
(...) the A^turney of ^his wo^ted fee?
If they were thriftlesse, mote not we amend,
And with more care our dangered fields defend?
Each man can guard what thing he deemeth d^^r^,
As fear^full Merchants do their Female heir,
Which were it not for promise of their wealth,
Need not be st^lled up for fear of stealth;
Would rather stick upon the Belmans cries,
Tho prof^rd for a branded Indians pric^,
Then raise we muddi^ b^l-wark^s on our ba^kes,
B^set around with treble quic-set ranks,
Or if those walls be over weak^ a ward,
The squar^d Brick may be a better guard.
Go to my thri^tie Yeoman, and vpreare
A brazen wall to shend thy land from fear,
Do so; and I shall praise thee all the while,
So be, thou stake not up the common stil^;
So be thou hedge in naught, but what is ^hi^^own^,
So be thou p^y^what ^ithes thy neighbo^rs done,
So be thou let not lie in fa^lowed plain.
That which was wont yield Usury of grain,
But when I see thy pitched stakes do stand
On thy incroched piece of common land,
Whiles thou discommonest thy neighbors keyne,
And warn'st that none ^eed on thy field save thine;
Brag no more Scrobius of thy mudded banks,
Nor thy deep ditches, nor three quick set ranks:
Oh happy d^ies of old Deucalion.
When one was Landlord of the world alone!
But now whose choler would not rise to yield
A pesant halfe-stakes of his new-^owne field
Whiles yet he may not for the treble price
Buy out the remnant of his royalties?
Go on and thrive my pety Tyrants pride
Scorn thou to live, if others live beside,
And trace proud Castile that aspires to be
In his old age a yo^ng ^i^t Monarchy
Or the red Hat that cries the lucklesse main,
For welthy Thames to change his lowly R^ene.
SAT. 4.
Possunt, quia posse videntur.
VIllius the welthy farmer left his heir,
Twice twenty sterling pou^ds to spend by year;
The neighbors praysen Villios hide-bound son,
And say it was a goodly portion;
Not knowing ^ow some Merchants dowre can rise,
By sundaies tale to fifty Centuries;
Or to weigh down a leaden Bride with Gold;
Worth all that Matho bought, or Pontice sold:
But whiles ten pound goes to his wives new gown,
Nor little less can serve to suit his own,
Whiles one piece pays her idle waiting man,
Or buys an hoode, or siluer-handled Fann^,
Or hires a Friezeland^ Trotter half yard deep,
To d^ag his Tu^nbrell through the staring Cheap
Or whiles he rides with two liueries,
And'^ treble rated at the Sub^i^ies,
One end a kennell keeps of (...) ^ounds,
What think yo^ rest's of all my younkers pounds,
To diet him, or ^eale out at his door,
To cofer up, or stock his wasting store?
If then I reckoned right, it should appear,
That sourtie pounds serve not the Farmers hey^e.
Finis. Lib. 2.
VIRGIDEMIARVM LIB. 6.

SAT. 1.
Or like a painted staring Saracin;
His che^ks chang^ hew like th'ayre-fed vermin skin
Now red, now pale, and swollen above his eyes
Like to the old Colossian imageries:
But when he does of my recanting hear;
Away ye angry fires, and fros^es of fear,
Giu^ place unto his hopeful tempered thought
That yields to peace, ^re ever peace be sought:
Then let me now repentmee of my ^^ge,
For writing Satyrs in so righteous age:
Whereas I should have strok't her towardly head,
And cried Eu^e in my Satyrs stead,
Since now not one of thousand does amisse^
Was never age I ween so pure as th^s:
As pure as old Labulla from the Baynes,
As pure as through^fare Channels when it raynes,
As pure as is a Black-moores face by night,
As dung^clad skin of dying Heraclite.
Seek over all the world, and tell me where
Thou find'st a proud man, or a flatterer:
A thie^e, a drunkard, or a parricide,
A lechor, liar, or what vice beside?
Merchants are no whit covetous of late,
Nor make no mart of Time, gain of Deceit.
Patrons are honest now, ore they of old,
Can now no ben^fice be bought norsold,
Give him a gelding, or some two-yeares tithe,
For he all bribes and Sim^ny defi'th.
Is not one Pick^thanke stirring in the Court,
That seld was free till now by all report,
But some one, like a clawbacke parasite,
Picked mothes from his masters Cloak in sight,
Whiles he could pick out both his eyes for need,
Might they but stand him in some better steed.
Nor now no more smell-feast Vitellio
Smiles on his master for a meal or two;
And loves him in his maw, loathes in his heart,
Yet soothes, and yeas, and nayes on either part.
Tattelius the new-come traveler,
With his disguised cote, and ringed ^are,
Trampling the Burses Marble twice a day,
Tells nothing but stark trueths I dare well say,
Nor would he have them known for any thing,
Tho all the vault of his loud murmur ring.
Not one man tells a lie of all the year
Except the Almanacke or the Chronicler.
But not a man of all the damned crew
For hills of Gold would swear the thing untrue.
Pansophus now though all in the cold swat
Dares venture through the feared Castle^gate,
Albee the faithful Oracles have ^orsayne,
The wi^est Senator shall there be slain:
That made him long keep home as well it might,
Till now he hops of some wis^r wight.
The vale of Stand^gate, or the S^ters hill,
Or western plain are free from feared ill.
Let him that has naught, fear naught I areed:
But he that has ought; ^y him; and God speed;
Nor drunken Dennis does by break of day
Stumble into blind Tauerns by the way,
And reele me homeward at the Evening star,
Or ride more ^asely in his neighbors chair.
Well might these checks have fitted former times
And shouldred angry Sk^ltons breath-lesse rimes:
Ere Chrysalus had ^ar'd the common box,
Which erst he picked to store his private stocks;
But now ^ath all with vantage paid again;
And locks and plates what does behind remain;
When erst our dry-soul'd Syres so lavish were,
To charge whole boots-full to their friends welfare;
Now shall thou never see the ^alt beset
With a big-bellied gallon Flagonet.
Of an ebb Cruce must thirsty Silen sip,
That Is all forestalled by his upper lip;
Somewhat it was that made his paunch so pear,
His girdle fell ten inches in a year.
Or when old go^ty bedridden Euclio
To his officious factor fair could show,
His name in margent of some old castbyll
And say; Lo whom I named i^ my will:
Whiles he believes and looking for the share,
Tends his cumbrous charge with busy care;
For but a while; Fornow he sure will die,
By his strange qualme of liberality:
Great thanks he gives: but God him shield and save
From ever gayning by his masters grave;
Only live long, and he is well repaide,
And weats his forced cheeks whiles thus he said,
Some ^^rong-smeld Onion shall ^tirre his eyes
Rather than no salt tears shall then arise^
So looks he like a Marble toward rain,
And wrings and snites, and weeps, and wipes again,
Then turns his back and smiles and look askance,
Seasoning again his sowred countenance,
Whiles yet he wearyes he auen with daily cries,
And backward Death with devout sacrifice,
That they would now his tedious ghost bereauen,
And wishes well, that wished no worse than heaven.
When Zoylus was sick, he knew not where
Save his wrought night^cap, and laun^ Pillow-bere:
Kind fools; they made him sick that made him fine
Take those away, and there is his medicine:
Or Gellia wore a velvet Mastick-patch
Upon her temples when no tooth did ach,
When Beauty was her Reume I soon espide,
Nor could her plaster cure her of her pride.
These vices were, but now they ceased off long:
Then why did I a righteous age that wrong,
I would repent me were it not too late,
Were not the angry world preiudicate:
If all the seuens penetentiall
Or thousand white wands might me ought avail,
If Trent or Thames could scour my foul offense
And set me in my former innocence,
I would at last repent me of my rage:
Now; bear my wrong, I thine, O righteous age^
As for fine wits an hundredth thousand fold
Passes our age what ever times of old.
For in that Puis-ne world, our syres of long
Could hardly wagge the^r too-vnweldy tongue
As pined Crows and parats can do now,
When hoary age did bend their wrincled brow:
And now of late did many a learned man
Serve thirty years Prenti-ship with Priscian,
But now can every Nouice speak with ease
The far fetched language of the- Antipodes.
Would thou the tongues that erst were learned hight
Tho our wise age has wipt them of their right;
Would thou the Courtly Three in most request,
Or the two barba^ous neighbors of the west?
Bibinu^ self can have ten tongues in one,
Tho in all Ten not one good tongue alone.
And can deep skill lie smothering within
Whiles neither smoke nor flame discerned bin?
Shall it not be a wild-fig in a wall
Or fired Brimstone in a Mineral?
Do thou disdain, O ouer-learned age,
The tongue-ty'de silence of that Samian sage;
Forth ye fine wits, and rush into the press,
And for the cloyed world your works address.
Is not a Gnat, nor Fly, nor seely Ant,
But a fine wit can make an Elephant;
Should Bandels Throstle die without a song,
Or Adamantius my Dog be laid along,
Down in some ditch without his Exequies,
Or Epitaphs^ or mournful Elegies?
Folly itself, and baldnes may be praised,
And sweet conceits from filthy objects raised;
What do not fine wits dare to undertake?
What dare not fine wits do for honors sake?
But why does Balbus his dead-doing quill
Parch in his rustie scabbard all the while,
His golden Fleece ore-growne with moldy hoar
As tho he had his witty works forswore?
Belike of late now Balbus has no need,
Nor now belike his shrinking shoulders dread
The Catch-poles fist^ The Press may still remain
And breath, till Balbus be in debt again.
Soon may that be; so I had silent been,
And not thus raked up quiet crimes vns^ene.
Silence is safe, when saying stirs sore
And makes the stirred puddle stink the more.
Shall the controller of proud Nemesis
In lawless rage vpbraid each others vice,
While no man seeks to reflect the wrong
And curb the raunge of his mis-ruly tongue?
By the two crowns of Pernasse euer-greene,
And by the cloven head of Hippocrene
As I true Poet am, I here auow
(So solemnly kissed he his Laurel bow)
If that bold Satyr unrevenged be
For this so saucy and foul injury.
So Labeo weens it my eternal shame
To prove I never earnd a Poets name.
But would I be a Poet if I might,
To rub my brows three days and wake three nights,
And bite my nails, and scrat my dullard head,
And curse the backward Muses on my bed
About one peevish syllable: which out-sought
I take up Thales joy, save for forethought
How it shall please each Ale-knights censuring eye,
And hanged my head for fear they deem awry;
Whiles threadbare Martial turns his merry note
To beg of Rufus a cast winter cote;
Whiles hungry Marot leapeth at a Bean
And dies like a starved Cappucien;
Go Ariost, and gape for what may fall
From Trench^r of a flattering Cardinal,
And if thou gettest but a Pedants fee
Thy bed, thy board, and courser liuerie,
O honor far beyond a brazen shrine
To ^it with Tarleton on an Ale^posts sign!
Who had but lived in Augustus days
T^ad been some honor to be crowned with Bays
When Luca^ streaked on his Marble-bed
To think of C^esar, and great Pompeys deed;
Or when Archelaus shau'd his mourning head
Soon as he heard Ste^icho^us was dead.
Atleast would some good body of the rest,
Set a Gold-pen on their bay-wreathed Crest^
Or would the^r face in stamped coin express,
As did the Mytelens their Poetesse^
Now as it is, beshrew him if he might,
That would his brows with Caesar's Laurel dight:
Tho what ayl'd me, I might not well as they
Rake up some forwo^ne tales that smothered lay
In chimny corners smok'd with winter-fires,
To read and rock a sleep our drouzy Syres^
No man his threshold better knows, than I
Brutes first ariuall, and first victory,
Saint Georges Sorrel, or his croste of blood,
Arthurs round Board, or Caledonian wood,
Or holy battles of bold Charlemaine,
What were his knights did Salems sieg^ maintain;
How the mad Rival of fair Angelice
Was Phisick't from the newfound Par^dice;
High stories they; which with their swelling strain
Have riuen Frontoes broad Rehearsal Plain,
But so to fill up books both back and side
What needs it? Are there not enough beside?
O age well thriuen and well fortunate,
When each man has a Muse appropriate,
And she like to some servile ^are^boar'd slave
Must play and sing when and what he would have!
Would that were all: small fault in number lies,
Were not the fear from whence it should arise
But can it be ought but a spurious seed,
That grows so rife in such unlikely speed?
Since Pontian left his barren wife at home,
And spent two years at Venice and at Rome,
Returned, hears his blessing asked of three,
Cries out, O Julian law, Adultery?
Tho Labeo reaches right: (who can deny?)
The true strayne's of Heroic^e Poesy:
For he can tell how fury re^^ his sense
And Phoebus filled him with intelligence,
He can implore the heath en deites
To guide his bold and busy enterprise;
Or filch whole Pages at a clap for need
From honest Petrarch, clad in English weed;
While big But ohs each stranzae can begin,
Whose trunk and tail sluttish and hartlesse bin;
He knows the grace of that new elegance,
Which sweet Philisides fetched of late from France,
That well beseem'd his high-stil'd Arcady,
Tho others mar it with much liberty,
In Epithets to join two words in one,
Forsooth for Adjectives cannot stand alone;
As a great Poet could of Bacchus say,
That he was Semele-femori-gena.
Lastly he names the spirit of Astrophel:
Now has not Labeo done wondrous well?
But ere his Muse her weapon learn to weild.
Or dance a sober Pirrhicke in the field,
Or marching wade in blood up to the knees,
Her Arma Virum goes by two degrees,
The sheepe-cote first has been her nursery
Where she has worn her idle infancy,
And in hy startups walked the pastur'd plains
To tend her tasked her^ that there remains,
And winded still a pipe of Ote or Brere
Striving for wages who the praise shall bear;
As did whilere the homely Carmelite
Following Virgil, and he Theocrite;
Or else has been in Venus Chamber trained
To play with Cupid, till she had attained
To comment well upon a beauteous face,
Then was she fit for an Heroicke place;
As witty Pontan in great earnest said
His Mistres breasts were like two weights of lead,
Another thinks her teeth might likened be
To two fair ranks of pales of yuory,
To sense in sure the wild beast of her tongue,
From either going far, or going wrong;
Her grinders like two Chalk-stones in a mill,
Which shall with time and wearing wax as ill
As old Catillaes^ which wont every night
Lay up her holly pegs till next daylight,
And with them grinds soft-simpring all the day,
When least her laughter should her gums be wray
Her hands must hide her mouth if she but smile;
Feign would she seem all frixe and frolic still.
Her forehead fair is like a brazen hill
Whose wrincled furrows which her age does breed
Are dawbed full of Venice chalk for need^
Her eyes like silver sauce^s fair beset
With shining Amber and with shady Iet
Her lids like Cupids-bow, case where he hides
The weapons which does wound the wanton-eyde.
Her chin like Pindus or Pernassus hill
Where down descends th'oreflowing stream does fill
The well of her ^ayre mouth^ Each has ^is praise.
Who would not but wed Poets now a days!
FINIS.
PO PY. SAT. 2.
Who says these Romish Pageants been too hy
To be the ^corne of sportfull Poesy?
Certes not all the world such matter wist
As are the seven hills, for a S^tiryst.
Perdy, Iloath an hundredth Mathoes tongues,
An hundredth ga^^ters shifts, or Landlords wrongs,
Or Labeos Poems, or base Lolios pride,
Or ever what I thought or wrote beside;
When once I think if carping Aquines spright
To see now Rome, were licensed to the light;
How his enraged Ghost would stamp and sta^^
That Caesar's throne is turned to Peter's chair.
To see an old shorn Loze^^ perched hy
Crossing beneath a golden Canopy,
The whiles a thou^and hairelesse crowns crouch low
To kiss the precious case of his proud Toe,
And for the Lordly Fasces borne of old,
To see two quiet crossed keys of gold,
Or Cyb^les shrine, the famous Panth^ons frame
Turned to the honor of our Ladies name.
But that he most would gaze and wonder at,
Is th'ho^ned Miter, and the bloody hat,
The crooked staff, their coules strange form and store,
Save that he saw the fame in hell before,
To see their broken Nuns with new^shorne heads,
In a blind Cloys^er toss their idle Beads,
Or Louzy coules come smoking from the stews,
To rays^ the Lewd Rent to their Lord accrewes,
(Who with rank Ve^ice does his pomp advance
By trading of ten thousand Curtizans)
Yet backward must absolve a females sin,
Like to a false dissembling Theatine,
Who when his skin is red with shirts of male
And rugged haire-cloath scoures his greazy nail,
Or wedding garment tames his stubborn back,
Which his h^mpe girdle dies all blew and black.
Or of his Almes-Boule three days supped and dined,
Trudges to open stews of either kinde^
Or takes some Cardinals stable in the way,
And with some pampered Mule does we are the day
Kept for his Lords own sadle when him list.
Come Valentine, and play the Satyrist,
To see poor sucklings welcomed to the light
With ^earing yrons of some sour ^acobite,
Or golden offers of an aged fool
To make his Coffin some Franciscans coule,
To see the Pop^s black knight, a cloked Frer^
Sweating in the channel like a Scauengere.
Whom erst thy bowed hamme did lowly greet,
When at the Corner-Crosse thou did him meet,
Tumbling his Rosaries hanging at his belt
Or his Barretta, or his towred felt,
To see a lasie dumb Acholit^ite
Armed against a devout Flies despite,
Which at th'hy Altar does the Chalice veil
With a broad Flie-flappe of a Peacockes tail,
The whiles the likerous Priest spits every trice
With longing for his morning Sacrifice,
Which he reres up quite perpendiculare,
That the mid Church does spite the Chancels fare,
Beating their empty mawes that would be fed,
With the scant morsels of the Sacrists bread.
Would he not laugh to death, when he should hear
The shameless Legends of S. Christopher,
S. George, the sleepers, or S. Peter's well,
Or of his daughter good S. Petronell.
But had he heard the Female Fathers groan,
Yeaning in mids of her procession;
Or now should see the needless tryall-chayre,
(When each is proved by his bastard heir)
Or saw the Churches, and new Calendere
Pestred with mungrell Saints, and relics dear,
Should he cry out on Codr^'s t^dious Toomes,
When his new rage would ask no narrower rooms?
FINIS.
A Postscript to the Reader.
IT is not for every one to rell^sh a true and natural Satyr, being of it
self beside^ the nat^ue and in b^ed b^tt^rnes and ^artnes of particul^rs, both
hard of (...) and harsh of s^le, and therefore cannot but be (...) easing bo^n
to the vnskil^ull, and ^uer M^sicall ca^e, the one being affected with only a
shallow and easy m^tte^ ^^e other with a ^moth and current d^sposition: so
that I wel^ foresee in the timely publication of these my concealed Satyrs, I
am set upon the ra^ke of many m^rcilesse and peremptori^ censures. which since
the cal^est and most plausible writer is almost fatally subject unto in the
curios^tie of the^e nicer times, how may I hope to be exempted upon the
occasion of so busy and stirring a subi^ct? One thinks it mis^belee^ing the
Author, because a Poem: another unlawful ^n itself because a Satyr; a third
harmefull to others for the s^arpnesse and a fou^th vnsa^y rl^ke^ for the
mildness: The learned too per^picuous, being nam^d with luuenall, P^rsius, and
the other ancient Sa^yres; The ^n^earned, ^auourlesse, because too ob^^ure, and
ob^^ur^ because not ^^der the^^ reach. What a monster must he be that would
please a^l?

Certa^ne^y look what we^^^er it would be if every Almana^ke should be
ver^fied; ^uch what l^ke P^^ms, if ^uery fancy should be suited. It is not for
th^s kind ^o de^^^e or hope to plea^e, which naturaily should only fin^e
pleasure in displeasing; notwithstanding ^f the ^^ult find^^g with the vices of
the time man honestly acc^rd with the good will of the parti^s, I had as (...)
^al^ my self w^t^ a slender ^polog^^, a^ wilf^lly b^are ^h^ b^^nt of (...)
^nger in my silence. For Poetrie^^ (...) after the so (...) all and a^solu^e
indeauour^ ^f her ^onouted Pat^ons, ^yther she needs no new defense, or else
might w^ll ^^^rne the offer of so impotent and poor a Client. Only for my
own part; tho were she a more unworthy Mistress, I think s^^e might be
inoffensiuely served with the broken Messes of our twelue-a-clocke hours,
which homely service she only clamed and found of me, for that short while of
my attendance: yet h^uing thus soon taken my solemn Farewell of her, and
shaked hande^ with all her r^tinue, why should it be an eye-fore unto any, since
it can be no loss to my self?

For my Satyrs themselves, I see two obuious cauils to be answered. One
concerning the matter; then which I confess none can be more open to dang^r,
to envy, since f^lts loath nothing more than the light, and men love nothing
more than their faults, and therefore what through the nature of the faults,
and fault of the pers^ns, it is imposs^ble so violent an appeachment should be
quietly brooked. But why should vices be vnblamed for fear of blame? and if
thou may spit upon a Toade vnuenomed, why may thou not speak of a vice
without danger? Especially so wa^ily as I have indeauoured, who in the
impartial mention of so many vices, may safely profess to b^ altogether
guiltless in my self to the intention of any guilty perion who might be
blemished by the likelihood of my conceived application, ^herupon choosing
rather to mar mine own verse than another name: which notwith ^anding if
the injurious R^^der shall wrest to his own spite, and d^sparraging of
others, it is a short answer: Art thou guilty? complain not, thou art not
wronged: art thou guiltles? complain not, thou art not touched. The other
concerning the manner, where in perhaps too much stouping to the low rea^h of
the vulgar, I shall be ^hought not to have any whit kindly ra^ght my ancient
Roman predecessors, whom in the want of (...) late and familiar presidents I am
constrained thus far of to imitate: which thing I can be so willing to
grant, that I am further ready to warrant my action therein to any
indifferent censure. First therefore I dare boldly avouch that the English is
not altogether so natural to a Satyr as the Latin, which I do not impute to
the nature of the language it self, being so far from disabling it any way,
that me thinks I durst equallit to the proudest in every respect, but to that
which is common to it with all other common languages Italian, French,
German, etc. in their Poesies, the fettering together the Series of the
verses, with the bonds of like cadence or desinence of ^ime, which if it be
vnusually abrupt, and not dependent in sense upon so near affinity of words,
I know not what a loathsome kind of harshnes and discordance it bread^th to
any judicial ear: which if any more confident adversary shall gainsay, I
wish no better trial than the tralation of one of Persius his Satyrs into
English; the difficulty and dissonance whereof, shall make good my assertion:
besides the plain experience thereof in ^he Satyrs of Ariosto, (save which,
and one base french Satyr, I could never attain the view of any for my
direction, and that also might for need serve ^or an excuse at least) whose
chaine-verse to which ^e fettereth himself, as it may well afford a pleasing
harmony to the ear, so can it yield nothing but a flashy and loose conceyt to
the judgment. Whereas the Roman numbers tying but one foot to another,
offers a greater freedom of variety, with much more delight to the reader.
Let my second ground be, the well known daintines of the time, such, that men
rather choose carelessly to lease the sweet of the kernel, than to urge their
teeth with breaking of the shell wherein it is wrapped: and therefore since that
which is unseen is almost vn^one, and that is almost unseen which is
vnconceiued, either I would say nothing to be vntalkt of, or speak with my
mouth open that I may be understood. Thirdly the end of this pains was a
Satyr, but the end of my Satyr a further good, which whether I attain or no
I know not, but let me be plain, with hope of profit, rather than purposely
obscure only for a bare names sake.

Notwithstanding in the expectation of this quarrel, I think my first Satyr
does somewhat resemble the sour and crabbed face of Iuuenals, which I
indeauouring in that, did determinately omit in the rest, for these forenamed
causes, that so I might have somewhat to stop the mouth of every accuser. The
rest, to each man's censure: which let be as fa^ourable, as so thanklesse a work
can deserve or desire.

FINIS.
After this impression was finished, upon the Authors knowledge, I had the view
of a more perfect Copy, wherein were these additions and corrections, which I
thought good to place here, desiring the reader to refer them to their places.

Additions.

Between the 10. and 11. line of the 16. page.

While yet he rousteth at some vncouch sign
Nor neuerred his Tenures second line.
Pome Pume. SAT. 7. lib. 4.

Wwo says these Romish Pageants,
To be the etc.
And so to the end.


