Numb. 104. An Exact Account, COMMUNICATING The chief Transactions of the Three
Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland. Also Particular ADVICE from the
OFFICE of INTELLIGENCE. Published by AUTHORITY. From Friday June 29. to Friday
July 6. 1660.
From White Hall, Friday 29 June.
THis day his Royal Majesty accompanied with the Dukes of York and Gloucester,
Duke of Buckingham, and several other noble persons being invited by the Earl
of Middlesex unto his house of Cop^-hall to the killing of a Buck, went
thither, where his Lordship gave them a noble treatment, after which they
returned with much satisfaction.

From Westminster we understand that Dr. Reynolds had thanks for his Sermon
which he preached before the House of Commons at Marg^rets Westminster, and
that he is ordered to print the same.

Several Merchants who were naturalized in 1655 and 1656, conceiving the
powers at that time not authentic, and finding that many persons began to
question their Denisation, petitioned the House for a new Act of favor in that
particular, which was granted unto them, and a Bill ordered to be brought in on
Monday morning for that purpose.

Also that the Elections of Haverford West was judged to be void

The Grand Committee to consider of the compensation to be given unto his
Royal Majesty in consideration of his Court of Wards and Liveries, are to sit
on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.

His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council taking notice of the Garrison of
Dunkirk, and of the charges belonging thereto and strength thereof, thought
fitting to add the Troop of his illustrious Highness the Duke of York as an
additionall strength unto that Garrison, and that their establishment be
recommended unto the consideration of the House with that of the Garrison, the
which the House of Commons has approved of, and appointed a Committee to
consider upon what certain receipt to charge the monthly expenses of that
Garrison,

A months pay is ordered for the present suppliment of the Army out of such
moneys as shall come in by virtue of the Ordinance of seventy thousand pound by
the month.

The Bill for a General pardon will suddenly be passed, there being no more
Provisoes to be tendered unto it.

His Excellency the Lord General Monck Duke of Albemarle, Knight of the most
noble order of the Garter and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council took his leave of the House of Commons, being called by his Royal
Majesty's Writ to attend the service of the House of Peers, unto whom Sir
Harbottle Grimstone Speaker to the Commons by the command of the House (being
sensible of the loss of so worthy a member) returned the hearty thanks of the
House unto him for those many great and faithful services performed by him
unto these Kingdoms, especially in being so instrumental in delivering the
Nation from Bondage and Slavery, and restoring his Royal Majesty unto them,
after which having taken his leave, was accompanied by several Honorable
members our of the House.

Mr. John Thurloe late Secretary unto Oliver Cromwell has liberty granted him
to wait upon the Secretaries of State, according to his desire in that
particular.

This evening after his Majesty's return from the Earl of Middlesex he was
pleased to accept of a Collation and Banquet at Wallingford house, by the Duke
of Buckingham.

Saturday, 30 July, at White Hall.
The Establishment of the Garrison of Dunkirk being passed, the moneys for the
monthly suppliment thereof, is charged upon the Excise to be constantly paid
for them as formerly.

Many persons having lately taken the boldness to reprint and publish certain
Books and Papers, putting new dates thereto, as if they were at this time
written: as a former Proclamation of his late Majesty's for the establishment
of the Book of Common Prayer, the Protestation of the Bishops in 1642. and also
another against the Covenant; and there being a complaint made to the House of
Commons, a Committee was appointed to examine the Printer, and to know by
virtue of what power he has done the same.

His Royal Majesty with his Brothers the Dukes of York and Gloucester, having
been invited unto Roe Hampton, the house of the Countess of Devonshire, this
day went thither, where his Majesty was received with all demonstrations of
loyalty and affection, and after a noble Entertainment, returned with much
satisfaction.

The House of Commons had under consideration the Bill for General Pardon and
Oblivion, and passed several Provisoes there.

Monday, 2 July.
To his most Sacred Majesty, CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland Kng, Defender of the Faith, etc.
The humble Congratulation of the Nobility and Gentry of the County of Rutland.
IT having pleased God so miraculously to preserve your Person from such
imminent danger, and at length to restore your Majesty to your just Dominion
over us, after so long a detention of your Rights, We (who, have never made a
public Application to any pretended power) cannot but express our thankful
acknowledgement of his goodness in so great a blessing accomplished without
effusion of Blood; And assure your Majesty, that we shall according to our duty
bear true Allegiance to your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, and shall upon
all occasions evidence our selves to be

Your Majesty's most loyal Subjects, Duke of Buckingham. Earl of Exceter. Lord
Campden. Lord Roos. Lord Sherard.
With may persons of honor and quality, etc.
To whom his Majesty was pleased to express his gracious acceptance of this
their Loyal and humble congratulation.

By L^tte^s from Dunkirk we have this account, that the Cessation betwixt (...)
and the Spaniards still continues, that they have a good correspondency each
with other. The Spanish officers coming to Dunkirk, where they are made
welcome, and the English officers, going both to Fern and Newport, where they
receive the like entertainment, by which good correspondency at last it is
hoped a peace may be agreed upon. The only obstacle which appears a^ present
is the Ostenders, who by their private men of war do much mischief at sea
daily, taking some of our ships, and lately one richly laden with all sorts of
small ware bound for that place.

Likewise from Dublin we have this account that all things remain in a
peaceable condition in that Kingdom, notwithstanding the discontents of some
persons whose industry has been to foment divisions, in which through the
industry of the Magistrates being discovered they have wholly failed, and that
Kingdom now remains in a peaceable posture.

From White Hall the same day.
His Majesty (according to his wonted clemency) this day touched many persons
which were infected with the Kings Evil, in which it is observable that his
Majesty's patience was not in the least tired, the doing so charitable and good
an act for the advantage of his Subjects taking away the tediousness thereof,
wherein the Almighty providence wonderfully appears in that gift of healing,
which is not to be pattern'd by any Prince in Europe.

From Whitehall, Tuesday 3. July.
This day several Companies of Foot being drawn up in S. Georges fields, the
Duke of York took a view of them, and was received with great acclamations,
etc. who were assured by their Officers of the great care which was taken to
provide them with moneys, and that the Parliament had ordered them one months
pay, which would be paid unto them out of the Tax of seventy thousand pounds a
month, now collecting.

His Royal Majesty considering the great deserts of Sergeant Twisden Sergeant
at Law, has created him Judge in the Court of Common Pleas, whereby he is
taken off from his attendance on the House of Commons, which will cause a new
Election of a Member to serve in his stead.

According to his Majesty's desire, and for the quieting of the minds of all
persons who have been concerned in the late transactions, excepting some
notorious offenders, we understand that the Bill for Indemnity and General
Pardon will suddenly be passed.

His Majesty in consideration of the great desert and faithfulness of the Lord
Bellasis has commissionated him to be Governor of that considerable Garrison
of Hull, to which end he is gone to take possession of the same.

Care is taking as well for the preservation of the due proceedings at at Law,
as for the confirmation of Magna Charta and the just Liberties of the people,
of which more in due time.

Touching Advice from the Office of Intelligence.
For the present all Buyers and Sellers are desired to repair thither, where
they shall have due notice, and particulars, of such Purchases and Purchasers
as may best fit their occasions.

At the said Office is to be sold the right sort of that famous Powder, known
by the name of the Countess of Kent 's Powder.

To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign.
UPon Your restoration to Your Throne and People, we do find in our selves a
certain Joy which is unspeakable both for kind and degree. It rises partly
from the sight of Justice, which has rendered the right of these Crowns to You
their undoubted hereditary owner, being withal a Person whom we are obliged to
honor, as for other respects, so, in gratitude and memory of those Benefits
which these Nations have received by the high Virtues and prudent Government of
Your Ancestors: And partly from our return to live under the Administration of
Monarchial Government, which as it is the most perfect bond of all Political
Felicities, so being managed by Your hand, we strongly hope to enjoy them in as
large a measure as our hearts, fitted by Gods grace, shall make us capable.
For, Sir, the blood which runs in Your veins flowing from the most Virtuous and
the greatest Monarchs of Great Britain and France, and Your natural Powers
perfected, and refined in the furnace of adversity (as were those of your
Progenitor* King Henry 7.) and ^^ur eminent deliverances, together with this
stupendous Restoration as to the manner of it, being evidences which will
make even the Heathen to believe that You are Dear to Almighty GOD, these, we
say, are arguments to embolden our hope, that the difficulties which should
obstruct our fruition of the benefits natural to this form of Government, will
be sirmounted by the magnanimous strength of Your hand. And though our bodies
and Fortunes are due to Your Dominion, yet one thing we have which is our own,
and do most humbly offer, that is, our wills, promising to obey and serve you
with Heart and good will; seconding this promise with our fervent, sincere
Prayers ^o the Omnipotent whom no creature can resist, that his Protection may
day and night cover Your Sacred Person; and that his gracious concurrence may
be ever with You in the beginning, and the continuance, and the finishing of
all Your works. So they pray and humbly rest, who have with their own hands
subscribed themselves

Your Majesty's most humble and most dutiful Subjects of Your County of
Hereford John Lord Viscount Scudamore. Wallop Brabazon Esquire. Sir James
Bridges Baronet. Sir Jo. Kyrle Baronet. Sir Jo. Scudamore Baronet. Sir Edward
H^pton Knight, etc.

This Address was presented to his sacred Majesty at White Hall the 23 of June
1660. in the name of his humble subjects of the County of Hereford, by the Lord
Viscount Scudamore, with diverse others of the abovenamed persons of Honor and
Quality, his Majesty expressing his gracious acceptance thereof.
Wednesday 4. July.
Many Persons according to his Majesty's gracious Proclamation for a General
Pardon daily ^a^e their pardons granted unto them, wherein his Majesty's
Clemency abundantly appears, in so readily granting the same, for the
quieting the minds of all persons, until the General Act of Oblivion and
Indemnity comes forth, which the House of Commons hasteneth with what speed
the weightinesse thereof will permit.

This day the Lord Howards Regiment of Horse Rendesvouzed in Tuttle field,
where such as would not take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, according as
it was ordered by the House of Commons, were discharged; and such who upon
second thoughts appeared willing were this afternoon appointed to take the
same, and in case of refusal to be razed out of the muster-Roll.

Many of the Nobility of Scotland having lately presented a Petition of
Address and Congratulation unto his Majesty, he was pleased graciously to
accept thereof* with assurance of taking their desires therein into speedy
consideration.

The Sheriff of Lichfield formerly committed into custody, touching the return
of a Writ is now released.

The preparation of the City for the entertainment of his Majesty and both the
Houses of Parliament are very great, the streets being railed where the
Companies are to sit in their order, with their S^reamers and Banners, and
twelve Pageants which are made ready, each demonstrating something touching the
manifacture of that Company which it represents. There is also made ready a
rich Cupboard of Plate, which will be presented unto his Majesty, the whole
Ceremony and order whereof we shall give you by the next.

Thursday, 5 July.
This day being appointed to entertain his Majesty at the Guild-hal* it proving
wet, hindered much the glory of the show. His Majesty attended upon by the House
of Lords and the House of Commons, with the Lords of the Council, etc. took
Coach at White-hal, and went into the City, the streets being railed where the
Companies sat with their several Banners and Streamers, through whom his
Majesty passed, being conducted by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and several of
the chief of each Company on Horseback with gold Chains and Velvet Jackets unto
Guild Hall, being entertained as he passed by the several Pageants.

His Majesty attended with the Lords of the Upper House, the Commons in
Parliament, Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, Barons,
Viscounts, Earls, Marquesses and Dukes, the Lord Mayor, Lord Chamberlain, Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Dukes of York and Gloucester, takes his Way
for Guild-hal, and at Fleetstreet Conduit he is received by a person
representing Time in a very glorious Pageant, who addressed himself to his
Majesty on his knee.

And so his Majesty passes on to Paul's Churchyard, where they are entertained
by another Pageant, very much amplif^ed and adorned, in which was seated Truth,
who made her A^d^esse.

Another Pageant presents its self at Foster-lane. At the great Conduit in
Cheapside Fame presents her Speech.

At Paul's Chain is another Pageant in the Nature of a Droll, where was
presented the Figure of Industry, and the Carders and Spinners, in relation to
the Clothworkers Company.

At Cheapside Cross another Droll, where Pretty and the Tumblers played their
tricks.

And from thence his Majesty passed on to Guild-hal, where notice given that
his Majesty and the rest were in their several retiring rooms, every officer
according to his condition and quality employed himself, the Conductors placing
the Servitors (being clad in Plush) side by side from each Dresser to their
several Tables, on which they were to attend.

His Majesty during Dinner time had several Musical Complisances both
Instrumental and Vocal.

That ended, his Majesty and the rest retiring, was presented with a Banquet.

LONDON, Printed by John Redmayne in Lowells Court in Paternoster Row. A^dare
to be had at the Office of Intelligence, 1660.


