Numb. 24. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer COMPRISING The Sum of Foreign
Intelligence, with the Affairs now in (...) England, Scotland, and Ireland. For
Information of the People. Published by Order of the late (...).
From Monday June 4. to Monday June 11. 1660.
BY Letter from Steepholm Island we are certainly informed, that Col. Okey and
Lieut. General Ludlow were there, but with no intent to add to their former
crimes by raising a new disturbance, but in expectation of a Bark to carry them
over toward France, where they might shelter themselves from that punishment
which their guilt tells them they have deserved. The Bark came to them, and
they on Friday the first of June went thence. Lieut. Col. Barrow of C^lonel
Twisletons Regiment, upon notice of it, is gone (...) them in a Vessel to
Scilly Island, whether it is thought they are gone to bring them back, if he
can find them, to receive such punishment as shall be thought fit to be
inflicted on them.

On Saturday the second of this month, His Majesty conterred the Honor of
Knighthood on Major William Salhield.

Naples, May 8.
This week, the Procession called of San Gennaro, our Protector has been made
with much more solemnity then for many years by past. Our Archbishop, our
Viceroy, and all the Tribunals of Judicature, were present to that ceremony.

The Pirates of Barbary have lately taken upon our coasts, a Bark and a Felluck
belonging to this City, that were going toward the Isle of Sardinia.

The Prince of Montesarchio is preparing to go with 2000 Nepolitan foot, and
1000 Germans, designed against Portugal; and some of his Vessels are to take in
at ^inal the foot that are in the M^l^nez, to be employed in the same
expedition.

Presburgh, May 13.
An Express is lately gone from home to advise the Emperor, that the Bashaw of
Buda, having crossed the river of Tyssa with 20000 men, has taken his head
quarters in a place belonging to Hungary, where he makes a cruel havoc,
expecting some more forces that are to come to him, which when he has joined,
he will march against Prince Ragotski, who likewise does of his side, put
himself in the best posture he can to oppose them.

The eighth instant the Palatine of Hungary arived at Tetzche, intending to
continue his march toward Pant^kel, where the Rendezvous is for all the
Imperial forces, that are to be employed in Hungary,

Rome, May 15.
The nineth instant Mr. Brancaccio was consecrated Bishop of Andrinopoli, in
partibus infidelium, by the Cardinal Fran^isco Barbarin, and he has been since
designed to the Nonciature of Florence.

Cardinal Antonio did the like ceremony that day for Mr. de Rovere, Bishop of
Vereci^ in Piedmont, and Mr. Castraca^ Bishop of Cagli in the Duchy of Urbin.
The tenth, Cardinal Grimaldi arived here from his Archbishopric of Aix in
France: and Don Mario Chigi the Popes Brother, returned likewise from
Civittavecchia, where he was gone to carry the orders for the going of the
Galleys that are sent every year into the Levant to the assistance of the
Venetians.

Koningsburgh, May 18.
It is reported here very confidently, that the Poles have surprised the City
of Vilna in Lithuania, where they are said to have slain or taken prisoners
most of the Moscovites that were in it; but that having been necessitated to
retire for want of Ammunitions to defend themselves against the Castle, which
annoyed them much with its Canons, the Moscovites flew most of the Inhabitants,
accusing them to have had intelligence with their enemies. Since which time, it
is said they are about fortifying the place more and more, to secure themselves
against a second enterprise; whereof we expect a confirmation.

Elbing, May 20
Extraordinary rejoycings have been made here for the publication of the peace,
whereof the Swedes do expect the Ratification by the States of Poland, which is
to be granted about the beginning of the next month, after which they are to
go out of this place; in the mean while, the Imperial forces in Prussia have
been commanded to march into Hungary, to join with the Army that is gathering
there.

Wismar, May 23.
The peace and the cessation of arms, have been published two days since in the
Imperial army; and at the same time, all Officers and Soldiers were prohibited
to make any hostility against the Swedes, nor to make any devastation in any
place belonging unto them. Whereof advice has been sent by an Express to
General Wrangle, who is at Stralsond, to know of him how to deal with the
Imperialists, whose Purvoyers have never yet been able to obtain leave to buy
here such things as they want.

Paris, 8. June, 1660.
Marshal de Turenne has obtained of the King the Abbey of Torn^s in Burgundy,
being vacant by the death of Mr. de Chandenoux, for the Abbot of Bouillon his
Nephew. The Express sent from Court about it, does report, That all the
d^ffi^ulties between France and Spain were regulated. That ^he S^cau^ d' Urgel
was yielded to the Spaniards. That the Marriage was to be solemnized by Proxy
the second or third inst^nt, and soon after would be consummated, and the
Interview follow presently. Mr. de Brisacies having complained to Cardinal
Maza^^ne, That he was u^justly turned out of his Government of Cirick in
Lorrain by the Marshal de la Forte; the said Cardinal has approved of his
complaint, and the King gave him leave to return to his command; which having
done, the said Marshal of his own Authority besieged him in that place; which
coming to the Kings Ea^s. Order has been sent to the said Marshal, by an
Express, to draw back his Forces, and to let the said Mr. Basacies and his
Family go out of it safely. The said Marshal has ^^ely been cast in a business
at Law, concerning the Manor of (...) Loupe, which has been adjudged to the
Countess of O^onne, the eldest Daughter of her House. The Queen of England has
lately sent from hence, by Mr. Sambo^^, the Clothes and other Furnitures which
were to serve the King her Son at his entering into London; and for a greater
diligence fresh horses were made ready before at every stage. The Princess of
Conti is returned hither from the Waters at Bourbon. The second instant, the
Parliament of Paris issued an Arrest, commanding the Duke of Elboeuf to
represent within a fortnight the prisoner forcibly taken by his Guard out of
the prisons of the Presidial of Amiens: Two days since, Mr. de G^mont, ordinary
Gentleman to the King, came this way, going into England to congratulate the
King of England in their Majesty's name; and is to remain there until ^n
extraordinary Ambassador be sent from this Court to London. Yesterday morning,
Mr. Akakia went from hence toward the Court, whither he carries the Treaty of
Pe^ce between Swedeland and Poland, to be ratified by his most Christian
Majesty, as Warrranter in the behalf of the Swedes.

Monday. June 4. At the House of Lords.
The Lords agreed to the Proclamation (...) up to them from the Commons,
requiring them to make their appearance at (...) certain, that fate as Judges
upon the late King, or else to be excepted (...) the act of Oblivion and
Indemnity, as to life and estate.

The same day, at the House of Commons.
The Right Honorable the Marquess of O^mond, Lord Steward, administered the Oath
of Allegiance and supremacy to several Members of the House.

Upon report made of ^o^ble Returns, it was resolved, that the person,
following were duly elect^d viz

Mr. Arthington and Mr Je^ni^gs for Rippon in Yorkshire.

Mr. Bampfield and S^ri^a^t ^ai^ard for ^x^n

Mr. Cleyton and Mr. M^yl or L^sti^hiel in Cornhil*

General Montague being elected for D^ver and Weymouth, waved his ^^lection for
Weymouth, and ma^e choice to serve for Dover, whereupon it is ordered that a
new Writ shall issue for the Election of another to serve for Weymouth.

The Bill of Oblivi^n and ^ndempnity, was this day under consideration: several
Amen^ments made; and the further debate adjourned till to m^rrow.

Edinburgh, May 29.
Several Noblemen are coming to congratulate His Majesty's happy a^^ival into
England, and to r^pre^ent the grievances of that Kingdom to His Majesty. Other
Commissioners are also coming from the Kirk of Scotland; amongst whom are Mr.
Robert Douglas and Mr. David Dick* The Lord of Argyle is upon the way to
London, and several of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland.

Whitehal.
On Sunday after Divine Service was said, the Bishop of Ely preached before His
Majesty.

His Majesty being informed by the Houses of Parliament, That several Riots and
forcible Entries were made upon the Possessions of diverse of His Majesty's
Subjects, Ecclesiastical and Temporal, that were settled in the same by lawful
or pretended Authority, and that without any Order of Parliament, or conviction
by Law, did set sorth a Proclamation, thereby commanding all persons to forbear
the disturbance of any such possessions, till the Parliament take further care
therein, or they shall have evicted them by due course of Law; and requiring
all Ministers of Justice to be aiding in the execution of the same.

His Majesty likewise set forth another Proclamation, commanding all Irish
Rebels (such only excepted, as have by Articles had the liberty of residing in
the Dominions, and have not forfeited the same) that still stay or shall resort
to England or Ireland, to be apprehended and proceeded against as Rebels and
Traitors; and that the Adventurers and Soldiers shall not be disturbed in their
possessions, until His Majesty by advice of Parliament, shall take further
Order, or they be legally evicted; and requiring all Officers, both Civil and
^ilitary, to see the late P^oclamation put in due execution.

Monday, June 1.
This day several of the Regimen^s of the Army mustered; two of Horse in Tutt^e
fields, whom the Duke of York honored with his pre^ence; and they sensible of
that high favor, received him with loud acclamations, and several volleys.

Tuesday, at the House of Commons.
The House took care for the payment of the 20000 l. forme^ly ordered to the
Lord General Monck.

The House ordered Mr. Car^^, one of the la^e Kings ^rie^s, taken at Plymouth,
to be brought up to Westminster.

Col. Hutchinson sent a Letter to the House, signifying ^is hearty sorrow for
being drawn to be one of the late Kings Judges, and his abhor^ncie of that upon
reading of which, the House ordered that he be set at liberty upon his pa^ol.

The House resumed the debate on the Bill of Indemnity, and agreed to several
Amendments.

His Majesty has sat in Privy Council, of which, these are said to be the
names.
The Duke of York Lord Chancellor Marquess of Ormond Lord High Chamberlain
Linsey Earl of Berkshire Earl of Southampton Earl of Norwich Viscount Seymour
Lord Say and Seal Lord Wentworth Sir Edward Nicholas Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper
The Duke of Gloucester Lord General Monck Marquess Hertford Earl of Manchester,
Chamberlain of Household Earl of Northumerland Earl of St. Albans Earl of
L^^^^ster Lord Culpepper Lord Roberts Sir William Morris Mr. Annesley Mr.
Denzil Hollis.
Colonel Charles Howard is likewise reported to be one of the Privy Council.

The Clerks of the Council are,
Sir Richard Brown Sir George Lane Sir Edward Walker Mr. John Nicholas.
Dublin May 28.
The Convention ordered, that tomorrow be kept as a day of Thanksgiving, and
observed with great sole^^ity, (...) of his most ^xcellent Majesty, it being
the day it pleased God to b^^^ow to gracious a Prince upon these Kingdoms.

They likewise ordered, That the persons who gave information about the
Treasonable Speeches against his Sacred Majesty, be examined upon Oath, that
the Offenders may be proceeded against.

They also ordered, that all the Laws against Sabbath-breaking, Cursing,
Swearing, Drunkenness etc. be put in execution, and commended it to the Mayor
etc. to be done accordingly.

They likewise ordered, that the peace be kept in all places, and no
possessions to be altered, until his Majesty's pleasure be further known; they
also (...) Order for the speedy suppression of the Tories and other Robbers.

And did nominate a Committee to fit during their adjournment, and then still
adjourn themselves, until the first of November next, unless his Majesty be
pleased sooner to command their convencing.

May 29.
The Members of the Convention went to Christ-Church, where Divine Service was
read, with great devotion, and much spiritual joy, and thankfulness expressed.
After Sermon was ended, they dined together, where was much civil mirth and
friendship, and as they first met upon necessity, and with sadness for want of
the Kings presence; so now upon expectation of his most gracious Majesty's
arrival, they could not but part with great Joy, as we^l for his Return, to
receive the Crown, as his being born that day H^ir to it, and are all retiring
home to live his Loyal Subjects.

May 30.
The Commissioners that are to go to his Majesty intended to have taken
shipping this day for England, but the wind not being fair, they have put it
off until to morrow morning.

Wednesday June 6. At the House of Commons.
The House this day received a Letter from the Duke of York* and upon reading
of it, they returned his Highness the most hear^y thanks of the House for
sending so affectionate a Letter to them.

They proceeded likewise to the naming of the other persons to be excepted out
of the Act of Pardon for Life and Estate, and resolved upon the^^ following,
viz. Colonel Harrison Willi^n Say John Jones Thomas Scot Cornelius Holland John
Lisle John Barkstead


Whitehal.
On Tuesday, the University of Cambridge, the Heads of the Houses and Doctors
in Scarlet, and the Masters of Art in Gowns and Hoods, being introduced by the
(...) of Manchester, Lord Ch^mberlain, their Chancellor, to H^s Majesty, who
are in a Chair of State in the Matted Gallery to receive them, Dr. Love, one
(...) noted for his eloquence, made a Latin Speech to His Majesty, showing the
great l^ss which that University, and Learning had suffered by His Majesty's
absence. To which, His Majesty returned a very gracious Answer, and gave them
the honor t^ kiss His Hand.

His Majesty has to add the Earl o^ Oxford Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Gart^r. His Majesty has been pleased likewise to confer the honor of
Knighthood on several Gentlemen, and amongst the rest, on Col. Ralph Knight, a
person that in obedience to his Excellencies commands, has been very active in
this happy restoration of his Majesty to his people.

St. John de Luz, 27 May. 1660,
The Marriage between the King and the Infanta is to be celebrated, as we hear,
at Fontarabia upon the second of the next month, and to be consummated here
four days after We hear that the Spaniards are much amazed to see our Court so
gallant and so richly apparelled, their own, though very sumptuous, being much
inferior to it. The Deputies of the Rentier^ of Parts are arrived here, and had
their audience of the Cardinal Mazarine, who told them the King was very much
satisfied with their proceedings, and that upon the delivery of their
Memorials, they would speedily have a favorable Answer. The King has given
his consent to the Ma^riage betwixt the Count of Lillibone and the Duke of
Lorrains Daughter by Madame de Canturoix, whom the said Duke has sent a
Gentleman to fetch from Mons in Haynault.

Orange, the same date.
Mr. de Bezons having received an Order from the Court of France for the
demolishi^g of the Fortifications of this place, has sent hither 1000 m^n out
of Languedoc, and as many from Dauphine, to hasten the work; the more diligence
being used therein, as the most intelligent persons do judge, because the Court
would have it done b^fo^e ^h^ King of England should be able to make an
instance to the contrary.

From Legorn, May 14. 1660.
The three Galleys of the grand Duke of Tuscany are gone from hence toward the
Levant, for the service of the Republic of Venice. The Patron of a Bark lately
arrived here from Candia, does report that he has seen about Sicily, the Ships
lately gone from Toulon with the French Infantry.

St. John de Luz, May 30. 1660.
The Cardinal Mazarin has received a Letter from Don Lewis d' Aro, whereby he
tells him, that the King of Spain was no less weary of being upon the frontier,
then his most Christian Majesty himself, and that therefore he earnestly wished
that all things might be speedily regulated to the mutual satisfaction of both
the Nations. The 28 instant, the King gave order for the preparing of the
Church of St. John in this Town for the celebrating of his Marriage. The same
day, the King sent an Express into Provence, to have all the French guards that
were there sent speedily to Paris. At the same time, the Bishop of Orange, and
M. de Lyonne, were sent to the Spanish Court. The regulating of the limits of
Roussillon has been ended, with content to each the parties, and much civility
between the two chief Ministers. As M. de Lyonne was debating those differences
with the Spanish Commissioners, and chiefly with Don Lewis d' Aro at
Fontarabia, an Express came thither, who acquainted with the King of Spains
resolution to refer wholly his interests to Cardinal Mazarin, to whom the said
M. de Lyonne presently repaired to acquaint him with the said Declaration of
the King of Spain; and further, that Don Lewis d' Aro would subscribe
whatsoever the said Cardinal should pronounce upon that subject. The same was
confirmed again the next day by the Count de Fuensaldagne, sent expressly to the
French Court, for that purpose, and to take directions for the marriage, and
for the enterview of the two Kings. It is thought the celebration of the said
marriage will be at Fontarabia upon the second of June, the first enterview the
third, the second upon the fifth, and the Consummation upon the sixth, that the
Court might set forward for Paris upon the tenth. The King shall carry with him
to the enterview but two hundred musketeers, a Brigade of his light horsemen,
as many of his Gensd'armes, and two hundred of his French Guards, his Majesty
having reduced himself to that small number, that his Guard might not be bigger
then that of the King of Spain, who was expected yesternight at Fontarabia.

Paris, June 12. 1660.
The 7 instant, the Queen of England received an Express from the King her Son,
who advised her Majesty of his safe arrival to Canterbury, and of his reception
by General Monck, and an infinite number of his Subjects. The ninth, her
Majesty made great rejoycings at the Palais Cardinal, where many fireworks,
and other bonfires expressed the joy of her Court, several hogsheads of Wine
having been given to the people, and a Ball there danced that night, where Duke
de Beauort was much admired.

This week several reports did fly abroad here of a massacre lately happened at
Dieppe, upon the French Protestant Inhabitants of that place, but upon the best
enquiry, the business is briefly thus: About ten or fifteen days since, some
Scholars of that Town, and other rude people, enticed, as it is supposed by the
Priests and Moncks, came forth into the Suburbs, where the Protestant Church is
situated, and where at that time the Synod of the Province was held, and having
forcibly broken the gate of the Churchyard, and part of the walls, they broke
likewise the Church-door, and coming in great number into the Church, they
overthrew all the seats and benches, broke to pieces the Pulpit, and made great
havoc there, and had they not been hindered, would have burned the Church to
the ground; but partly the Magistrates by their authority, to avoid the tumult,
and p^^tly the Capucines shrewdly suspected to have set them on, by their
admonition slappeased them, and made them retire; but before they had, besides
what is aforesaid, broke open the Chamber of the Consistory, ransacked all the
Books, Registers and Papers there, which they carried away with them: The
several Protestant Ministers of that place, and some other Inhabitants, fearing
this tumult would have some further consequences by the rage of their
implacable enemies, saved themselves, some to Rouen, and some to other places:
What has since happened therein, is not yet come to our knowledge, only some
report that the Magistrate of the place have since banished out of it the
chiefest Ringleaders of that sedition. We hear likewise that the same happened
about the same time at Falaise, and other places of Normandy, which gives some
ground of suspicion that it is a general combination hatched and carried on
underhand, for a general mischief upon those lambs scattered among the wolves.

Thursday, June 7.
This day was published a Proclamation by his Majesty, to summon the persons
therein named, who sat, gave Judgment, and assisted in that horrid and
detestable murder of his Majesty's Royal Father of blessed memory, to appear
and render themselves within fourteen days after the publishing of that his
Majesty's Royal Proclamation, to the Speaker or Speakers of the House of Peers
or Commons, the Lord Mayor of the City of London, or the Sheriffs of the
respective Counties of England or Wales; and that no person harbor or conceal
them, under misprisson of Treason.

The Persons Names are:

John Lisle, William Say, Esquires; Sir Hardresse Waller, Valentine Wauton,
Edward Whalley, Esqs; Sir John Bourchier Knight, William Heveningham Esquire Isaac
Pennington Alderman of London, Henry Martin, John Barkstead, Gilbert
Millington, Edmund Ludlow, John Hutchinson, Esquires; Sir Michael Livesay
Baronet, Robert Tichbourn, Owen Roe, Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scroope, John Okey,
John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, John Carew, Miles Corbet, Henry
Smith, Thomas Wogan, Edmund Harvey, Thomas Scot, William Cawley, John Downs,
Nicholas Love, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, John Dixwel, George
Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Daniel Blagrave, Thomas
Wait, Esquires.

To which are added these other persons, as being also deeply guilty of that
most detestable and bloody Treason, viz. John Cook, employed as Solicitor;
Andrew Broughton and John Phelps, employed as Clerks; and Edward Dendy, who
attended as Sergeant at Arms.

Thursday June 7. 1660.
This day the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Faulkland, (one of the
Citizens in Parliament for the City of Oxon) did present to his sacred Majesty
the loyal and dutiful affections of that ancient City, which they have always
borne to his Majesty, and also to his late royal Father, and in particular did
present an Instrument under the common s^al of the said City, whereby they did
most cheerfully undertake for ever hereafter to pay to his Majesty the ancient
^ee-farm rent due from the said City, which they were nec^ssitated to purchase
from the late usu^ped powers for a considerable sum of money; all which his
Majesty did most g^aciously accept from them, and did then vouchsafe the honor
to the Mayor, and diverse worthy members of that City there present, to kiss his
Royal hand, graciously declaring that he would always vouchsafe his particular
grace, favor, and protection to that ancient and loyal City.

Advertisements.
Psalterium Carolinum. The Devotions of his sacred Majesty Charles the First,
in his solitudes and sufferings, rendered in Verse by T. S Esquire and set to Music
for three voices, an Organ or Theorbo by John Wilson, Doctor and Music
professor in Oxford. Sold by John Martin, James Allestro, and Thomas Dicas, and
are to be sold at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard.

An Advertisement.
Lost the 24th of May 1660. between Charlton and London, (by conjecture near
Greenwich wall) one table Diamond weighing twelve or thirteen grains, having a
little speck in it, bring word to Mr. Nicholas Clobery at the Fleece in
Lumbarstreet, and you shall have 5 l. for your pains, and many thanks.

Whereas in a certain News-book published on Friday, June 1. some aspersions
are cast upon the Mayor, Aldermen, and Corporation of Chesterfield in
Darbyshire, and the Lecturer of that place, Mr. Tho. Forth, intimating their
negligence in not proclaiming the King with that due ceremony they ought: These
are to certify the contrary, that the Mayor, Aldermen, and that Corporation,
proclaimed his Majesty in the most solemn manner that could be expected from
such a place, and the Lecture is also very hearty in his expressions in praying
for his sacred Majesty.

The House resumed the debate concerning the Act of Oblivion and Indemnity,
and resolved, that Andrew Broughton, John Cook, and Edward Dendy, being persons
deeply guilty of the murder of the late Kings Majesty, be excepted out of the
said Act as to life and estate.

They likewise ordered, that Hugh Peter's and Cornet Joyce be forthwith sent for
into custody.

Resolved, that the House does declare that they do in the name of themselves
and the Commons of England, ^^y hold on his Majesty's gracious pardon,
mentioned in his former Declaration, with reference to the excepting of such as
shall be excepted in the Act of Pardon, and accordingly a Declaration was
prepared and agreed unto, and a further Resolve made, that the Members of this
House which are of his Majesty's Privy Council, do acquaint his Majesty with
the Resolves of the House, and des^^^ of his Majesty that he would be pleased
to appoint when and where this House shall wait upon him.

The House took likewise into their consideration the Bill for preserving the
Privileges of Parliament, and confirming the Fundamental Laws, which was read
and committed.

Friday, At the House of Commons.
Mr. Denzill Hollis, a Member of the House, and one of his Majesty's most
honorable Privy-Councells, made a Report, that he had attended his Majesty
according to their Order, with the Resolves of the House, declaring that they
laid hold on his Majesty's gracious pardon mentioned in his former Declaration,
and that his Majesty had appointed to give them a meeting at three of the clock
in the afternoon, at the banqueting house.

The Committee that attended his Highness the Duke of Gloucester, to give him
the thanks of the House for the affection he had expressed in his Letter to
them, reported, that the Duke did very kindly accept it, and assured them of
the continuance of his respect to them, and that it should be his study still
to declare it to them.

The House appointed a Committee to consider of the Queens Jointure, and to
consider of a way to procure a present supply for her Majesty, and report the
(...).

The House ordered the Ordinance of Assessment, and the Act for putting in
exocution the powers in that Ordinance, to be forthwith printed and published.

They likewise ordered that all those sums of money that the City of London
has advanced upon that Ordinance, be forthwith paid out of such moneys as
shall be raised out of that Assessment, and that the Chamberlain of London, who
is Treasurer, do see the same paid accordingly.

R^solved, that twenty* and no more, besides such as are already excepted, or
sat as Judges upon the Trial of the late Kings Majesty of blessed memory,
shall be excepted out of the general Act of pardon and oblivion, to suffer such
penalties or forfeitures, not extending to life, as shall be thought fit to be
infl^cted (...) by an Act to pass for that purpose.

Saturday.
Upon a report from the Committee of Privileges and Elections, the House
resolved, that Mr. Secretary Morris, and Mr. Trelawney, are duly elected, and
ought to sit as Members of Parliament for that Borough.

Mr. Speaker informed the House, that Mr. William Hevoningham, one of his late
Majesty's Tryers, had rendered himself to him according to his Majesty's
Proclamation, and that he put him into the hands of the Sergeant at Arms, (...)
the further p^easure of the House was known concerning him; whereupon it was
resolved, that he still remain in the custody of the Sergeant, till further
order.

Upon reading the humble Petition of Adrian Scroop, it was ordered, That upon
the payment of a years value of his estate, he shall not be excepted in the
general Act of pardon as to any part of his estate that is properly his own,
and which he has not (...) of, or does belong unto the public.

The Petition of Francis Lassells was read, and it was resolved, that he be
discharged from being any longer a Member, incapable of any office or place of
public trust, and that he pay one years value of his estate, upon payment
whereof he shall not be excepted as to any part of his estate that is properly
his own, etc.

The Petition of Colonel Hutchinson was read, expressing much hearty sorrow,
and it was resolved, that he be discharged from being further a Member,
incapable of any office, and not to be excepted out of the Act of pardon.

Resolved, that the Lord Gray of Groby be not excepted out of the Act of pardon:

Colonel Dove's Petition was read, and referred to a Committee.

The Petition of Sir Gilbert Pickering was read, and it was resolved, that he
shall be excepted, as to the penalties and forfeitures not reaching to life, to
be inflicted by an Act to be provided for that purpose; as also Thomas
Challone^, James Challoner, Sir James Harrington, Lord Monson, John Fry, Tho.
Lister, Sir Henry Mildmay, and Mr. John Phelps, Miles Corbet, John Okey, Robert
Lilburn, Sir ^ich. Livesey, Sir William Constable, Jo. Blackston, Isaac
Pennington, Sir Tho. Malev^rer, Sir John Danvers, Sir Hardross Waller, William
Goff, Edw. Whaley, Isaac Ewers, Sir Jo. Bourchier, Edmund Ludlow, William
Hoveningham, William Purefoy, Gilbert Millington, Henry Martin, Robert
Tichbourn, Richard D^a^e, John Carew, Owen Row, Colonel Walton, James Temple,
Peter Temple, Francis Allen, Daniel Blagrave, Thomas Wait, Simon Meyne, Tho.
Andrews Alderman of London, Geo. Fleetwood, Augustine Garland, William Cawley,
Tho. Horton, John Downs, Vincent Potter, Nich. Love, Jo. Dixwell, Tho.
Hammond, Sir Greg^ry Norton, Peregrine Pelham, Humphrey Edwards, Henry Smith,
John Venn, Edmund Harvey, Tho. VVogan, Jo. Aldred, and John Hewson.

Resolved, that the Sergeant at Arms do summon Mr. Wall^p to appear on Monday
next.

Whitehall.
On Wednesday the sixth instant, the Bailiffs, Burgesses, and commonalty of the
Town of Ipswich, accompanied by Mr. Sicklemore, Captain Sparrow, Mr. Keen, and
diverse other Gentlemen, attended his Majesty, and presented him with six
hundred pieces of gold from the Town of Ipswich, which his Majesty was
graciously pleased to accept.

The same day the Earl of Cleaveland brought about two hundred Gentleman, many
of them Officers formerly serving under him, the others Gentlem^n that rid in
his troop to meet his Majesty to kiss his M^j^sties hand* who kneeling down in
the matted Gallery, his Majesty was pleased to walk along, and give every one
of them the honor to kise his hand, which favor was so highly resented by
them, that they could no longer stifle their joy, but as his Majesty was
walking out (a thing, though unusual at Court) they brake out into a lou^
shouting.

On Thursday Mr. Wallop, the Deputy, Steward and Burgesses of the City of
Westminster in their Gowns, being conducted by Mr. Gerard, a member of
Parliament for that City, waited upon his Majesty, and presented a Pe^ition,
wherein they desired that his Majesty would be graciously pleased to bestow the
Office of Lord H^gh Steward of Westminster on his Excellency the Lord General
Monck. M. Gerard made a short speech to his Majesty, and leaving it to the
Steward to enlarge, who delivered himself so rhetorically, and with such due
and a^ful respect to Majesty, that he has deservedly gained a very high
reputation in the Court, his Majesty returned a most gracious pa^don, and
afforded to a^l of them the honor to kiss his hand.

The same night his Majesty was graciously pleased to honor the General with
his company at Supper at the Cockpit; before supper he conferred the honor of
Knighthood on Colonel John Clobery, who had deserved so well in his constant
adhering to his Excellency, and prudent mannagement of affairs for the happy
restoring of his Majesty to his people. After supper, his Excellency
entertained his Majesty with several sorts of Music.

On Friday his Majesty went to Hampton Court, about five in the morning,
returned about eleven, and then touched many that had been troubled with the
Evil. At three of the clock in the afternoon, his Majesty gave a meeting to the
Parliament in the Banqueting House, and having heard Mr. Speaker, returned a
most gracious Answer. His Majesty was pleased to sup this night with the Lord
Cambden at Kensington.

On Saturday the Knights of the sh^re for Sommerset, a County that have
sufficiently manifested their constant loyalty to his sacred Majesty, as well
by their early actings of late (giving presidents to others to do those things
that tended to the bringing in of his Majesty) as their former fidelity,
delivered a Petition subscribed by many of the Nobility and Gentry of that
County to his Majesty, wherein after they had expressed their hearty joy for
the happy restoration of his Majesty, they humbly desired that his Majesty
would be pleased to take care for the settling of the Church, in such manner as
it was in the time of his Royal Grandfather and Father of ever blessed memory.

At the Generals Quarters at the Cockpit.
Several Addresses from several Regiments of the Army to his Majesty,
expressing their great joy for his Majesty's happy restoration, and an
assurance of their loyalty were early delivered to his Excellency, though
formerly forgot to be mentioned, viz. his Excellencies own Regiment of foot,
Col. Fairfax his Regiment, and the I^ish Brigades.

On Friday night his Excellency presented to his Majesty the addresses of the
Regiments in Scotland, viz. that of Col. Morgans Regiment of horse, and
subscribed a so by the Judges Commissioners of Excise and Customs, and most of
the considerable civil officers, Col. Daniels Regiment, Col. Clarks, Col. Hughs
and Co. Miles Man's.

The Commissioners from Ireland, viz. Sir John Clotwerthy, Sir John King, Major
Aston, and Major Rawden, who were here some time since, the Lord Broghil, Sir
Paul Davies, Sir Jamos Barry, Sir Theo. Jones, Sir Morris Eustace, Arthur Hill,
Audle^ Merrin, and Rich. Kennady Esquire la^ely come, will suddenly make address to
his Majesty, having brought with them b^^ls for the twenty thousand pound for
his Majesty, and such other sums as the Convention ordered. Sir Charles Co^t
cannot yet be so well spared, though chosen one of the Commissioners, there
having been lately some little c^ntests in Ireland, which his presence will
easi^y aw^.

Dunkirk, June 1. The Ostend Pirates do daily snap some of the English Vessels;
an house was unhappily blown up with three barrels of Gunpowder, occasioned by
making of fireworks, but one child killed.

Edinburgh. Major Aberin that was Deputy Governor of Edinborough Castle, when
Cromwell went into Scotland in 1656. lately hanged himself, Tho. VVielch walking
upon the Peer at Leith was thrown into the Sea.

The Covenant is very much pressed in all parts, and great hopes they have of
enjoying their former freedom. London.

Ullk and Puckle that conveyed away Miles Corbet, taken at Yirmouth, and one
^enon Tilham at Colchester, were brought to London on Saturday, and remain in
the custody of the Sergeant at Arms.

The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council have taken the oath of Alleg^ and
Supremacy.

The East India Company have bespake plate to the value of 3000 l. to be
presented to his Majesty.

A Spirit was lately apprehended and carried to the Guard at the Tower, for
drawing away soldiers, whom after he had deb^uched, he put into ships to be
transported, but after four dai^s imprisonment he was released.

London, Printed by John Macock, and Thomas Newcomb, 1660.


