VOX COELI, OR, NEWS FROM HEAVEN.

OF A CONSVLTATION THERE HELD BY THE HIGH and mighty Princes, King HEN. 8. King
EDW. 6. Prince HENRY. Queen MARY, Queen ELIZABETH, and Queen ANNE; wherein
SPAINES ambition and treacheries to most Kingdoms and free Estates in EVROPE,
are vnmaskd and truly represented, but more particularly toward ENGLAND, and
now more especially under the pretended match of Prince CHARLES, with the
Infanta DONA MARIA.

Whereunto is annexed two Letters written by Queen Mary from Heaven, the one
to Count Gondomar, the Ambassador of SPAIN, the other to all the Roman
Catholics of ENGLAND.

Written by S. R. N. I.

Printed in Elesium. 1624.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS AND GRAVE ASSEMBLY OF THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT The
fruition of all Temporal Blessings. The felicity of all Spiritual Blessings.
LORDS. KNIGHTS. BVRGESSES.
TO you who are the re-presentiue body of England, and the Ep^tomie and
Compendium of this great Volume of our Estate; To you who are assummoned by our
King, and sent up by our Country, to obey the first with your best Fidelities,
to serve the second with your chiefest Zeal and endeavors, and to affect and
honor both, with your most religious Prayers and wishes. To you from whom God
for his glory, our Sovereign for his honor and safety, and our Church and
Commonweal for their flourishing welfare and prosperity, do expect much by
your transcendent and honorable employments: To you I say, and to no other,
do I present this Consultation (termed VOX Coeli) to your consideration, and
dedicate it to your protection.

And because (in point of integrit^e and duty) I hold my self bound ^o bring
the truth nearer to your knowledge, or rather home to your understanding; May
it please you to be informed, that about some three years since, at the first
sitting of the last high Court of Parliament, when our King was so earnest in
proposing the match of our Noble Prince his Son, with the Infanta of Spain;
When the King of Spain coulourably presented (though not really intended) to
be d^epely affected to entertain and embrace the said motion; When Coun^
Gondmar (his Ambassador) made show to be a zealous solicitour, and a most
active and officious stickler for compassing and finishing it; When our Romish
Catholics became passionately, and insultingly confident of the free
tollera^lon of their Religion, and in the skie-reaching mountains of their
ambitions and superstitious hopes, were already preparing to erect their Groves
and Altars, to set up their Idols and Images, and consequently to introduce
their Pope and his Mass in the Temples of our God; when all Prisons were
unlocked and open to all pernicious Priests and dangerous ^esuites, and that
many others (...) (Caterpillars and Vipers) came flocking and swarming from
diverse parts of Europe, to poison and eat cut the souls of our people, with
their Idolatrous doctrine of Antichrist, and to withdraw their hearts and
consciences from their Alleagiance and Fideli^ie, to their natural Prince and
Country, purposely (with (...) treachery then Religion) to subject them to a
foreign power and jurisdiction. When the Emperor had beaten the King of
Bohemia from Prague, and the Duke of Bauaria with the assistance of the Swords,
Soulders, and Treasure of the King of Spain, had in a settled truce assaulted
and taken many Towns in the Palatinate, contrary to their promises to our
King, and of his Maresties to the Prince his Son in Law, and contrary to the
Public peace of Germany aend Christendom. Then, then it was, (that to pull
off the Mask of Spaines ambition and malice, who with the fire of this match
sought to set England all flaming in a mournful and miserable combustion)
thereby to bury her glory in the dust, and her safety in the cinders of her
subversion and ruins) that as Prometheus fetched fire from heaven, so the fire
of my zeal to the good of my Prince and Country, likewise fetched from thence
this Royal consultation for the discovery of our apparent and imminent
dangers, and in knowing them, to know likewise how to prevent them; Which
resolving to m^ke publiq^e; because it solely re^ded to Englands public (...)
and prosperity: I contrary to my expectation (but not to my fears,) saw my
hope^ nip^ in their blossoms, and my desires stis^ed in their births, because
the Seas of our Kings affection to Spain went so loftle, and the winder were
so tempestious, that it could not possibly be permitted to pass the Pikes of
the Press: When albeit my zeal and fidelity again and again infused new
audacitie and courage to my resolutions, to see it receive the light yet it was
imposible for me or it, to be made so happy, because I saw Allureds honest
letter, Scots loyal Vox Populy, D. Whiting, D. Euerard, and Clayto^s zealous
Sermons, and others, suppressed and silenced, as also Wards faithful picture,
which yet was so innocent, as it only breathed forth his fidelity to England
in silent Rethorique, and dumb eloquence. Whereupon enforced to take a law
from the iniquity of the time, (with much reluctation and more grief) I
bushed up my said Consultations in silence, and because I could not serve my
Prince and Country in that Book of mine: I therefore then renewed my constant
resolution and zeal to serve them in my most seruent prayers, and my most
religious and zealous wishes, the which I have ever since faithfully and
constantly performed.

Sitting thus to behold the constant inconstancy of the World, Which presents
as many different accidents to our knowledge, as objects to our eye; and being
Jealous, Vigelant, and attentive, to that which did, or which might any way
appertain to my Sovereign and his Princely posterity, to his Dominions and
Subjects; I was enforced to see (O that I had been so happy, as not to ban^
seen) the perfidious progress of Spaines now trecheries, and usurpation upon
many countries of Europe; for first his Cosen Leopaldus has devoured the
Duchy of Cleaues and Iulleirs: then he and his forces have taken many other
free Towns, and whole Bishoprics in the Countries of Luxembourg, and L^
Mark, as also in the frontiers of Swisserland and Loraine; Then he and his
factor the Duke of Bauaria (for him) has finished his absolute Conquest of the
Pallatinate (that dainty, rich and fertile Province of Germany) the dowry of
our only Princess, the inheritance of the Prince her Husband, and the
Patrimony of their Royal issue, wherein the honor of our King, and his three
famous Kingdoms, do most extremely suffer.

I saw him conquer the chiefest Cities, Forts, and Passages of the Grisous, and
has brought their liberties and lives to their last gasp and periode; yea, to
the merciless mercy of his not generous but bloody sword; which being under
the protection of the French King. does likewise cast a wonderful stay^e and
blemish on the luster of his honor and Crown, if he speedily take not his
revenge thereof; by leaving these his honest (...) as free as he found them,
and as great Henry his Father left them. And after the Triumphs and
treacherous progression of the house of Austria in Germany. The King of Spain
has now made a body of his, and the Imperial forces, and this Summer intends
to play his bloody prize for the total ruin and subuertion of the
Netherlands, who (to the eye if the world, and to human judgment) must
shortly sink if the two Kings of great Britain and France do not make them
swim; by speedily sending them brave succors and assistance in this their
urgent necessity.

And whereunto tends all this treacherous ambition, and formidable usurpation
and greatness of the King of Spain, but to cut out a passage with his sword,
and to make his troops and Regiments fly over the Alps, for his erecting and
obtaining of the Western Empire: And whereunto tends it I say, but to make his
territories and Dominions to encirculiz^ great Britain and France, yea to be
their Cloister, and to make and esteem those two famous Monarchies, but only
as a fatal Churchyard to bury and interre themselves in.

But Illustrious and genero^s Sirs, it this all the malice and treachery which
Spain has offered toward England; O no, nothing less, for upon that Journey
(which was as dangerous as sudden) of our Prince into Spain (then whom the
world has not a brauer:) Has not the King of Spain dealt treacherously with
him about his match with the Infants his Sister, yea have they not in his
Princely person, violeted the Laws of Hospitality, and the priueledges of
Princes (when being under his own roof) by attempting to tie him to forms,
which were dia^etrally opposite to his honor; yea, to be so audatiously
impudent, as with much violency and virulency to seek to put a rape upon his
Conscience, and Religion, and proffered inforcement of his Conversion to
Popery; as if their Infanta had bin to him more precious then his soul, or
that he had bin so wretchedly grounded and instructed in piety, that his
Highness would have forsaken his God purposely to have obayed and adored the
King of Spain, who is not, nor cannot be a greater King then he is a Prince.

And to step yet a degree further; was it not a hellish policy, and a
diabolical design and resolution of the Counsel of Spain, to advise our
Prince upon his return into England, to waerre upon the Protestants, and to
proffer him an Army to suppress and exterminate them. The Prot^stants, I say,
who are those by whom our King his Father raingeth, and without whom his
Majesty can never subsist nor reign; nor his Highness sucessi^ely aspire, or
hope to aspire to his Crowns and Kingdoms after him, since they are the life,
the vigor, the heart, and the soul thereof. And will our King, and our
Prince, our Parliaments, and our Protestants of England, then ever forget this
inueterate rage, and infernal malice of Spain against them? as also the rest
of their imperious and insulting carriage toward his Highness, and toward
Great Britain, as if they prized i^ at so low a rate, and made their
boundless ambition so excessinely ouer-valew their own Spain? that that were
in the Crisis of her weakness and misery, and this in the prime and vertical
point of her power and glory? And when his Highness pressed them for the
restitution of the Pallatinate, which they had often promised to the King his
Father, then they temporized so cunningly, and subtillized so trecherously with
him, that every day brought forth new delays and difficulties, till in the end
they had made the cure worse then the disease, and having taken firm footing
therein, were enforced to vnuaile and unmask their dissimulation, and faintly
and coldly to affirm, that they would treat with the Emperor for the
restitution thereof, but could not promise it: Thus having abused, first our
King the Father, and then our Prince the Son, they have now likewise betrayed
and ruined our Princess the Daughter in their final Conquest, and resolute
detention of the Prince her Husbands Palatinate, that Princess I say, whose
Royal and sublime virtues, make her the honor of her time, the ornament of
her sex, and the Phaenix Princess of the world. Whereunto adding the absolute
breach of the Match long since prophetically delacerated, and cast in Heaven by
the Princely and Royal Authors of this Consultation, and since the same breach
here on Earth likewise so happily confirmed by the King, as also by the Prince:
so all these premises considered, has not England reason to hate Spain, in
regard Spain hates it? especially because of these two maine ensuing points,
and important considerations?

First, for that the King of Spain is a greater, and more professed Enemy to
our sacred King, and his Royal posterity, then either the Emperor, or Duke
of Baua^ia, and is to be held and esteemed of us.

Secondly, that therefore to denounce War to him, and to make it good as
soon as it is denounced, is as Honorable as necessary, and as just as
honorable for England; As upon New-yeares day last I made these two points
apparent and manifest to the King; in my Discourse entitled Votiuae Angliae,
which I sent his Majesty in the behalf and favor of the Prince Palatine his
Son in law, for the restoration of his Palatinate.

Having thus (with as much disdain as grief) seen his inueterate malice
toward great Britain, toward our King and his Royal posterity, and
consequently the eminent danger whereinto our profound security has thrown
and precipitated us in particular; and understanding likewise how the said King
of Spain with Xerxes, threatens the Seas and Mountains of Europe in general;
Being as well in heart as tongue an Englishman, and therefore knowing by Grace,
what I owe by Nature to my Natural Prince and Country (like Cressus his dumb
Son) I would not, I could not be silent thereat, but must expose this
Consultation of Vox Coeli to the light and sight of the world: I mean to the
light of your knowledge, and the sight of your consideration, under the secure
Target, and safe shelter and Sanctuary of your auspicious protection.

To you therefore great Britains greatest Palladines and Champions, to you
the invincible Bulwark of our King and his Royal Progeny, and the
inexpugnable Citadel and Acrocorinth of our Estate: To you I say the Conscript
Fathers of our supreamest Senate; does it in duty present it self, and in
humility prostrate it self; which when your first leisure has curiously
read, and your best zeal carefully and maturely considered: Then by all that
true English blood which streameth in your heart and veins, by all the love
which your Country bears you, and by all the duty and affection which
reciprocally you owe to your Country: I both request and conjure you, To tell
our King that it is nothing for his Majesty to have made a brave and generous
Declaration of Wars against Spain, except he speedily second it with
execution, without which it will prove a vain Fantasma, and an abortiue
Embrion: Tell him, that it were the last Acts of Augustus, which embellished
his reign, and that old Pericles made the greatness of his generositie and
courage, to revive and flourish on his Tomb, when he caused the Athenians to
war upon the Pelloponessians: Tell him that Philopaemenus affirms, that
Peace is the best time to meditate of war. Tell him that to transport War
into Spain, is to avoid and prevent it in England, as Hannibal said to King
Antiochus, that the only way to make war against the Romans, was to begin it
in the heart and bowels of the Dominions of Rome, and so to vanquish Italy by
Italy. Tell him that Plutarch affirms there is no action so royal or
magnificent in a King, as to take Arms to assist and revenge his Confederates
unjustly oppressed and ruined, much more his own Royal children, and that if
the Palatinate be too far, that Flanders and Brabant, are but the skirts and
Suburbs to England. Tell him that Agesilaus said, that words are feminine, and
deeds masculine, and that it is a great point of honor, discretion, and
happiness for a Prince, to give the first blow to his Enemies. Tell him that
Spaniards hate us; why then should we love them? that we can beat them at our
pleasures, why then should we fear them? Tell him that if it go not well with
Holland, it must needs go ill with England; and that if we do not prevent
their ruin, that we cannot secure our own danger. Tell him that in matters
of war, it is dangerous to make a stand, shameful to retire, and glorious to
advance. Tell him that Philip of Spain is of Pyrrhus his mind, who said, that
having deuowred and conquered all Europe, he would end his days in ^ollity and
pleasure in Macedonia. And therefore that it is time, yea high time to strike
up our Drums against him, as well because our saftie, as our honor inuites us
to it.

And now turning from his Majesty, to you the Illustrious and famous body of
this great and famous Court of Parliament (whereof the King is the head) to
you, I say, who are the cream and flower of his Subjects: O hold it no
disparagement tha I tell you; that since in all matters of Order, Policy and
reformation, that delays and protractions prove still dangerous, many times
fatal: That you beware least as your Consultations fly away with the time;
That occasion and opertunitie fly not away with your Consultations, since time
must be taken by his forelocke, and then as Julius Caesar says, we have wind
and tide with us.

Think what a happiness, what a glory it is for England to have wars with
Spain, since Spain in the Lethirgie of our peace, has very near undermined
our safety, and subverted our glory; And let us dispell those charms of
security, wherein England has been too long lul'd and enchanted a sleep:
And if fear and pusillanimitie, yet offer to shut your eyes against our
safety, yet let our resolution and courage open them to the imminency of our
danger; that our glory may surmount our shame, and our swords cut those tongues
and pens in pieces, which henceforth dare either to speak of peace* or write
of truce with Spain.

No, no; to take the length of Spaines foot aright, we must do it with our
swords, not with our ^ecks, for the first will assuredly establish our safety,
and the second infaliby ruins it. Wars, Wars, then ye (with cheerful hearts
and joyful souls) let us prepare our selves for Wars: That our great
Britain (the beauty of Europe as Europe is the glory of the world) lie no
longer exposed to the apparent danger, and merciles mercy of this Castilian
Rat, of this Crocodile of Italy, of this vulture of Germany, and af this woolfe
of Ardena; but let us all signaliz our fidelities to our Sovereign by our
courage, and immortaliz our zeal to our Country by our valor and resolutions
herein: That we may all be of Alcibiades his opinion, that the bed of honor is
the best death, that there is no better recompense of death then glory, nor no
richer glory, then to dye for our Prince and Country.

And here I had imposed silence to my pen, and infused a period to this my
Epistle, had not the dignity of your places, the quality of your employments,
the nature of the time, and the consideration that I am an Englishman,
commanded me to insert and annex these few lines, by the way either of a
supplement, or a postscript.

Although I can add nothing to your affection and care, for the good of our
Country, yet give me leave (I beseech you) to substract this from mine own
fidelity and zeal.

1 That you be careful that your wars (both by sea and land) be plentifully
stored with money, powder and shot, which indeed is the veignes and Arteries,
the sinews and soul of war. 2 That you cry down all gold and silver Lace,
and all silks, Veluets, and Taffities, and cry up woole cloth, and black
(...) and Corslets insteede thereof, that thereby England as a black and
dismal cloud, may look more martial and terrible to our Enemies. 3 That our
English Romanists may be taught either to love, or to fear England. 4 That
there be provision made, and especial care had to secure his Majesty's Coasts,
Seas. and Subject from the Ships of war of Dunkerke and Ostend, by whom
otherwise they will be extremely indomaged and infested. 5 That by some
who'some Statute and Order, you cleanse the Cities and Country, the Streets
and highwaies from all sort of Beggars, by providing for their labor and
relief, whereby many hundred thousand Christian souls will pray unto God for
his Majesty, and to power down his blessings upon all your Designs and
Labors, whereby without doubt our Wars will succeed and prosper the better.
I will no further usurp on your patience: But here (withdrawing the Curtain
of this Preface) inuit your eyes and thoughts to the sight and consideration
of this consultation,

S. R. N. I.

The introduction,
Heaven being Gods Throne, and the Earth his Footstool, it is impossible any
thing can be here spoken and acted, but will there be heard, revealed and
detected; for not only our hearts but our thoughts, not only our tongues but
our intents, lie open and are obuious and transparent, to the glorious, and
relucent eyes of Gods most sacred Majesty, who being the sole Architector, and
preserver both of Heaven and Earth, rules that by his presence, this by his
providence, and both by his power; and that we Men are not by many thousands
degrees so great in his eyes, as the smallest Pysmires are in ours; who looks
still in our Designs and Actions, sometimes with approbation; now with pity,
then with contempt, and anon with Choler and indignation, being himself the
prime President, the great Moderator, the mighty Councellor, the eternal and
everlasting Jehovah; who can and will give Laws to all the Kings and Princes
of the earth, as they do to their subjects by their subordinate, and yet
transcendent power, drawn from his most sacred Majesty of Heaven, as the
Stars who actually derive their light, and borrow their luster from the
refulgent beams, and glorious body of the Sun.

And as this great God seated in his Celestial throne of Glory, with his
All*seeing and sacred eyes beholds in Heaven the thoughts and actions of men
here on Earth: so likewise out of his indulgent mercy and providence, he
likewise gives the same authority and power to his Angels, Saints and Martyrs,
to do the like; who clad in white Robes, the Ornaments of sanctity and purity,
with Palm branches in their hands, the Emblemes of Peace and Joy, and Crowns
and Coronets on their heads, the rewards and marks of Glory, Follow the Lamb
Christ Jesus wheresoever he go, still singing these joyful Io Peans and
Epithalamians of Haleluiah, and Glory be to God on high, Peace on earth, and
good will toward men.

By virtue of which Divine privileges, the mask of Spaines boundless
Ambition being discovered and pulled off, in supporting the Pope, and seeking
the increase of his spiritual Jurisdiction, whereby his Holiness in Exchange,
may enlarge that of Spaines temporal Monarchy, so as that shall have feet to
go, and these wings to fly to the height of earthly greatness; whereby the
Catholic Kings aim, out of the ruins of Rome and Germany, to erect another
Empire in the west, and endeavor by degrees to make most of the Kingdoms and
Free Estates of Europe become Provinces unto Spain; as, some by force, some by
policy, some by treachery, and now England by the match of the Infanta his
Daughter, with our most Illustrious and Royal Prince Charles (next to his
Royal Father King James, our most dread Sovereign) the hope of Englands life,
and the life of it is joy and hope.

I say the news of these proiects and resolutions of Spain, having with as
much fortunary as celeritie, passed the clouds, and peirced the Vaults and
windows of Heaven, it fast arrived there, to the understanding of that
immortal Maiden Queen Elizabeth, whose heart ever loved England, as her soul
did Heaven, and of whose flourishing welfare and prosperity I cannot truly
auerre, whether she still remain more jealous or ambitious? whereat grieuing
with as much disdain, as she disdained with grief, and knowing that her
Nephew and God-sonne Prince Henry, participated and burned in her zeal, that
the insatiable and blood-thirsty ambition of Spain, might not erect his
Trophies upon the Tomb of Englands downfall, and the ruins of her subversion,
she speedily acquaints him with it, whom although heaven had purified and
deuested of his Earthly passions, yet such was this young prince, his never
dying zeal to Englands ever living glory that his Highness could not refrain
from looking red with anger, and pale with fear, at the report and knowledge
thereof. They consult hereon and hold it both expedient and necessary to
acquaint other English Princes herewith, especially those whom they knew stood
deeply and sincerely affected to England. So Prince Henry acquaints his Mother
Queen Anne herewith, and Queen Elizabeth her Brother King Edward 6. and both
their Father king Henry 8. who so upon advise hereof, could not refrain to
look on England with the eyes of affection and pity, and on Spain with those
of indignation and contempt. So these five great Princes and Queens prepare
themselves to Consult on this most important business, when lo they are
suddenly met and assailed, with a doubt of no mean consequence and
consideration viz. Whether, or no, they should admit and receive Queen Mary
into this their Consultation, whom not her Roman merits, but the prayers of
the Protestants had brought to Heaven; When at first they considering that in
heart and soul, she always loved, and preferred Rome and Spain before
England; they resolved to exclude her, but at last (upon riper and more mature
deliberation) considering that she knew many secrets of Spain, whereof
peradventure they were ignorant; as also that from her innate and inueterate
malice to England, she might (either in jest or earnest) bewray something that
might turn and redound to the good of England, they all consented she should
be advertised hereof, and so admitted; which was instantly performed; and as
the rest of these Royal Princes envied Spaines ambition, and pitied Englands
dangers; So to speak the truth, and no more, Queen Mary (still resembling
herself) both in her speeches and looks testified the contrary; Vowing that
as she loved ^hilip the II. the Father, so she would still honor Philip the
III. his Son.

Thus these three Princes, and three Queens, not daring to consult in Heaven
on any thing, without permission of the Superior powers, they all repair to
the sacred throne of the Lamb, (of that Great Maker and conductor of Heaven
and Earth) whose Tribunal is environed with more sparkling and burning Suns,
then we see Stars in the Firmament; and who is waited and attended on by many
millions and Meryades of Angels; Where in sign of Gods glory and their
humility, these Royal personages fall on their faces to his blessed feet, and
so proffer up their Petition to his heavenly Majesty to have authority, and
place given them to Consult on this important business betwixt England and
Spain.

Their Petition read and considered, God out of the profunditie of his immense
affection and favor, toward the prosperity of England, (Wherein for the space
of well near One hundred years, his Sacred Majesty has seen himself truly
served and glorified) ratifies their request, and approues and authoriseth
their sitting; When departing from Gods most sacred Throne; they were by a full
Quire of Angels with Trumpets and Tymbrels in their hands, vshered into the
golden Star Chamber of Heaven, which was purposely prepared for them; when
taking their several seats, the door shut, and guarded by Englands Tutulary
Angel, with a naked brandished sword in his hand, all things being hushed up
in silence, and all heavenly duties and ceremonies performed, these six Royal
personages begin their Consultation in this manner.

The Consultation.
H. 8. BEfore we descend to speak of Spaines ambition and Enu^e toward
England, or the Match now in question betwixt England and Spain, with the
dangers which threaten, and presage us will ensue thereof, it will not be
impertinent, rather necessary; that we mount up the steps of this last century
of years, and so take a cursory, though not a curious survey, with what
Ambition and Cruelty, and Treachery, the Kings of Spain from time to time,
have knocked at most Kingdoms and Estates of Europe; in the unfolding and
dilating whereof, you must not expect much light from me, rather I from your
selves, since as your years so your reigns succeeded me.


Navarre.
E. 6. ANd as you all know my years were so few and my reign so short, that
neither these, nor this, made me capable to diue into the affairs of Princes
and Kingdoms, and yet I must confess it was both with grief and pity, that
I read, with what usurpation and treachery, Ferdinand King of Arragon deprived
John of Albert, and Katherine his Queen of their flourishing Kingdom of
Navarre, who for mere grief and sorrow dyed immediately after, having no other
claim nor title to this Kingdom, but an insatiable desire of Empire and
Dominion, which the Aragonois, and Castil^ans won with their Swords.


Q. M. O but Navarre lay fit and commodious for the Provinces of old Castille,
B^iscay, and Galicia, besides, the Kings of Spain are the Catholic Kings,
and therefore it is both proper and natural for them to be Universal.


Q. E. It is indeed both natural and proper to them to be ambitious and
tyrannical, for I am confident, that as Catholic as they are, they love
Earths Empire, better then Heavens Glory; and sure I cannot but lament to see
Navarre made a Province to Spain, which more is the grief of Christendom,
and the shame of the Royal line of Burbon, now the French Kings, whose
patrimony and inheri^ it is, and will not King Jews recover it?


P. H. Had Great Henry his Father lived, he would undoubtedly have conquered
Navarre with as much glory, as it was lost with shame and pity; yea, the
Turrets of Pampelone, and Fonteraby, had long since cast off the ragged Staff,
to bear out the three Flower de Luces.


Q. A. So might King Jews his Son too, if the Pope and Jesuits diuerted not
his thoughts from that honorable and glorious Enterprise.


E. 6. Surely it is against the laws of Conscience, and the rules of Religion,
for the Kings of Spain thus to usurp Navarre, or were they so just, as they
pretend they were holy, they would restore and not retain this Kingdom.


Q. M. O the Cath^lique Kings are too wise to commit such gross errors of
State, as to restore; for it is Conquest and Possession, and no way
restitution, which af^oords them best melody; Besides, since they are the
Catholic Kings, they cannot be irreligious much less uncharitable.


H. 8. Why then Daughter, the Kings of Spain are of Pirrhus and Lysande^s
mind, whose limits and confines of their Countries they held so far, as
their Swords and Lances could extend them. Which being so, they are only
Catholic in title, not in effect, much less in heart or soul, for if
Usurpation be Religion, I know not what is Heresy.


E. 6. The Pope may, but our Savior Christ, never authorized or approved
Usurpation.


Q. M. But the Kings of Spain know the Popes will and pleasure, as they do
Gods, and this belief I am sure is both Catholic and Apostolical.


Q. E. See, see with how much Ignorance and wilfulness, with what blind zeal
and po^re implicit faith, my Sister is perpetually lincked to Rome and Spain.


P. H. If so Usurpation be Romes Doctrine, and Spaines delight and practice, my
soul did well to make me hate the one, and detest the other.


The West Indies, or new Spain.
H. 8. But leave we Navarre weeping and groaning under the burden of the
miserable servitude to Spain; O how since Columbus de Cortez, and Pizarro,
(with as much judgment as fortunacy) discovered to Castille the rich America,
and in it the Gold and Silver Mines, which has given wings to his Ambition to
fly to the height of this earthly Greatness, wherein we see Spain seated
and founded; How it has both grieved and amazed me to understand, how at Cuba,
Hayta, Peru, Panama, and Mexico, and in all these vast Isles and spacious
Continents, that the Spaniards with a more then hellish Cruelty, have slain
such infinite Millions and Meryades of those poor Indians, whereby in a manner
they have wholly depopulated these populous Countries, and not only made
rivers but whole seas of their Blood; and of whose inhumane and bloody Cruelty,
I may justly say; that as all former ages cannot show the like President, so
our posterity will difficulty believe it. And yet behold the horrible
Hypocrisy of these insulting and usurping Castillians; for demand them the
reason of these their bloody and execrable Massacres, of those poor armelesse
and harmless Indians, and of the rooting out and exterminating of all their
Princes and Nobility, they with as much falsehood as impiety will affirm, that
since their King is the Catholic King, so this is to plant the Catholic
faith in the remote, and new found Worlds of the World; whereby we may observe,
that Religion must still be the pretext, and cloak of their bloody Usurpation,
when Heaven and Earth knows and sees, that it is first gold, then a greedy
desire of Dominion and Empire, which is the true cause, and sole object thereof.


E. 6. But if that bloody resolution, against these huge numbers of poor
Indians took place in the heart and council of Charles 5. must it needs
follow that the like inhumanity and cruelty should live in this of Phil. 2. and
Phil. 3. his Son and Grandchild: so as this bloodthirsty malice of spleen
and gall against these poor Indians, must be heriditary to the Kings of
Spain, as now by custom and intrusion, (and by the ignoble coniuencie of the
Princes Electors) the ambition to enjoy the Empire of Germany, is to the house
of Austria, from whence they are descended.


Portingall.
Q. E. MY royal Father observed well, that Religion was only the pretext, but
wealth and Empire the sole object of Spaines ambition; for although Charles the
5. usurped those places of America from the Indians, who indeed knew not
Christ; yet what Religion or Catholic was that of Philip the 2, his Son,
under hand to precipitate, and throw Sebastian King of Portingall, into the
unnecessary and unfortunate wars of Africa against the Moors, where he
losed his life with his ambition: and then after his decease, to work so on
the impotency, fear, and ignorance, of old King Henry his successor, as
(contrary to the laws of Justice and Nature) to enforce him to illigitimate
Don Anthony the Prior of Crato, who was the first and nearest heir unto that
Crown and Kingdom, thereby to exclude him as indeed he did, or if he had
not an itching and longing desire to swallow and devour that Kingdom of
Portingall; which all Christendom and Rome her self knew was still more
Catholic then Spain; yea, and then when he had engaged his Royal word to
the rest of the Pretendants, as the aforesaid Don Anthony, the Dukes of Sauoy
and Parma, Katherine of Maedicis (Queen mother of France) and Katherine
Duchess of Braganca; that he with them would stand to the sentence of the
Chamber of Lisbone, to know to whom the right of that Kingdom most properly
and lineally descended. That then this King Philip the 3. forgot his conscience
to God, and his promise to these Princes (fearing others right, and distrusting
his own) brought an Army to the gates of Lisbone, ere the Pretendants, or
Portingalls themselves dreampt thereof, or had means or leisure to defend
themselves, whereby such was his insatiable ambition, usurpation, and
covetousness, that in a plain and settled peace, he devoured this rich and
noble Kingdom; making it not only tributary but a Province to Spain. And was
this also Religion, or to plant the Catholic faith? or rather was it not
manifest treachery, and apparent usurpation, such if Don Anthony had not, all
the world knows, the Duchess of Braganca had more right to this Kingdom then
King Philip.


P. H. Yea, that policy King Phil. learnt of the Emperor Charles 5. his
Father, who when himself, and King Francis the first of France. contended for
the Empire of Germany, whiles Francis was bribing of the Electors, Charles
brought an Army into the field and so enforced them to elect and choose him.


Q. M. I must confess I ever held the Portingalls to be zealous and good
Roman Catholics; but as Navarre lay fit for Biscay and Galicia, so
Portingall lay exceeding comodious for Andoulosie; and if my husband King
Philip, had not seconded his right of descent by the law of his sword, perhaps
he might have had a bad neighbor in Portingall, which he and his counsel
timely foreseeing they as wisely prevented. And howsoever, although he hated
Don Anthony, yet I know he loved the Duchess of Braganca well; but When we
speak of Crowns and kingdoms, Religion will make his surprise of Portingall
a matrer of State, though to speak truth, State can never make it a matter of
Religion.


Q. A. How Well King Phillip loved the Duchess of Braganca, I know not, but
this I am sure of, that both Monsieur de Boysise Monsieur de Bissea^x, and
Monsieur de Marais, (Ambassadors with King James my Husband; for the two last
French Kings, Henry 4. and Jews 13.) told me, that Philips hatred and rage
was so great against Don Anthony, that he begged his body, which lies in a
Coffin of Lead, in the Cord-liers Church at Paris, to be delivered his
Ambassadors, and so sent him into Spain; but as they said, these two most
Christian Kings their Masters answered Philip, that there was little Religion,
less charity, to take up, and remove the ashes of a dead Prince and King, as
was Don Anthony, and so his body still remeanes in Paris.


P. H. If Spain were so malicious to a dead Prince, how ought those that are
living to beware and take heed of him?


H. 8. As a guilty conscience can never find ^est, so it may be that King
Philip was afraid of a second Don Anthony, as of a second Sebastian.


P. H. But King Philip 3 his son, has far more reason to fear Don Anthony
his two Princely sons, Don Emanuel, and Don Christopher, and of Don Emanuell,
his two generous and Illustrious Sons, Don Maurice and Don Jews, all four
living who are fam^os, and Royal reserved Peers of Shipwreck of that Royal
Kingdom and blood of Portingall.


Q. M. O but they are poor, and want friends and means to advance their just
title to that Crown if they have any.


E. 6. Their right and title to Portingall is just, and therefore cannot, and
should not dye.


Q. E. If the French forces had met mine at the Groyne, Peneca, or Lisbone, or
had the Portingals ^isen, my Norris, Drake, and noble Essex, in despite of
Philip and his forces, had plucked the Crown of Portingall from his head, and
set it on King Anthonies.


P. H. No, no: Don Anthonies Sons are beloved of the Nobility of England,
France, and the Netherlands, and Don Emanuels wife, is Sister to that valiant
and incomparable Captain Maurice of Nassaw, Prince of Orange. So if fortune
smile, and a favorable gale blow, these disinherited Portingall Princes may
one day prove pricks and thorns to the sides of Spain. For all Portingall
knows, that their veins and hearts stream with pure Portingall blood; yea,
with the remainder of the royal blood of that Kingdom, which Philip 3. his
last entertainment (together with the Prince his son) at Lisbone, had almost
found true: but that his Majesty departed with as much fear, secrecy, and
shame, as he came with resolution, popularitie, and glory: in the interim,
these Portingall Princes remain prodigious and ominious Commets to Spain.


Q. M. Did Spain think so, it would quickly make these Princes ride Poast
into another world.


Q. E. If Spain should send these Princes Poast into another world, either by
the b^cke door of poison, by the wicket of a Poniard, and not by the great and
fore-dore of Nature, it would draw the fists of most Christian Prince, about
King Philips ears, and make all Portingall solemnize their Funerals with their
swords drawn, and their Cities gates shut.


E. 6. Indeed I have heard that the Commons, and especially the Nobillitie of
Portingall begin extremely to distaste the imperious pride and ambitious
carriage of the Spaniards, as many of them let not to say boldly and
publicly, that Phillip enioyes the Kingdom by usurpation and not by right.


Q. M. Not by right? Why Pope Gregory 14. approved his Title and confirmed his
Conquest of the Kingdom of Portingall.


Q. E. So did not our Savior Christ, whose Successor and Vicar the Pope
pretends himself to be.


P. H. In the mean time Spain domineeres at her Conquest of Portingall, and
well she may; for it is one of the fairest flowers of his Garland, and of the
richest Diamonds of his Crown.


H. 8, But the other Kings of Christendom have ^ust cause and reason to grieve
and storm hereat; for as it was Portingals mischance then to fall, and veil
Bonnet to Spain, so it may be theirs to morrow; for to a Prince and people so
greedy and ambitions of Empire as is Spain, all fish is good that comes to his
hook or net.


P. H. Thus Spain deuoures Kingdoms as the Cyclope Polephemus did passengers;
for he surprizeth no more then he meets withal, and yet will not Chirstendome
beware of Spain.


Italy.
H. 8. WE have past from Navarre, the West Indies, and Portingal, and now let
us come to Italy to see how Spain is beloved or feared of the Italians, and how
he has behaved himself there.


E. 6. In Italy the King of Spain is nailed to the Pope, as most of the
College of Cardinals, and all die Jesuits are to him; yea, he has the
greatest and richest territories thereof, as the Kingdom of Naples, the Duchy
of Millane, and the Island of Cicily, and (in a mannet, the Marquess of
Monaco, and Final, the Dukes of Montoua, Parma and Vrbin; the Princes of
Massa, and Piombino, with the States of Genoua and Luca, do all march under
his banner, and call only on his name; yea, he has so incircled the Pope as
he is rather his Prisoner, then his spiritual Father; for if his Patrimony of
St. Peter be the Temple, his Naples and Millane is the Cloister to impall it,
so as he has no impeachment or obstacle from making himself sole Lord of
Italy, but the great Duke of Tuscany, and the prudent and potent Seignorie of
Uenice.


Q. M. O but the Pope need not fear the King of Spain, for ^s Spain is the
Popes hand, so the Pope is Spaines tongue: For the Catholic King is his
Holiness Champion; and his Holiness the King of Spaines Oracle.


E. 6. I had thought that the Popes always loved the Kings of France better
then those of Spain.


Q. E. O no: there is reason to the contrary; for Spain has received Romes
hellish and bloody Inquisition, and France is so wise and courageous, as it
rejects and disdaines it.


P. H. Nay, there is another reason likewise; for although the former Kings of
France were brave and victorious, yet king Jews that now is fears the Pope
and loves him not, whereas King Phillip of Spain loves him, but fears him not.


Q. M. If the Popes had not loved Spain, they would never have given him
Naples and Cicily, nor permitted him to enjoy that rich and populous Duchy of
Millan, which is the Patrimony of the house of Orleans, and is now fallen to
the right of France.


Q. E. Surely there is a great Union between the Popes and the Kings of
Spain, for Spain makes the Pope ride on his pontifical Chair, and the Pope
makes Spain fly in Phaetens Chariot, about the four corners of Christendom.


P. H. But the Pope loved not Spain so well, to give him either the Marquisat
of Anconitana, or the Duchy of Ferrara, when he begged it of him by his
Ambassadors.


H. 8. But did Spain seek Ferrara, and the Marca of Ancona of the Pope?


Q. M. Yea, and upon good grounds and solid reasons too, for that lay
commodious for Millane, and this for Naples, and both would serve as Bridges to
pass into that brave and proud State of Venice.


The State of Uenice.
Q. E. NOw you speak of the grave and Noble Venetians; as they have long since
pulled off the Mask of Spains itching desire to deflowre their beautiful
Adriatike Sea-Nimph: so they have resolved no more to trust Spaniards. For of
late (notwithstanding their prudent decree to the contrary, grounded upon some
private reasons of State) they both think in their hearts, and know in their
souls and consciences, that it was only the ambition and double Pistols of
Spain, that laid the foundation of the last treacherous and execrable attempt
against their City; and consequently against their whole State,
notwithstanding that some perfidious Frenchmen (degenerating from the honor of
their Country and Ancestors) were corrupted and seduced (by the gold and
flattering promises of Spain) to be the chiefest Agents, and forlorn Hope in
that damnable attempt; and to make this as clear and apparent as the Sun,
That Illustrious and wise Senate well knows, that at that very instant, and
nick thereof, the Duke of Ossuna (Viceroy of Naples) houered with his fleet
and Landforces to lay hold and embrace that occasion.


Q. M. Sure Sister you wrong the Duke of Ossuna, and in him king Phillip his
Master; for I have heard that the said Duke did then Arm, upon news of a
great Fleet of Gallyes coming from Constantinople to Rhodes, upon the
irruption of intelligence betwixt the great Turk and the French King, for the
escape of the Polonian Prince Coriski: for the which the Baron of Sancy, the
French Ambassador was at least confined, if not imprisoned at Constantinople,
and that therefore for the safety of the Kingdom of Naples, it behooued the
said Duke to fortify his Ports of Apulia, O^tranto, and Calabria, as well with
Fleets as Regiments.


P. H. The King of Spaines Ministers never want pretexts and euasions for their
designs; but if the Duke of Ossuna for affirming hereof, should swear Botto
D^os, and par la Sanctissima Uirgina, till he were damned, yet that wise
Senate, and especially the Council of Tenn, will never beleoue him.


Q. E. O but Ossuna and the King of Spain his Master, shall give me leave to
join in opinion with the prudent Venetians; and therefore I highly praise
their foresight, and applaude their generositie, in keeping a brave Nauall
Army on their Seas, and strong Garrisons in their Castles and Cities, for the
security of their State, as also for k^eping of their Exchequer rich, and their
Arsenall and Magasins abundantly stored and furnished.


H. 8. But has Spain offered the Signiory of Venice, no other wrongs and
affronts but this?


Q. E. O yes: for although that prudent State say little, yet they remember,
(and will not forget) how busy his Ambassador and Agents were at Rome, to
give fire to the quarrel between Pope Paulus Quintus and themselves, about
banishing the Jesuits from their State, and for imprisoning the Chanon of
Vincensa; as also, how readily and earnestly they proffered the Pope, that a
great Spanish and Neopolitan Army should instantly enter their State, and put
all to fire and sword.


P. H. And they likewise remember, how the King of Spain (that thereby his
Regiments might fish in troubled waters, and get firm footing in their
Country) has often incensed this Emperor Ferdinand, then Duke of Gratz, to
invade their frontier Towns in Fri^, and the Trevisan,


Q. E. But Noua Palma Brescia, Pescara, and Veronae, are obstacles and stops to
the designs both of the Emperor, and King of Spain; yea that wise Sat, is
so watchful and vigilent, that in time of peace they make their greatest
preparation for War. And it were a blessed happiness and a safe felicity,
for most Kingdoms and Estates of Christendom, if herein they would emulate
and imitate the example of these wise and valiant Venetians, which is neither
to trust, much less to fear Spain.


Q. M. But as wise and as strong as the Venetians are, as their Church and
Palace of St. Mark, was not built in a day, so are not all the designs and
resolutions of the King of Spain, and therefore a time may come, but I say no
more.


Q. A. O, I guess at your mind! you would have the State of Venice made a
Province to Spain, that thereby he may find a way for his Fleetes, to convey
his Armies into high and low Germany. And if Spain think so: Contareno the
Venetian Ambassador, resident with the King my Husband; and since him Donato
likewise told me, that herein Spain is deceived in the Arithmetic of his
ambition and usurpation; and thus to reckon, is to reckon without his Hostess,
and without God.


Swisserland
H. 8. But how do the warlike Cantons of Swissers trust the King of Spain?


Q. A. As they do the Emperor Ferdinand, his brother Leopaldus and the rest
of the Austrian Princes: for they know his ambition and their malice, and so
neither fear nor love these,


Q. M. But they love the double Pistols of Spain, do they not?


Q. E. Yes, but they say the French Crowns of the Sun are far purer and
truer gold, and therefore pass currenter with them.


E. 6. The Austrian Princes, and the Swissers; I have still heard, are from
Father to Son, hereditary and irreconcilable Enemies.


P. H. Yea, the Swissers draw good use and benifit hereof; for by this means
they live not in security as some other States do; but are still armed and
ready to march and follow their colors,


Q. E, But there is no War would be so acceptable and pleasing to them as up
to Millane, or down to the free Country, Brabant, and Heynault; if France,
Sauoy, and Uenice, would command them the first, and England, France, and
Holland, ordain and give way to the second.


Q. A. What is not past is yet to come.


Q. M. Yea, but the Council of Spain has policy enough, to insinuate and
temporize with all these Princes and States; and so to divert their Designs,
and frustrate their resolutions, if they were bent that way.


P. H. It has indeed hitherto proved so by Spain: for their policy and
treachery, has purchased and gotten them more Countries, then either their
valor or swords.


Q. M. These easy Conquests are still sweet and pleasing to Spain.


P. H. Yea, but they are neither honest nor just.


E. 6. But has not Spain (...) with the Swissers for their confines and
limmits?


Q. E. Yes, two ways, next Germany by Leopoldus, and betwixt Losanno and Gray
in the free County by the Archduke Albertus.


Q. M. Yea, the King of Spain will angle so long till he take.


Q. E. But has not Spain attempted by his Ambassadors and Agents, to sow
discention and discord amongst these Heluetian Cantons; to oppose them one
against the other, and so to debauch and withdraw them first from the French
Kings service, and then to his own.


P. H. Yes many times, but that trick of Spain is now grown old and
thrid-bare; so as the Swissers vow to remedy the first, and the French Kings
to prevent the second.


Q. M. But the Catholic King will watch those Swissers a good turn, and if
the Ephinaerides of his en^ie, ambition, and greatness fail him not, either
his Spinola, or his Pedro d^ Tol^do, shall one of these days dine with him at
Berne, Friburg, or Soleurre, ere their Table-cloathes be laid.


Q. E. But Sister, you are deceived in the Swissers; for their Table-cloathes
are always nailed to their Tables; yea, they have so great a quantity of
Swords, Pikes, and M^skets in a readiness, to give any Enemy of theirs a
bloody banquet, that if Phillip King of Spain dare assault them, they doubt
not but to use him as they have formerly done Phillip Duke of Burgundy, whom
they overthrew in three several pitched battles, at Gra^son, Morat, and Nancy,
where he losed his treasure, his men, and his life.


The Grisons.
H. 8. But how stand the Grisons affected to Spain?


E. 6. Spain through the vicinity of Millane, does so often knock at their
doors, that if they keep them not fast shut, they know, or at least fear
that he will shortly enter by the Uoltaline and Chiauena.


Q. M. O though of late they made a show of resistance, yet the gold of Spain,
the neighborhood of Millane, the Fort Trents, but chiefly their own credulity
and security, has almost brought them to the King of Spaines lure.


Q. E. This people were both warlike and wise.


P. H. But Spain will briefly make them fools and cowards if they will
hearken unto him.


Q. M. As how Nephew? pray be not bitter against Spain.


P. H. Why, first Spain will (...) them up in peace and security till matters
be ripe, or else he will engender factions, and sow discords among themselves,
either ^or Religion, or rank, or betwixt them and their dearest friends the
Swissers; and so when he sees all things ready, and the Iron hot, then he will
march, and strike, and not fail to unite and annex the Cantons of the Grisons
to Millane, as he has already done Millane to Spain.


H. 8. If the Grisons at any time lose the Swissers friendship, or their own
vigilance and generosity, it will not be long, ere they shake hands with their
liberty and lives.


Q: M. So Spain hopes, for if war cannot work, and effect it, they make no
doubt but peace shall.


Q. E. If the Grisons hearken to the Charms of Spain, they are half lost.


Q. M. If they hearken not to Spain, they are wholly undone, but if they
listen to Spain, all will be well.


H. 8. Yea Daughter, I believe for the Spaniards, but not for the Grisons.


Q E. To trust to Spain, is to rely on a broken staff, and to harbor a
serpent in our own bosoms.


P. H. To trust to the promises of Spain, is to commit our selves to the mercy
and protection of a Lion who will devour us.


Q. M. The Grisons will see, and say the contrary.


E. 6. So will I say, if I see the contrary; till when, I fear the Grisons
will buy their peace, as well with tears as blood.


Sauoy.
H. 8. But how does Sauoy brook Spain? for I take it this present Duke
Charles Emanuell, married this King Phill. 3. his second sister; the Infanta
Katherina Michaela.


P. H. Sauoy loves Spain, as it has deserved of it; for the noble and
generous Duke thereof cries out; God de^end me from such a brother in law as
King Philip.


Q. M. I believe if the Catholic King offered that Duke any unkind office,
it was nothing but because he was so near a neighbor to Geneua* as he and
the Pope suspected his Highness, would turn Caluinist.


Q. E. Alas that good City of Geneua, why all the world knows the Dukes love
to it, and its Religion, witness the Barron of Attigna^ and his Consorts, as
also Terraill and Bastide; but if there were once a Spanish Garrison in this
City, Sauoy would soon know how to distinguish between good and bad
neighbors.


E. 6. But it is the laughture of the world, to say that Spain hates Sauoy,
because he loves the Religion of Geneua.


P. H. Yet this is as true as many other of Spaines Colors pretexts and
euasions, when he has a purpose and plot to usurp.


Q. M. Why wherein has the King of Spain abused, or wronged the Duke of Sauoy?


P. H. First, in being himself the chief cause and subject, and then m^king
him the Instrument and executioner, to cut off the two noble heads of Biron in
Paris, and D'Al^igny in Turin.


Q. M. Why the Catholic King is the universal King, and therefore it is not
strange, if in all Countries of the world, he have his far fetched policies,
Agents, and Instruments to make his stra^agems and resolutions take effect, for
those who are obstacles to his will and pleasure; his verbal friendship shall
always prove their ^eall overthrow and subversion; howsoever he and his
Ministers pretend, and make show of the contrary.


Q. A. Nay, let us leave Biron and D'Albigny in their Graves, for me thinks it
is a poor charity to take up the ashes of the dead. And for our better
information, let us take a survey of the courtesy, or rather of the cruelty
that Spain has offered Sauoy.


E. 6. None knows nor can deliver the particular truth thereof, so well as
your Royal Sonn^ Prince Henry.


Q. M. But I fear my Nephew will be too partial in the delivery hereof,
between the King of Spain, and the Duke of Sauoy, because I have heard that
of the two Princesses their daughters, he preferred that of Sauoy, before this
of Spain.


H. 8. No, no; my Nephew Henry is a judicious and just Prince, therefore I know
he will not wrong Spain to do right to Sauoy.


Q. A. He resembles King James his Father too well, who will still love the
King of Spain, although therein he hate himself, therefore speak on fair
Son.


P. H. When Great Henry of France (my honored Uncle) made wars upon the
present Duke of Sauoy for the (...) of his Marquisat of Saluses, then this
Phillip King of Spain, (under the pretense and show to aid the Duke his
brother in Law against the French) sent him may troops and Regiments of
Spaniards for the preservation of his State; when the Peace being made betwixt
the King and the Duke, and the exchange for Saluses, with the Countries of
Bresse and Gex ratified and accomplished; These Spanish Regiments being
quartered in Carboneres, Mountemellion, Sauillan, Pignorall, and other places
of Sauoy and ^iedmont, they upon no request or assummons made them by the Duke,
would depart thence, but being commanded the Contrary by the Count de Fuentes
(Viceroy of Millan) as he wa^ from the King his Master from Spain, they
peremptorily r^solued and vowed to keep firm footing, which they long time
did, until at last that wise and Valiant Duke being thereunto constrained for
the security of his estate, whose eminent and utter subversion he apparently
saw before his eyes, he very nobly cut all their throats.


H. 8. Believe me his Highness of Sauoy did well, for it was an act most
worthy of his judgment and generositie.


Q. M. But the King of Spain, the Dukes of Lerma, Pastramae, Denia,
Albecurque, Tolledo, and all the Counsel of war of Spain; vow to have their
revenge of this affront.


Q. E. Spain has done his worst to Sauoy already, for as long as France loves
Sauoy, Sauoy needs not fear Spain; at least mine Authors tell me so, who are
that famouss Captain, the Duke of Dedisguieres, his valiant son De Crequy: and
noble Du Fremes.


Q. A. Though this one wrong, be one too many, yet is these all wrongs that
this King of Spain has offered this Duke of Sauoy.


P. H. No Madame, for although the Duke wink, and seems (with father Aubigny)
to have the art of forgetfulness; yet he well remembers how Don Iuan de Faxis
( Spaines Ambassador in France) told Lullius, Arconas, and Alimes, his
Highness Ambassadors at Lions, that the King his Master would Conttibute
toward the Exchange of the Marquisat of Saluces, conditionally it remained on
that side the Alps from the French; and since how his Catholic Majesty has
performed nothing. He remembers Spaines Plots upon his Castle of Nice (the key
not only of his Countries, but of Italy) when his Spanish Galleyes lay at Villa
franca to bereave him of his Children, He remembers how the Spanish Cardinals
oppose his precedence at Rome, with the Duke of Florence, and how the Catholic
King, or his Viceroy of Millan for him, was the match and Incendiary to set
fire twixt the Duke of Mantoua and him, For the Marquisat of Montferrad.


Q. E. We may see what a kind brother in Law the King of Spain is, and what it
is to build upon his alliance, affinity, promises and assistance.


P. H. I am glad the Duke of Sauoy, and the Princes his children have now
purchased the length of Spaines foot.


E. 6. They have reason to have it, for they were all enforced to take it with
their Swords, ^ikes, and Lances, at Cassallo, Uerceile, and other-wheres.


Q. A. As long as Sauoy loves not Spain. The Marquis of Lullius, and Monseur
De (...) told me, it needs not fear it.


Q. M. O but as long as Spain Knockes at the Gates of Sauoy and Piedmond, he
may at last enter.


Q. E. Sauoy has reason to enter Millan, not Spain Sauoy.


Q. M. But time and the policy and Swords of Spain cut all donations and
rights in pieces.


P. H. Sauoy has had warnings enough to beware of Spain, and therefore as I
ever loved that generous Duke, so I hope that he and the Illustrious and
valiant Princes, his Sons, will never want arm of steel, and hearts of
Diamonds to out-braue Spain, who with such ambition and malice seeks to
out-braue it.


France.
H. 8. But what says France of Spain.


Q. M. My honored Father* all the world knows that Spain has ever loved
France well.


Q. E. Yea, too too well, and so well as France will never love Spain, much
less trust it in requital.


Q. M. Why has not Spain reason to balance and counterpoise the power and
greatness of France.


P. H. Yea, but not to seek to make that famous and flourishing Kingdom
become a Province to Spain.


Q. M. Spain never wished it, much less attempted it.


Q. E. Years, more often then France has Provinces, or Spain Cities.


P. H. Why? who was the Author and Protector of the League, but first Spain,
then the Pope, and next the Devil.


Q. M. O that was only to preserve Catholics, and the Catholic Religion, and
to exterminate and root out Heretics, and was not this well done of the King
of Spain, since he is the Catholic King.


E. 6. Nay, now the least child in France knows that Religion was only the
pretext, but Empire and Dominion the object of that League. How else dared
Mendoz^ (Spaines Ambassador) in Paris seek the Crown of France for the
Infanta of Spain, or how else dared the Jesuits his Ministers, in their
seditious Sermons, and pernicious Pamphlets advance her right to the Crown and
Kingdom, when God and the world knows she had none to it.


Q. M. Why, it was when God had caused that good Friar James Clement, to kill
that bad King Henry the third at Saint Clou, and when indeed that Kingdom was
without a head, and then the King of Spain had reason to advance his Daughters
Title to France, in right of her mother Elizabeth, (that Queen of Peace)
notwithstanding the fundamental power of the Salique Law to the contrary.


H. 8. You are deceived daughter, for it was a good King, and a bad Friar (or
rather a Devil in a Friars weed) to set hands on the Lords anointed, but this
arrow came out of the quiver of Spain, and Hell, for that bloody and execrable
murder was no sooner perpetrated, but then instantly followed the proposition
of the Infantaes Title to France, which apparently makes the murder to be
Spaines,


Q. M. It was the Dukes of Mayene, Mercu^ur who drew the King of Spain, to
assist the League and in it France.


Q. E. No, no, contrariwise it was the King of Spain, that debouch'd and
drewthese two Dukes, and with them almost all the Nobillitie, to f^rge and
contriue this League, and in it to ruin France* for already France was almost
Spain, and the Infanta had undoubtedly borne the Crown, if Great Henry his
victorious sword had not pulled off Spaines mask, and so cut her Title and its
pretense in pieces.


Q. M. But see the equity and justice of King Philip, for when Henry that
Heriticke King came to the Crown, he restored him Calais, Dourlans,
Ualencienes, Blauet, and all other towns and Castles which he had formerly
won and Conquered in France.


P. H. But all this was not worthy thanks, for Philip alone restored that
which he could not, nor dared not to keep.


Q. M. Nay observe farther, how religious King Philip was (in imitation of King
Agesilaus) for he kept his faith inviolable toward Henry 4. although he were
an heritique King.


P. H. Nay observe how irreligious and treacherous King Philip was to King
Henry 4. (in imitation of Antaxerxes, the Son of Xerxes) for he violated his
faith and frindship toward him, in debaushing of Biron Marcanques, Lost,
whose promises and gold made them Traitors to theit King and Country.


E. 6. Surely I think it is incident, and I fear it will prove hereditary to
the Kings of Spain, to conquer more by treachery then by the sword.


Q. E, But had Great Henry lived, he would have required, these courses of
Spain, as also that of Guyguard and Chastell; who (although the report run
otherwise) had their greatest light and encouragement from beyond the Pyreene
mountains; for to speak truth he in heart could never be drawn to love Spain.


P. H. Yea, that Spain knew full well, for when the French Jesuits his
Ministers had unlocked that mystery, they like bloody Schoolemasters, so
diuilishly instructed and fortified that monster of men Rauilliaek (their
execrable and damnable desciple) that he soon sent him hither in a bloody
Coffin.


Q. M. But you will not say that the King of Spain was accessory to Henry the
4. his murder.


P. H. No, but I will say that if the truth were known, the opening of that
vein would make many great Birds, yea and many learned ones too, bleed
themselves to death, and peradventure the wounds and scarres thereof, would
bleed an hundred years hence.


Q. A. The Marshall of Lauerdin whispered me a word concerning this, which I
shall never forget, only he requested my secrecy therein: so the King of
Spaines Lerma, and the Queen Mother of France her D'Anchre, his Mariano, and
her Cotton shall give me leave to think.


Q. M. Questionless it were the sins of that King, and the finger of Heaven
that cut off the thread of his life.


Q. E. Questionless you are deceived Sister, for it were the sins of France
who made the Knife, and the treasons of Spain and Rome, which made that
Parracide Rauilliack perform.


H. 8. Well, in despite of Rome, Spain, and Hell, that victorious and
glorious King is wafted hither in triumph, therefore leave we him with God, and
God with him, and let us see since his deplorable death, how kind King Philip
of Spain has been to King Jews his son.


Q. M. So kind that he has matched King Lewis to his eldest Daughter, the
Infanta Anna; and his eldest son, Prince Philip to the eldest Princess of
France Madame Elizabeth, that now these two mighty Kingdoms and Houses seem
to be but one.


Q. E. This is fair to the eye of the world, but it will be excellent if the
end of these matches prove fortunate for France.


H. 8. Who were the Match-makers?


P. H. S. P. Q. R. or to be better understood, Spain, Pope and Queen Regent.


Q. E. If King Philip of Spain be Heir as well to his Fathers ambition as to
his Kingdoms, he will love France so well as to push and fish for it.


P. H. What force could never effect, he hopes those Marriages now will.


E. 6. Indeed, the Snake lurkes under the fairest green leaves, and the Aspick
under the purest and sweetest Roses.


Q. E. No Kings of the world know better how to dissemble then the Catholic
Kings.


P. H. You speak Scripture, not tradition.


Q. M. And you tradition not Scripture.


H. 8. But what entertainment had the Infanta of Spain in France?


P. H. Noble, Royal, Glorious.


E. 6. What train of Spaniards brought she with her into France.


P. H. A very great train, for Monsieur de Marais (the French Ambassador with
the King my Father) told me that Monsieur d^ Bo^elle (Master of the
Ceremonies to the French King) reported, that when the first of them were
entering Paris at Saint Jacques Gate, that the l^st were but coming ^owne the
Pyrene Mountains.


Q. A. But what did all this rabble of Spaniards do in France?


P. H. To speak truth, they fell presently to skrewing and working themselves
into the State, by begging and buying of Offices, Places, Pensions and
Governments, both in Church and Commonweal, and by making Pensioners for
Spain, and consequently a bridge and passage for the King their Master to
enter.


H. 8. But how did the Parliaments, the Privy Council, and the Nobility of
France brook and digest this?


Q. E. Yea, that is a question of state indeed.


P. H. As for the Parliaments and Privy Council, many of them are so
Iesuitiz'd, as they are Spaniards in heart, though French in tongue, and
therefore they were so far from preventing, as they gave way to it, only for
the Princes and Nobility (some few excepted) they (resembling themselves)
vowed and swore, that their swords should cut the Pens and Tongues in pieces
of any Spaniard whatsoever, that dared propose or attempt it, for they spoke
aloud, and affirmed, the Florenti^es had taught them wit.


E. 6. A brave resolution of the French Nobility; for the greatest of a State
have always the greatest interest in the State; those Princes and Nobles are
therefore highly to be applauded and praised: and such of the Privy Council
and Parliament who tacitly are delinquents, and Traitors to their Prince and
Country, deserve to be found out, arraig^ed, and sacrificed to the good of the
Commonweal, either with a sword, or a halter.


Q. M. But what said the Clergy of France to this?


Q. E. Sister, it is to be feared, as you wish and desire.


P. H. Why they out of passionate zeal, more then of zealous and sollid
judgment, approve of any Match for their King, so it be not with a
Protestant, and yet of none so well as of this with Spain; demand their
reason, and they will answer you (with as much vehemence as ignorance) that the
King of Spain is the Catholic King, and if you come further to
particularize, they reply, that their Cardinals (who indeed are only the
Popes creatures) shall deliver more at the estates General: So the Clergy bad
the Spaniards welcome into France.


Q. E. But where are the Firebrands and Incendiaries of the State, the French
Jesuits, who indeed are the Fistulaes and Botches of a State, what
entertainment gave they to the young Queen and her Spaniards?


P. H. Surely Aunt, they crouched very low to the Queen; but in Cottons
absence, Arnoux and Berrulla (their Tongue and Ear) whispered so secretly to
her Majesty, that I could neither gather nor understand what they said, but I
guest at it: only they gave fair words and actions to all the Spaniards in
general; and to the Nobler and wiser sort of them in particular, they engaged
themselves to keep curious correspondence with the Catholic King, to whom
they affirmed and swore by their Semie-God and sole Patron Ignatius Loyalla,
they would bear true observance as the Marigold does to the Sun.


Q. A. Are not these two Jesuits the French Kings ordinary Preachers, and yet
dare they do it?


Q. E. Although Berrulla be the Father of the Oratory, yet he is in heart and
soul a Jesuit, and Arnoux is the Arch-Iesuite of France, and the Kings
Confessor, and yet they dare, and will do it.


H. 8. But how did the Queen Regent entertain the Spaniards?


P. H. Courteously and Nobly, because she made the Match; which since she has
repented tho; yea, and the Duke of Mayene too, who concluded and finished it:
And so did Villeroy likewise, although it were too late. But Sillery and D^
Uair love Spain so well, as their courages are so masculine, that though they
see their errors in persuading these matches, yet they rather persist then
acknowledge it, for like good cleare-sighted Statesmen, they have wit enough
to bear up with the time, for otherwise they know the times will not bear up.


Q. M. But how did the Commons of France entertain the Spaniards?


Q. E. Truly I think they will never be persuaded to like the fashion of the
little Hat, and great set Ruff.


Q. A. Son Henry, pray answer Queen Mary.


P. H. If we may judge of Hercules by his foot, so we then may of France, by
those of Paris (which is the eye, the heart, the soul thereof) where the
Citizens in all streets, and especially the Lakeyes at the Lourre gate, and
the new bridge, still salute the Spaniards as they pass by, by these courteous
Epithites, Boracho, Pantalones, and Bouriques.


H. 8. How long remained all these Spaniards in France?


Q. M. So long I warrant you, until they did all their Kings business, and
their own too before they departed.


P. H. In truth so long, till all France was weary, and distasted of them and
their proceedings, yea, so many years, that at last the King and Counsel were
in a manner constrained to send them away by an Edict, as they themselves, not
many years since, did the Moors.


Q. M. The banishing of the Moors was a good and wholesome Counsel of Spain.


Q. E. And I assure you sister, the sending home of the Spaniards was as
excellent one in France, for upon the matter, they were but spies, moaths, and
drones,, and would have proved so to France if they had continued there longer.


E. 6. But were they all sent home, and none left at the Court of France to
give, and receive packets too and fro for the Jesuits, the king of Spaines
Factors and Agents.


Q. E. O, no assure your self, for the Council of Spain is too wise to
commit so gross and palpable an error of State.


P. H. Therefore to cast the thicker mist, and to put the better varnish one
the business, The Countess De la Tour was left there with the title of
gouernesse to the young Queen, and there is as much correspondencie betwixt
her and Don Ferdinand de Geron (the Ambassador of Spain) as there is betwixt
him and the French Jesuits.


Q. A. Thus Spain leaves always a Sting behind him, and I fear France will
in the end find it so.


Q. M. Whereon is your suspicion, and fear grounded?


Q. A. Upon the apparent symptoms of the Lethargy, Fever, or Consumption of
France.


E. 6. You say right Madam, and the Noblest and truest hearted Frenchmen
participate of your apprehension: for the Jesuits (being the Popes Factors,
and the King of Spaines Oracles and Agents) have already corrupted the
Parliaments and Privy Council, who should be her Illyum and Acrocorynth.
They have undermined and ruinated the Sorbone, heretofore her Palladium, once
the Queen of Universities: Who now as a mournful Widow, sits with her hair
dandling about her ears, and her tears trickling down her cheeks, living
only in her shadow or Ghost, or rather in her ruins; for the Genius and
Soul, has already made a transmigration to Clermont House; Yea, and to speak
true French, in our English tongue, they by their deuilish Aphorisms and
bloody positions (under a false and hipocriticall show of Learning and Piety)
do poison and corrupt the Youth and prime Wits of France, as the Jews did the
springs and fountains in England.


Q. E. Also, the Clergy of France degenerates from its Pristine candor and
zeal to the good of France, and the glory of the French Church, for they
receive Laws from the Popes Nuncio, and the Jesuits, to whom they should give
them. How else at the last general Estates of Paris, and the assembly of
Notables at Rouen? were they so unwise, dishonest and cowardly, to refer
themselves to the two Cardinals Perron and Gondye? who like good Cardinals, but
bad Frenchmen (having only their Bodies in France, but their hearts at Rome)
in thankfulness to the Pope for their red Hats, forgot themselves and their
allegiance so much, as to prostitute and debase that famous Crown, and
flourishing Kingdom of France, to be dependant to Rome in Temporal matters,
notwithstanding the Pragmaticke Sanction, and the prerogatives of the Crown
and Church of France to the contrary; whereat the Popes Nuncio at Paris laughed
with open mouth: So did the College of Cardinals, and the Pope himself at
Rome; and likewise the Catholic King in Spain, with all that huge rabble of
Jesuits, whiles all the Kings, Sovereign Princes, and free Estates of Europe
(Spain and Italy excepted) grieved and lamented at it, with as much shame as
wonde^.


E. 6 Indeed these are two maine points and reasons, that the greatness and
genero^ity of France declynes, and that Rome and Spain will shortly sl^uffie
the Cards so well* as it must needs be made a Province to Spain; for they both
have consulted, and find, that what couldnot be effected during the Reign of
old Henry, may in these of young King Jews his Son.


P. H. It is not impossible, rather likely, for France abounds in a moustrous
height of Pride and Sin: And the old Clergy of France admit of so many new
orders of Friars and Nuns, that almost all is out of order; and the
seventeen Millions which the Duke of (...) left by account to the Queen
Regent, is all long since spent, and twice seventeen more. So as although the
(...) be still on foot, Monopolyes never so rife, the Finnances, or Exchequer
drawn dry, and exhausted, yet the King is extremely (...) to his Nobility
and Pensioners; and is not this (...) King of Spain?


H. 8. (...) Great Henry lived, he would have remedied and prevented these
calamities.


Q. A. But his Son King Jews is not so happy to do it, no not his (...),
the Duke of Luynes so discreet and honest to advise and (...) thereunto.


P. H. (...) neglect thereof may make one, or both of them to repent^t, and
peradventure the kingdom too; for already the Commons (...), and the Nobility
would, but cannot remedy it.


Q. M. Spain loves France, therefore France need not fear Spain.


P. H. The Panthers skin is fair, yet his friendship is fatal, and his breath
infections.


Q. E. Indeed if France loved not Spain, it need not fear it.


Q. M. King Philip loves King Lewis dearly.


Q. A. Not half so well as he loves his Kingdom of France.


Q. E. In truth France has reason to have a vigilant eye ore Spain, for as
long as she sleeps in her bed of pleasure and security, perhaps one of these
days, Spaines Ambition may awake her with Drum, Trumpet and Cannon.


P. H. O no* not as yet, for if the king of Spain were so ill advised, his
Council is not; for they like old experienced Foxes, will never permit him to
discover himself, much less his Resolutions, and least of all his Ambition
and Sword, until the Sun has attained the Meridian.


Q. M. I know not what my Nephew means by this Mathematical Riddle.


Q. E. I was never greatly skild in the Mathematickes, and yet consuming my
Youth, Years, and Cares for England, I have reason to understand his
knowledge. Wherefore Sister, since he is a Noble and famous Prince, let us
hear him, for he has some mystery to reveal twixt France and Spain.


Q. M. He loves France, and hates Spain, and which is worse, he was an
Heretic, therefore his tongue can make no Spherall melody.


E. 6. But his heresy has brought him hither to heaven tho, and he is a
famous and Noble Prince: therefore Cosen Wales speak on of France and Spain,
for now we are all resolved to hear you.


Q. E. I gave him my Fathers Name, and he inheriteth my resolution and courage,
and the King his Fathers wisdom, therefore he can neither flatter nor
dissemble.


Q. A. Speak on Henry.


P. H. Know all men by these Presents, that if Spain did see the Heart and
Bowels of France weltring in its blood, and flaming in the fire of an intestine
Giuill war, if it did see the Princes banded against the King, or the King
against the Protestants, these rifeling of the Lourre, and of Paris, and his
Majesty besieging of Rochell, Sancerre, Sedan, Nismes, or Samury, or
denouncing war to all those of that Religion. If it did see sixteen Parisian
Tribunes, carrying away the Court of Parliament prisoners to the Bastille, and
Chastellets the rebellious Barycadoes, and a bloody Massacre in Paris; and
generally in all the Cities of the Kingdom, if he did see some Princes of the
blood (or two great Dukes as were Du Mayene and Merary) Captiuating and
Deboshing the obedience and affections of the French Nobility, Clergy and
Commons, and covering their pernicious designs and treacherous attempts, under
the cloak of the holy League; If it did see Calais, Dourlaus, Amiens,
Montdidier, Valencienes, Blauet, and Croyden, or other strong Cities, or Forts
of France, bearing out the red ragged Cross instead of the three yellow Flower
Deluces, and a second Mendoza for his Ambassador, sat as premier President
and Oracle in the Louare, Towne-house and Parliament, That then Phillip the
III. of Spain loves his Son in Law Jews the thirteen of France so well,
that he would use him as King Phillip the second had an eager desire, and had
almost done great Henry his Father.


Q. M. Why how was that?


P. H. Right as my Godmother Queen Elizabeth has formerly told you, nothing
but to deprive him of his Kingdom.


E. 6. It were better that all the Jesuits were hanged, and the young Queen
of France sent home to Spain, with her Portion, to the King her Father.


Q. E. But we see strange alterations in the Court of France, for some dare,
but will not, and others would, but dare not inform the King hereof.


Q. A. France has reason, yea, it is high time for her to look to her self,
for the Agents, Jesuits, and double Pistols of Spain are busy, and their
Swords and Pikes are not Idle. For whiles France plays the Theorie, Spain
plays the Practique.


Of the Netherlands.
H. 8. How does Spain and the Netherlands ^gree?


E. 6. Spain has so long inured and enforced the Hollanders to blood and
wars, as now at Sea and Land they are become such brave Soldiers and
Mariners, as they fear not Spain, and to love Spaniards they vow it is
impossible, much less to obey them.


Q. M. It is pity that King Phillip the second ended not the chastising and
Conquest of these Heretic Hollanders, ere King Phillip the third began it, or
that he cannot reduce them to obedience, by ending these wars with more
fortunacie, and less danger and damage.


Q. E. Nay Sister, it is pity that these two Kings of Spain, and the
Archduke Albertus and Isabella, have from time to time been so ambitious,
inhumane, cruel and reuengefull, to drown the face of the Netherlands with
many deluges of blood, in seeking to preserve their liberty, lives and
Consciences from the cruel Tyranny and Inquisition of Spain.


P. H. Indeed for this forty years, the Netherlands has been the School and
Theater of Mars, whereon there has been more brave soldiers and renowned
Captains flame, then in any Country of the world, or in many precedent Ages;
and yet all this blood is not capable to quench Spaines Ambition and Tyranny in
seeking to devour those Provinces.


Q. A. Has not Spain assaulted the Netherlands as well by Treachery as
Hostility?


Q. E. Yes, witness the damnable Villain Gerrard, who long since murdered
William the famous Prince of Orange, their Lieutenant General, and Father to
Maurice that valiant and incomparable Captain, who now succeeds him in his
Principality.


Q. M. O Sister, cast not so base an aspersion on King Phillip my Husband, to
affirm he was accessory to the murder of William Prince of Orange, much
less authorized it or commanded it.


P. H. All the Ocean between Holland and Spain, cannot wash off that Murder
from your Husband King Phillip, for his proscription to murder him bears it,
and his Lieutenant the Duke of Parma commanded the Count Assonuille to deal
with Gerrard about this murder, who promised him twenty five thousand Crowns
to effect it, which, O grief to speak it, he did.


E. 6. But his valiant Son has long since had revenge for the death of his
Father.


Q. A. If he have not, he resolves to have it.


H. 8. But has not Spain since attempted, or broached any other Treason
toward the Hollanders?


P. H. O yes very lately, for whilst Spain is Spain, Holland will never
forget how near he was to have extinguished her liberty, and surprised their
State, by infecting and corrupting their Secretary Barneuelt, a man of so
profound wit, and deep judgment and experience in matters of State, as he was
not only the Oracle of the Netherlands, but the Ornament and wonder of Europe,
ye^ of his time.


Q. E. See, the fruits of Spaines Gold, and the effects of his boundless
Ambition, for it is a common custom with him, if not by the maine, yet surely
by the bye, to break the neck of Great Princes, and free Estates, public
Ministers, whether they are great Soldiers or great Statesmen, or both.


Q. A. Yea, the Web of this Treason was so cunningly wouen, and so subtly and
finely spun, as if the Netherlands had not broken Barne^elts neck, he long ere
this had assuredly broken the neck both of their liberty and State.


Q. M. Well, Barnauelt is gone, and now Spain needs not fear his policy.


P. H. Nay, Barneuelt being dead, and Maurice that famous Prince of Orange
living, Holland need not fear either the trechetie, or force of Spain.


H. 8. But Nephew, I hear that the United Provinces of the Low Countries will
this Spring have Wars with Spain, for their peace is near expired and ended.


P. H. A brave, noble, and wise resolution of theirs.


E. 6. Heretofore England taught the Hollanders wit and valor, and now they
resolve to show England the way to those two Virtues.


Q. M. But the Gold and Silver of Spain w^ll prevail against them, and weigh
them down.


P. H. But the Hollanders had Ships enough of their own, and Gold, Silver, and
Men from England, therefore they disdain to fear Spain, nay rather they vow
before the next Summer to make Spain fear them.


H. 8. See, see, a handful of men dare attempt that against Spain, which
Great Britains huge infinity will not.


Q. E. And yet their cause and reason is Englands, viz. their Consciences,
Lives and Countries.


Q. A. Pray God England and France interpose not to cross the Wars, and
seek to conclude a Peace betwixt Holland and Spain.


E. 6. But the Hollanders are resolved to make King James a large Offer, to
protect them against Spain.


Q. M. But King James loves Spain too well, and therefore will not hearken to,
or regard their proffer, for his Majesty is resolved not to protect them.


P. H. The more is the pity.


Q. E. The more my grief.


Q. M. And without grief or pity, the more is my joy.


Q. E. I protected the Netherlands in despite of Spain.


E. 6. But Spain went near by your Leicester, to betray both you and them.


H. 8. If King James would now protect the Netherlanders, how easily might he
refetch back Flushing, the Brill, and the (...)?


E. 6. Nay, how easily did his Majesty depart with them to the Netherlands?


P. H. It infinitely rejoices me to understand the Hollanders brave resolution
and forwardness to have wars with Spain.


Q. M. But there is a secret trick to cool their courages which they least
think of.


H. 8. As how Daughter?


Q. M. Why, to Pistol this Prince of Orange, as they did his Fat^er.


Q. E. Heaven forbid it.


P. H. God defend it.


Q. M. Why, it is but one for another; for he knowing Barnauelt a Traitor to his
Countr^y because a Pensioner to Spain, caused the Lords States, to put him to
death, why then (in exchange and requital) should not a Pensioner of Spain
either poison, or pistol the Prince of Orange?


E. 6. These Diabolical resolutions and bloody Positions come from Hell.


Q. E. And thither they go that profess and practice them.


Q. M. The King of Spain is too religious to authorize so execrable a Murder.


Q. E. But the Pope as holy as he is will pardon it, and yet the World, I hope,
knows, that the K^of Spain cannot be so religious as his Holiness.


Q. A. It were good then for Holland to be careful of their Prince of Orange
his life, as all the world knows his Excellency is of their safety and
preseruations.


P. H. And it will likhwise behooue them to observe withal (as I hope they
do) how subtly and trecherously Spinola, takes their neighbor Towns for
the Emperor, and keeps them for the King of Spain his Master.


E. 6. And if the Wars go on 'twixt Holland and Spain; as I hope they will,
it will be needful for Spain to have a special care of his West Indies from
the Holland Fleetes.


H. 8. Wherefore only Spaines West Indies, or rather why not all the worlds
West Indies; since their red and white earth sets all the Would on fire and in
Combustion.


Q. ^. Surely, ere this Summer pass, and the next appear, the Hollanders vow
to have a heave at them.


Q. M. Nay, I hope the contrary, for the West Indies is the maine and only
prop of Spain, which if once found out, and taken away from them, will quickly
make the greatness of his Ambition and Empire totter.


P. H. Till when, all other Kingdoms and Estates of Christendom may think
themselves exempt from Spaines fear, but shall never be from his danger.


Q. E. This Holland perfectly and apparently knows, and it were a greater
happiness for the rest of Europe, if they would herein imitate their
Generositie, Valor and Wisdom, who stand on their Guards with their swords
drawn, and their Match lighted ready to give fire; as being constantly and
virtuously resolved neither to love, trust, nor fear Spain.


ENGLAND.
H. 8. But now leave we all other Countries, and come we to England, from
whence being descended, we by the Laws of Nature, are eternally obliged to
honor and love it; yea to prefer it and its prosperity and glory to all
other Countries of the world; wherefore let us see Spaines Ambition and Envy
toward it; and how he has from time to time borne himself to the English.


Q. M. There is no Kingdom in the world, that Spain loves better then England.


Q. E. Nor no people under the Sun that it hates more then Englishmen.


E. 6. For Peter King of Castille, most ingratefully and basely abused our
famous and generous Edward the Black Prince, (the Ornament of Arms, the Glory
of England, and the Honor of the World) and his whole Army in Spain, after
that he had inthronised and seated the said Peter in his Kingdom, and with his
Victorious Arms expelled Henry the Bastard, who Usurped it.


Q. M. If Spain had not loved England and Englishmen, King Philip would never
have married me.


Q. E. He loved you well Sister, but your Kingdom far better, for you were
the Object of his zeal, but England that of his Ambition.


H. 8. But Elizabeth, he hated you more then ever he loved Mary.


Q. E. And yet I dare truly affirm, that King Philip loved my Kingdom far
more then ever he hated my Person.


H. 8. To speak truth Daughter, he neither loved you, nor Mary his wife and
Queen, but only England.


P. H. And I have heard that if he had never married my Aunt Mary, she had
never lost Calais, nor consequently, England, France.


E. 6. Though that Match were unfortunate to England in the loss of Calais,
yet it was fortunate in that Philip and Mary had no Children.


Q. M. If we had had any Males, England had been long since a Province to
Spain.


Q. E. God knew so much, and therefore prevented it, wherein I qle^se his Mercy
and providence, as also your sterrilitie.


P. H. Aunt, and I your resolution in speaking it.


Q. M. The Kings of Spnine are the greatest and most potent Kings of the World.


Q. E. Yea, in Ambition and ostentation, but not in power, for I proved it not
so, I found it not so, I left it not so.


P. H. You Madame found War with Spain surer and safer then Peace.


Q. E. Yea, far more safer, and far more profitable too for England.


Q. A. Then I wonder that King James my Husband so delights and drownes
himself in his peace with Spain.


Q. M. O but Spain finds both policy and reason enough to full King James a
sleep in the Cradle of Peace and Security.


Q E. I never feared Spain less, then when I loved it not, no^ more then when
it made greatest show to love me.


P. H. And the King my Father never loved it more, then now when he fears it.


E. 6. But is it possible King James fears Spain?


P. H. It seems so, for else he would never love it so excessiuely.


Q. E. Sir Nicholas Bacon my Chancellor on his Deathbed wrote me a Letter,
that the Glory and Conservation of England consisted in holding Spain at
Rapiers point; and will not his son Sir Francis, the now Chancellor tell his
Master so much?


P. H. O no, he is otherwise employed.


H. 8. But tell me Daughter, was Spain ever treacherous to your Person?


Q. E. Almost every year Spain hatched me a new Treason, witness Parry,
Babbington, Williams, Yeorke, Lopez, and infinite others, who sought to lay
violent hands on my Person and Life, but that God in his infinite mercy and
providence still protected and defended me, to their own confusion.


P. H. But King Phillip 2. chiefly discovered his love to England, in the
treacherous attempt of his huge Armado of 88. (termed by the Pope) in a
bravery (The Invincible Fleet,) at what time his ambition and greedy desire of
Usurpation, so far ore-swayed him and his Council, as he thought to have
made an absolute Conquest of England; but he was deceived of his hopes; for
God looked on England with his indulgent eye of pity and compassion, and on
that great and mighty Nauall Army with contempt and detestation.


Q: E. Yea God was so gracious to England, and so merciful to me, as not only
my Ships and People, but the Winds and Waves fought for my defense, and that
of my Country, against the pride and malice of Spain, who grew mad with
anger, and pale with grief, to see this his great and warlike Armado beaten,
foiled, and confounded, in the midst of their glory and ambition.


E. 6, But Sister, was this all Spaines malice and treachery toward You and
your State?


Q. E. No, no, for I had forgotten how before that, his Majesty in Spain and
his Lieutenant the Duke of Alua in Flanders, embarg'd and confisk'd a world of
Goods and Ships that belonged to my Subjects, contrary to all Laws of
Conscience and Nations.


P. H. And no other?


Q. E. Yes, King Phillip begged my Ki^ngdome of Ireland of the Pope, and so
assisted the Rebels, and made a confederacy with them for ^he Conquest thereof
from me, bringing in first Stukeley, then Don Iuan of Aquila, into that
Kingdom to the same effect: But Heaven always laughed at their ambition,
usurpation, and treachery, which still proved as vain, as impious and unjust.


P. H. And yet see the justice of the Cause, and the equity of your Arms; for
Essex landed at Calez, and in despite of Spain took and rifled it, beating
and sinking their best and greatest Ships, in a manner without any show of
defense or resistance.


Q. M. O but now the times are altered and changed, for then Spain was poor
and England rich, and now England is poor and Spain rich: Likewise Spaines
wars parsimonie, and frugalitie, makes his Men Soldiers; and our Peace,
Pride, and superfluity, has made our Soldiers either Courtiers or Cowards.


H. 8. France knew that I found Soldiers in England when I took Tourney and
Bouloigne.


Q. E. And Spain felt that English were Soldiers, when my Drake beat them on
my Seas and Coast in 88. my Norris at Croyden in 94. my Essex at Calais in 96.
and my Montioy at Kingsale in 1600.


Q. M. But when England was delighted in Combats, Wars, and Victories, and
now in Stage Plays, Maskes, Revels and Carowsing, so as their courages are
become as rustie as their Swords and Muskets, which serve to grace the walls
and not the fields, except in poor Musters, and slight Trainings, and that
but once a year, which upon the whole, is more for ostentation then Service:
Moreover, then Englands Nauy-Royall could give a Law to the Ocean, and now time
and negligence has almost made all these ships unserviceable, who lie rotting
at Chatam and Rocesther.


E. 6. Here Queen Mary has reason, for now she is in the truth.


Q. E. What (Sister and Brother) my Royall-Nauy lie r^tting, who are the
Bulwarks and Walls of England, and when I left them were capable to beat the
power and pride of Spain to shiuers? O this grieves me! but I believe not that
my wife and prudent Successor King James will suffer or permit it, I pray,
God-son and Nephew Prince Henry, resolve me hereof.


P. H. Indeed Madam, I confess I have seen so much my self, when God knows
I grieved to see it; neither did I fail to put the King my Father often in
remembrance thereof; and his Majesty still promised me to new build and
repair that Royal Fleet, to which number I added my Prince-Royall, a ship,
who had she many fellows, England needed not fear all the Fleetes of the
World; but although the old Lord Admiral has not been careful for the
preservation of the Navy, yet the new one is.


H. 8. If he be not, I grieve for the Fleet.


Q E. And I lament it.


E. 6. And I pity it.


Q. A. And I bewail it.


Q: M. And not to dissemble, both Gondomar, King Phillip his Master, the Pope,
my self, and all the Roman Catholics of England rejoice hereat, for the
Impotency and destruction of this Royal Navy, is the Harbinger to prepare the
way, and a step for King Phillip to mount the Throne of Estate, to pluck off
King James his Crown, and to place and ^ettle it on his own head.


Q. E. O my Ships, my Ships: God knows they were still dear to me, because
still necessary to England. Where is my Drake, where my Cumberland, my For
bisher, my Grinuille, my Cau^dish, my Haukins, my Rauliegh, and the rest: Alas,
they want me, and king James and Englnad wants them; for when they lived, and I
reigned, our valor could stop the progression of Spain; yea my ships
domineerd in his Seas and ports, and their Clouds of smoke and fire, with their
Peales of thunder, strueke such such amazment to the hearts, and terror to the
courages of Castille and her faint-hearted Castillians, that every Spanish Bird
kept his own Nest, not powerful enough to defend themselves, much less to
offend any; and lest of all England, who was then ^n her Triumphs, in her
luster, in her glory.


P H. Grieve no more (dear Aunt) for the Navy Royal of England; for although
Nottingam were remiss and careless herein, yet brave Buckingham has of late
years set a new face on that Fleet: and makes it not only his delight, but
his glory to re-edifie and reform them; yea there is not a year passes him,
but he brings some new forth from their Dockes, and puts in other old,
although Cranfield (resembling himself) bites his lips at the charge thereof,
because he affirms he has other occasions to disburse, and pay away the Kings
Treasure.


Q. E. Nephew Wales I am glad to hear that Buckingham is so careful of
England* Fleet-Royall, and in very deed, his Ambition, Care, and Zeal herein,
will infallibly purchase him much love and honor of the whole Kingdom,
especially if he continue it.


H: 8. Me thinks Scotland annexed and united to England, should make it far
the stronger.


Q. E. But how can King James say England and Scotland is strong, when he
fears the powers of Spain, and will not know or believe his own.


E. 6. Yea it were much honor to the King, and happiness to his Kingdoms and
Subjects, if in any point (knowing the weakness thereof) he would fortify
and reform it.


Q. A. And it were a great happiness for most Kingdoms and free Estates of
Europe, if they would follow the examples of the Venetians and Hollenders, who
will neither trust, nor love, much less, fear Spain.


P. H. And among the rest, if England would follow it, they should draw
security out of danger, whereas now her apparent danger is drawn and derived
from her apparent security.


Q. A. O that the King my Husband would think hereof.


P. H. O that the King my Father would make use hereof.


Q. E. O that King James my Heir and Successor would not hearken or believe
the contrary hereof.


H. 8. But this were the way to have wars with Spain, and King James I
understand, is resolved to live and dye in peace with them.


Q. M. War cannot be bought at a cheap rate.


Q. E. But it is pity that peace should be bought at too dear and
dishonorable a rate.


P. H. I have always been informed, that England still gets by her wars
with Spain.


Q. E. I got by my wars with Spain, and Spain lost by it.


P. H. My Father and his Subjects lose by his Peace with Spain, and Spain
gets by it.


Q. M. When England has lost her self, she can lose no more.


Q. E. But Sister, your death was the death of the Popes hopes, and of Spaines
pretenses to England.


P. H. But they both seem to revive and bud forth a fresh, if the Match
between my noble Brother P. Charles, and the Infanta of Spain take effect.


Q. A. May Heaven deny the first, and the King your Father never consent to the
second.


Q. E. So shall Spain ever fear England, but never England Spain.


Q. M. But I hope the contrary; for in these days the King of Spaines Gold and
his Ambassador Count Gondomar act wonders in England.


H. 8. Has Gondomar propounded this Match to King James?


P. H. O long since, and he has vowed to wear out his red leather Coach and
green Buckram Litter, but he will see an end of it this Parliament.


Q. A. I thought indeed it was not for nothing, that he makes Aesops Fables
his daily pocket guest.


E. 6. How does King James relish this Match.


Q. M. His Exchequer is poor, and King Philips Indies rich, and therefore his
Majesty likes it so well, as he will hearken to no other.


H. 8. How does Prince Charles himself like this motion?


P. H. I know not how my Brother likes it, but for my part I should ever have
preferred a Daughter of France to that of Spain, and I hope the Match will not
succeed, because my noble Brother Prince Charles is wise, valiant, and
generous.


E. 6. But how does the brave and grave Parliament savor this Spanish Match?


Q* A. Few love it, most fear it, But as the Match, so the Parliament is not
yet ended.


Q. E. This would be music indeed for the Roman Catholics of England, if
it should take effect; for the very first news thereof, made them flap their
wings, as if they were ready to crow.


Q. M. Yea, for they hope, and which is more, they know, that if it prove a
Match, That the Infanta will soon introduce the Mass, and Usher in the Pope;
therefore they have reason to rejoice at it.


P. H. But if the King of Spain will not give the sum which my Father King
James demands, will not they make it up?


Q E. It is probable and credible, That their Holy Father the Pope, and
themselves will stretch both their Purses and Credites to knit the Match.


H. 8. Why? has Gondomnr such power with King James, to hope to see this Match
effected?


Q. M. O yes; for his Majesty says, that his Master is an honest King, and
he a wise Servant: The first all the world knows; and the second, I hope
England shall shortly feel, at least, if all hooks take.


P. H. Indeed if Gondomar can effect this match, it is the direct way for him
to be a Grande of Spain, and to procure a red Hat for his Son or Nephew.


Q. A. Was the Duke of Monteleone so rewarded for his French Matches?


Q. M. He is already a Grande of Spain, and has the promise of a Hat.


Q. A. Why then Count Gondomar need not fear, for he has as much policy as
the Duke of Monteleone, though not so much ost^ntation.


H. 8. Who made and concluded the match with King Philip?


Q. M. My Self and the Parliament.


Q. E. Nay Sister, put in Woolsey and Gardyner, and leave out the Parliament;
for you only proposed it them but for form, and had secretly concluded it
before hand your self.


Q. M. Suppose I did, I might do it of mine own authority, and prerogative
Royal.


Q. E. But you offered no fair play to the Parliament, though in asking their
advise when the Contracts were ready to be sealed.


Q. M. But I had reason to follow mine own Judgment, not their Passions.


H. 8. Nay, nay Daughter, you contrariwise followed your own passion, not
their Judgments, and so God gave limits to Philips Ambition, and your own
desires, by making you ^orsake Earth, and he Eng^and.


E. 6. But wise King James is opposite to my Sister Mary, as well in Religion
as sex; and therefore, I hope, nay, I assure my self, he will first consult
this Match with his Parliament, ere he conclude it with Spain.


P. H. If the voyc^ of the Parliament be free, and not enforced, I make no
doubt but the Pope, the King of Spain, Gond^mar, and all our Recusants will
come short of their hopes for the Match.


H. 8. Daughter, what benefits proposed you to the Parliament, by your Match
with Spain?


Q. M. Strength, Profit, Honor, which England, King James, and Prince Charles
will likewise now find if the Match hold.


E. 6. As for strength, if England would know its self, it need not expect or
hope for any from Spain: for Spaines assistance has always proved fatal and
ruinous, to those who have used it; And if England would assume the ancient
generosity of her Ancestors, and forsake her new fangled pride and prodigality:
We know it is strong enough to beat Spain, and all his Kingdoms and
Provinces, and no way so weak, to fear that Spain should make England a
Province; for it were far safer for England and Englishmen, if they wore
worse clothes, and had better hearts and swords, and if they were more
martial and less effeminate.


Q. E. For Profit, what Indies is richer then England? for if England want
money, herself is still more powerful and capable to enrich it self, if it
would be less vain, and more frugall and industrious, etc. what is a few
hundred thousand Pounds to England, if England be thereby exposed to the danger
of Spain? or that it b^ again fetched from them by the Bye, as it was brought
in by the Maine? for was profit ever cheap when it was bought with loss and
repentance, with tears and blood? or shall not every Ducket be weighed and
counterpoised down with a far greater prejudice and inconueniency: for if
the Match hold, will not our Recusants look a loo^e? will not Spaniards be so
ambitiously insolent to attempt to out-looke English? will not the Pope steal
in by degrees, and the King of Spain break in either like a torrent or a
thunderbolt, when his factors and agents have made all things ripe and in a
readiness? will this be Englands profit?


P. H. For Honor, England and Scotland were Free, Royal, and ancient
Monarchies; when indeed Spain was not Spain, but disioynted and disseuered
Provinces: yea, for Pomp, State, and Glory, our Princes were Kings, when their
Kings were scarce Princes, nor their Princes Nobles: Therefore GREAT BRITAIN
by the Match can confer and add honor to Spain; but not Spain to GREAT
BRITAIN.


Q. A. I could never yet affect the match of Spain, for either of the two
Princes my Sons: for the Spaniard is by nature as treacherous as proud, and
although Northampton persuaded me thereto, yet I loved true-hearted Salisbury,
who always diuerted me from it; as (in the depth of his Allegiance, and the
profunditie of his wisdom and Judgment) well foreseeing they would prove
^atall and ruinous to England.


E. 6. It is strange to see with what insatiable desire and Ambition, Spain
couets England; for he has already attempted it by treachery, by force, and
now by the Match of his Daughter the Infanta to Prince Charles.


Q. M. You mean King Philip the 2. and not this present King Philip the third;
And as Don Iuan de Taris (the Ambassador of Spain) told King James at his
first coming to the Crown of England, that the Ambition and malice of Spain
to England, dyed with that Prince, and was interred and buried with him.


Q. E. But was this King Philip the third and his Council, never acquainted
with that horrible Gunpowder Treason, whereby it was intended and resolved,
that England should have been blown up, overthrown, and ruined in a moment.


Q. M. O no, he is too Catholic a King to have hearkened, much less to have
approved that Passionate plot.


Q. E. You might have said, that execrable and damnable plot of Treason, but
that you will seek to diminish and extenuate Rome and Spaines Treasons.


Q. M. You infinitely wrong the Pope, and King of Spain, to suspect, much
less to believe, that they were acquainted with that Powder plot.


Q. E. No? went not Faulkes (that hellish Incendary) once to Rome about it, and
the younger Winter twice to Vallidolide.


Q. M. Yea, about some other business it may be, although I must confess it
was very immediately before that Treason was discovered.


P. H. Gondomar told me, that both the Pope and King of Spain abhord that
Treason.


Q. A. I fear they abhord it, for grief it took not effect.


Q. M. If ever this King Philip hated England, ye may be sure now he loves it;
for else he would never seek to match his Daughter to it.


Q. E. What force and treachery cannot effect, now affection in the match
shall. Wherein King Philip is of Lysanders mind, who when the Lions skin
will not serve, he will sow on a piece of the Foxes tail.


E. 6. So he come into England, he cares not by which way he ariue.


P. H. So the Daughter come not into England, England need not fear the
coming of the Father.


Q. M. Count Gondomar will beat his head and his horse shoes, but he will
bring in the Daughter, and already his hopes and the probabilities are great,
for he is exceeding great and familiar with King JAMES.


Q. E. Else he could never have gotten open the Prison doors for the Roman
Priests and Jesuits.


P. H. Nor have made Raleighs head to caper beyond his body.


Q. A. Nor have kept back an Army from my Son and Daughter the King and
Queen of Bohemia, when so many hundred thousand valiant English Soldiers
desired and longed to have served them in their wars.


Q. E. Nor have shipped away so great a quantity of Ordnance for Spain, which
one of these days will return bullets to our hearts.


E. 6. Nor have procured a gallant Fleet to secure the Coast of Spain,
against the Turkish Pirates, vndeer color of going to Argier and Barbary.


P. H. That Fleet was fitter to have gone to Mexico.


Q. A. So indeed it might have returned with glory and Gold, whereas now I
fear it will with loss and repentance, I will not say with shame.


Q. E. I know by Experience, it is an excellent thing for England to fight with
Spaniards, but not to join with Spaniards against others.


P. H. Why should not our English Fleetes go for the West Indies.


Q* M. If this proposition be broached, then Gandomar will run mad.


E* 6. What difference is there betwixt the East and West Indies?


P. H. As much as there is between Pepper and Silver, or white Feathers and
yellow Gold.


H. 8. O but England, near this twenty years has lost those golden times of
going to the Gardens of Hesperides.


P. H. And now Holland after ten years trial, and patience, resolves to find
them.


Q. E. Now we speak of Holland: It again exceedingly grieves me, that England
goes from Holland, in that it will not protect it against Spain.


Q. M. And truly it is my joy and comfort to understand it; for the farther
England goes from Holland, I am sure the nearer Spain comes to England.


P. H. Nay, if the Match hold, Holland can expect no assistance from England;
for the Pope, the King of Spain, Gondomar, the Jesuits, and English
Recusants, will in few years so shuffle and deal the cards, as England shall
not be able to assist herself, much less her Neighbors.


E. 6. Why that is the way, in a few more years, to make England a Province to
Spain.


Q. E. Yea, yea, there is the mystery; for if the match with Spain hold, the
conquest of England will undoubtedly follow, and then Gondomar can be no less
then Viceroy or great Commander of England, for the King and Council of
Spain will judge him worthy of this honor, because he has deserved it.


P. H. It were better Spain were Hell, and Gondomar Viceroy to the Devil, as
he is now Ambassador to the Catholic King.


Q. A. But is it possible that the King of Spain has so little Justice and
charity, and so much vanity and ambition to desire it?


E. 6. The Kings of Spain make this the tenth Article of their Creed, that the
Rules of Empire and State ought to give Laws, but not to receive any.


Q. E. But this is contrary to the Laws of the KING of Kings.


Q. M. But in the Counsel of Spain, the Rules of State are always too
sublime and powerful for those of Religion; yea the Pope will easily dispense
with the King of Spain, to make a Conquest of England, either by treachery,
hostility, or the match: for it is against an Heriticke King and people, who
refuse to enter into the bosom of the Church, and therefore lawful in it
self; because it tends to the Catholic cause, the displanting and rooting
out of Heretics, and the establishing and pres^uation of the Roman Catholics
in England.


Q. E. Those giddy and passionate Roman Catholics of England, who disire to
fish in troubled waters, who delight in nothing but in innovation and nouelty,
and who make a May Game of Conscience, and an Ape of Religion, may peradventure
flatter themselves with the false sunshine of these hopes; but those of them
whose hearts are better lodged, and whose eyes and judgments can see farther
and clearer: Those I say who know by the Laws of Grcae and Nature, what they
owe to GOD, to their lawful Prince and Country; those remember, that the Duke
of Medina Sydonta said in eighty eight (who was then General of the Spanish
Fleet) that his Commission was not to distinguish of Religion; but to make a
passage with his Sword, ore both Religions without exception, that thereby the
King his Master might have the easier way, and fairer passage to the Crown and
Kingdom of England: Therefore we need no perspectiue Glass, or Spectacles
to see, that it is not the establishing of the Roman Religion, but of himself
in England, whereat the King of Spain still aims.


Q. M. (...) Count Gondomar is wise enough to provide a plaster for that sore,
for he in netling the Nobler sort of Catholics with the match, has in
plain terms given the lie to the Duke of Medina his speech, and therefore he
hopes they will believe him.


P. H. The nobler and more passionate and factious sort of them may believe
Gondomnr herein, but the wiser, temporate, and conscious will not; and yet the
Feminine Gender, are Masculine sticklers and solicitors for him, as he and the
Jesuits are for the King his Master.


Q. E. Nay, the Roman Catholics of England have reason to believe Gondomar;
since King JAMES loves him well, as he esteems his speeches Oracles and
Scripture; and who with the quintessence of his Castillian, or rather Galician
brain, has now brought matters to this pass, that no sincere advise, honest
Letter. Religious Sermon, or true picture can point at the King of Spain, but
they are called in; and their Authors imprisoned (in sted of rewarded) though
never so honest and loyal Subjects.


H. 8. But me thinks that this is no subtle policy of Gondamar; for the more
he strives to suppress the truth, the more it will flourish and prevail; For
(for the good of England) if one pen, or tongue be commanded to silence,
they will occasion and set ten at liberty to write and speak; as Grass or
Cammomell, which the more it is depressed, the thicker it will spread and grow.


Q. M. But has not Gondomar reason to strike whiles he finds the Iron hot,
and to take the benefit of the flood, before the ebb come or the tide be spent.


Q. A. Indeed they say, he reports that this Summer time, the air of London
and Islington is not sweet enough, either for his Fistula, or perfumed brain,
and that he has thereforefore gotten leave of his Majesty, to lodge in a
part of his Palace of Greenwich, which stands in so pure an Air, upon the
pleasant Crystal River of Thames.


Q. E. That were a presumptuous part of Gondomar indeed, to aspire to lodge in
that pleasant, and Royal Palace of Greenwich.


Q* M. But if it be so, I think it is not to lodge there himself, but only
to square out the Infanta's Lodgings, her Chamber of Presence, and a Plot to
build her Grace a Chapel against she come, whereof Jones Sir Innigo has
already the Model in his brains.


P. H. If King JAMES my Father lodge Gondomar this Summer in Greenwich, the
next, King Philip himself will hope to lie in White Hall.


E* 6. Nay soft* first let his Daughter the Infanta come, for she must break
the Ice, ere his Catholic Majesty will dare adventure to come pass the Seas
hither.


Q. M. Adventure to come? why wherefore else, says Count Gondomar, lies King
JAMES his Fleet at Alciant, and Carthagena, but to transport her for England
this Summer?


Q. E. Until I am enforced to understand, that that Fleet is at Lisbone, the
Groyne, or Saint Andera, I will not believe it, but then I will fear it.


Q. M. So the Heretic Protestants of France feared their Spanish matches, and
yet we see they prosper.


Q. A. It is the end which crowns the beginning, not the beginning the end of
a work.


Q. E. What speak you Sister of the French matches with Spain^, to this of
England and Spain? for all the World knows, that the Estates of England and
France, are Diametrically opposite in point of Religion; for France has forty
Papists for one Protestant, and England forty Prot-stants for one Papist.


Q. M. But those Protesting Heretics of England, will sing another tune, when
they see the King of Spain has made their Country his Province.


P. H. Heaven forbid, that ever England should sing the tune of Spaines Ballad,
or Spain live so long to make England see that dismal and bloody day.


Q. E* It were far better, that Prince CHARLES were married to an English
Milke-maid, and the Infanta of Spain mewed up for a Nun in a Cloister.


Q A. Yea, for how can my Son Prince CHARLES think the King of Spain loves
him, when he sees that underhand he is a mortal and professed Enemy to his
Brother and Sister, the King and Queen of Bohemia.


Q. M. You mistake Madame; for it is the Emperor Ferdinand, and not King
Philip that is their mortal Enemy.


P. H. If Philip had not (underhand) powerfully assisted Ferdinand, His
Imperial Majesty, had neither had legs to go, nor wings to fly into Prague,
and yet the King my Father will not asist his Son in Law, King Frederick.


Q. A. Yes to recover the Pallatinate if that were lost; But Gondam^r through
his slye crouches, and sugared insinuations, has extorred a hope, and some say
wrested a promise from King JAMES not to assist Bohemia, but I hope the
contrary.


Q. E. But will Spinola restore those towns he has taken in the Pallatinate.


Q. M. Gondomar promised that Digby shall bring that home under his hand and
seal, only he says, it is fit that Spinola should be satisfied for his charges.


Q. E. That's an old baffle and trick of Spain, which upon the matter, will
prove but a flat denial. Therefore if King JAMES please to hearken to my
advise, I would send an Army thither and re-fetch these Towns of the
Pallatinate from Ferdinand, Phillip, Albertus, and Bauari^, with the point of
the sword, in despite of Spinola, Tilly, and Cordo^a.


P. H. If I were again living in England, I would so work with the King my
Father, that this resolution of Queen Elizabeth, should never dye, but spedily
be put in execution; for it is the safest, cheapest, shortest, and
honourablest way for England; yea what would not England do for my dear and
Royal Sister of Bohemia, if the King my Father would give it the word of
command?


Q. M. But content your self Nephew* Count Gondomar has promised that his
Master King Phillip will give King James content for his Towns of the
Pallatinate.


Q. A. So Gondomar promised his Majesty, that Spinola should never attempt the
Pallatinate, and yet we see the contrary, and being false in this, how, or what
reason have we to believe him to be true in the match.


Q. M. England must believe him since the King does, and will. And herein I both
triumph and glory.


P. H. Thus my Royal Father intreates; where he should command, and loves
Spain, where he has far more reason to hate it.


Q. E And this is my truest grief and deepest affliction, that King James will
still delight in contemplation, when (if his Majesty will not) all the world
sees, that King Phillip is (underhand deep in actio^.


H. 8. It may be that King James thinks King Phillip to be of Hanniballs
mind, who more feared Fabius not fighting. then Marcellus fighting, or of
Pompe^* or of Marcus Crassus their opinion, who were more afraid of C^cero's
gown, then of Caesar's sword.


Q. M. Nothing less; for King Phillip loves King James his Gown and pen, yet
no way fears his sword.


Q. E. But if King James inherited my resolution as he does my Kingdoms, I
would make Spain fear his sword, and Rome either love or obey his pen, and
never consent to a Peace, much less to the match.


Q. M. But why should King Philip fear King James his sword, since he never yet
knew the way to draw ir: or why should his Catholic Majesty fear the
Counsel of England since it is apparent to all the world; that the eliment and
delight of their King, is books, not battles, the pen, not the pike.


H. 8. Why? know you not Daughter that King JAMES has lately established a
Counsel of War, and whereunto think you tends that.


Q. M. To peace I hope, or rather, assure my self.


Q. E. Then Sister you are of near intelligence with Gondomar; for not long
since in one of his dispatches to Spain, he wrote the LL. of that Council,
that they should not doubt nor fear of the Counsel or war of England; for
it was (said he) but a scarre-Crow to fear, not to hurt, and would only serve
as a Vane on a house top, rather for ornament then use. But if King JAMES were
of my mind, his Counsel of war should strike rather then threaten; and send
a Royal Army into the bowels and heart of Castille ere they thought it could
be ready to depart from the Ports of England.


Q. M. Not into Castille; for then the peace were quite broken betwixt ENGLAND
and SPAIN.


P. H. Why then into Bohemia, the Pallatinate; The Netherlands, or the States
of Uenice, or wheresoever the Castillians Regiments disturb the public peace
of Christendom.


E. 6. I see no reason to the contrary, but England should be as soon in Arms
and action as Spain.


Q. E. But it is the enchanting melody of the match, that brings England out of
tune.


Q. M. But in this proposition and parlee of the match, the King and Counsel
of Spain, speak fair terms, and give real not verbal content to King
James.


Q. E. So did Philip your Husband, and his Father by his Ambassadors to mine
at Bourbourg, thereby to ^ulle me a sleep when his great Armado was in a
manner ready to weigh Anchor, and set Sail from Lisbone, to invade me and my
England.


Q. M. But King ^Iames knows Spaines affection and Gondomars sincerity to him,
and consequently to England in seeking this Match.


Q. A. But England knows neither the affection of the Master, or the
sincerity of the Servant, and therefore has reason, though not to fear yet to
suspect both.


H. 8. It rather thinks King Philip of Pericles his opinion and Ambition, who
desired that the ^land in the port of Piree might be removed, since it was a
moate and beam in his eye.


P. H. The moral is, that Philip would (...) England a province to Spain, but
if the Match hold not; Spaines Ambition, Gondomars policy* and both their
treachery will prove too week to perform so strong an execution.


Q* M. Then the King of Spain will hate Gondomar, as much as he vaunts the
King of England loves him: But I must count Gondomar has lived too long to
dote, or be made a Child in his old age.


P. H. No, no, Gondomar is too young to dot^, and too old to be a child,
therefore he is confident and sure that the Match will hold; but withal, he
says the Parliament must be ended, ere these Royal Nuptial ceremonies can
begin, and I think so to.


E. 6. Indeed this Castillian Ambassador now sails before wind and tide,
under fore* sail, and maine top-sayle, but very shortly he hopes to hoyst up
top and top-gallant.


P. H. He may chance to pack on so much sail, that he may at last crack the
maine Mast of his policy, or the maine stay of his hopes, or be so busy and
violent in the solicitation of this Match, as he himself may give himself a
Shot, which may sink either his reputation, or judgment, or both, betwixt
wind and water.


Q. E. Intruth I found his predicessour Mendoza too busy and dangerous in my
State, and therefore I forbad him my presence, and discharded him my Kingdom,
whereat I know not whether he, or the King his Master, more grieved, or my
Counsel and my Country rejoiced.


Q. A. Gondomar has had time enough to know my Husband King Ianes, but it
seems King James has not yet enough deeply pryed into Gondomar. In a word I
know his Majesty has heard his tongue, but not seen his heart, much less the
designs and resolutions of the King and Counsel of Spain, which are
inuelloped and hood-winked under the Mystery of this match.


H. 8. Indeed I have read that King Phillip King of Macedon went near to have
betrayed Arisbes King of Molesses of his Kingdom, under treating a Match with
him.


Q. M. O but that Phillip of Macedon was a Heathen King, and this Phillip of
Spain is the Catholic King, therefore King James need not fear his
sincerity in the Match.


Q. E. Since you are so religious Sister, pray say, how does the Inquision of
Spain like to Match their Infanta to an Heretic Prince, for so I know they
term my Noble Nephew Prince Charles.?


P. H. Why? Digby could have resolved you of that long since, for he knows
that the sacred and reverend Inquisition of Spain love England, but not the
match; our Country, but not our Religion and people; and yet in hope to root
out Heretics, and to plant England with Roman Catholics, they oppose not
the Match, but rather give way to it and approve it.


Q. E. But can Royal King James, and his Illustrious Son Prince Charles
observe their Religion and Conscience, in consenting to this Matcb, or have the
Clergy of England warrant enough Authentical, out of the word of God to say
Amen to it?


Q. A. O no, for King James (though not the Prince and Clergy) will now make
Religion and Conscience Handmaydes to wait and attend the State.


E. 6. But his Majesty should do far better to defend the Faith (whereof he
is the defender) and therein the State, which professes the true and sincere
Religion of Christ and his Apostles, since Plety is the preserver of Kingdoms,
and all our actions whatsoever should tend to the glory of God; which is the
banishing of Idolatry and Superstition, with their effects and causes.


Q. M. Why pray, what Marriage so religious as for Prince Charles to match with
the Catholic King his Daughter.


Q. E. Sister you have still Religion in your tongue, but I fear we shall
find none in your heart, for pray what places have you of divine Scripture, to
authorize and approve this Match of Prince Charles with the Infanta, since they
are of a different Religion and Belief.


Q. M. As I confess I have none to approve it, so I am sure you all cannot
allege any one to oppose and contradict it.


H. 8. Yes, I produce Genesis Chapter 24. Ch 16. against it.


E 6. And I, Exodus Chapter 34. Judge. Chapter 17.


Q. E. And I, Josh. Chapter 23. 2. Chron. Chapter 21.


P. H. And I, 1. Kings Chapter 11. Chap. 16.


Q. A. And I, Ezra. Chapter 9. Nehem. Chapter 13.


Q. M. Well, whatsoever you say this Match (notwithstanding) tends to Gods
glory, and the good of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, and in the end
you shall find, that Gondomars policy and Spaines Ambition will triumph ore
your Scripture.


Q. E. This match tends only to bring in the Pope into our Churches, and the
King of Spain into our estate; for that is the aim of the first, the Ambition
of the second, and the object and hopes of both, and I fear a few years will
prove it so; if in time it be not remedied and prevented: which GOD of his
mercy grant, for it is true all the wheels of Gondomars Art and invention,
are at work to effect and accomplish it.


Q. M. The Pope I must confess (as Christ's Vicar General on Earth) desires
that England were Catholic, but for the good King of Spain, he has
Kingdoms enough of his own, and therefore looks not after England, only he
desires to see the Match consummated.


P. H. Yes, the King of Spaines tongue has so long watered, and his mouth gaped
for England, that after Spain, he wishes England were his, above all the
Countries of the World, and his Catholic Majesty is very confident, that
this Match will give a maine stroke to the business.


Q. E. If he once have England, he will presently assume the Title of Emperor
of the West, as King Philip his Father was resolved to do a little before his
death; yea, his Ambition was so violent, as he missing of England, would have
proclaimed himself Emperor of Spain; and had not his Council diuerted and
prevented him he would have sailed to Mexico, and there invested and entitled
himself Emperor of America.


P. H. And I have heard that Gondomar has given the King of Spain his Master
good hope of England; for it is certain that he not long since wrote to the
Dukes Lerma and Pastranna, that the report of the strength of England resembled
those huge Pageants and Colosses erected at Rome, as the Caesar's past from the
Meluine bridge to the Capitol in triumph, who were outwardly glorious, and
within filled only with straw and poor combustable stuff.


E. 6. Indeed, it is the shame and weakness of England, that Spain is no
better acquainted with its strentgh.


Q. A. And it is my grief, that Spain should see Englands weakness, and not
feel its strength.


Q. E. O but it is the Spanish Match which will give fire to England, and make
her welter in her miseries, and flame in her calamities and afflictons.


Q. M. No, no, that Match will keep the Temple of Englands peace from firing.


H. 8. Yea, as Erostratus did that of Diana of Ephesus, which in one day
consumed all the wealth that rich Asia had bin many years and ages getting.


Q. A. As Religion is the powerfullest passion of our Soul, so there is no
stronger lincke of Friendship then Conscience, and therefore I hope my Son
Charles will not consent to match the Infanta of Spain.


Q. M. But one of his chiefest Virtues is his obedience to the King his Father;
for although the Prince be his Son, yet he knows he is his Subject.


Q. A. All the world cannot better teach the Prince my Son to obey the King
his Father, then already he knows and does; but I could wish that King James
my Husband, would not enforce his affection to this Spanish Match.


Q. E. If he marry the Infanta, she may prove a false and vnsecret Secretary to
the Prince her Husband, and a dangerous Princess to the State: for he giving
her his heart, his Highness can hardly reserve any corner for himself.


P. H. Yea, then every Spanish Traitor and English Rebel will shroud
themselves under the authority and greatness of the Princess.


E. 6. So if England match with Spain, Spain undoubtedly will in a short time
ouer-match England.


Q. A. And infallibly take the Crown from it.


Q. M. Borrow it peradventure, to see it, not to wear it.


P. H. I fear to wear it, never to return it.


H. 8. Yea, for once gone, it is gone for ever.


Q. E. And then shall Englands strong men fall upon the edge of the Sword; her
Virgins be defloured and murdered, her Wives defiled and slain in sight of
their dying Husbands; and their Children and young Babes shall have their
brains dashed out against the walls in sight of their dead Parents.


P H. Yea, then shall our Nobility and Gentry, dye upon the swords of those
barbarous (...), and those who escape and survive their fury, shall be
fettered and led Captives and Slaves to work in the Mines of Peru and Mexico.


E. 6. Then shall our Priests who are now clothed in the white robes of
Righteousness, be drowned in those of their own scarlet blood: No Church, no
Temple, no Preaching, no Sacraments, but all covered with the thick fogges of
Romes superstitious Idolatries, and Aegyption darkness.


Q. A. Yea, then the King my Husband, the Prince my Son, my excellent
Daughter the Queen of Bohemia, her Princely Posterity, and if Spain possibly
can, all Great Britains blood Royal shall be rooted out and exterminated; as
if they never had been, or at least no remembrance left of them, or of the
Name of GREAT BRITAIN.


Q. M. This were music indeed for Rome and Spain to dance at, and for
Gondomar to laugh himself to death for joy.


Q. E. But I hope God of his mercy will confound all those who wish or desire
it, whether it be Gondomar, the Jesuits, Englands Recusants, Spain, the Pope,
or the Devil.


The Conclusion of the Consultation.
H. 8. But here let us make a stand, and shut up our Consultation; and since so
many millions of imminent dangers, desolations and miseries attend and hang
over the head of England by this Match of Spain; let us go to suffrages and
Votes, that plurality may give sentence whether it shall be a Match yea or no;
for what we conclude, I make no doubt but our great God with his own voice
will ratify and confirm.


H. 8. Q. M. E. 6. Q. E. P. H. Q. A. Whereunto we all consent and agree.


H. 8. I am against the Match.


E. 6. I am against the Match.


P. H. I am against the Match.


Q. M. I am for the Match.


Q. E. I am against the Match.


Q. A. I am against the Match.


H. 8. Daughter Mary, we are five against you one, therefore the Match of
England and Spain has end (...) beginning, and is absolutely cast without
(...).


And now let us break up our Consultation; and again repair to the Throne of
the Lamb, (of our sacred God both of Heaven and Earth) to acquaint his Divine
Majesty with all the particulars thereof, and therein his Heavenly pleasure
and Command; When the Angel opening Heavens Star Chamber, a great concourse
and affluence of Saints and Angels (singing most Divinely) conduct them to the
blessed ^ribunall, where the whole news of their Consultation, being already
arrived to the understanding of the Almighty; It pleased his Divine and
Celestial Majesty, to call forth Queen Mary whom he sharply reproues and
checkes, in loving Spain, to be so unnatural to hate her native Country of
England. Then he infinitely disproues the Match of Prince Charles, with the
Infanta of Spain; as derogating from his Divine Glory, and England safety and
prosperity; and so to conclude very joyfully and cheerfully approues of their
Consultation; which for the more grace and authority he makes and reputes as
his own. When Commanding these three Princes, and two Queens (for Q^eene
Mary was now put by and excluded) to send unto England (by its own Tutulary
Angel) four several printed Copies of this their Consultation; The first to
be delivered to King JAMES; the second to Prince CHARLES ^is Son; the third,
to the High Court of Parliament; and the ^ourth, to the Lords of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, the which in his Sacred presence was speedily
performed and effected; When a great shout of ^oy, and an Universal plaudity
being hereunto given by all the Angels, and Host of Heaven* These five Royal
Personages followed the Lamb CHRIST JESUS where he went.

This Consultation thus ended, Queen Mary biting the lip at her check and
disgrace; and grieuing to see the Match of the Infanta with Prince CHARLES thus
unexpected dashed; and consequently the Pope frustrated of his hopes, and the
King of Spain of his Ambitious desires; She calls Mercury to her, and with
all possible speed sends him away likewise to England, with these two ensuing
Letters which she had written, the one to Count Gondomar, the other to all the
Roman Catholics of England.

Queen MARY, To Count Gondomar Ambassador for Philip the III. King of Spaiine,
resident with JAMES, King of Great BRITAIN.
YOur Excellency may understand, that I have dispatched Mercury to you in
England, (...) advertise you of a Consultation held here in Heaven, by my
Father King Henry VIII. my Brother King Edward VI. my Sister Queen Elizabeth,
Queen Anne, Prince H^nry, and my self, concerning your Masters pretenses and
hopes of England, by the Match of the Infanta his Daughter with Prince Charles,
which all the (...) five have opposed as prejudicial and dangerous, and my
self maintained as profitable and Honorable for England; for loving Philip
the Father, I must and will ever honor Philip his Son; They have likewise ripped
up and unmasked Spaines former Ambition, Cruelty, and Treachery, as well
toward England, as other Kingdoms and States of Europe, the discovery and
relation whereof, I could neither silence nor prevent* your Excellency must
give me leave to signify, that I fear your Secretaries are not so honest, as
your self Politic; ^or you are here by these Princes brought on the Stage in
your naked and natural Colors, therefore I could wish y^u to be more modest
and not so busy; Only to the utmost of your m^rtall power, (...) the knot of
this Mat^h, for if it hold, the heart of England will be soon broken, or if
the contrary, it will infallibly break the neck of the King your Masters
general hopes and pre^ences, and also of your own particular credit and
reputation, as well in England, as Spain; you have many eyes over you, and
although your sweet words and promises ^ull King James asleep, you will
nevertheless go near to be circumuented, by those (...) seek to circumuent.
If you can bring in the I^fanta, doubt you not but she will usher in the Pope,
and consequently he the Catholic King your Master; For*get not to continue,
and sor^efie your Intelligence with (...) S^minaries and Jesuits of England,
as also with the Catholic Ladies of that Kingdom, and especially, with those
of the Nobler rank, and who are most powerful at Court, for they may open a
passage for your Master when none else dare. At any hand use the prime of your
Art and Invention, to keep the King of England poor, and be sure to riuet
this (...) to his Majesty, that there is no Virtue so Royal and Magnificent
in a Great King, as Liberalit^e. I am sorry to hear that Englands Navy
Royal, does so prosper and flourish; In which regard and Consideration the
King your Master shall do well to build store of new Ships in Biscay, Ostend,
and Dunke^k; for if Spain master England at Sea, England can never withstand
Spain by Land; for now the English are Effeminate, and you (...) Soldiers. I
doubt not but by this time, there is such order taken in Spain, that the
English Fleet at Alicant, and Car^agena, shall return home with less, shame
and repentance, whereby you may teach them that it is only proper for
Spaniards, to Domineere at Sea, and that the Sea and Maritine actions, are now
Spaines, no longer Englands Element.

So whiles England lies gasping, on her bed of Peace and security, let the
King your Master provide for War; Continue to sow D^uision in the Church of
England, and rather augment then diminish your Pensions to you know wh^m. If
(...) be (...) Army to go out of England, either for Bohemia, the Pa^atinat,
the Netherlands, or Venice, deal so eff^ctually with King I^mes, that either
it be so small as it can (...) great (...) to Catholics, or be a m^anes to
cause them to sta^ so long* that it be impossible to (...) g^od for
Protestants. I commend (...) Excellen^ies poli^y, in being sharp, and bitter
against those, who either Speak, Write, or (...), against the King your (...)
and his pretenc^s, for now you (...) the H^nour and feli^itie, to see your
self (...) to King (...) his E^re, and his Majesty to your Girdle the (...)
an^ (...) ^f th^se will terrific others* Be sure to be intimately (...) with
all Factious and Discontented Catholics, for they will prove fine Agents and
Instruments to execute your Masters Commands. I am glad to see King Philip so
slight and dis-respect King James, as he has not this many years sent him
an Exraordinary Ambassador, especially, now for Treating and Concluding this
Match; for the more you and he Debase the Honor and under value the Reputation
of England, the more you advance and prise that of Spain. But that which
grieves me most, is, because GOD himself has opposed and Confirmed the
breach, and delaceration of the Match; but I hope that for the Catholic Kings
sake, our Holy Father the Pope, and our blessed Mother the Church, will so
interpose their Prayers to his Sacred and Divine Majesty, that very shortly
he will revoke and change his Resolution, and relish that which he now
distasteth. Through your zeal and industry, I likewise doubt not, but (before
a few years be past and (...) over) to see England made a Province to Spain;
her Nobility most murdered, and the rest carried away Slaves to work in the
Mines of Peru, and Mexico; the Pope installed; all Heretics rooted out either
with Fire or Halter. Let your Excellency proceed, as you have well and happily
begun, and fear not but you shall enjoy your wishes, the King your Master his
hopes, and myself and all the Roman Catholics of England our desires. In the
mean time I kindly greet and salute your Excellency, and bp your next Dispatch
for Spain, fail not to signify that I kiss the Catholics Kings hand.

Written and sent from Heaven. Your Excellencies Friend: MARY Queen.

Queen MARY, To the Roman Catholics of England, of both Sexes, and of all
Ranks.
MY Heart on Earth, and my Soul in (...), has ever so deeply affected you and
your Religion, as to the utmost of my power, I will never admit, that any
adu^rse accident, or stratagem what soever, shall endomage you or prejudice it:
to which end by Mercury (Whom I have purposely sent unto you) I would not fail
to advertise you of a Consultation which has been here held, by my Father
Henry VIII. my Brother Edward VI. my Sister Queen Elizabeth, Queen Anne,
Prince Henry, and my Self; tending to the safety and glory of England, to the
unmasking of Spaines pretentious Ambition and Treachery to many Estates of
Europe, and more especially to the utter breach of the Match betwixt Prince
Charles and the Infanta of Spain, which two last points alone, I (...) and
defended, but they all most violently contradicted and opposed. In which
consultation (I write it as well with Grief as pity:) Count Gondomar, has
^eene narrowly both sifted and censured, and all his Actions brought on the
Table, and made apparent and obuious to the dimmist Eye, to the weakest
Judgment and understanding, the which I have now signified his Excellency by a
particular Letter; wherein I have prayed him to have a more Jealous and curious
eye over his Secretaries, as I know England has over him; And to the end your
Souls and Consciences may have Spiritual food and Consolation, I wish and
exhort you to put all your Wits on the tenter-hooks to bring in the Infanta; or
else never expect the Pope, and consequently not the Catholic King. For else
all your intelligence with Rome and Spain, your correspondence with the
Jesuits and Count Gondomar, will not prevail, nor your Poison Po^iard, or
Powder take effect, if the Match do not; and because King James wants money,
and his Exchequer drawn dry and exhausted, if he stand on a greater sum
then the Catholic King can, or will give, you shall do a most acceptable
service to our Blessed Father the Pope, and to our Holy Mother the Church; That
you Lords and Knights Morgage your Manners and Plate, and you Ladies and
Gentle-women p^wne your Ringes and Jewels to make up the expected Sum; For
the Match once consum^ted, you know, and Count Gondomar can perfectly teach
you, a thousand ways to refetch it, with a ioyf^ll and golden Interest; I
highly (...) and applaude your ^oy, when you (...) Bohemia won, and the
Pala^nate assaulted; toward which Victories and (...), your (...)
Contributions gave a great stroke, which although Ferdinand for the present
cannot recompense; yet doubt (...) Phillip sho^tly and fut^rely will; Sit^ his
Ambassador Gondomar ^akes him confident, that you are as fast nailed to his
Scepter, a^ his Catholic (...) is to the Popes triple Crown. Be you still
the eyes of Count Gondomar, (...) him still continue your (...), for you can
never desire a better (...) then himself, nor a stronger Protector then the
King his Master. But in very deed, I much fear that this great Parliament,
will teach the Protestants of England wit, and you Roman Catholics
repentance. If Holland, the Palatioate, or Venice be in the Field, be you not
Idle in your Houses or in England; for although Dover be shut, you shall (...)
Ports enough open, for it is for the Progression and Advancement of the (...)
Cause, and for the Service of the Great Catholic King, and if all things hit
well, you shall not repent your selves of your Valor and Generosi^ie employed
and spent in his Seruic^. What though God (...) here approved of this
Consultation against the Match; yet his great (...) the Pope, will confirm the
Match against the Consultation* Therefore make you your (...) with the Pope,
and doubt not, but his Holiness, both can and will at his pleasure, make his
with his God; Howsoever be ruled, and believe in the Pope, who is the Head of
the Church; For you know out of the Church, there is no Salvation. I like well,
that there daily Travels some of your wisest Gentlemen for Spain, and now you
see there is no fear to bring ^ome Priests and Jesuits, for Count Gondomar
^ath found out the Art and Mystery, to open the Doors of Wisbich, the
Gatehouse, and the Clincke at his pleasure. To live Idle is Effemin^te and
(...) be you therefore (...) your selves) still b^sie and in action, for as in
matters of Religion and Piety, so in th^se of the State the P^actique is
always more Honorable then the Theorie. In a word, as long as (...) Kings
reign in England, your zealous Catholics shall there find but little Peace,
and less Joy; and yet I must need^ confess, that God se^mes to b^are a
particular affection to King James, out withal you know the second means must
be used, which (I write to my comfort) I see his (...) neglects; So ^f
Gondomar continue in England, and the M^tch dye not, then I hope a little time
will work all things to the best. T^ll when I salute you all, and will ^till
pray* (...) you for the Prosperity of the Great cause.

Written and sent from Heaven. Queen MARY.

FINIS.

