THE Confession and public recantation of thirteen learned personages, lately
converted in France, Germany, and the Lowe-Countreys, from Popery, to the
Churches reformed: wherein they have zealously and learnedly set down the
reasons that moved them thereunto.

The names and degrees of the Conuerts.
1. Godefrid Rahin, Friar and Preacher in Prage, at S. Thomas on the little
side. 2. Simon Palory, Prior and Provincial of the order of the Holy cross.
3. John Colleij, a Caputchin, and Guardian of S. Omer. 4. Melchior Roman, a
Spaniard, Proctor for the Iacobins at Rome. 5. John Norman Sub-prior of
Marestay, a Preacher. 6. Father Abraham, Prior of Carmes in Arles. 7. Antony
Ginestet, a confessor of the order of S. Francis. 8. Signeur Lewis of C^ransy,
a Priest. 9. Father Edmon, a Jesuit, Doctor of Divinity. 10. Leonard Theuenot,
Curat of S. Sauin. 11. Sir Francis a Monk of the order of the Celestins. 12.
Francis Goupil Angeuin, a Friar in the covent of Chastean Roux. 13. Lewys du
Boys, Priest, of S. Francis order in Dunkerke.
Translated out of the French and Dutch Printed copies, by I. M.

Imprinted at London for G. P. and are to be sold at the sign of the Bible in
Paul's Churchyard. 1602.

A Christian Recantation, preached by the reverend GODEFRID RABEN (in English
Crow) who had been an Augustine Friar, and Preacher in Prage, at S. Thomas on
the little side.
Wherein he bids the Roman Popedom farevvell, recanteth freely and
openly the same superstition and Antichristian abominations, in which he had
before bin nusled, and gave himself to the Protestant Churches of the
Augsburgisher, confession, made in the Parish Church at Wittemberg; on Sunday
called Misericordias Domini. 1601.

Then published for the benefit of all well affected Christians, together with
a Preface made by the faculty of Divinity at Wittenberg: and Printed at
Magdeburg by John Franck the same 1601. And now faithfully translated according
to the said high Dutch copy: with an addition of the verses in all the
alleged Scriptures, and Marginall notes, by I. M.

A Preface unto the Christian Reader.
FOr the space of certain years hethervnto, If men be not well grounded, nor
have conscience, they will in time of persecution be easily drawn from the
truth.
even ever since the Papists in Stiria, Carinthia, and Carnira, have begun
again with might and maine, as enemies to persecute the Gospel, we have had
grievous experience, in what sort many people, some for favor of their
Governors, and fear to be driven from their great lands and honor: some for
love of their earthly country, wealth, and goods: some, of foresight and
pride, desirous to be thought more wise then others: and some also of
simplicity and fear, have fallen from the known truth of the holy Gospel,
and have embraced the palpable Idolatrous errors of cursed Romish Popery.

For then by reason of such bloodshedding, many godly hearts were greatly
offended, because they savve Gods clear and pure word, In persecution God
tries and strengthens his children.
(contained in the Bible) must endure to be openly proclaimed and accounted, by
many simple souls, for heresy and horrible errors: where hence also was
occasioned of every side, much doubting of the doctrine, whereby also the
blind Papists conceived unto themselves a vain hope, that thence forvvard the
Popes Antichristian kingdom, was set up again on foot, and that his
condemned hypocrisy, Idolatry, and blasphemous doctrine, should be again of
most esteemed and received for pure holiness. But the eternal good God,
according to his comfortable promise, has not forgotten his beloved Church in
this her heaviness, God only able to rule the conscience.

If the scriptures were freely permitted unto all to read, many in Popery
would see the true^^.


but by the strength of his holy Spirit, has granted unto many as well in
high and great account, as in low and mean estate, a cheerful constant
heart unto Gods truth, so that their says is tried and increased by his fiery
oven of temptation, and made known unto all men.

Besides, whereas the vvretched and obdurated Papists, thought most men would
have become Papists again, God to the contrary has declared, that he is Lord
over the conscience, and not the Pope and his rablement, seeing that at all
times he has enlightened some peoples hearts, that they have known and openly
confessed the truth. And it would be much more done, if the holy Scripture (of
which the Papists as lucifugae scripturaru^, and hypocritical shunners of the
light, are afraid) were permitted unto every one to read. As also it is come
to pass, that a fevv days since, there came unto us from Prage, the reverend
learned man Godefridus Coruinus, borne at Newstat on the River of Sahl in
Franconia, who was an Augustine Friar, and an appointed Preacher of the same
order, amongst the Papists in the Province of Bauaria, which work of God is
so much the more to be admired, seeing the doctrine of the Gospel had never
greater enemies, then even those, called in Popery spiritual: namely the
Friars, Schoole-diuines, Jesuits, Bishops, and such like: yet has God also,
even in the great disordered and spoiled Fryers-order, his number, whom he
sometimes brings unto his sheepe-fould. And as he in former time out of Paul
a blasphemer and a persecutor, made a Christian and an Apostle: so he
mercifully used Doctor Luther an Augustine Friar, for a general reformation of
all Friery orders. This Godefridus was in the year of Christ 1582. Dominica
Reminiscere, This convert was a great preacher amongst his order, and therein
esteemed above others by the people.
brought by his Parents (who were driven thereunto by poverty) unto the
Augustine Fryerie at Wirtzburg; about the 18. year of his age. Two years
after Anno. 1584. the sixth of May, he professed and made his vovv. Three years
after that Anno. 1587. on Saturday before Iudica, he was made a Priest at
Freisingen in Bauaria, and presently thereupon, feria tertia Pascatos, sung his
first Mass solemnly unto the Friars in the Augustine Fryerie. And because God
had endued him with a special gift of Preaching, Anno. 1593. he was
appointed to be a common and ordinary Preacher of the Augustine Friars, as his
especial Letters testimonial do declare: and has now certain years since
exercised himself in Preaching at Prage, wherein he was also praised above
others, beloved, and esteemed of. But being diligent in reading the Scriptures,
the longer he read, the more he found, that Popery might in no sort be made
like thereunto, Popery grounded either upon no Scripture, or upon strained
glosses.
but that the Papists erroneous doctrine for the most part, was grounded upon
no Scripture at all, and part again only upon strained glosses of certain
places, he began to doubt of the whole cause. And as he more earnestly sought
after the truth, he found at the last, that he might no more, with a good
conscience, deliver unto Gods congregation, the apparent errors of the Papists,
and therefore resolved with himself, to leave the same, and to give himself
unto the fellowship of the doctrine of the Gospel. And came from Prage this
year about Sexagesimae, unto our most gracious Prince and Lord to Dresden: and
upon his graces further appointment, likewise came hither to Wittenberge, and
presently told us of his purpose, to join himself unto our Churches,
according as he should be best directed: whereunto we wished him Gods
blessing and furtherance, and also received him willingly. And for that he had
heretofore a good while used publicly to Preach, himself thought it very
expedient, by preaching to condemn such evident errors, which he did with a
well meditated Sermon and great descretion from his heart, This reca^tation
was solemnly made before a great auditory of all sorts.
upon the day Misericordias Domini this year, in the Parish Church, before a
great congregation, consisting of the university and Scholars out of all
Countries, together with the whole company of Citizens and Commons: And
after the Sermon ended, he confirmed this his confession, with prayer and the
Lords Supper. Wherefore we humbly thank the Eternal, for that he daily
graciously calls his poor strayed sheep unto his heavenly kingdom: and do
further beseech Almighty God our heavenly Father, to vouchsafe by the vvorking
of his holy Spirit, fatherly to strengthen and confirm this Godefrid, in the
known truth, mercifully to reduce other strayed sheep unto his sheepefould,
also to direct and govern his people, and to confound the Roman Antichrists
raging kingdom, even, for his beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord his sake,
Amen. At Wittenberg the fifth of May. 1601.

By the Senior and other Doctors of Divinity there.

A Recantation done on the second Sunday after Easter, called there
Misericordias Domini, upon the Gospel for the day.
JOHN. 10. ver. 11. to 17. Jesus spoke unto the Jews: I am that good
shepherd: the good shepherd gives his life for the sheep. But an hireling,
and he that is not the shepherd, neither the sheep are his own, sees the
Woolfe coming, and he leaves the sheep, and flees, and the Woolfe catches
them, and scatters the sheep. So the hireling flees, because he is an
hireling, and cares not for the sheep. I am that good shepherd, and know
mine, and am known of mine. As the Father knows me, so know I the Father:
and I lay down my life for my sheep. Other sheep I have also, which are not
of this fould: them also must J bring, and they shall hear my voice: and there
shall be one sheepefould.


Beloved and elect in the Lord Christ, we read in the Book of the Chronicles
of the Kings, how that Almighty God did fight for his people, and slew a great
multitude of the enemies, 2. Chro. 20.
and obtained the victory, and got thereby such a huge spoil and booty, that
in three whole days, they could not carry all the same away; but in the
fourth day they went into the Valley of Blessing, Christ by his bitter
sufferings has subdued all our enemies, and made us to rejoice, by giving us
inward peace.
and there praised the Lord. Now hethervnto beloved, your well affected minds
have sufficiently heard, how great a combat Jesus Christ has sustained for
us, the like whereof was never heard, nor the like booty was ever brought unto
the people of God. This was done on Passion Friday past, on which day the Son
of God through his bitter sufferings overcame, and utterly threw to the
ground, all the enemies of mankind, whereby there is given unto us such a
booty, of the which we may rejoice for ever. As also the Prophet Esaias says in
his 9. chap. ver. 3. They have rejoiced before thee according to the joy in
Harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil: Such glorious joy
have we heard and found upon the holy Easter day, when Christ victoriously rose
again from the dead. Now what this book is that we have herehence received,
was declared and taught unto us the last Sunday: namely, that peace which
Christ thrice wished his Disciples, Peace be with you, to show that through his
sufferings, death and resurrection, now from henceforth all is become
peaceable. Let this therefore now stand still before us, that we, like unto the
ancient people of God, hasten us unto the valley of blessing, lawde, honor, and
praise the worlds Savior, Man soon forgets Gods benefits, and therefore
must often be put in mind thereof.
and never forget so great and unspeakable a benefit. But because man
forgets nothing more, nor sooner, then benefits; the whole Christian Church
has set before us this day such a Gospel, in which is brought again unto our
minds, the great love and mercy of our most dearest shepherd Christ, as
namely how that he gave his life unto death for us straied sheep.

Seeing therefore I have hethervnto been a Friar, and stuck in the manifold
errors of Popery; but am now by the given grace of God come unto the light of
the truth, I will ground this my Recantation upon this days Gospel, 3.
parts.
and divide the same into three parts.

Misericordias Domini, the mercies of the Lord, I will speak of the great
mercy of God, contained in these words: I am that good shepherd, and give my
life for my sheep.

He has yet other sheep which he must bring hitherunto.



1. Part. Wherein Gods great mercies are set forth.
It is not without cause that the holy Apostle S. Paul, 2. Cor. 1. verse. 3.
calls Almighty God, The Father of mercies and God of all comfort. And Ephesians.
2.4. A God which is rich in mercy. Without all controversy, Paul had some
cause given him, why he gave God such a notable and glorious title: yea surely
there was good cause given him; for he was a blasphemer and a persecutor, but
yet acknowledges he was received of God to mercy. 1. Timoth. 1.13. Not only
that God had of his mercy forgiven his sins, but also had advanced him to a
notable Apostle and Preacher of his holy Gospel. David likewise exceedinglye
commends Gods mercy, but not without cause, for he was an adulterer and a
murderer, and yet God did not only remit him his sin, but did also
establish his kingdom in peace. And therefore he justly says, Psalm. 33.5.
Benignitate (or as the common translation) Misericordia Domini pleci est terra.
The earth is full of the goodness or mercy of the Lord. And in the 145.
Psalm. ver. 9. His mercies are over all his works. But such mercy goes not
alone over one people, and such mercy is not promised alone unto one Nation,
Gods mercy comes unto all nations and sorts of people.
City, or Town, but it goes over all mankind. The which Moses with great
and fervent earnestness proves, saying. Exodus 34.6.7. The Lord, the Lord,
strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and
truth, reserving mercy for thousands, that is, without end. As also God
himself says again, Deuteronomy. 5.9.10. I am the Lord thy God, and show mercy
unto many thousands.

In the second Book of Samuel, chap. 14. ver. 14. the mercy of God is
mightily declared by a notable speech, Though God spare none that sins, yet
he appoints means for the elects conversion, so receives to mercy the truly
penitent. A comfort to all afflicted consciences.
where the widow of Tekoah dealing with David concerning Absolon, whom David,
for the murder he committed, had banished, amongst other things, said thus.
God does not spare any person, yet does he appoint means, not to cast out from
him, him that is expelled. But what? are there any examples ready at hand,
whereby it may appear to be so? For otherwise surely, the holy Scripture
should be but of small accoumpt with afflicted and wounded consciences, if it
did but only comfort us with bare words, without setting before us any one
example, on whom God had also showed his mercy. But the holy Ghost, has
besides the Scripture also set men before us, on whom we may clearly see the
exceeding great mercy of God. Adam is justly the first to be accounted of,
seeing also he was the first that was overcome by Satan, and driven from
obedience, to disobedience; from the truth to lies; for yet God would not that
Adam should altogether perish, but bethought him how Adam might be brought
again: which was thus done. After that Adam had perfected his sin, When
soever man feels any motion, or hears any thing condemning his sin, it is
of God, that he should repent, which he refusing casts God off, whatsoever
he be.
he hid himself, and then God asked, Adam, where art thou? which God asked
not, as if he had not known where Adam was, or saw him not, seeing there is
no man that can hide himself from the sight of God: but God therefore asks,
that Adam should have descended into himself, and acknowledged his sin, and
(as after David did) should have said; Peccaui, I have sinned, and should have
called upon the mercy of God, for grace and forgiveness. Which because he did
not, but much more went about to hide, excuse, and extenuate his sin, God
thrust him out of Paradise into the valley of misery, amongst all kind of
crosses, sorrow and trouble: and yet that Adam might not altogether perish and
despair, under his cross, sufferings, and sorrows, God does forthwith
vouchsafe him a most comfortable promise; as namely, that he would raise out of
the woman a means and mediator, which should help him and all his posterity
again out of that misery, and break the Serpents head. The like occasion of
bethinking himself gave God to Caine, Gens. 4. whom also Satan had persuaded
to murder; for God notwithstanding dealt fauourablye with him, to the end he
might acknowledge his sin, and entreat for grace and pardon, but in the end,
because he would not thus do, but only say coldely; his sin was greater
then might be forgiven him, he was through his own fault, temporally and
eternally cast away and condemned.

God deliberateth much before he punishes.
What a notable communication had God with Abraham before he overthrew the
sinful cities Sodom and Gomorrha, Genesis 18. God accorded and yielded so far
unto Abraham, that if they might have found in those cities, but ten righteous
persons, he would have spared them. What should I speak, how God stood in
contention, deliberating with the holy man Moses, concerning the stiff-necked
Jews, that he once said to Moses, Exodus 32.10. Dimitte me, Now let me alone,
that my wrath may wax hot against them, and consume them? And what can
with-holde God, why he should not forthwith severely punish sin, but even his
mercy? Examples whereof, if the time would permit, there might be many
alleged. But unto any one even of mean understanding, these alleged may
suffice, where-hence he may aboundantlye learn, how our good and merciful
God, even from the beginning unto this present (and will also hold and
continue the same rule, as long as the world indures, according to his natural
mercy) has ever at all times so lovingly and earnestly bethought him, before
he has wholly overthrown and destroyed any poor sinner. As also the Lord
Christ gives the same to understand by the example of the unfruitful Figtree.
Luke the 13.

Well and justly therefore is it said by the Wiseman in the 11. chapter of his
book of Wisdom, verse. 20.21. Lord thou have mercy upon all: for thou have
power of all things, and make as though thou saw not the sins of men,
because they should amend. For thou love all the things that are, and hate
none of them whom thou have made. And presently after in the last verse: But
thou sparest all: for they are thine, O Lord, which art the lover of souls.
And again Christ says, Math. 18.14. Man not repenting, provoke God, and
procures his assured wrath.
It is not the will of our Father which is in heaven, that any of his little
ones should perish. And the holy Apostle S. Paul says thus. Romans 2. ver.
3.4.5. O thou man, know thou not that the bountifulness of God leads thee
to repentance? But thou, after thine hardness, and heart that cannot repent,
heapest up as a treasure unto thy self, wrath against the day of wrath.

Consider it with thy self, thou Christian heart, and think upon it well, how
often have thou given thy self lewdly and wilfully to any notorious sin, as to
adultery, All sin seperateth us from God.
or otherwise to any kind of whoredom: to theft, murder, blaspheming of God,
and to such other heavy sins, which, as the Scripture witness, separate us
from God, so that God has had just cause, even in the doing of that thy
sin, to have cast thee alive into hell. But now notwithstanding, thou abidest
yet, and live yet, Gods mercies for our preservation are daily renewed.
and God has not as yet revenged himself upon thee. And wherefore not I pray
thee? where mark and observe, upon what occasion the Prophet Jeremy says in
his Lamentations, Lamen. 3. ver. 22.23. It is the Lords mercies that we are not
consumed, because his compassions fail not, but are renewed every morning.

It is much said, and nature also teaches, that parents love their children
exceedingly, and therefore sometimes are very slow and loathe to take the
rod, although the children have well deserved it, Gods mercy in part set
forth by the love of parents to their children, although indeed there be no
comparison therein.
for their love prevails herein. But what is the love of Parents to their
children, to be compared to the love of God toward us? Does not God expreslie
say by the Prophet Esaias cap. 49. ver. 15. Can a woman forget her children, and
not have compassion on the son of her womb? though she should forget, yet
will not forget thee. Yea, no father, no mother, no brother, nor sister, yea no
friend whatsoever, could so long bear with, and endure thy wickedness, as God
has borne with it, so that God may justly complain, as in Esaias. 43. ver. 24.
Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearied me with thy iniquities.
Yea, whosoever will rightly indeed learn and know the mercy of God, It is
fearful to make God serve with our sins.
and thereby observe, how God bethinketh him, before he punishes sinners, let
him only read the 42.43. and 44. chapters of the Prophet Esaias, where he shall
find, how God behaved himself toward the wicked stifnecked Jews.

First he rebukes them with words, shows them their disobedience, calls
them blind and deaf. By and by thereupon as in the 43. chapter, he comforts
them again, bids them not to fear, and tells them, he would give people for
them, and nations for their ransom: yet notwithstanding presently thereupon
reprooueth them again, charging them to be hardened and abide in their sins.
And all that comes now from the alone mercy of God, Then only man lays hold
on Gods mercy when he wholly ante^deth his wicked life.
yet so indeed that the sinner confess his sin, and lay hold on God his
mercy. Which he does when he forsakes his sins and wicked life, for then
will God not only blot out and forgive him all his sins, but also thereunto
bestow upon him all good things. As it also is said by the fore aledged
Prophet Esa. 44. ver. 2.3. Fear not, O Jacob, my servant, and thou righteous,
whom I have chosen. For I will power water upon the thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground: I will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon
thy buds.

Behold, this is now that unspeakable goodness of God, whereupon we stand,
All our prosperity comes from God alone.
are, and live. Who would not (...) then with joy, say and sing with the
Prophet David, Psalm. 89. (...). I will lawde, praise, and sing the mercies of
the Lord for ever. And in another Psalm, as namely the 59. ver. 17. he says;
God is my defense, and my merciful God. Which is as if he had said: All that
ever I have, and whatsoever I am, comes wholye from Gods mercy.

Well then, beloved in Christ, I suppose I have not herein done amiss, in
setting forth and praising the goodness of God. Seeing that our God and
merciful God, though I were a persecutor of his holy word, and of all true
Christians, a blasphemer of God, and a superstitious Friar, has of his free
love and mercy sought me, found me, and graciously delivered me from those
errors I had been long time nusled in: So that I may well and justly say with
David: Loqueus contritus est, and ego liberatus sum, The snare is broken and I
am delivered. Psalm. 124. v. 7.

Let this suffice for the first part. Now we will proceed, 2. Part. The manner
how God brings us to his knowledge and so to salvation.
and here the second part, how that God does show his mercy, and bring us
first to his knowledge, and then unto salvation. And this is not done unto me
alone, but for the comfort of all sinners, whereby they may learn to
acknowledge Gods goodness, and amend themselves.

Although Gods ways are not as our ways, and his thoughts far otherwise
then our thoughts; and besides, God in the Scriptures has revealed so much of
his will unto us as is needful for us to know.
his counsel is without searching out, and also we cannot certainly know how
God deals with man: yet our loving God has so far forth revealed his will
unto us in the Scriptures, his holy and divine word, that we may easily know,
how and wherewith, God calls and leads us to his sheepefolde.

The word of God is that sweet and notable voice, through the which God has
from the beginning, in the old Testament, Gods word is his voice whereby he
calls us to repentance.
brought many wild straied sheep to the true sheepefold; which God did by
Moses and all his true Prophets. Lastly, he sent his beloved son himself
unto us, as the right and true shepherd. This is the true shepherd, who says
by the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 23. ver. 3. I will gather the remnant of my sheep
out of all countries, whither I had driven them, and will bring them again to
their fouldes, and they shall grow and increase. In Ezech. 34 ver. 11. says
this shepherd; Behold J will search my sheep, and seek them out, which the
son of God has done by the preaching of his holy divine word. After him did
his Apostles and their successors the same, and even at this day all true
shepherds and carers of souls do, which by the word of God call all straid
sheep. It is Gods word and not force that must content men.
And there were ever at the beginning thereof, many tyrannous Emperors and
Kings, Princes and Lords, yea and the whole world, brought unto the true
sheepefold, not with sword and arms, nor with might and fire, but by the word.
This is that word whereof the Lord speaks by the Prophet Jeremy 23.2.29. that
his word is ever like a fire and like a hammer that breaks the stone. Gods
word is of nature like the Sun, ever having forcible effect, either to
mollify the elect as the Sun does wax, or to harden the wicked as the Sun
does clay.
And in the Prophet Esai. cap. 55. v. 10.11. God compares his word unto the
Rain and Snow which come down from heaven, and water the earth, and make it
fruitful. So shall his word be, that goes out of his mouth, it shall not
retu^ne unto him void. This is that word mentioned in the Epistle to the
Hebrews Heb. 4. v. 12. That it is sharper then any two edged sword, it intreth
through, even unto the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit.

Paul rejoices 1. Cor. 4. v. 15. that through this word he had begotten his
Corinthians. But some man may say, or think in his heart, that he has indeed
often and much heard Gods word, and yet has not found any such change in
himself, nor perceived any such power. To whom I answer: I believe it very
willingly: for alas, we see in this our time but little of that fruit, which
should come and arise out of the word of God. The cause why men of all sorts
profit no more by the word of God, is for that they esteem of it but basely,
and therefore prepare not themselves aright unto the hearing, reading and
meditating there^f.
But the reason or fault must not be laid upon Gods word, but upon thy self,
because thou co^mest and preparest not thy self thereunto, with aright earnest
and religious affection, and so do thy self wilfully hinder the gracious
working of the holy Ghost. For it is even so at this time, as at the time of
the Prophet Ezechiel, where God complains unto the Prophet Ezech. 33. verse.
30.31. The people talk against thee, they will come unto thee into the
congregation, and sit before thee as if they were my people ( So it is
interpreted by most, and is indeed the sense of the place.
where is to be marked, that idle lasie hearers of Gods word, are not Gods
people) and they will hear thy words, but they will not do the^: For with
their mouths they make iestes, and their heart goes after their covetousness.
And also God says by the Prophet Esaias (of the peoples stubbornes) who seeing
many things, kept them not, and opening their ears, hard not. Esai. 42. v. 20.
Here hence may thou easily perceive, wherefore Gods word has not a powerful
working in thee, thou do hear it indeed, but thou will now follow it, Gods
word not taken to heart, cannot be powerful to convert.
thou take it not to heart, thou let it in at one ear, and out at the
other, thou will not leave thy covetousness, thy pride, thy immodest
incontinencie, and such like sins, for the which the holy Ghost cannot dwell
in thee, and Gods word can have no fruit in thee, wherefore mark how S. James
exhorts thee Iam. 1. verse. 21. namely to receive, with meekness the word
that is grafted in us, which is able to save your souls. Out of this word of
God so heard, Gods word we heard works new thoughts and good motions.
the holy Ghost works all manner of good thoughts, so that a bad and wicked
man considers sometimes how he has heard in Gods word, that God has so
mighty a dislike with every impenitent sinner, that he will not only punish
such temporally here, but also eternally in hell, with the devil and all his
train. And considers further, how he has heard in the preaching of Gods
word, that man's life is so short and uncertain, Sgnes of Gods calling and the
working of his spirit in us.
that our life here is nothing else, then a vapor which indureth but a little
while, and is like the shadow upon a wall, like a bubble upon the water, and
like all such other things remaining but the twinkling of an eye. And although
this life be so uncertain and transitory, yet is it so accompanied and
assaulted with many thousand miseries, that we are not so long, as the
twinkling of an eye at any time secure, but we may be called hence by death,
and be set before the judgment seat of Christ, there to hear our final
sentence, and thereupon to receive either good or bad as Paul says 2. Cor. 5.
verse 10. When therefore a sinner feels such motions in himself, he ought to
be assured, God calls him to amendme^t, that he should depart from sin, and
turn himself to Christ his shephard and carer of his soul. This is now that
knocking whereof Christ speaks Reuela. 3. verse 20. Behold, J stand at the
door, and knock, If any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in
unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with me. Forasmuch then as God will
not the death of a sinner, but that he convert and live, as he says by the
Propet Ezechiell in the 18. and 33. chapters, so does he bring such motions
into a sinners mind, whereby the sinner should learn to reform himself. The
good shepherd Christ has yet another pleasant voice, whereby he does also
call us unto his sheepfolde: Outward blessings a second voice calling us to
his sheepefolde.
namely, outward and temporal benefits: as health, strength, straightness and
comeliness of body, art, wisdom, foresight, giving of counsel in althings,
the understanding and interpreting of the holy Scripture, and all such
other-like good guiftes, as riches, houses and land: yea all that is good
comes from God, as the Apostle James says, Every good thing, and every perfect
gift is from above, and comes down from the father of lights. Iam. 1. v. 17.
Whereby every man ought to consider, how his loving God has graciously endowed
and adorned him. Gods graces in us ought to humble and not to inflame us with
pride.
Therefore he should not brag it out, nor be high conceipted, and contemn
others, as others, the most part do; but he should humble himself, and be
thankful unto God, that he does so notably respect him, and so excellently
adorn him, and so richly provide for him, although he deserve it not, but is a
rebellious sinful man: and should endeavor by all his strength, All men ought
to employ the graces given them to Gods glory, their own salvation, and
neighbors good.
to apply all the above named gifts unto piety and the fear of God, seek his
praise and honor, his own souls salvation, and further his neighbors good;
that so he may after this life, hear the Arche-shepheard Christ his
delightful voice, who has bestowed upon him, and given him such great gifts
and graces.

But when a man in this sort and manner will not turn unto God, but hardneth
his heart as an Adamant stone, and drinks iniquity like water, as Job says,
Job. 15. v. 16. and will not at all reform himself by the sweetest voice, but
by how much he is the better dealt with, by so much the more he falls into
sin: then comes God with a hard and roughe voice, Gods judgments and
threatenings a third voice to call us, when plain commandments and blessings
will not prevail. If after co^mandeme^ts blessings, and threatenings, men
repent not, then te^porall destruction at the least, will lastly ensue.
which is called, crosses, sorrow, sickness, and all kind of misery. Moses
in the old Testament, exhorts the Israelites committed to his charge, how
they should behave themselves, when they were in prosperity in the promised
land. And says Deuteronomy. 8. (in all the chapter) When thou shall be in the
promised land, build cities and houses, plant vineyardes, and Oil trees, and
shall eat and fill your selves, beware diligently thou forget not the Lord thy
God. And yet in the above named book, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 15. it is showed, that such
hearty and faithful admonitions made unto the Jews did them no good: But when
he waxed fat, he spurned with his heel: he was fat, and gross, and laden
with fatness: therefore he forsook God that made him, and regarded not the
strong God of his salvation. Therefore God gave them over at the last to the
sword, to hunger, and sorrow, to grief and misery, as also David shows in
his 78. Psalm. Likewise we see as with eyes, in these last evil and dangerous
times, that God punishes our disobedience and unthankfulness, with war, and
rebellions, with dearth, hunger, heaviness, plague, and many wonderful
strange diseases. All which befall us for chastenings, that if so be, we would
not turn unto God when we were well and in prosperity, yet now at the least
we should hasten unto the Lord by sorrow, as also the Prophet Esaias says; Lord
in trouble have they visited thee: they powered out a prayer when thy chastening
was upon them. Affliction drives to repentance, and repentance to pray unto
God for deliverance.
Esa. 26. v. 16. And Osea. 5. v. 15. and cap. 6. v. 5. In their affliction they
will seek me diligently; and say, Come, let us return to the Lord: for he
has spoiled, and he will heal us: he has wounded us, and he will bind us up.
Therefore God threatens all the wicked, which have no delight, but to go
forward in sin. Hosea. 2. v. 6. Behold, I will stop thy way with thorns,
and make an hedge. Thorns in the Scripture, betoken often sorrow and
heaviness. Here might I well allege many examples, upon whom this is truly
performed. The same proved by example.
Nebuchad-nezzar, as we read in the 4. of Daniel, who would reform himself,
neither by the preaching of Daniel, nor by his dream which Daniel interpreted
unto him, nor by outward blessings and prosperity, but did abide still in his
pride, and would be nothing else but God alone: Yet when God drove him from men
to have his abode amongst beasts, and to eat grass as the Oxen, till his
hairs were grown as Eagles feathers, and his nails like Birds claws: Then
lifted he up his eyes unto heaven, acknowledged the Almighty, gave thanks
unto the most high, and praised and honored him that lives for ever, verse.
30.31. So also the Prodigal son, Luke the 15. he would not at all hear and
embrace his fathers voice and admonitions, as lamentable experience teaches:
Many prodigal children in this age, etc.
there are at this time such like young little Gentlemen-straglers, and stout
grone-children, which also cannot longer endure to here their parents kind
admonitions; and to the end they may be delivered and freed therefrom, they
set before men's eyes (as a covering cloak) their desire to study, yet they do
it not for any love unto study, but for liberty sake. Also, who was more
stout, bold, and malapart, then the Prodigal Son? He thought upon no
cross, nor any misfortune, but when it came thereunto, that he should keep
Swine, and had not withal any bread to eat, but would feign with the swine,
have filled his belly of the husks. Then he came to himself and said: how
many hired servants at my fathers have bread enough, and I die with hunger? J
will rise and go to my Father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, Luke 15.
verse 16.17.18.19. See how true that common proverb is; Misery drives to God,
which we see very clearly in the fore recited example: justly therefore says
the Prophet David, that their hope is with bit and bridle, which will not draw
near unto thee. Psalm. 32. verse, 9. And let this also suffice to be said of the
second part, as namely, how God uses to call us unto his sheepefold.

3. Part. Wherein how Christ the true shepheardes voice is to be hard, and of
popish errors, Antichrists voice.
There remains yet the third part, wherein Christ exhorts us, that if we
will be his little sheep, and come and belong unto his eternal sheepefolde,
then we must hear his voice. And to the end that we may know which is our true
shepherds voice, and which Antichrists, I will note certain errors, which
Antichrist the Pope exhorts the people unto, and teaches them as though it
were the voice of Christ the true Shepherd: yea he enforces and constrains
the poor little sheep, unto such his idolatrous doctrine with might and
maine, that the poor silly people must embrace and believe such doctrine, as
if it were Gods word: and although thereby they be eternally damned, yet dare
no man say: Pope, why do thou so? This is: Sic volo, sic iubeo, will thou
not, A doctrine if ever, now carefully to be observed.
yet thou shall be constrained. Therefore mark this you christian parents, and
teach it your children, that they may know how to take heed of and shun
popery, as the poison of Adders and Basiliskes, yea as from the devil himself.

Let the first be the vowing of Friars, whereupon the Popedom stands fast
grounded, Popedom stands upon Friars vowing.
wherein Friars swear and vow perpetual chastity, voluntary obedience, and
voluntary poverty. And who can sufficiently declare, how many tong-tyed dumb
persons both men and women, are drawn headlong to hell by this deuilish rope?
I call them tong-tied and dumb, because I know it my self, and have had
experience in the order, wherein I have spent my time twenty years, that the
intising overseers, have persuaded many a young boy, to make Professionem, as
they call it. That is, he must either be sworn to the Friars vows, or be
thrust out again forth of the monastery, whereupon many swore for shame, and so
more accounted of the shame they should have by departing from the monastery,
then of the salvation of their souls. And wherefore? because they knew not
what was contained in the vows, until they came to riper years, and began a
little to increase in understanding, then they take on exceedingly, and curse
the hour wherein they were borne, Note diligently.
yea then they curse father and mother, and all such besides as were any
means to help them to their Friars weed, and them they often call upon, and
inuit the devil, to draw them forth again out of their Monastery. To
conclude, I have heard such lamentation my self in Fryeries and Nunneries,
that a very hard stone, if it had reason, could not but pity them. This
lamentation proceeds from the very sorrow of their hearts, because they can
never see or perceive, that they ever vowed, or swore, unto such things, as
they never did keep, or ever shall be able to keep, for then they well
perceive, it stands not in their might and power.

And to the end also certain big fellows of sufficient age, Frieries the
greatest liberty and most open door unto all sin, in all degrees.
might not take offense at the wicked (I should say holy) Friars life, the
Sophisters and soul deceivers have covered the Friars order, with a fair
goulden cloak; as namely: If any man commit a thousand murders and adulteries,
ye have perpetrated infinite sins, and although they should be manifested to
the world, yet if he do but run into a Monastery, and draw on a Friars
garment, then he has full remission of all his sins, and no man may lay upon
him pain or punishment for the same. For (say they) look what Baptism does
effect unto little children, that does a Friars order unto the old knaves.
Wherehence it comes, that such as put on a Friars coat, sometimes change
their name they received in Baptism, to signify that they are a new Baptized
again. But who sees not here Satan's craft and deceit? There is not one
syllable or letter to be found in the whole holy Scripture, that one should lay
upon any man, after the vow he has made unto the Lord Christ in Baptism, any
such Fryerly vows, or cast such a rope about any man's neck. Paul indeed
speaks of virginity, which he commends and praises very highly, and also
counsels thereunto: but says expressly; he had no commandment, namely to
constrain any unto virginity, but so, that whosoever perceives in himself,
that he has the grace and gift of cleanness, he should so abide and not
marry. And yet says again expressly, he would not entangle any with a snare.
1. Cor. 7. v. 25. etc. In like manner our Lord Christ himself reasons of, and
handles this virtue, Math. 19. but yet says directly verse. 11. It is not
given unto all men. Of these Fryerly vows, the Wiseman speaks directly in
the 5. of Ecclesiastes ver. 3. that God delights not in fools, eue^ in
foolish and unfaithful promises. And that is surely a foolish promise, if any
one vow to do a thing, and know not whether he can or be able to perform it;
and that is an unfaithful promise, if any one promise to do a thing, knowing
well what it is, and yet wilfully breaks it, as in a manner all Friars and
Priests do in Popery, and therefore God has no pleasure in them, for they be
foolish and unfaithful servants.

Confession of sins good in it self.
Confession and acknowledgement of sin is good in it self, and is grounded
upon Gods word, yea the Lord commands often in holy scripture, that we should
confess our sins, Leuit. 16. v. 21. and Leuit. 26. and Psalm. 32 v. 5. and
Psalm 36. Prou. 18. Also Daniel confessed his and the peoples sins, Daniel.
9.4. to 20. And surely if we had no other proof for confession, yet should
that be sufficiently thereunto, where S. John says: If we acknowledge our
sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, True confession
vilely abused by the Popes wicked traditions.
1. John. 1. v. 6. But the Pope has most vilely abused with his traditions
this notable ordinance of God. The Prophet David says, Psalm. 54. v. 6.
Voluntary, I willl sacrifice freely unto thee, and will praise thy name, O
Lord. And what else is confession, and an acknowledgment of sin, then a giving
and offering up of the heart and mind unto God? Now the Prophet says: he will
do it freely; but the Pope says: although thou would not, yet thou shall
confess, and that when it pleases me namely about Easter, and presently
thereupon to go unto the Sacrament: Popish tyranny against quick and dead.
but if thou will not, thou shall not then be accounted for a true christian,
and may not be partaker after thy death of any christian burial, but thou
shall be carried out into the fields, and thrown behind a hedge, as in places
of Popery they use to do with the Protestants that die amongst them, carrying
them out like dogs, and throwing them into some little hole, casting a little
earth on them. And although the Pope has brought confession to be a
tyrannical commandment, and will expressly that every one do confess, and
that at such times as he will have the^; yet notwithstanding he has set so
many fearful abominations unto this necessary confession, that every godly
persons ears may justly ring, and his heart tremble with exceeding fear, when
he hears them mentioned: and by this popish tyrannical confession, there
come not a few people to despair, and eternal damnation. I know well how men's
consciences be burdened and afflicted in popery: What the errors be in Popish
confession.
but here might many think and marvel what these great errors in popish
confession are? To whom I answer, that the Pope has therefore appointed
auricular confession, not only that men should (specifi^e) and particularly
confess all their sins, but also the circumstances of their sins, as how,
what, when, where, with whom, at what time, how often, etc. And if any do not
thus, he has not then rightly confessed, and his sins are not forgiven him.
Now I have all this by experience; for I have been a confessor in popery these
thirteen years, and do know well what unfit matters oftentimes came to
scanning and recital: It is altogether impossible for a man to confess all
his sins, and much less possible to know how, when, where, and how often he
has sinned, seeing that the scripture records, how that the righteous man
offends seven times a day, and how often then offends the poor sinner?
The first error, that men's consciences are thereby inthrauled and disquieted.
There are many indeed in popery that when they come to confession, do as
much as in the^ possible is, to declare al their sins, and yet when they have
received absolution, and prepared to come to the Lords Supper, yet if suddenly
there come a sin into their mind which they doubt whether they have confessed
or no, they use to be so exceeding faint and sorrowful, that they know not
whether they may receive the Lords Supper or no, for they think they should
receive it unworthily, and so a conscience can have no peace. And is not this a
fearful abomination, where men's consciences are so martyred and punished?

Over and above this, Second error, that one cannot denounce forgiveness for all
sins.
the Pope has divided and all to broken confession: for some he has reserved
to be by himself forgiven, which are called Casus papales, some he has
granted unto Bishops to pardon, and they are called Casus Episcopales: the
remainder he has permitted unto other ordinary priests. But beloved, where
has such foolery any ground in Gods word? Surely in no place, and therefore
this is not Christ's the true Shepheardes voice, but Antichrists and the
Diuelles. As for praying to an invocation of saints, Praying unto saints.
it is now grown so notified that the little children intriuiall schools know
it to be against God, and an Idolatry, and is against the holy peace and
salvation, as I will prove anon. It is not unjust to have in worthy remembrance
Gods holiness, and therein to praise Gods works and Christ's mercy: for God
says himself, 1. Sam. 2. v. 30. Them that honor me, J will honor, and Christ
says also, John 12. v. 26. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. It
is therefore not amiss to give unto Saints their due praise, but to call upon
them as intercessors and mediators, and to seek for help and comfort of them
in extremity, that is against God, and is properly said to be a seeking for
aid of strange Gods. It is written in the old Testament by all the Prophets
that God calls us unto him only, that he alone is the Lord and God, Gods
truth.
that will and can help us, that without him there is neither God nor
salvation, and that he will not give such honor unto any other. How lovingly
and fatherly does God admonish his people in the old Testament, that they
should not run so after vanitye, but should have all their refuge unto him
alone? And Christ the Son of God in like manner cries out a maine in many
places of the new Testament, that we should come unto him, that he is the true
Well indeed, that he is the way and the truth, and that he is our quickening.
So the beloved Apostles do also nothing else, but only preach and teach that
Christ is the Savior of the world, that he only is our advocate and
intercessor with the father, that he only has washed away our sins with his
blood, that through him by faith without works we are and shall be justified
before God, and that there is no other name under the sun, by which we can or
may be saved, but by the name of Jesus. Wherefore it is a great impiety of us
sinful men, that have so loving and so gracious a God, who is so willing and
ready to help us, and is able to deliver us out of all danger and extremity:
and yet we will seek for help by others, which have need themselves of Gods
help, Praying to Saints, is as to God dishonor, so to their own disquiet.
and without his help and grace can never be saved. For in Popery there is no
thing so small and of no accoumpt, but they run to Saints for it, and seek
for help and counsel of the^. This is against God and is also against the
Saints own rest and peace, that we should call upon them to make intercession
for us: howsoever Ierom reasons thus, seeing Peter, Andrew, and John, (says
he) whilst they yet lived upon earth, Hieromes error.
could obtain some thing for others by their intercession, and should they now
be able to do nothing, being in heaven? They may now much more by their
intercession win us, seeing their love is perfected. But I answer him, I deny
not, that the Saints upon earth in their life time may pray one for another,
and obtain somewhat, but do very willingly confess, that one may and ought here
temporally pray for another, which is according to Gods commandment. 1. Tim.
2. verse. 1.2.3. Iam. 5. verse. 14.15.16.17.18. But when one is gone from this
temporal into eternal life, he takes no longer charge or care over us,
neither can help us, for he knows there is a God, that both can and will
help us. Or if the Saints in heaven do pray for us, they must necessarily
know our distress and afflictions, The absurdity then arises of Hieroms
reason.
for which they pray: for if the Saints in heaven do know our sorrows, and if
their love be perfect, then without all doubt they will observe the holy
apostle S. Paul's rule, which he has left unto all men Romans 12. v. 15. Rejoice
with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep. And that the Saints in
heaven should be grieved for our sakes, and suffer disquiet and heaviness, is
directly against Gods word. For it is expressly written in the third chapter of
the book of Wisdom, v. 3. Illi autem sunt in pace, but they are in peace. And
likewise Revel. 7. v. 17. and chap. 21. v. 4. it is plainly recorded, that the
Saints after this life have neither sorrow, neither crying, neither any more
pain, for God has washed all tears from their eyes, and they feel nothing
but joy and bliss: Otherwise, where should the saying of the Prophet Esaias be
fulfilled. For he says in the 22. of his Prophecy v. 18. Residebit, my people
shall dwell, or rest in the tabernacle of peace, and in sure dwellinges, and in
safe resting places? Where may a man have these things? Gods children may
expect no perfect peace in the things of this life, but affliction.
Where is the tabernacle of peace? In the old Testament there was but little
rest, peace, and safety, and much more war, tumults, hunger, and all kind
of persecutions: In the new Testament likewise have the people of God from the
beginning thereof until the end had little rest and peace, as also our Lord
Christ promised not much temporally here unto his own, Ioh. 16. verse. 20. Ye
shall weep and lament, and v. 33. In the world ye shall have affliction, and
Math. 10. v. 34. No^ veni missurus pace, sed gladium: I came not to send peace,
but a sword. Which is to be understood of worldly peace, for Christ has
called his from the world, and therefore can have no peace with the world, but
a sword, that is they shall be persecuted, scourged and wholly killed. So
Christ tells them plainly Job. 16. v. ^0. the world shall rejoice but ye
shall sorrow. And else where, the world will hate you, True rest and peace
only in heaven.
persecute and kill you: this must all true faithful christians as Gods own
people expect. Where then is that peace, rest and safety, which God promises
his people? we must then surely lift up our eyes unto the triumphant Church,
which is with God in heaven, for there is the true peace, rest, and safety.
Here hence therefore arises that which has now been vnanswerablie said, that
the praying unto and calling upon Saints, is against the honor and glory of
God, and against the Saints own rest, peace, and safety. For it is
unspeakable to show how many Saints they run unto in Popery. And thence
arose the use of Pilgrimage, a man runs one while hither to Mary the Lords
mother, shortly thither to Saint John, This Popery is heathenish idolatry.
and presently again to Saint Benet, or to Saint Barnarde, wherein is surely
sought the Saints honor, not Gods. And there hence it is also come to pass,
that there be almost as many Gods, as Saints in heaven. Saint Nicholas is the
God for the water, Saint Leonard for the prisoners, Popish foolerie. Great
impiety to spend so much upon senseless things, and forget Joseph's bonds and
Lazarus his misery.
Saint Sebastian for the pestilence, S. Apolonia for the tooth-atch, and more
such like. Thence also is it, that men show over abundant honor unto their
images, and cloth them with Velvet, and silken gowns, with great riches
about their hands and necks, with stately Rosaries, as they call them, and
with beautiful and excellent garlands set upon their heads; they kneel down
also and pray before them, and give honor unto dead, senseless, wodden, and
stone images, clothing them after the brauest manner. But contrariwise, they
let the living images and fellow members of Christ Jesus, go bare and naked,
and dye with hunger.

Of the Mass. The Mass is alike available against diseases, as ringing of
Bells is against enemies and evil spirits. 4. Kreitzer make 30. starling.
Well then, let that also suffice for this point: Now I will go to Gods
chiefest and holiest service that the Papists have, namely to the Mass, and
will truly show what I have observed therein, whereby we shall hear and
understand that Christ's voice is not hard in the Mass, but Antchrists. In
Popery the Mass is esteemed and said to be good, and a sure means against all
kind of diseases or heaviness. And therefore it cannot go so straightly with
any man but he will run to the Mass forthwith, and therein seek all help and
aid: thither come godly men and devout women one after another, and bring ten
or twelve Kreitzers, more or less (and yet it may not well be less) for then
the Sexton that receives the money and appointes the mass, will not endure it
(neither dare such a one come the second time) and desire a Mass, of our Lady,
that is, of Mary the mother of our Lord, this man of S. Hanna, and another one
of S. Sebastian, and of such like more. Or this man will have a Mass for some
bodies soul, because perhaps he takes no rest in the night: the Massing
Priests care not what be the cause, but receive the money, and read on forward
their Mass. For none may well desire a Mass gratis: And if one desire an open
and public office to be sung, whether it be for a soul in Purgatory, or
otherwise for the honor of any saint, he that desires it must give an
imperial doller (4. shillings 6. pence) for it, neither may it be a farthing
less. And yet all this must not be accounted Simony, but a mere Alms, The
Mass is a fair. The errors of the Mass.
although it be exacted and gotten by force. And this is the Mass fair. The
errors therein are these. First when the Masse-munger has laid al his
trinckets which appertain unto the Mass upon the Alter, he goes down again
from the Alter, and makes his confiteor, that is, his confession, wherein he
confesses not only unto God, but unto Mary, S. Michael, S. John Baptist, unto
the Apostles Peter and Paul, and unto all the Saints. But wherein have I
offended Saints, that I must confess my sins unto the^? David was better
taught, 1. Error, Horrible Idolatry, confessing unto saints.
who said unto God Psalm. 51. v. 14. Have mercy upon me o God, according to the
multitude of thy compassions, for against thee only have I sinned. This
therefore is an error in the entrance of the Mass, that a man must confess
unto the Saints that are dead, and which cannot forgive sins, now when this
confession is ended, he rises and comes again to the altar, makes a Cross
upon the altar, and whilst he is kissing the same cross, says: Oramus te
Domine, per merita sanctorum tuorum, quorum reliqua hic sunt and omnium
Sanctorum, vt indulgere digneris omnia peccata mea. Which is in English thus
much: We pray thee O Lord, by the merits of thy Saints, whose relics are
here present, and of all Saints, 2. Error, desiring to have all sins forgiven
for the merit of Saints: to Christ's dishonor.
that thou would vouchsafe to blotte out all my sins. Behold here loving
Christian, what a notable prayer this is? where remains the merit of our
alone Mediator and Savior Jesus Christ? O blasphemy against God, what have the
Saints deserved, that God should forgive me my sins for their merits sake? In
the 5. of the Revel. v. 9. it is accorded how the Saints praise Christ and say.
O Lord thou have redeemed us to God, by thy blood. Behold, there the Saints
themselves acknowledge, that they are redeemed and delivered by the blood of
Christ, that is, they have obtained heaven by his blessed merit. But if the
saints by the blood of Christ, and his merit, have obtained heaven, then it
follows that they have not merited it: and if they have received nothing for
themselves, they ca^ surely merit nothing for me. Idolatrous prayer.
It is therefore an idolatrous praying, to desire that God for the merit of
Saints, would forgive us our sins: but we will leave unto the Papists their
idolatry, and pray thus: We pray thee O God mercifully to forgive us our sins
through the merit of thy beloved son Jesus Christ our Savior.

Further, when it comes now to the sacrificing, then the Masse-munger takes
the plate whereon the Hostia lies, heaueth it up a little, and says: 3. Error,
the Host called an unspotted Sacrifice.
Susepe, Sancte Pater, omnipotence aeterne Deus, hanc immaculata hostiam, etc.
In English: receive holy father, Almighty eternal God, this unspotted host,
which I thy unworthy servant offer unto thee my true everliving God, for all
my sins and transgressions, also for the sins of all that are present, yea
for the sins of all faithful Christians alive and dead, that it may serve
for mine and their health to everlasting life. This also should be a prayer,
but is nothing else the^ a horrible blaspheming of God. For the holy scripture
knows not but of one only unspotted sacrifice, which is Jesus Christ, who
once offered himself upon the cross for our sins, and the sins of the whole
world, by which alone we are cleansed, and by this only Sacrifice, and by no
other, can or may we attain unto everlasting life.

When they proceed forward, and take in hand the great Canon, as they term
it, 4. errors in the great Canon, praying God to sanctify that, they take to
be his immaculate son.
wherein they hold the heart and treasure of Gods true service, lies hid, yet
notwithstanding there are certain special and horrible errors therewithal,
which are directly against Gods word. As first that the Masse-monger says,
that prays God the Father, Vt sanctices, benedicas and acceptum habeas, etc.
Namely that God would sanctify, bless, and accept this Sacrifice, which
should notwithstanding be his son. And who at the first sight, perceives
not, that this is a great error, striving against Gods word? What? is not the
Son of God then, whom (as they say) this sacrifice signifies, yet
sanctified, is he not yet blessed, and is he not as yet accepted of his father?
Is not the Son one eternal true God, with the Father and the holy Ghost?
that surely they will not deny. And God says, Leui. 11. v. 44. We should be
holy as he is holy. Yet there is none so holy as our God, Psalm. 99. v. 5. And
the Prophet Esaias cap. 6. v. 1.2.3. declares how he saw the heaven open, and
saw the Lord sitting upon a high throne, and lifted up; and the Cherubins and
Seraphims stood round about him, The blesed Trinity.
and cried without ceasing one unto another: Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of
Hosts our God; Which is expressly spoken of the holy Trinity; the person is
threefolde, and yet but one divine essence or being.

Christ also according to his holy humanity, is likewise perfect and holy,
Christ's humanity perfect and holy.
and anointed with all fullness of the holy Ghost, John. 3. v. 34. Wherehence
it is that the Angel says, Luke 1. v. 35. That holy thing, which shall be
borne of thee, shall be called the son of God. If Christ Jesus now be the
second person of the Trinity, he holy was honored and prayed unto of the
Angel, and also is holy according to his humanity; then is it blasphemy, to
pray God the Father, to sanctify him first in the Mass, seeing he himself is
the sanctifier of all that are sanctified. The other word, namely, that thou
would bless him, has all one sense. Oh great blindness: we Adams wretched
children, shall and must be blessed in Christ Jesus, for that is the seed,
whereof God said to Abraham, Genesis 26. v. 4. In thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed. David says and prays in his 67. Psalm. v 6.7. God,
our God shall bless us, God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth
shall fear him. Through which thrice recited word, God, is also understood the
holy Trinity. Now as David prays that God would bless us, so the
Mass Priest prays that God in his massing sacrifice would bless his son,
who notwithstanding is God equal with him; which of these prayers then shall
we say belongs now unto God? without doubt, David's prayer must needs be much
better, David's prayer being true, the massing prayer is false, which we are to
avoid, and use David's.
for it proceeds from the holy Ghost. That also should we now follow, and
pray God, that he would vouchsafe to bless us through his son: but the
other, seeing it is Antichristian, we ought to avoid and fly. Also that the
Mass Priest says: It may please thee to accept of thy son, who through and
by this Sacrifice is sacrificed unto thee; is even like the former, a
blasphemy. The Evangelists show, Math. 3. v. 17. and 16. cap. v. 16.17. Mark.
9. v. 7. Luke. 9. v. 20. that a voice came down from heaven and sounded over
Christ: This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Peter testifies
2. Pet. 1. v. 16.17 that he and his fellows heard the sound upon the hill.
Wherehence it certainly comes to be blasphemy for us to desire of God, it
would please him to accept of his son. In the great Canon likewise are these
words, 5. error. 2. sold.
Suppl^ces terogamus, omnipotens Deus, iube haec perferri per manus sancti
Angeli tui in sublime altar tuum in conspectu diuinae maiestatis tuae. In
English thus. We humbly beseech thee Almighty God, command that this (namely
this Sacrifice) may be carried by the hand of thy Angel upon the high Altar
before the presence of thy divine Majesty. Who observes not in this vain
frivolous prayer, two great errors? For first this prayer thrustes Christ the
son of God out of his throne, 1. Thereby they thrust Christ out of his throne.
even out of the throne of his honor and glory, as though Christ were not as
well in time of the Mass in heaven, as upon earth in the Mass. Where with our
Christian faith wherein we acknowledge, that Christ sits at the right hand
of his heavenly father, is overthrown; which notwithstanding is much and often
read in the holy scriptures. As Mark. 16. v. 19. Luke 24. v. 51. Act. 7. v. 55.
Romans 8. v. 34. and Coloss. 3 v. 1. Secondly it is blasphemy, in that the
Masse-munger prays, 2. They rob Christ of his omnipotency making him
inferior to the Angels. Christ ascended of his own power without all aid of
Angels.
God would command his Angels to carry this Sacrifice (namely his son) upon
their hands before his divine Majesty's sight. Herewith they would rob Christ
of his omnipotency, as though Christ were not so mighty, that he ascended into
heaven of his own strength, but that the Angels must or had carried him up
thither upon their hands. But the Scripture testifies unto us, that Christ
ascended into heaven of his own strength. Act. 1. v. 9. Ephesians. 4. v. 8. Psalm.
68. v. 18. Heb. 4. v. 14. In which places it is expressly said, that Jesus
ascended into heaven, and to be understood by his own strength, and had no
need at all of the Angels service thereunto. But he is so ascended into heaven,
that also he has not left and forsaken his faithful Christians upon earth.
Math. 8. v. 20. and Chap. 28. v. 20. but is present in the Lords Supper (to the
worthy receauer) and needs not thereunto any ascending or discending, Here
the Author has (according to his holy humanity) which is erroneous, and by his
cited scriptures not proved. For they speak of a spiritual not of a corporal
presence. 6. Error, is to lay hands on Christ, and to crucify him again.
nor yet any help of Angels as the Papists dream. And who sees not now that
the Mass in every thing strives against Gods word? This is done in the
chiefest service of God: and therefore beloved, you may imagine how it stands
with them in other things: and yet the Papists rest not, but first lay their
hands directly upon Christ himself, for when the Mass draws near to the
end, the Mass priest takes the body in his hand (for they maintain with
great vehemency, that after Consecration there is noe longer any bread left at
all, but that the bread is wholly changed into the flesh of Christ) and breaks
the same in the midst asunder, lays the one piece upon the plate, the other
which he holds in his hands he breaks again in two pieces, and throws
the one piece into the cup, but lays the other also in the plate: and so
breaks the Lords body into to three parts. And this surely is to lay hands
upon Christ anew (that we may so speak) to crucify him again. The Heathen
were not so wilful as to break a bone of Christ's dead corpse hanging upon
the cross: which was therefore done says S. John. Ioh. 19 v. 36. That the
scripture should be fulfilled, which says Exo. 12. v. 46. Not a bone of his
shall be broken. But yet the Papists break him into three pieces: Is not this a
horrible thing to be heard? And yet the Papists will turn all the sacrifices
of the old Testament, and especially the Passe-ouer; to have signified the
sacrifice of the Mass, that all the Prophets prophesied thereof, that this
only is Judge sacrificium, that daily sacrifice, whereof Daniel speaks, Dan.
8. v. 12.13. and 11. v. 31. and 12. v. 11. that this is Oblatio munda, The pure
offering, whereof Malachie speaks Mal. 1. v. 11. And to prove that Christ
himself also ordained this Mass sacrifice, The places quoted for the Mass,
prove nothing for it.
they allege Luke, 22. v. 19.20. And also that the Apostles (but chiefly
Paul) had said Mass, and confirmed the same, 1. Cor. 10. v. 16.17. etc. and.
11.23.24. etc. whereas notwithstanding they are never able to show out of the
above alleged places of Christ, and Paul, that either the Lord, Christ, or
Paul, in the same ever ordained or confirmed the Mass, An exhortation unto all
to avoid Popery.
but the Lords Supper as we faithful Christians daily use: Let this also
suffice to be said of the third part. Wherefore I exhort all people, but
especially loving parents, that they will faithfully admonish and warn their
children to fly from popery as from Satan: For I am well persuaded these
few, yet fearful errors, will give them just occasion to take heed of
Popery, and thus has our loving, merciful God, of his great mercy sought
me, found me, and pulled me his unworthy servant, although I were then no
servant but a persecutor, no sheep but a wolf, no shepherd but a destroyer
of the sheep, out of popery that I may now joyfully sing and say with the
prophet David, The snare is broken, and I am delivered, the Lord was my helper.
Here hence the^ upon the knowledge of such errors, The Authors thanks giving
and prayer.
seeing that thou O God, father of mercies, have opened my eyes, and lightened
my understanding, that I might know them to be such errors, and also have
given me a heart not to contend with thee, I praise and thank thee, through thy
son Jesus Christ. And I also beseech thee father of mercies, through thy
son Jesus Christ, thou would graciously forgive me all my sins,
abominations, and Idolatries, which I have done and accustomed my self unto
in popery (against the clear light of thy holy word) these twenty years,
even for thy beloved son Jesus Christ his merits; for I did it ignorantly. I
entreat thee likewise Father of mercy, thou would of thy like grace and
goodness, mercifully keep and preserve me in this known truth, strengthen me
as thou did strengthen thy servant Paul, when he put the Jews to rebuke.

And I pray no less the whole Christian Church, His request to the
congregation.
to remember me in their prayers, that our merciful good God, moved by the
prayers of honest and faithful Christians, may keep me the more graciously,
and make me strong and sure in this my knowledge.

And hereupon I Godfride Rabin, He proves this his recantation to be sincere.
protest and witness before the eyes of thy bottomless mercy, before thee
Jesus Christ my alone savior and redeemer before thee God the holy spirit, who
in Baptism sanctified me to be a Christian, and before you as a Christian
congregation, that by Gods gracious assistance, I will not depart from this
pure doctrine and known truth, neither through joy nor sorrow, neither
through hunger nor misery, neither through good nor ill success; But as
before I have said, will abide constant to my end: whereunto God assist me with
his holy Gospel. Moreover I do Anathematice and curse that blasphemous
popery, with all other sects and heresies, which fight and strive ever more
and more against Gods word Amen.

The Declaration of Simon Palory of Richeleieu, heretofore Prior and
provincial in the pretended order of the Holy Cross, according to the
protestation by him made in the reformed church of Caen, the 11. of March. 1601.
1. Cor. 4.6. Presume not to know above that which is written.


I Make no question but many will be offended at this my change: I do foresee,
that many likewise will speak opprobriouslie and injuriously of me: and
therefore I thought it not amiss to make known unto you all, what my
profession has bin until this present, and the motives that have stirred me
to take this resolution in hand.

It is about 18. or 20. years that I have lived in the order of the
Holy-Crosse: which profession I have not left for any lightness or humorous
conceit, God is my witness: for before I took this holy resolution upon me. I
have endured many combats in my self. I have well pondered and foreseen the
dangers and inconveniences whereinto I might fall: I have seen that according
to the world I am sufficiently furnished wherewith to live at pleasure, and
therein to spend the residue of my days; and forsaking the same, I have
likewise foreseen, necessity and much unquietness. Neither am I entered into
this happy resolution through any coffeehouse received by any of these of
my order: I have Letters testimonial from our General, which sufficiently
testify how I was honored and beloved of those of my order: but I must now
come to unfold unto you that which has awaked me in the prime of my pleasures.

I have thoroughly considered in my self the great contentions that have been
and yet are in Christendom touching religion. I have cast the eyes of my mind
upon that mortal hatred, which the greatest part of the world (and those too,
that are the greatest personages) do bear to true religion, and the professors
thereof. I have laid before me the sharp and grievous persecutions exercised
against them: and on the other side I cannot forget their constancy and firm
resolution, to maintain that which makes them so odious among so many
assaults, and dangerous trials, contrary to man's nature which seeks after
naught else but rest, and that, which may bring him solace and pleasure. This
consideration makes me suspect that it is more then a humane spirit that awakes
in them these heavenly motions so smally acceptable to the flesh. I here the
voice of the Lord speaking by his holy Apostle: Try all things, but retain
that which is good. 1 These. 5. John 5. Act. 17.
I here our Savior Christ commanding us to found the Scripture; the example of
the faithful of Berea, who examined the Scriptures, to see if that which S.
Paul preached was answerable thereunto, comes into my memory, I behold how it
was a question of eternal salvation, and deserved in good earnest to be
thought upon: I confess freely, that in coming and going from place to place
for the execution of my charge of provincial, I have communicated with some of
the religion as well Ministers as others: I have seen and have bin constrained
to confess that al manner services are not acceptable in Gods sight. Ierem. 7.
Es. 29.13. Math. 15.8.29. Colos. 1.
He condemns by his Prophet Esaias, and by our Savior Jesus Christ in S.
Matthew, the commandments and traditions of men: he rejects by Saint Paul to
the Colloss. voluntary services, what apparaunce or show so ever they have of
devotion.

He forbids us in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 4.
to do that which shall seem good in our own sight, and enioyneth us, to do
only that which he commands us, neither to add nor diminish his word: he
cries unto us by his Prophet, Who has required that at your hands: Such and
an infinite number of other like places of Scripture have induced me to learn
whether my profession were of Gods institution, or if God were the author of
those services which now bear greatest sway in the midst of the Roman
Church. I have busied my self in reading some books entreating of Religion,
and such as handle matters now in controversy. I have bestowed some time in
reading and examining the places of holy Scripture, whereof Saint Paul
speaks, 2. Tim. 3.
that the whole Scripture is given by inspiratinn of God, and profitable to
teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man
of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works: John. 5.39
Esaias. 8.
whereof he also bears record, that the Scripture is of power to make us
become wise to salvation through faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. It is she,
as I said before, to whom our Savior Christ sendes us, as also the Prophet
Esaias, when he uses these words; Romish service.
To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them: there have I found, seeking her
opinion and advice touching the service and doctrine maintained in the Roman
Church, which she in no wise approoues, but contrariwise in express words
condemns it. I have not disdayned to peruse the ancient fathers and doctors
of the Christian Church, whom the Roman Church ordinarilye use for a buckler
against those of the religion: their own words do make me know, that their
books serve not so much to confirm the services in the Church of Rome, as to
destroy them.

One thing has exceedingly moved me, and that is the Mass and prayers used
in the Roman Church, Mass.
which bear witness against themselves: having many traces and relics of
the ancient doctrine of the primitive Church, which was in the Apostles time.
And to show that I do not speak this at random, I will produce some witnesses
as well out of the holy Scriptures and ancient fathers, as out of that which is
contained in the Mass, and in the service of the Church of Rome.

The principal controversy at this day is concerning the pure service of God.

Those of the Church of Rome, and in general all the religious thereof do
fully esteem and conceive it to consit in praying to Saints and Ladies,
Praying to Saints.
to honor and serve them: nay which is more, to present themselves before
their images and there yield up their offerings and devotions.

God speaks so plainly by his first commandment to worship and serve him
only, Exodus 20. Math. 4. Deuteronomy. 6. Esaias. 48. Exodus 20.
that it is easily seen how he condemns all service in the Roman Church.
And heereunto I add his protestation made by Esaias: Not to give his glory to
another: and his declaration else where, that he is jealous of his honor. What
can there be more express against all the services of images, then the
prohibition by the second commandment: Against Images.
not to make any image, nor the likeness of any thing, not to bow down to it
and worship it. I should never have done, if I should rehearse all the
passages of holy Scripture, which are against images and the service of them:
Haba. 2. Ierem. 10.
they are called vanity, teachers of falshoode, and those that shall serve them
are threatened to be brought to confusion.

The other great contention at this day, is touching the transubstantiation and
worshipping of the host. Transubstantiation.
They persuade themselves in the Church of Rome, that the bread and wine of the
Mass, after their consecration is no more bread and wine, but the true and
natural body of our Savior Jesus Christ: and thereuppon they forge that the
substance of bread and wine must not be there any more sought for under these
apparances of bread and wine: Christ Jesus is there really all whole both God
and man in his own proper substance: and therefore they teach men to bow down
themselves and worship this bread and this wine: wherein doubtless they commit
a great Idolaty if Christ Jesus be not there, Act. 3.22. Acts. 3.20. John.
12.8. Mat 28.5.6 Mar. 24.23 Mar. 13.21 Luke. 17. Ma. 24.27
as they would have it believed. And I pray you what mean so many places of
the holy Scripture, which testify, that Christ Jesus is ascended up into
heaven, that from thence he shall not come, until he comes to judge the
quick and the dead, that the heavens do contain him, until the day that all
things shall be restored, that we shall have the poor always with us, but him
we shall not have always, that we must not follow those that shall say Christ
is here, Christ is there, that he shall come like lightning that goes from
the east toward the west?

The Apostle Saint Paul names bread and cup the bread and wine in the
celebration of the supper? Whosoever shall eat of this bread, 1. Cor. 11.
says he, and drink of this cup. etc.

Our Savior Christ Jesus, after the communication of his supper, Math. 26.
Mark. 14.22.23.24. Luke 22.19 John. 4.14
names the cup which he had ministered to his Apostles, the fruit of the
Vine. I will drink no more (says he) of this fruit of the vine: he himself
requires it at the hands of his worshippers. Who worship the father in spirit
and truth, places wholly contrary to the doctrine of transubstantiation and
adoration of the host. 1. Cor. 10.16.17.
I know well that the bread of the supper is called the body of Christ, and
the wine also the blood of Christ: but notwithstanding I note on the other
side, that the same bread is called the communion in the body of Chrost: the
wine is called the blood of Christ, but it is also named the communion of the
blood of Christ, and the new Testament in the blood of Christ. Which places
teach us that we must not always take the words in the foot of the letter,
nor understand that the bread and wine of the supper be not more bread and wine
in their substance: but as bread is called the communion in the body of Christ,
and the wine, the communion and new testament in the blood of Christ: for
because they represent unto us our communion in the body and blood of Christ,
and the new testament in the same blood of Christ, and moreover, the bread and
wine of the Lords supper represent unto us the body and blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ, August. in prolog. tract Psalm. 3. Tertul^adu. Marcio. lib. 4.
chap. 40. Et lib. 3. Cotra eunde, cap. 19.
as S. Augustine and Tertullian name them, the one a sign the other a figure
of the body and blood of Christ. And this was the reason when Christ
instituting his supper has said of bread This is my body, and of wine, This
cup is my blood, Hence it comes that the ancient Church (as the words of
the Mass gives us to understand (when they came to the communication of the
supper) used this exhortation, sursum corda, thereby aduertising the faithful
to lift up their hearts above the visible things of the Sacrament, and to
embrace Christ Jesus in heaven through a lively and true faith.

And such, or the like manner of speaking is not to be thought strange: for
there is not any but does acknowledge that here is a question of a Sacrament;
and it is well known that in matter of Sacrament, the Scripture uses to give
unto the sign, the name of the thing signified: as when she names the
Circumcision, covenant, Genes. 17. Exo. 5.11.
albeit it was but a token of the Covenant and the Lamb which was offered in
the Passe-ouer, she names him Passach, that is to say, Passage: and yet
notwithstanding he was but a token of passage.

Sacrifice for quick and dead.
They think that in the Mass there is a sacrifice propitiatory for the
remission of sins both for the quick and dead: but I do see that the whole
Scripture sendes us to the sacrifice of Jesus Christ which he has offered;
Heb. 20. Romans 5.
viz. his own body upon the Cross. It is through this only oblation, that we
be made holy, and have eternal redemption. How can the Mass be propitiatory
for our sins, seeing that in the Mass there is no effusion of blood; Heb. 9.
and as the Apostle to the Hebrews says; There is no remission, without
shedding of blood. I have considered, and oftentimes meditated as well on the
three Evangelists, as on Saint Paul touching the institution of the Supper of
our Savior Jesus Christ, Heb. 5. and 7 Psalm. 110. Math. 1. Acts. 4. 1. Cor. 22.
whereupon they would build and ground the sacrifice of the Mass; But I have
seen plainly that it was without any appearance of reason. For Christ Jesus,
under the forms of Bread and Wine, presents his body and blood, and commands
to communicate it, and to preach his death and passion until his coming: he
speaks nothing at all touching the offering it in sacrifice.

I find likewise in other places in the scripture, that Christ Jesus is the
only sacrificer according to the order of Melchisedech: that through his only
sacrifice, the wrath of God is appeased: and therefore he is called Jesus, that
is to say Savior. S. Peter says, There is no other name given under heaven
whereby we must be saved. S. Paul says, that he rejoices in nothing, but in
Jesus Christ, and him crucified. It were a needelesse thing for me to reckon
up all places that serve for this purpose. In the Mass it self there are
words to be found, which bear record, that those that have composed it, have
been constrained to confess, that aunciently in the action of supper, there
was but a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, according to the doctrine of
Saint Paul, When, and as often as you shall eat of this bread and drink of
this cup, you shall pronounce the death of our Savior until his coming:
Mass condemned by her own Canons.
and behold the proper speeches touching the same in their own Canons; Pro
quibus tibi offerimus, vel qui tibi offerunt, hoc sacrificium laudis pro se
suisque omnibus; that is, For which we offer unto thee, or those that offer
unto thee this sacrifice of praise for themselves and all others. And in
another place in a Collect for the dead, Praesta quaesamus omnipotens deus, vt
animae pro quibus he sacrificium laudis t^ae obtulmus maiestati; that is,
Grant we beseech thee Almightye God, that the souls for whom we have
offered unto thee this sacrifice of praise, etc. And in another Collect
beginning, Propitiare Domine, there is, pro quibus tibi offerimus sacrificium
laudis, that is; Be merciful O Lord to those for whom we have offered unto
thee this sacrifice of praise.

The Church of Rome nourishes men in ignorance, Reading the Scriptures
forbidden.
forbidding lay people and women to read the Scriptures: and in their prayers
and assemblies they use an unknown tongue. I could never comprehend how many
be accorded herewith, that which is said in the Psalms: Happy is he, Psalm. 1
Psalm. 19. and 119. Deuteronomy. 4.
who in the law of the Lord exercises himself day and night: that the law of
the Lord is an undefiled law, converting the soul, and gives wisdom to the
simple: that she is a light to lighten our feet, etc.

Saint Peter says, that we do well to be attentive to the reading of the
Prophets, which give us light as it were a Candle in a dark place: and Saint
Paul says in general terms, that whatsoever is written, is written for our
learning. Saint Jerome knew very well this doctrine when he wrote to Lata in
these Terms: Let the daughter love divine and heavenly books, insteade of
sylke and precious stones: and in those books, let her not be delighted with
the outward gilding and embrodering of the cover, but with the inward erudition
distinguished and corrected according to faith: let her learn first by the
Psalms of David, to renounce wordly vanities: let the Proverbs of Solomon
teach her to live virtuously: let her accustom her self to contemn and
detest earthly things, in Ecclesiastes: let her follow the example of patience
and virtue in Job: let her take the holy Gospel into her hands, and never let
it depart from her, but with all her heart let her study the Acts and Epistles
of the Apostles: and when she shall have enritched the closet of her heart
with such riches, then let her learn the doctrine of the Prophets, and the
books of Moses: and for the last, the Canticles: For if she should have read
it in the beeginning, she might peradventure have been wounded in her heart,
by not rightly understanding the holy songs of the spiritual weddings, under
carnal words. Upon this purpose Saint Augustine doubts not to pronounce,
August. in hu. 50. Sermon to his brethere^ in the desert:
that he, who makes no reckning to read and meditate in the holy Scriptures
sent from Paradise, ought to fear not only the incurring of eternal
tribulations, but also the enduring everlasting pains and punishments. For it
is so dangerous unto us not to read the holy Scriptures, that with great
grief of mind the Prophet cries out: Esaias. 5. Ose. 4. 1. Cor. 14.
For this cause my people have been led into captivity, for that they have no
knowledge: for he that is ignorant, shall be ignorant: and a little after he
adds, that those who will not understand in reading in this world, God will
not know them in the day of judgment: and then finally he exclaimeth, Why are
we not careful to read the holy Scripture, where our souls are fed and
nourished for ever.

Service in an unknown tongue.
As for the service used in a tongue unknown, I am greatly abashed, that so
many reasons used by the Apostle S. Paul (in the 14. Chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians) to withdraw men from so palpable abuse, could not
touch nor move the hearts of the Pastors and Governors of the Roman Church,
for to feed the poor People with a better nourishment.

They compel them moreover to confess all their sins to the ear of a
Priest: Auricular. confession.
which thing they would not use, if they had but penetrated into the knowledge
of these words of David, Who can tell how often he offends: O cleanse thou me
from my secret faults: or if they had regard unto the example of the self
same David, Psalm. 19.
who says, that it was to God alone that he confessed his sins.

The Church of Rome, teaches that salvation must be sought for, Justification
by works.
in man's merits, and that our justice comes through works: but I should be
too long in reciting all that which the Scripture says to the contrary. For
she does acknowledge that there is not any sufficiency or capacity in man
to do well: we are not able to think any good thing of our selves, 2. Cor. 3.
Genesis 6. and 8 Psalm. 53. 1. Cor. 2. Gala. 3. 2. Tim. 1. Romans 3.8. and. 5. Act.
1.3. Phil. 3.
as the Apostle says: she condemns the thoughts of man's heart even from his
in fancy, and says that they are at strife with GOD: and that they cannot be
made obedient to the law of God: she pronounces that men are dead in sin,
and affordes them no hope but in the mercy of GOD, through the obedience of our
Savior Jesus Christ: and further she declares that we be justified gratis by
his exceeding great mercy, through faith in Jesus Christ, without the works
of the law. And certainly we stand in great need thereof: for as Saint Ieromie
says, Hierom in Pro. cap. 20 Et in Eccl. cap. 7. Lib. de orat.
what righteousness and what cleanenesse can be here in the life of the just?
the works which we minister through this body of ours, are always mingled
with some error: we be taught, says Saint Gregory of Nice, in the holy
Scripture, that there is not one to be found among men, which can pass one
only day without spot.

And therefore Saint Augustine was moved to say that which every one of us
ought to say of ourselves after this example, I presume not at all of my self:
In Psalm. 58.
for what good have I wrought to the end thou should be merciful unto me,
O my God, and that thou should justify me? What have thou found in me but
only sins? There is nothing in me of thee but bare nature which thou have
created: all the rest is my sins which thou have defaced. I have not first
risen up to come unto thee, but thou did come to awake me: and before I
brought any good thing to pass, thy mercy, O Lord, directed me. And Saint
Barnard asks, Sermon. admilites tepli. cap. 11. In his Manuel. cap. 22.
Why men should require again at our hands that which Christ Jesus has paid
for us? He that has borne the punishment of sin, and given unto us his
justice, the self same has likewise paid the debt of death, and has
received life: for death being dead, life returns again, even as sun being
in esse, justice comes again. Now death has been extinguished in the death
of Christ, and the justice of Christ has been imparted unto us. To be short,
I say with S. Augustine: All my hope is in the death of my Savior, his death
is my desert, my refuge, my salvation, my life, my resurectio^, my merit is
nothing else but the mercy of the lord: I am not poor of merit so long as the
Lord of mercies shall have his being: and if the mercies of the Lord are great,
then am I great in merits, and look how much the more he is mighty to save, so
much the more am I assured.

The opinion of Purgatory, whereon are grounded so many Masses, Obits, and
yearly services done to the dead, is plainly overthrown by infinite places
of holy Scripture: whereof some do testify, that there is no condemnation for
those that are in Jesus Christ, and that live after the spirit, and not after
the flesh: that he who believes in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. John. 3.36. and 5.24.
is gone from death to life, and shall not enter into condemnation. Other
places there are that assure us of the forgiveness of our sins in the blood
of Christ Jesus: his blood cleanses us from all sins, 1. John. 1. Ephesians. 1.
Col. 1. Esaias. 5.3. Ephesians. 5. Apoc. 1.
says Saint John: by himself he has purged us from our sins, through his
blood we have redemption, we have deliverance, that is to say remission: he
has been delivered up for our sanctification, and to wash us he has also
washed away our sins, and defaced our iniquity as a cloud: and therefore he
has promised by his Prophet, that men shall seek for the iniquity of Israel,
Esai. 44.
and the sin of Judah, but it shall no where be found: and adds the reason,
because, says the Eternal, J will pardon their iniquities: Ier. 5.
Yea were they redder then Scarlet, they shall be made whiter than Snow. And
likewise the ancient Fathers could never find any other Purgatory in the holy
Scripture, John. 1.
then the blood of the Lamb which takes away the sins of the world. Saint
Augustine says, that the Catholic faith believes according to the
authority of God, that there is the kingdom of Heaven. Secondly, Augu. contra
Pelag. Hipp. lib. 5.
that there is the lake of hell wherein every Apostatate, or stranger to the
faith in Jesus Christ shall suffer torment: of the third place says he, we
know nothing at all, and do not find in the holy Scriptures, that there has
bin any such: and also he says in another place, that there are but two ways:
the one leads to condemnation, and the other to salvation: Sermon. de temp.
232. Euchir. cap. 115. de verb D.
and elsewhere he disputes against Purgatory it self: Brethren, says he,
let no man deceive you, for there are two places, and there is not a third for
any: he that shall not be worthy to reign with Christ Jesus, without doubt he
shall perish with the devil. Here is all the forgiveness of sins: Christ
Jesus taking upon him the punishment of our sins, and not the fault, has
wiped away both punishment and offense: we are not here without sin, but we
shall depart from hence void of sin. Where is Purgatory then? Sermon. 37. de
verb. D.
Mary behold says he in another place, the purging of our sins is the blood
of the just, that is to say, Christ Jesus. Saint Cyprian says, Sermon. 31. de
trinit. lib. 4. cap. 2.
that when we shall depart hence, there shall be no other place allotted unto
us for repentance nor to make satisfaction: here life is either lost or gotten.
Saint Hierom likewise upon Esai. cha 65 says, Cypr. contra Demet. lib. 4. cap
4.
that he who shall not have obtained pardon for his sins whilst he lives in
this world, and shall depart in that manner, does perish undoubtedly. Hence it
comes that another says, that so long as we live here we have a remedy: Grego.
Nazianzene Carm. de Reb. suis in Moral. reg. 1. cap. 2.5. Faith only
justifies.
but when our last end is come, there remains but a perpetual prison, that
is, for those that shall not receive remedy in this life: for it is the time of
repentance says S. Basyll, and so soon as we are gone, why all power of
doing any good is taken from us. How comes it to pass, says he in another
place, that the wretched sinful soul dare be so bold as to approach unto
God? Mary in steadfastly believing, that the purging of her sins has bin
effected through the blood of Christ Jesus. To be short, if Roses may be
gathered among thorns, I might here produce what the doctors of the Roman
Church have conceived hereof. Lomb. lib. 8. Sent. D. 19. C. Nunc.
Lombard says, that even as those who in ancient time beheld the brazen
Serpent lifted up, were healed from the biting of Serpents: so likewise if by a
right and true fight of faith we behold Christ Jesus, who for us was hanged
upon the Cross, we are thereby delivered and freed from the bonds of Satan:
that is to say, from our sins: yea in such sort, that after this life, he
finds in us nothing punishable. Scotus likewise in his 4. book of Sentences,
Did. 15. and the Gloss of the Canons says, that Nec cordis contritione, nec
oris co^fessione peccata remittuntur, sed tantum gratia Dei: sed ipsae
contritio cordis signum est peccata est dimissa, sicut exterior satisfactio
signum est cordis contritionis: gratia enim praecedit contritione^. Epiph. 2.
lib. 1. tho. Heroes. 59. in Cant.
According to which I conclude with Epiphanus, that there is neither fasting,
nor alms, nor repentance, nor justice, neither good nor evil that profits,
after death.

It is not my purpose nor intention to set down here in particular, all that
which has distasted me in the church of Rome; there are very many other
things by me observed, which in no point agree with the word of God. But I
think that those points which I have already touched, are sufficient enough
to make it manifest that I have enterprised nothing without good reason, and
that my conscience would never have suffered me to live in quiet and rest, if I
had done otherwise.

All which things carefully balanced in my mind, have exceedingly moved me
to this resolution: and I think verilye there is no true Christian soul but
is with them. I find that it is a difficult thing to resist Gods voice, and to
fight against the truth which discovers her self so apparently. Psalm. 142.
Psalm. 158.143.119. and 51.
My conscience still urging me, what could I do else, then sit down and say, O
my God lead me in the right way, teach me to do thy will: I am a poor sheep
that is strayed, make me to know thy Sion, Draw me into thy holy Hill: cause
me to see in these troubles and confusions, that she is the true Church and
espouse of our Savior Jesus Christ: bring me into this rock of life, where
thou do gather together thy flock: open my eyes, and suffer me not to be
deceived with the horrible abuses of the world. I did perceive in general the
corruption of men's manners, and therefore I persuaded my self that she was
not the true Church only through holiness of outward conversation: I did
know and confess that she is that company, which has true faith and
follows the infallible doctrine of the Son of GOD, Ambr. in Luke lib. 6.
cap. 9.
according to the saying of Saint Ambrose. He commands us (says he) to
seek and principally to choose that church wherein Christ Jesus dwells: but
there is a church that rejects faith and possesses not the foundations of
the Apostles preaching: and such a Church we must leave. Yet notwithstanding, I
could not choose but somewhat be touched in my heart, in respect of the
uncharitable reproaches, which many great personages have a long time used
against all the Court of Rome, and against the principal governors and
conductors of the Roman church, and especially considering the complaints
and murmures on every side used against the dissolution of the Clergy.
Barnard. in Sermon. 33. Cant. Cant.
I remember the words of S. Bernard who speaks as follows. Now from whom
shall the Church convey or hide her self? All are friends, and all are
enemies: all are allies, and all are adversaries: and are domesticals: and
there is none in peace and charity, all are neighbors, and all seek but their
own profit, They are Ministers of Christ, and serve Antichrist: they walk in
the honor of the goods of the Lord, and yet they honor him not. Beauty of the
strumpet
And hence comes that beauty of the strumpet which thou see dailye gaily
apparalled sometimes like stage players, and other whiles like kings: hence
comes their golden bridles, their imbrodered saddles and gilded spurrs: By
means hereof their tables with delicious cates and rich vessel of silver are
furnished, hence proceeds their drunkenesse and gluttony, the harp and the
viole: hereof comes their wine-presses abounding in plenty, their garners, the
one answering the other always full. By this means are their, hogsheads full
of ointments and sweet savor: their purses never empty: and in respect of
these things forsooth, they are and will be so called, Princes of the Churches,
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deanes, prouosts, and such like. But this
comes not so to pass justly, but because they walk in obscurity, and trace
the works of darkness, and therefore it has bin heretofore prophefied (and
now it is accomplished) behold, in peace my bitterness is most bitter. It has
been before bitter in the death of Martyrs, after more Bitter in the
controversy of Heretics, and now most bitter in the manners of domesticalles:
a man cannot drive them away nor fly from them: so mighty are they both in
power and number: the Churches grief lies in the entrails, it is incurable,
and therefore her bitterness most bitter. Hitherto. S. Barnard.

He that desires to know further, In Psalm. 90. In conuers. S. Paul.
let him read the words of the self same author upon the 90. Psalm, and in
his Sermon of the Conversion of Saint Paul, where he says among other
things: Alas Lord, those whom we see to effect the highest places in thy
Church, are the first and chiefest to persecute thee, etc. He further in his
first Sermon of consideration to Pope Eugenius, breaks forth into these
terms: What is it, faith he, that Image makers say vnvnto thee? Go to and
stick not, for thou may bouldly buy them with the spoil of Churches.

Though there be many that cease not to enueigh against the Ministers of the
reformed Churches, and that stick not to call them Heretics, to charge them
with slanders: yet do I plainly perceive that they are thus hardely dealt
withal, contrary to all reason and equitye of conscience. In some of them I
have found true simplicity joined with modesty, the sweetness of their
demeanure and many other virtues which are the true notes and infallible
effects of a right Christian: by means whereof I am not, nor ought to give any
credit to the detractions or uncharitable speeches of the world. For my
conscience has brought me back to this point, that the truth of Religion
depends not of men's conversation, but of the will of one only God, which by
his word he has made manifest unto us.

I pray the brethren of my Order, and also all other, to consider all these
reasons. I have not forsaken them to iniurye or wrong them in any point, nor to
bring any scandal unto them. If I could have remained among them with
tranquillity of conscience: If I did not think to offend God, by continuing in
this profession wherein I have been norished so many years, surely I had yet
been with them. Brethren, it is not my will nor intention to offend you: I
persuade my self likewise that there is none can justly reprove me of my
comportment and behavior: I was never culpable of drunkenness, of adultery,
or any other such misdemeanour: I was no profane person among you, but have
showed my self zealous in maintayning and advancing your order.

You know, that through my diligence and care, two of your decayed and ruinated
Monasteries have been reedified: the one near Troy in Campane, the other in
the country of Main. I have followed your businesses and affairs in all
travail and vigilancie, and I know you are not ignorant how that I have had
issue to your contentment: I have so well demeaned my self among you, that I
purchased unto you many rents: yea and forgiven you some. Wherefore I beseech
you, and exhort you in Gods name, and with all the affection of my will, that
with a spirit of meekness and fear of God, you do examine if I have not
done holyly and religiously, to lay hold upon the true word of God, directed
thereunto by his spirit? And if you find that it was not my duty to have
done otherwise, then that you would rather (take the self same resolution in
hand, and following my steps, direct your course to the haven of eternal life:
whereunto I hope to come with all the true faithful and elect (then to be
moved against me and to slander) Before my departure I would gladly have laid
open my deliberation and the reasons whereon I grounded my self: I would have
exhorted you to take in hand the same resolution with me, I would have embraced
you, and witnessed that I desire all manner of good unto you: but the most part
may then imagine to what great danger I had exposed my self, and the small
hope left me to have profit therein.

O my Lord Jesus confirm in me this resolution, suffer me not to yield unto
the assaults and combats which are or may be made against me: help my
unbelief, increase the faith within me, make me conceive that assurance of
Abraham, who believed in hope against hope: arm me with thy promises, deliver
me from the snares of my cruel enemies, make me (good Lord) in effect to feel
that thou art with me: and wilt be (as thou have assured Abraham) my most
liberal guerdon. I seek my salvation: give me, Lord Jesus an assured place of
retrait in the holy Jerusalem, spare me in the temptations of the world: but
if it shall please thee to exercise me therein, fill me I beseech thee with the
spirit of constancy, to the end that, finally having carried away the victory,
I may enter into Paradise with thy most happy servants. Amen.

He forsakes not the church, that with his body goes out from her: Chrisost.
in Math. ho^^ 46.
but he that with his spirit and mind renounceth the foundations of
Ecclesiastical truth leaves her. We be gone out from her with our body, but
they from us with their spirit: we have left with them the foundations of the
walls, but they with us the foundations of the Scriptures: we have left and
gone away from them according to the apparances of men, and they from us
according to the judgment of God: and therefore, the Christians corporal do
persecute and trouble us that are spiritual. But to the^ is properly addressed
that which the lord says; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets. etc.

Read, says S. Jerome, the Apocalips, Hieron. ad Marcel. viduam.
and consider that which is there written of the woman clothed in Scarlet with
blasphemy written upon her forehead, of the seven Mountains or hills, of the
great waters of the miserable end of Babylon. This is that rock of Trapeius,
so many times beaten with thunder from God, for that it was displeasyng in his
eyes. Come out from among them my people, says the Lord, that you be not
partakers of her sins and wounds: fly from Babylon, let every one save his
soul, for she is fallen, she is fallen, and is becme the hachitation of
Diuelles, and a refuge of unclean spirits.

The declaration and conversion of Master John Colleij, sometimes a Preacher,
a Caputchin and a Guardian of the Covent of Saint Omer, publikly by him made in
the Church of Sedan, on Sunday the 4. of March. 1601.
THE Kingly Prophet, or rather our Savior Jesus Christ under the figure of
David (most dear brethren) in the 22. Psalm. having prayed the almighty to
deliver his life from the sword, his desolate soul from the power of the
dog, from the Lions mouth, from among the horns of Unicorns, does promise,
if he hear him, to declare his holy name to the brethren, to praise him in the
midst of the great congregation, and to make his vows unto him in the
presence of those that fear him.

If the son of God himself has vouchsafed to make this vow, how much more
am I bound (being a miserable sinner, and having obtained of Gods eternal
bounty my spiritual deliverance) to declare and exalt the name of the
everliving God among you, my brethren, to render unto him my vows, in this
great congregation and assembly of you which fear the Lord: to the end that
those who heretofore have received the like grace as my self (having been
drawn out of darkness, and brought into the true light) may have matter and
occasion to remember the benefit by them received from God and therefore yield
unto him innumerable thanks: always laying before themselves, that as God is
a most liberal bestower of his benefits, so he is a most severe exactour in
expecting thanks for the same: which doubtless is the true mean to obtain
the continuance and increase; ingratitude being nothing else but an obstacle
that hinders the streams of his flowing mercy. And (dear brethren in the
Lord) I make no doubt but that many of you are thoroughly acquainted with my
former conversation and profession, and likewise with my intention. For
certainly I may well say with S. Paul (to the glory of God and my great
conversion) that though heretofore I have been one of the greatest embracers
of the foolish traditions of my fathers, being of that Sect the most
superstitious of the Scribes and Pharisees of the Roman church, when that my
heart was in darkness, my understanding hardened, and her ways and doctrine
wholly tending to death (Prou. 14.) seemed to me pure and right: yet now, my
heart is enlightened and I may contemplate in the bright mirror of the
Gospel, the glory of the Lord plainly. 2. Cor. 3. And my most merciful
father, who has converted me unto himself, through the influence of his holy
spirit, who a long time and that very often has summoned and warned me,
sounding in the inward ears of my mind, that which before he spoke to the
rebellious children of Israel; Walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers,
neither observe their manners, nor defile your selves with their Idols. I am the
lord your God, walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments and do them: which
if a man do, he shall live in them (Ezec. 20) And in another place, he wills
his people to come out of Babylon, that they be not partakers of her syns, and
receive her plagues (Apo. 18) depart, depart ye, go out from thence and touch
no unclean thing. Jsai. 52. Hearing, I say, so many times such and the like
words of Gods divine spirit sound in the ears of my soul, it being a hard
thing for me to kick against the prick; and Gods clemency and bounty through
his patient pursuit surmounting my too great malice and blindness, has now
in the end forced me to obey his voice, and follow his vocation. Hence it comes
therefore dear brethren, that I have forsaken the vain and superstitious
traditions of men, and disposed my heart to receive at large the divine beams
of the eternal sun of justice, the influences of his supreme grace, the
most sweet joys of Gods face, to wit, through the participation of the word of
life, of the excellency of the Sacraments, of the efficacy of the exercies of
piety, of the perfections of a lively faith, and other infinite blessings and
benefits inspired from heaven into the elect, in the mystical society of the
body of Christ. O thrice and four times blessed be that so great power of the
spirit of GOD, which leads me to such good, high, and heavenly things.
Behold me now through the grace of God to have forsaken and abandoned these
seminary abuses of papistry, to become forth from the dungeon and sink of all
filthiness and malice. Behold me loose and freed from the embracings of that
strumpet Babel, the nurserie of all impiety; by whom the holy name of God is
so villanously profaned, and the honor of the sovereign God (infinitely
jealous of his glory) so impudently prostrated of Idols of gold, silver, stone,
wood and clay: behold I say, how that I am come forth from that dangerous
labyrinth of errors, so abominable, as that there is not any man, having never
so little feeling of faith, but does detest and abhor them. My conscience
also, which before had so many times grieved and tormented me, for that she
found her self so far wandering out of the way of the true and lively spirit of
God (which secretly drew her to himself, affoording her no assurance in the
false grounds, which before she sought) now gives me a true repose and
consolation, having found that unknown good which she thirsted after: the
which is now happened to her, when according to the counsel of the wise (Prou.
14.) and through the favor of my GOD, I am departed from that foolish man,
from the son of iniquity, from Antichrist; in whom I have found no lips of
knowledge, but rather of falsehood and deceit. This is the only fruit that
lies hidden under the leaves of this fained holiness, justice, obedience,
poverty, fastings and disciplines, instituted without and contrary to the
word of God. All these fooleries, these proud habilliments and haughty pomp of
the Hierarchy of Antichriste, tend to no other end or use, but to busy,
amaze and abuse the sense of those who do not know the true celestial
ornaments of the city of the living God: which cannot discern the manifest
difference which the faithful see between the crown of thorns of their
Redeemer and Savior Christ Jesus, and the glittering crown of the son of
perdition, sending men to men, and human works; which are in part the
causes of their eternal salvation, which to us and for us is purchased by the
only son of God: to whom he does exceeding injury thus to diminish,
through his false doctrine, his merits, and rendering them insufficient. But if
these poor souls which he amazeth would but enter, how little soever, into
the bottom of their consciences, to judge of this his doctrine, according to
the understanding which God works in them, I do assure my self they would
soon discover and condemn the vanity and falsehood of this deceiuer. For GOD
does suffer by his secret (but most just) providence, that the more they have
their eyes open to their works, as expecting by them salvation, so much the
more are they doubtful, fearful and in despair; what show or appearance
soever the bounty and greatness of their works carrye with them: which
doubtless is a work which God works in them for good, if they would not
wilfully resist the holy Ghost. I speak this by experience which I have in my
self, and in a great number of others, whose inward disposition has been
very well known to me. And surely this cursed teacher of lies and inuenter of
fooleries, does dishonor and outrage to the blessed son of God, not only
in this which has been said, but also most unworthily and outragiously
deuesteth him of all his other dignities and excellencies, wherewith he has
been honored by his eternal father, though in appearance he qualifieth him
the Savior and redeemer of the world: but it is in such sort, as that in
effect, and as much as in him lies, he depriueth and robs him of all that
which is necessary for such an office. And first, what is he so blind, that
sees not plainly how he dispossesseth him of his Sovereign and perpetual
office of Sacrificer, seeing he gives him, coadiutors and successors in this
kind of office, which are the Priests: Christ daily Sacrificed.
who according as he vainly conceiues, do again daily sacrifice the son
of GOD, offering him to the eternal father for the expiation of the sins of
the world. And what, I pray you, means he by this, but that he reputeth the
only sacrifice of the son of GOD, the true defacer of all our offenses, to
be of so small power, and virtue, that it is incapeable and vnsufficent to
deface them for ever? And again is not this preferring of the Priest, saying
Mass, or sacrificing (a mortal and sinful creature, whose lips are
defiled) before the blessed Son of GOD, Christ Jesus, a Lamb without spotte,
in whom there is found no guile nor sin? seeing that every sacrifice is
received in respect of the Sacrificer, as it is written in Genesis 4. The eternal
had respect to Abel and his offering.

I omit for brevity sake a thousand other absurdities, that follow after this
new sacrifice of the Mass, and likewise, a whole world of horrible and most
abominable villainies, which are to be found in the order of these Sacrificers,
as well regular as secular: which sufficiently declare, of what stuff both
themselves and their sacrifice are made.

I will not here say any thing of the gross and beastlye ignorance which is
in many, though they be respected and honored like great Doctors of the people
and governors of souls; which (blinded as they are) they lead with
themselves into the pit of perdition.

I need not likewise to make known to you the vicious life and scandalous
conversation, Of Monks and their lives.
and too too notorious of the religious, and Monks, mere abusers of the
people; who in Cloisters and Monastaries are nourished in idleness, and
entertained with the labor and sweat of the poor and simple people: who
conceiving too good an opinion of them, do oftentimes take the very bread out
of their own mouths, to give it to them, which they abuse over wantonly
through excess and gluttony.

But to return to their chief leader and Patriarche; When this deceiuour
usurps supreme authority over the laws, doctrines and documents of the
son of God accusing them of insufficiency, and lack of power to demonstrate
unto us the Sovereign good, saying in a word that the holy Scriptures are
imperfect; what does he else then deprive him of his doctorall robe.

But the truth is and so it behoues us to believe assuredly, that as Christ
Jesus has sent us from the everlasting Father, as a most wise Master, with
charge and power to bring men to their salvation: so has he likewise by his
doctrine, laid open most sufficiently the way and means thereunto. Traditions:
Whereby certainly is overthrown all the host of traditions, all this Iliade
and infinite number of human inventions, and unwritten doctrines, forged in
the shop of this deceiuer: Pope above the Scriptures.
by the which he does not only surpass, but is also contrary and opposite, to
the divine and wholesome doctrine and precepts of Christ Jesus, a most
sufficient Master and teacher, the true Messiah, both God and man; Pope is
Antichrist.
accomplishing that which S. Paul foretold of him, that he should oppose and
lift up himself against all that, which is called God. 2. These. 2. No less
does he of the royal dignity of Christ Jesus, whereof he depriues him;
attributing it to himself, as well in heaven as earth, usurping and chalenging
the full authority, to dispose after his fancy, of the whole Church, as well
tryumphant as militant.

Hence it comes, that this proud and arrogant deceiuer, Canonising saints.
takes upon him to make Saints, to canonise those that seem good unto him,
deifying them in such sort, as that the siely ignorant people cannot know nor
discern Christ Jesus among this rabble of saints: and eftsoons it falls out
that the bodies of those are honored and superstitiously adored by men in this
world, whose souls are tormented by the diuils in hell. He takes also power
over Angels, Pope commands Angles.
and all the happy spirits of the celestial court, to command them: what
could he usurp more in heaven, unless he would banish and drive God himself
(if he could) from thence. But (alas) what authority takes he upon him here
upon earth? what exceeding great tyranny and cruelty, does he exercise? Some
he excommunicates, anathematizeth others, he takes the temporal and
spiritual sword, he deposes Kings and Monarchs from their thrones; to be
short, being seated in the Temple of God: he causes himself to be worshipped
as God, 2. These. 2. But oh, Lord Jesus when will thou discomfit and bring to
confusion this wicked usurper? by the breath of thy wrath when will thou
abolish him by the brightness of thy coming? when shall this beast with his
false Prophet be cast into the pit or lake, to the end she do no longer seduce
the world, Apo. 19. When shall that hour come, wherein we shall understand
great consolation that voice of the Angel, crying alowde, Rome is Babylon.
She is fallen, she is fallen, that great Babilo^. Apo. 18. O lord when shall
it come to pass that the great nations and kings of the earth shall have
drunk enough of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and have spewed
forth all the venom which already thy have sucked out of her cup? As for my
part, I am weary and tired therewith: and therefore I renounce her, I detest
and abjure her, in the presence of this Church of God, both now and for ever;
loving rather to endure the Cross of Christ in the bosom of his lawful
spouse, then enjoy the pleasures and joys of this world, between the arms of
a shameless strumpet, who has so long time deceived me through her fooleries.
But again I renounce and abjure now and for ever, both her and all her
doctrine; in so much as that it is against the express word of God,
blasphematory, Apostatique, superstitious, and as far from the meaning of
Christ our true master, as darkness from light, as falsehood from truth,
and vice from virtue: most humbly beseeching almighty GOD (thorough the
entralls of his mercy, and through the most precious blood which his son
Jesus Christ has shed for me) that he will not lay to my charge the faults of
my youth nor judge me according to the sins of my ignorance; but rather
pursuing his mercy begun in me, he will pardon all my offenses committed by
me either in works, words or thoughts, and in others, through examples and
wicked superstitious doctrines: and that it would please the same God to work
so, that those who hitherto have been wrapped up in the palpable darkness of
error and ignorance, and luld a sleep under the shadow of the wings of that
strumpet, having been drunk with the wine of her fornication, may now awake
out of that profound sleep, and slumber of death, to taste how little soever it
be of the sauourous fruit of life, and drink only a glass of the delitious
waters of the fou^taines of immortallity, which stream from the house of God,
into the assembly of the elect: for then I do assure my self, they will
forthwith abandon the venomous Cisterns of that defiled strumpet and most
malicious deceiuer. For this end therefore, O merciful father and everlasting
God, we power out before thee, even from the bottom of our hearts, our humble
petitions; for that the compassion we have of so many poor souls (which she
causes to be drunk, and poisoned with a deadly poison, covered over with an
agreeable sweetness) makes our eyes become fountains, and our hearts, to yield
forth unspeakable sighs: considering in the theater of the world, the great
multitude which through the whirlewinde of sedition, is ravished, drawn and
carried headlong into the gulf of perdition. But, O father of light, seeing it
is thy manner rather to use mercy then justice, and that thy will and pleasure
is to use favor, not fury; and that thou do not desire the death of a
sinner, but that rather he turn to thee and live: stretch forth thy hand over
them, draw them to thee, teach them, since thy good pleasure is that all
should come to the knowledge of salvation: Imprint in their souls a desire to
found thy holy Scriptures, and let the discretion of thy holy spirit lead
them togather in these gardens fit and necessary herbs for the physic of
their spiritual infirmities, the food of their souls, the sacrament of
eternity, the certain pledge of felicity. But as for me, O father and most
good God, what shall I render unto thee for those thy exceeding blessings
bestowed upon me? for like a good sheepeheard thou have sought after my
soul, being a poor wandering sheep, and having laid her upon thy
shoulders, have brought her back to thy evangelical sheepefould, to join her
to the flock of thy true faithful: thou have unmasked her eyes, laid open to
her the abuses of Papistry, made known to her where she should find her rest
and tranquillity, the truth of her salvation: thou have forgiven me all my
sins, and healed me of all my infirmities, thou have saved my life from the
pit, thou have crowned me with mercy and pity, and satisfied me with all good
things (Psalm. 130.) so that through this my conversion, and this change, by the
power of my Creator, I am made young and lusty as an Eagle: what shall I then
give unto the Lord for all the good which he has done me? Surely my dear
brethren, even as I esteem and hold this to be the chiefest and most
excellent benefit among all those wherewith it has pleased God of his
incomparable bounty and heavenly mercy to make me pertaker: so willingly I do
acknowledge and confess my self unable to render any thing comparable to so
great a good, yet notwithstanding, among all those that are bound to yeilde
hearty thanks to God, I do acknowledge my self at this time most of all
indebted. For, alas, without this benefit, what profit should I have received
of all the favors which came from him, but condemnation, ruin and confusion?
What would it have auailed me that the well-beloved son of God, Christ Jesus (who
became obedient to his father) endured the ignominious death of the Cross, for
my reconcilation to God his father, if I had been deprived of so great a
benefit, if I had continued still in that spiritual fornication wherein I was
altogether ignorant of the pure truth of the Gospel? What vtility, I pray you,
to see my self created after Gods Image and yet to have borne the portrature
and character of beast? What profit to have had the eyes of my body open to
the outward light, and those of my soul debarred of the inward brightness,
and besieged with the darkness of infidelity? Arise then my soul, and
praise the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name: praise the
Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, let his praise be always in
thy mouth, to the end the meek and gentle may here it and rejoice. (Psalm.
103.) O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name together: I
sought the Lord, and he hard me: ye he delivered me out of all my fear. Psalm.
34. Job did curse the day of his temporal birth in this miserable world: but I
ought to bless the day of my spiritual regeneration to eternal life; for
that the God of all mercy and consolation has caused to appear in me the
effects of his eternal election, acknowledging me for his child of adoption,
and for a lawful heir of that great and eternal kingdom purchased for the
elect, through the perfect obedience of Christ Jesus their brother: And as at
this time I have abiured that strumpet and her fornication, so now I promise
and protest before God and his Church, hence forth with all my power to live
and dye in the faith of the Churches reformed, where I see the Gospel purely
preached, and the Sacraments faithfully administered; the confession of whose
faith I will seal, not only with pen and Ink upon paper, but also through the
effusion of my own blood, if need be: and this I fully purpose to do through
the grace of almighty God, who has called me to this resolution, and whom
with all the powers of my soul I do entirely beseech to ratify his vocation
in me, and finally (to make me feel the full effects of his election) that he
would likewise fortify and assist me against all assaults and attempts that
may be presented against me, serving me insteede of a strong and invincible
buckler in all dangers, both spiritual and corporal. I earnestly beseech the
present congregation of the faithful, to receive me into their number, to the
end that after I have fought a good fight with them in this church militant, I
may after my departure hence reign with them in the triumphant. So be it. Amen.

John Colleij.

The Conversion of Signeur Melchior Roman, a Spaniard, sometimes Proctor of the
order of Iacobins at Rome, for the province of Thoulouse, which he has
publicly protested in the reformed Church of Bragerak, the 27. of August 1600.
being Sunday.
THE holy Scripture tells us, that the good Jacob, seeing himself deceived
by Laban (who the more he served him, the less was recompensed, receiving
naught else but ingratitude and injuries) went into the land of promise,
carrying away with him all his riches: which so soon as Laban understood, he
came to seek him in the Mount Galaad, and searched or visited all that which
Jacob had carried away: where he found nothing that was his. And afterward
they made an agreement between them, that from thence forth, the one should
not come toward the other to do him hurt, and for a token here of they
named this Mountain Galaad, which is to say, the hill of Testimony. Saint
Jerome says, and also Pagnine, that Laban signifies whiteness: and Philo the
Hebrew, that this word Laban signifies color: so that whether it be in the
one or other signification, it represents an accidental and inconstant
thing. Who is this Laban? A deceiuer, a traitor and an ungrateful person, who
has so oftentimes deceived Jacob? What is this cursed wretch? who has only
the appearance of good, but no solid nor constant good indeed. It is even this
papistrie, and Sophistry, which we see in these tromperies and deceipts of
riches, and under the title of holiness, of obedience, of poverty, of
fastings, and fained disciplines, leads many to despair. Surely it is a
work of great piety to fly and retire from her. Forasmuch as if we believe
works to be sufficient, we must wholly deny Jesus Christ, and say that his
passion was without fruit: which were a sin against the holy Ghost. And
therefore now do I purpose with all my affection to withdraw me from this
Laban or idolatry, (as did the good Jacob) with an infallible belief that her
promises are vain and deceiving: and I do know my nature to be so depraved
and corrupted, that it were impossible for me to attain salvation through my
works, according to her cursed counsel. And that which I find more
detestable is, that notwithstanding the perfect wisdom of holy writ, whereunto
the Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, and the sacred word of our Savior Jesus
Christ do bear record, that in believing them we shall have life everlasting
(the scope of our desires, and tipe of true felicity) and contrariwise, a
curse, and Anatheme pronounced against those that shall either thereunto add
or diminish, Apoc. 22.21. Yet our adversaries against this celestial truth
(the only foundation of faith) do approve a thousand traditions and unwritten
doctrines, Human traditions.
forged upon a mortal anuile in the shop of human wit. But O prodigious
thing, oh monster of our age, unknown to the most perverse heretics and
fullest of impiety! One Archicoriphee, and as it were a Patriarch of others,
has not blushed to write, nay which is more, to imprint and publish (not
without horrible blasphemy) a little Treatise of the insufficiency of the
Scriptures. Insufficiency of the scriptures.
Where is then the perfection of them which is so highly commended by the
Apostle, who says; It is not permitted to know above that which is written. 1.
Act. 1. Cor. 4. no, not if an Angel should speak otherwise. Gala. 1.5. Could
they not, or ought they not, or had they not the knowledge, or durst they not
fully reveal unto us the mysteries of truth concerning salvation? Surely it
were sacrilege to think it, and Atheism to believe it. Alas, what would
become of so many religious souls, since the worlds infancy, unacquainted
altogether with the inventions of Roman Bishops, brought forth but since a
few forepassed ages: Let us assure our selves, that that which is the first,
whether it be prophecy, or the written gospel, is most true and sufficient to
salvation: otherwise what should we believe, where should we ground our
selves, whereon would our faith lay hold, if we should follow man's
inventions? Every man is a liar, and cursed be he that trusts in the arm of
flesh. Men would teach against Gods word, that the son of man, God and man,
Transubstantiation.
is under the form bread, in the pretended sacrifice of the Mass: that his
body is made of bread, or at least that the substance of bread is changed into
him: that he is to be sought for between the hands of the Sacrificer. Good God
what absurdity is it to seek the father of eternity, the creator of the
world, who has the heavens for his throne (respecting his divinity) and who
according to humane nature, sits on the right hand of the father, from whence
he shall come visibly to judge the quick and the dead, to seek him I say, as
great as he was upon the cross, closed within a little morsel of dowe, less
than half a foot. Should he be found where he is not? What blindness trow
you is this? Let us rather seek him where he advertised us that he would
retire himself, and prepare a permanent habitation for those that are his: he
alone is a faithful witness, he alone is our Doctor to reveal his secrets.
Let us go to the law of grace, to the gospel that speaks plainly and
certainly hereof. What is he so ignorant or foolish that would faste^ to this
corruption the prince of immortality? seeing that the Sacrament is often
subject to the eating of Mice or Rats, and apt soon to corrupt. I can allege
in testimony of the truth, that which I saw at Lymoges in the Covent of the
Iacobins; the Provincial being come thither, found an infinite number of
forms or consecrated sacrifices, much eaten with Rattes and worms, wrapped
about likewise in cobwebs: and again in the said place, the first sunday after
the Octaue (under pretense of religion) the Subprior threw down the box,
falsely and maliciously accusing those of the true religion reformed; thereby
minding to have massacred them as a domestical servant of the said covent
publicly confessed, and therefore was whipped in the said town, and banished
the same. In Leride a goodly town in Spain, in the church of the covent of S.
Dominick, in my presence the proctor of the Covent being come into the city,
said Mass, and consecrated many Wafers to give unto the communicants whereof
sundry were left,, whence returning to the Vestry, one fell down, which he
treading upon, it claue to his wet feet, without being able any way to pull it
off: but was mixed with the dirt which could not be wiped away. Four Augustine
Monks were hanged in Seuel, for that they said Mass, and did not purpose to
consecrate: such is their extraordinary proceeding to cause the people to
become idolaters to the bread and chalice. Molon an inquisitor at Barselon,
after the consecration, did cut the host with cissers. Also Pope Sixtus the
fourth in the town of Florence, commanded that when the Priest held up the
host, the people the^ worshipping should be murdered: which bloody choler was
put in execution. Pope Gregory the 7. having asked the Sacrament touching the
revealing of certain things against the Emperor, and receiving no answer,
threw it into the fire. To be short, Pope Victor the 3. a Bishop of Ebora and
also the Emperor Henry the 7. were poisoned in taking the host and chalice.
Lo, these are the absurdities and prodigious acts whereunto transubstantiation
would subject the glorious body of our Lord, if it could prevail. Besides the
Concomita^cie, which is falsely pretended therein, Sacraments under one kind.
is the occasion of the peoples privation of the cupp against the ordinance of
Christ, who has commanded, saying, Drink ye al. Mat. 26. and the practice
of the Church, 1. Cor. 11. and so they are deprived of consolation in
participating through a lively faith really the benefits of the blood of our
Savior for the remission of sins, and confirmation of Gods covenant. Now the
taste of the substance of bread, the savor and odor of wine, the inseparable
accidents of the essence, their true foundation, and wherein they subsist, do
teach us that the signs abide in their natural and essential propriety: not
in their usage, which represe^ts unto us (as a lively image and really present,
and as an instrument of Gods grace) the spiritual food, the quickening
refectio^, the pledge of immortallity to the penitent and faithful soul;
bread being the communion of the body, and the chalice sanctifieng the
communion of the blood of life, known, received, apprehended and applied,
as well through the secret operation of the mind in the elect, as through the
efficacy of faith: which is a presence of things absent, a vision of things
invisible, an hypostasis of the mysteries of eternal salvation: Lo this is
the truth of this sacrament, contrary to man's tradition. But time will no more
suffer me to repeat the erroneous absurdities of this tradition. Purgatory
Now of Purgatory which they dote upon, it is contrary to the washing and
purging of Christ his precious blood shed upon the cross, applied through
virtue and secret operation of the spirit, and received through a lively faith.
But these are but Monkish absurdities, to imagyne, that the unspeakable dignity
of the Sacrifice of Christ is not perfectly able to blot out our offenses, to
reconcile souls unto God, and to iustyfie before the throne of justice: it is
surely a great deminyshing of his mercy, grace and unspeakable favor, a too
much eclypsing of the inmatchable glory of the Ocean of his compassions. I
leave behind for breuity sake a Chaos of like errors: most humbly beseeching
the Lord to have mercy upon the ignorant, to enlighten the^ in his knowledge,
and to confound those that maliciously war against the truth. I will be no
longer a captive in Babylon, thus to have no remembrance of Sion, nor remember
my self. And for that I cannot sing the Lords song in a strange land, in this
pernicious Babylon, nor upon her banks which do ouerflow with abominations, I
will make rivers of mine eyes with a sweet remembrance and contemplation of
the spirytuall Jerusalem, notwithstanding all aduersityes, which cleanse us from
vicious imaginations, from all superstitions and idolatryes, and to the end I
may worship one only GOD, and believe in his gospel, renouncing all humane
inventions: which faith is given unto us by the holy ghost, through the
preaching of the holy Gospel, as it is witten in Saint John 3. Matthew. Chap.
16. To the Romans, Chap. 10. and in the Acts, Chap. 16. and in many other
places, which to shun prolixity we will not now name. This profit therefore
comes of tribulations. And surely I may well say that which I my self have
experimented a few days past: wherein I was tormented with an infinite number
of imaginations, caused in respect of the absence of my parents, to see my
self in a strange country, to here the Papists murmr and ordinarily speak
against me, with threats and slanders; but howsoever, I did pray unto the Lord
for those that persecuted me, and for mine own comfort and consolation: for it
was the true mean to fortify me the more in the truth of the Gospel, as at
this present I do with my eyes behold fresh comforts, and new effects of the
holy ghost in my soul, bidding me persevere in the obedience of the word of
life. This was the purpose of Esaias, who said; O Lord, in tribulations we will
seek thee: and of the Prophet David; Fill their faces with shame and reproach,
then they will seek thy merciful name. By the mouth of the Prophet Osee says
GOD himself; In their troubles and anguishes they shall rise up and
acknowledge me. By Ezechiell; My Zeal shall be taken from thee, and J will
cease and will no more be angry with thee. God gives us manifestly to
understand in this place, that he is angrye the more with us, when he does
not punish and chastise us with tribulations: for then he shows not the love
he bears unto us. Saint John says in the Apocal: chap. 3. that those whom he
loves he chastises: a great consolation doubtless. Esaias. Chap. 43. When thou
shall pass through the waters, the rivers shall not cover thee: and when thou
shall tread upon the fire, it shall not burn thee. This is represented unto us
in Exodus. 14. when the Hebrews passed through the red sea: in Daniel. 3. when
the young men of Babylon were cast into the burning flames. God could well have
hindered them from casting the three innocent young men into the fire: but he
the more to show his mighty glory, and for the salvation of his own people,
suffered them to be thrown into the fire without receiving any damage or
hurt. In like manner the Lord does show greater mercy unto me, in chastising me
with tribulations, giving me patience and spiritual strength, then if he had
delivered me from the outrageous ignominies and adversities above said. For I
well knew that when I was in tranquillity and rest, he had as it were forgotten
me: but so soon as he laid his cross upon me, I knew that I was his
creature, bought with the inestimable price of his own blood, who has
justified me, through his unmeasurable mercy and heavenly grace. Thus much
does the scripture teach us, when it says, that the King of Babylon saw three
young men walk in the midst of the fiery flames, singing praises unto God;
and that they were accompanied with an other, resembling the son of God. For
tribulation taken with patience, procures God to come to us and be our
defender, being free and loose from papisticall dignities and ambitions: who
with inventions of rich Altars beautified with idolles of gold, and silver
with many thousands of other superstitions, do hinder men from attaining to
the true knowledge of the Gospel or grace.

The imitation of the Apostles, Acts. 5. causes wise men to rejoice in their
afflictions, standing in great fear of prosperity. Saint Jerome compares
tribulation to Jonas his whale: when others thought she swallowed him up to
kill him, she swallowed him up to save him. Saint Gregory says, that like as
perfumes laid upon coals, declare their force and good smell; so men do show
the fortitude of their virtues, passing through the floods of adversity. Saint
Barnard says, that as woll is to be carded, wherewith fine and pure cloth is to
be made so must the life of the just be tormented, to the end their knowledge
prove more excellent. Saint Chrysostom says, that virtue surmounteth in
patiently abiding: that affection is the true haven of heaven, Saint Gregory
proves it. God himself in Saint Mat. Chap. 7. says, that the way that
leads to life is straight and narrow: but that which leads to death is very
large: thereby meaning to infer, that those who would obtain glory, must
first pass through many tempests and difficulties.

And surely it will be an unspeakable contentment unto us, if we consider that
those passages are by Jesus Christ who is the way of glory: and let us not
wonder, if they be set with thorns; but rather think and consider of him who
has first passed them, and whither he at last resorted. In the book of
Wisdom it is written, that the Lord had made known the right way, together
with his kingdom, unto the just. O Lord I beseech thee, at this present, to
show me the right way, that I err not. For I do steadfastly believe, that
Jesus Christ living in me, abolisheth the curse of the law, condemns
sin, mortifieth death, he alone is peace, comfort, justice, and life
everlasting in my hope. Now must fear and amazement give place unto all these:
now must pensiuenes, and hell it self depart from me: Christ Jesus, abiding
and living in me, does consume and banish all evils that afflicted me. Hence
it comes that this union and conjunction is the cause that I am delivered from
the terrors separated from the flesh, transformed into Jesus Christ, and into
his kingdom? which is the kingdom of grace, justice, peace, joy, life, health,
and everlasting glory: so that living in him there is no hurt can chance unto
me. God promised that there should no more come an universal deluge: and in
sign of a peaceable love, he gave the rainbowe, (a pledge of his mercy) which
the Gentiles called Ianus, as says Berosus the Chaldean. This is that bow
whereof S. John speaks in the Apocalips, to be over the head of Jesus Christ,
signifying Christ crucified, with his arms spread abroad. The red color of
which celestial bow represents the blood of Jesus Christ, and his green
color betokens hope: for that in his wounds and blood remain all the hope
of our good being: and the several colors declare unto us the multitude of
his mercies. This is that token which God the Father promised in redemption of
the world: whereof Saint Paul to Titus, Chap. 3. says, That the
bountifulness and love of God appeared, not in regard of any works of
justice by us performed: but he saves us according to his great mercy. When
there shall be presented before mine eyes, the dark clouds of sin: when
sorrows and terrors shall with huge violence threaten me: when dangers,
persecutions, injuries and other torments shall come upon me, then will I
behold the celestial covenant, I will cast my eyes upon Jesus Christ
crucified; in whom I shall find plenty of hope. For he is our only refuge, and
such a one as Saint Paul. 2. Corinths, calls the Father of mercy, and God
of all consolation, comforting us in all our calamities. Wherefore I will
always be running to him, arming my self with invincible patience. For the
good Surgeon shows his experience in dangerous wounds; the physician his
skill in great maladies; in perilous battles, the prudent, courageous and
valiant captain declares his strength and policy; and in great tempests and
storms, the expert pilot exercises his diligence. Affliction is no new thing,
neither am I alone he that endures it. S. Gregory says, that if we would
consider that which the Saints have endured, we should see all our
tribulations to be of very small importance: particularly, if we look upon and
contemplate Jesus Christ, the true God, tormented upon the cross, we should
perceive our miseries in comparison of his, to be but a drop of water in
respect of the whole Sea. And S. Barnard says, that Christ Jesus is not only
the mirror of patience, but the recompense and reward thereof. To this end
therefore will I contemplate his cross, whereby I shall reap great comfort
and reward. But what recompense (say the worldlings) will thou have, seeing
thou have forsaken thy country, thy parents, thy means whereby thou might
have lived pleasantly? thou have left thy vocation, and all these have thou
abandoned in the pride of thy days. Then will I answer them, according to the
saying of Saint Bernard in his meditations; that if it be a difficult thing for
one of the most just under the law to be saved at the point of death; it will
be more hard, and as it were, impossible for him to be saved, that at his death
presents unto God nothing else but his bones, (which dogs refuse) having
given their flesh to Satan, as daily they do, employing the time in
vainglory, in proud ambition, only delighting in the flesh, as they are
guided by the devil. But then they will tell me, that at the hour of death,
through virtue of the Popes Bull (saying S. Peter, S. John, S. Paul, S. Caphas,
Popes pardons.
and S. Macharus help me) they shall be saved. But if they wait til that time
in that belief, they shall manifestly see, how God will hear the^, since they
attribute to a mortal creature Gods eternal glory, and place their hope in
the Bull of a Croisade, which is highly esteemed in Spain, where every year it
is bought at ten shillings price: by virtue whereof, they are tolerated in Le^t
time to eat Eggs, Milk, Butter, Cheese, and besides to be absolved (as they
fondly imagine) from their sins, and as well a culpa, as a poena, that is to
say, as well from their fault as from the punishment; once in this life, and
another time (through Purgatory) at the hour of death. Besides this, there is
another Bull, named de los finados, that is to say, of the dead, through which
(first having yearly well paid for the same) the party living may, for every
Bull, fetch a soul of his friend or parent out of pain. To be short, great
store of silver and reuenews is gotten in respect of pardons, or the Popes
indulgences, who vaunteth that he detaineth and keeps treasure of the blood
of Christ and of Martirs. An intolerable and auaritious abuse doubtless,
contrary to holy writ, which certifieth that the mercy of the father of
compassions, presents to the faithful, forgiveness of their sins to
salvation, through the virtue of his Holyghost, applied and received by a
lively and justifying faith, of every one believing in Christ; who was given
for our justice, sanctification and redemtion, dyed for our sins, and rose
again for our justification. This is all my hope, the foundation of my faith,
whereby I may overcome the terrors of sin and death, and enjoy eternal
life. And again, of the like corrupted stuff, as the Bulls before mentioned,
is the Canonizing of Saints, and deifying them: with whom the seely ignorant
people commit idolatry, and spiritual fornication, very impiously and
incredulously against GOD, who is only able to save and restore to life those
that are dead. Pilgrimages.
Hence proceed so many pilgrimages into strange countries; under pretense
whereof, many adulteries, fornications, Sodomies, incests, much drunkenness,
and other execrable wicked acts are daily committed: and their bodies are
adored and superstitiously worshipped upon earth, whose souls oftentimes are
tormented in hell. The manner of the Popes proceeding in canonizing many Saints
(for the most pretended) is very notorious. For many times since the reign of
Popery, Canonasing saints.
those are placed in this rank, of whom there remains no memory or
testimony of their life and conversation: to the end that through process of
time, and running on of the world, there might be conceived and brought forth
a forgetfulness of their vices and enormious crimes, which they might have
perpetrated. And if any dare speak against such persons, endeavoring to be
any hinderance, that under such a false title, holiness and sanctity be not
attributed unto them, the Inquisition knows very well how to stop his mouth
and remedy it, by cruel torments and intolerable punishments. And again,
there want not in these kind of affairs and businesses, gildings, aromaticall
savors, precious ornaments, admirable stones, impostures, illusions of signs
and wonders, Fained miracles.
as well in the tombs where the relics are laid, as in the images and
statues erected: which often times, by artificial motions, do produce tears,
to the end that through such kind of spectacles and sights, the eyes of the
spectators might be deceived; a thing so familiar and common, that such
deceivers have many times been by the laws punished. To be short, without
entering further into this bottomless pit of a matter so lamentable, I will
only say, that gold, silver, favors and liberalities with the Pope can work
much, for raising such persons into this reputation of holiness and
deification: which comes not from the spirit of sanctification, but from the
authority of a sinful and mortal man. For a testimony whereof, note but the
thundering brute and fame within Rome, in many kingdoms, and within the couents
of Monks, touching the invention of the Jesuits: who have offered 50000.
crowns, employed the credit of Potentates, and sundry Princes, that Ignatius
their patron and first founder may be canonized. But his cursed remembrance was
so fresh, that neither he nor any of his disciples could yet attain thereunto.
Upon these purposes of cunning devises, I will not forget the tricks of the
Portugal Nun, Miracles.
so famous in respect of the effects which the devil wrought in her person.
She, while she prayed, was lifted up into the air, and there stayed without
any visible prop. She bare upon her head the thorns, and likewise the wounds
of Jesus Christ, in other parts of her body; by means whereof many Princes,
Dukes, Lords, and a number numberless of people came from far countries to
see and adore her: But the Lord of truth, in the end, discovered this
fraudulent and diabolical device, and the Inquisition being forced by the
evident light of the truth, repressed it. These are the Saints and Ladies,
forsooth, their conception and bringing forth, and their qualities, on whom
the Papists hope, and at whose hands they look for succors both in life and
death. Wherefore I utterly renounce them, and do only put all my trust and
confidence in my Creator. As for the absence of my parents and country, I must
and will yield most hearty thanks to God almighty, for that he has not
placed me in the universal number, but in the particular number, having
withdrawn me from the bondage of the devil, from the worshipping of Idols,
from the invention and errors of men, and in their steed has communicated
unto me the inestimable gifts and graces of his holy Gospel. And this is
very well explained in Genesis. 12. when GOD commanded Abraham to come from
his country, from the house of his father, that he should forsake the world
and his own lusts and affections, and only seek a peaceable and quiet life
of the mind. Saint Ambrose expounding that place, says that he should
converse in heaven, to the end that leaving the conversation and managing of
worldly matters, he should speak with God, and fasten all his thoughts upon
him Saint. Paul says, to the Hebrews. Chap. 11. that Abraham went forth,
not knowing whether he should go, insinuating thereby, that as soon as God
had commanded him to go forth, Abraham straight ways obeyed him, not seeking
answers or excuses: he went and knew not whether, for that he knew not the
place, having no person with him for his guide, but only his own humble
obedience to Gods divine providence. He had a son, whom the Lord commanded to
be sacrificed in the Mount of More^, which signifies the Mount of division:
there he was ready with his son I sack to have kilde him. God might have
charged him to have sacrificed his son in his own house, but he ordained that
he should come forth of his house, and should go to the Mount of division with
his son alone; which is not without a mystery. For God meant thereby to note
unto us, that we should sacrifice (in the fire of his divine love) our own
sons, videlicet, our appetites and carnal desires: for the performance
whereof, there is no place more fit and convenient then a strange country,
having left our Parents and riches behind us. This is the high Mount of
division, where the devout soul vieweth many more mysteries, then those who
abide below in the valley, at the foot of the Mount, at the house of their
Parents, without climing up to God-warde, with all their thoughts and
affections. Saint Chrysostom says, that absence from ones country is more
rich then cities and more glittering than the universal world: And speaking
of Abraham in his 13. Homily upon Genes. says; Think I pray you, with what
love the Patriarch affected tranquillity, seeing he kept it so many years. And
David says; I had rather be the meanest in the house God, then converse in the
palaces of sinners. Where Saint Chrysostom by the house of God understands
a strange land, and a separation from the world. Jacob seeing himself
overwhelmed with miseries, and persecuted by his brother Esau, forsook his
original conversation, went from his fathers house into a strange country: and
taking his way toward Aran, he wandered so solitary and meditating, that being
come thither and finding himself weary, he sat down; and falling a sleep, saw
in a dream, a heavenly ladder, the one end whereof touched the skies, and the
other the earth, whereupon was the universal Creator the true son of
Justice, the brightness that illuminateth souls, and consumes all darkness.
In the absence of the visible sun, there appeared unto him a sun invisible:
the beam of the sun that gave light unto his body forsaking him, there came
unto him the beams of the Sun that brought light to his soul, changing an
outward brightness into an inward light. The Sun that had created him did
shine unto him. John. 1. vz. the Sun increate, from whose light proceed all
other lights, as from an everlasting light, the fountain of life and
salvation. Who, by the said vision, gave Jacob to understand that from him
should come the Messiah, our blessed redeemer: that the first degree or step
of this ladder was Abraham, the second Isaac, the third Jacob himself, and so
forward all the rest recounted by Saint Math. Chap. 1. until Jesus Christ the
son of the virgin, who was at the end of the ladder, opening the gates of
heaven, which before were shut. God was able to have showed him this mystery in
his fathers house, frequenting his friends and kinsfolks: but he shows not
himself but to those that are alone, and have shaken hands with worldly
vanities. By these arguments may be seen, that the life of a stranger has a
far more excellent contemplation (seeing his meditations are profitable) then
the daily and fond studies of the greatest Papists and Sophisters. In the
desert of Madian Exodus 3, Chap. Moses was keeping of sheep, when the Lord
appeared to him in a burning bush, making him his Ambassador, and Coronell over
the children of Israel. He was all alone in the Mount Sinai, far from
dignities or ambitious desires, when he spoke with the Almighty, and received
of him his law, Exodus 19. Esai was alone, when he had a vision of the Lord of
hosts: the Seraphins with their wings covering themselves, Helias, Elizeus,
and the sons of the Prophets walked alone within the desert conuersing with
God, triumphing over the world, riches, ambitions, and carnal forces. Others,
of whom (says Saint Paul to the Hebrews, 11.) the world was not worthy,
conuersed in mountains and caves of the earth. What means it, that God has
called many of his servants from their country and their Parents, but that
those who are of the world, are not worthy of them whom GOD loves? They are
brought from the house of their fathers into strange countries, there to see
and behoulde great mysteries. In the wilderness John Baptist was: he, of whom
many year before Esaias had prophesied, Chap. 4. that he was to be a voice
that should preach in the desert. And Saint John the Evangelist walked through
the I Will of Patmos, when God revealed unto him the Apocalips John. Chap. 1. The
Enuch of Candacis travailed through the kingdom of Ethiopia, and coming from
Jerusalem, Saint Phillip appeared unto him, who declared the holy Scripture
unto him, baptized him, and instructed him in matters touching faith, as says
Saint Luke Acts. 6. He learned more in an hour, being far from his
country, then in all his life time continuing at home. And I may truly say
as much. For so long as I conuersed at home in my country, I never knew ought
else saving a company of traditions and humane inventions, which at the day of
judgment would have cast me into despair and perdition: but so soon as I
conveyed my self to the Gospel, under the wings of grace, far from my
familiars, I learned more in a day, then in all my life time before. For that,
as Saint Augustine says, The greatest knowledge is, to learn how to be saved.
These are the true means to know the truth, videlicet, to be drawn from
Popery, from Cardinals, Patriarchs, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and all their
familiarities, as depraved people and unworthy the person of a true Christian.
So much does Christ Jesus himself teach us; when he forbear to have to do with
temporal riches and dignities, but conveyed himself into solitary places far
from his greatest friends. And S. Matthew in his 4. chapter says, He was
accompanied with the holy Ghost, in goimg from the city to the desert. Thereby
noting unto us, that it is the holy Ghost that retireth us from cities, from
ambitions and other dignities: and contrariwise, it is the devil that inticeth
us and leads us to the cities and Papisticall dignities, and such like
worldly affairs. The self same Evangelist recites that the devil did
accompany Jesus Christ when he went into the city, to the end to try if he
could cause him to fall from the pinnacle of the Temple: because his office is
to procure men's fall, through prosperities, greatness, and ambitions, to the
end to bury them in eternal perdition. This does the Scripture make known
unto us, when it teaches that the children of Israel lest the Mount Sinai,
and came to the Toumbes and Sepulchers of desire and concupisence. By the Mount
Sinai, let us understand the grace of God: by these Jews, those that forsake
the high Mount, and give themselves to the law, which give commodities for a
short life, but not able to give us a neuer-fading glory. For he that has no
hope in grace, commonly with his works comes to despair, fearing them to be
insufficient to save him; as in truth they are. Therefore, being contemplative
upon the earth, we are to converse in the heavens: being dead to the world, yet
living in Jesus Christ, we must say with the Apostle Saint Paul, I live and
live not. But Christ lives in me. Hence it comes that Jeremie, Ier. 9.2.
the light of the Israelites, said, Oh that I had in the wilderness, a cottage
of wayfaring men that I might forsake my people. And this spoke the Prophet, in
declaring his will, and giving us to understand, that it behooves us to
renounce all ambitious glory, and to embrace Jesus Christ fervently: who will
be the true peace in this world, a guerdon and crown in the other, with a
happy contentment of felicity, to all believers in the truth of his promises,
hoping in his bounty and power, living according to the equity and
righteousness of his law, which is a sweet shower coming from his no less
admirable then eternal holiness and justice. Finally, if any one be desirous
to know what my parents were, and the public charges which I have exercised
among the Papists before my conversion, I will briefly satisfy them; not to
boast or brag thereof, but to the end to beat down every slander, that may
arise, whereunto the faithful are most subiest. My Father was called Melchior
Roman, a Fidalgo, that is to say, a Gentleman: and the mother of my Father,
Ferrer, of the villages of Frague and Caspe in the kingdom of Arragon. My
mother was called Isabell Roman, of the Baylies of Arragon, sufficiently
renouned and known. For from those, are issued Saint Roman a Martyr and
soldier, a Cardinal named Roman, and S. Vincent Ferrer, whose body is again
superstitiously worshipped in Britain, S. Romain Bishop of Balbastre, where
he is worshipped with idolatry. Such canonizations do sufficiently express my
race, and therefore I think it needless to speak any more in that behalf.
As for my charge, accompanying the Inquisitour Xamora, I saw at Saragoussa a
virtuous personage burned for complaining of religion: who as well by his
pregnant arguments and doctrine, as his constancy of martyrdom, persuaded me
to forsake the errors of Papistry. This occasion transported me into France:
and being arrived in the province of Thoulouse, I was very kindly received
into the covent of Again: and afterward, a Chapter being held in an I Will in
Dodon, Peter Capdeuile being Provincial President there, I was by the consent
of them all, elected Proctor provincial to go to Rome, as appears by a
Letter beginning, Nos infra signati, etc. When I came from Rome and had
finished my affairs there, the Provincial made me his visitor and provincial
vicar, as it may appear by a Letter, the beginning whereof is, Nos qui infra,
etc. And in the end (seeing, and well liking my conversation) they made me
Co^fessor of the Gentlewomen of the little Chapel of Again. But now the
Almighty and Father of light be ever praised, for that through the grace of his
holy spirit, he has opened the eyes of my mind, displayed the corruptions of
Papistrie, made known unto me where I should find the peace of my conscience
and truth of my souls salvation. I render unto his divine majesty eternal
thanks, above all other benefits of his large liberality bestowed upon me, for
this my conversion, protesting to employ the grace and gifts it has pleased
his omnipotency to endue me withal, to the glorious praise of his Majesty,
the edification of his Church, there where his word is purely preached, his
holy Sacraments sincerely administered, according to the Lords institution. And
here I protest utterly to renounce papistry, the Mass, errors, and other fond
superstitions, and am disposed to spend my blood and life, for the maintenance
of Gods word, which teaches a perfect way to my salvation. And therefore
according to my example, I exhort all manner of people, desirous of their
salvation, to give themselves to the understanding of the truth, to contemn
the world, not to fear adversity, to prefer the excellent joy of eternity,
and the glory of the celestial kingdom, before all commodities and worldly
vanities; with a reverent fear, that if they despise the voice and counsel of
our Savior, hardening themselves in their wickedness, there will be no more
place given to them for to repent in: but shall contrariwise, instead of their
present pleasures, vanities, and soon fading pastimes, endure most horrible
and fearful torments in a place of darkness, where there is nothing but
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Now God, for his grace, give us some sparks of
his heavenly knowledge: that thereby knowing the shortness, uncertainty, and
calamity of this present life, we may seek to advance and set forth his
glory in the way of righteousness, which leads us to his kingdom. So be
it. Amen.

In die, mandauit Dominus misericordiam suam:
Et nocte, canticum eius. Psalm. 41.
Manus supra globum.
O
Dextra tenet coelum, manus altera sustinet orbem,
Vt me sancta leuat, sic grauis ista premit.
Sidera perlegerem semper, diuumque cohortes,
Me nisi natorum sollicitaret amor.
H
Lux vera. Johannes. 8.
Illuminat tenebras meas. Psalm. 29.
Splendour eius. Abacuck. 5.
Deti depend mi s^r, de tu luzmi resplendor, mivalor detu valor.
Of thee depends my being, of thy light my brightness, my valor of thy
valor.

MELCHIOR ROMAN.

A Christian declaration, made viua voce, in the reformed Churches of Tours and
Fraisneau, the 17. and 24. days of September (being Sondayes) by Master John
Norman, sometimes ordinary Preacher at Mastas, and Sub-prior of Marestay. 1600.
Come out of Babylon my people; to the end, ye be not partakers of her sins.

Apoc. 18.
IT is ordinarilye seen, that he who enterpriseth to travel into a far
country or region, and being still urged with a continual desire to make a
speedy return into his own native country, fears not eftsoons to travel
in the night time. But in the end, continuing his journey, and chauncing to
light upon two several paths, not knowing which of them to take, I refer to
your judgment in what great perplexity he is detained. But if (by some divine
assistance) he meet with any that can and does set him again into the right
way, you shall straight way see him leap for joy, acknowledging himself
unspeakably bound unto him, who has been the cause and mean of that so
great a benefit; even so my soul having taken her beginning from the
celestial country, being placed in this exile like a stranger, Psalm. 19.
Hebr. 11.
and marching with her prison (the body) in this world (a world say I, covered
with thick fogs of death, a world of misery, where there is no order, but a
perpetual horror) and again, she finding two diverse ways diversely leading
(the one broad, Job. 10. Math. 7. Luke. 18.
the other narrow) has rather followed that which conducted to perdition,
forsaking the true path, which was to be traced for the attaining heaven, the
place of her first being. But in the end, the spirit of God, (darting one of
the beams of his holy inspirations on my poor soul, and taking off the veil
that covered her eyes) has brought her to the light of an holy knowledge of
the way of salvation. O admirable bounty of our God! I remember the Parable our
Savior used in the Gospel, Luke. 15. Math. 28.
saying: What man of you, having a hundred sheep, if he lose one of them does
not leave 99. in the wilderness and go after that which is lost, until he do
find it? and when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders with joy:
and when he comes home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, saying
unto them; Rejoice with me: for I have found the sheep which was lost. Even so
(O God) my soul having too long gone astray, lo now with diligence thou have
sought after her, to join her to the flock of thy poor faithful, in such
sort, that for so great a benefit of my conversion, as it is one of the
excellentest which it has pleased God to bestow upon me: so willingly I
confess and acknowledge my self unable to render him condign thanks, for so
great a good. Alas, what would it have auailed me, that the well-beloved son
of GOD, Jesus Christ (embrasing the godly virtue of humility, having taken
upon him an human body) vouchsafed to go under the form of a servant, and
(the just, for the unjust) endured the ignominious death of the cross, Math.
20. Phillip. 2.
for the reconciliation of man to God his Father? And what would it have
profited me (say I) secluded from so great a good turn, wallowing in
spiritual fornication, in that unchaste Babell, not acquainted with the pure
truth of the Gospel? And seeing that, with greater facility, I could not
attain to the excellent riches of Gods grace, but through faith, how had it
been possible for me to attain thereunto? since I had but an ideall and
imaginary faith, in stead of a faith able to apprehend the true foundation,
which is Jesus Christ; upon whom the faithful are to set the building of
their salvation.

Lo now (thanks be to GOD) you see me unmasked, from the fraudulent
embracementes of the strumpet Babell, which is the Nurserye of all impiety.
Behold, I am loose from the dangerous labyrinth of Papisticall errors:
errors (say I) so abominable, that there is none (having never so little
feeling of faith) but detesteth and abhors them. I will deduce some of them
unto you. First see how shameleslye the Papisticall Priests dare use the
terms of speech; Qui creauit me, dedit mihi crearese, he that created me,
Gabriel Bial. hec verba Barnardi resensel. lect. 4. in exposcanonis missa.
Scholemens speeches.
gave me power to create him: and, qui creauit me sine me, creatur mediante me:
he that created me without me, is created by my means. Is not this a manifest
overthrowing of the doctrine touching the truth of the human nature of our
Savior Jesus Christ? who has one body and one soul; and not two bodies, as
their words infer. For, by this their reconing, Jesus Christ shall have one
body framed in the womb of the holy virgin: and another which the creator
creates by the Priest; and so consequently two bodies: for, to create, is to
give the first being to a thing and to make it of nothing. Moreover,
Sacrificing for quick and dead.
by their daily sacrificing for the quick and the dead they seem directly to
infer, that the sacrifice, once made upon the cross by Christ Jesus (the
Sovereign and eternal high Priest) is insufficient: and consequentlye, that
through one only oblation of his body, he has not consecrated for ever them
that are sanctified: contrary to the doctrine of the Apostle Hebr. 7.27. and
10.10.14. Let us go further. Is it not a taking from Christ so excellent titles
of honor, viz. of intercessor and Mediator, when and so often as they have
recourse, Prayer to Saints.
and address their vows and petitions, now to Saint Antony, then to Saint
Apolline, Saint Barbara, Saint Catherine, and others? When we pray, our
chiefest request is, that God would give us life everlasting (the butte and
scope whereunto we all ought to aspire) together with those things, that are
necessary for the leading of us thereunto, as are the graces of our God and the
sanctity of life, accorcording to that which Saint Augustine teaches us.
August. ad Probam de orand. Deum.
It is God alone, who makes happy: it is he alone, that gives grace: it is he
only that sanctifies us, in this mortal life: by means whereof in vain do
they implore the aid of Saints; seeing that it is not in their dispensation
and disposition. Again, Luke. 11. Math. 7. John. 16.
Christ commands us to ask, and we shall receive: to seek, and we shall
find: to knock, and it shall be opened unto us: the like promise is in Saint
John, if we ask in his name. Alas: is it to be thought that God will refuse
us: since he has so loved the world, that he has given us his own only
son, and all things with him? Romans 8.18
Moreover, if the Saints have been recompensed sufficiently, and (to use the
Papistical term, merit) more then they have merited (as it is written; To you
shall be given into your bosoms good measure, pressed down, Luke. 6. Math. 7.
Math. 19.
heaped up, and such as shall run over: Likewise, to those that shall have
forsaken father and mother, brethren and sisters, or any temporal goods for
Christ sake, he promises to give them a hundred fold as much: Sant August.
Sermon. 6. ad fratres in heremo; Almighty God does always with justice show
mercy to the just and unjust, to the happy and to the damned: for that he
yeildeth glory to those that are happy; and yet they deserve it not (for all
the good works they have done, be they never so many) and punished the wicked;
and yet they deserve more punishments (in regard of their offenses committed)
how can they then yet merit? for that they are in termino, at the end, non in
via, 1. Cor. 9.
not in the way, and run no more the race: for they have carried away the
prize, and enjoy the crown of justice. Ergo, etc. I will not here speak of
their Idolatry, 1. Cor. 9.
namely when they think that a cross of stone or wood, after they have salued
it, may pardon their offenses; as they chante in their himnes ( O Crux aue,
spes, vnica, Worshipping the Cross.
hoc passionis tempore, auge piis iustitiam, reisque dona veniam. Hail Cross,
the only hope in this time of passion, increase justice to the godly, and give
mercy to the guilty; attributing) so exceedyingly are they tied in their
superstitions to a thing without life, that which belongs to one only Jesus
Christ: as also they forge in their understanding, that by their works they
may, meritoryously gain Paradise; Men's merrits.
even in such manner, as though GOD were highly bound unto them. Alas what is
he so blind of understanding, that sees not how absurdly they deceive
themselves, doing great injury to Christ, and endeavoring to lessen his
merits? We know, by the testimony of holy writ, that GOD, in the beginning of
the world, creating man after his own image, endowed him with free will,
forbidding him to eat of the fruit of knowledge of good and evil: Genes. 3.
but he being too credulous to the Serpents persuasions, and transgressing
that commandment, was deprived of so great a benefit: Psalm. 43.
in such sort, that homo cum honor esset, non intellixit: when man was in
honor, he understood it not, he was compared to horse and Mule, and became
like unto them.

1 Cor. 15.
Now, for that we all came from the race of Adam, this curse is derived to all
his posteritye: for all men are unprofitable, 1. Cor. 15.
there is not one that does good, no not one. Seeing then man by nature is
wicked, Psalm. 14.
and that of himself he cannot comprehend what the spirit and will of God
is, and if he should know it, Eccles. 7.
yet he would not: and if he would, yet he could not do it (for it is God
alone, that works in us a will, 1. Cor. 2.
and a performance according to his good pleasure; so that of our selves we are
not able to think any good thing, all our capacity depending of our Creator)
we must thereby acknowledge that our godly works are not meritorious, seeing
it is the actual motion of the holy Ghost that has induced us to do well.
Again, 2. Cor. 3.
if the graces of God might be purchased by man's merits (as it must needs be,
if they were justified by them) Jesus Christ had then dyed in vain: and it had
not bin needful that he should have opened unto us the gate of life, if by
our own free will we could have purchased it.

What shall then become of their meritum decondigno? If it be a question, to
compare and equal good works done by grace with eternal felicity, they are
not only, I will not say worthy, but not approaching to the least parcel of
the same. Let the Christian endure all the afflictions that ever may be
invented, Romans 8.
yet nevertheless (as says S. Paul) the angushes and tribulations of this
world cannot counterpoise that future glory which shall be revealed in us.

Likewise, though a man were the richest in all the world, and did distribute
all his goods to the poor, or did any other godly work, yet (as says Esai)
all our righteousness are as filthy clouts. Esaias. 64. Luke. 17.
And, if we should have accomplished all that which is commanded us, yet are we
nevertheless but unprofitable servants.

I will, with silence, pass over how they said; Scriptures insufficie^t.
the holy Scripture is not sufficient to salvation; being so audatious as to
be lie the word of God, which tells us that every Scripture, 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
divinely inspired, is sufficient to make perfect the man of God: how they
deprave the Sacraments, by their filthy inuensions: Sacraments depraved.
how they anoint their belles, with Oil and cream (as they call it) with the
assistance of God fathers and God mothers, imposing names upon them: how this
Antichrist that wears the three Crowns, Popestriple Crown.
with others of the like stamp, do challenge to themselves the power and
authority of Jesus Christ, both in heaven and earth; though to none other but
only unto Christ it does appertain and belong, as being given unto him of God
the Father.

To be short, I will omit very many superstitions and heresies, that have
caused me to fly from this pretended Catholic Church; to settle my self with all manner of humility in the church reformed (by Gods grace) in this kingdom. I
make no doubt, but there are many) the very instruments of Satan,) who envying
my holy resolution and salvation, will draw out of hell a sea of slanders,
intending thereby the decay of my good fame, and to bring me into an evil
opinion of the faithful. I know they will endeavor to spotte my coat of
innocencye with a thousand lies: but time, that reuealeth all things, shall
show the contrary.

One thing comfort me: which is, that if our head Jesus Christ has received
many opprobious speeches, the faithful who are his elected members, should
not desire to be exempt from the same, seeing it is the mean to attain to
heaven? Let them say what they will, let them do what they can neither
promises, nor threats, neither injuries, nor persecutions, nor the sword, can
(through Gods grace) with-drawe me from my holy resolution; which is to embrace
the true and lively faith of the reformed Churches: assuring my self, that GOD
(who has ever care of his poor faithful) will be a sufficient buckler to
defend me against all their assaults. It remains now, that with all humility
I do beseech the congregation of the faithful to receive me into their number:
with whom I desire to finish the residue of my days; to the end, with them, I
may freely serve my God, and walk according to the sincerity of his Gospel.
Amen.

So Signed, JOHN NORMAN.
We, the Ministers and Elders of the Church of Tours, do certify under our
hands that the said Norman has made and signed his Christian profession and
abiuration of Papisticall religion; all the people being assembled at the said
Church of Tours, the 17. of September being Sunday, with praises and
thanksgiving of all the faithful. 1600.

So signed, B. Rousseau, Minister, L. hommo Martin. P. Mercier, Doucet. D.
Mercier, Elders, for all the rest.


And the 24. day following of the same month, the said Norman being in a
place at Fraisneau, in the presence of all the congregation, has again made
the abouesaid declaration, with promise to continue in the true profession and
holiness of a Christian life.

So signed, B. Rosseau, Minister. L'. homme. I. Bazin, Mesgrier. Bourrand, all
Elders.



A christian declaration, made by Father Abraham, sometimes Prior of Carmes, in
the town of Arles, publicly in the reformed Church of Vzez.
THAT great and excellent Philosopher, who in respect of those virtues
wherewith the heavens adorned him, was surnamed the Divine (viz. Plato) gave
thanks to God for three things; for that he was borne a man, and not a beast: a
Grecian, and not a Barbarian: but above all, for that he had received the
benefit of life in the time of Socrates, from whose mouth he had learned many
goodly and virtuous instructions.

If this Heathenish Philosopher has esteemed it (and that by good reason) for
a happy benefit, to be borne in the Olympiads of Socrates, of whom he might
learn certain human sciences, but not the knowledge of his salvation: alas,
with what a strict bond are we bound to praise and glorify the name of our
blessed Savior, who has caused us to be borne in this age, which is dyed red
in the blood of so many faithful witnesses of his verity, and also by the
brightness of his gospel shining through the clouds and mistes that are
thickened by the malice of Satan, intending to hide from me the sweet sun of
justice and knowledge of truth.

But among all those that are bound to this duty of giving of thanks, I do
acknowledge and confess my self (this day) the greatest debtor: and do place
among all the benefits received from Gods hand, this of my conversion and
entrance into his Church, to be the first and chiefest. Without which (alas)
what could have profited me all the favor received from his sacred hand, but
on lie to have turned to my condemnation, ruin and confusion What would it
have auailed me to have been stamped in the stamp of Gods face, if I bare
the mark and character of the beast? What good had it been for mine eyes to
have been lightened with this corporal light, if my soul had been enclosed in
the darkness of infidelity? What health had it been for me to have breathed
in an air agreeable to my body, which being infected with such impieties, had
been contagious to my soul? What honor to bear the name of a Doctor, and to
teach a lie? to destroy instead of instructing? to ruinate and bring to decay
that which I should have built and repaired?

The Lord therefore be praised, who has unmasked my eyes, and caused me to see
the light of his Gospel, wherein my sight has been so long dazeled and
blinded.

Blessed be that happy day, wherein this good God has caused to appear the
effects of his eternal election in me, and has acknowledged me for his
adopted child and lawful heir of that great and eternal kingdom, which his
son Jesus Christ has purchased for his elect, through the merit of his
perfect obedience.

Behold me now come into the house of God between the arms, and in the
bosom of Christ his espouse, as far from impieties and sacriledges of that
shameless Babell, as the truth from falsehood, and light from darkness.

Behold, now I am come into the sweet liberty of my conscience, which has
so often summoned me to leave and depart from the Seminary abuses of
papistrie: from those horrible sinkes and vautes of impiety, where the Lords
holy name is so villainously profaned, and the honor of the eternal (who is
infinitely jealous of his glory) shamefully prostituted to idols and
marmosets: where the blood of Christ serves for a traffic: where his only
sacrifice, which is the expiation of our offenses, is held incapable and
insufficient to blotte them out and deface them: Man's merits.
where man's merits go cheek by ioule with those of Jesus Christ's: where the
son of God, our Redeemer; is robbed of his greatest and most worthy titles of
office: where coadiutors are given him for intercession and Sacrificing:
Prayers to Saints.
where the pastoral staff is taken out of his hands, wherewith he rules and
governs his flock: where the Empire of the world, and conduct of his Church
is shared in half with him: where the son of perdition, that damnable
Antichrist, will forsooth have a part with the Lord (whose Lieutenant he
calls himself) in his house, in his kingdom and Empire, which is his Church.

O blasphemy, O abomination! whose defense I have too long (but in vain)
obstinately taken in hand: for the maintenance whereof, I have often employed
my tongue in the good towns of this kingdom, and namely in this wherein I now
am. But if it shall please God to sanctify my wish, and bless my labors;
whereas heretofore I have used my vocal instrument, as a pipe, for the
furthering of lies and fallacies of Satan, I will now use it as a neuer-wearied
trumpet for the publishing the truth of the Gospel, to proclaim the Lords
will in all places where his voice shall call me. And by means of his good
grace, neither fear, nor hope, promises nor threats shall make me to depart
from this holy resolution and protestation, which I now make, vz. to live and
dye in the faith and religious belief of the reformed Churches of this
kingdom.

I know very well that I must walk upon thorns, and sight with great
difficulties which will take hold on me, to stop this my happy course, I
know that the enemies of my salvation, being grown desperate at this my
conversion, will frame a world of slanders, thereby to make me odious to Gods
true Church, and to make my profession suspected. Yea, it may so come to pass,
that the devil will even make use of some that say they are my friends;
thereby to shake and crack my constancy, through vain promises: but,
whatsoever they do, they shall prevail nothing. For there are two points, that
fortify me against their furious assaults. The one is, that slander does
sufficiently show it self to be a lie; so that being opposed to innocence, it
melts away like snow before the sun. The other is, that seeing I am in gods
own house, which is an unconquerable city, a fortress that is out of danger
for shaking, undermining, or scaling, I need not fear their force or
surprise: being assured that the Lord will break their unrighteous
designements, and make their attempts as vain as the rebellious waves that
beat themselves against the foot of a great rock; which do make a huge noise
and rage in vain: yea the end of their furious menaces shall be naught else
but froth.

God, through his infinite bounty and mercy, strengthen me, and finish the
work which he has begun in me, giving me grace to live and dye in his house
and in his Church, Amen, Amen, Amen.

Whereunto, all the people there assembled, with one voice, and the greatest
part weeping for joy, answered alowde, Amen.

The ninth of January, 1600.
The Conversion of Master Anthony Ginestet, borne at Lautreck, in Albigeois,
sometimes a confessor, and religious Priest of the pretended order of Saint
Francis, according to his protestation made the 22. of October, 1600. in the
Church of Bragerak: together with that of Signeur Lewis of Caransie, borne in
the town of Angoulesme, heretofore a Priest, as may appear by their Letters.
LET the Papists glory in the magnificence of their Churches, artificially
built with curious stones, brought from strange places: Let them brag of the
building of their Altars proudly adorned: Let the^ triumph in their vaults
gilded, Adorning of Alters and Churches.
and no less azured: Let them exalt their ecchoing music, the picturing and
sculpture of their images: let them wonder at the greatness of the sundry orders
of their sacrifices, glittering in cloth of gold, silk, scarlet, and hung
about with precious stones in stately pomp: As for us (illuminated with the
sacred life of the divine truth) we esteem all this, and the like bravery, as
a thing of naught, a perishable vanity, unworthy of true religion, incapable of
leading to salvation; in such sort, that those who are busied, or rather abused
by such worldly inticements, do leave (behind) the principle of piety, and
spiritual worship. And (to judge truly) those who are dazeld with such an
appearance, do only feed their outward sense: not at all understanding the
rich ornaments or rather celestial enrichments of the city of the living God.
For, the wisdom of the children of this world is abominable folly before the
Sovereign only wise God. That which man (seely creature) does indiscreetly
admire, is ougly and execrable before the eyes of the eternal: and that which
the fool (swollen in ignorance) contemns, is certainly great and admirable.
The faithful hereof have daily experience, to their unspeakable comfort And
with them, we (thrice happy at this present) do enjoy full matter of solace
and gracious delectations; having our eyes cleared with the beams of the
eternal son of justice, so that we may contemplate in the house of God
(through this influence of supreme grace, or at least the illumination of the
celestial light) the most sweet felicities of his face, the word of life, the
excelle^ce of the Sacraments, the efficacy of the exercises of piety, the
perfections of a lively faith, the virtues of the holy ghost, and other
infinite blessings, inspired from heaven into the elect in the mystical
society of the body of Christ: which are as christalline mirrours, containing a
quickening brightness of the bounty, favor, beatitude, eternity, power, mercy,
wisdom and heavenly life, in steed of the horror of darkness, of hellish
torments, of the terrors of the second death, wherinto the error of humane
inventions do throw us headlong, with a perpetual despair. Now as the Apostle
2. Corin. 3. prophecieth of the issue of the children of Israel, saying; Until
this day the veil did cover their hearts, when Moses was read unto them: but
when they shall be converted to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away: even so
all we, who do behold, as it were in a glass (which is the Gospel of grace)
the glory of the Lord plainly, be transformed into the self fame Image, from
glory into glory, through the effectual aid of the holy Ghost. And our earnest
desire is, that those who are floting, and as it were, bandied to and fro with
sundry opinions of the vain and not true Phylosopie, would meditate hereupon,
that they would ascend into the mount Sion, that they would taste of her
sauorous fruit of life, and would drink of the delicious waters of her
fountains of immortality: forsaking the venomous Cisterns of the desert of the
world: a desert not of sin, but a desert of justice: a desert not of
transitory goods, but a desert of wholesome graces. To this effect, we from the
bottom of our hearts, make our humble petitions to the most high; the inward
compassions of our souls, making our eyes melt into fountains, and our better
parts yielding forth unspeakable dolors, considering (in this Theater of the
world) that the greatest multitude, by the violent storms of seduction, be
enticed and ravished to be trained and finally to be thrown headlong into
perdition. But O father of light, seeing it is thy good pleasure always rather
to use mercy then justice, to be gracious in showing favor and not furye,
stretch forth thy hand, draw them unto thee, teach them, since it is thy will
that all may come to the knowledge of salvation. Imprint in their minds a
desire to sound the depth of thy holy Scriptures. Let the discretion of thy
alsearching spirit guide them, to gather in these gardens the flowers of that
Sovereign good, the food of their souls, the fit and effectual herbs for
the physic of their spiritual infirmities, the plants that are a Sovereign
Antidote against death, the Sacrament of eternity, the certain pledge of
felicity: Let them touch no more the tree of knowing good and evil; although
his outward beauty does cloak his inward poison. And as thy sacred word,
divinely inspired, shall be an assured guide to all people desirous to reject
an untruth (being the Organe of perdition) for to receive the Evangelical
truth (the power of God for the salvation of all believers) manifesting in her
brightness, the splendor of thy incorruptible heritage: by the self same
reason let it make known unto the^, that there is essential conformity
between the doctrine of the Church reformed and thy true church: and a
substantial discord between thine and that which is announced by the Roman
Bishop or his adherents: and, consequently, that this leads to damnation,
and the other to permanent happiness. And certainly, as the glory of our
Savior is unseparably conjoined with the salvation of his elected and chosen
creatures, honoring and crowning with inesteemable benefits those that honor
him: So likewise, that is the true and sincere Religion opening the way to
salvation, which addresseth all her documents, and exercises, purely and simply
to the glory of the almighty: and contrariwise that religion is false and
ruinous, which seeks the glory of creatures; honoring them with that which
only belongs to the living God, who gives not his glory to any other. By
this rule, the knowledge of the wise on earth is condemned and accused of
vanity, Romans 1.21.25. for that, having known God, they have not glorified him
as God, and have not yielded him due thanks, but are become vain in their
discourses, and their heart (void of understanding) has been filled with
darkness, and tearming themselves wise are become fools, and have changed
the glory of God immortal, into the likeness and image of man. By reason
whereof, they have been given up to their own hearts lusts, to filthiness
and the defyling of their own bodies, as having changed the truth of God into
falshoode, worshipped and served the creature, and have forsaken the Creator,
who is blessed and praised both now and for ever, Amen.

By this rule and general Maxim, our Savior in Saint John Chap. 5. verse. 39.
and after, confirms the will of his act (whereof see verse. 16.17.30.) against
the deceipts and fallacies of the Jews: Search the Scriptures diligently: for
in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of
me. But ye will not come to me, that ye may have life. I seek not glory of
men. I am come in my fathers name, and ye receive me not: if another shall
come in his own name, him will ye receive. How can ye believe, which receive
honor one of another and seek not the honor that comes from God alone? And
again, in the 12. Chap. verse. 43. They have loved the glory of men more then
the praise of God. By this rule, the Apostle (Gal. 1. verse. 10.) proves, that
his preaching came down from heaven, to the confusion of vain discourses and
false Apostles; Do I preach man's doctrine, or Gods? For if I should yet please
men, I were not the servant of Christ. To be short, this principle is so
clear, so true, so authorized, that it needs not any more witnesses out of
the scriptures: it being more clear and transparent then the Noonday, that
the true and perfect religion is marked and known by this, that she seeks
absolutely the glory of the creator of heaven and earth, and that religion is
false and abominable that does the contrary. And that the religion reformed
is of the first degree, and that of the Roman Church of the second, the
conference ensuing does briefly set down. And to tell the truth, who is so
blind that sees not that the true Christians do profess, that (first) one
only God must be called upon: Secondly, that from him alone all manner of
salvation and deliverance must be expected: Thirdly, that his mercy defaceth
all our sins: Fourthly, that the sacrifice of the undefiled Lamb, offered
upon the cross, takes away condemnation. Fifthly, that his justice redeemeth
us from the second death, and his resurrection leads his Saints into the
right way of eternal life: Sixthly, that his most blessed word contains all
manner of secrets necessary for our welfare and happiness: Seauenthlye, that
works cannot merrite everlasting felicitye: Eightlie, that the most righteous
and perfectest men cannot produce works of supererogation; as if it were in
their power, not only to accomplish all justice commanded, but also more than
is required: Ninthly, that God must be worshipped in spirit and truth:
Tenthly that the glorious body of Christ sits at the right hand of his father.
Briefly, all those that steadfastly believe this doctrine, do they not rightly
attribute all glory to his Sovereign majesty? Prayer to ^ai^^.
And contrariwise, the Papists dishonor him: who first call upon Angels,
Saints, and Ladies: Secondly, they hope from them succors and help in their
perils and necessities: Thirdly, they promise to themselves remission of
sins through the indulgences from the Bishop of Rome: Fourthly, they mingle
the blood of Martires with the blood of Christ, thinking his not sufficient:
Fiftlie, they trust more in the merits of Saints, or mortal creatures, then in
the obedience of the son of the eternal: Sixthly, they are not contented with
the sacred letters of reconcilation; but to supply their want (as they fondly
imagine) they add the vain sufficiency of their unwritten traditions:
Unwritten Traditions. Justification by works.
Seauenthly, they presume of their works for their justification before the
throane of Gods supreme justice, and do further commit many things repugnant
to Gods heavenly will: which notwithstanding is the only rule of
righteousness: Eighthly, Works of supererogation.
they think to be more wise than the Master of Masters, when they do more and
above his commandments, in their actions of supererogation: Ninthly,
Worshipping of Images.
they incline and bow themselves to the images of Creatures contrary to the
law, and they serve God after a sensual and carnal manner, prohibited by his
word; without whose warrant every work is done without faith, and by
consequence a most abominable sin: Tenthly, Transubstantiation.
they fasten the precious body of Christ to bread and wine (subject after their
consecration) to a thousand corruptions and abuses, and altogether far from
his excellency. We omit here to speak of ignorant Priests, that are not
capeable of their pretended mysteries, and have yet much less the purpose or
intention to consecrate: yet for all that, there is nothing so much worshipped
of the ignorant people, nor with such horrible Idolatry, as, the bread and
Wine. Of Monks and Monastaries.
We will not likewise spend time in unfolding the detestable conversation of
Monks in Monasteries, their whoredoms, impieties, seditions, murders, and
bloodshed: we will only propose one example set down in his Majesty's
letters, yeauen this year 1600. at the entreatie of Friar Jews Casteh (borne
in the town of Condon, within the province of Gascoigne, elected Provincial
and Vicar general for the Province of Thoulouse) against the Religious people
of Saint Mary-port, and others, etc. I need not say any more hereof, for it is
still fresh in the memory of every one. So that the religious, who have but any
spark of a good conscience, yea the learned amongst the^, are by such
palpable errors of doctrine, and through their scandalous life and manners,
stirred up and provoked, to forsake this broad way, that leads into prison
and lamentable captivity, and with all the powers of their mind endeavor to
seek and lay hand-fast on the discipline, which is in truth and sincerity
among those of the reformed religion, and not in appearance only, as it is in
the kingdom of Poperye, without realtye. Oh how it were to be wished, and how
exceedingly do we desire, that this house of Popery might be cleansed,
puryfied, and restored to the truth. It is now shaken, wether-beaten, and
fallen into decay: it is now filled with corruption and filthiness, defiled
with abuses, and uncleanness, darkened with the smoke of error, stuffed
with Cob-webbes, and dangerous venom of man's inventions: But they will not
listen hereunto. We be now in the latter days: wherein according to the
Revelation, there shall be no faith, no law, no godliness, no charity, yea
the remnant of the elect themselves shall be seduced, were it possible to
overthrow them. Hence it comes, and for many more considerations, most just
and reasonable (which we pass over with silence, for breuities sake) that we
have renounced the world (wherein we were daintily fed, well apparelled,
acquainted with pleasures, where no carnal delights were wanting, and do
wholly renounce and abandon papisticall errors (namly the intolerable abuses
and superstions of the Mass) to be entertained and taken (especially in these
times of the free liberty of conscience under the most puisant and famous
Monarche, Henry the fourth) into the domestical number of Gods celestial
kingdom, embracing the truth of the Church reformed, and partaking of her
excellent and most wholesome benefits. And we do here protest to live and dye
in this resolution and assured hope: to the end, that having fought a good
fight in the Church militant, against the world, the devil, falsehood, and
sin (without sparing this mortal life, which the Lord has bestowed upon us
for his honor) we may with three other virtuous and religious personages
lately converted in this town, pass with the faithful into the Church
triumphant, So be it, Amen.

A Declaration of Father Edmund of Beauval, sometimes a Jesuit, a Doctor of
Divinity, and Preacher in Bourbon, publicly by him made, viua voce, in the
reformed Church of S. Amand, in the said Province, the 16. of July. 1600.
Wherein, he briefly gives a reason of the most notable causes, that have
induced him to leave the Roman Church, and join himself to the reformed
Churches of this kingdom.

MAN has in himself a continual sting and desire to become happy, and to
seek a mean for the attaining of the Sovereign good: albeit many have missed
of the right way, searching after the necessary mean thereunto, in their own
proper abilities, and in that which only consists in a mortal man. Others
there are, who have sought for it in his proper essence, without any access
unto it. But, if there be no other mean to attain thereunto, then by the
proper ability of man (pretending the access in himself) or that the degrees
and steps thereunto be not before prepared for us, we shall never come near
the fruition thereof. Now, forasmuch as man is created to the end he might
have the possession of that eternal felicity, his Creator would not leave him
destitute of fit and effectual means, whereby to withdraw him from himself
and from his own abilities, and to give him recourse to another, by whose good
means (as by an accessor and Mediator) he might be brought to the enjoying and
possession of so excellent a good. And this Mediator is Christ himself, our
Sovereign Lord, the true son of God: Who, being made like to man, and
having taken upon him humanity, conjoined to his Divinity, John. 14. John. 5.
John. 5.
has performed our reconciliation, has prepared the way, has offered up
himself for a gate and way, to the end that whosoever shall believe in him,
shall have life everlasting; which is the true end and scope of the Sovereign
good. But to make use of this fit and happy access, it is very requisite that
we join our selves, and with all our force embrace the Advocate and Mediator,
in such sort as he is given unto us of his Father; not taking from him any of
his offices and dignities. For many Sectaries do challenge to themselves not
only possession, but also in incorporation in this advocate and Mediator, and
yet nevertheless do rob and despoile him of his due honors and essential
titles of Advocate, or Mediator to the Sovereign good. Now, the faith and
doctrine of the pretended Roman Catholic Church arises hereof, in that they
acknowledge and confess one Jesus Christ to be their Savior; yet,
notwithstanding, that which is necessary for such an office they take away,
and imagine him to be but a naked Savior, and unfurnished of all honor,
although exceeding and unspeakable honors are given unto him in his anointing
from his father, as by that which follows may plainly apeare. For it must
needs be, that a Mediator between God and men should be a Sovereign and an
eternal Sacrificer, as the Apostle (Heb. 7.24.28.) hears record; because
that every reconcilation requires satisfaction in the parties that have
offended: and Satisfaction is according to the quality of the offense; as also
the Sacrifice is by death, in regard of the deadly and mortal crime. But the
Roman Church vnapparreleth Christ's sacrifice of eternity; Priest reiterateth
Christ's sacrifice. Heb. 9.24.
in affirming that the property and virtue of it alone cannot continue to the
worlds end, unless it be many times reiterated. And yet in the new Testament
we learn, that Christ entered once into the Holy place, obtaining eternal
redemption for us, and that the word of eternity, signifies his eternal
virtue and efficacy in all perfection, Moreover it is clear, that every
sacrifice is respected in regard of the sacrificer (the Sacrificer first, and
the^ the sacrifice) and consequently, that the Sacrificer is preferred before
the sacrifice: as we may see, Genes. 4.4. where the holy ghost witnesses, that
the Lord had first respect to Abel, and then to his offering. This then being
granted, and therewithal considering that (in the Romish Church) the Mass
priest is reputed a Sacrificer, Popish priest better then Christ.
and Christ Jesus the sacrifice? it must hereupon needs follow, that the
Romish priests (being but mortal and sinful men, and by nature altogether
estranged from God) are preferred before him in whom there is found no guile
nor sin, 1. Pet. 2.22 1. Pet 1.19
even before that unspotted Lamb, the true son of God by nature, Jesus Christ.
Oh intolerable blasphemy, never used among the Turks: And to the end none may
be ignorant of such a foolish impudency, note (I pray you) but that which may
be seen, when in their Mass they mu^ble out these words, Supraque proprio ac
sereno vultu respicere digneris, and accepta habere, Hebr. 9. 1. John. 1 Math.
3.
sicuti munera pueri tui iusti Abel. Wherein there are two propositio^s: in the
first, the Priest becomes a Mediator for the Sovereign Mediator, Priest a
mediator for Christ.
of whom the father says, this is my well-beloved son in whom I am well
pleased: for you must always suppose (as the Church of Rome does) that the
true body of the son of God is present in the host, as it was in his
transfiguration, and in his Baptism in the Jordan.

In the second, he compares Jesus Christ to the sacrifice of Abel: By means
whereof (as aforesaid) the Priest shall be more pleasing and acceptable to God,
then Christ Jesus himself: who likewise by this means shall be robbed as well
of his office, as of his Sacerdotall dignity. What man's ears, that be
attentive to any wholesome doctrine, and stirred up with the affection of a
Christian zeal, can endure and suffer the echo of so harsh and horrible a
speech? What soul is there, which is desirous to aspire and come to her true
scope and felicity, Math. 17
through the true and sacred mediator Christ Jesus, Math. 23. Deuteronomy. 18. Esai.
11.
that can permit his excellencies and dignities to be so trampled underfoot?
The Church of Rome is not content to banish Christ out of the sanctuary
(whereas the Jews have cast him only out of the Synagogue) but goes on
further, and takes from him his pastoral robe: which appertains and
belongs unto him alone, as it may evidently appear in many places of the
holy Scripture: wherein he is promised and recommended for a Doctor and
master, giving laws and precepts against which or besides which (as
proceeding from a most wise master) none of his desciples dare thrust
themselves in, for their alteration. This Maxim (against which the very
heathens dare not dispute) declares sufficiently, that he, who is a means for
conducting me^ to the Sovereign good, must also by his instructions and
precepts lay open the way and assured means for the attayning thereunto.

The Church of Rome yet notwithstanding usurps and chalengeth to her self
the Sovereign authority of judging such like instructions, and accuses them
of insufficiency, Popes Doctrine.
as not able to show the way leading to eternal life: which surely is nothing
else but an accusing of the author himself, Christ Jesus the son of God. Nay
she yet goes beyond and far surmounteth the said precepts, as well in the
virtue of her word not written, as of her traditions, together with an Iliad of
inuensions, rather diabolical then divine or humane. And moreover she teaches
doctrine clean contrary to Gods truth, as may be noted in these few examples:
Jesus Christ forbids any of his desciples to desire pre-eminence over the
other: The Church of Rome has a counterpoise, Math. 24.
for she constituteth one in authority above all the Bishops in the world.
Christ Jesus will that his Church take her firm foundation upon this that he
is Christ, the son of the living God; Math. 16.16.18.
who suffers not the gates of hell to prevail against her, Chruch not built
upon Peter.
for that she is grounded upon a sure rock, which is Christ: The Church of
Rome will build her upon a rock which (like unto man) is subject to fall
away and come to ruin (I mean during the life of S. Peter) as may be seen
how the floods of misbeleiefe and rivers of infidelity have had great power
over her, and brought her flat upon the ground.

Carved Images.
To be short, all the doctrine of our salvation, as well in the old as new
Testament, forbids us to draw or paint any images or statutes in matter of
religion: yet notwithstanding the Church of Rome obstinatly allows them, will
have them, and command them. Finally in conferring the one with the other, you
may see as it were in a glass, that Belial is no more contrary to Christ,
falsehood to truth, darkness to light, vice to virtue, then the doctrine of the
Church of Rome to that of the Mediator and accessor to the Sovereign good.
Behold then Christ Jesus in the Roman Church deuested of his doctorall robe.

Now remains the third and last dignity of his unction: that is to say, that
he is King, having all power both in heaven and earth (as it is proved by
diverse places of the holy Scripture; namely in the 49. of Genes. in the person
of Judah in the 11. of Esaias. in the 31. of Jeremy, Psalm. 2. Psalm. 110. Matthew
23.) of the which he is likewise dispossed in the Church of Rome. For,
whosoever says that he has both spiritual and temporal power to govern the
Church Triumphant and Militant, to do with them according to his pleasure, he
does surely take upon him the true domination of Christ, who says, I give the
water of life, and who so shall drink thereof, John 4.10.
shall never have thirst: by which special passion of thirst, he comprehends
all other (spiritually) by the figure Synedoche. This is that which the Apostle
expounds, and the Evangelist in the Apocalips, speaking of Saints who have
washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb, Apoc. 21.
and do no more taste of lamentations, sorrows, or any other kind of
passions or torment. It beelongeth therefore only to the undefiled Lamb, who
gives the water of life, to make and canonize true Saints. But the Pope, who
is the head of the Church of Rome, takes upon him authority and power to
create Saints and canonize them: he enrouleth, in the book of heaven, such as
he will: and when it is his good pleasure, he makes them to reign with
Christ Jesus in the like title and degree, as himself: he vaunteth to have
power over Angels to command them: nay which is more, one of his books named
Stella Clericorum does affirm that the meanest Priest among them, Pope above
the Angels.
is greater in dignity then the holy Virgin and all the Angels. How much
greater then is the Creator of Priests, viz. the Pope? Oh shameless vanity:
Non Stygius tentaret Orcus, quod audent effrenes monachi. Again, every one may
easilye know what authority he takes in the Church Militant, excommunicating
some, anathematizing others: he takes the temporal sword, he pulls down
kings and Monarchs from their thrones, he sets his foot upon their necks,
and commonly makes them kiss his pantable. I omit to speak of the excessive
dignities attributed unto him by his own Canons, Decrees, Decretals,
Clementines (being truly extrauagant from all truth) as likewise a thousand
more points of doctrine issuing out of these three principals: That Christ
Jesus is deuested of his office of Sacrificer in the Roman Church, that his
office of Doctorship is taken from him, that his government in heaven and
earth is usurped from him. Now, seeing these offices are necessary adiacents to
the Sovereign good, and that the Church of Rome diuorceth them from the
Mediator, it must needs be that she does not seek the Sovereign good, but
rather shuns and flies from it.

Hence therefore it comes, brethren, that I have renounced Papistry, and do
purpose carefully and with labor to seek the right paths leading to the
Sovereign good, wherewith the Church of Rome is not acquainted. And for this
purpose I have abiured, and do now abjure al her doctrine, as blasphemous,
Apostaticall, superstitious, and as far from Christianity, as she is from the
true end and scope of man's creation; which is, the Sovereign good.

And finally, above all other graces wherewith God of his mercy has made me
pertaker, I yield him most humble thanks for these two (which are far
beyond compare of all others) videlicet, that he has showed unto me through
the light of the holy Ghost the natural brightness of his holy truth, and
that the clearenesse thereof causes his beams to shine in the Churches of
this kingdom, reformed both in faith and doctrine, according to the pureness
and sincerity of his holy Gospel. The confession of whose faith I will not
only seal with pen and ink upon paper, but also if need be against tyrants,
with my blood, upon this base Territority. In which reformed Church I protest
to dye and finish my days: praying the Lord Almighty and only wise, who has
called me to the knowledge of his truth, that he will establish and ratify
this vocation of me, and make me to feel and perceive the full effects of his
eternal election: and further, that of his mercy he will strengthen and
assist me, against all assaults and temptations that may present themselves
before me.

And to conclude, I heartily beseech this Church to make me pertaker of her
holy prayers: as I will in like sort be ever mindful as well to power forth
prayers to the eternal, for her long and prosperous continuance, as also for
those that are of the like faith in Jesus Christ. To whom with the father and
holy Ghost be given all honor and glory both now and for ever. Amen.

So Signed, De Beauvall.
We the Pastoures and Elders of the reformed Church of Saint Amand L' Alher in
Bourbony, do certify that this day being the 16. of July. 1600. Master
Edmond de Beauval heretofore a Jesuit has made a public abiuration of all
the Papisticall Idolatries, wherein he had bin norished and instructed;
protesting to live ever hereafter as the reformed Churches of this kingdom do
require, and according to a solemn promise by him made in an assembly of some
Pastors and Elders, as well of this said Church as others hereabout, held at
Belt in the house of the Lord of the said place, the fourth day of this month,
and has signed his confession of the faith of the reformed Churches of this
kingdom. In witness whereof, we, whose names are here under written, have
given him this present Testimony, to the end that he may be known in those
places where he shall come, for a member of the true Church. Yeouen at S.
Amand, the day and year above written.

Signed: Iamet, Pastor of the said Church. Perrinet, an Elder. Maget, an Elder.
Perrimet, Judge in the said place. Deueras. De Foulenay. Daniard Limosin.
Ieneueau. Gaillard.




The declaration of Leonard Theuenot heretofore Priest and Curat of the Parish
of S. Sauin, in the City of Poitiers, publicly pronounced in the Church of
Poitiers aforesaid, at the end of the exhortation on Sunday the 26. of Nouemb.
1600.
I Am here before God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and the elect
Angels, and this Christian assembly summarily to declare, what I have been in
time past, in what mind I am at this present, and whereto by the means of my
God, I aspire in time to come: I am borne and was bred up until this present
in the Church which is called Roman, where I sucked from the unclean dugs of
the impudent Babel, and was one of her favored Nurse children, even to the
obteyning the mark of the beast, to be advanced to the Priesthood, and
sacrifizing of humane inue^tion, which I have used for the space of five
years; I was soothed up (and I believed it) that I was in Bethell, that is to
say, in the house of God, which is the Church, the which, he which has not for
his Mother, cannot have God for his Father, as S. Cyprian and S. Augustine
apostolically do teach. But some days since, that it has pleased God by his
holy Spirit, to awaken, and with-drawe my soul from the letarge wherewith it
was possessed, working inwardly in me, and there stirring up and executing a
great desire to read the holy Scriptures, and to confer of that which
concerns eternal salvation, especially with the pastor of this church* I
perceived and acknowledged that I was in Bethauen, that is to say, in the house
of Iniquity, of corruption, and of abomination: where the purity of the word
of God is defiled, the sincerity and truth of the Sacraments corrupted, and
the holy commandments of God, by men's traditions are brought to nothing; and
have ever since continually heard a voice sou^ding in the ears of my
conscience, saying unto me; Depart from Babylon, get thee out of the midst of
her, for fear that continuing in participating in her sins, thou receive of
her punishment: Now to obey this voice: which the holy scriptures teach me, to
be of the Spirit of God, I am retired into this place to you, which I
acknowledge to be of the sheepfolde of our Lord Jesus Christ, for as you hear
his voice, and will not give ear to strangers, and mercenaries, and I protest,
that I do abhor and detest the Romish Idolatries and Superstitions, and do
renounce the Pope, whom I acknowledge to be the son of perdition, the man of
sin, described by Saint Paul. 2. to the Thessaloni. 2. and the papacy; Pope
is Antichrist.
which is the great whore described in the Apocalips: And that I desire to live
and to dye in the confession and profession of the faith of the reformed
churches of this kingdom, forasmuch as in them, men are content for the feeding
of their souls, with the Milk which distilleth from the pure breasts of the
chaste Spouse of our Lord Jesus Christ, to wit, the canonical writ of the old
and new Testament, wherein is not admitted any article of Faith, which is not
grounded in the express text, or by necessary consequence of the holy
Scriptures: and this is the true and essential mark of the church, to be a
sound pillar and faithful keeper of the word of God, which is truth. O father
of light, and fountain of all goodness, to thee I now lift up my hands, my
eyes, and my heart, and beseech thee in the name of thy Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, that thou pardon me my faults, of the time of my youth and ignorance
past, and I yield thee thanks for the knowledge which thou have given me of
thy truth: and I pray thee that thou continue, fortify, and increase me
therein, and also that thou communicate the same to those which yet are plunged
in the sink of Popish Idolatry and Superstition, to the end, that they
speedely forsake the great Rivers of Babylon, which will turn into a Sea of
fire and Brimstone, to burn eternally those which persevere in the service and
the worshipping of the beast, and that they may retire themselves into Sion,
unto the Brooks of Siloe which run gentilly, which are made a fountain of
water springing to life everlasting to those which drink thereof. And you
which are hearers and beholders of this my declaration, I beseech you by the
intrailes of the Christian charity which is in you, that you will join your
prayers with mine, to the eternal, to the end that he defend me with
constancy and perseverance in the holy conversion and resolution which he
has given me, for it is he which works in us the desire and perfection
(according to his good pleasure) as he to whom the creation, preservation, and
the conducting of all things do eternally appertain. Amen.

Signed: Theuenot.

The copy of a Letter from Mounsieur Clemencean, Minister of the Church at
Poitiers: To Monsyeur De la Vergne, chosen in the election of Poitiers, being
this present at Paris.
SIR, seeing that you do me the favor to make me pertaker of the general
news which you learn in the place where you are, it is also my duty to
advertise you from hence of such matters as are of worth, as is that of the
conversion of a Curate of one of the parishes in this city, who on Sunday last
made a public abiuration of Papistrie, and profession of the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, in the place where we had assembled our selves, at the end
of the preaching, to the great contentment of all honest men which were hearers
of his declaration, all which for the most part did shed abundance of tears
for joy; but if we did rejoice and were comforted, the Papists to the contrary,
are greatly troubled and discontent. The good is that this man had caused the
bell to be rung to Mass in his Parish, and his Parishioners stayed for him
till noone, but they might have been there till this time, if they had still
stayed for him. Before that time he was in good reputation amongst them, both
in reguarde of his service, and also in regard of his life: but now they say
the worste of him that they can. He is your countriman, to wit, of
Mont-Morillion, and it is three year ago that he was Curate of the parish of
S. Sauin in this city, a month since, he conferred six or seven times with
me, the most secretly that he could, I found that he had a good wit, and a good
understanding of the Latin tongue, in traveling, as he reports himself
thereto disposed, he may do good. I send you his declaration, if we had
Printers that were honest men, and liberty to do it in this place, we would
have had it Imprinted: you are in a place where (it may be) that it may be
done, and it cannot be but a great edification of the Churches of the Lord. I
am of opinion that God will draw fruit there hence for his Church. I will also
tell you, that yesterday an honest man came and advertised me, that an other
Curate, of one of the most principal parishes in this city, had said unto one
of our friends, that his conscience did summon him to do the like, and that
there were above fifty of his profession in this city of his mind. God give
them the power to perform it, to his glory, and their salvation, as I pray
him to preserve us long in health and prosperity, and humbly kiss your hands,
resting ever

Your most humble and affectionate Servant, I. Clemenceau.
From Poitiers the 29. of November. 1600.
A christian declaration, of Sir Francis Breton, a Monk, of the order of the
Celestins, publicly made in the reformed Church of Vendosme, on Sunday the 28.
of January. 1601.
IF it be so that there is joy in heaven, in the Church triumphant at the
conversion of a sinner: I no way doubt of this present company which is here
assembled to here the word of the Lord, and to the end to recite his praises:
but that this company will likewise rejoice in giving thanks to God, when they
shall understand the benefit and grace which it has pleased the Lord to
bestow upon me to wit, for having drawn me out of the darkness of ignorance,
and calling me to the knowledge of the truth of his holy Gospel, opening the
eyes of my understanding, and taking from me the veil of supersticion,
wherewith I have long been blinded. I now yield thanks to God for that he
has not punished me with the law of rigor, as he punished our first parents to
wit, Adam and Eve, and likewise the serpent, who was the author of the offense,
for he inflicted upon the serpent for his punishment that from thencefoorth he
should creep upon his belly, and should never have any other thing to live of
but of the earth. And to the woman for giving ear unto him, that she should
loose the privilege to be companion and equal with her husband, being
appointed to be under his power and rule: moreover that with pain she should
bear her children, as for Adam he was banished and cast out of the earthly
Paradise, being said unto him that in the sweat of his brows he should eat
his bread. But he now no more shows himself to be the God of vengeance but
rather the God of mercy and consolation, whose properties is to have pity and
to pardon, which he has showed in my behalf. Well then assuring my self of
his infallible promises, promising well to give recompense to those which go to
work in his vinyard at the eleventh hour of the day, as to those which have
wrought all the day; and also that the son of man came to seek and save that
which was gone astraye and lost (of which number I know my self to be) I hold
my self assured of my salvation. And I may justly say as the children of
Israel said, being detained in Egypt under the servitude of Pharao, the
eternal, the God of the Hebrews, is come to meet us, we will travail three
days journey in the wilderness, and will sacrifice to the eternal our God,
apparently showing that so long as they should be in Egypt, or under the
bondage of Pharao, they could offer no sacrifice to God that could be
acceptable unto him. As for me I may say the like, not only that I was detained
in Egypt (for Egypt is by interpretation darkness) but also under the
servitude and captivity of a Pharao, and more. For Pharao did not exercise his
power and cruelty, but in ruling over the temporal bodies and goods, But he of
whom I intend to speak, will rule both over our bodies, over our souls, and
our goods, meaning himself and causing others to call him Gods lieutenant upon
earth and Lord of heaven and earth. Which he shows in effect, when he
sanctifies and canonizeth some, enroling them in the book of heaven,
anathematizing, and excomunicating others being in the Church militant, taking
the sword against kings and Monarchs, willing to depose and bring them to
nothing, Sixtus quintus.
as it well appears by a Bull, which Sixtus quintus made in the year 1585.
against Henry the second king of Navarre and now our king. And against Henry
prince of Conde, in confiscating all their temporal goods present and to come.
To the end that you may understand the holiness of this Pope Sixtus quintus last
deseased, I can assure you, that I being at Rome familiarly, talking with a
Monk of the order of Saint Benit, priour of his monastery, asking him how they
proceeded in the election of the Pope, he answered me that there was nothing
but bribery, favors and ambition, reciting unto me that it was found to be
true, The Popes bargain.
that th'aforesayd Pope Sixtus v. Made a bargen with the devil, giving
himself unto him, upon this condition that he should be Pope seven years. It
so happened that upon the end of the sixth year or the beginning of the
seventh, a Neuiew of his in Rome, had a quarrel against a great Lord which was
very young, and the said young Lord slew the Popes Neuiew. Being apprehended and
taken by justice, the Pope commanded him to be put to death, the Judges of the
law answered, that he was not yet of age competent according to their laws, he
asked how much there wa^ted, they answered that there yet wanted one year: then
said the Pope, go put him to death by and by, I can do all; I give him one of
my years. Incontinent this being done, behold a vehement fever with a fransie
took hold and seized on the said Pope, and the devil came and presented
himself unto him, in the shape and form of a black man, who took him by the
arm and said unto him, Let us go: the Pope answers he knew him not; but he
said, I am the devil to whom thou gave thy self to be Pope. Then the Pope
said unto him, there rests to me yet one year. The devil answered him,
thou gave it to the young man which killed thy neuiew, for to put him to
death, and then he departed and dyed in this sort. And as for his behavior who
now reigns. I have seen him and considered of him, having upon his head a
triple crown, where is written upon his forehead in precious stones the word
Mystery. For the reverence which must be borne and done unto him, whosoever will
speak with him, must presently, so soon as he is permitted to enter into his
chamber, set him on his knees, and so come unto him, to the end to adore him,
and this being done, return in the same manner upon his knees. I marked also
another thing, which is, that being in the city of Beulogne I saw a great
multitude of people going to the church to adore the body of a woman called the
happy Katherin of Bouloigne, I asked them wherefore they did not call her
Saint, they answered for that she was not yet canonized nor sanctified by the
Pope, I asked the^ where the fault was; they answered me that the fault was in
the Monks by reason that there must be good store of gold and silver to do it,
showing thereby that the Pope does nothing without money, the like is found in
the city of Auignon, in the monastery of the Celestins, of the body of S.
Peter of Luxembrough, which is not yet sanctified nor canonized for want of
money. I have marked moreover, that in sundry Churches of Rome in Italy the Pope
has given such power and privilege to some aultars, Privileged Alters.
(which they call privileged aultars) to deliver souls from purgatory, that
in saying one only Mass, before the said privilege altar, he assures that a
soul is delivered from purgatory. Now I leave to you to think if it were so
that there were a Purgatory, what need should there be to say some times so
grear number of Masses, that the means of the deceased are not sufficient to
pay the priests, if one only Mass (as aforesaid) being said before the said
altar, be sufficient for his salvation. I believe that this which they do is
to fulfill the prophecy of Esaias, which says they eat the sins of my
people, and desire no other thing but the iniquity thereof. I have noted also a
great blasphemy, in as much as they affirm in a book called Stella
clearicoru^ that the least of the priests is greater then the holy virgin, or
any Angel which is in heaven, which they show by their effects, saying that
they can pardon and remit sins, in making unto the^ auriculer confession,
showing thereby that if they could, they would pluck the pastoral rod out of
the hand of the Lord, wherewith he rules and governs his folk. It seems to
me upon this discourse, that I cannot better compare, neither the Pope nor the
priests, then to Lie, which has this property, to whiten linen, and as for it
self it remains ougly and filthy: for they boast that they cleanse others
from their sins, although they themselves be impure, and I steadfastly believe
that if the Popes ambition were accomplished, to wit, to have dominion over
bodies, over souls, and over the temporal goods, there would rest nothing else
to do but make a new religion after his fantasy. You shall further know, that
if it so happen that the Mule which carries him dye, it must be buried and
enterred for fear that the Wolves and dogs eat him not: I believe that they
fear if that should come to pass, they should be sanctified having eaten of
so worthy a beast, as to have borne Gods lieutenant upon earth. I believed
according as it was told me, that when I should be in Italy, I should be half
way to Paradise. But having perceived the contrary by reason of their
superstition, I believe rather that I was already in the Suburbs of hell. But
God has given me the grace to draw my feet back; and after the example of
the children of Israel, I purpose to march three days journey, and to go out
of Egypt, I mean out of darkness, knowing that so long as I should stay
there, all the sacrifices which I should offer unto him, would not be
acceptable unto him, but rather abomination. The Sacrifice which I desire to
offer unto God for my first days journey, is a Sacrifice of praise with a
contrite heart, according as S. Augustine defines, contrision is a grief
proceeding from the grace of God, voluntarily taken according to the quality
and quantity of the offenses, with purpose of amendment. And S. Gregory
Nazianzen said; God requires of us only a sacrifice of praise, and to be new
creatures in Jesus Christ. And S. Ambrose says, that there is not any
sacrifice more acceptable unto God, the^ that which is maintained in
innocence, and that the wicked leave his wickedness, that we should have
contrition for our faults: unreasonable beasts themselves, do teach and show
us: for the natural Philosophers report, that there is a Foul, marvelous
great and very cruel, resembling in the face a Man, (which is called Harpia,)
who sometimes constrained through hunger falls upon a man and kills him,
and then eats him: which when he has done being dry, he flies to the waters
and Rivers to drink, and in so doing he sees and beholds himself, and
thereby remembers that he has killed one like to himself: And the
Philosophers say, that sometimes he is so displeased therewith, that he dies
of grief. With greater reason, I which am, or ought to be a reasonable man,
ought to have contrition and repentance, not for having killed the bodies, but
rather for having lost the Souls, having given them assurance of their
salvation, going to prostrate themselves before a Crucifix of Wood, or some
other Marmoset: and saying some Pater noster, or Aue Maria, that their offenses
were forgiven them, which is blasphemy: for it appertains to God only to
forgive.

It suffices not to have traueiled this first journey of contrition, but I
must pass further and come to the second, which is confession to God, to
obtain pardon of him according as says. David: I have said I will make
confession of my sins to the Lord, and thou have pardoned the iniquity of
my sin: S. Augustine upon the 103. Psalm has these words; Discover thy self
to God who knows thee, confession is acceptable unto him. And again, The
confession of sins, shows the sore to the Phisytion, and the confession of
praise yields him thanks for health. Being now in the house of the Lord,
between the arms and in the bosom of his dear spouse. I detest and renounce
all superstition, abomination and Idolatry, protesting and promising from
henceforth to live and to dye according to his holy Gospel, in doing and
believing that which the reformed church does and believes. And forasmuch as
of myself I am able to do nothing, I pray him, of his infinite goodness, to
give me strength and power, to put in execution that which I now have promised,
all to his glory, to the salvation of my soul, and the edification of his
church. So be it.

Signed Frauncis le Main.
To the end, that no man say, as their custom is, that it is for his evil
behavior that he is retired to us, we have caused to be inserted the copies of
the testimonial Letters, which he has brought from his Couents, taken out of
the original, in the manner which follows.



A Copy of the testimonial letters to M. Francis the Monk, lately of the
order of the Celestines, by the superiors of the said order. Translated out of
Latin into French.
Ego D. Chrisostomus de Florentia, Prior Sacri Monasterij Sancti Iohannis
Baptistae, etc.
I Sir Chrysostom of Florence, Prior of the holy Monastery of S. John
Baptist of Bouloigne, do certify that R.P.D. Francis le M^yne Frenchman, has
dwelt with me two years in this venerable monastery, under obedience and
regular observance, with the leave of the most reverend the Lord Abbot,
declared in writing: during which time, he has behaved himself so religiously
and honestly, that he has edified all the others, through his honest behavior
his exemplary life, and his commendable example. In witness whereof I have
given him these present Letters, subsigned with my own hand, and garnished
with the seal of our sacred Monastery, at Bouloigne the xviii. day of March,
in the year 1600. and of another hand it is so. I the foresaid Sir Chrysostom
with my own hand.

D. Theodosius a Bononia Abbas generaliis celestinorum ordinis Sancti
Benedicti, etc.
SIR Theodosius of Bouloigne, Abbot general of the Celestins, of the order of
S. Bennet, we will and command thee Sir Francis Breton, our Monk and Priest
expressly professed, by the tenor of the presents, in virtue of holy obedience,
that upon the sight hereof, thou transport thy self in person, within two
months, to our venerable Monastery of S. Mary of Lion, there to remain under
the obedience thereof, until such time as by the reverend Provincial of
France, and parts far hence, shall be otherwise ordained. Therefore we require
the said reverend Provincial, the Priors and other officers which are in those
quarters, that they receive thee gently, and entreat thee courteously, as him
who has dwelt among us honestly: and as it apperteineth, thou may return
into thy country with our special leave, accompanied with our blessing,
permitting thee upon the way to make Sacramental confession, before any
Priest, having leave of his Ordinary, and of him to receive the benefit of
absolution: and at all times and as often as it shall please thee, thou may
celebrate Mass. In witness whereof we have caused these presents to be
dispatched: Subsigned with our own sign, and assured with our Seal. Given at
our venerall Abbey of the holy Ghost, at Moron the vii. day of May, in the
year 1600. Sir Theodose de Bouloigne, Abbot general of the Celestins, and of
an other hand at Montaua, where is our residence. The present commandment was
presented to the said Sir Francis Breton, by me Sir Archange of Milan, visitor
general of the Celestins, the first day of the month of June, 1600. Sir
Archange above said, Visitour general, with my own hand, and of another hand,
Sir Celse Romain Secretary.

Fidem facio et attestor ego D. Theophilus de Bononia, etc.
I Theophilus of Boloigne of the order of S. Benet, S.T.P. and Prior of the
Monastery of Saint Peter Celestine in Milan, do certify and attest that
Father Sir Francis of Bretaigne, Frenchman, Monk of the said order and
congregation, at my entreaty, and also by the consent of the most reverend
Abbot our general, has remained two months in this venerable Monastery of
S. Peter Celestin at Milan, there to serve the church, by reason of the great
want of Monks, which he has faithfully and devoutly served. This time being
expired, and having obteind sufficient number of monks, the above said Francis
has requested, that according to the leave by him heretofore graciously
attained from the most reverend Abbot, he may go into his own quarter and
country, which ought not in good right to be denied unto him, I have given and
granted him leave. In witness whereof I have written and subsigned this
presents with my own hand, and garnished it with the common seal of the
congregation, given in our venerable monestery of Sir Peter Celestine at Milan,
the 16. day of August 1600. I Sir Theophilus abouesaid, with my own hand and
with another hand, Sir Peter the younger, by consent have subsigned.

We the Minister and Ancients of the reformed Church of Vendosme, certify to
all to whom it shall appertain, that master Francis Lemoyne, sometimes a
Celestine Monk of the order of Saint Benit, has in this said Church, made
public abiuration of the errors of the Church of Rome and profession that he
will follow the true catholic and apostolic religion, and signed the same
with his own hand. Sunday the xxviii. of January Anno Domino, 1601. whereof
we have given him this present certificate, having required us, to stand him
insteede with the Brothers, whether he may address himself. Done at our
consistory of Vendosme aforesaid, the 29. January in the year, 1601.

Solomean Minister. Chauueau. C. John. I. Garriner. R. Ceuruoisier.


The Christian protestation of Francis Coupil Angeuin, heretofore a Friar in
the covent of Chasteau Roux, openly published in the reformed Church at Thouars
upon Sunday the ninth of September. 1601.
O How pleasing is the protestation of God, so often repeated in Ezechiel,
Ezechi. 33.11.
as I live says the Lord, I take no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but
rather that he turn from his way and live, I apply to my self in particular,
the general exhortation which he adds, turn you, turn you, from your
wicked ways, for why will you dye, O you house of Jsrael. But for as much as it
is not of free will or of course, but of God who shows his mercy, I also
acknowledge before this holy assembly, that I have truly found mercy, for
being sometime past, seduced by the sectaries of Francis D'assisa, I yielded my
self to be persuaded to this protext of holiness, whereof they vaunt, until
such time as I had clad my self with the habit, wherewith they so much deceive
the world, I imagined that in clothing me with this weed, I did put on the
new man which as says S. Paul, Ephe. 4.24
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. But I had not been
long amongst them, but God gave me the grace to know, that I was deceived, both
in works and doctrine: as for their works, I will not stand much upon them,
but will tell you this only, by the words of the same Apostle, I will no more
participate with their unfruitful works of darkness: and that it is a shame
to name those things which by the^ are done in secret. And as for their
doctrine, I could never comprehend, that God took any pleasure, that the
honor which appertained unto him alone, should be transferred to the
creatures, after that I hard him say, I am the Lord, Isa. 42.8.
this is my name, and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise
to graven Images. But this is openly done amongst them, and (without that I
speak any further hereof) all men know, that they extol their pretended S.
Francis many degrees above Christ himself, in the book of conformities,
co^piled by one of Pisa, and imprinted by their permission and procurement at
Milan. Moreover, I could never imagine how it could be possible that the merits
of Christ could find any place amongst the pretended merits of men, so many
works of supererogation, proceeding from the counsels, whereby they persuade
themselves to exceed the observation of the commandments of God, and to have
sufficient for themselves and others. I am of opinion and do steadfastly
believe, Job. 9.2.3.
that that agrees not with the saying of Job, how should man compared to God
be justified, if he would dispute with him, he could not answer one thing of
a thousand, and with the saying of Jesus Christ, who willed that we acknowledge
our selves for unprofitable servants, even when we have done all those things
which are commanded us. Luke 17.10.
My conscience has confuted me that I could not stand before God through my
works. Wherefore I embrace the remission of my sins in Jesus Christ, and the
justification through faith only, reputing my habit and works done amongst
them, for dunghill dross to win Christ, renouncing the traditions of men,
namely the Mass, and all the superstitions and idolatries of the Romish
Church, to live according to the word of God, sincerely preached in the
reformed Churches, and having put off the habit off leasing with the leasing: I
beseech you to hold me for a member of Christ, and with me to pray to him, that
it may please him to perfect his work in me, to his honor and glory, the
building of his Church, and my eternal salvation, assuring you that feeling
that hearts ease as David did after the remission of his sins, I repeat in
heart and voice those his words. Psalm. 31.2.
O how blessed is he whose vnrighteousnsse is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered: oh how blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not his iniquity,
and in whose spirit is no deceit: I hope that God will give me the grace that
you shall know by my Godly perseverance that there is not any in my heart or my
mouth. So be it.

The said Francis Goupil came forth of the covent of Chasteau Roux and is come
to that of Thouars, where he was received in virtue of his obedience, written
and signed under the hand of Cardinal Vicairra, of the said covent, wherein he
gives testimony of his honest life and religious conversation, as the
original bears record, kept in the said Church of Thouars.

We underwritten pastor and Elders of the Church of Thouars, certify those, to
whom the same shall appertain, that the said Francis Goupil has made
profession of the true religion amongst us, according to the tennor of that
which is above written, and do pray the brothers to whom he shall repair, to
hold him for a true member of our Lord Jesus Christ. From Thouars the xviii. of
September. 1601.

Andrew Riuet Pastor. Elders F. Guerineau: P. Mausset, F. Ferraut. P. Pelleus.





The conversion and confession of Lowys du Bois late of Rissijl (Priest, and
preacher of S. Francis order within Dunkerke) done publikly in the City of
Leyden, the third of June, Ann. 1601. on Sunday after the Sermon. Translated
out of French and Dutch into English.
Luke. 15. verse. 6.7. Rejoice with me: for I have found my sheep which was
lost. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven for one sinner that
conuerteth, more then for ninety and nine just men, which need none amendment
of life.


The Dedication.
To the reverend Ministers, Elders and Deacons of the French congregation in
Middelborough, Lowys du Bois
wishes peace and salvation.
HOnorable brethere^, the desire which I have to testify, how much I esteem
my self beholding unto your worships, because when I came first out of he
bottomless pit of darkness, ye have not only received me very friendly,
but also entertained hither to with your liberality. This desire moves me to
give unto your worship, not any thing worthy for such a benefit, but that which
I can only give at this present, beseeching your worship to regard more the
affection of the giver, then the smalnesse of the gift. I send unto you my
reclamation from Popery, done publickelie in the city of Leyden, out of the
which God by his infinite mercy has brought me, unto a sound resolution and
confession of the true religion, for to live and dye in it, God which has
begun his work in me accomplish the same also, and give unto your honorable
brethren, daily increase in scripture and corporal gifts, and by the same
grace bestowed on me, to call those which are yet drowned in the impurities of
Popery, and live in the midst of a Babilonicall confusion, Leyden the 14. of
June, 1601.

Your honors most humble servant Lowys du Bois.

The Conuerssion of Lowys du Bois.
I Stand here in the presence of God the father, and his elect Angels, and of
this Christian congregation, for to declare briefly what I have been in times
past, and of what mind and inclynation I am at this present, and whereunto I
hope to come by the grace of God.

Being now departed from the abuse of Popery, which are an A^ysme of impiety,
by which the name of God is so villanously profaned,, and so sinfullie
attributed unto idols: Behold the reason why I am gone out of this dangerous
labyrinth of damnable errors, and there is no body (having only a smacke of
knowledge of the truth) but he will with all his heart, fly from the same, and
abhor it, according to that excellent admonition, given by the holy Evangelist
John in his Revelation the 18. verse. 4. Go out of her, my people, that ye be
not pertakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. etc.

And even as God in this spiritual Babylon, and under this kingdom of
Antechrist, has always kept his elect, so he does draw the same in
convenient time out of this pit of damnation, darkness, error, and
ignorance, for to bring them unto him. Such a one am I at this present by the
grace of my God, which has opened mine eyes for to understand the falsehood and
infidelity of the Romish Church, The authors institution of former life.
in the which I have been nourished and instructed amgo^st the sect and most
superstitious order of S. Francis, and as one of the chiefest favorites, did
exercise the office of a Priest, offering the abominable sacrifice in that
Sinagogue: notwithstanding, my heart being yet hardened, and my understanding
vayled with ignorance, I esteemed my self to be in the house of God, and in
the midst of his church, and the ways leading into damnation, seemed unto me
good and upright. But now by the grace of God our Father, (who) according to
the great riches of his bountiful grace, as the Apostle testified in the 2.
Ephe. 2.7. The authors conversion.
Chap. to the Ephesi. and by the inward motion of his favor, has so
graciously drawn me out of the pit of ignorance to his knowledge) mine eyes
being opened, and my understanding enlightened, I consider now how far I was
gone astray from the way of salvation, being so zealous in the tradition and
ordinances of the fathers (with the Apostle S. Paul before his conversion,
Gala. 1.14. The practice of Popery is fained devotion and an Ape play.
as he himself tells in the first to the Galathians,) being in a house full
of iniquity and uncleanness, where the truth of Gods word lies under foot,
although they seem to maintain the books comprehended in the old and new
Testament, for to blind so the eyes of the common and simple people, the which
the meane-while they do occupy with human traditions, which not only are
not to be found in the scripture (which is the only rule of truth but are
quite contrary, and repugnant to the same, making them to believe, that it is
sufficient if they continue sometimes religiously in their Ape-play, ceremonies
and church customs, as there is, the sweet singing in the Mass, vespers, and
mattines, not permitting that the mysteries of salvation contained in the
scriptures, should be understood of every one, but that all should be plaide in
an unknown speech, fearing that Gods word being translated into the common
language, might bring full knowledge and understanding to every one, therefore
also they do forbid, that no body should be so bold as to read the Bible, and
to have it in their houses, holding them for heretics and suspect men which
keep it by them, and so bridle them with threatenings of imprisonment and of
death, in the name and by the commandment of the Pope, The Popes part.
who being partly by deceit, partly by more and Barbarous tyranny, by little
and little crept into the midst of the Church, boasts himself to be (O
monstrous blasphemy) the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and the head of his Church,
sitting as God in the Temple of God, as it is written, 2. 2. These. 2.4
These. 2. robbing vnshamefully, and attributing to himself the honor, which
the holy Scripture only describes to Jesus Christ the true head of his elect,
Ephesians. 4. and 5. Col. 1. and 2.
in the 4. and 5. to the Ephesians, and in the first and second to the
Collossians, usurping not only authority and violence, against all right and
reason, over all the Monarkes and Princes of the earth, so that they must
submit their necks under his feet, The Princes slavery.
and are constrained with more then servile servitude and bondage, to kiss the
soul of his Pantoffles, but also, although it be intolerable before God and
men, does endeavor and seek to govern most cruelly the poor souls and
consciences of men: 2. Cor. 1.8.
contrary to the saying of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 1. verse. 8. charging them with
innumerable burdens of human traditions and triflings, excommunicating some
men, and some condemning by anathema, forgiving sins with full authority,
canonizing the Saints, arrogating to himself power above the Angels, Pope
above Angels.
to command and to use them for his messengers: and according to the same
authority, accompanied with more then godly wisdom, (as he boasted) does
teach and instruct his flock, delivering unto them the right scense and meaning
of the holy scriptures, as the only and supreme interpretor of the same,
leading them in all truth. The mean while does feed them only with human
traditions, with prohibitions, that nothing may be said to the contrary,
neither may be enquired for the truth out of the said Scriptures, confounding
the truth of Gods word with his decrees and statutes. The which things teach
us manifestly the love and kindness of such a shepherd toward his flock,
that instead of feeding it with the wholesome doctrine propounded in Gods word,
and refreshing it with the sweet waters of Gods graces, the which are conveyed
into our hearts by the pure and sincere preaching of his word, does rather
cast it down into the pit of errors and superstitions, depriving the common
people most unjustly, from the reading of the holy scriptures, and keeping them
thereby in ignorance, The peoples ignorance.
whereby they cannot be resolved of their salvation, prescribing unto them an
infinite number of traditions, as if the scriptures were not sufficient to
salvation: yea accusing them most blasphemously of imperfection, and of
obscurity, against the plain testimony of S. Paul. 2. Tim. 3. verse. 16. 2.
Tim. 3.16.
For the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to convince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness: that the man
of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. This it is
that opened our eyes, that moved our heart, and settled us upon the right way,
from the which we erred by our corrupt nature, The profit of God his word.
and this does manifest unto us the mysteries of salvation. For as Chrysostom
an old Father very well teaches: We must only believe the holy scriptures,
by this door, enter both shepherd and sheep, who enters not through it, is
a thief, for it is a property of the devil to add somewhat to the
commandments of God, and behold therefore how clearly God commands, Deuteronomy. 4.
ver, 2. Deuteronomy. 4.2.
to content our selves with this rule, for to discern by it the truth from
falsehood, Ye shall put nothing unto the word which I command you, neither
shall ye take ought therefrom, that ye may keep the commandments of the
Lord your God which I command you. Shall we desire a more express charge? The
Romish doctors part in this play.
But why do our doctors of the Romish Synagogue notwithstanding all this: They
take their refuge to traditions of men, without, yea against the word of God,
adding unto it, and detracting from it, according to their pleasure. They say
the holy Scripture is not perfect enough, she is obscure and hard to be
understood, but we must explicate and clear her with our traditions: but (I
pray you) what other perfection can they find for us, to come to salvation:
Let us here what the Apostle says, 2. Tim. 3. verse. 15. Thou have known the
holy scriptures of a child, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation,
through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. And in the Gospel of Saint John.
chap. 20. verse. 31. we are set twice to the scriptures, But these things (says
he) are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is that Christ that Son
of God, and that in believing, ye might have life through his Name. David the
Prophet considering the same, Psalm. 119. verse 103. and 105. says; How sweet
are thy promises unto my mouth? yea, more then Honey: And again. Thy word is
a Lantherne unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Yea but is it not say they
a commendable thing to serve God according to the institutions of our Fathers,
and to keep us by them? Is it not a thing agreeable unto GOD to worship his
Saints? to go in Pilgrimage, to fast whole Lent, to confess, to hear Mass,
etc.

But (I pray you) upon what ground is this built, and who requires such at your
hands? if we will serve GOD, let us serve him according to his word, let us
enquire for his holy will, and having found it, let us follow it obediently,
for truly there was never so base a master, but he would be served
according to his will prescribed unto his servants or disciples concerning
their duty.

Wherefore shall we then deteine from God his right, who has revealed his holy
will unto us in his word, and the means how he will be served by us. If then
we will be obedient unto him, let us seek nothing in our selves to please him,
nor also the institutions of the Fathers, to follow them according to the
commandment of GOD given to the Israelites, Ezech. 20. verse. 31. Walk ye
not in the ordinances of your Fathers, neither observe their manners, nor
defile your selves with their Idols. I am the Lord your God: walk in my
statutes, and keep my judgments and do them.

For as God says in the 55. Chapter of the Prophet Esaias, verse. 8.9. For my
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the
Lord. For as the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are my ways higher
then your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. And in the 15. Chapter of
Matthew, the 9. verse. But in vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines,
men's precepts.

But let us turn our selves to him, seeing he does inuit us so kindly by
his word; and as Cyprian an old Father says, Cypr. Epist. 3. lib. 2.
Let us not behold those things that have been done and teacht before our
times, if so be we will follow Jesus Christ: but let us before all things,
cast our eyes on those things which Christ (who was before all men) has
commanded to be done by us, following rather the truth then custom. And
although an Angel from heaven should Preach you an other Gospel then I
preach unto you, let him be (says the Apostle) an Anatheme, Gallathians 1.
Our Doctors hold to the contrary by Popely authority, that all those are
execrable, that do not hold for good their institutions and human
traditions.

But is this so wonderful (dear brethren) that such men show themselves so
heinous enemies against the truth and the holy Scriptures, seeing they be so
bold as to come thus far, that besides all their blasphemies against the
word of GOD, Robbing of Jesus Christ.
to vnder-creepe and to rob from Christ his office and honor, that only
appertains unto him, before God his heavenly Father, to accomplish the work
of our gracious redemption, stealing away a part of his sacrifice by their
merits and indulgences, drawn out of the treasure of the Romish synagogue,
which as they say, is full of the merits of the Apostles and holy Martyrs,
and of their works of supererogation, this they make the poor ignorante
people believe.

Those now that have great store of money and goods (for that is it that makes
their chimney to smoke, and the spit to broache their roast meat) buy of the
same, thinking to get thereby salvation, and thus according to their pleasure
do distribute for money the blood of Jesus Christ, wherein they are like not
unto Simon Peter but Simon Magus, of whom is spoken in the 8. chap. of the
Acts, and tread under feet the sacrifice of Christ, by the damned sacrifice
of the Mass, The Mass a damned Mass.
I name it damned, and with good reason, for if Satan in any article shows
himself impudent, deceitful, and malicious, it is in this point, For what is
the Mass, but a manifest and damnable profanation of the merits of Jesus
Christ? yea such a profanation whereby not only the body of our Lord Jesus
Christ is again here on earth killed (being nevertheless asce^did into
heaven, glorified by God his father, and placed to his right hand, comes to
be broken of a man, as being comprehended in a piece of dowe) but also the
greatness, the full satifaction, the virtue, the eternity of his merits are
utterly rejected. The scripture to the contrary teaches us manifestly to fly
such a monster of errors; admonishing us, that we obtain only by the blood
shedding of our Lord Jesus Christ, once done at the Cross, salvation, and not
by the damned sacrifice of a priest who offers again, and tears in pieces, as
a cruel hangman, the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, that it is by his only
sacrifice done for us, as the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 1.30. But ye are of him in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. That, according as it is written, he that
rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord: Whereof the Apostle testifies in the
9. to the Hebrews, making a comparison between the sacrifices of the old
Testament, with the sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, showing the difference
of the one to the other, opposing the imperfection and mutability of the one
(for they were renewed every year) to the perfection of the eternity of the
sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And therefore read the new Testament over and over, you shall find no where
one word, I say not only of the Mass, which is an invention of Satan, but
neither of any Propetiatory sacrifices, of what kind soever they be, but of
the only sacrifice of Jesus Christ, Psalm. 110.4
who being anointed of God his father to be an eternal priest according to
the order of Melchizedeck, has voluntarily given over himself unto the death,
and for ever reconciled us with God the father. If then the matter be thus
clear, what shall our Docters reply to maintain their Mass, which is utterly
convicted by these places of the holy Scripture, for they cannot hold the words
of the Apostle for truth, unless they accuse themselves of this their abuse:
the reason is evident, for if the Leuiticall sacrifices have been imperfect,
and not sufficient to wash away the sins of the children of Israel, because
it was necessary to iterate and renew them often, how much the more shall the
Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ be of small estimation before God his
father, when, not only every year, but also every day, yea almost every
hour, it must needs by a priest be itterated and renewed. And lo this is the
doctrine of that great vicar of Jesus Christ, of his Bishops, and Supposts, or
Cardinals etc. Consider once the substance of this fair sacrifice which is
figured in the Mass, but why do I call it a sacrifice, seeing it is nothing
else but a manifest division of Christ and his merits, for as the Apostle
says, Heb. 7.22. Where no shedding of blood is, there is no sacrifice.

Mark once briefly the doctrine wherewith they nourish the people, when they
speak concerning salvation, they keep them depending on their tradition, and
merits of men, where the scripture contrariwise testifies most evidently, that
we cannot please God in any sort of our selves or by our merits, but that we
obtain salvation only by faith, and that it is his pure goodness, as we read
in the 3.4.5. and 10. chap. to the Romans. and in the 2. and 3. to the
Ephesians, where the Apostle excludes clearly all these commeritors, when he
says, By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves: it is
the gift of God: Not of works, least any man should boast himself. and in the
3. to the Phillipians verse. 8. I esteem says the Apostle, speaking of his
own person, (having thousand times more reason to boast of perfection and
holiness of his works, then our Papists have now a days) I esteem (says
he) all things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my
Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge them to be doung,
that I might win Christ.

Shall we desire a clear and manifest testimony for to humble our selves
before God, and so to lift up our hearts unto God, for to crave mercy from him?
But the wickedness of the Romish clergy is so great, and the poor people is
so blinded, that they never examine themselves and the unworthiness of their
merrites which be not at all, yea instead that they should cry out with the
Prophet David in his 143. Psalm. verse. 2. Enter not into judgment with thy
servant: for in thy sight shall none that lives, be justified. they flatter
themselves, and bring to an account before God, their merrites and worthinesses
to be saved by them, or at least partly. Wherein we have to mark the great
deceitfulness of Satan, who knowing our sickness, and our weaker part, and
observing that men by nature is given to an idle presumption and pleasing of
themselves, and that man flatters commonly himself, he propounds unto him his
merrites and good works, to this end, that putting his confidence on the same,
he might forget to embrace the grace of God, which saves us in Jesus Christ,
and therefore if any doctrine be mingled with the deceit of Satan,
Justification by merrits the devils Doctrine.
it is this doctrine, namely of the justification of the poor sinner before
God: for if he could once take away the truth of this Doctrine, (which is the
foundation of our salvation) he might soon come to the end of his purpose and
intent, seeing that without this, there is no more any life for the poor
sinner, no mercy, no covenant, no promise: but (in a word) eternal damnation,
if we will trust in any manner on our selves, or have opinion only of any
merrite. The death of Papists, a good thing to observe.
From whence, I pray you come so many sobs, so much weeping, so many tears,
and to be short, such an unbelief, and incertitude of salvation in the article
of death, not only amongst the common people, but also amongst the Priest and
teachers, yea such a despair, that they condemn themselves, having no feeling
of the salutary grace of God, is not the reason because they considering and
diligently examining their own works, find nothing that can subsist before
such a just judge? Surely it is so, for they are all but infirmities and
stinking pollutions. And this is the consolation which they can get by the
considering of their merits and good works in the last breath of this life. By
and by follows the last saluing or unction (as they call it) done by a
Priest, who washes and purges with an holyed and consecrated Oil, the poor
sick man of his sins, then come the waxen Candels which burn day and night
before the grave, the ringing of Bells, Masses, Vigiles, De prefundis, and
Requiescant in pace: and such like Ape-play. These things are rather unto them
Needels to prick their consciences, seeking consolation in things which are of
no valor, in steed of taking their refuge to the blood of Christ which
purges us of all our sins, as S. Peter says 1. Epist. 1. verse 18. And thus
is the common people seduced and brought to their everlasting perdition by
these deceivers and seducers of souls: behold this is the sweet consolation,
which they have to weapon themselves against the battle of death and Satan.
Behold this is the rest and peace of their consciences in the end of their
lives. Besides this unbelief and diffidence wherewith they are tormented, being
uncertain of their own salvation, they see nothing but pain and torments
prepared for them, being transmitted (soon after death) to a Purgatory (which
is the more rediculous, because it can be found no where) for to do their
penance and repent, to the end that the poor souls which have not merited
enough in this world, should suffer there for a certain time the pains of
Purgatory, being roasted in a fire, the one more, the other less, for to come
at last to heaven, and deserve eternal salvation.

But for to discover somewhat better their errors and abuses, The sin of
Romish Doctors.
how shall the Doctors of the Romish Church be able, to excuse themselves
before God, seeing they turn not only the people from the true worshipping of
God, but command them also to worship creatures, and take their recourse to
Saints and Saintesses, to be mediators between God and them in all their
necessities and defects. A doctrine flat contrary to the holy Scriptures:
for examine the holy Scripture from lease to lease, from the beginning to the
end, you shall find no commandment to do it, nor promise, nor example of any
that have done it, neither in the old nor new Testament, as those of the
Romish Church do, who being infected with plague, take their recourse with
prayer to Saint Andrew, or to Saint Rocquis, being in tempest in fear of
Shipwreck, they take recourse to Saint Nicholas, or Saint Clemens, and so
forth, according to the diseases or evils which come upon them. And is not
this it that the Scripture condemns, showing as though it were with a finger we
must invoke and worship: The Prophet David in his 18. Psalm verse. 2. says:
The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and he that delivers me, my God and
my strength: in him will I trust, my shield, the horn also of my salvation,
and my refuge. And in the 3. Psalm, verse. 5. I laid me down and slept, and
rose up again, for the Lord sustained me. I will not be afraid for ten
thousand of the people. Besides these are yet innumerable places of Scripture
propounded unto us, to demonstrate, that we must not trust upon the might and
arm of man, nor look for any help of creatures, but that we must take our
course unto God only, who can, does, and will, deliver us from all evils.

But is not this an impudency (say they) and too great a boldness, to appear
so before God, without craving first the means or intercession of some Saint?
I would feign that they should answer me whether it be presumption or boldness
to obey unto God, and to follow his commandment: I think not that they be so
impudent, but they must confess so much. Considering then that we have this
commandment in the holy Scripture, that in all necessities we must take our
refuge to God with a true and lively faith, and with a sure and undoubted
assurance to obtain that which we pray for at his hands, as clearly is
written in the 50. Psalm of the Prophet David verse. 15. Call upon me in the
day of trouble: so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And the
Apostle Hebrew. 4. verse 16. Let us go boldly therefore unto the throne of
grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
And if we seek a mediator between us and the Father, we must not run to
Saints, for Christ dyed for us, yea more, he is risen, and sits at the right
hand of God, and prays for us, which the Apostle explicates in the 8. to the
Roma. 24. ver. For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen, is not hope:
for how can a man hope for that which he sees? and in Hebrew. 9. verse. 24. For
Christ is not entered into the holy places that are made with hands, which are
similitudes of the true Sanctuary: but is entered into very heaven, to appear
now in the sight of God for us.

We must therefore go to him in all our necessities, by him shall we obtain
mercy, he is (to be brief) our advocate by the father, offering unto him our
prayers. Let us therefore not run to creatures, and call upon them in our
need. Let us not rob God of his honor only due unto him, to defer the
same to any other, but let us follow that rule of well praying, which Christ
teaches us Matthew. 6. Let us in all surety by the virtue of the Mediation of
our Savior Jesus Christ, go to God our Father, trusting assuredly that nothing
shall fail us, if we fail not in our duty, God is true in his promises, to
whom I will take my refuge.

Concluding therefore my rehearse, I will give him praise and thanks for all
his exceeding great benefits, which I confess to have received from his
gracious mercy, that he has brought me, that was gone astray from the right
way of salvation, and was departed from his tabernacle, to his Church: clearing
the eyes of my understanding for to enjoy the light of his holy Gospel, and
the truth of his holy word, and to renounce to all errors and superstitions
of the children of darkness, in the which hitherto I have been smothered.

I confess here before God, and his holy congregation, that with a sincere
and upright mind and heart, I forsake from henceforward all Popery and their
superstitious Apostaticall blasphemous doctrine, and abominable and damnable
errors which they exercise yet daily, in the which I have lived too long a
time, feeling my self now invited to the salutary knowledge of the truth.
Therefore I promise and protest before God and his whole congregation, to
desire to live and to dye in the faith of the reformed Churches, where the
truth of Gods word is purely preached, and the Sacraments faithfully
administerd, praying all thirsting souls) according to my example) to their
good welfare and salvation, to gather themselves in all humility of heart to
the true flock of that great shepherd, whosoever feel a spark of truth,
let him no longer be transported by all winds of humane traditions, to the end
that the kingdom of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ more and more increasing,
we also altogether at last may be congregated to the joys of eternal life,
through Jesus Christ our lord, to whom with the father and the holy Ghost, be
praise and thanksgiving for evermore, Amen.

We subscribed, testify this declaration to have been done publicly the 3.
of June 1601. after the sermon in the French Church within the City of Leyden,
by Lowys du Bois of late Priest and preacher of the order of S. Francis, in the
city of Dunkerke.

Lucas Tulcat the Father. Lucas Tulcat the Son.





