Good news from France.

A true Discourse of the winning of sundry chief Towns, Castles, and holds
in France, which are now in the obedience of the French King.

With the great Victory which his Majesty has had in sundry late Battles,
Skirmishes, and pursuites made upon the enemy at Mouncounter in Brittanie, and
else where, since the winning of Chartres, which was in April last.

Together with the defeating, drowning, and taking of much victuaile, corn,
and money sent by the Enemy to the City of Paris.

Published by Authority.

AT LONDON Printed for Thomas Nelson, and are to be sold by William Wright.

To the Courteous Reader.
WHo so beholds and considers the present estate of the French King, may
easily see and perceive how unspeakable and of what power the works of God
are, in the defense of those that put their trust in him: he still preserves
this good King from danger, he gives him strength being weak to overcome
those that are the mighty enemies of his truth.

It cannot be otherwise said, but that the God of heaven does aid and assist
his Majesty, that beats down his enemies in the high way, that daunteth
them with fear, and gives him a magnanimious mind against them: Terror and
majesty sits in the forehead of this christian King, and the Creator of all
creatures preserves him as the apple of his eye: if then it cannot be denied
but that even in all his honorable and Princely actions against the rebellious
and wilful people of that nation (who are risen up in great multitudes and
armies against him) the God of heaven goes forth before him, and as it were
with a Clubbe strikes down that wicked and rebellious rout, to the amazement
and terror of the whole world: how dare they then resist him and repugne him
of his right? nay how dare they attempt to take arms against God and their
lawful Sovereign? not fearing that God, yea that God whose power is
unspeakable, whose terror in the defense of his truth is as a burning Sword,
and whose right hand woorketh their destruction.

O perverse rabble of traitorous subjects, O blind and wilful in all
wickedness and

(...) A true discourse of all such things as has happened in France, since
the yielding up of Chartres unto his Majesty.
Faithfully translated out of French.
THE Kings Majesty, having entered into ye Town of Chartres, upon the 19. day
of April last, His Ma. departure from Chartres after he had been most
roially received into the same.
(according to the Roman Computation,) and being received with great triumph
into the same, and all things performed unto his Majesty, according to
certain Articles already published, his Majesty being accompanied with a
great troop of Horsemen, The Duke de Maine flies, and retyreth toward
Rheims.
went toward the Castle of Thiery, purposing to raise the siedge which the
Duke De Main had laid against it. But the Duke, contrary to his Majesty's
expectation, durst not be so bold as to stay there, but got from thence by
flight, although contrary to the promise of the Governor, the said Castle
Thiery was surrendered to the enemies use, whereas the said Governor had
promised to hold it one Month longer, until the coming of his Majesty.

Nevertheless, his Majesty left not to pursue the Duke De Main, who was
retired toward Rheimes, meaning there to stay himself for a space: but by
reason of the brute which was noysed all over the Country, that the Duke had
divided his Army into sundry parts, and that they should continue in that
sort for certain days, The Castle of Dowsery and of Clay yielded.
was the only cause that the Kings Majesty stayed three days at Senlis, to
the end that in the mean while, the Castle of Dousery and Claye lying near
to Aumartin, where the Enemies kept some Soldiers, might be taken, which was
speedily done: whereupon his Majesty in the pursuit, Tremblay yielded.
commanded the Town of Tremblay by Montfort to yield to his obedience, which
they did, which Town is a great hurt, to the passage.

Meanewhiles Mounsier, the Duke Despernon, and the Lords Deo and Vicq.
understanding of a great number of Boats passing the River, which were of the
bigness of Lighters, and that they were going down toward Parris, laden with
Corn and other commodities, which came from the said Castle of Thiery,
Certain boats laden from ye Castle of Thiery, with wheat and money willingly
drowned to hinder the enemy.
they omitted no time, but with force set forward with great diligence to
overtake them: which having speedily done, they presently drowned fourteen
or fifteen of the greatest of them, with all the provision in the same: and
as well drowned all their chief provision of Wheat, as also provision of
money, which was carried in the same Boats, so that there escaped but a few
small Boats, Some small boats escaped.
which with some small provision of Corn, saved themselves by flight.

The Kings Majesty departed from his Army to Auneau and Macheuiuille, Auneau
and Macheuiuille yielded.
which Towns are also reduced under his Majesty's obedience, and shortly
after, the Kings Army removed to Dourdan, Durdon entered by force.
which Town they immediately entered by force, wherein was found great store of
victuals, which were gathered, and intended also to be conveyed to Parris.

Thus the Kings Majesty's power having cut them off, and defeated the Enemy
of great store of victuals, the Marshall Biron gave advise to the Kings
Majesty, for the speedy taking of the Castle: howbeit it was very strong, but
being obtained, it is the only mean to depryue them of Parris, of all manner
of commodities and succor whatsoever.

The inhabitants of Parris, Paris deprived of all passage for provision or
victuals.
are now stricken into a great fear by reason of the loss of Chartres, and
also by finding themselves deprived of victuals, money, Munition, and all other
warlike provisions for their strength and succor, as has been lately seen
by sundry Letters intercepted, from the Bishop of Pleasance, and Mounsier
Belin, who is the chief Commander or Ruler in the said City of Parris.

Now his Majesty lying at Senlis, came from thence to Crespij in Valloyes,
from whence the next day he departed early in the morning, intending to go
and charge upon some troops, of whom his Majesty had secret intelligence,
and that they were to be lodged in eight or ten Villages, between La fere
and the Castle Thiery, The Castle Thiery very strong.
which in troth was the greatest part of Horsemen that the Enemy had.

Notwithstanding this his Majesty's very sudden, secret, and speedy
departure toward them, yet by that time he had passed but five miles, his
Highness heard, that the brute of his coming was already blazed among those
troops of Horsemen, The Leagars flies through the River of Marne.
whereby in the evening and night before, they fled and were passed beyond
the River of Marne, and that with such great fear, as if his Majesty's forces
had come thither in time, the most part of them had been taken and slain.

Hereupon his Majesty returned to Crespij, and from thence on the first of
May last, to Campaigne, being resolved to pass to Chauny, entending then to
take the Castles of Manican and Genlis, and for the better effecting of his
Majesty's purpose therein, two great Cannons and diverse other Ordinance was
brought from Campaigne, which those that were in Manican did not attend but
sled, and left the place before his Majesty was there arrived.

The King upon the fourth day of this month,, Ordinance brought before Genlis.
made a view of the said Genlis and caused the said Ordenance and Munition
to be brought thither, with other that came from Saint Quintaines, to the end,
to make short work thereof: but thereuppon the said place of Genlis was
immediately yielded to his Majesty.

Soon after it pleased God, that an other good hap fortuned to his Majesty,
in this his pursuit and journey: The succes of the Duke de Maine to his Troops
of Almaines
for the Duke de Maine having sent into those quarters, the regiment of the
Almaines, which last came unto him, being nine Ensigns, only to be placed
in some Towns, which traytorously held with the Leagors, against his Majesty:
who Marching to Coussy, had the Gates of the Town kept fast against them, by
means of which resistaunce at the gates of Coussy, (where they supposed to be
received) The succes which commonly follows Traitors.
together with the brute of his Majesty's coming toward them, they suddenly
retired, and being greatly terrified, they ran fiercely into the Forest,
hoping thereby to save themselves.

At which time some few Soldiers, mounted on horseback, being fifty in
number, The Garrison of Sant Goubin.
belonging to the Garrison of Saint Goubin, only conducted by a Sargeant, who
in the Forest marching with about four score boores of the Country, hearing
of the arrival of the Kings Majesty, were greatly encouraged, and began to
pursue them, and immediately set upon them, crying: Viue le Roy, A strange and
unlooked for victory.
God save the King. Whereupon these Almaynes were wonderously amazed, and
supposing that his Majesty had been there personally present, they fled
immediately, without offering any resistance: whereupon this small company,
little thinking of any such good success, did with great courage pursue them:
by means of which pursuit, they were all discomfited, slain, and taken, and
their Collonell slain also, Seven companies of Almaines slain.
only two Ensigns of those nine Companies were besides saved in La Fere, with
some fifty or three score men, who were weaponlesse and unarmed, which they
had flung away, the better to save themselves by flight. Thus were these
companies discomfited, and the Country well purged of them, so that his
Majesty found his desire sufficiently effected, without putting his hand
thereunto.

Not many days before, the said Garrison of Saint Goubin, had discomfited two
or three Regiments of the Leagors, Three Regiments of the League taken and
slain.
which were gone out of their Garrisons, to go to the Duke de Maine, and put
many of them to the sword.

About three days after, Mounsier Humiers knowing that the company of
horsemen of Mountcaure had assembled in a Burroughe or village there about, he
departed with a power from Corbeylle, intending to set upon them, and having
by chance found by the way, the company of the horsemen of Dour Lay, A
company of horsemen slain.
he by a fierce assault, had soon discomfited, having slain many of them
and taken the most part of the rest, by means whereof few or none of them
escaped: nevertheless, he ceased not to prosecute his former purpose and
intent, which fell out so happily, that he had soon surprysed all the said
company of Mountcaure, A company at Mountcaure discomfited.
in the Borough, where the most part of them were at play, guarded with a
small watch, little thinking of that which in a moment came to pass.

This good success made his Majesty not little joyful, who giving hearty
thanks to God for the same, was determined to stay with his Army so little
as he might: hoping nevertheless, to reap yet some greater benefit of this
his journey.

In Brittanie the enemies had taken the Town of Moncounter, Moncounter taken.
but the Castle held out, attending, the succor which was ready: for Mounsier
de la Tremblay, Commander of that place, who being gone about some exployt,
fifteen Leagues from thence, had speedy intelligence that his place was taken,
and therefore resolved to enter the Castle with forty light horsemen, whom he
caused to go one foot, about a quarter of a mile from the said Moncounter,
A good foresight.
because no men could issue into the said Castle but with Ladders, A great
slaughter happened among his Majesty's enemies.
whereinto he entered by force, and suddenly slew two watches, making
sithence two or three issues for assault: by means whereof, there has
happened a great slaughter upon his Majesty's enemies.

Many of the Nobility being then at Rennis, were resolved to take horse and
to command all the Garrisons thereabout to go straight to the said Town of
Moncounter, Mounsier the Prince Dumbis absent at the taking of Mouncounter.
and to make what resistaunce they might, and the rather for that they saw
Mounsier the Prince Dumbes was at that time ridden forth about fifteen or
eighteen miles from that said town of Rennis, mustered up imediatlye so many
as they might procure upon the sudden, which was a hundredth and fifty
Horsemen, well appointed, and two hundredth footmen: who being well furnished
with harquebuzzers, were forthwith sent about two forlonges from the said
Moncounter, Power sent from Rennis and other places.
to the intent only to join with the like company of Soldiers, who came
from another town being sent for the same purpose.

In the mean while, Mounsier de S. Laurent, chief Marshall of the army and
troops, appertaining to the Duke of Mercury, who was gone into the said Town
of Mouncounter, The number of horse and foot which had entered Mouncounter.
with three hundredth Horsemen well appointed, together with a thousand
Harquebuzzers being immediately advertised of the coming of his Majesty with
his royal troops attending his person, and seeing the minstring up of men^^^
every side to make resistance, he resolved to leave the same town, supposing
it better to depart thence, then to enjoy the same as it might fall out to
his greater damage: And forasmuch as he ^^ew the Kings majesty polliticke and
wi^e, and ^e^^ing he would have found means at his coming thither, either to
have fumished them in time, ^^to have entered the walls by force, he departe^
(...) Mouncounter about eleven of the clock in the evening, Their departure
from thence by night to Londiace.
having with him two hundredth Horsemen, and six hundredth harquebuzzers, and
taking then the advantage to travel in the night, he came to Londiac, by six
of the clock on the next morning, where his Majesty with his army lay, who
having intelligence of his coming, delayed no time, but immediately went into
the Feelde to battle.

The enemy perceiving that the King was imediatly bent to bid him battle, and
that his Majesty at his coming thither, had sent some of his troops into the
feelde for that purpose, he left his Harquebuzzers before the trench of the
town, thinking thereby to force the Barricados or trenche to yield themselves,
which they would not do.

Whereupon the enemy advanced themselves and marched into the feelde, setting
themselves in battle raye, and divided his Horsemen and Harquebuzzars into two
troops or companies: on the one troop there was fifty Horsemen, and on the
other chief troop there was two hundredth Horse men, besides other troops
which was on the enemies side.

On the Kings side, there were not in the Feelde of battle, above six score
horsemen, whereof there were also made two troops, The battle at Londiace
where his majesty had the victory.
the one troop had but thirty Horsemen, and the other head troup had
fourscore and ten: The footmen of either part being set in battle raye (the
Kings Majesty being then personally present) after that his Majesty had
desired aid of the God of heaven in whom only he put his trust, and having
cheered up his Sould^ours to fight in the behalf of his Majesty's ^ighte both
the armies joined as well Horsemen as footmen, in the end whereof the enemy
having made very small resistance, was by the wonderful providence of God,
suddenly stricken with a great fear, insomuch as they might scarce stay any
longer: which his Majesty's Soldiers and leaders perceiving, gave them such a
hot charge, The flying and pursuit of the enemy.
that they turned their backs and fled: Whereupon his majesty's power pursued
them two miles from Londiac, where the enemy stayed with those Horsemen that
escaped in a Town or hold, held by their favorers, having lost many
footmen, beside fifty Horsemen slain, as many more taken prisoners, and
sundry other that were sore hurt.

The footmen that were scattered and dispearced in multitudes, seeing their
horsemen fled, slain, or taken prisoners: sought to save themselves by flight,
who so speedily as they might ran into the woods which were near at hand,
and there hid themselves.

This news came to Mouncounter The enemy flies from Mouncounter.
which was speedily blazed throughout all the enemies troops, by means whereof
there arose such a general fear among them, that they retired from
Mouncounter with all possible speed, leaving the Town free from any strength of
the enemy.

But the said Mounsier de la Tremblaye being in the Castle, and seeing how
wonderfullye it had pleased God to bring these things to pass for the ease
and quietness of his Majesty, and for the overthrow of his enemies, he with
his company issued forth of the Castle, and seeing them gone out of
Mouncounter, The enemy by flight was pursued and all of them slain.
he with his forces made a greater charge upon the enemy then was at the
first, and followed them imediatly, when setting upon them with great courage,
they were all in general slain and taken Prisoners, by means whereof they got
both bag and baggage from the Leagars.

Sithence that time my said Lord the Prince of Dumbes being departed toward
Quimparcorentem in Low Brittainie Other garrisons of the enemy slain.
the Garrisons of the enemy would have charged upon some of his troops that
went forth of the said Town: but having been prevented by good foresight,
the said Garrisons were overthrown by the said Lord Prince of Dumbes, who
lost not one man in the said overthrow of the enemy.

There was slain on the enemies side three Captains of name, Some slain
other taken prisoners.
who were of great estimation and chief account among the Leaguers: there was
also seven Gentlemen taken prisoners, who are yet living: Nevertheless all the
rest were followed in chase, and upon the pursuit were all put to the Sword.

THus may you see how the Lord daily fights for his Majesty, how he saves
the godly and destroieth the wicked, how the King prospers while his enemies
perishes, how contrary to man's expectation the King in show being weakest, is
found in the end to be the strongest: and that which his enemies for a while
by force holds from him, they are by ye outstretched arm of God compelled in
the end to render unto him. O unspeakable blessing and heavenly comfort, a
comfort far excelling all earthly comforts: which appertains to none but to
the faithful believers, servants and followers of Christ Jesus.

And although the cheifest Cities appertaining to his Majesty have been for
a while by force detained from him, as Paris, Roan, and such like: yet there is
no doubt but that God in the end, yea and that speedily will compel them either
to deliver the same to his Majesty, or else by famine, to weaue the web of
their own confusion.

And now to you I do address my pen O ye disloyal subjects of France, that
contend, rebel and resist against your lawful sovereign: when it is bye time
for you to be better advised. See you not your perrill, or rather is it so
deep as hell, which though you cannot thoroughly measure it, yet may you justly
fear it: remember your selves betimes and know that your disturbance of the
state is like to be the overthrow of the state, without almighty God do woork
your speedyer conversion: each man seeeth the horror of your fact, and yet
your selves cannot or at least will not behold the same: come out of darkness
if you love your own welfare, open your eyes that you may see your own
misdemeanors, and humble your selves unto his Majesty: yea I admonish you
for the honor of God, for the quietness of the Realm, for the safety of your
selves, your lives, possessions, wives and children, yea and for the
preservation of your own souls from everlasting death: that you withdraw your
selves from disloyal dealing against your sovereign, your taking arms
against his majesty, is an act most detestable, yea your fact is odious and
not pardonable: and yet know your King is gracious, he is merciful, nay
readier to conceive well of you, then he is to condemn you: if ^e you would
leave following of your ungodly leaders, that have by wicked persuasion
incensed you to this disloialty You take arm against your King, and are
parties with Arch-traitors, who to discredit the title of his Majesty, have
drawn false pedigrees, to color their treason, showing by great falsshood,
that the house of the Guize in whose behalf you fight is the next and right
heir to the inheritance of the diadem of France: which how far they are from
truth, let the Princes and chief peers examine and judge without affection,
then shall truth overthrow your traitorous perswaders, and you the most
forwardest that now stands in the defense thereof, shall see manifest proof,
that none but Henry of Burbone is your lawful King, and whom you ought daily
to pray for, and dutifully to obey.

The God of heaven prosper and bless his Majesty, grant unto him victory
still over his enemies, that either his Subjects may with speed be reconciled
to obedience, or else that they may be speedily confounded in their wilful
stubbornnes.

Amen.

