PARISMENOS: THE SECOND PART OF THE most famous, delectable, and pleasant
History of Parismus, the renowned Prince of Bohemia.

The aduenturous travels and Noble Chivalry of Parismenos, the Knight of Fame,
in diverse Countries.

The second time Imprinted, and amended.

T C

VIRESSIT VULNERE VERITAS printer's device of Thomas Creed

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, 1605.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, NOBLE, PRVdent, and virtuous Lady, the Countess of
Essex, the Almighty grant everlasting Honor and Happiness.
ANimated by the view of your manifold virtues, (Right Honorable Lady) I
have presumed to shroud this simple work, under the harbor of their
protection, resting in confidence, your Honor will vouchsafe to accept the
same, though nor for the worthiness, yet for the well meaning intent of the
writer, who in all duty dedicateth his endeavors, to deserve your Honorable
favor. Trusting your favorable and prudent censure, will extinguish the
blemish of my ouer-boldnesse: and your wisdom, receive with favor, what is
presented with affection.

Pythias Apollo, refused not to drink in wooden dishes: Alexander the great
and mighty Monarke, disdained not to travel, to visit simple Diogenes in his
Cell. Not the gifts value, but the giuers good will, has been always
esteemed. Even so I rest in hopeful assurance, that (of your own most
Honorable and virtuous inclination to favor learning) you will daine to take
this small gift, proceeding from my hearty good will. Which I am bold to present
to your protection, thereby in some sort to express my humble duty, which
binds me to give your worthiness a far better present then this, if my
ability were correspondent. The dutiful regard I bear to your laudable
gifts, being such, that I am unable (having no other mean) to express the
same: humbly beseeching your honor, to accept this gift in place of a better:
and my humble and dutiful meaning, in steed of a better performance: And
(according to your virtuous bounty) vouchsafe to protect this talent of my
poor labors, under the Title of your honorable Patronage. Which shall bind
me to invoke the almighty, to indue your noblemind with innumerable virtues,
increase your honors, enrich you with all blessings, and reward you with
eternal happiness.

Your Honors in all duty. Emmanuell Ford.

To the Courteous Reader.
GEntlemen, according to my promise, I have set forth this second part of
Parismus, which I wish may prove worthy your favor and kind estimation, the
Ankors whereon my hopes depend: and though it deserve not so much, yet let my
good meaning therewith purchase the same. If you find any imperfections, pass
them over with a careless respect: and if ought please your fancy, let it
counteruaile that which is amiss. If neither well nor amiss, then I pray rest
indifferent: and let your courtesy be greater then my boldness: and your
favor beyond my desert. My intent was to please, but if not, my labors are
ill bestowed, and my hap the harder: If I may breed any delight to the well
minded, or purchase any good opinion of the welwillers to learning, then I have
the reward I expect. One peradventure will say, the invention is barren:
another, the English is harsh: and a third, all is naught. Yet let me answer
in my own behalf, that which is lightly discommended, is not easily amended:
and the work well done, that pleases all: and that very harsh that none
likes. But I submit my self to the wise, curtuous, and learned: whom I trust
will vouchsafe to esteem favorably of my good intent: that though I am not
able to compare with any: yet I am willing to prove worthy: and have taken some
pains to procure their good opinion, unto which I submit my self. As for
Momus mates, that are contented with nothing, yet desire most: I let them pass
as regardlesse, whom I neither care to please, nor displease: but if my fortune
be so adverse, that I cannot procure their delight I would, then I plead
penitencie: protesting I was in good hope of their favor. Knowing this, that
which disagrees with ones fancy, may delight an others. So that I am in hope
this poor Treatise, may pass with the favorable opinion of some, though not
of all, yet especially of the courteous: That I still rest in hope, I shall not
be frustrated in all my expectation, but reap your cu^t^ous censure, for my
good meaning. And so I commit you to the heavens protection.

Your friend, E. Ford.

THE SECOND PART OF THE MOST FAMOVS, delectable, and pleasant History of
Parismus, the renowned Prince of Bohemia, his travels with the valiant Rnight
Pollipus; in search of Violetta.
CHAP. I. How Parismus after Pollipus marriage, departed from Thessalie. And of
a strange adventure besell them in Bohemia.
AFter that Pollipus had wedded Violetta (as is declared in the first part of
this History) and every one in Dionisius Court enjoyed his own hearts
content, Parismus again desired to see his native country of Bokemia, from
whence he had been long time absent: as also to comfort his aged Parents, who
languished with extreme sorrow, doubting that he was perished.

Parismus now determined to take his journey by land, the rather for the
Laurana could not brook the seas, the passage being long and dangerous, that
within few days Parismus (having with Laurana, Pollipus, Violetta, Tellamur,
Barzillus, and two hundredth Knights, being honorably accompanied onward of
their journey, by Dionisius and Oliuia, the King of Hungary, the Prince of
Sparta, and his beloved Clariana, Lord Remus, and Lady Isabella, with thousands
of the citizens of Thaebes,) left the bounds of Thessa^ie, to the exceeding
grief of all, especially to the King and Queen, whose farewelles were expressed
with exceeding sorrows, and hearts replenished with sadness, whose care for
their welfare, and prayers for their prosperous success, were uttered with a
buna^dce offeares. They on the other side, with like heavy coffeehouse, and
sad sighs, left their delightful company, with whom they could everlastingly
have remained, i^ weighty occasions had not withdrawn them. To recount their
trau^^ler, and the countries they ou^rp^st, would be tedious, the rather for
that they were neither crossed by misfortune, nor any way ^^aungered, but
achieved the tediousness thereof, with prosperous success, and within few
days, they arrived in the wished country of Bohemia, whither Parismus
we^commed Leurana, with these speeches. Now most dear Lady, you set foot on
she Bohemian soil, whither I have long time wished to conduct you, desiring
you to account both it and all therein, as yours to dispose of, and though by
your departure, you left your parents in heaviness, your friends in care, g^d
your subjects discome^ted: yet here shall you find parents, whom you shall
raise from heaviness friends whom you shall comfort, and subjects whose pensive
hearts will be revived with your presence. Then I be seech you, let no disquiet
thought trouble your hind hearts ^^tent, but esteem your self both welcome
and beloved (...) ^hemia, for thousa^ds of my subjects have already devoted
their lives to your command. And dear friends quoth he, as my self I esteem
you, and as my self, esteem your selves welcome hither, for your kindness
has diserued that estimation and recompense, that I am not able to make. And
dear friend Pollipus my faithful partner in woe, make you account of all mine
as your own, ^or we^l have you diserued all kind estimation and friendship of
me, whom you have infinitely bound to you in all league of affection. The
Bohemians soon had knowledge of their arrival, and by infinite troops came to
meet them. Amongst the rest, Aurestes an anrient noble man, destred Parismus
to bonchsafe him such honor, as to grace his poor mansion with his presence,
and to except of his unworthy entdrtainment, to refresh himself after his
tedious travails: whose kind offer Parismus curtiously accepted: where he and
the princess Laurana were so honorably and lovingly entertained, as that she
and the rest that were strangers, exceedingly maruailed there at. The aged king
and Queen, having intelligence that Parismus was arrived and in safety, cast
off their former habit of sadness, and banished care, which long had tormented
them, and with exceeding joy, unwonted state, and inexplicable majesty, went
forth to meet him, royally accompanied with gallant troops of estates.
Parismus seeing his aged parents, with a^l reverence humbled himself to them:
who could have spent many hours only embracing him, but seeing Laurana, they
both came unto her, most louin^ly welco^ming her, expressing the same with
tears, proc^^^^^g from the depth of kindness: withal, uttering these words.
Most virtuous, kind, and honorable Princess, our words cannot express your
welcome, nor our deeds, show our good will, our joy for your presence is not
to be described, and our entertainment too simple to entertain you according to
our desires. Which said, the aged queen, after a loving embrace, took her by
the hand, and all the Ladies of high estate, saluted her with most reverent
behauioure. The good King knowing Pollipus, embraced and welcomed him with
great kindness. Likewise the Queen welcomed Violetta, and on every side, all
expressed their joy, for their happy arrival, Bonfiers were made in the City,
the belles roong in the country, and triumphs in the Court, some welcomed
the^ with gifts, some with mirth, some with praises, and all with joy and
exceeding reioycings, which my dulled pen is altogether unskillful to describe,
the king and queen, exceedingly rejoiced in their sons virtuous choice: and
in Lauranaes presence. Laurana was affected with great delight to see their
kindness, Parismu^ had his fill of content, and altogether greatly admired
Lauranaes beauty, and did their best to welcome and entertain the whole
company that came with Parismus, with all courtesy: that the Bohemian court
which lately was darkened with the mists of sorrow, was now beau^^fied with the
pleasant assemblies of knights and Ladies, that repaired thither to welcome
home Parismus, and behold the princess Laurana. In which place they continued
many days after. But Fortune whose conssancie was never permanent, but
disposes their content.

Pollipus and Violetta upon a day walked forth for recreation, some half mile
from the Court, into a most pleasant shadie green wood, which by means of the
coolness and abundance of sweet smelling flowers, wherewith it was adorned,
and by natural slight was so p^uised, with the assistance of little twigges
and spraies, that neither the heat of the sun, nor vehemency of wind could
molest it, that the place seemed to ad increase to their delight, where they
lovingly sat down, recreating themselves with great pleasure, and at last fell
both a sleep, in midst of which slumber, a ravenous wild bear that haunted
those woods, whom extreme hunger had forced to wander so near the Court,
winded them, and guided by unlucky sat, came to the place where they lay,
ready to seize upon the tender body of kind Violetta, who at the very
instant (by the divine providence) awaked, and espying the ugly bear,
suddenly shriked. Pollipus amazed with her cry, started up and drew out his
sword, and rescued her from the beasts violence, pursuing him with such vigor
and dexterity, that the bear being grievously wounded, shund his blows, and
made have to get from him, but he intending to win honor by his conquest,
regardesly pursued the bear, until he was quite out of Violetas sight. Who
likewise fearing his harm, and pricked forward with a tender care of his
welfare, followed after him, but not knowing which way he was gone, took a
quite contrary way, and with ege^ steps labored to overtake him He having
with much travel slain the bear, smote off his head, and intending to
present that spoil to his love, came back to the place where he had left
her, and missing her, he could not well tell what to think, being persuaded
she was gone to seek him, wherewith he was wr^pt into an extreme
perplexity and doubt: fearing that if he should go to the Court to seek her,
she might in the mean time wander out of the way, and run into danger.
Contrarily, he thought if he should seek her in the wood, and she be in
the Court, his long tariance might bring her in some fear of his welfare, that
in these extremities he could not determine of any thing: at last calling her
with a loud voice by name, and not hearing her answer, with all have he
ran to the Court with his spoil upon his swoords point, and running hastily,
he enquired if any saw Violetta return, but she was not there heard of,
which made him cast down the bears head, and without speaking a word,
returned toward the wood again. Which strange behavior of his, drove the
Courtiers (but especially Parismus) into a wonderful doubt. Parismus seeing
the Bears head, and hearing some speech of Violettas absence, presently
mounted a goodly steed, and with have rode that way he was directed Pollipus
went. Tellamar, Barzillus, and many of the Knights, followed after him, neither
of them knowing wherefore they made such have.

Parismus having overtaken him, demanded if any mischance had befallen
Violetta? My Lord (quoth he) as she and I lay stumbring in this wood, the
bear whose head I brought to the Court, was ready to seize upon her, but she
with a shrike awaked me, and I pursued him until I had slain him: and
returning to the place where I left Violetta, she was gone: neither can I
suppose whither, unless she be wandered to seek me: the have I made, was to
come back to seek her. Do so quoth Parismus, and my self and these Knights
will search the wood through^u^, so every one took a several way.

Violetta in the mean time, still wandered on without regard whither she went,
her fear persuading her, that she heard Pollipus blows and the Bear gone
right before her, that with as much speed as she could, she ran quite out
of the wood, but not yet setting eye on him, (the night approaching) she was
drawn into an exceeding fear of his welfare, and her own danger: for to go
back by the wood she durst not, fearing least she might again meet the
furious beast: and to go further she thought it vain, for she saw no
likelihood he was come out of the wood, and there, what with grief and
weariness, she sat down upon a banque, encombred and overwhelmed with a
thousand cares and giving her mind some respit to ponder on her miserable
estate, for fear of her most dear Knights danger, she entered into such
heavy plaints and lamentations, that even the very woods and meadows wherinto
she was wandered, seemed to impart her sorrows, and yield pity to her cries
and scorching sighs. At which very instant (I know not by what unlucky
destiny) Archas the cruel (so called for his cruel tyranny) came to y^
hearing of her lamentations, and dra^^ing nigh to her, demanded her cause of
sorrow, Sir knight (quoth she) I am a stranger, that lately came from
Thessalie, with the Prince of this country, and this day, coming into these
woods with my Lord and husband Pollipus, a mighty bear encou^tred us, whom he
pursuing, I have lost, and am wandered hither, not knowing which way to retire,
Archas all this while, well noting her exceeding beauty, and sweet delivery
of speech, the gracious moving and disposition of her eyes, which had power to
pearce millions of hearts, felt such an inward effect of transitory confusion in
himself, that he resolved, having so fit opportunity offered him, to try his
wita to win her love or exercise by that means, some revenge against Parismus
whom he mortally hated, uttering these speeches.

Most sweet Lady, my heart is much tormented to see the sorrow you needlessly
make, for no doubt your knight is in safety: pleases you to accept of my
service, my serua^^s shall guard you to the Bohemian court, where you shall find
him: and my self will search the woodde to give him knowledge of your return.

Violetta kindly thanked him for his courtesy, who presently mounted her
behind one of his servants, giving them secret warning to convey her to his
own castle, which was situate in the mountains: himself took her scarffe,
which he said he would deliver unto Pollipus, as a taken that she was in
safety: wherewith he departed back into the wood, and tare the same into many
pieces, here scattering one, and there confusedly casting another, and withal
have, rode an other way to his Castle. All soul could not eat one bit, but
all things seemed to be hateful: their sweet music harshe: their courteous
entertainment, rude and barbarous: and that well adorned place, more loathsome
then a prison: nothing but care and grief could take place in her unquiet
breast. After supper, they brought her to a most pleasant chamber, where all
things were most neatly provided, comforting her with many perswasione, that
Archas was at the Bohemian Court to expect her coming, and by reason of the
nights approach, could not come back that night, but would early in the
morning bring her news, entreating her to betake her self to her rest: which
she did, the rather to be rid from their company, that being alone she might
enter into consideration of her estate: and being by her self, she began to
reuolue in her mind, her miscrable condition, Pollipus peril, and Archas
intent: for her self she care^ not, if Pollipus were in safety: neither
feared she what Archas intended, if her Knight were in health: that so many
cares concurring together, so many doubts clogged her mind, and such fear
possessed her heart, that her words, burst into a sloud of tears, and the warm
blood seemed to issue from every vain of her body, that with their abundance,
she bedeawed the bed where she lay.

When she had wept her fountains dry, she then began to accuss her self of
folly, that would not stay in the place where he left her: then a certain
persuasion entered her heart, that he was dead which took such deep root,
that of a long time no other thought would take place, which made her think
the Tapers which gave her light, burnt blew: which likewise added a further
settled resolve in her fancy, that it was so indeed. In this careful estate,
she lay tumbling and tossing her self, giving no qui^t to her mind: no rest
to her cares: no ease to her pensive heart: no respit to her senses, nor sleep
to her head but being overcome with sorrow, she continually rather augmented
then diminished the same.

In this sad and heavy estate she s^ent the night, not suffering her eyes once
to slumber. In the morning the two gentl^women came to her again, offering her
al duti^ul service which she kindly accepted. And shortly after came Archas
counterfaiting a sad countenance, with his eyes cast down to the earth: whom
when Violetta beheld, a sudden fear infused it self into every part of her
body, and she stood shaki^g and quaking like one transformed, to hear the
news he had brought, which she thought to be but bad by his look: who with a
shameless face, and impudent dissimulation, told her that Pollipus was not
yet returned to the Court, nor heard of, but all supposed him to be dead.
Which words struck such grief to her heart, that there she fell down at his
feet in a trance: but when by their industry she came to her self again,
her amazed countenance, and lamentable groans, made the tears trickle down
her cheeks, and seeing her in that dangerous estate, conveyed her to her
bed, whose vital senses were so abated and extinguished, that for a long
time, notwithstanding their uttermost endeavors she seemed no otherwise, then
as one quite bereft of sense, and in that lamentable estate she continued many
days.

Pollipus all that night raunged up and down the woodde, in every corner,
searching each thicket and unfrequented place, calling Violetta by name, and
tearing both his flesh and apparel, with the bushes and brambles, that
encountered his mad steps: sometimes making haste this way, then returning
back with persuasion that he heard her shrike behind him, being so fully
possessed with fear and desire to find her, that every fancy that rose in his
brain, altered his former thoughts: that whereas in other men's afflictions he
seemed most patient and provident, by his own he was quite bereft of reason.
In this unquiet sort he spent the most part of the night, until toward
morning, what with weariness and care that oppressed his heart, he laid him
down, leaning upon his elbowe, neither uttering word nor tear, but inwardly
stuffed with extreme vexation, seeming no other then the form and picture of
discontent. But when he saw Phoebus ^isplay his brightness, he again betook
himself to his earnest sea^ch, uttering such inward groans, as would have
melted a rock^e heart into liquid tears.

Parismus b^ing early up that morning, gave commandment to all the Bohemian
knights to arm themselves, and to post throughout al^ Bohemia in her search,
and to make proclamations, with great promises of reward to them that could
bring any news of Violetta: that by time the Sun was up, there were a great
number of knights departed, dowing to search all places to find her, that all
the whole country was filled with report of her loss.

Parismus, Tellamor, Barzillus, presently rode to the wood to Pollipus, whom
they found in such heavy plight, as it made their manlike hearts to melt with
grief. But Pollipus espying them, would have fled from their ^^ght, that loved
him most dearly, until Parismus ouertooke him, and said: Most dear friend,
how can you be so unkind, as to shun my company, whose care is no less then
yours? and who tends your welfare as much as mine own? have you forgotten
manhood, knighthood and courtesy? where is that virtue now become, that was
wont to rule your affections? good Pollipus, for my sake, for all the
friendship, by all the curtes^es, promises, and good will, that ever past
betwixt us, leave off this desperate folly, and listen to my counsel: ^^ not
for all this, yet for Violettaes sake pity your self, and recall your former
senses, and let us determine how to recover her, that is but straied out of the
way: many hundred knights are already posted into most places of this country,
and will coast all Germany throughout, but they will find her: then do not
you increas^ our further care, by this desperate sorrow, but according to your
wonted wisdom, wherewith you have counseled me in my afflictions, let us
study how to recover this misery.

Oh my Lord (quoth Pollipus) my Violetta is dead, at which word, extreme
hearts sorrow, and inward grief, stopped the passage of his speech, and was
restrained with heart-swelling sighs, which being a little assuaged, he again
said: If I were sure she were not dead, then would I willingly immitate your
direction: or were I but sure death had seized upon her tender heart, then
would I never part from this place, though millions of devils should seek to
drive me hence.

Why (quoth Parismus) how can you think she is dead, when there is no
likehood, sign, nor mention to be seen thereof: neither her apparel nor any
part of her body torn* or any other circumstance to persuade us to any such
conceit? then why will you suffer any such persuasions to possess your fancy?
Quoth Pollipus, how then came the scarffe so torn? it may be the wild beasts
have some secret dens, whereinto they have drawn her body, and many other
mischaunces befallen her, that she was subject unto, and yet still be hidden
from our knowledge: neither let that trouble you (quoth Parismus) but rest
contented, and your care that way shall soon be cased: but ^epart with me to
the Court, to comfort your self with some food, and I will presently give
order to have this woodde so thoroughly searched, that you shall plainly find
she has not miscarried.

Pollipus with his persuasions, though unwillingly, went back with them,
mounting on Tellamors horse, for that he was sore travailed and weary of that
disquiet nights trouble.

Thus for a time we will leave Pollipus returned to the Court with Parismus,
Violetta very sick and weak in Archas Castle, and many of the Bohemian and
Thessalian Knights in her search, to turn my senses to write of an other
Subject, long time buried in forgetfulness, the chiefest subject of whereon
this History depends.

CHAP. III. How Parismenos was brought up in the Island of Rocks in Tartaria.
How his nurse was slain by a Lion. How he lived many years like a wild man,
and afterward arrived at Andramarts Castle.
AT such time as Laurana was imprisoned in the Island of Rocks, under the
government of Adamasia Andramarts sister (as is declared in the first part of
this History, the nurse unto whose custody the young child Parismenos was
committed, fearing his untimely death, which Adamasia threaned, because his
mother would not consent to Andramarts lust, secretly (to save the child from
her cruelty) fled by fight into a desolate wood, where she carefully educated
him according to the condition of the place, which was with such wild fruit as
she gathered, making many a hard shift to stanch her hunger, and defend the
sweet babe from famine, until at length, hearing of Andramarts death, she
determined to return to the Castle, and there present him to his mother: and
to that intent, forsaking her poor habitation she went as she thought,
thitherwards but most unfortunately, wandered into a desolate and unfrequented
Wilderness: where she had not long stayed, but met a fierce and cruel Lion,
who slew her: which when Parismenos beheld, notwithstanding his infancy, he
labored with his weak resistance to preserve her: but the Lion refusing to
hurt him, withdrew himself to his den, whither Parismenos boldly pursued
him: and being entered therein, the Lion began to wag his tail, and fawn upon
him gently, which made him marvel why he had slain his nurse, and would not
hurt him: and made him the more bold, that being weary with travel, he
laid himself down to sleep, and when he awooke, being very hungry, he
gathered wild fruit, whereof there was plenty, which was his food, and the
clear water his drink. This was his habitation a long time, taking great
pleasure to hunt and chase the wild beasts, from whose fury he was still
preserved by the Lion. Afterward when he was grown to riper age, in his
sleep he drempt, that his nurse appeared unto him, willing him to forsake that
unfrequented place, and to seek out Andramarts Castle, where he should find
people, in whose company he should be brought up.

When he awaked, he could not tell what to think of his dream, nor what she
meant by Andramarts Castle, nor which way to go thither, being therewith drawn
into a deep study, but suddenly he espied a young Bear, whose sight made
him quite forget his dream, and taking exceeding delight to chase such
beasts, he caught up his stafie and followed her, and pursued her so fiercely,
that at length he slew her: wherewith he was wandered so far, that getting
to the top of a mountain, and looking round about him, he espied the Castle,
thinking that was the place his nurse had told him of in his dream, that he
went thitherwardes. It chanced one of the knights that Parismus had left to
keep the Castle, espied him: and being of a sad disposition, seeing
Parismenos begin to withdraw himselfr, ran to him, and offered to lay hands
on him. But Parismenos being afraid of his behauior, struck at him with his
staff so fiercely, that had he not quickly avoided his blow, he had beaten
out his brains. The Tartarian being angry, drew his sword, and therewith
wounded Parismenos in the thigh, the smart whereof so enraged him, that
notwithstanding all his resistance, he left him for dead.

Afterward entering the Castle, his wind was drawn into an exceeding delight,
to behold the goodly buildings and beauty thereof. The Tartarians beholding
one in such strange disguise, (for he was clad in the skins of such beasts
as he had slain, and his hair grown to a great length) much marvelled how
he came into that countri^: withal, noting his comely personage and stately
countenance, were suddenly drawn into a great affection toward him, that they
saluted him most kindly, demanding the cause of his arrival in that place,
and of whence he was? who seeing their behavior to be more gentle then the
others with whom he had encountered before, made answer so well as he could, y^
he knew not: which blunt answer of his, made them muse. Withal, noting his
attire, they took him either to be a madman, or that he had been Sauagely
brought up: which they were the rather persuaded unto, for that he was very
young. Notwithstanding, they entertained him, and used him most kindly. But his
countenance, calling to remembrance, the noble Knight Parismus, whom he so
much resembled, that they were half persuaded he was his son, that the nurse
fled withal. One amongst the rest named Tyresus, used him most kindly,
apparelled him decently, and instructed him in all points belonging to
cruelty: teaching him to manage a horse, and use armor, whereunto he was so
apt, and took therein such delight, that in short space, he grew to such
perfection, that he excelled his instructor in all warlike behauiours. And was
so generally beloved, that nothing they had o^ could devise, was too dear for
him.

Many days remained Parismenos amongst the Tartarians, increasing in many
excellent qualities, not finding occasions enough amongst them to make trial
of his manhood. Upon a time, certain Pirates returning from sea, in his
hearing, made report of their battles and skirmishes, and the huge slaughters
they had made: reporting how tragically they murdered some of the resistance,
and how valiantly some withstood them, and with what travel they endured the
^^ght. Making particular rehearsal of one Captain amongst the rest, who so
valia^^ly withstood them, that before they could vanquish him, he had slain
above twenty of them: but in the end, seeing that by reason of their
multitude, he must needs either be taken prisoner, or die, he rather chose
an honorable death, then to become their captive, and endured the fight,
until with faintness he fell down dead, even as he was advancing his sword
to resist them. Which report of theirs, kindled such honorable sparks in
Parismenos breast, that he extremely thirsted to see those brave skirmishes,
accounting it dishonorable for him to spend his days in that obscure plate:
his thoughts still aiming at higher matters, and his fancy persuading him,
that he should rather so and his time in heroical exercises in Kings courts,
then in that unfrequented place, where no pleasing attempt of martial deeds
was exercised: which thoughts took such effect, that he presently determined to
seek adventures abroad: and coming to Tyresus (who loved him deately ^he told
him his whole intent, asking his advise therein.

Tyresus seeing such resolved valor in him, told him, that he was both ready
and willing to do any thing that might agree to his fancy, or purchase his
content: that if he desired to travail and hazard himself by sea, he was
ready to go with him: or if he were determined to seek strange adventures by
land, he would likewise travail with him, and forsake no peril for his sake.

Parismenos hearing his courteous reply, could not choose but embrace him,
yielding him many thanks. Tyresius effected all things with such speed, and
so well ordered his affairs to further his intent, that within few days they
departed into a ship, well manned and victualled, ho^sing their sails, with
a merry gale, committed themselves to the mercies of the seas. They sailed many
days without any adventure, which inwardly fretted Parismenos, for his mind
longed to perform some exployt. At last they kenned a sail a far off, and
toward it they stirred amain: and coming nigh the ship, laid her aboard,
which was of Barbaria, well manner with stout Moors: who seeing the Pirates,
and knowing, that either they must resolutely fight it out, or become captives,
valiantly resisted them: between whom, began a most fierce and cruel fight:
where Parismenos had means enough to exercise his valor, who behaved himself
with such courage, that many Moors that day lost their lived by his infant
blows.

Egradam Captain of the Moors, being a man of exceeding courage, seeing the
cruel slaughter Parismenos made, came to him, and uttered these speeches.
Proud Pyrate, thou shall dearly buy these Moors lives, for I am determined
to bring thy cursed life to an end, that think by robbery to enrich thy
self. Wherewith he assailed him so fiercely, that he wounded him in many
places: notwithstanding, such was his valor, that with great force he likewise
so valiantly defended himself, and ^ffending Egradam, that it was doubtful
which of them would have the conquest. In midst of this cru^l fight, a mighty
storm began suddenly to arise, and the winds began to blow with violence,
that their Cables burst and both light of day and Sun was shadowed by thick
Clouds, the seas began to rage and swell that they were enforced to give over
their fight, the thunders rored, and the lightnings flasht about their ears,
and their ship with violence of the surging seas was so test, that there was
none but expected present death. The Northern blast, rent their sails, one
way goes their Helm, an other way swimmeth their mast, with violence torn
from their ship, and wave upon wave rusht in, ready to ouerturne the ship, who
now tossing upon the seas at liberty, was driven upon a flintie rock and
split in sunder. Then began a hideous cry amongst the soldiers, some
cursing Parismenos the causer of that journey, some exclaiming on Tyresus, and
some banning their own destinies. Some whelmed under the gaping water, yield
up their ghostes: here three at once are cast upon the rocks, and again
devoured by the waves: there others ^unke in the quick sands, and dawne falls
the Master headlong: then might you behold men swim in their armor: here and
there striving to make their death tedious: there might you see one seated upon
a planke, ouerthrown with a wane: here another tumbling with his heels upward.
Parismenos (by good fortune) was gotten up to the maste, whose length had some
power to endure the waves, with his sword still drawn in his hand. Tyresus he
was gotten on to a chest, wherewith a while he applied himself from drowning,
but in the end, the raging waves dre^ched him deep in their spations gulfes.
Within a while the raging seas began to cease and ware calm, the sun began
to shine, and the clouds to vanish that darkened the skies, and the maste
whereon Parismenos sat, began to slide along with the calm tide: when he
looked about him, and espied all his fellows drowned, an exceeding sorrow
overwhelmed his heart, especially for his loving friend Tyresus, that had not
the fear he was in revived his senses, he would have waxt careless of his
own life. But the remembrance of his peril made him recall his better senses
to their former use, and to study for his own safety, to whom the seas were
so merciful, that with a gentle and calm tide he was driven to shore, where
getting to a sunnie bancke, he sat him down to refresh his wearied limbs,
and ponder his happy escape from drowning, drying his gaping wounds with such
linen as he had above him, who with the salt water smarted exceedingly.

CHAP. IIII. How Parismenos being cast on shore in Trace, was taken up by Duke
Amasenus, who named him the knight of Fame: of two compats he fought with
Corus and Argalus.
AS Parismenos was sitting upon the bank after his shipwreck, in heavy estate
for the loss of his dear friend Tyresus, it happened, an ancient Duke of
Thrace, named Amasenus, that day was come into a forest adjoining to the sea
to hunt, accompanied by a gallant troop of Knighte, who ^h^ltring himself
from the storm under the craggie (...), behold the miserable shipwreck, and
saw Parismenos swim to shore, and so straungely prescrued from drowning, unto
whom he came as he was sitting upon a sunnie bancke, and demanded of whence
he was. Parismenos beholding his reverend age, and the troop of Knights that
attended him, ^ose from the ground, and with great humility bowed his body,
making this answer. I am a miserable man, by cruel^ie of the seas cast on
this shors, having lost my faithful friend, drenched in the spacious gulfes,
being my self reserved to further miseries, my name is hidden from my self,
neither know I certainly in what country I was borne, nor where my Parents
remain, and now am cast into an unknown place, and miserably left to the wide
world, to endure such hard fortune as my unlucky stars have allotted me.

Amasenus hearing his answer, and withal, noting his fall and comely
proportion and beautiful countenance, thought by his speech that his senses
were altered with fear of the^ tempest, and care for she loss of his friends,
that he thus replied. I perceive fear of drowning has made you forget both
yourselfe, your name, and country which fear now sh^ke off, si^ce all the
peril is past, and leave to grieve for their lost that are irrecouerable, and
go with me to my Castle, and to such entertainment as the same yields, you
shall be welcome. I most humbly thank you (quoth he) for this kindness, but
whereas you think, that fear has made me forget my self, you altogether
aim amiss, for I have reported of my self nothing but truth. Then stepped
forth Corus (asuspitious and ^nu^ous Knight) my Lord (quoth he) it is some
Pirate that lives by spoil of passengers, and has heretofore don you some
mischief, which makes him thus cunningly dissemble.

Parismenos hearing his speeches could not contain himself but made this
answer. Most discourteous Knight, neither thy self, nor any in this country
whatsoever, shall make me dist^ble, or once falsify my word, and were it not
that the strangers of this place, and the reverence I bear to this courteous
Lord, withholdest we, I would even presently make thee eat that word, and
turn it back into thy dishonorable throat, Corus being a Knight of a proud
courage, was so vexed with that reply, that he entreated Amasenus to give him
leave to revenge those injurious words. Say quoth Amasenus, and leave off this
discourteous behavior to strangers, here is neither place nor time, for you
see he is wearied with shipwreck, and faint with effusion of blood: thy pride
and discourteous behavior will one day be thy death: had he done me wrong, yet
he has not offended thee. Then he said to Parismenos: Sir Knight, I pray cease
this discontent, and go to my Castle, for so well do I esteem of you, and so
far am I from the least suppose of any such thought, as my self will
undertake his accusation is false. So they departed together. Parismenos by the
way, so well as he could declared his birth, which made Amasenus make greater
estimation of him, for by all tokens he thought he should be sprung of kingly
race, that Amasenus entertained him most honorably and kindly, and welcomed
him in the best sort he could devise, which made him disdained amongst many of
the knights that attended the Duke, and seeing him so highly esteemed, began
to suspect by that means, that they were but slightly accounted of by
Amasenus, that ever after that, they began to envy him, and to consult which
way to do them a mischief: thinking Corus quarrel already begun, a fit
occasion to further their intent, they urged him to prosecute the same, who
being ready of himself, and the rather by their instigation, sent him this
challenge.

Knight (for so I must call thee) thou remembrest what past betwixt us at our
first meeting, which thou think I have forgot, but so far is it from my
thou^ht', as courage is from thee to perform that which thou threatnedst: thy
fear of drowning is now, and thy deep wounds I am sure well cured, therefore
if thou dare maintain the words thou have spoken in my disgrace, send me
word where I shall meet thee, and there we will end the controversy. So
farewell.

As thou will, Corus.

Parismenos having read this brave challenge, smiling thereat, sent this reply.

Corus, by the name of the unknown Knight, I will aunswers thee, and maintain
my words, wishing thee to be persuaded, that I so littlle fear tby vaunts,
as that even now I will come to thee, or when thou will, if not now. But if
thou intendest to avouch this challenge, thou shall find me ready for thee
at the South side of my Lord Amasenus park. And so adue.

The King of Fame.

Corus having received this reply, presently went and armed himself, and came
to the appointed place, where he found the Knight of Fame gallantly mounted,
staying for him whom he little ^steemed, as that he assured himself the
conquest before the begun: for Parismenos was young and of tender years, and
nothing comparable to him in growth nor skill, netwithstanding, of such
undaunted resolve, that he would not have refused to cope with him, had he been
another Hercules. Corus seeing him in that readiness, came to him, uttering
these speeches Knight, I like well thy forwardness, and commend thy
resolution, but by that time thou departest hence, thou will repent thy folly.

Parismenos thus answered, if I repent me, the woorst will be mine, but if I
aim not amiss, thy folly will be the greatest: for know, that I so lightly
esteemed thy speeches, that I account them ridiculous, and this time spent in
prate too tedious. With that Coras went back, and Parismenos retired himself
to take their careir, which was performed so gallantly, as that they shiuered
their lances, passing by without any other harm, presently drawing their keen
swords, beginning fight with gallant bravery, sometimes offending, and
sometimes defending, which continued so long, until their armor began to
yield to their fierce blows, and the blood to issue out at many places. In
which cruel rage they continued for an hours space, without any disadvantage
on either party, sometimes taking breath, and then again redoubling their
blows with fresh courage, that Corus fretting at his enemies v^lour, and
calling to mind his former speeches, struck so mighty a blow at him, that
with the force thereof, he made him stagger, which turned Parismeuos senses
into such fury, that advancing himself in his stirropes, he struck Corus so
full and so valiantly on the Crest, that he was astonish therewith: yet
notwithstanding with quick courage soon recovered his memory again,
prosecuting his blows with great fortitude, until that both their armor and
steedes began to be colored with the purple blood that issued from their
wounds: both of them waxing faint, yet neither willing to yield. Sometimes the
one driving his enemy to re^yre, and he again returning with new courage.
But Parismenos being the nimbler of body, warded many of Corus blows, and in
the end wounded him so sore, that he began to stagger too and ^ro, to save
himself from his fury, who still pursued him with such violence, that Corus
with faintness fell on his horse neck: which he espying, was lifting his
sword to fetch a fresh blow to end his life, but that he heard one call to
him to stay, and looking back, saw that it was Amasenus: who missing him,
being told that he departed from the Castle in Armor followed him to the
place, and had all that while stayed covertly and beheld the combat, and seeing
the danger Corus was in, desired Parismenos to spare his life, who according
to his request desisted. Amasenus then caused his Knights to take up Corus
fallen from his horse in a trance, who receiving fresh air, came to himself
again: but when he saw the Duke present, and his enemy still mounted and in
a good estate, his heart was ready to burst with inward grief, which malicious
ranckour filled up all his senses, that cursing himself and his ill fortune,
he yielded up his fainting ghost Farewell (quoth Amasenus) the most proud and
discorteous Knight that ever lived in Thrace, thy in^olence and malicious
discontented envy, has wrought thine own down f^ll. And most noble Knight
(quoth he) to Parismenos I both honor your valor, and applaude your
victory, wherein you have behaved your self so valiantly, as I shall for ever
love you: and since you remain v^ctor, I pray return with me to have your
wounds cured. Parismenos humbly thanking him departed: and the rest of Amasenus
Knights took up Corsus body, which afterward they buried with great
sosemnitie. After Corsus death the Knights that envied Parismenos, now began
to imagine assu^redly, that the Knight would darken all their glories, and the
more account they saw the D. make of him, the more their maliciou^ envy
increased, that they deu^sed all the means they could to contriue her death,
w^^^soever insued thereon waiting all opportunities. But he (...) his wounds
fully cured, forsook his chamber and betook hims^^f again to his wonted
exercis^s, which was, sometimes to manage ^^e ^^urdie steed, and sometimes to
sport himself (in company o^ his unknown enemies) amongst the Ladies and
Gentlewomen, who liked his behavior and courtesy so well, besides his come^y
proportion, the sweet youth so greatly pleased their fancies, that they
accounted the Thracian Knights rude in respect o^, him, all both liking,
loving, and commending him, and that so openly* that his enemies might hear
their speeches, which wrought such a violent effect of rancor, that no thought
could harbor in their breasts, but tragical devises to work his downfall. One
amongst the rest near kinsman to Corus, named Argalus, was forwardest in this
exployt, who to further his intent with one Themides, dissembling a friendly
countenance, i^sinuated themselves into his familiarity, using such kind
behavior toward him, and entertaining his company with such courtesy, that
(he having no insight into their dissimulation) began to make account of
their friendship, and to take delight in their company, oftentimes imparting
his secrets unto them, and without suspicion, making them privy to most of his
actions.

Argalus upon a time came to Parismenos, telling him that a squire of his had
found a mighty wild Bore, and could bring them to his den; desiring his
company to go with them to hunt him. Parismenos hearing that, was as forward
as any of them, and the next morning appointed to meet them in the midst of
the Forest, at the Pooles side. And early the next morning he got up,
according to his appointment, being ready to depart his chamber, some five or
six drops of blood suddenly fell from his nose, with which he started, and
staying, felt a sudden drowsy heaviness and throbbing, possess his heart,
which drove him into a deep study what should be the cause of that unwonted
p^ssion: at last he began to think with himself, May not these few drops of
blood divine some bad success to my enterprise this day? I am here in a
strange Country, amongst such as I know not how to trust, for I see apparently
many of them do envy me, which they manifest by their lowering countenances, and
Corus behavior may be a pattern of their dispositions: therefore I were best
not to go at all. Then again he began to think, Argalus and Themides are my
friends, then what need I fear any mishap? All which doubts would not stay
him, but arming himself, and resolving to endure all mischaunces, be departed
toward the Poole. By the way as he rode, he met a damsel posting toward him
with great speed, wringing her hands, and making great lamentation. Parismenos
maruelling at her sorrow, asked the cause of her complaint. Sir knight (quoth
she) I was going to Duke Aamsenus court, carrying a present, and a letter from
my mistress, unto a strange knight that lately arrived there: but by yt way, I
met with two knights in green Armor, who dispoyled me thereof, and most
dis^oyally effered to abuse me, had I not fled* Damsel (quoth he) bring me if
you can where they are, and I will do my best to cause them make you
restitution. Wherewith the Damiell turned her horse, and rode back again. Sir
Knight (quoth she) they took down this narrow Lane. Parismenos set spurs to
his horse, and with great speed rode that way. He was not far entered, but he
espied the two knights in green Armor, ready mounted, staying in a pleasant
valley, encompassed round with woods, unto whom he thus said: Is it the manner
of you Thracians, to offer violence to sille Damsels? Render me those things
you have taken ^^o^ her, or I protest I will not lean you, until I have
compeld you to doit by force. Unto whom one of them replied: If thy self art
no Thracian, what do thou here? or what interest have thou in that Damsels
quarrel, that makes thee so bold to contro^ll our doings? That interest I
have (quoth he) as all knights should have, which is to succor distressed
Damsels: wherewith turning back to take scope for his race, he ran at one of
them, and at the encounter, overthrew him backwards, who by mischance in the
fall, burst one of his arms. The other seeing his fellows mischance, assailed
Parismenos with his sword drawn: whom Parismeuos so ouerlaid with fierce
blows, and wounded so grievously, that he fearing his death, and seeing no
other come to his rescue, was ready to yield. Even at that instant another
Knight came,* who seeing one of them dead* and the other in great danger, ran
at Parismenos, with in^ent unawares to pierce his spear through his body: But
he hearing the noise of his horse feet behind him, nimbly spur^ his horse
forwards, by which means the knight lost his course, passing by without doing
him any harm. Parismenos looking about him, and espying two enemies more, and
missing the Damsel that had brought him thither, began to suspect some
treachery: which thoughts, and the remembrance of the drops of blood y^ fell
from him that morning, added new courage to his valor, that reaching a ^urions
blow at the wounded knight, the sword lighting on a broken place in the armor,
rusht into his body, and ended his life. By which time the two knights lately
come, assailed him both at once, between whom began a most cruel and
dangerous fight, that all the earth was colored with y^ blood that issued from
their wounds: and notwithstanding Parismenos was before sore wounded, yet he
defended himself so courageously, that his new come enemies could not endanger
him, but with their own disadvantage, who seeing his valor, and calling to
mind Corus death, forsook knightly chi^alty* and used al villainous and
cowardly fight, the one sometimes behind him offering him a thrust, and when he
turned to revenge that int^r^ous ^eed, the other did the like, that he
perceived they intended to murder him, which so enraged that galla^t knight,
that dashing his spurs into his tr^stie steeds sides, he rusht with such
violence against one of them, that he bare him quite out of his saddle, whose
foot still hung in his st^^rop, and his horse dragd him with violence up and
down the field, until the stirr^p burst, and he lay dead and dismounted. The
other knight seeing his ^rie^^s misfortune, would have ^led, but Parismenos
struck such a violent bl^w upon his head, that he lost his senses, but soon
recovering himself again, and thinking it better to dye by his enemies sword,
then to yield ^o his mercy, turned to Parismenos, vttring these speeches.
Knight if thou art well give over, otherwise know, that notwithstanding my
former show of fight, it is y^ least part of my thought: but I intend ^o try it
out with thee to the v^^comost. Quoth he again, no dissembling Thracian,
account not me so base minded to leave such a villain to breath any longer,
that art not worthy of knighthood, much less to be esteemed amongst men: was
it thy policy by subtlety ^o be tray my life? If I be not deceived, I know
thee by thy voice, and thy name is Arga^us, my counterfaited friend. Am I the
Bore thou intendest to flaie? No traitor Thracian, do not think me so
simple, but I perceive thy treachery, and well understand thy drifts, nor do
thou think to escape my hands. This Knight indeed was Argalus, who hearing
his words, was so overcome with rage, that marking where his Armor was most
broken, he gave him such a violent thrust, that the purple blood followed his
keen sword: which wound was more deadly then all that he had before received,
that bending all his forces to revenge the same, he s^ote so fiercely and
nimbly at Argalus, that in the end with many grievous wounds, he beat him
from his horse, and lighting, pulled off his helmit and knew him: with that he
said, Argalus, what offense have I done thee, that thou should se^k my
death? or wherein did I ever merit other then friendship at thy hands? mest
unkind dissembler, thou shall receive a fit reward for thy vilany, wherewith,
feeling the smart of the wound he had lately give^ him oppr^sse his heart, he
thrust his sword into his body, which ended his ^^^e, and sat down weary with
travel, and so saint with ^ffusion of ^ood, that his eyes began to dazzle, and
he fell down upon the earth, as one ^erell of sense.

Amasenus all that day missing the knight of Fame, began to suspect that some
other cha^lenge had caused him to depart so secretly, but hearing that Argalus
and Themides were in his company, whom he thought loved him dearly, his care
was somewhat diminished, but when it grew toward night, and none of them yet
returned, he then began vehemently to fear the worst, that calling for his
steed, he presently rode forth well accompanied, commanding one to post this
way, and another that way about the Forest, to seek the Knight of Fame,
himself rode which way his fancy best parswaded him unto, and by chance
(directed by good fortune) be took directly toward the place where the Combat
was fought, and as he passed by the narrow Lane that went down the valley, he
espied one of the steedes all bestained with blood, wandering without the Rider,
which struck a sudden fear to his heart, that ryding down that Lane, he
espied the dead bodies of mangeled knights, lie confusedly scattered upon the
earth, with ghastly countenances, being the fearfullest spectacle that ever eye
beheld. The first that he beheld was Themides, almost torn to pieces by his
own steed, with his soote stillin the stirrope. Next he vewed the other two
knights so grievously mangled and wounded, that the tears with grief gusht
from his eyes in abundance Next he came to Argalus, whose face was uncovered,
whom he soon knew. And last of all, he came to Parismenos, who lay groueling
with his face to the earth, still grasping his bloody sword in his hand, whom
he perceived to gasp for breath, that in all have lifting up his Beuer to give
him fresh air, he knew him to be the knight of Fame, and perceiving some life
yet to remain in him, he unarmed him with his own hands and gently wrapped him
up close, that his wounds might not take air, causing him to be carried to
his Castle. The rest of the dead knights he likewise caused to be carried
back, which was done with great lamentations, and afterward by his pointment
were honorably buried.

CHAP. III. How the Knights returned without any news of Violetta. Of the
sorrows Pollipus made for her absence, departing in her search. How Violetta
having endured many miseries in Archas Castle, at last escaped from thence in
Soranas disguise.
THe Bohemian Knights, by commandment of Parismus, and the Thessalian knights,
for the affection they bare to Violetta, having posted through every part of
Bohemia, and made all diligent search, leaving no place unsought, no means
unattempted, nor labor unperformed to find her: yet notwithstanding all their
faithful diligence, at last returned without any news of her at all: which
renewed Pollipus sorrows afresh, that but even then had entertained a little
quiet by Parismus persuasions. But when he saw Violetta was by no means to be
heard of, nor any likelihood or comfort left for him ever to see her again:
neither knowing nor any way supposing what should be become of her, his heart
was so inwardly overcome with troublesome cogitations and doubtful cares, that
he could neither resolve to seek her, nor take any course to ease his mind:
but rested like one utterly given over, to forlorn and careless misery,
daily frequenting those sollitary walks where he left her, and hourly
renewing his sorrows, by the sad remembrance of her absence, uttering such
mournful plaints and sad lamentations, that the birds that haunted those
unfrequented places, seemed to mourn and lament with him. Sometimes accusing
himself of negligence, to leave her, to pursue the Bear, blaming her that
would not stay his return, and then again, fretting his heart for accusing
her. Sometimes thinking she was dead, and then again persuading himself she
was alive, then musing why she did not return to him if she were alive: that
by contrarieties of doubts, he could add no ease to his cares, nor rest to his
heart, at last he determined to search throughout all Germany and Greece, but
he would find her: for he assuredly thought she was not dead, being thereto
induced, for that he could not find no likelihood thereof, being persuaded by
Parismus, that some discurteous knight had met with her, and so withheld her
return: that within few days (arming himself in a green armor, which he
made of purpose, bearing this device; A knight pursuing a wild Bear) he left
the Bohemian Court, making none privy to his departure but Parismus, (who
determined not to stay long behind him) whom we will leave onwards of his
journey, and speak of Violetta, whom we left weak in Archas Castle.

As Soon as the two gentlewomen had conveyed her to her bed, with the
comfortable means they used, she began to be somewhat revived, and calling her
senses to their wonted uses, began to make such doleful lamentations, that no
heart was able to endure to hear them, without effusion of tears: oftentimes
offering to do her self violence, but that she was hindered by the two
gentlewomen: especially one of them named Sorana, was so careful over her,
that she left not so much as a pin about her, wherewith she might do her
self harm: but when some three days were past, and the extremity of her
desperate passion somewhat calmed, she began to desire that Archas would convey
her to the Bohemian Court: if not to find Pollipus, yet to enjoy the
comfortable presence of Parismus and Laurana: but notwithstanding her manifold
entreaties, they used some excuses or other, to frustrate her expectation,
telling her that it was dangerous for her to travel yet, by reason of her late
sickness, and that since it was certain Pollipus was no more to be enjoyed,
she might stay with them some few days, until she were better able to endure
so long a journey: for that the Bohemian Court was not so near as she thought.
Which excuses, rather increased her desire, and the more she seemed desirous to
go thither, the more they defrauded her by excuses many days. In which time,
she being endued with an extraordinary wisdom, having well weighed each
circumstance of her bringing thither, and their frivolous excuses to detain
her there: and withal, noting their behauiours and speeches, began to suspect
Archas dissimulation: to find out the truth thereof, she began (contrary to
her inward thoughts) to frame a cheerfuller countenance, and comfortabler
disposition, thereby to feel their intents, which wrought such effect, that
within a while Archas would often frequent her company, and in the end proffered
love to her, using her most kindly, c^refully and tenderly, seeming above all
things to regard her quiet and content, whose speeches she endured quietly,
and took in good part (as he thought) that upon a time, amongst many speeches,
taking her by the hand, he said.

Most beautiful Lady, I have ever since the first view of those excellent
bewties, been tormented with the passions of entire love, that I could take no
quiet, but in the sweet remembrance of your perfections, which have bound my
devotions to your service, in such firm and constant leagues, that my
resolution is, to spend my life (if it were a thousand times dearer to me then
it is) only to procure your content: therefore thus boldly I presume to
reveal my affections, trusting your clemency will add some ease to my
careful heart, by showing some courteous sign of your favorable acceptance of
my humble suite: and though my merit has no way deserved such favor, yet I
beseech you, make trial of my loyalty, and you shall find I will be inferior
to none in good will, nor violate myprotested loyalty in any undutiful
respect. I have the boldlier presumed to detain you here, because with your
absence my life would depart: then consture not amiss of that true love and
sincere affection which has caused me to offend in, but no offense at all, if
you vouchsafe not to take it so: here shall you enjoy you fill of content, in
as ample sort as any other place can yield: then I beseech you grant some
ease to my troubled heart, and by your clemency release me of those cares
that possess my breast, only procured by the piercing dart of your sacred
beauty. Which words being ended, he offered to have kissed her, but she
gently refusing the same, made this reply.

Sir knight, my sorrows will not suffer me to believe your speeches, nor my
late loss, permit me to entertain your love: for then might you esteem me
light, and so lightly won, as little regard me: but to put you out of
suspense, my resolution is, never to love any but my dear Pollipus: wherewith
the Crystal tears with a violent passage, fell from her grief swollen
eye balls.

That grief quoth he, is remediless: therefore banish the sad remembrance
thereof from your heart, and entertain a persuasion of my constancy, and true
affection, which shall everlastingly remain inviolable, without intermission.

How can I (quoth she) in conscience, and without everlasting stain to my
honor, when I have neither performed his funeral, nor showed any token of
duty to his dead corpse, who loved me most dearly in his life time. But show
me this favor, as to let me but return to the Court to bewail his death, and
a while enjoy my dear friends company, and I promise and protest next
Pollipus, to love none but your self.

Archas hearing her reasonable demand, stood like one amazed, not knowing
what answer to make her, thinking that if he should deny her that request
being so small, she might think his love but slender: and if he should
promise her, and not perform it, that might be a means to breed a suspicion
in her, that his reports to her were false: that he stood musing a great while
confounded in his thoughts, what to devise for a ready aunwere.

Nay study not so for that (quoth Violetta) but answer me another time. Which
said, she withdrew her self unto her chamber, where she began to meditate of
his speeches, and how he was astonished, when she requested him to convey her to
the court, which drove her into many cogitations, when presently one of the
gentlewomen came to her, whom she used most kindiy, and of purpose to feel^ her
mind, grew into familiar conference with her: and amongst many other speeches
(quoth she) I pray tell me what Archas has reported unto you, concerning
Pollipus, for he seems unwilling to v^ter his mind unto me. He told me
nothing quoth she. Which words came from her with such stuttering, and change
of countenance, that Violetta began to suspect, that Archas had all that while
dissembled with her, and that Pollipus (contrary to his report) was yet living.
And when Sorana came, she likewise felt her mind, of whom she gathered some
probability: and likewise, when she next came into Archas company, she asked
him so many questions, that she found many contrarieties in his speeches,
which settled such a perswasiue opinion in her mind, that Archas report of
Pollipus was untrue, that she rested greatly comforted that way, but yet in
great care, cogitating what he would suppose was become of her, how she should
get out of that place, or give him knowledge of her being there, and avoid
Archas odious love, which seemed as deadly to her heart as infectious venom.

Archas still prosecuted his suit with great earnestness, making many
frivolous excuses to withhold her from the Bohemian court, growing into such
boldness, that oftentimes when she refused his offered embracings and impudent
behauiours, he would by force kiss her, and sold her in his arms, which
rudeness, he so often used, that she began so extremely to abhor him, that
his sight was most odious unto her.

Oftentimes Violetta did walk into a pleasant Orchard adjoining to the Castle,
as well to recreate her dulled senses in those pleasant shades, as in
solitariness to recount her miseries, and ease her careful heart by inuenting
means how to rid her self from forth that labyrinth of sorrow, and also to
avoid Archas odious sight, who inwardly lusted to satisfy his inordinate
appetite, by obtaining the fruition of her dilicate body: and though he knew
Pollipus were living, and heard the mones and sorrowful complaints Violetta
made, able to extenuate any tyrannous disposition, yet he persisted in his
devilish resolution, with such impudency, that neither regarding her
complaints, nor the laws of nature, he still sought all disloyal opportunities
to dishonor her. And on a time, marking when she went into the Orchard, as she
was wont, in midst of her silent cogitations, he came to the place where she
sat, (whose heart began to pant with a kind of fear, when she beheld him) and
coming unto her, seating himself close by her sweet side, he uttered these
speeches.

You know dear Lady, how long I have sued to obtain your love, being thereto
compelled by the extremities of loves everlasting flame, which boileth in my
troubled breast, but hitherto you have obdurated your heart against me, and not
vouchsafed to yield any pity to my distress, but contrary to the kind
nature that should abound in you, seem not at all to regard my passions, which
has added sorrow to my torment. Now sweet Lady, seeing with what denotions I
have attended your pleasure, defer me no longer, but let me obtain that
faoour, which with such care I have expected, and you so unkindly withheld:
which would both ease my comfortless heart, and add no small content to the
remediless sorrows you so impatiently endure.

Violetta hearing his speeches, made this reply. Sir, I have long since told
you my resolution, which might be a sufficient answer to any reasonable
creature: besides, my vows passed to my dear knight Pollipus, have bound me
from yielding my spotless honor to be stained with the blot of infamy. Then
I pray leave off to prosecute your suit, which you ground upon loves
foundation, being indeed, nothing but the insatiate desire of filthy
concupisence, the remembrance whereof, adds new care to my careful heart,
and every way affrighteth me with discontent: and if you so much regard my
content, as you protest, desist to trouble me with your love, and give me leave
to depart from hence, that I may spend the rest of my days in sorrow, for his
loss, that was more dear unto me, then all the worlds treasure.

I but Lady quoth Archas, calm this discontent with remembrance of an
impossibility in obtaining ought at his hands, and go not about to consume
those heavenly perfections with sorrow, and seem not stranger then reason
requires, to him that loves you as well as Pollipus ever did: and now that
occasion has so fitly offered the sweet opportunity of time and place, let us
spend this time in love, and not in these contentions: these unfrequented
paths add means to further our ioies: here are no eyes to behold us, nor any
to bewray our secrets, but the silent trees and sweet smelling flowers: and
that which is unknown, is in a manner vncommitted: and in requital of your
kindness, I will perform whatsoever you shall command me, were it to run
through thousands of deaths, to procure your content: the^ sweet love be not
so unkind, but yield some pity to my restless cares, and detain not from
me that pleasant delight, which will extinguish my bitter griefs. When he had
ended his speeches, he stricktly caught her tender body in his arms, imprinting
a compelled kiss upon her tender lips, twining her curled locks about his
gross fingers, and beldly fingring her tender breasts, offering other forced
behavior: whilst she striued to untwine her body off his arms, which when
she had obtained, casting a disdainful countenance upon him (like as Diana
cast upon the woeful Acteon) with her cheeks as red as scarlet, she uttered
these speeches.

Most discourteous villain, has my lenity enforced thee to offer me this
abuse: or is thy mind so far from piety, as not to desist from prosecuting
thy detested lust? know this, that rather then I will yield my honor to be
blemished by thy appetite, I will tear these eyes from forth my head, and end
my woeful life, which thou soughtest to spill. Is this the friendship thou have
protested? was it thy policy to train me hither to dishonor me? had
thou left me in the place where I lost my beloved, then had I been happy, if
some wild beast had ended my life. I now perceive thy protestations are but
filthy actors of thy intended villainy, and all which thou have told me of
Pollipus death, to be most false and untrue: for no doubt, he is yet living,
whom thou seek to dishonor, by dispoyling me of that which I reserved for
him. Accursed wretch that I was, to fall into thy odious hands, which art void
of knightly behavior.

Archas hearing himself thus reviled, abandoned shame and pity, violently
pulling her to him: told her, that she should submit her self to his will,
offering by force to attain the fruition of her spotless body. When Violetta
felt her self so handled, she labored by all means to disapoint him of his
will: but in the end, feeling her self too weak, long to withhold his force,
she yielded forth such shrikes, as all the Castle roong with the noise other
entry: that Sorana hearing the same, knowing the place where she used, came
thitherwards. Archas beholding her, withdrew himself, and Violetta rose from
the place, tired with resistance, and swollen with inward vexation and disdain,
to be so used, casting her countenance down to the earth: to whom Sorana said:
How now Lady, what causes your sorrow? has Archas offered you violence?
Violetta with tears trickling down her crimzen cheeks, answered: yea, that
villain Archas would have done me violence, had not you so fortunately come to
my rescue: but I think the divine providence, that has sent you so happily to
preserve me from his devouring lust, whose dishonorable mind is fraught with
all villainies: accursed be the day that first brought me to this hateful
place, to fall into his loathsome power, that contrary to nature has done me
this outrage. Sweet Sorana (quoth she) convey me secretly into the Castle, that
there I may in sorrow end my accursed life: rather then again abide his
loathsome sight, which will be as pestilent as deadly poison to my heart.
Sorana taking her by the arm to support her weak body, led her to her
Chamber. Archas likewise seeing himself so frustrated of his desire, with an
impudent and unshamefast countenance, went into the Castle, vowing in his heart
never to desist until he had accomplished his desire.

Violetta being come to her chamber, related to Sorana the whole manner of
Archas usage, entreating her counsel which way to avoid his suits, which she
knew he would still prosecute: who uttered her mind in this sort. Lady, I pity
your estate, but am so far from adding release thereto, as I know no means at
all how to comfort you: for Archas disposition I too well know, is far from
any spark of honesty, who has in like sort behaved himself to me at my
first coming hither, which was in the prime of my youth: neither give any
credit to his reports: for he has told me that Pollipus is yet living, and
long since I suspected he would use you in this sort, and escape from hence you
cannot: for this castle is continually guarded, having but one entrance
thereto, whereby none can escape vndescried: therefore I think it best for you
to yield to his love, and then you may live in quiet: otherwise, I know your
life will be miserable enough.

Violetta was stricken into a sudden amazement to hear her detested
counsel, thinking to have found some comfort in her speeches: insomuch, that
with extremity of passion, she was ready to give up the ghost. Which Sorana
beholding, reuining her with robbing her pale cheeks, she said, as follows,

If you will follow my advise and counsel, I may peradventure ease you in
some respect, which is this: That the next time when Archas again sollicites
his suite, condescend to his request, conditionally, that he will come ^o you
in the silent of the night, so secretly that none may know thereof, and that
only he satisfy himself with your love without asking questions, or entering
into any talk, which may renew the remembrance of your former grief: and when
with these conditions you have agreed, my self will supply your room, and
thereby safeguard your honor, and satisfy him: which may well be performed,
considering that his desire being nothing but lust, he easly will be drawn to
condescend to your conditions: which once done, let me alone to execute the
rest: for I am so well acquainted with his fashions, that it shall be long before
he discrie our deceit.

Violetta hearing the circumstance of her talk, promised to do all things
according to her counsel, if she her self meant faithfully. Which Sorana
assured her of, by many protestations, and so left her in some comfort, hoping
by this means, to be rid from her impudent lover.

As Soon as Sorana was departed, she presently goes to Archas, (pri^ked
forward with as great a sting of foul lust, as reigned in him) and told him,
that she had talked with Violetta about his suit, which she was persuaded she
would yield unto, but that she was bashful: and by his speeches, rather
hardened, then any way mollified: but (quoth she) try her even now, and
whatsoever she binds you unto by condition, that promise you to perform:
and when you know her mind, tell me what she says, and I may peradventure
counsel you what to do for your furtherance: for she is worthy to be
beloved and kindly used, and in my judgment, you did amiss to use her so
rudely as you did in the Orchard: for forced kindness is not worth
estimation, but consent in love breeds the sweetest delight. Archas presently
put her counsel in practice, and came to Violettaes chamber (who was then
studying how to rid her self from his custody) and very kindly saluted her,
craving pardon for his last offense, excusing himself by many reasons, and
alleging as many persuasions, that she could not in reason deny his request,
his love being grounded upon the truest foundation of perfect constancy, of
vows, oaths, and protestations, to dedicate himself, his life, and all that
he had to be at her command. Violetta (casting down her eyes to the earth,
and with a blushing countenance, to think how much it went against her heart,
^o use him kindly: asking pardon of Pollipus, in her secret thoughts, for doing
him that unwilling wrong) at last made answer, that she could in some sort
be contented to grant his request, if he would promise to perform what she
should inioine him too, which he vowed and protested to fulfill in every
respect. Then she concluded with him as Sorana had counseled her to do, which
liked him exceedingly well, and quoth she, for a pledge hereof, give me that
ring which you so much esteem, which he gave unto her, and at his departure
received from her a gentle kiss, which she wish might prove as deadly poison
to his heart, being greatly discontented with her self for showing him that
favor.

Archas presently with a joyful heart went to Sorana, and told her all that
had passed betwixt him and Violetta: which ^he willed him in any wise to
perform: and seeing she has bound you from talk, what need you care for
speaking, since you may enjoy what otherwise you desire: and she finding you so
willing to condescend to her requests, will be the easiler drawn to yield
you any courtesy. Sorana being parted from him, immediately came to Violetta,
and told her all that he had made her privy unto, and withal said, that for
her sake only she undertook that task, (which was nothing so, but of a most
inor^inate desire to beastly lust, which Violetta well noted:) and thus they
(...) the day in much idle talk, until evening drawing nigh, she left
Violetta in her chamber, and went unto that sweet bed, which she had neatly
dressed for Archas, perfuming her self with many odoriserous waters, devising al
means she could to keep her self unknown from him, being affected with great
desire for his approach. As Soon as the appointed time was come, Archas
secretly conveyed himself in the dark, into Violettas chamber, without
speaking a word, whom when Sorana heard russing upon the rushes, her heart
leapt for joy: and she prepared her self to entertain him in the kindest
sort, who approaching the beds side, softly lifting up the clothes, laid
himself down by her side, who seemed to shrink thereat, and with such
cunning behaved her self, that he ^o whit supposed he embraced his woonted
Sorana.

Violetta being sure of Archas, with all haste attired her self in Soranas
apparel, which so well became her, that had Archas himself seen her, he
would not have discerned her disguise, and taking with her the ring he had
given her, she came to the Gardiants, telling the^ she must go out about a
little business for Archas, and gave them the ring as her warrant to pass by.
The Gardiants marvelled whither she went so late, yet taking her for no other
then Sorana, accepting her warrant, let her depart. Violetta being past the
entrance, began to study which way to take, but knowing that the time now
yielded no respite to delay, took any way came into her fancy, fittest as
she thought for her escape, and with all have, ar^ing her self with as much
courage as could possibly be in a woman, forsaking the mountains, which she
thought dangerous for wild beasts, she traveled all that night, sometimes
running, and sometimes going, as if Archas had bin hard at hand pursuing her,
and by that time Phoebus began to illuminate the earth with his brightness,
she was gotten a great way from Archas Castle, toward Greece, rejoicing at her
happy escape not caring which way she went, so she might get from him: and
applauding Soranes counsel, which had forted to that unexpected issue for her
escape.

CHAP. VI. How Pollipus was taken prisoner by the Giant Brandamor, in the
Forest of Arde. And of Parismus departure with Tellamor and Barzillus, in
search of Violetta.
AFter that Pollipus was departed from Parismus, he came to the place where he
left Violetta, and t^ere uttered these speeches. This is that blessed place
where my Love lay last foulded in mine arms, whose pre^ence was the sollace of
my sweet content, whose perfections excelled the rarest gifts of other Ladies,
as far as good does bad, or any virtue his contrary: which way should I take
to recover that inestimable jewel of my delight here lost? or whither should I
travel to find her, considering I know not whether she be dead or alive?

D^ad I am pers^^^ed she is not, but by some discourteous Knight withheld from
returning, or conveyed far hence unto some unknown place, from whence she
cannot send me word, or any way give me knowledge in what estate the remains:
then what rests for me to do, but to search the world throughout to find her,
and either to recover her to my comfort, or spend my life in that pursuit: and
since I undertake a travel, without knowledge which way to take, or whither to
convey my st^ppes, sweet Fortune be so favorable, as to guide me in my
tranels, that by thy aid I may come to the place of her abode, and attain the
fruition of her heavenly presence, who by thy appointment has fallen into
these mischances: and I will for ^uer dedicate my endeavors to thy service, and
continually adore thy name. Which words being ended, he mounted himself on
his steed, and rode the way his fancy first chose, travailing toward the
mountains that incompasie Bohemia, but not finding her, being unacquainted in
those countries, wandered toward Grecia, and traualed without any more hope to
find her, then at the beginning, continuing his travels without intermission,
passing many places without any misaduenture. At last he came to the great
Forest of Ardea, wherein stood the Castle of the mighty Giant Brandamor, the
place being invincible, by reason of the situation and strength, whose
cruelties committed by him and his brother Argaletus, made him much feared, and
his walks eschued of all men.

Which Forest Pollipus was no sooner entered, but he espied the bod^e of a
goodly Knight, that had lately given up his ghost, lie weltred in his blood,
which when he had well viewed, and perceived to be quite past recovery, he
maruailed what sad adventure had been cause of his death, persuading himself,
those that had done the same were not far off that he withdrew himself into a
thicket of bushes, where he could not be discerned, to stay until he might
discrie those that had done that deed.

He had not been long shrouded there, but he saw a damzell and a squire,
coming to the dead knight, with great lamentations, bewailing his untimely
death, seeming by their behavior to be quite overcome with extreme miscrie.

After their lamentations ended, they hasted to take up the dead Knight, to
whom Pollipus came and demanded what Knight that was, and what misaduenture
had brought him to that untimely death. The damzel easting her eyes up to him,
which before were sadly fixed on the earth, said. Sir Knight, to discover the
whole circumstance of our mishap, would ask more respite then the time will
now permit: because if we be surprised by our tariance, we are like to be
partners with him in death. This Knight was named Tyrides, son to the noble
Duke Amasenus of Thrace, being brought up in the Court of the renowned King of
Libia, who bring with the Princess Venola, the kings only daughter on
hunting, in the mid^^^ of their pastime, she was severed from the rest of her
company, and being wet with following the game, alighted in a pleasant valley
to cool her self, and lay down on the flowring banks of a sweet burbling
brook, where she had not long stayed, but she was surprised by a Giant, who
with rude behavior brought her away: wherewith I being amazed, ran back to
this worthy Knight Tyrides, who with me and this Page, purs^ed him until we
came to this place, where this noble Knight charged him to redeliuer the Lady
to him, who lay panting with extreme fear of her life, under this guard: but
the Giant presently set upon this Knight, and in long continuance of terrible
fight, slew him, by which time many of her damzels had found us out, whom he
with Venola, notwithstanding their earnest entreaties, conveyed to a Castle not
far hence, whither we secretly followed him, and are now returned to carry
back this knight, with this heavy news, to the King.

Do not so quoth Pollipus, but bring me to the Castle, and thou shall soon see
I will set her at liberty, or venture my life. Sir (quoth the damzell) if I
thought your travel would sort to any good issue, I would conduct you thither,
but the Giant is now within the Castle, and the night near approached,
therefore we will depart with this dead knight, and if you please to go
thither, you may easily find it.

Pollipus seeing her so unwilling, left her, and rode toward the Castle,
which he found fast shut, whereto was one passing by a bridge, over a mighty
huge deep lake, the Castle it self being situated upon a lofty rock, so
well fenced by nature, and strengthened by the art of man, that it was
unconquerable, and not to be subdued by force: and coming to the bridge he
found the same drawn up, by means whereof, he thought it vain to account of
any thing that night, but contented himself to take the cold earth for his
bed, and the large Forest for his Chamber, where he could take no rest,
being troubled with many thoughts, having likewise some hope to find Violetta
in that place, which added (though it were very unlikely) great courage to
his resolution. That viewing she invincible strength of the Castle, and well
considering how he might disadvantage the Giant if he could get him to single
fight, in these and such like thoughts he spent most part of the night, until
at last he laid him down, and gave a little slumber to his eyes.

Early in the morning he buckled on his armor, and mounting his steed,
shrouded himself under the shadow of an oak, not far from the Castle, where
he might easily see who went out and in thereat.

The first that came out that morning, was Argalte, mounted upon a goodly
Courser, and armed in very rich Armor, whom Pollipus thought had been the
Giant that the Damzel had told him of, whom he thus greetes, Traitor, art thou
the Giant of this Castle, which have stolen the Lady Venola? Argalt hearing
his peremptory demand, made this answer. I have the Lady Venola in my
custody, whom I esteem above all the world, but no traitor as thou termest
me. Yes, (quoth Pol^lipus) thou art a trator, and worse then a villain, that
disloyally offerest outrage to resistlesse Ladies, that have not so much
valor, as to show thy self before an armed Knigh: but since my destinies
have allotted me to meet thee thus conveniently, I will abate thy pride, and
correct thy tyranny, and make thee repent the outrages thou have committed.

Argalt hearing his speeches, was so enraged, that suddenly he drew forth
his mighty Fawchion, and as suddenly struck a violent ^lowe therewith at
Pollipus, which by the unexpected opproach, being unresisted, glaunced on his
thigh, and pierced the Armor, that the blood appeared.

Pollipus seeing how treacherously he had smitten him, drew his sword and
revenged that blow, beginng a brave and fair combat, which continued for a
good space, until they had given each other many deep wounds. Argalte
maruelling at his enemies valor, being never before so roughly handled, laid
on his blows with mighty force, but Pollipus sometime nimbly avoiding one,
and cunningly warding another, kept himself from any great harm, and in the
end tired Argalt, who seeing that all his strength little auailed to his
enemies disadvantage, and withal, feeling himself almost wearied, began to
abate his blows, which Pollipus perceiving, gave him so many blows, and
withal, such deep wounds, that he was in great danger of his life: and
turning his back, fled toward the Castle, whom Pollipus pursuing, gave so
many wounds, that he began to rore and cry exceedingly, yelling forth such a
hideous noise, that all the Castle rung therewith.

Brandamor hearing the same, presently hasted to his rescue, and lifting up his
mighty mace, unawares struck so forcibly therewith vp^n Pollipus Crest, that
it made him stagger, withal saying: Why offerest thou this outrage to my
brother? Pollipus seeing his mighty proportion, being somewhat dazeled with
the blow, retired a little back, and being recovered, made this answer. I
need not tell thee wherefore, for that thy guilty conscience repl^te with
vice, can bear witness of thy degenerate cruelty, offered to all that come
within thy power, but especi^lly to the fair Lady Venola, whom thou (or thy
brother) haste brought to this Castle, whom I am come to rebeeme.

Brandamor hearing his speeches, most towardly assailed him, being before
almost wearied, and grievously wounded: who not withstanding resisted him so
valiantly, that Brandamor in short time had received many grievous wounds, yet
staying himself, said. I pity thy estate, and therefore I wish thee to
yield thy self, before I chastise thy boldness any further, for I see thou
art already wounded, and unable to withstand my strength: besides, I scorn to
cope with one already vanquished: then take my offer of mercy, or else I will
soon give that weak body of thine to be devoured of wild beasts. Vain
boasting monster (quoth Pollipus) know, that I disdain thy friendship, and
disclaim thy proffer, desiring rather to die by thy cursed hand, then yield to
thy courtesy, therefore do thy worst.

Brandamor hearing this resolute reply, being enraged with collor, struck at
him most violently, but Pollipus avoiding his blow, thrust at him, and wounded
him so deep, that the blood ran down upon his white steed. Argalt seeing
this Knight so valiantly withstand his brother, called forth a great sort of
servants in Armor, who rushing all at once upon him, with their throng beat
him ^^om his horse and carried him unto the Castle, where he was unarmed, and
for that night put into a close prison, having an old woman to dress his
wounds.

Early the next morning, he was brought into the Hall before Brandamor, who
had Maiestically feated himself in a chair, with ^^^ie ^^d^e eyes swollen with
rage, uttering these speeches* Presumptous and ouer^a^ing Knight, what fre^zie
has caused thee to commit th^^ unadvised folly, whereby thou have int^ust my
wr^th against thee, an^ brought say self in danger? Wherein have I wronged
thee, that thou should ^ffer in molest me?

(...) ^^^daining to be so peremptorily examined, made this reply. I list not
tell my name, because thou know me not, the cause of my coming hither, is
in search of a Lady that I suppose thou unjustly detainest, making thy infamous
name so ignominious by thy outrages, that both heaven and earth will shortly
hate thee. Do thou seek a Lady (quoth he) come with me, and thou shall see
all the Ladies I have.

Then he brought him into a goodly Hall, hung with ancient clothes of
T^p^st^ie, out of which he went into a most pleasant Gallerie, furnished with all sorts of most beautiful pictures of excellent workmanship: from hence he
came into a chamber of great largeness, so rarely furnished, as Pollipus
marvelled at the richneste thereof: at the end whereof, sat the most
beautiful and fair Lady Fenola, with her golden hair hanging about her
shoulders, her ^^ch and costly ornaments all betorne, her crimzen cheeks
sprinkled with old dried tears, and fresh droppe^ flowing from her pure eyes
heavily leaning her careful head upon a cushion, with her hands hanging down
f^ld^^ one in another, seemed so sad and heavy a spect^^le of a distressed
Lady, as never eye beheld: who seeing Brandamor and Pollipus coming toward
her, lifted up her head from the place where she rested it, and carelessly let
the same fall on the heavy pillowe again. Pollipus seeing her exceeding
beauty, and withal, uoting her heavy estate, was strooken into a sudden
compe, that he stood like one in a study. Brandamor thnking that was the Lady
he came to redeem, said. Knight, if this be the Lady thou seek to
release, thy labor is in vain: for her do I esteem more then all the world:
whose presence I so highly honor, that no force shall redeem her from hence:
whom I both love and honor, as much as thou and all the Knights in the world
besides: whose love has caused my languishing forme^ts this long time, which
now I purpose to enjoy, to the extinguishing of my inward vexations: for her
sake have I endured much travel, then do not think, that I will easily or
willingly leave her heavenly company, but will approve and maintain, that I am
worthier of her love then any Knight living: and since I have my desire in
attaining her custody, I will likewise enjoy her love before she part hence.

Venola hearing his proud boasting so much disdained them that she could not
refrain from answering him, but rising from the ground where she sat, she
uttered these speeches.

Impudent miscreant, why presumest thou so much of thy self, that art able to
perform nothing but bragges? think thou my love of so small ^^timation, as
to be controlde and conquered by thy vain speeches? or any way to yield liking
to thy detested karcasse: No, I account the basest trull in Libia, too good to
be thy Paramour, much less my self do so much scorn thee, that I will
rather execute mine own death, then suffer thee to defile me so much as with a
touch: and think thou because thou have betrayed this one knight by
treachery, there are no other that will seek my release? Yes be thou assured,
that the violence thou haste offered me, by bringing me hither against my
will, one day will turn to be the occasion of thy cruel death. Thou foul
detested villain, leave off to utter such bosting speeches in my presence, for
nothing can bring more grief to my heart, then thy ill pleasing sight.

Brandamor hearing her heavenly voice sound for^h such bitter taunts against
him, was exceedingly enraged therewith, but dissembling a pleasant countenance,
he departed with Pollipus, whom after some speeches past betwixt them, he
commanded to be conveyed to a chamber, from whence he could as hardly get, as
from the strongest prison in the world: who seeing that Violetta was not in the
Castle, wished he had not attempted to have come there, but making a virtue of
necessity, he endured such imprisonment as patiently as might be, thinking all
misery nothing, being undergone for Violetas sake. Where we will leave him, to
speak of Parismus.

Parismus heart was oppressed with such grief, for the loss of the virtuous
Violetta, and the absence of his dear friend Pollipus, that day nor night he
could neither by sleep, or other recreation, give any case to his troubled
head: therefore he determined likewise, to endure some travel for their sakes,
that had suffered much misery in his behalf: and when Laurana and he were one
night sweetly solacing themselves, each in the others pleasant love, he told
her his full intent desiring her not to be discontented therewith, but to take
his departure patiently.

Laurana hearing his speeches, was so overcome with grief, that a flood of
tears distilled from her precious eyes, and twining her tender arms about his
neck, impressing a sweet kiss upon his lips, she uttered these speeches.
Most noble Lord, are you weary of my company, that you seek to estraunge your
self from me by travel? do you think I shall be able long to endure your
absence, well knowing how many dangers may hazard your person, and detain your
heavenly presence from my ssght? think you that I can attain any quiet,
without the fruition of your heavenly company? or ever suffer sleep to seize
upon my eyes while you are avsent? No sweet Lord, with your departure, all joy
and delight shall part from me, and never will I suffer any content to harbor
in my breast. Then most dear Love, (which words she uttered, intermingled with
a number of sweet kisses) do not leave me in care, do not withhold my content,
do not take away my sweetest delight, but stay you still with me, and command
your knights to go in Violettas search, who at the least beck, will post
through the world to do you service: and hazard not your person in strange
Countries, nor amongst foreign enemies, which may by some treachery work your
grief: my self will here shrowde you from harm: my arms shall enclose you
from danger, and my love shall be the Fort you shall conquer. I will expel the
sad remembrance of their loss, with delighfull communication: my self will
rock your senses a sleep with Music, and my endeavors shall labor to
purchase your content: then do not seek to leave me comfortless to bewail
your absence, but make abode with me still, and my love shall shelter you from
all peril. Which words being ended, the ouerflowing of her tears, stopped the
passage of hi^ speech, and sopping forth sighs, she hung about his neck.

Parismenos was exceedingly greeue^ to see her heaviness, that sowlding her
precious body in his arms, with a strict embracing, he labored by delightful
familiarities, to expel her sadness: which being some what mittigated, he
uttered these speeches.

Why dear Lady, what need you make th^se complaints, considering you know
nothing is so precious in my sight, nor of so dear estimation with me, as your
sweet love? Or what need you make speech, or take such fear of dangers, when
you see no cause of disquiet? Why are you unwilling that I should take a little
pains for their sakes, that would have many ways endangered their lives, and
endured extreme misery for your sake* How can I excuse my self of
ingratitude, to that courteous knight Pollipus? if whilst he passes his time
in sorrowful care, I should live here in ease not seeming to regard his
misery, that would have shunned no danger to procure my comfort? How will all
the knights of this Court esteem of me, but as of an ungrateful person, if I
should so much neglect the duty of a friend? Then sweet Love, be not you ^he
cause of my stay, but let me obtain your sweet consent, and exp^^l those
confused cares that trouble your quiet: for be you assured, nothing can be more
grievous unto me, then your discontent: and not^ing more pleasing, then your
accord: the dangers accurrant to travel, are by wisdom easily avoided: then
be you assured, that I will shun al hazard of mishap, for your sweet sake: and
leave you ^ff is sorrow thus for that which you cannot with equity contradict:
my stay shall not be long, nor my journey far: then be you contented to
vouchsafe your agreement, and you shall thereby satisfy my content: his
speeches being ended, with silence she gave consent, spending some time in
sweet dalliance, and in the end, fell fast a sleep.

Early in the morning, Parismus with many sweet kisses, took his leave o^
Laurana, who bedewed her bed with abundance of tears, for his departure, and
falling into a deep passion of fear, she presently started up, and arraying
her self, came down into the court, where Parismus was ready to take his
horse and running to him, caught hold of him, who maruailing thereat, took her
most lovingly in his arms, who was so far ouergon with grief, that she could
not speak a word: but bestowing many sweet tear wet kisses on her, he left
her amongst her maid, and departed. With him, were Tellamor and Barzillus,
keeping company together some three days, without adventure at all: at last,
they came to a goodly plain, wherinto a common beaten path conducted them,
until coming to the midst thereof, there stood a brazen pillar, from which,
parted three several ways: there they stayed devising amongst themselves*
which of those ways to take: at last, they concluded, that each of them should
take a several way, and solemnly taking* their leaves, with kind farewells,
they betook each other to their good or bad fortunes.

CHAP. VII. How Parismenos called the knight of Fame, won the chief honor of
the Tourney, at the Court of the king of Thrace. And having won Phylena, the
kings daughter, was commanded in a vision, to give her to Remulus.
PArismenos (no otherwise known, but by the name of the Knight of Fame, under
which name, he did pass till he came to the knowledge of his parents) being as
is before said in another Chapter, co^ueied by Amasenus to his castle sore
wounded in the bat^el he had with Argalus and Thenudes, was so carefully tended
by the Dukes Ph^sitians, that in a few days they had brought him to his
perf^ct remembrances: and within short time after that, to his former health,
which greatly rejoiced the good old Duke, who took great felicity in his
company, for the many honorable parts he saw to abound in him. And upon a
time, in the presence of all his Court, demanded the cause of the combat
between him and Argalus, which he requested as well to know the truth thereof
himself, as to satisfy the ^uspitious minds of many that inwardly maligned
the discontented Knight, unto whom he declared the truth in manner as is before
set down, saying* This my lord, is the truth of our misadue^ture, whom I never
iniuried, but always esteemed as my dear friends. Amasenus was glad that no
cause of discon^ent could be conceived against him, by any other of his
knights, who envied him, because his noble gifts darkened their glories: but yet
his ^rieous and kind behavior in short time expelled that rancor, and they
that before were his enemies, began to make good estimation of him, and his
fame began to spread it self in most parts of Thrace, and all that eeuer beheld
him, grew into admiration of his strength, accompanied wi^h ^uch beauty, as his
youth yielded: that had they not known the contrary by his prowess, they
would have taken him for some disguised Lady. Wheilest the knight of Fame
remained in Amasenus court, the King of Thrace appointed a general triumph, to
beheld for certain days, the occasion whereof, is this.

He had one only daughter, nam^d Phylena, whose beauty was inferior to none:
and her gifts of nature were such, as made her much spoken of in many
countries: insomuch that many knights came as suitors to obtain her love: but
she had secretly betrothed her self to Remulus, one of the knights of her
fathers court, without her parents consent: by means of whose beauty, the
court of Thrace was so full of gallant knights that sought her love, that the
king was much troubled in mind how to bestow her: and seeing that she did not
fancy one more then another, he appointed a general triumph to be held for
seven days, and whosoever bare away ye prize the last day, should marry his
daughter. Intending thereby to end his doubt and care that way: thinking, that
though his daughter had not a rich and Princely husband, yet she should have a
valiant Champion to defend the price of her beauty.

Amongst the rest of the Knights, there was Guido, who had long time ^ued to
obtain her love, who now rejoiced at this decree, hoping by his valor to
bear away the bride. There was Trudamor of Candie, who thought none to equal
him in strength, and therefore none more forward against the appointed Triumph,
there was Drio of Cicil, who had sailed from his own Country thither, who
likewise by his strength, at several times, slew three Lions, who came with
resolution to win Phylena for his wife. And many other knights of high
account.

The report of this Triumph came to the knowledge of the knight of Fame, whose
mind was kindled with a great desire to go thither, that he requested
Amasenus consent, who being destrous any way to pleasure him, gave him
sufficient coin to furnish himself of all things fit for such an attempt. Who
caused a most rich Armor of green to be made, shadowed with trees of gold,
presenting a Forest. In his shield he bare this device: A naked man leading a
Lion, with this motto underneath, Ouergone with discontent. Wherein the expert
Artsman had so cunningly immitated his Fancy, that a man by his Armor and
shield, might easily understand his meaning, The appointed time of Triumph
drawing nigh, Amasenus with a gallant troop of knights, amongst whom the
knight of Fame was chief, came to the Thracian Court, whom the king honorably
received. Amasenus having done his hom age to the king, pitched his Tent
without the Court Gates, upon a little hill hard by the appointed place for
Triumph, where likewise hard by him were the Tents of Guido, Trudamor, Drio,
and the three valiant knights of Candie: Tristamus, Tennulus, and Babulus, in
whose company were a number of valiant knights, that came thither, some to
make trial of their valor, and some of purpose to win the fair Phylena.
Likewise there were the Tents of the young King of Aragon: who came accompanied
with a number of valiant knights, hoping to bear away the prize, that all the
plains were filled with Tents. There might you see knights breaking staves,
practicing themselves against the day of Triumph. Here might you see other
recreating themselves in martial exercises; there might you hear the neighing
of horses, clattering of Armor, cracking of staves, and such companies of
knights assembled, as if the richest prize in the world had bin appointed for
reward.

Whilst these things were acting, Phylena was in great care for Remulus, whom
she loved so dearly, that rather then she would part with him, she would
endure any misery whatsoever: who likewise addressed himself to try his
fortune amongst the rest. And the day before the triumph, Phylena secretly
getting opportunity to speak with him, gave him this assurance of her
constancy.

My dear love quoth she, since my father has decreed this public triumph,
for the bestowing of me in marriage, because amongst so many Knights as have
sought my love, I have affianced my self to none of them, but have chosen you,
as the chiefest load-starre of my life and love, be you yet assured, that
though fortune may allot me to be another by conquest, yet none but your
self shall enjoy my love: and though another may challenge me by right of my
fathers decree, yet none but your self shall have true interest in me: and
rather then I will yield to like of any Knights love but yours, I will endure
either death, or any other torment shall be inflicted upon me, for you are the
Knight that shall conquer my love: you have by courtesy won my love, and you
shall wear it. Nor King nor Knight shall rob me of that which I have given
to you: then be not you discomforted, or any way disquieted, but try your
fortune amongst the rest, and fate may happily allot you the conquest as well
as any other.

Remulus hearing his Ladies constant resolution, was overcome with exceeding
joy, resolving to venture as much as any, to attain the conquest, and solacing
himself so long as their stolen time would peru^^t, in her company, being by
necessity compelled, they parted.

The next morning, the King of Thrace accompanied by a number of personages of
estate, brought forth the beautiful and fair Phylena, most richly adorned
with costly ornaments, wearing upon her head a crown of gold, attended by a
hundredth Damzels clad in white, and seated her on a scaffold, in the open view
of all the Knights there assembled, whose hearts were inamoured with the sweet
attaint of her shining beauty, and their courages revived with the hope of so
rich and precious a prize. Amongst the rest, there was Remulus, whose heart was
oppressed with distrustful care, to see the Lady he most esteemed: and his
secret protested love, set as a prize, to wring him from his possession: yet
comforted by her faithful promise, he took great felicity to see that
beauty made famous, which he made account to enjoy.

The knight of Thrace began the triumph, and the first that entered the listes
was Andreas, who was at two courses unhorsed by Cleanthes, who continued
conqueror by the overthrow of many Knights, until Bubulus, one of the three
brethren of Candie, with violence drove him from his horse, and burst one of
his ribs. Bubulus unhorsed many Knights a^terwards, both of Thrace and other
strange countries, and in the end, was unhorsed himself by Remulus, who
behaved himself so valiantly in the sight of the Princes, that by the soil of
many Knights, he ended that days triumph, to his exceeding honor, resting
co^querour until the next morning. When the night was ouerpast, the King
conducting Phylena in the like manner he had done the day before, seated her
again upon the sc^ffold. When Remulus came into the listes, bravely mannaging
his prauncing sleed, whom Thylena beheld with a careful eye, breathing forth
many a denouted prayer for his good success, w^o having conquered some twenty
Knights, in the end was foiled by Temulus, and so with a heavy heart left the
field. Temulus continued conqueror by the disgr^^^ ^^ many knights, almost all
that day, but in the end, was unhorsed by (...) king of Aragon.

The King of Aragon ended that days triumph, and con^^^ed chief conqueror
the next day, and on the fourth day was ^nhorsed by Tristramus, and so lost the
conquest he so much destred.

Afterward Tristramus continued that days triumph with great bravery, and
the fifth day was unhorsed by Annulus, a knight of Libia, who unhorsed that day
sortie Knights, to his exceeding honor.

The Knight of Fame all this while kept himself out of sight, and lodged at a
village some two miles distant from the Thraciau Court, and according to
Amasenus appointment, came toward the listes gallantly mounted all alone, and
by the unexpected manner of his sudden approach, and by the strange fashion of
his armor, as fortune would, was not generally noted, and in that sort he
entered she listes, reuerencing himself toward* the scaffold whereon the King
was seated, and setting spurs to his horse, incountred Annulus, (and fortune
intending at the first to do him some disgrace) mist his course, and Annulus
brake his staff most bravely, wherewith the whole assembly gave an exceeding
shout, and the knight of Fame being enraged with his oversight, charged
another course at Annulus with great violence, and overthrew him, with his
heels upward, whereat the whole company gave an exceeding shout again, every
one thinking he had purposely lost his first course, by which means all were
desirous to see him run again, which the discontented knight performed so
gallantly, that he unhorsed another knight of Libia, that thought to revenge
Annulus overthrow.

Guido disdaining thereat, and seeing how the beholders were affected, noted
him more specially, thinking by his foil to win some special honor, and
with the more bravery to continue the rest of the triumph, and attain the
prize taking a strong staff, prepared to meet the knight of Fame, who by that
time had dismounted three or four other knights.

The people seeing the valiant Guido come to the listes, who was well known to
all, thought then surely to see the discontented knights honor at an end, for
on him and Drio, the chiefest suppose of conquest ^^pended.

Guido encountered the knight of Fame the first time, without of^^^ing or
sustaining disadvantage, which inwardly vexed him to the heart, that charging
him again the second time, notwithstanding all his force, he could not once
move him in his saddle. The discontented knight, likewise feeling the puissance
of his enemy, was exceedingly enraged, that taking another course, they met
with such fury, that the earth shook with the force of their encounter, and
their Lances shiuered into a thousand pieces, passing by without any show or
sign of odds.

The king of Thrace seeing the day so far spent, sent a messen^er to entreat
them to leave the further trial of their doubtful conquess ^ntill the next
day, which they both consented unto.

The next morning these two Champions came again, with desirous minds to be
revenged each of the other, and met two courses with such bravery, that the
people with great shouts applauded their chiualry, the knight of Fame choosing
the strongest staff that he could find, meant now or never to give or take the
foil, and rushing forcibly to encounter Guido, he met him so violently, that
Guidos Horse yielded so the force of their encounter, and falling down, burst
his leg: the people seeing Guido down, were drawn into a wonderful
amazement what this Knight should be.

Phylena likewise was much tormented in mind, in her fancy allotting him the
chiefest honor, and seeing he was some Knight of a strange Country, fearing
least he obtaining her by conquest, should carry her far from her fathers
Court, and so quite from the sight and company of her dear friend Remulus,
that she was drawn into such a sad conceit, that her heart seemed to me^^
^hereat. Trudamor seeing Guido so foiled, with great bravery entered the
listes, and encountered the knight of Fame, who likewise charged him with many
brave courses, that in the end, the conquest remained in great doubt betwixt
them, still continuing their encounters with exceeding courage, that Trudamor
with all his strength could not any whit disadvantage the Knight of Fame, nor
he by his force get any adds of Trudamor: that in the end, Trudamor thirsting
for the honor of the title, and longing to enjoy Phylena for his Bride,
tracing softly to his races end, went toward the knight of Fame, who with the
like behavior met him, ^ whom Trudamor said as follows.

Knight, I see we have no advantage against each other by this ^^ercise, let us
then finish the doubtfulnesse of this strife with our swords, which is the
readiest mean to make one of us conqueror. With all my heart (answered he
again) your proffer so well agrees with my fancy, as I neither can nor will
deny the same: wherewith they drew their swords, and charged each other with
furious blows, whose courage each beholder greatly commended.

The King of Thrace beholding the noble valor of the Knight of Fame, was
exceedingly well affected toward him: in so much, that he desired none might
enjoy his daughter but he: between whom and Trudamor continued a most brave
combat, till in the end, the knight of Fame had so grievously wounded him, and
in so many places, that all the beholders accounted Trudamor as half
vanquished: and what with effusio^ of blood, and ouermastred by the knight of
Fames strength, his armor giving way to every blow, was ready to fall from
his horse: which the knight of Fame perceiving, stayed: uttering these words.
Most noble knight (quoth he) I see the danger you are in, therefore I wish you
to yield your self, for it is not your death that I seek: and rather then I
will be guilty thereof, I will yield up the pray I shall win by your conquest.

Trudamor hearing his speeches, exceedingly admired his courtesy, and being
ready to speak, his senses by weakness began to fail, and he was taken
from his horse to have his gaping wounds stenched. The whole multitude of
beholders noting the singular valor of the knight of Fame, and how courteously
he had abstained from killing Trudamor, whose life was in his power, were so
well affected toward him, that they shouted and rejoiced exceedingly at his
victory.

The king seeing the day grown to an end* came from the scaffolde, and with
great entreaties got the knight of Fame to go with him to the Court, where he
was most hono^uably entertained, and had his wounds carefully searched by the
Physicians, who sound none of them dangerous, Amasenus seeing the knight of
Fame had won the chiefest honor of the triumph for that day, came to the king,
and reported to him how long he had been with him, and the manner of his first
arrival in that country, seeking to increase the kings affection toward
him, by entering into many exceeding commendations of his valor, virtue, and
courtesy: that the king did him all the honor that might be for that night,
intending after the triumph ended, to express his love toward him by all
means he could devise.

Early the next morning, being the last day of the triumph, the king was
sommoned to the field, by the shrill sound of the knight of Fames trumpet, who
was gallantly mounted, attended by an infinite number of people, that came to
glut their eyes with beholding him: there was now no talk but of the knight of
Fame, his same had fed the ears of all, in so much that such a number of
people thronged to see the last days triumph, that the place could not
contain their multitude. The knights of Thrace marvelled what he should be,
and for that he was unknown, ^he strange knights somewhat rejoiced, that the
prize should be carried ^^om Thrace. Amongst the rest, Remulus noting his
exceeding cour^esie, and p^^ing more narrowly then any of the rest, into his
behavior, ^eioyced in his mind that so honorable, valiant, and courteous a
knight, should possess his dear Phylena, and above all the knights of the
Court, he was most ready to entertain the knight of Fame, with all courtesy,
and wi^^t that none but he might bear away the c^iefest honor of the triumph.

The king having again in most sumptuous and royal sort, seated his daughter
upon the scaffold, attended the first encounter that should be given to the
knight of Fame, which was performed by Parrus, a knight of Cicill with great
bravery, but the second course he measured his length on the earth, as others
had done before him. Next him came a knight of Libia, who had like fortune to
Parrus: Guido being not satisfied with desire of victory, but in putting the
cause of his lost overthrow to his horse, not himself, changed his armor, and
came into the listes again, intending to revenge his foil: but before he
came, Drio of Cicill had broken two staves with the knight of Fame, and before
he could take the third course, Guido instigated by rage, ran against the
knight of Fame, and intercepted him. Drio disdaining thereat, struck Guido
such a forcible blow on the head, with the trunchion of a staff, that he made
him stagger. Wherewith Guido drew his sword, and assailed Drio with great
fury, between whom began a most brave combat, until the knight of Fame stepped
betwixt them, and parted them, uttering these speeches. Knights (quoth he) what
means this outrage? why contend you betwixt your selves, and leave me, with
whom you should principally deal, unassayed? think you I am not of
sufficiency to deal with you both? but that you must thus dishonourably,
seek with private quarrels to disturb our trial? But notwithstanding his
speeches, they began to assail each other again, which so enraged him, that
drawing his sword, he first struck at Guido, and then at Drio, offering to
combat with them both, that the issue of this combat seemed to be most
intricate. Sometimes the knight of Fame assailed Guido, and he resisting, when
Drio lent his blows to both: and the knight of Fame intending to revenge him
on Drio, was again assailed by Guido.

The King perceiving what danger this tripartite fight might breed, commanded
the Champions to be parted, which being done, the Judges gave order, that the
knight of Fame should continue his course with Drio. This conclusion being
made, the knight of Fame sheathing his sword, went to the races end so fully
incenst with rage, that his eyes smarted with vexation. Drio likewise was so
fully puffed with fury, that he vowed at that course to end the trial of the
combat: that both of them taking scope enough, to meet with the greater
swiftness, set spurs to their steeds sides, and with exceeding violence, and
shiuering their Lances into a thousand spelles, which sung in the air: before
the steeds met, Drio wi^ding his raines, intending to overthrow his enemy
unawares, the steed unacquainted to such custom, bare his head aloft, and the
knight of Fames steed keeping on his continued course, with great strength
ouerturned both horse and man, that Drio late almost bruised to death with the
weight of his horse. Guido attending the next trial, had readily couched his
staff, but the knight of Fame being extremely enraged, not well knowing, nor
caring what he did (having secret intelligence before given him, that it was
Guido, the knight that he had already vanquished) set spurs to his horse, and
ran at him with his sword point, that had he not avoided him, he had pearsed
the same quite through his body: who turning himself with his sword drawn,
assailed the knight of Fame, between whom continued a m^st brave combat a long
space, until Guido by his irresistable blow, was grievously wounded: who
intending to revenge himself, struck a most violeat blow, which lighting
cross his helmet, brake his sword: which the knight of Fame seeing, cast down
his own, disdaining to have any ^ddes of weapon, and joining himself close to
Guido, with long striving and maine force, in the end flung him down from his
horse: wherewith the people gave such a shout, that the earth seemed to shake
with the Echo of their voices: by which time, the nights black mantel began
to ouerspred the whole earth, and there appeared no more Combattants against
the knight of Fame, but to his vnsprakable honor he remained victor. Then
presently he was in tryumphant manner (according to their custom) with the
noise of Trumpets conducted to the kings Palace: where the king and all the
vanquished knights received him with great honor. Amongst the rest, was the
king of Aragon, a most gallant and brave knight at arms, who greatly desired
to be acquainted with this brave Champion, using him, with the rest of the
knights, with all courtesy and kindness. After many solemn welcomes were
past on every side, and he unarmed, the king speaking to him, uttered these
speeches. Most noble knight, whose prowess has deserved everlasting
commendations, according to my former decree, and the promised reward to the
conqueror, I yee^d to your hands my daughter, the only heir of my kingdom.
Then taking Phylena by the hand, he delivered her to him. The knight of Fame
with great reverence kissing her hand, uttered these speeches. Most sacred
Princess, how can I sufficiently rejoice, that am this day extolled to the
highest type of heavenly felicity, by being unworthily preferred to have your
custody. Yet I beseech you vouchsafe me (though a stranger) that bounty, as to
esteem of me, as one that is altogether vowed to your service, and though by
right of conquest I may justly challenge you for my own, yet be you assured, I
will request nothing at your hands, but what shall be granted with your free
consent: but I rest yours to command and dispose of, in all humble duty.

Which words being ended, (he that never before kissed Ladies lips) with great
reverence took of her a sweet kiss: and she with a heavy heart and mild
behavior, yielding her self as his to dispose of, which she was constrained
to do by her fathers promise, and the knights worthy deserts: though inwardly
in her heart she devoted all kind love and affection to Remulus: on whom
being by, she cast many a mild^ and modest look, inwardly wishing he were
the man might claim her by right of conquest, as well as by the true affection
she bare him.

That night the knight of Fame was honorably feasted by the King, and
afterward conducted to a most Princely lodging. And being now alone, he began
to meditate of his estate, and to ponder hew happily he had escaped shipwrake,
and was preferred to such high dignity* as to marry the daughter and only
heir of a king: withal, he began to call to mind every particular thing he
could remember of his birth and bringing up in the Island of Rocks, his fancy
persuading him, that he was son unto some greater personage then he yet knew
of: with all, well viewing a jewel which he had kept ever since his nurse was
slain, which she gave him in charge to keep charily, which thoughts, and
withal, a secret instinct of nature, which he felt in himself aiming at higher
matters, settled a p^rswasio^ in his thoghts, that he was borne of royal race,
and therefore meet to match with a kings daughter. And calling to mind the
exceeding beauty of Phylena, importing in his fancy a perfect remembrance of
her graces, sweet countenance, and mild behavior, he felt a secret stirring
and throbbing at his heart, which disturbed all his senses, that he was as it
were transformed into a kind of pleasant delight, wherewith he fell into a
dead sleep.

In midst of his sleep, the Goddess Venus pitying the troubled thoughts of
her devoted subject Phylena, willing to extol the same of this knight,
appeared unto him in a vision, standing by his beds side, with a clear burning
^^per in his one hand, and holding a most beautiful Lady in the other, of
such divine perfections, that heaven nor earth c^uld not in his fancy frame a
more divine essence of purity: the Lady Venus uttering these words.

Thou Knight of Fame,
Regard the words I speak:
Seek not by force,
Loves constant bands to break.
Phylena fair,
The beauteous heir of Thrac^^.
Her constant love,
On Remulus does place.
Desire not then,
Her liking to attain,
But from her love,
Thy fantasy refrain.
Thy conquest right,
Give him that has her love:
And from their hearts,
The cares they bide, remove.
This Lady bright, thy fancies shall subdue,
Then to her love, be constant just and true.
First seek her out, then to her pleasure tend:
To win her love, thy who^e affection bend.
Of Royal race, thy self art rightly sproong,
Lost by thy friends, when thou of art were young.
Thy fathers fame, has filled the world with praise.
Thy mothers gifts, her lasting honors raise.
Bend thy desires,
Their comfort to procure,
That for thy loss,
Sad sorrows do procure.
Whilst the Goddess uttered these words, the Knight of Fame diligently beheld
the exceeding beauty of the Lady she held in her hand, and thinking to have
demanded her name* she presently vanished: wherewith he awaked.

The remembrance of this Vision, drove him into a censused multitude of
thoughts: one while persuading himself, it was but a dream and not to be
regarded, and then again assuring himself it was a Vision, like to that which
appeared to him in the Island of Rocks, but chiefly such a secret impression of
the Ladies beauty was fixed in his remembrance, that he quite forsook and
forgot the least thought of Phylena, whose beauty in his fancy, was nothing
comparable to her divine perfections, that calling to mind every particular
note he had seen, the perfect Idea of the Ladies countenance, favor and
beauty, was so deeply imprinted in his heart, that no other thought could
sink in his brain, but that she was the Lady he should honor, that he vowed
to search the world throughout to find her, and come to the knowledge of his
parents. In these cogitations he spent the rest of that night.

Early in the morning, he was honored with all diversities of courtesies, and
most royally feasted of the King, and by his appointment, should be affianced
to Phylena, within six days; The Knight of Fame remembering the Vision, being
most commonly in company of Phylena, diligently noted, which might be the
Knight Phylena loved, and soon perceived that it was Remulus, who amongst the
knights of Thrace, had sought most means to honor him. Who little thought the
knight of Fame had noted the kindness betwixt him and Phylena: but he
noting all circumstances, perceived that Phylena was deeply inthralled in the
bands of constant love: for though she were in talk with him, yet her eye was
continually on Remulus, glaunsing so many sweet looks (intermingled with
sighs) toward him, that he thought it a most discurteous and inhumaine deed
to part them. And once taking occasion when Phylena was in a deep study, he
said. Dear Lady, may I be so bold as break off your sad study, wherewith
you add heaviness to your mind: and expel this careful disposition, and
rather spend your time in mirth and pleasure, I have often noted your
heaviness, which makes me suppose my unworthiness to be the cause thereof:
but seeing my interest is such, as that I may claim you for my own, I beseech
you do not so much disgrace my travails, as not so vouchsafe me that
kindness belongs to the condition of my conquest, and your fathers decree:
and if you esteem me, be^^^s^ ^^knowne, as yet not to have descrued your
love, impose (...) any talk, and I will undertake it for your sake: and not
on^l^ ^^bour to win your love by desert, as by the tryumphe I have ^^^ained
the interest of your person. But I perceive your ca^^^ are such, for some other
great occasion, that I am an unwelcome guest to your company, and an other
has already attained your sweet love: which if be so, sweet Lady hide not
the same from me, but make me privy thereto, for I am not of that rude
disposition, to challenge any thing at your hands, or enforce you to any
thing, but what shall stand with your liking: and though your virtues force you
to yield consent to your fathers decree, yet considering that love is not won
with the swoorde, but with a mutual consent of the heart, I yield my self to
be censured by you, and give my right of trial into your hands, and the
interest I attained by conquest, I surrender to your censure, to be revoked or
established.

Phylena hearing his words, with tears standing in her eyes, made this
reply: Most courteous Knight, howsoever I have settled my fancy heretofore, that
is now countermaunded by my fathers promise, and your interest, that I am not
mine own to dispose of, but must in all humbleness rest at your disposition.
And it an other had my promise of love, yet now I must revoke that promise,
and labor to attend your liking: therefore I wholely commit my self according
to your right of conquest, into your courteous hands.

Dear Lady (quoth he) know this, that I account my self unworthy of that
honor, and am unwilling any way to contradict your will, or disturb your
quiet: but knowing that which you virtuously conceal, will surrender my estate
to the Knight you most fancy: for the honor I have won, shall be my
sufficient reward: therefore I beseech you, conceal no part of your mind from
me, for I will not deny to perform any thing you shall command, but will hazard
both life and honor to satisfy your fancy, and any way procure your content.

Phylena with a blushing countenance, made this short reply: Most noble
Knight, Remulus is the knight I have long esteemed, but must now forsake him,
or purchase my parents discontent, and deny you the right of your conquest.
The Knight of Fame smiling at the inward conceit of his Vision, made this
answer. And dear Lady, I will yield my interest to Remulus, only to work
your content: for he has worthily deserved to be beloved of you: besides the
honor he has done me (notwithstanding I might be the only man to hinder his
content) shows the abu^dant virtues that rule his heart. He had not scarce
ended those words, but Remulus seeling his ears to glow, thinking all time
tedious out of his La. sight, came into ye gallery, where they were in private
conference: but seeing them (half repenting his intrusion) would have stepped
back: toward whom, the Knight of Fame came, leading the Princess by the
hand, and contrary to Remulus expectation, said. Courteous Knight, your
interest in this Lady, is greater then mine, for you have her heart, and I but
her hand: which I surrender unto you, with all the state I can claim in her by
right of conquest: and so effectually will I deal with the King, to your
liking, that he shall confirm that to you, which I should possess by his
grant. Remulus hearing his speeches, was so revived with joy, that he could
not tell what answer to make him, and Phylenas heart lept within her, being
most glad, fortune had effected that means for her, to enjoy her dear knight
Remulus.

The Knight of Fame, having his thoughts troubled with the remembrance of his
travels in search of his unknown Lady, and willing to leave them to their
secret content, with all courtesy (after many speeches past) departed from
them: who took such felicity in the assurance he had given them of obtaining
the Kings consent, that their joy was without compare, spending their time in
sweet and pleasant communication. Afterward the knight of Fame grew into
great familiarity with Remulus, and the day for the solemnization of the
wedding being come, he with Phylena, in great pomp, were conducted to the
Chapel, to be affianced together, where the Knight of Fame kneeling down,
desired the King to grant him one request: who swear by his Crown and
Kingdom, to grant it him, whatsoever it were. Most noble King (quoth he) my
humble desire is, that you would without further doubt, ratify that which I
shall perform in the behalf of the Princess. Thou shall not be denied quoth
the King.

Then the Knight of Fame rising up, took Phylena by the hand, and gane her to
Remulus: the King being astonished thereat, yet remembering his oath, said.
Since by right she is yours, and this being with her liking, I give her freely
to thee Remulus, and withal, adopt thee mine heir, with her after my death.
Remulus kneeling, thankt his Majesty: and presently they were affianced
together, and the rights and solemnities of the wedding performed with
admirable pomp, to their ^ay, and the high honor of the knight of Fame.

CHAP. VIII. How Archas discovered Soranas deceit, and missing Violetta, slew
her. And how Violetta lighted on a Hermits Cell, who conducting her toward
Bohemia, died: and of the miseries she endured afterward* until she was
entertained at Panuamus Castle, near the Forest of Arde.
ARchas (as before is declared in the fifth Chapter) having coutcht himself by
Sorana, whom he supposed to be Violetta, without speaking a word, and having
somewhile embraced her in his arms, began his daliance, whom Sorana so
cunningly handled, that (notwithstanding his former familiarity) he perceived
nothing but that it was Violetta indeed. At the first she made a show of a
strangeness, but afterward endured whatsoever he proffered, with whom he
spent that night, giving no respite to sleep, but greedily satisfying both
their desires, until the morning approaching, Archas according to his
mistress command, departed, and left his Paramour in his bed, his fancy
persuading him that she was the most sweetest Lady in the world, which so
rejoiced his heart, that he spent that forenoone in much mirth, but missing
Sorana, for that he had not seen her all that day, he went to her chamber,
where being entered, he saw some of Violettas attires and ornaments confusedly
cast about, and all things in such disorder, that he could not tell what to
think, at last he enquired of every one for her, but none could tell what was
become of her, until coming to the Gardiants, they told him that Sorana went
out of the castle the last night, and that she had left with them his ring.
Archas seeing the ring, knowing that he had given it to none but Violetta, was
so amazed and astonished with doubt, that he presently suspected Violetta was
escapt: and coming to the chamber where she should have been, softly drawing
the bed curtains, sound that Sorana had been his bedfellow in steed^ of
Violetta, who after her pastime was fallen a sleep. Archas now perfectly knew
that Violetta was escaped in Soranas disguise, and thought that it could not
be, but that she must be consented thereto, which caused him to fetch his
sword, determining to end her life: but by that time he was returned, she was
aw^ke, and seeing him coming toward her, with his sword bent to her death,
being terrified therewith, she gave such shrikes as many of the servant
hearing the noise, came running into the chamber, but he being inc^nst with
exceeding rage, for Violettas loss, and inwardly fretting at his deceit, with
repentance that he had bestowed his love on that loathsome creature, who now
seemed most ugly, in respect of the divine and sweet Lady he supposed he had
embraced, caught hold on her, and by the hair of the head, dragd her out of
the bed into the midst of the chamber, uttering these words. Most detested
strumpet, could thou not he contented to consent to Violettas escape, but
thou must also betray my love to thy loathsome lust? was not the favor I daily
showed she, sufficient to deter thy mind from offering me that abuse?
deceiving my expectation, betraying my life by her escape? I could peradventure
have remitted the one, if thou had not been guilty in both: but never
shall thou rejoice in my fall, and little pleasure shall thou reap by thy
nights work: wherewith, not suffering her to make him answer, assuredly
persuading himself she was guilty in both, he thrust his sword quite through
her body, and there in that indecent sort left her, giving many a groan, with
the date of her life. The servants seeing this, covered her body, and
afterward buried it. Archas presently arming himself, giving special charge
to the Gardiants to keep diligent watch, posted that way he thought best in
her search.

Violetta by this time was wandered a great way, care hastening her steps, and
fear to be again by him surprised, took away the tediousness of travel, at
last forsaking the beaten way, she wandered aside into a most desert and
unfrequented place, being so full fraught with trees and little springs, that
there she thought was the safest harbor, wherein to remain vndescried, being
tired with travel, and possessed with care, she sat down upon a bank site so
refresh her self. She had not long stayed in that place, but she beheld an
aged man, whose years made him stoop to the earth wards, carrying a few dry
sticks under his arm. Violetta thinking she might repose some confidence in
his virtues, because of his years, drew toward him: who seeing so beautiful
a Lady in that unfrequented place vna^tended, exceedingly marvelled, to whom
she said. Ah good father, whose years bear reverence, will you vouchsafe a
distressed Lady succor, who by extream^ miseries compulsion, am wandered to
this unknown place, sore wearied with travel, and in requital of your
kindness, my prayers shall invoke she heavens to grant you felicity, and
my reward sufficient to content you for your pains. The old man hearing her
speeches, made this answer: Fair Lady, my homely Cell is not worthy to
receive your person, but such as it is, you shall be heartily welcome thereto:
for I desire to live no longer, then to extend my small assistance to such as
are in distress, but especially to such harmless creatures as your self:
therefore pleases you with kindness to accept what succor my ability will
afford, or what counsel my experience may give you, you shall receive both
with a willing heart. And for that I see your travel, (upon what occasion to
me as yet unknown) has both wearied you, and this cold earth whereon you
sat, may endanger your health, give me your hand, and I will yield you what
aid my weak strength wilt permit, to guide you to my Cell, which is hard by.
Do so good father (quoth she) and I thank you most heartily, where I will
disclose to you my unfortunate mishap: that said, she lent her self upon his
aged arm, so wearied with travel, that she scarce could set her feet upon
the grassie earth, for hurting them. His Cell, it was no other but a hollow
cane, which the poor old man by his own instustrie, had cut and undermined
under the side of a rockie hill, which was well contrived, having his lodging
several from the rest, and so artificially had he framed his Chimnie, that
through a hollow vaw^e he conveyed the smoke, at the foot whereof, ran a
most pleasant spring, where the clears water striving with the smooth pebbles,
made a burbling noise, where the comfortable beams of golden Phoebus had full
force. On the other side was a sweet spring, where the birds kept continual
pleasant recording harmony. As Soon as Violetta was entered this old man's
Paradise he seized her soft upon a chair, giving her all the courteous
entertainment he could, and presently brought forth such cases as he was
provided of: which was, white bread, cheese, and apples: her drink being the
clear brook water that ran by his Cell door, whereto, because he would amend
the taste to her liking, he mingled Aquanitie. Violetta being hungry, thought
his poor provision in that quiet place, dainty fare, wherewith she stenched
her hunger* and in the mean time, the old man had heat water and herbs for
to bath her ouertrauelled feet in, which she kindly accepted, perceiving tha^
it came as willingly from the old man's heart, as ever good deed came from any
and therewith bathed her feet. This done, Violetta desired the old man to seat
himself down by her, (who taking a stool, let down right against her, fixing
his eyes upon her face) whilst she began so (...) as follows.

Good Father (quoth she) the kindness I find in your entertainment, shows
the virtues that rule your heart, which makes me no whit doubt to commit the
dangerous report of my tragical misfortune to your secrecy, neither need I
require any stricter assurance, then your promise already past, to extend your
aid to my distress. Therefore thus it is. I was borne in Thessalie, and there
wedded to the noble and courteous knight Pollipus, who came lately to Bohemia,
with the most noble and famous Prince Parismus, who has brought hither the
kings daughter of Thessalie, the virtuous Princess Laurana: we had not stayed
long in the Bobemian Court in great joy, but thus our felicity was crossed, (my
Lord and I one day) intised by the heat of the sun to seek some cool
shadow, wandered from the Court into a pleasant gr^ue, where haunted a wild
Bear, whom my loving knight espying, pursued, and I fearing least some harm
might be^ide him, compelled, by desire of his welfare, thought to have followed
him, but wandered a quite contrary way, and being gotten out of the wood,
fearing to return back, was by Archas (to me before unknown) by cunning
deceit conveyed to his Castle, his promise being to carry me back to the
Bohemian Court, where when he had remained some two days, he certified me
falsely (which I afterward perceived) that Pollipus was dead, which I
believing, took so heavily, that I was often in danger of my life thereby:
but in small time I plainly found his falsehood, and understood his intent,
which was, to detain me in his keeping to satiate his lust, which grew to
such fury, that surprising me unawares in his Garden, he would have forced me,
had not a Gentlewoman by my cries repaired to the place where I was, and
thereby prevented him, Whom I made privy to all my secrets, by whose means,
late yesternight I stole from the Castle: now good father (quoth she) counsel
me how to escape his hands, who I know makes all diligent search for me and
unless you help me, I am like to fall into his hands again, which rather
then I will do, I will endure a thousand deaths.

The old man had all this while diligently noted every circumstance of her
discourse, making this answer: Lady, I perceive by your speech what miseries
you have undergone by Archas treachery, whose infamous deeds has made his
name famous, being the chief Governor of these mountains: indeed extremely
and generally hated, who delights in no virtuous action, but continually
addicts his mind to villainy, and vnknightly deeds, out of who^^ hands, you
are most* (...) to have escaped: neither are you in the co^ntrey of Bo^^mia (a^
you suppose) but far distant from thence: and the best means for you to g^t
thither is to change your habit, whither my self so pleases you, will be your
weak, yet trusty guide.

Violettaes heart leapt within her, for joy to hear his speeches, which the
presently put in practice, giving him a Jewel: which ^e at the next town
exchanged for such homely ^^eedes as they devised to ^ee fittest to shroud her
from being discried. Wherewith having apparelled her self, she departed with
the old man, who left his Cell to the keeping of his son, who was servant to
a wealthy Boore dwelling thereby. The first days journey they ouerpast with
ease, shortning the tediousness of the way, with the old man's discourses: and
at night rested themselves as conveniently as they might, upon the cold earth,
and in this sort they iournied on some three days, until their provision
began to decay: and they were without hope of getting any more to supply their
want, for that they were entered into a desolate Wilderness: which they could
not ouerpasse in three or four of their short days journey. Violetta of the
twain, was the best teaueller: for the old man by reason of his withered age,
was soon tired, having no such inward conceit to drive him forwards, as she
had procured by a longing desire to see her dear knight Pollipus, that she
wished a thousand times that her guide had been young, and of better strength
to endure their journey. But thus contrary, it fell out the old man's time of
death then approached, who having taken a sur^et, with lying on the cold earth,
began to be sickly: and in the end so weak, that he could endure no further
travel: but sitting down upon a bank side, feeling an extreme faintness
possess his heart, he uttered these speeches: Unfortunate wretch that I am,
that am not able to perform my promise made to you most courteous Lady: but
must here leave you in asstresse, and without comfort: would that my desteny
had not suffered me to live until this instant, for that your good fortun^ had
bin so favorable to have lighted upon a safer guide, that you might have
escaped the desolation, I am most unhappily like to leave you in: this
unfrequented wilderness, affords no ^elease ^o your cares: but after my
death, your travels are to begin a fresh, being without a guide, which may
chance to bring your virtuous perfections into some further d^nger: only this
comfort remains to my careful dying heart, that your habit may be a mean to
bring you safe from all dangers. This unfrequented place is so full of
uncertain ways, that I know not almost which of them to counsel you to
follow: only this, keep the Sun at his setting, right before you, for that
way lies the Bohemian Court, and so sweet Lady, I commit you to all good
fortune: for I see the date of my wretched life is at an end, wishing all
prosperous success to your journey, all happy escape out of danger, and your
own sweet hearts content: desiring you to make no tarriance to provide my
Funeral, but leave me in this place: for little account do I make of my aged
body* And so again, I wish you all happy felicity, with a blessed and
joyful end of your cares: which words being ended, he gave up the ghost.

Violetta seeing the good old man dead, was overcome with such infinite
multitudes of cares, that she had much adoo to keep her self from following
him, that she sat there sheading abundance of tears, and what with the
remembrance of the desolatenesse of the place, and the dead body of the old
man, which was a fearful coarse to look upon: her senses were drawn into
such amazed terror, that she was half beside her self therewith: and being
aghast with the sight of the old man, hasted with all the speed she could,
onwards her journey, but dark night approaching, her mind was then rackt with
such confused fear, that sometimes she thought the old man's Ghoast haunted
her, which appalled her senses with deadly ghastfull terror: then she thought
she heard some wild beast behind her, ready to seize upon her, which made
her forsake the place where she had shrouded her self, and seek an other
in her fancy more safe: and in a multitude of these cares, she ouerpast that
tedious night, uttering many a sighe for the mornings cheerful approach: which
being come, she again betook her self to her sollitarie travel, inwardly
sorrowful for her late misfortune: but most of all terrified with fear to
meet Archas, thinking to be^d her steps toward Bohemia.

But Fortune entending to augment her cares, and lengthen her travails, caused
her to wander a quite contrary way, and she nothing misdoubting, but
supposing she was in the best way, kept on her steps some three days
without intermission, and at last espied an ancient Castle, whose craggie
walls were ready to fall to the earth, by reason of age, where she was
constrained by reason of extreme hunger, to seek for succor: and coming to
the gate, she saw an aged old man with a sad countenance, keeping the entrance
to whom Violetta spoke in this sort. Good aged sir, vouchsafe a poor
distressed woman some relief, being wandered far out of my way, and for want of
food, am like to perish.

He lifting up his head, made this answer: this place affords small
comfort, because every part thereof, is repleate with sorrow: but come in, and
what entertainment it yields, you shall be welcome unto: that said, he shut
the gate, and brought her into the Castle, where were a few servants in
mourning attire: seeming by their habit and sad countenances, to be quite
ouergrowne with discontent: and in a room several by it self, sat a
beautiful Da^zel, with her eyes swolen with grief: to whom the porter brought
Violetta, and said. Madame Carina, this distressed woman craves some succor,
being wandered far from her way, whom I will leave with you, because I must
return to my charge. Clarina rising up, took Violetta by the hand, and
desired her to sit down by her, to whom she said.

This place by reason of our misfortune, may rather add care to augment your
sorrows, then comfort your distress: for the misery that has lately befallen
us, is such, as has expeld all joy from our hearts. And because you shall be
acquainted with the truth of all, I will relate* the circumstance of our
tragedy.

There remains a Giant not far from this place, called Brandamor, in a castle
of such invincible strength, as it is impossible to be vanquished by legions of
soldiers, who takes delight in nothing but cruelty, and unlawful attempts.
Who upon a time, chanced to atriue at this Castle, and by evil fortune, espied
me walking abroad, in company of my parents, my brother Panuamus, and two of
my fathers servants. And (I know not by what desire thereto drawn, his mind
be^^g apt to any mischief) he viewing me, liked my beauty, and such a
disordinate desire stirred in his breast to obtain the same, that he shrouded
himself in secret, until he espied his fittest opportunity, and suddenly set
upon my father, offering to take me away by violence: my father denying him,
until the Giant being enraged, drew his sword and assailed him, whom in
short time he slew: which my mother and I perceiving, ^led toward this
Castle, and in the mean time my brother Panuamus continued fight against him a
good space, but being unable to cope with so mighty an enemy, was by reason
of many grievous wounds, in the end left by him for dead: which done,
Brandamor seeing our slight, hasted after us: but before he could come at us,
we attained the Castle, and rescued our selves from his possession. But when he
saw himself disappointed, he made as though he had departed from hence, and
contrary to our thoughts, he hid himself secretly amongst the bushes. My
mother being overcome with extreme sorrow for my fathers death, neither
regarding doubt, nor danger, went back with hope to recover him, whom
Brandamor surprised and carried away with him, hoping by her imprisonment, to
win her consent to yield me into his hands. My brother Panuamus, within a
while, recovered his feet, not knowing of my mothers misfortune, with great
danger of his life, crawled home: whom I had much adoo to preserve from death,
and now he is departed toward the Forest of Arde, where the giants castle
stands, to invent means to set my m^ther at liberty: and this night is the
promised time of his return. And thus have you heard the whole circumstance of
our sorrow: which when she had said, abundance of tears issued from her eyes,
which made Violetta (whose tender heart was ready to relent at every sad
discourse) accompany her lamentations with watrie eyes: withal, remembering
how unfortunately she was still cros^ in her desires, which was to attain to
Bohemia, and how contrary to her expectation* she was wandered quite an other
way, and brought both in danger of her life, and to that poor and distressed
estate, her heart was pressed with such inward sorrow, that she could not stay
the passage of her tears already begun: but such a violent flood distilled
from her precious eye-balles, that Clariana could not choose but note them: and
withal, grew into an earnest desire to know the cause of that extraordinary
passion: withal, well viewing her beauty and sweet countenance: collecting
into her fancy every circumstance, she began to suppose that Violetta was
no such as her apparel showed, but of better birth and bringing up, then
by her attire was shown, that desiring to be re^^lued of those doubts which
rose in her fancy, she uttered these speeche^.

I know not quoth she, what title to ascribe unto you, for that I am ignorant
of whence and what you are, but if you will commit the report thereof ^o me, I
promise you both to co^ceale the same (if any such need be) and also to do my
uttermost to pleasure you any way.

Therefore I desire you to impart the recital thereof to my secrecy, that
knowing your estate, I may know how to use you according to your worthiness.

Violetta being desirous to seek any means for to comfort her self, made
this reply. I most heartily thank you for off^ing me so large a proffer of your
assistance, which I stand in need of now, for that my endless travel crave
some ease: for my lucklesse stars have allotted me such adversities, as would
soon cut off the wretched lives of many: but neither death, nor ought else
will be so favorably as to rid me from further calamities, but I am still
plunged into their intricate labyrinth* for know most courteous Lady, that my
self of late was promoted to all felicity, but now am contrarily plunged in
all distress, and that this habit I have only put on, to shroud my self from
many petils, that I was formerly subject unto. For I am an unfortunate Lady as
you are, by extreme misfortunes drawn from my dignity, friends and
acquaintance, and forced both by want and weariness to seek refuge in this
place, where by your kindness I am well refresht: neither will I conceal any
of my misfortunes from your knowledge. Then Violetta repeated the whole truth,
as she had done before to the old man in his Cell, which when Clarina heard,
with tears she did partake her sorrow: and taking her by the hand, desired
her to hold her excused, for not using that behavior toward her, which her
estate deserved, promising with willingness, to further her safe conduct into
Bohemia, which she knew her brother Panuamus at her entreaty would undertake.
In this and such like communication they spent their sad time, until Panuamus
return, who shortly came without hope of redeeming the Lady Madera his mother.

Clarina as soon as he was come, declared to him all that she could of
Violettas estate, and what she was: amongst the rest, she told him that she
was espoused to a Knight named Pollipus. Panuamus hearing her name Pollipus,
called to remembrance the speeches he had with a Knight that he met that day,
and assuredly thought this was the Lady he went in search of. Now the knight
he had met was Tellamor, who entering into communication with him, enquired if
he could tell any news of a Lady that was unfortunately lost in Bohemia,
(relating the very same circumstance that Clarina told him, Violetta had
before declared unto her) withal, Tellamor d^maunded if he had not met a
Knight, bearing this devise in his shield: A Knight pursuing ^ Bear. Now it
fell so out, that Panumus beheld the notable combat that Pollipus fought with
Brandamor, and remembering his devise, knew him to be the same knight Tellamor
inquired after, to whom he declared all that he knew, concerning the battle
with Brandamor, and how treacherously he was surprised and imprisoned.

Tellamor hearing that Pollipus was imprisoned in the Forest of Arde, departed
thither-wardes, and Panuamus came to his Castle, where at his coming, he found
Violetta, in simple array, and hearing his sisters speeches, waying each
circumstance, found that she was the very Lady that the Knight inquired after,
and that the knight that fought so valiantly with Brandamor, and was by him
imprisoned, was her husband.

Panuamus having gathered this intelligence of Violettas misfortunes, and
remembering the noble valor of Pollipus, was touched with an affectionate
pity of her distress, and what furthered by his own inclination and
Clarinas entreaty, resolved to use his uttermost endeavors to work her
comfort: and coming to Violetta, declared the whole circumstance of all that
he had heard of Tellamor, and of Pollipus, in the Castle of Brandamor.

Violetta hearing of a certainty that Pollipus was yet living, and not dead,
as she before that suspected, (for though she perceived the contrary before in
Archas Castle, yet a scruple remaining in her mind thereof) was somewhat
comforted, and in some better hope to come to him again: but calling to mind
the danger he was now in, was exceedingly again overwhelmed with care of his
welfare: and hearing of his imprisonment, determined to endanger her own
liberty to enjoy his company, if other means could not be wrought for his
release. Panuamus seeing her overwhelmed with such a chaos of co^fused cares,
said as follows. Most virtuous Lady, since Fortune has brought you into
this place, and that you have thus happily heard of your knight Pollipus,
release your self from the bonds of those cares, which disturb your quiet:
for here you shall want nothing that accords to your will: and my self will
do the best I can to set Pollipus at liberty, which whilst I go about, so
pleases you, my sister Clarina shall keep you company, whose griefs are as
great as may be.

Sir (quoth Violetta) might I obtain this favor at your hands, that you
would give the knight you met, knowledge of my being here, then I am sure he
will soon come to me, with whom I would gladly speak, for I know he is one of
the knights of Bohemia.

That will I do (quoth Panuamus) or any thing else you shall command me: and
because I will not be disappointed of meeting him, I will early in the morning
follow him, for that he is gone to the forest of Arde, where I shall be sure
to find him. Early the next morning, according to his word, he mounted
himself, and departed after Tellamor, leaving Clarina and Violetta together,
using the best persuasions they could to comfort one another.

CHAP IX. How Panuamus met with Tellamor, and how he and Tellamor met
Barzillus at the Golden Tower: and returning altogether to Panuamus Castle,
Tellamor was enamoured of Clarina.
PAnuamus having left Violetta and Clarina together, with all speed hasted to
find Tellamor, and riding an unwonted pace, he ouertooke him entering into
the Forest, unto whom he said. Sir Knight, let me be so bold as to ask you
one question? Tellamor hearing his words, and knowing him to be the same knight
he had met withal before, courteously bad him ask what he pleased. Are you
not a knight of Bohemia (quoth he?) Tellamor maruelling why he asked him that
question, told him that he was indeed belonging to Parismus, Prince of
Bohemia. Then said Panuamus, a Lady that remains not ^ar hence, named
Violetta, has sent me back unto you, and desires to speak with you.
Tellamor hearing his words, was affected with exceeding joy thereat, making
this reply. Sir Knight, in a happy hour did I meet with you, by your means
to come to knowledge of their abode I most desire to find: indeed Violetta is
the Lady I go in search of, and also wise to the knight you told me of
yesterday, who by your report remains prisoner in the Forest: therefore I
will return with you to visit that Lady, to whose service my life is wholly
dedicated. This said, they reterned back together, but the night being
approached, and they without any place to lodge in, thought it as good to
travel all night, as take up their lodging on the cold ground: therefore
Panuamus undertook to guide them, trusting to his own knowledge, contrary to
his expectation, wandered a quite contrary way: and when Phoebus began to
illuminate the earth with his golden brightness, they were come into a
pleasant valley, where they beheld two Knights continuing a most fierce combat,
and drawing near unto them, Tellamor presently knew the one of them to be
Barzillus, the occasion of which combat was thus.

After Barzillus had parted from Barzillus, and Tellamor taking the middle way
he wandered many days without any adventure, and at last arrived at a most
goodly Palace, most exceedingly beautified with innumerable Turrets of
exceeding height, that their tops seemed to equal the clouds, of such
curious workemanshippe, as the like has not bin seen, whose glistring
reflection procured by the suns bright beams, dazeled the sight of the
beholders: with an admirable glittering. In the mids of this stately Palace,
stood a gallant building in form of a Temple, seeming to the view of such as
beheld the same, to be made of the most purest and burnisht gold, on the top
whereof, stood the form of a most goodly Lady, with a Crown of gold upon her
head, whose lively proportion and form of exceeding beauty, would have
detained a most constant mind, in a wandering delight to behold the same.
Barzillus beholding the exceeding be autie of the Palace, and the stately
form of the pictured Lady* was desirous to know who inhabited there, and to
that intent drawing nigh thereto, at the entrance thereof, he beheld a tent,
with these verses written thereon.

Pass not this Bridge before thou knock,
Least thou too late repent thy pride*
Leave not obtained, thou may go ba^ke,
For entrance is to all denide.
A Knight within must know thy name,
Thy boldness else will turn to shame,
Barzillus reading the superscription, smote the Tent with his lance, when
presently issued out a knight, in every point ready armed, to whom Barzillus
said as follows. Knight* I reading the superscription over the entrance into
the Tent, according to the direction thereof, have called thee forth,
demanding thy meaning thereby, and what goodly Palace this is, the like
whereof, I never beheld for beauty? Knight (answered he again) this Palace
is called the Golden Tower, belonging to Maximus, the most mighty and famous
king of Natolia, wherein is his only daughter Angelica, for beauty without
compare: for wit, form, and virtuous ornaments, excelling all the Ladies in
the world: whose equal was never heard of, nor can be found within the
spacious continent of the earth. The King has placed her in his most rich and
gorgeous Palace, whose walls are of Brass, and framed of such invincible
strength, that no power of man is able to subdue the same: she has to attend
her a hundredth Ladies of great dignity, and a thousand of the most valiant
Knights in all the world. The occasion why he guardeth her person is this* At
her birth, an old Inchauntresse prophesied, that her beauty should set Kings
at discord, and be the cause of her fathers death.

A child is borne, whose beauty bright,
Shall pass each form of other fair:
As does the Sun in perfect light,
Each little star sixth in the air.
For whom great Kings shall enter st^ife,
And war shall shed Natolians blood:
Whose Ire shall spill Maximus life,
Yet wisdom often has harm withstood.
A mighty Prince her love shall gain,
Though vice do seek to cross their bliss:
He shall her r^inne with restless pains,
And she of sorrow shall not miss.
Much barbrous blood revenge shall spill,
And all of war shall have their fill:
All this sholl happen by degree,
Before this child shall weaded be.
And because he will match her according to her dignity, he has likewise
made a vow, that none but the greatest Potentate in the world shall be her
husband. Which said, the knight went into this Tent, and brought out a most
gallant picture: this (quoth he) is the Ladies form, wherein the Artsman has
showed some pretty skill, but so far is this picture uncomfortable to the
perfect description of her celestial perfections, and as far different in
delicacie, as is black from white, or beauty from deformity, whose view
would change the affections of the truest knight living, from his former
constant resolve, to adore her beauty, and forsake his former vows, only to
attend her person, for so divine are her liniaments, and so rare her
perfections, that her ^ame is even spread through all the regions of the world.
Barzillus hearing him enter into a new discourse of her beauty, and that in
such affectionate sort, having before in his fancy said enough, began to
laugh at him, saying.

Knight, me think thou dotest, or else art mad, to enter into such
commendation of this Ladies beauty, having peradventure never seen other
fair Lady, or else for that thy self art affectionately devoted to love none
but her: for I have seen a Lady that as far exceeds this picture, as thou
reportest she does all other: (which words Barzsllus spoke only to see whether
his valor and bostings were agreeable) wherewith the knight that kept the Tent
was so vexed, that he uttered these speeches.

What ill nurtured creature art thou (quoth he) that deridest the beauty, that
is rather to be admired? haste thou no more manners, then to make so little
estimation of that which all the world adores? thou shall dearly abide this
discourtesie: with that he mounted himself, and charged a spear at
Barzillus, who answered him with such courage, that at two courses he
overthrew him from his horse. By which time a number of Knights were upon the
bar^lements viewing their combat, and seeing the knight that kept the Tent
foiled, burst into an exceeding laughter, and so departed.

Barzillus having foiled the knight, for that the night drew nigh, withdrew
himself from the Golden Tower into a pleasant valley, and there stayed that
night. The Knight that kept the Tent was belonging to the King of Candie, who
came with persuasion to win Angelicas love with his prowess, and with much
ado had obtained leave of the Gardiants to keep the passage, but he not
contented with his foil, intending to revenge his disgrace, followed him to
the valley, where Tellamor found them combatting, as is aforesaid: who knowing
Barzillus, stepping betwixt them, parted the fray. Barzillus likewise knowing
Tellamor, with great kindness embraced him, and upon his request declared the
cause of their combat. Tellamor then speaking to the knight of the Tent, gave
him this farewell. Knight, return to your charge, for your combat here is at an
end, for business which I have yielded into your hands, and when you are
amongst your friends in Bohemia, be not unmindful of poor Clarinas love, who
has committed her life, honor and chastity, into your gentle custody.

Most dear Clarina (quoth Tellamor) my return shall be as speedy as may be,
for like as you, my self shall never enjoy one minutes respite of content,
without your heavenly company, whereon my chiefest felicity depends: and as
you have yielded all that I can desire, or you grant, into my unworthy keeping,
I will as carefully labor to preserve the same from all spot of dishonor,
hoping at my return, to enjoy the possession of your love, as well by general
consent of your friends, as by your courtesy I have attained their divine
fruition in private. Then I beseech you, let no disquiet disturb your peace,
let no doubt trouble your fancy, nor any suspense of my loyalty take root in
your heart: for sooner shall the Sea become dry land, the Sun and Moon
loose their clear light, and all things turn to their contrary, before
Tellamor will any way falsify his faith. In these and such like speeches
(entermingled with many delights) they spent that night, taking their leave
each of other, with many a ceremonious farewell, and parting with many a heavy
s^gh and sad tear, thinking that with each others sight, each others life had
parted. Tellamor according to his promise, arrived in Libia, even at the time
of Parismus departure, whom we will leave onwardes of his journey toward
Bohemia.

The Knight of Fame having slept his fill, and longer a great deal then he
determined, awaked within two days after Parismus departure, little thinking
the Prince had been gone, but beginning to arm himself, Flauia coming to
him, said as follows. Worthy Knight (quoth she) I am glad to see that you
are well, which until now I doubted. The knight of Fame wondering at her
speeches, said: Gentlewoman, as yet I have not been sick, then why do you
make any question of my health? Indeed sir (quoth she) I see now you have not
been sick, but you have slept very long, for I have been your keeper here
this two days, ever since the Prince of Bohemia departed, who thought to have
had your company some part of the way, but seeing your sleep (from which you
could not be wakened) he imparted his mind to the Lady Venola, who has
given me especial charge to attend you diligently.

He hearing her speeches, was amazed in his thoughts to think of them,
entering into many cogitations what should be the cause of his sleepiness,
which he perceived was the potion which he had tasted, that he was
exceedingly enraged with himself, that he thereby was disappoynted of Parismus
company, whom he esteemed above all the knights that ever he had met withal,
and making a virtue of necessitid, blaming himself for his sleepiness, he
went down into the company of other knights, making the best excuse he could
thereof. Flauia in the mean time went to Venola, and told her all that had
happened: and what she had told him of Parismus departure: wishing her to
devise what she thought best to satisfy his mind. The Knight of Fame being
desirous to know what message Parismus had left with Venola, meeting with
Flauia, desired her to certify her Mistress that he attended her pleasure, to
know what the Prince of Bohemia had told her as concerning him.

Flauia hearing his speeches, brought him into a gallerie, where she desired
him to stay, and she would go bring him answer presently: so coming to
Venola, she told her thereof. Venola then having rid her chamber of all
company, willed her to bring him in, whom she welcomed with unwonted
kindness: and taking him by the hand, desired him to sit down by her upon
the beds side, to whom she said, as follows.

Most courteous knight, the Prince of Bohemia willed me to certify you, that
he would within four days return to this place, to desire your company in
executing a secret of importance: desiring me, that I would entreat you to
stay here some few days, and at his return he will requite that kindness:
therefore I pray (quoth she) be my guest for so long time, for I have
received such benefits by your courtesy, as I would willingly (if it lay in my
power) requite the same. I thank your excellency (quoth he) for proffering
me such kindness, acknowledging my self both unworthy thereof, and unable
to requit^ the same: being so much the more willing to stay Parismus return,
thereby to shew^ my duty to your request: and seeing you vouchsafe me to be
your Guest, having yet deserved no such kindness, pleases you to command
or employ me any way, and I will most willingly undertake any travel to
procure your content: which words he spoke, little knowing what passions had
possessed her heart, whom she used so kindly, and entertained with such loving
glaunces, that he began greatly to commend her courtesse: and maruailed
why she used him with such kindness, that would have pierced the heart of
any other Knight but only himself, whose affections were setteled on his
inward devoted Lady: that Venolaes love was but bestowed in vain, and she
spent her sighs and her good will in a barraine soil, where shes wept in hope
of recompense: which drove her to such extreamitie of grief, that she was
often in mind (having him so fittely in her company, and fearing to loose so
sweet opportunity) to reveal her love to him of her self, but that purpose
was suddenly altered by contrary thoughts, that she satte rackt with so
many and so extreme cogitations, that the grief on the one side, that he
could not conceive of her good liking, by so many evident tokens as she had
shown thereof, and her own passions overwhelmed her heart with such care,
that she suddenly burst into abundance of tears, and so rose from the bed
and went to a window.

The Knight of Fame maruailing what should be the cause of her saddenesse,
thinking that his company could but disquiet her, departed her chamber, which
she perceiving, was overcome with such passion, that she fell down dead:
wherewith Flauia gave such shriekes, that the knight of Fame hearing her
outcrie, suddenly returned, and finding Venola in that estate, did the best
he could with the Nurse to recover her senses: which at last began to turn
to their woonted uses.

Venola lifting up her eyes, and espying the knight of Fame holding her in his
arms, wished that she might for ever have continued in that trance, who
carrying her to the bed, there laid her down, and Flauia and other Damzelles
by that time took her into their custody: which caused him to depart again:
after whom Venola cast such a greedy look, accompanied with such scalding
sighs, that Flauia feared she would have fallen into the like trance again.
After that she was well recovered, and all her attendants departed, Flania
said as follows. Why dear Mistress (quoth she) how immoderately do you
govern your self, to fall into these extremes? I beshrew my heart, if I do
not repent that ever I undertook to be an acter herein, What, have you no
more wisdom, but so fondly to d^a^e on a straggling knight, that cannot, or at
the least will not understand your meaning, taking a delight to see your
torment, for it is impossible but that he should perceive your love toward
him: then be not so affectionate toward such a one, as neither regards love,
nor knows what belongs to courtly ciuiltie, Peace, peace, (quoth Venola)
either fill my ears with the sound of better words, or else hold thy tongue:
for I tell thee, it is more odious unto me then death, to hear thee so much
disgrace the Prince of courtesy: for in him remain all honorable parts,
whose presence is more pleasant unto me, then all the proffered services of the
knights in the world: and if thou can comfort me no better then by these
speeches, keep secret what thou know, and hereafter thou shall know no more
of my mind.

For I imparted the same to thee, thinking to have comfort by thy counsel, but
thou contrarily, addest care ^o my grief. Sweet Mistress (quoth she) I
beseech you do not conceive so hardly of my meaning, for I speak nothing but
with intent to procure your good: and rather will I tear my accursed tongue
from forth of my head, then it shall hereafter utter a word to displease you.
Then (quoth Venola) once again counsel me what to do, for thou see how
far I am tied in the bonds of love to that worthy knight, that without some
hope of comfort, my cares will be exceeding, and more then my poor heart will
be able to endure. This I think (quoth Flauia) is the best to be done, either
do it your self, or let me give him knowledge of your love, and then you shall
soon see whether he will accept thereof or no. Do so then (quoth Venola) I
commit all to thy discretion.

The knight of Fame being departed to Venolas chamber, was as far from
conceiving the cause of her passion, as he was from the knowledge of all
things, and being walked into a Garden alone by himself, Flauia came to him,
whom he kindly greeted, asking her how her Mistress did.

Sir knight (quoth she) in the same case you left her, and rather worse, the
cause of whose disquiet is procured by no disease, but by an extraordinary
occasion, which none but one can remedy, which I would willingly give the
party knowledge of, but that I know not whether he will take the same kindly
or no: Else were he much to blame (quoth he) for hard were his heart, that would
not pity the distress of so divine a creature. Gentle sir (quoth she) thus
it is. My Lady has ever since the first sight of your person, been greatly
tormented with loves passions, which is the cause of her sickness, which
rests only in your power to salve.

The Knight of Fame hearing her speeches, was so suddenly astonished, and
therewith drawn into such cogitations, that he stood a good while like one in
a trance, at last he said. The harder is her hap, and the worse my
misfortune, for I am unworthy of such kindness, and unable to yield her
recompense: which words being spoken, he turned himself from her, being drawn
into such a deep meditation, that he regarded not, nor scarce heard some
words Flauia spoke to him afterward, who thinking that he had of purpose
contemned her, departed in a monstrous rage: and being alone by himself,
cagitating upon these events, perceived that her former kindness had proceeded
from the same root of affection, greatly condemning himself of dullness, that
could not before that perceive the same: wishing that he had departed with the
Prince of Bohemia, for that his fancy could by no means be* drawn to the
least good conceit of her love: for his heart was wholly employed an other way.

Then he began to call to remembrance the somniferous p^^^on he had tasted,
by which means he was disappointed of Parismus company, reuoluing every
consideration and circumstance of the same and these events, was in the end
fully persuaded, that it was purposely done by Venola, or some by her
appointment, to stay him there: which thought was so fully grounded in his
fancy, that he assuredly persuaded himself that was the very truth, and none
else: which drove him into many studies how to rid himself from thence, at
last he determined to depart in secret and unknown to any. And with this
resolution, all that day he accompanied the rest of the Knights, thereby to
shun all occasions of hearing any further speech of Venola. Who hearing how
scornfully he had received Flauias message, (which Flauia had told her) entered
into such extreme complaints against her hard fortune and shed such abundance
of tears, that the bed whereon she lay was watered therewith: in which estate
she continued tormenting her self with extreme cares.

Early the next morning, the knight without the knowledge of any departed,
clogged with such a chaos of confused cares, as that he wished the date of his
weary life (subject to so many crosses) were expired, intending never to
return thither, whom Flauia soon mist: the news whereof, she conveyed to the
hearing of Venola, who took the same so heavily, that many days she continued
as one likelier to entertain death, then to survive: which drove her Parents
into an extreme sadness, from whom she still concealed the cause of her
grief. In which estate for a while we will leave her, and the knight of Fame
onwards on his journey, and Clarina in great care for the absence of Tellamor,
in the forest of Arde.

CHAP. XV. How the Knight of Fame arrived in Natolia: and by what means he
found the Lady he saw in the vision: and the combat he fought with Collimus.
AFter the Knight of Fame was departed the King of Libias Court, to avoyde the
love of Venola, he traveled many days without any adventure, tired with
extreme care and desire to come to the knowledge of his Parents, and to find
his devoted Lady, that when the Sun was at the highest, and by that means
the season very hot, he alighted from his horse in a pleasant valley, where
sitting under the shadow of a Chestnut-tree, he entered into this
communication to himself* What crosses still prosecute my steps, that I can
in no place be at quiet, but am still troubled with that which I would not,
but cannot find the thing I desire? My birth day was the beginning of my
sorrows: since which time, nothing but care has fallen to my share, whereas I
see other Knights enjoy their hearts content. My Parents hidden from my
knowledge, my self traveling to find them, peradventure go rather a great
way from them, then to them: for the Island of Rocks, from whence I came, and
where I was brought up, is far distant from this place: and I think if I
would come to their knowledge, it is my best course to return thither again.
Was I not ouerfoolish, to refuse the marriage of Phylena, the Kings daughter of
Thrace, upon vain confidence of a dream? upon whose certainty I can no way
build, which might be procured by some Sorcerie of Remulus, to make me refuse
that honor, to the intent he might install himself therein, and cause me to
doat on the beauty of a Lady that is no where to be found: for the whole
world contains not such an essence of perfect beauty, as that which I
beheld? Then what shall I do? or which way shall I shape my best course? shall
I give over her search, since dreams are so uncertain? I but this was more
then a dream, it was a Vision: for I beheld the Goddess Venus, who enjoined
me this talk, holding that sweet Lady in her hand: whose form so perfectly
is printed in my remembrance, that I cannot forget the same: which assuredly is
living and to be found: and therefore I will never desist till I have found
her, though I spend the whole race of my life in that quest: which if it were
ordained for my endless forment, then how should I avoid the same? neither
care I what pain to endure, if I may after all my travels find her.

In this sort he spent much time, until he fell in a deep study, leaving his
back to a Tree, he fell fast a sleep. Whilst he was in this sweet sleep,
(by happy fortune) Angelica the fair, that day had forsaken the Golden
Tower, (which was not far from the place where the Knight of Fame ^a^e) to
meet the King her father, who with the Queen was coming from the City of
Ephesus, where he kept his Court, to soiourne certain days for his disport in
the Golden Tower, that yielded all kind of delights. Angelica passing along
this pleasant valley, gallantly attended by an unwonted train of Ladies and
guarde of Knights, espied the Knight of Fame, supposing that he had been
dead: to ease which doubt, she willed one of her Knights to see what he was.
The Knight coming to him, awaked him, who suddenly starting up, began to
lay hand on his sword, but casting his eye aside, he beheld Angelicas
gallant train, and amongst the rest, her self, whose countenance he
presently knew to be the very same Lady he had seen in the Vision: whose
beauty and sudden presence struck such an amazement to his senses, that he
stood like one in a trance. Angelica seeing that he was alive, and not dead as
she supposed, past on her intended journey, not regarding him. He seeing her
departed, thus said to the knight. Courteous sir, I pray let me crave that
gallant Ladies name. Sir (replied he) her name is Angelica, daughter to the
most mighty king of Natolia, who passing this way to meet the King and
Queen, (who are coming toward the Golden Tower) and seeing you lie under
this tree, sent me to see whether you were alive or dead: which said, he
departed.

The knight of Fame rejoicing that he had seen his long expected Mistress,
was presently rapt into a heavenly conceit of joy, that he thought himself as
it were transformed into pleasure, such comfort revived his dro^ping heart from
sad dumpes, with her delectable fight, even then beginning to study how to
come to her speech, to purchase occasion to give her knowledge of his duty;
finding so many lettes and impossibilities between him and his intent, that he
began to despair thereof: at last resolved upon nothing, but determining to
do something, he mounted his steed, and followed that way Angelca went:
purposing to take a more precious view of her perfections, being hopeless of
any other comfort.

He had soon overtaken her train, not yet resolved by reason of his
strangeness, what to do, nor what means to use to speak to her, being
encompassed by such a number of Knights: at last he thus thought with himself:
I that have refused the good will of kings daughters* only to find this
beautiful Lady, and in her search have endured so many mischances, shall I
now when I see her, be afraid to speak to her* or may I not hereafter be
disappoynted of such fortunate occasion as is now offered me? What though she
be guarded by these knights, being alone, it can no way breed offense to
them, that I speak to her. With this resolution he passed by the hindermost of
her company, without speaking to them, who greatly marvelled what he should be,
and coming right against Angelica, who he easily knew from the rest, by his
former little view of her form in the vision, he kindly drew near her, and
with a submissiue sign of reverence first given, he said as follows.

Most sacred Lady, pardon my boldness, which I beseech you do not account
rudeness: I have traveled many a mile, to attain the height of this
felicity, to behold your divine perfections, which makes me, contrary to
that dutiful reverence my heart has vowed* to intrude my self thus rudely
into your presence, being void of other meane^ to demonstrate my depth of
devotion: therefore I humbly once again desire your pardon, that have offended
against my will: desiring you withal, to enter into this opinion of my
meaning, that (notwithstanding what persuasion my rudeness may breed in your
heavenly heart) it is both loyal, honorable and virtuous, and no more
intending to presume above my desert, yet my life shall be always employed to
deserve as well as the best.

Angelica hearing his speeches, sadly noting his countenance, and being of a
most singular wit, admired his courage, that notwithstanding all her guard, he
durst so boldly presume into her presence, which caused her the better to
regard both his speeches and proportion, made this reply. Sir Knight, it may be
you are deceived, for you have not found that which you have so long sought,
which makes m^ account your speech flatteries, and your boldness folly:
entering into no other conceit of your meaning, for be it either good or bad, I
care not, for the one cannot harm me, nor the other pleasure me: but for your
good will, I take that kindly, though in my fancy you profess more then you
will perform.

Divine Lady (quoth he) vouchsafe but to employ me, and then shall you make
trial of my forwardness, which shall be no less then I have promised: for my
speech nor bold approach into your presence, has not proceeded from want of
respect of your worthiness, but from a strickt command, long since enjoined
me to become your dutiful servant: therefore I humbly beseech you, judge
favorably of my meaning, for I will rather hereafter consume my heart with
silent care, then by my speech purchase your displeasure, if you command the
contrary. He had not scarce ended those words, but she let fall her glove:
which he seeing, presently alighted and took it up, with reverence kissing the
same, offered it her again.

Knight (quoth she) take it for your labor, wherewith she turned away from him,
for that she espied her Father coming: which caused him, being glad of that
favor, to withdraw himself. One of Angelicas knights named Camillus, to whose
principal custody the king had committed his daughter, above all the rest
noted the knight of Fames behavior, and disdaining that a stranger should
carry away the glove, which he esteemed a favor far beyond his desert,
himself having been her servant a long time, yet could never attain any such
kindness: withal, supposing he was some knight Angelica knew, presently hasted
after him, trusting too much to his own valor, and bluntly badde him render
back the Princess glove. Sir (quoth he) again, the Princess gave it me, and
for her sake I will keep the same. Wherewith Collimus without any more mords,
retired back to encounter him: and he did the like, and remembering it was the
best deed of chiualr^e he could perform in his Ladies presence, thought with
himself, that if he sat not fast, he would quail his courage: presently,
they met each other, the one with bravery, the other with force, for Collimus
measured his length on the ground.

By this time the King and Queen had met Angelica, and all greetings ouerpast,
their trains met which almost filled that pleasant valley: in company of
Maximus, was Camillus, son to the king of Slauonia, attended by a number of
gallant Knights, who hearing o^ the e^ceeding beauty of Angelica, was lately
come into the country as a suter, to whom Maximus said, (beholding the brave
course between the two Knights,) What Knight is yonder, that has overthrown
his adversary with such agillitie? A comely Knight he is (quoth Camillus) but
it seems he is a stranger. With that, another knight of Angelicas attendants,
upon the former quarrel, incountred the knight of Fame, who tasted of his
valo^r, as his predecessor Co^limus had done, and after him another, which when
Maximus beheld, he called a Gentleman to him, willing him to request the
strange knight to come and speak with him, which fell out well for the knight
of Fames quiet, for had not the king been present, the knights of Angelicas
guard had taken such a secret indignation against him, that they by violence
would have sought his death. The messenger Maximus sent, told the knight of
Fame that the king did request to speak with him. Sir quoth he) I am ready at
his command: to whom Maximus said as follows.

Sir knight, you are it seems to me, a stranger in this place, but
notwithstanding somewhat bold with my knights, both whose quarrel against
you, and your cause of arrival. I desire to know. Most renowned king quoth he)
I am a stranger in this place, or in any else: in my travels meeting with this
gallant troop, to any of whom I have as yet given no cause of offense, which
should make them trouble me. Sir (quoth Maximus) they have reapt shame for
their discontent: bu^ I pray let us without offense know your name, and of
whence you are: neither fear to disarme your self* for upon my promise, you
shall have no wrong off^red you: which said, the knight of Fame pulled off his
hesmec, making this answer. By name most noble king, I am called the Knight of
Fame, my birth to my self unknown, by no ill intent drawn into this
country, but only to find out my Parents, which are likewise unknown: my
self subject to misery, by the want of knowledge of my self. Marcellus son
to Maximus, a knight of exceeding courteous and honorable parts, hearing his
speeches, humbling himself upon his knee before his Father, said. I humbly
crave your Majesty's favor, to entertain this knight honorably, for that I
have some knowledge of him, which I will declare to your Highness hereafter.

Maximus hearing his sons speeches, said: Rise up Marcellus, for thy sake,
and for his own too, he shall be welcome: whom do thou use according as shall
seem good, and be agreeable to his honorable deserts. The Knight of Fame
hearing his speeches, most humbly thanked him* and Marcellus presently
embraced him, showing many tokens of hearty good will.

Angelica all this while noted every circumstance of this knights arrival, as
first how she found him a sleep: and next, of his speeches to her: then how
valiantly he had ouerthrwne three knights: then her brothers speeches: and
lastly, his gallant yotuh, and comely person: which altogether wrought such a
kind of admyration in her, that she began with a curious eye to mark all
his actions: and to affect his company, more then she had done any man's:
oftentimes casting a look upon him, she perceived his eye was still upon her:
which made a ruddie blush beautify her cheeks. In which time, the king
entreated him to stay sometime with him, if his important business did not
withdraw him: which offer he willingly and kindly accepted: which fell out
according to his own hearts content.

CHAP. XVI. How the Knight of Fame was entertained at the Golden Tower, and
what speeches past betwixt Anna and Angelica.
AFter these speeches past, the King, Camillus, the Queen, Angelica, and all
the rest, departed toward the Golden Tower: and by the way, Marcellus began
to declare in hearing of them all, what her had heard of the Knight of Fame: of
his valiant exployts in Thrace, and afterward how in the Forest of Arde he
slew the Giant Brandamor, which he uttered in such ample manner, and with
such commendations, that it made them all admyre his noble gifts: especially
Angelica above all the rest, noted every circumstance thereof, with such
regard, that she seemed to take great delight therein. The Knight of Fame
hearing thereof, entertaining his Mistress perfections with such pleasure, and
admyring her beauty with such surfeiting delight, that he rode like one in a
trance, having all his senses bent upon her.

By this time they were commen to the Golden Tower where was exceeding
preparation made for the King, who speaking to Camillus and the Knight of Fame,
told them they were most heartily welcome thither: likewise the Queen
welcomed them with great kindness, especially Marcellus care for the Knight
of Fames entertainment was very great, who caused him to be lodged in a
most stately lodging, where every thing was readily prepared for him in the
best manner. Every one being departed to their several lodgings, the knight
of Fame meditating on his good fortune, and the kind entertainment he found
in that strange place, waying on the one side, how late he was plunged in
care, and how suddenly he was possessed with pleasure, how from misery, he
was advanced to the highest degree of his felicity: how he was lately in
despair of finding his devoted, and how prosperously he had now met with
her, and had in some part manifested his affection: how the occasion of his
quarrel for his Ladies Glove, was the cause of his kind entertainment: how
fortunately in that strange place his deeds were extolde: and how kindly
Marcellus used him, whose acquaintance and friendship might be a means both of
his stay in that place, and also of obtaining Angelicas love. Then again
considering how strange it was that he should stay in the very place where
his Lady should see him: and how suckily he had left the Court of the king of
Lybia, and thereby he was rid from Venolas rash love, which might both hau^
indaungered his honor and person: that with the remembrance of all these happy
concurrences, his mind was exceedingly contented, and ^ee se^med to have
attained more happy success then he would have wished: that in that sun-path
of sweet delight, accompanied with quiet sleep, he spent that night.
Angelica was likewise no whitte inferior to him in centrarietie of passions,
but having likewise spent the day in company of her mother when the time of
rest drew nigh, she soon g^t from out of all company which she thought
troublesome, being much disquieted in her thoughts, feeling a kind alteration
to her former liberty of mind, being desirous to be alone, she gat to her
chamber: where was none but her Damzel Anna, that was her bedfellow, to whom
she said; I pray thee good Anna leave ^ee alone for a while, for my thoughts
are possessed with such disquiet, that I desire by solitariness to ease my
passionate heart.

Anna hearing her speeches, meruelling what might be the cause thereof, and
being in all respects dutiful, departed. She was no sooner gone, but
Angelica fitting down upon the rushes, leaning her head upon the beds
side, began to study whence the occasion of that sudden alteration she
fell in her self should proceed: sometimes deeming this, and then that, but
still she could not certainly know what to judge thereof: that her mind was
drawn so an extreme torment, which so oppressed her senses, that presently she
called Anna again: who maruelling at her strange behavior, and greeuing at her
sadness, kneeling down by her, uttered these speeches. My dear M^stresse, I
beseech you conceal not from me the occasion of your disquiet, to whose
secrecy you need not fear to commit the same: for I hope you are
sufficient^y persuaded of my truth, that do esteem my duly so you more dear
then my self, which I would most willingly spend for your sake: or if you
will voucsafe to employe me any way, or in what sort so ever, so it please you
to command, I will be most willing to use my uttermost endeavors, as faithfully
as ever did servant, to purchase your content. Aye me wretched creature
(quoth Angelica) it is not mistrust of thy secrecy, nor doubt of thy aid, nor
ought else that I mis^oubt in thee, that makes me withholde any part of my
counsel from thee: for if I would show it thee, I cannot, for this passion is
so newly begun, that I cannot rightly conjecture what the cause thereof
should be, or why my thoughts should be thus suddenly disquieted: and such
assured confidence do I retain in thy fidelity, that I would conceal no part
of my thoughts from thee.

Anna hearing her mistress speeches, began presently to suspect that she
had entertained some good conceit of some of the knights that were arrived that
day, whom she thought to be the young Prince Camillus: which caused her make
this answer. Dear Mistress (quoth she) I believe the approach of some of the
gallant Knights that came with the King, is the cause of your alteration. Why
(quoth Angelica) do thou think their approach should disquiet me? Marry
(quoth Anna) because many Ladies have been suddenly overtaken with love:
wherewith Angelica blushed, saying. Do thou think my affections so light, to
look of every one I see?

Pardon me dear Madame (quoth she) I do not think so. Well (quoth Angelica)
suppose thou have iumpt upon the right, which of those knights do thou
suppose it is? Will you pardon me (said Anna) if I give my opinion? I will
(said she.) I think (quoth Anna) it is the brave Prince Camillus. Camillus
(quoth she) it is rather the stranger. Indeed (quoth An^^) that strange knight
far surmounteth all the knights that ever I beheld, for comeliness,
courtesse, and prowess. I am assured said Angelica (breathing forth a sad
sigh) thou speak this rather to flatter me, then according to that thou
think: for otherwise why did thou speak of Camillus? Faith M^stresse
(quoth she) I named Camillus, not for any thing I see in him comparable with
the strange Knight, but for that I would thereby know your mind: which now
that I understand, if you would follow my counsel, you should not only like
him, but also love him: for there is no doubt but the cause of his coming
hither, was only for your sake: who in my rash opinion, will prove both
constant and loyal: for his very countenance bewrays the united essence of
true Nobility and virtue to be placed in him.

O Anna (quoth she) thou woundest me to the heart: before I had but a suspicion
of love, but by thy speeches I begin to be inthralled therein. Do not I pray
thee seek to augment that, which is impossible to come to perfection: which if
I should entertain (as I shall I fear me against my will) thou know how
many impossibilit^^s do threaten my everlasting torment thereby: therefore I
pray thee do not once name him to me again, for if thou do, I shall be
more inthralled to that very name, then to all the humble suttes of the most
noblest knights in the world.

Did thou not hear my brother Marcellus report, how prodigally he gave away
the kings daughter of Thrace? and what pains he took to redeem Venola, that
beautiful Lady, from Andramarts Castle?

I know thou did: but likewise I know thou did not hear what he said to me
to refell these doubts, that he was long since enjoined to my service, and was
the thing he had long time sought to attain.

Did thou not see how I found him a sleep, and yet notwithstanding all the
Knights that guarded me, how resolutely (yet with humility) he approached my
presence? where he told me, that not want of regard had bredde that rudeness,
but fear of missing that fit occasion, considering how straightly I am kept
and pried into by my Fathers decree?

Did thou not see how bravely and valiantly he overthrow three stout Knights
together, that would have taken my glove from him? Do thou not see how
dearly my brother Marcellus loved him, and all in general are well affected
toward him? These I think are occasions sufficient to refell all suspect of
his good intent and meaning.

Quoth Anna* Truly most gracious Madame, I think verily (all things
considered) he has not his equal, neither for valor, nor for Virtue. You
may do as you please, whom I will not so much as once speak of hereafter,
since I shall offend you thereby.

Yes, I pray thee speak of him (quoth Angelica) for nothing can please me
better, though I ^eare me nothing will do me more harm. And well may thou
think me ouer^ond* so ^oo^^ to do entangled in the bonds of love, with a
stranger, that I neith^r kn^we of whence, nor what he is: of whom we have
said enough at this time, therefore I pray let us defer any further
commendation of him, until we have made better proof of his worthiness:
which said, they betook themselves to their rest.

Early the next morning the Knight of Fame was up, to whom Marcellus was soon
gotten, who took no other delight, but only in his company, using him so
kindly and so honorably, that the Knight of Fame marvelled thereat, wondering
whence such kindness should grow: that he likewise began greatly to affect
his company, and being both come into the Kings presence, who was accompanied
by Camillus, they spent the forenoone in several discourses: likewise Angelica
spent her time amongst the Ladies of great account, in such sort as agreed in
their fancy.

Dinner time being come, a most costly and sumptuous feast was prepared:
whereunto Maximus invited all his Nobles, and Camillus and the Knight of Fame
amongst the rest as his chiefest, where they were most honorably entertained,
sumptuously feasted, and kindly welcomed.

Camillus seeing that the Queen and Angelica were wanting, was suddenly
fallen into a sad dumpe, because the Lady of his delight was absent: which
the King noted more specially then all the rest, who supposing that Camillus
came as a S^ter to his daughter, had of purpose given order to the Queen, that
she should banquet the Ladies by themselves: which was so done, that neither
Camillus nor any else perceived his drift therein, which made Camillus extreme
angry with himself, that he had not the day before (when he enjoyed both her
sight and full liberty of speech) in some measure given her knowledge of his
love.

The Knight of Fame on the contrary side, governed himself with more
moderation, for he having attained such good success as his heart did wish,
was therewith for the present contented: hoping that fortune that had been so
favorable to him, would not suddenly alter her countenance, but still
contiune her aid to his furtherance: whom Maximus likewise diligently noted,
having suspicion that he likewise came for Augelicas love, though he
dissembled the contrary, of which he could perceive no likelihood by his merry
countenance, which caused him only to suspect Camillus, and not him.

The Feast being ended with great royalty, every one after some Courtly
pastime past, betook themselves to what exercise liked them best. Camillus
still accompanied the King, showing (for grief of Angelicus absence, such a
kind of behavior, as though his senses were bewitched with careless
passions, which he noted diligently, thereby breeding in his mind, an assurance
of his suspicion. The Knight of Fame had withdrawn himself into a Garden, and
seeking the solitariest place he could find, began to recall the sweet
remembrance of Angelicas beauty into his mind, whereunto he was more firmly
inthralled, then he was before he had seen her, though even then his love was
firm, having but seen her in a Vision, that he was now not only contented
with that favor she had already shown him, but also devised and studied how
to become more gracious in her sight, and attain some better hope of her love,
which as yet he had not likelihood to attain. Whilst he was in the depth of
these cogitations, Marcellus missing him, and seeing him before enter into the
garden, never left until he had found him out, to whom he said. Sir Knight, I
am somewhat bold to interrupt your quiet meditations by my approach, being
desirous of your company: therefore if I may without intrusion accompany you, I
will stay, otherwise I would be loath to breed your disquiet.

Most noble Marcellus (quoth the Knight of Fame) I am not troubled with your
presence, but think my self most happy to enjoy the same, as far unworthy
such kindness: being a stranger here, think my self so highly honored by
your favor, that I shall account my self for ever bound unto you for the same:
thinking my self more happy thereby then I could have wished, being before
subject to all evil for^itude, account my self exceedingly fortunate by your
kindness and friendship.

I would it were in my power (quoth Marcellus) to deserve so well of you: being
more willinger then able to pleasure you, for the report of your honorable
gifts, has made me long since desirous of your acquaintance, that if you
please to stay with me in my fathers Court, I will labor to show my good
will toward you: and if you will accept of my plain meaning, without further
trial, I will hereafter prove your faithful friend. Most courteous Knight
(quoth he) I can yield no other recompense but hearty thanks for your
kindness, which has extended it self far beyond my desert, with so
willing a heart accepting your kind proffers, that before I prove disloyal,
I will tear my heart from out my breast. Then (quoth Marcellus) let us
conclude this sudden consent of good will, which for my part, shall never
while life does* last be dissolved.

Desiring you hence forwards to make such account of me, that wherein soever I
may in any degree pleasure you, I will as assuredly do my best, as in my power
consists. With that they embraced each other: betwixt whom, such good will
began to grow, as was both constant and indissoluable.

CHAP. XVII. How Angelica was imprisoned: and how Maximus rebuked his son,
for suffering the Knight of Fame to speak to Angelica.
MArcellus having a while walked with him in the garden, desired him to
accompany him into the Court to visit the Ladies, who (quoth he) are this day
feasting by themselves. The Knight of Fame glad thereof, willingly gave his
consent, being the only thing that contented his mind: and being come into
the presence where the Queen was, and having done his reverence, she most
kindly welcomed the Knight of Fame, telling Marcellus, that his coming was to
see the young Ladies: whereat Marcellus* smiling, departed into a gallery, where
were a multitude of sweet beauties, exercising themselves at several pas^imes,
some at Chesse, some at Cards, and some in pleasant communication, whom
Marcellus kindly embraced: but the Knight of Fame by reason he was a stranger,
was not so bold, but having his mind dedicated to serve no other Saint but
Angelica, looked for her, whom he espied at the further end of the Gallery in a
heavy dumpe, leaning upon her elbowe: who hearing Marcellus voice, looked
back, and cast her eye first on the Knight of Fame, on whom she fastened a
steadfast eye a good space: but remembering her self, with an exceeding blush,
she withdrew the same, because she saw his eye settled on her.

Marcellus by this time came toward Angelica, and perceiving her blushing
countenance, caused him to note how melancholy she was alone, saying: How now
sister, what sollitarie studi^ ^^ that which has withdrawn you from yonder
peasant company? My mind (quoth she) is better exercised, by being sometimes
alone then in their company: but since your presence has broken my
meditation, I can be well content to forsake the same to enjoy your company,
which me thinks is very rare.

I thank you good Sister (quoth he) assuring you, that I take it wondrous
kindly, that you think so well of me, which hereafter you shall at your
command enjoy: withal, I desire you for my sake to bid this Knight welcome,
whom I esteem as dearly as my self: with that Angelica turned toward him,
and he with humble reverence, kissed her hand, to whom Angelica said: Sir, by
my brothers command I bid you welcome: the knight of Fame most humbly thanked
her, being so exceedingly ravished in his mind with joy, that no joy might
be compared to that he endured.

Angelica on the other side was every way affected with as sweet^ content, by
that opportunity to take a more precise view of his comeliness, entertaining
the same with such surffetting delight, that she not only augmented the heat
of her former affection, but also was now fettered in the dissolueable bands of
love.

Marcellus and she continued sometime in conference together, in which time
Angelica cast many a sweet look toward the knight of Fame, which he well
perceived, by reason his eye was never off her, which she likewise noting,
striued not to show the like kindness again, but notwithstanding contrary to
her purpose, her hearts inward affection, constrained her to behold him, which
made her color go and come exceedingly: oftentimes breaking off her speeches
with such passionate studies, and sometimes breathing a silent sigh, which
Marcellus noted, but yet seemed not to mark. In the mean time, in comes the
Queen, who calling Marcellus* unto her, entered into comunication with him,
which when Angelica beheld, her heart began to throb and pant with a kind of
delight: the knight of Fame likewise was tormented with such diversity of
passion, being desirous to speak to Angelica, yet not daring to attempt such
boldness in presence of ye Queen, having before heard of Maximus decree. Whilst
he was in this cogitation, Anna seeing her Mistress alone, and the knight she
so dearly loved hard by her, came and used some speeches unto her on him, which
he well noted, at last the Queen departed again, and Marcellus went to sport
amongst the rest of the Ladies, having before noted his Sisters passions, which
he was in some suspicion was, by reason of the knight of Fames being there.

The knight of Fame seeing the Queen departed, and Marcellus amongst the
Ladies, not rashly attempting such boldness, but with a most submisse and
comely behavior, drew toward Angelica (being surprised with such a fear to
offend) and care what to say, that his heart shook therewith) and humbly kissing
her hand, with a trembling fears he still held the same in his palm, and said:
My divine Lady, pardon my presumption, that ouerboldly and contrary to my
desert, presume to trouble your sacred ears with my speeches: which if I did
suppose would be offensive, I would bury still in the closet of my troubled
heart, from whence they proceeded: but if I may be so gracious in your sight,
as to gain the sweet opportunity by your favorable license, as to declare the
depth of my devotion, and how and in what sort, and how long since I was
enjoined to become your devoted servant, I shall rest so much more inthralled
to your virtues, as my poor heart shall for ever be unable to yield
sufficient thanks for: which I dare not presume to ^oo without your favorable
consent, which I desire you to grant. Angelica all this while stood as one
transformed into bashfulnesse, being possessed with delight, yet unwilling to
make any show thereof, which caused an exceeding blush beautify her cheeks,
which added some splendure to perfect beauty it self, which at all times
appeared most lively in her sweet countenance: at last withdrawing her hand,
which now began to sweat with his strickt embrace, which he was unwilling to
let go, yet fearful to hold without her consent, to whom she made this
answer: Sir, where no harm is meant, there needs no such intreatance for
pardon, for the actual offense I see none, but if any be intended, it is more
then I know, and therefore without my power to forgive: neither does your
speech much please nor offend me, but if spoken with good meaning, I cannot
blame, nor will deny to hear an other time: withal, wishing you not to think
me tractable to every persuasion, but have yielded you that favor, never yet
any had at my hands: which peradventure imboldneth you to use your accustomed
manner of flatteries, whereunto most me^ are addicted, wherein you shall do
greatly amiss: for though I condescend to hear you, yet do not tinke my mind
easily drawn to believe every protestation. Most virtuous Lady (quoth he)
neither do my words proceed from custom, but my speeches proceed from the
depth of my true and humble heart, that has vowed never to start from the
constant verity, which has long nurced many bitter forments, proceeded by
desire ^o find your virtuous self: which has bin the cause of my long
travel* Then I most humbly beseech you, esteem of me as one that can breath no
longer then he is in your favor. For sooner shall all things be dissolved,
then I fail in duty to your service, and constancy to continue devoted to
your command: which if I may be in any hope to attain, though it be with the
extreme hazard that ever knight endured, I shall account my self the most
happiest man living. Therefore I beseech you, let no suspected conceit of my
truth, withdraw your virtues from pitying me: for without the fruition of
your sweet favor, it is impossible for me to live. Beseeching your
excellency likewise, not to suppose my words to proceed from fained
affection, but from a heart that has vowed to be perpetually constant, and
will never start from truth, whatsoever miseries or crosses may happen to try
my constancy* Angelica hearing his speeches, withal, noting with what motions
and alterations his heart was oppressed, by the often change of his countenance,
and withal, being her self every way as much inthralled to love as himself,
hoping that his heart, if it harbored true loyalty, would not deem amiss of
his courtesy, (for the noblest minds are soonest drawn to pity) gave him
this kind reply.

Sir knight, your earnest speeches has so much prevailed with me, that gladly
I would show you what kindness rests in me, but that I still fear to be
deceived: therefore if hereafter I see you constant, make no doubt but I will
be so kind as you can wish* and yield you what recompense I can, in requital
of your good will: withal, wishing you to think that my heart has yielded you
that favor, which yet never any had from me.

Angelica had not ended those words, but in comes Maximus pu^^ing with
vexation, to whom Collimus had declared, that the Knight of Fame was some
disguised counterfeit, that came to seek Angelicas love (whereo^ his life
depended) and coming to him, seeing him in talk with his daughter, said.
Knight (quoth he) what makes thee thus bold, so far to presume above thy
desert, to intrude thy self into my daughters company, which thou know is
contrary to my decree. Then taking Angelica by the arm, he thrust her from
him, commanding Collimus (who was ready at hand) to commit her to safe
custody: and upon pain of death, not to suffer any, not so much as his son
Marcellus, to come to her speech: by whose means Collimus had told him, the
knight of Fame was brought into her company.

Collimus having this charge, which was his own seeking, immediately conveyed
Angelica from their presence, who notwithstanding her fathers presence and
displeasure, turned back and gave the knight of Fame a kind look at her
departure, which he well noted, and therewith conceived more joy, then he took
grief at Maximus unkindness.

By this time Marcellus was come to his father, who cast such a dis* pleasant
countenance upon him, as that he well perceived he was someway incenst
against him: wherewith the king in a great rage departed, not speaking a word
to him. After he was gone, Marcellus coming to the knight of Fame (whose
heart was ^^p^ with greef) and noting his sad countenance, departed with him
down into the garden: where being come, Marcellus said as follows. Dear
friend (quoth be) for by other name I will never call you) be not disquieted
with my fathers dispeasure, who gives too much credit to untrue reports: and
that causes him both to be offended with any that speaks to my sister, and
also suspicious of all that come into his own company, whereby he dishonors
his own name, lives a troublesome life, and also keeps her as it were in
prison, which I am sure can breed no little care in her breast, whose hard hap I
much pity, and would any way ease, if it lay in my power.

Most honorable knight (quoth he) I am most heartily sorry, that my over
boldness has causes your fathers displeasure, and that divine Ladies disquiet,
which is more grievous unto me then death: which it was my accursed misfortune
to procure, being drawn to that presumption by attractiue beauty: wishing that
I had some way ended this my accursed life, before my approach in this place,
that thereby I might not have been so unfortunate, as to be a means of her
care, and your disquiet: for that I see the King is likewise displeased with
you. As for that take no care (quoth Marcellus) nor be so much grieved for my
sister, for these troubles will be soon calmed: which to effect, let me alone.
In the mean time, (whatsoever inward thoughts you conceive) yet smother your
discontent, and show your self cheerful as heretofore you have bin: for I
perceive that some of envy has incensed my father, the truth whereof I will
soon find out. Marcellus having ended these speeches, left the Knight of Fame
walking in the garden, and presently without any show or sign of discontent,
went into the presence, where he found the King in company of Camillus,
according to his woonted manner doing his reverence, and taking his usual
place. The King maruelling how he durst so boldly presume into his presence,
without reconcilement, thought that either want of duty had procured the same,
or else he did not perceive he was displeased with him: to ease himself of
which doubt, he said as follows.

Marcellus, I had thought your care would have been greater to regard my good,
then any man's else, considering you know the depth of my secrets* as concerning
Angelica, on whose beauty my life does depend, and not so negligently and
disobediently, not only to suffer that strange Knight to proffer love to her,
but also to be a means to bring him into her sight, and help him to her
speech, wherein you have shown your self undutiful, which makes me rather
to suspect you as one ready to seek my life, then careful to preserve the
same* My Lord and Father (re^lied Marcellus) I trust your Majesty do conceive
no such (...) of (...) deserved the same: much less^ (...) in thought (...)
^utie to your (...) besides my Lord, I do alluredly believe, you (...) strange
knights meaning, whose intent is both honorable, and from the least thought of
love to my Sister, but there are some in credit with your Highness, who
disquiet you too much with their flatteries, and will rather rejoice to see all
things fall out according to their reports, then be any way sorry to see the
same: whose speeches and false informations, I trust shall not alter your good
opinion of my loyalty: whose constant love, duty, and obedience, shall
continue firm, when their treacheries shall be revealed, and they found
traitors: therefore I beseech your Highness, both alter your conceived
displeasure against me, and the knight of Fame, of whom so honorable report
has been spread in most places, for it will be accounted an act of great
discourtesie, to use him unkindly.

Maximus hearing his sons speeches, in accusation of them he most favored,
and in defense of the knight of Fame, against whom he was mightily incenst,
was turned into such collor, that he gave him this rebuke. Dare thou both
enuiously accuse my friends, and disloyally plead for my enemy: henceforth
presume no more into my sight, without my license, for I will rather esteem
thee as a privy enemy, then as my natural son. Which when he had said,
turning aside; Marcellus departed, maruelling who it should be that had
incensed the King against him, being so inwardly grieved in his mind, that he
thought to leave no means unassayed to learn the truth thereof. Angelica as
before is said, being conveyed by Collimus to safe custody, began to
conceive such sorrow for her fathers dsipleasure taken against the Knight of
Fame, unto whom she b^gann^ to bear an exceeding love: such effect had his
perswasiue speeches wrought in her gentle heart) that she entered into exceeding
sorrows, coniecturing diversely what disquiet that discontent might breed by
reason of her fathers jealous suspect already begun: and how the Knight of
Fame might be abused in that strange place, having no friend to take his part,
which thought struck a sudden pensiveness to her heart. Contrarily, she
thought that would be a means to try his loyalty, which somewhat would have
eased her heart, so that no other danger would have ^usued thereon. At last*
having no other means of comfort, (nor friend to impart her mind unto) she
^^lled Anna unto her and willed (...) ^ow the (...) so discr^^^^^, that (...)
presently went about the business Angel^^^^ (...) we leave them all in diverse
cogitations.

CHAP. XVIII. How the Knight of Libia hearing that the Knight of Fame was in
Natolia, by Flauias false accusation, sent messengers to Maximus, to entreat
him to put him to death. How Maximus threw him into the Lions den.
AFter that the Knight of Fame was departed from Libia, and Venola had
knowledge thereof by Flauia, she continued many days in great sorrow, but
afterward by tract of time calming her gree^e, but no whither affection, by
Flauias persuasions, who was privy to all her actions, turned her former good
will that was grounded upon virtue, to lust and mad destre: that seeing she
could not by fair means win him to her love, she thought to leave no means
unassayed, either by force to compel him thereto or else in some measure to be
revenged on him for his discourtesie. The mind being always ready by every
persuasion, to yield to work any means for to procure desired content: even
so she casting about many devises with Flauia, one day (finding fit
opportunity when the King was in his dumps, for Venolas sickness) came unto
him* and told him that the cause of his Daughters sickness, was procured by
an exceeding flight she had taken by the discourteous usage of the knight of
Fame, who for that cause was lately fled from the Court, which until that
day she had concealed from her, neither should she ever recover her selse,
until she were in some hope to be revenged of him.

The King willed her to declare the same unto him. Flauia then began as
follows. My Lord, this Knight presuming often into my Mistress presence, by
reason of the kindness she showed him, for working her release in Brandamors
Castle, (which he well deserved) began oftentimes to make love to her, whom
she answered in good sort, being unwilling to make choice of any, but by your
appointment: but in the end, his suits grew to that importunacie, that he
would have no deuiall, but coming into her chamber, choosing his fittest
opportunity, when my Mistress was in her bed, and surprising her unawares,
offered her exceeding shame and villainy, but being by her striving and
out-crie disappoynted of his full intent, he presently fled away.

The King hearing Flauias speeches, was exceedingly iuraged with fury,
commanding his knights to post every way, to learn where he made his abode.
This news being spread at last came to a knight of Natolia who by occasion was
then in the Lybian Court who presently came to the king, and told him that he
needed not ^o make inquyrie for the knight of Fame, for that he was ^t the
Golden Tower. The King hearing that news, was excee^ingly glad thereof,
commanding his knights to stay their journey writing a letter to Maximus, to
this effect.

MOst mighty King, I salute you: requesting you to work revenge in my behalf
upon a traitor, who now remains with you, who has dishonored my Daughter:
he is called the Knight of Fame: assuming that name to color his wicked
practices, who no doubt will soon devise some mischief against your person:
let him not escape your hands, but rather send him to me, that I may ^euenge
that monstrous injury he has done me, by his life: which only shall
satisfy me. Thus remembering my love to you, and desirng your secrecy, I
cease.

Your brother of Lybia.

Having written this letter, and sealed it with his signet, he presently sent
the same by certain of his knights to the Golden Tower, who as effectually
dispatched their journey, as he had given them straight charge: and arriving
at the Golden Tower, delivered the letter to Maximus, who having read the
same, and well considered the circumstance, which augmented his hatred and
suspi^ion already begun against the knight of Fame, presently coming to the
place where he was in talk with Marcellus, he caused him to be apprehended,
and without any other judgment, caused him presently to be cast into a den
of Lions, to be devoured.

The knight of Fame was no sooner put into the den, but the Lions made an
exceeding roaring, that those without assuredly judged him devoured, and
himself expected nothing but that terrible and ^ea^full death: but the Lions,
who by nature will not harm those of Royal blood, spared his life, and not so
much as offered* to touch him but were rather terrified with his presence. He
being glad of this happy, escape, began to assure himself that he was
sprung of Kingly race, which greatly comforted his heart, and added a
perswasiue hope to comfort himself withal, that by that occasion he should
attain to Angelicas love, if he could work means for his releasement out of
that place: most of all he woondred why. Maximus had offered him that outrage.
In these and such like cogitations he spent the rest of the day.

Marcellus seeing the Knight whom he most dearly loved destroyed, without
judgment, equity, or cause, was so inwardly* enraged, that he was in mind
oftentimes to work himself iniu^ie, and seek means of revenge, if he knew
who had been the causer thereof: and not knowing what to do, nor in whose
company to spend his time, he presently thought to go to Angelica, whom he
thought bare some good will to the knight of Fame, with her to bemoane his
untimely death: but coming to the place where she was, he would have entered
therein, but Collimus according to Maximus command, denied him, and that the
more obstinately, for that he knew none favored the knight of Fame so much as
he, whom he mortally hated.

Marcellus* being before sufficiently enraged, was now so much more vexed, that
he drew his dagger, and with a violent blow stabbed the same to Collimus
heart: and withal going to Angelica, he found her very sad, little thinking
of these mischances, who seeing him in that rage, which she soon perceived by
his behavior, she came unto him, (having seated himself down in a chair)
and desired to know the cause of his wrath.

O Sister (quoth he) this place is the harbor of cruelty, tyranny, and
dishonor, which in times past has been famous, and a receipt of honor, but
shortly will be hated and sh^nned, as odious and omniminious, and all procured
by the foolish Divining of a wicked Harlot, that has filled my Fathers head
with such fancies, that he forgets himself, his honor, and Kingly
behavior, and gives credit to none but flat*terers, and parasites,
imprisoning his children, murdering his friends, and seeking the subversion of
honor and honorable knights. Oh Angelica, what should I say, or to whom
should I complain? he has slain virtue, he has destroyed honor, he has
murdered my dear friend, that kind and courteous knight: he has cast the
unknown (most honorable though unknown) Knight of Fame, into the Lions, den:
without judgment, justice, right, offense, or trial. Angelica hearing his
words, was ready to sound with grief, but that fear to discover her love
withheld her: but being not able to refrain from tears, she withdrew her
self aside to conceal the same, which Marcellus espying, caught her in his
arms, and said. Nay dear Sister, do not conceal your grief for his death
from me, that love you so much the better* and if you ever conceived any good
liking of him, I shall honor you for the same: for he was worthy to be
beloved of the best Lady in the world: for in him shined all parts and points
of true Knighthood and honor. I cannot (quoth Angelica) deny, but that I
liked and loved him too: neither shall I ever do otherwise whilst I live,
though he knew not so much: for whose death, my heart shall never harbor
quiet, nor never shall thought of other love si^ke into my breast: for him had
I vowed to love, and that vow will I keep inviolable, whilst life does last.

Oh Angelica (quoth Marcellus) had I known you had loved him so well, I would
have dyed with him, but I would have saved his life, which was so suddenly
acted, and so unexpected, that before I could recover my senses from amaz^ment,
he was past my reach. What cause had my Father think you, to seek his
destruction, but because he saw him in speech with you? Aye me (quoth
Angelica) was I the cause of his death? I will then go to him: with that, such
grief oppressed her heart, that she fell down in his arms.

Marcellus called to her Maids, who presently came thronging about her,
maruelling at her sudden sickness: and especially Anna, who was privy to
her thoughts, and hearing Marceilus speeches, made great lamentation. This
news was soon come to the Queens hearing, who presently came running unto
the place, and having by her labor recovered her, en^red into these speeches.
Why how now Angelica, what mean^st thou to do thy self this wrong? What
m^^chance or sudden passion has caused this disquiet? Then turning to
Marce^lus, Or can you tell Marcellus (quoth she) for you were by* I know not
quoth he) but I am sure we have all cause of little joy, when we that are
the Kings children* shall be imprisoned upon the flattering report of every
dissembling S^cophant. Why quoth she who has abused you? That did Collimus
(quoth he) and him I have rewarded. Besides, my Lord and Father has destroyed
that honorable strange knight, because I loved him, who never deserved the
least cause of such cruelty, but was always honorably esteemed in every
Kings Court* until it was his ill hap to arrive in this unfortunate place,
to end his life by Tyranny, not by Justice* Take heed Marcellus, scandalize
not your Fathers honor, which may bring you in danger: for that he has done
nothing but right, and with good consideration, for behold that letter, and
thou shall soon see what a counterfeit that Knight of Fame was.

Marcellus having read the letter, was at the first suddenly amazed thereat,
but yet notwithstanding, he s^id: upon my life this accusation is most false
and untrue. Angelica taking the letter, and ^^ating the same, was exceedingly
astonished thereat, to whom Marcellus said. Angelica believe it not, for if
you do, you shall too much wrong that honorable Knight, that is too much
abused already, who if he were living, would soon prove these accusations
false: but he good Knight is now dead* and past recalling, whose death will
bring more dishonor to the Natolians, then ever will be recovered. Why (quoth
the Queen) what makes thee Marcellus so inconsiderate, by taking a strangers
part, to indaunger thy own life, which know the kings humor? Love (quoth
he) to that stranger, makes me bewail his vn^imely death, whom I would
that I had excused.

The Queen seeing Angelica somewhat well recovered, departed unto Maximus, who
by that time had knowledge of Collimus death, and was meditating how to
chastise Marcel* for that presumption: But the Queen upon her knees entreated
him to pardon him, alleging that Collimus had greatly abused him: with much a
do the King was pacified.

Marcellus having somewhat comforted Angelica, in a heavy and sad estate,
departed to his chamber, and left her with her Damozell Anna, rather ready to
yield up the Ghoast, then otherwise likely to survive: and night being
come* she refusing meat, went to her bed, not to sleep, but to bewail the
k^ight of Fames untimely death.

The knight of Fame all this time remained in the Lions den, carefully
devising which way to get out of that place, ^yring his senses, but finding
no means of rele^se. Our while accusing his hard fortune, and then Maximus
for his cruelty. Sometimes fearing to be famished in that place: and then
comforting himself with persuasions of impossible deliueries. Now dispairing
to be utterly exempt from the sweet sight of Angelica, whose absence and
restrainte of liberty (procured as he thought by his boldness) pinched his
heart with extreme forture.

In this sort he continued so long, until that he was ready to be starned,
and constrained to eat such unsavory ^oode as was daily cast to the Lions.
Angelica likewise no whit mittigated her grief but rather augmented the same:
being much comforted by Marcellus, whose mind was not yet satisfied with
s^fficient consideration of these mischaunces, but both he and Angelica
continued as it were in a further hope in their fancies, of the knight of Fames
safety: though when they began to comfort themselves with any persuasions,
they were quite past hope. Maximus likewise having considered with what
severity he had used the knight, and that he had condemned him without any
trial of the accusati^n that had been used by his knights, ever since his
death, (began to tell a remorse in his conscience of injustice) but by the
settled opinion that was stirred in his heart by those false Prophesies, he
soon shook the same off.

Camillus all this time, likewise noted what jealous suspicion the king heard
of him, and having heard the report why he kept his daughter so strongly
guarded, and of set purpose withheld her from his sight, and noting how
suddenly the knight of Fame was made away, without any cause of offense
given, he began to fear himself, and by that means, du^st not show any
sign of desire to see Angelica, least by that means he should seek some
occasion of quarrel with him, and use him like the stranger: within a while
departed from the Golden Tower, intending notwithstanding, either with force,
or fair means, to attain her possession.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Knight of Fames preservation. How he gat out of the den,
and departed the Tower.
THe next day after Camillus departure, which Maximus perceived was with a
discontented mind, the keeper of the Lions den, came to make clean the same,
and used his woonted manner, which was to set open those places that were
clean, into which the Lions would soon enter, and having fast bolted the
doors, and being owner of the Lions, entered into the den, where the Knight of
Fame was, who suddenly caught hold on him, (having before secretly shrouded
himself from his sight) and being careful to provide for his own safety,
snatched from his side a hanging sword: the keeper knowing him, maruailing to
see him alive, and exceedingly astonished at his sight, held up his hands for
mercy, to whom the knight of Fame said. My friend, I seek not thy life, but
mine own safety, being as thou seeest, preserved by Divine providence, from
the Kings cruelty, by him unjustly cast into this place, without any cause of
offense: but wrongfullie, as thou may perceive by my preservation: for if my
fact had deserved punishment, no doubt I could not have escaped the cruelty of
these executioners, having endured great danger of famishment. Now my request
unto thee is, that thou would but suffer me to depart from hence, without
discrying me* for I have no reason to trust to Maximus courtesy, having
already e^bured this misery by his Cruelty: which thou may well do,
without endaungering thy self any kind of way, for there is none but does
assuredly think I am dead.

The keeper hearing his speeches, and withal seeing how admyrably he was
preserved, and also fearing his own death, assured him by many vows and
protestations, not only to do that which he had desired, but also would most
faithfully execute what other thing soever he should command, to his
uttermost power. Will thou then (quoth he) do this for me? give me the
keys, and make fast the door so that thou can not go from me, and then
call down thy boy and send him to Marcellus, to request him to come to thee,
but in such sort, that the boy may not see me, and also to do his message
secretly: which the keeper told him, he would most willingly perform. Then
dyrecting the Knight of Fame how to lock the door, that he could not escape,
he called down his boy, who presently came to him whom he commanded to seek
out Marcellus secretly, and to desire him, that he would vouchsafe to come
and spe^ke with him, about a matter of great importance. The boy having
received his message, immediately hasted to execute the same: and most
fortunately met him in the outer court, to whom he declared the cause of his
coming. Marcellus maruelling why the keeper had sent for him, presently began
to remember the knight of Fame, with which his heart began to throb: but
hasting down to the den, the keeper commanded his boy to depart: and humbling
himself to Marcellus, told him that the knight of Fame was still living. Which
said, he ran in unto him (who had shrouded himself from his sight) and told
him Marcellus was come: then presently he came forth, whom Marcellus
espying, with great rejoicing, caught him in his arms, and most lovingly
embraced him, seeming to be revived with joy, in respect of the care oppressed
his mind before he had knowledge of his safety. Many courteous greetings
past on either side, Marcellus desired the keeper not to reveal this secret
to any: for if it should come to my fathers hearing, it were impossible then to
prevent his rigor: and withal promised him, that if he would let him lodge in
his house but that night, he would reward him most be^utifully: and withal
promised him to higher dignity, and to such place of account as that he
should have good cause to rejoice, that ever the knight of Fame came within his
house. The keeper both drawn by his own good inclination, and also by the
hope of reward and preferment, being but poor, promised his uttermost aid
and assistance to pleasure him, and withal, to perform his full desire, with
such security, that none should conceive any suspicion thereof: with that
they all together departed up into his Lodge, where the Knight of Fame
refreshed himself with comfortable meats, being exceedingly glad (as he had
good cause) of this success: and rendering many thanks to Marcellus (who well
deserved the same.)

Marcellus being yet somewhat troubled in his mind about the Letter the King
of Lybia had sent, and desirous to bre satisfied of the truth therein, taking
the Knight of Fame aside, from the hearing of the keeper, said as follows.

Sir knight, although I have shown you this favor and friendship, which my
fancy often persuaded me to refuse, yet urged by the good well I bear you,
and for other considerations which I will yet conceal from you, I could not
choose but rejoice at your safeite, and work what means I can for your
preservation: yet there remains a grudging in my conscience against you,
until you assure me by your faithful oath, to sati^fie me of the truth of my
do^bt without fraud: for if that be true which is alleged against you, by
the affirmation of a King, you deserve the punishment my Father inflicted upon
you, and rather to be generally hated, then beloved at all. Most honorable
knight (quoth he) I know my self so clear from all such villainy, as that I
swear, and protest by my life, by Heaven, and by all the good that ever I
expect, which I desire to turn to my destruction, if I tell you not the very
truth.

Then (quoth Marcellus) the same day that the King my Father caused you to be
thrown into the Lions den, the king of Lybia sent hither certain of his
Knights with a Letter, wherein he accused you to have most shamefully
deshonoured his Daugh^er Venola, desiring my Father to dispatch you out of the
way: for your li^e and nothing else might appease his ire: which was the cause
of his cruelty.

My Lord (quoth the knight of Fame) upon mine honor, my former oath, and by
all other truth and fidelity, this accusation is most unjust, false, and
untrue: which if I may by your savor (in whose hands life now rests) have
liberty to approve, I will maintain the contrary, even in the gates of the
king of Lybia, and cause my accusers to confess the contrary: neither did I
ever seek love at that Ladies hands, by whose dishonorable means this false
accusation is raised against me.

Dear friend (quoth Marcellus) you have said enough, and I rest assuredly
satisfied of your loialty. The knight of Fame was so inwardly vexed with this
accusation, that he was half mad wi^^h greet, but chiefly for that he
thought it was come to Angelicas hearing, and might be a means to cause her
utterly to forsake him: which appalled his s^nces with ^xtreame vexation, that
he stood like one transformed.

Marcellus perceiving his discontent, desired him not so be grieved, but to
ouerpasse the same, until he had means to prove the contrary.

My Lord (replied he) how can I choose but be sorry, when thereby I am
dishonored in every man's opinion, which I account more dearer then my life?
Besides, with what impatiencie may I show my self before any knight living,
but rather rid my hated self out of this miserable life, which is the next way
to salve this blemish? But if you will vouchsafe to hear the true report of
the miseries I have endured ever since my birth, you would say that I am the
only map of sorrow, and borne to perpetual calamity. I desire nothing more
(quoth Marcellus) with that he rehearsed to him all that he could, of his
bringing up in the Island of Rocks, his departure from thence, and shipwreck
at Sea: how he was entertained by D. Amasenus in Thrace, and the treachery
that was intended against him there, by Corus and Argalus* then of his success
in the Kings Court of Thrace, and the occasion why he departed from thence to
the Forest of Arde: and how there he met the Prince of Bohemia, and released
Venola: then how Venola sought his love, and how she gave him (by subtlety) a
somniferous potion, to withholde his departure with Parismus, which he
purposed: and how afterward perceiving her intent, departed from thence.

Withal, he declared the manner of the vision that appeared unto him in
Thrace, and how that he was thereby enjoined to seek out the Lady that
appeared to him, and sue for her love, which was the cause that he both
refused Phylenas marriage, and Venolas proffer of kindness: and also he
declared how he first arrived in that country, and met Angelica, which was
the very same Lady that appeared unto him in the vision: and also told him,
that he was likewise enjoined to seek out his Parents, which the vision told
him were of great birth. This (quoth he) is the true discourse of my
forepassed life, which I never yet manifested to any but your self, whose
favor has far surmounted my desert, into whose hands I commit my life to
be disposed of: desiring you not to conceive amiss of me, for that false
accusation, being most untrue.

Marcellus again embracing him in his arms, desired him likewise, not to
think that he did any way conceive the least evil opinion of him, but that
he did esteem of him, as of the dearest friend he had in the world, and that
he did both love and honor him as himself, ^and would never forsake him
whilst he lived, but continue his faithful friend for ever. Having in this
sort made a new league of amity* Marcellus left the Knight of Fame to his
private meditations, promising to return to him very shortly, going directly
to Angelica, whom he found continuing her woonted sadness, for she could ^y^e
means be comforted, but still augmented her love, by remembering the knight of
Fames person, to whom she bare such entire aff^^ctions, that she resolved never
to love any other Knight, but determined to spend the whole date of her life
in single ^state.

Marcellus sudden approach brake off her silent pensiveness, by his
countenance showing a heart replenisht with joy which he uttered in this sort.
Angelica (quoth he) cast off this sad countenance, for I bring you news of
more comfort, for the knight of Fame is living, and preserved qy admirable
means. Oh brother (quoth she) this new a cannot be true, which will nip my
heart with grief to hear of, and be disappoynted therein. Sister (quoth he)
it is so neither marvel thereat, for his innocencee in the fact la^d to his
charge, has I think caused the Gods to pity him: besides, thereby you may
be assured, he is borne of royal blood, who is now in the keepers house in
safety, with whom I have been these two hours: now cast ^ff those stormy
discontents and clouds of care, for there is no further cause of disquiet for
his supposed death.

Angelica then verily peleeuing his words, said. Good brother, fell me how he
does, for whose safety I rejoice? for of all the knights that ever I beheld, I
never liked nor loved any so well, d^siring you withal, to keep my counsel,
(having bewrayed my secrets to none else) and not to let him know so much as I
have told you. Then should both you and I do him wrong (quoth he) for he has
well deserved love, and especially at your hands, to whom by his own report,
he has long ago dedicated himself, and not only of his own inclination,
but of a high command: for the truth of which, he has upon trust of my
secrecy, revealed to me, which you shall like^ise hear: then he discour^ed
the whole truth, even as the Knight of Fame had before done^ which when she
heard she said. What a discourteous Lady is that Venola, to seek the overthrow
of so worthy a Knight? and how may I esteem him, that before he knew me,
was so constant in his love, without hope of my favor, and refused the
proffered love of two such Ladies for my sake? besides the peril he has
endured in my search, and peradventure is sprung of greater birth then my
self. And now also by my Parent doom, was put in that hazard of his life.
Good brother be you careful of his good, and whatsoever you shall counsel me
too, I will do: if my Father should know of his safety, then were there no
means for him to escape death: for such a hard conceit of suspect does
possessed his mind, that he hates all those that bear me any show of good
will. Well sister (quoth Marcellus) rest you contented, and still continue your
love toward him, to increase and not diminish the same, who is by destiny
allotted to be your husband: the care of whose welfare let be my charge: for I
so much love and esteem him both for his own and your sake, that I will leave
no means unassayed, whereby to do you good: which said, he again departed
to the knight of Fame. By this time the dark night approached, and Marcellus and
the knight of Fame were devising what means to use for his safety, and to
procure the desired content Angelica expected, who before had given her consent
to be ruled by her Brother: that by the assurance he had of her, he put the
knight of Fame in assured comfort of her love, by relating in some sort, the
contents of Angelicas conference before had with him, which affected his heart
with greater joy, then ever before he had endured grief: that his escape from
death did not comfort his heart so much as this happy news. At last Marcellus
said: Noble knight, you see how stricktly my Father gardeth Angelica, that there
is no means left to ease your grief or her care by tarrying here: neither can
you without great hazard of your life, remain within the circuit of this
Tower: for that my Father suspecteth every one, yea his own children, whereby
we are tired with those troubles, and would willingly wo^ke any means to ease
our selves: especially Angelica has been mewed up so closely, that she I am
sure would undertake any thing to enjoy her liber^ie, were it in never so poor
estate, wherein in my opinion is many thousands of sweet contents to be
found, rather then in this troublesome Pomp, which is repleat with infinite
cares. Therefore this is my censure, that you shall this night (as I will dyrect
you) depart from hence, and go to S. Austins Chapel, not far hence, and there
stay for me, vnt^l to morrow morning, where remains an old religious
Priest, named Iabine* who if you say you come from me, will give you
entertainment: which when you have done, I will so work with my Sister
Ange^ica, that he shall condescend by such means as I will work for her
secret escape, to come to you: by which I hope I shall end the doubts that
possess my fathers mind, rid their Country of the scandal it is likely to
run into: and work both mine own, yours, and Angelicas content: for so
dearly do I love her, that had I many lives to loose, I would hazard them all
to work her releasement: for were she once married, then should the date of
the foolish prophecy have an end. The Knight of Fame hearing his speeches,
which only tended to work the content, he above all things in the world
sought, could not well contain himself from expressing immeasurab^e joy, but
yeel^ing many humble and hearty thanks to Marcel^us both commended his devise,
and also entreated him to go forward with the same.

Then Marcellus called the keeper, asking his counsel if he knew any devise
whereby the Knight of Fame might get out of the Castle promising him a good
reward: and withal, pulling from his neck a chain of gold, gave him the same.
The keeper being intised with this reward, (gold having that force, to make
things impossible come to effect) presently told them, he had a devise that
might go for current, if the knight would undertake the same. I have my Lord
(quoth he) a vessel of great largeness, which sometimes sorted for other
uses, which if we could devise to let down into the Lake, he might easily in
that get over on to the other side: which devise Marcellus and the Knight of
Fame both liked. And about midnight, when all things were at rest, they put
this same in practice, and by a Rope let the vessel down, which swam most
currantly.

Then fastening a Roape about the Knight of Fames middle, after that (with many
fair promises and protestations of perpetual friendship) they had taken their
leaves, the keeper and Marcellus let him down, who was so heavy by reason of
the weight of his own body and his armor, that they had much adoo from
letting him fall, and being in the vessel, was like to sink the same. But
with much adoo and great danger of drowning, by reason of the tottering and
vnstayednesse of the vessel, which with every little weight more on one side
then on the other, wos ready to turn over, he got on to the bank, which was
so steep upwards, that he had much adoo to clime up the same, but was
oftentimes ready to fall down backwards into the Lake under him, which was of
an exceeding great and huge depth: but having happily escaped both those
dangers, he departed toward Saint Augustines Chapel, according to such
directions Marcellus had given him to find the same. Marcellus and the
keeper drew up the Vessel, and betook themselves to their rest.

The Knight of Fame had not well remembered Marcellus speeches, and therefore
having gone some half mile from the Golden Tower, fearing to wander out of the
way, he took up his lodging under a Cipresse Tree, spending the whole night
in manifold meditations, of the success of this business: being oftentimes
in great despair of ever seeing Angelica again, drawn to that fear, by
reason of Maximus jealousy, and the diligent watch he had set in every
corner of the Tower, but especially at the entrance, where none went out and
in, but the gardiants searched them, that his mind was sometimes wrackt with
despair, and sometime animated to comfort by the assured trust he had in
Marcellus. The night being by him in this sort spent, in the morning he
betook himself again to his journey, and with ease found out Saint Austins
Chapel, and knocking at the Chapel door, it was long before any came, but
at last he espied old Iabin standing behind him, who had been abroad very
early, and then returned, whom the Knight of Fame most kindly saluted. Iabin
maruelling to see one in Armor, demanded what he would have?

Right reverend Father (quoth he) I am sent to you by Marcellus, whose request
is, that you would for his sake vouchsafe my secret abode with you until his
coming, which will be this day, if contrary occasion hinder him not. Iabin
noting his comely proportion, and willing to do any thing for Marcellus sake,
brought him into his Cell adjoining to the Chapel, and welcommend him so
kindly as he could.

CHAP. XX. How Marcellus entending to carry Angelica to Saint Austins
Chapel, was prevented by Camillus. And how the Knight of Fame departed to
seek his Parents.
MArcellus early in the morning, came to Angelica, who still continued pensive,
to whom he declared what had passed betwixt him and the Knight of Fame, and
withal of the promise he had made him to bring her to Saint Austins Chapel.
Which when Angelica hearing, she said: Brother, how can this be effected, when
you see so many impossibilities to hinder our intent, that we shall but spend
much labor to little effect, and also rather bring my fathers heavy
displeasure against us, then reap any comfort? whose cruelty you see is such,
that he will if he should find out our drift, punish v^ with severity:
besides, if it should come to that pass, what excuse could you find to
pacify his ire? Therefore I think it best, that we never hazard our selves,
but rather be contented with this quiet estate, lest a worse mischance light
upon us thereby.

Sister (quoth Marcellus) your counsel is good, but yet hear what I shall
say: the life you lead is but miserable, being kept like a prisoner, whereas,
it you could but win this liberty, you should enjoy your fill of hearts
content, and be a means to rid my father and us all, from the doubts we may
now endure. Besides, if you loved that worthy knight* whose constancy to you
wards is without compare, you would for his sake refuse no peril. Why brother
(quoth she) what need you make any such doubt when I have said sufficient
already, unless you think me to dissemble? for such is my love and good
will, that I will more willingly undertake any means to attain his company,
then he can desire: not drawn by your persuasion, but of my own voluntary
will: which have made some doubt of this attempt, because I am fearful of
your ill, and careful of your good: but whatsoever you shall counsel me unto.
I will execute. Which said, they began to study and consult how to bring their
business about: but were so confounded in their thoughts, that they thought it
altogether impossible.

Now Maximus being rid of Camillus company, and assured of the knight of
Fames death, gave his mind to more quiet, then during the time of their being
there he had done: and being wearied with care, thought to recreate himself by
some exercise: therefore he appointed the very same day to ride on hunting: and
to that intent he was early up, sending for Angelica to go with the Queen,
even at the instant when she was devising with Marcellus: which opportunity
fell out most conveniently to further their intent, which Marcellus told her he
would determine of.

Angelica immediately went down with the messenger: and with the King and
Queen, Marcellus and diverse others departed out of the tower. Marcellus all
that day kept diligent company with Angelica, until the King being earnest in
pursuit of the g^ine, strayed from them: the Queen likewise was absent, and
most of Angelicas gardiants, saving some six, being indeed such as
Marcellus had before made privy to his intent, who had firmly protested to
keep his counsa^le^: which opportunity Marcellus took, and presently
conveyed Angelica toward Saint Austins Chapel: being without the Park, when
they thought themselves far enough from the King, they were unawares set upon
by a company of strange knights, who offered by force to carry away Angelica.

Marcellus being somewhat* astonished thereat, drew his sword; and being before
well provided, withstood them* Angelicas gardiants did the like: that on a
sudden there began a cruel combat betwixt them, until Marcellus was
grievously wounded, one of his company slain, and the rest in as great danger
as might be: but being a knight of exceeding courage, he defended himself
most valiantly. So long continued the fight, that in the mean time, some of
the kings company, having the charge of Angelica* mist her, which he soon
declared to the king, who commanded his knights to post every way: by
several troops: himself and the Queen well guarded, took the readiest way
out of the Park: which was the same way Marcelius and Angelica had taken, and
hasting, came to the place where they were, in the hottest of their skyrmish.

The strange knights espying the King, presently fled away, with all
possible speed, whom many of the Natolians pursued so far, until they
might discrie a band of Soldiers: wherewith they returned with all expedition
possible, and certified the King thereof, who presently hasted to the Golden
Tower, with the Queen, Marcellus, and Angelica in his company: and by reason
of the strangers he saw in fight with Marcellus, he had not the least
suspicion of Angelicaes intended flight: and maruailing what that Army should
mean, he ^ent out spies to view of what ^orce they were, who having done in
all points accordingly, they went and certified him that they were ten
thousand Soldiers, but they could not discern under whose conduct.

Maximus fearing the woorst, presently sent letters to the Nobles of his Land*
with all expedition to muster up their forces, and to convey them to the Golden
Tower: and also caused most diligent watch and ward to be kept.

Marcellus being most greeuosly wounded, was likewise with all care tended by
the Kings Physicians, to whom Angelica repaired: and being with him alone, she
said as follows.

What misery awayteth my hard destenie, that am thus desasterly detained from
my wished content? my evil presaging mind, did foretell this misfortune,
which has thus frustrated our desire, and which is more miserable, brought you
to this dangerous estate: but most of all withheld me from the sight of my
beloved, and causes him both to augment his cares, and suspect our loyalty.
What will he think when he sees no performaunce of that which was promised,
but still stays for our coming, and yet be frustrated? for the knowledge of
our mischance, can by no means come to his hearing. Would to God that I had
ended my accursed life, by the hands of those enemies rather then to have
suruiued to endure this extreme care. No hard fortune can be compared to that
I endure, no care comparable to my grief.

First to see you thus grievously wounded: next to be disappoynted of our
desire: and lastly to frustrate the knight of Fame of his expectation. What
shall we now do? how shall we recure this mishap? or what means is there
left, that may add the least comfort to our hearts in this extremity? In stead
of the content I expected by enjoying his presence, I am returned to my woonted
bondage: and see my friends almost murdered and enuyroned with foes. Peace
peace (quoth Marcellus) good Angelica, cease these complaints, and in this
extreamitie, immitate the old phrase: make a virtue of necesss^tie, and with
patience away^e for better success: for now in these perplexities, there is
small hope of present amend^ent: for that worthy knight no doubt is of such
wisdom and prudent government, that be will judge the best of our state,
and carefully provide for his own safety. With that Angelica burst forth into
abundance of t^a^es, s^ying. Aye me poor wretch, I wall never then see him
again. With that she departed, wringing her hands, and making great
lamentation, that Marcellus seeing her sorrow, was ready to work his own
decay by his vexation.

Now those bands of Soldiers belonging to Camillus, who presently after his
departure from the Golden Tower, enduring many restless Passions, for the
want of Angelicas presence, with whom he was full greatly in love: with all
speed mustered up those forces, and brought them by shipping toward the
Tower, with intent to besiege the same, and suddenly to surpr^se Maximus
unawares, and so to get the possession of Angelica: and coming toward the
Golden Tower with a few in his company, whilst the rest marched after him, he
met Marcel^us and Angelica, and knowing them, thought without any more trouble
to take her away, but was disappoynted as is declared.

The Knight of Fame being with old Iabine, spent much part of the day in
conference with him, maruelling that he heard not from Marcellus* but when it
was dark night, his mind was rackt with exceeding care and vexation, and
being without any hope of his coming, he was as much grieved how to satisfy
Iabine, whom he thought would now suspect him of falsehood: and might suppose
he came not from Marcellus. Therefore he said as follows.

Father, I marvel that I have not heard from Marcellus, according to his
promise, which makes me think that some cross mischance has hindered him,
that may breed in you some misconceit of me, that have in his name come unto
you, which if you do, you shall much injury me: for it was he that sent me
hither, as I could assure you by diverse probable reasons.

Sir knight (quoth he) I pray be not troubled with any such thought, for you are
welcome to me, though Marcellus had not sent you, which I make no doubt of, but
so well do I love him, as that whosoever comes in his name, shall by the
strickt observance I bear to that name, command me any service.

Afterward they went to their repast, with such sparing diet as the Priest
used, and after supper to bed: where the knight of Fame could take no rest at
all, but yet lay very quietly, because he was loath to trouble his Host: with
which restraint of liberty of speech and other passions that oppressed his
senses, he endured that tedious night in great forment, which seemed longer
then many nights would have done, if he might have had liberty to utter his
lamentations, which boiled in his breast like the violence of a mighty flame
pend within a small compass.

Early the next morning, Iabine went forth for to provide food, and left the
knight of Fame alone, who then uttered many complaints, but at last finding
fault with himself for urging that effeminate kind of lamentation, he striving
to ouermaister his passions, which the more he labored to assuage* the more
they ^ncreased.

In this sort he continued all that day and the next, and many days after,
still being in good hope of Marcellus approach: but when he saw so long time
past, and he could hear no news from him, he began to accuse him of
discourtesie and disloyalty, for breaking his promise: and withal, grew into
a settled persuasion, that both he and Angelica had quite forsaken him: which
added grief to grief, and more care and vexation to his minds, not knowing
what to do, nor which way to shape his course: that arming himself one day,
he mounted himself, and wandered in a melancholy study toward the golden
Tower, and by chance met with two of Maximus knights, who were exceedingly
astonished at his sight, taking him to be a ghost: but he drawing nigh to tham,
they began to fly, which he perceiving, thought to stay the one of them, to
have some further speech with him, that charging his lance at him, and hitting
him full, ouerthrewe him to the ground: the other being therewith exceedingly
terrified, fled* The Knight of Fame alighti^g, coming to him that he had
overthrown, thus said.

Knight, thou need not to have stedde from me, for I intended thee no harm,
but was destrous to know some news of thee, which if thou will tell me, I
will let thee depart: otherwise, thou shall never escape my hands* The knight
maruelling to hear him speak, whom he thought had been a ghost, made this
reply* Pardon me good sir, for I took you to be another then I see you are,
but if I may know what you will command me, I will do it. (Quoth he) tell me
how fares Marcellus? Sir (quoth he) at this instant he lies very weak, by
reason of many grievous wounds he received not long since: where he declared
the whole truth of that which had happened by Maximus means, since which time
(quoth he) the King has set such secret watch about the Tower, that none
goes in nor out without his priuitie.

The Knight of Fame having heard his speeches, departed back to Iabine, to
whom he declared the truth of all that he had heard, being very sorry for
Marcellus hurt, and well w^ying every circumstance of that report, thought that
when* Marcellus was gotten with Angelica out of the Park, so slightly
at^ended, it was to come to him: which added some comfort to his heart, being
fully assured thereby, that Angelica had not forsaken him.

By this time the Natolian that escaped from the Knight of Fame, was come to
the Golden Tower, and coming before the King, told him that he had met the
knight of Fame: whereat he began to laugh: but presently came the other, who
iust^fied the same words: alleging that it was the knight of Fame, and that
he had both talked with him, and knew him, affirming the same most constantly.
Maximus woondring thereat, was almost astonished at their words, that he
determined to send all his knights to search for him, and the occasion now must
fitly serue^: for the Nobles had according to his command, gathered a number
of forces together, which Camillus swing, being unprovided to withstand such
force, but coming for another intent, immediately returned with his soldiers
toward his country, and Maximus now seeing the coast clear of enemies,
presently sent forth Knights every way to find the Knight of Fame.

Thus news was soon come to Marcellus and Angelicas hearing, which filled
their hearts with exceeding care and fear, least he should be apprehended:
this bredde new sorrows in their troubled thoughts, bu^ principally in
Angelicas, whose love was grown to such perfection, that it was impossible for
to remove the same: that getting to her chamber, she ^ntred into many heavy
complaints, able ^o have rent the stoniest hearts of the cruellest tyrants: whom
Anna comforted by all means she could devise: to whom Angelica said. Oh Anna
(quoth she) little do thou know the forments my heart does endure, for were
thou so much inthralled as I am and to so worthy a knight as he is, thou
might then have some insight into my sorrows, but bring ignorant therein,
how can thou give me counsel? have I not cause to sorrow? nay rather to
run mad with sorrow, to see the danger that worthy knight is now in, having
so lately escaped a most miserable death, by my Fathers censure? and without
cause, who not contented therewith, nor satisfied in his mind, has now sent
out many knights to search for him: who if they find him, will bring him back,
o^ by violence destroy him, whose death shall be the end of my life: for I
have vowed, if my Father seek his ruin, he shall also see my death, for I
will not live one hour after him: in which complaints she still continued
without intermission.

It fortuned most happily, that Iabine was gone forth of S. Austines Chapel,
and left the Knight of Fame in his Cell, meeting with many of the Natolian
knights, who demanded if he saw not such a K. describing so well as they
could) the knight of Fame, whom he answered al after one sort, that he had not
seen any such: but maruelling at their earnest inquiry, he demanded what
that knight might be? One of them told him, that he was called the knight of
Fame, who lately arrived in that country, and was kindly entertained by
Maximus, but especially of Marcellus, and having in some sort offended the
King, was by him afterward thrown into the Lions den, by reason of a letter
the king of Libia sent, wherein he accused him to have dishonored Venola his
only daughter, whom that day was seen and spoken withal. Iabine hearing his
speeches, wondered thereat: yet notwithstanding was careful least the knight of
Fame should be ^ound abroad, whom he now began greatly to esteem, both that
he deemed him to be sprung of royal blood, and also for that Marcelius made
estimation of him: who he thought knew him clear of those accusations, or else
he would not have favored him so m^^^h: that with all speed he hasted to his
Cell, where being entered, he ^ound the Knight of Fame very sad, and fast
bolting the Chapel door, he came to him, saying. Worthy Knight, I am glad
that I have found you here, for were you abroad, there are such a number of
Knights in search of you, that it were impossible to escape them. For me (quoth
he) I think you are deceived. Yea (quoth he) if you are called the Knight of
Fame, and lately escaped out of the Lions den. With that his color changed.
Nay (quoth ^abine) fear not, for you shall be here as safe as your heart can
wish, for this place is no way suspected, therefore think your self secure:
then Iabine declared unto him all that had happened, and what he had heard.
Whereupon the knight of Fame likewise finding him faithful and secret,
declared unto him the whole discourse of his travels, only leaving out the
vision which appeared to him in Thrace. Asking his counsel what to do, and
entering into many sad discourses, how he was still crossed in his
expectation: and withal, told him that he knew not which way to travel in
search of his Parents, which if he could attain, then he would not doubt but
to revenge those injurious wrongs done him. Sir Knight (quoth Iabine) I think
it best that you travel in search of them, and that presently in the mean
time these troubles by forgetfulness will be well over blown, and then you
may have the better opportunity to go forwards with any intent you shall
afterward put in practice: for if you stay here, you may unfortunately be
descried, for the Kings jealousy is such, that he will leave no means
unattempted to work your death.

Father (quoth he) your counsel is good, which I will put in practice, not
voluntarily, but forced thereto in regard of mine own preservation:
requesting this one favor at your hands, that you would by some means
remember my humble duty to that honorable knight Marcellus: and tell him
that it shall not be long ere I return: desiring him in the mean time
(according to his former courtesy, which has bin extended far beyond my
desert) to remain my friend, and remember me to Angelica. I will (quoth
Iabine) fulfi^l your request in every respect. But first (quoth he) I think
it most convenient you change your armor, for that in that you are easily
known: and I have one within, that is every way of as good proof. The knight
of Fame liked his device exceedingly well, and armed ^imselfe in that armor,
which was very rich and costly, gilded all over with Gold and Amell, without
any devise to be known by: and in that armor the next night he departed,
taking his leave of old Iabine, with many courtesies, being most unwilling to
leave his company: and parting with a heavy heart, for that he went to
undertake ^^^ewe travel, which might detain him long from returning to
Angelica: and by good fortune, that night he gat out of the country, and past
the search of the Natolians, whom he did not care to meet withal, but that
he would not thereby hinder the speed of his journey.

CHAP. XXI. How the Knight of Fame arrived in the Country of Bohemia, and
redeemed Violetta from Archas. How Archas was put to death. How the Knight of
Fame came to the knowledge of his Parents, and after that, departed again
toward Natolia.
AFter that the Knight of Fame was past the bounds of Natolia, he arrived in
an exceeding great plain, where he saw many ready paths, but knew not which
of them to take: at last a sudden thought and remembrance of Parismus entered
his fancy, which so fully possessed his mind, that the thought thereof, would
by no means remove, which was so effectually wrought in him by a natural
effect: for there were his Parents, and no where else, which caused nature it
self, to pity his restless Passions, and no longer to procastinate his
felicity, that he fully and resolutely determined to travel thither.

Whither afterward with long travel he attained having great desire to see
Parismus again, to whom his heart had vowed everlasting friendship. And now
drawi^g nigh the court, in the afternoon when the sun had with his scorching
beams made the season hot, he heard a greenous complaint, as it seemed to
his hearing, of some distressed lady, which made him stay to listen which way
that cry came, and by the voice, drawing nigh to the place, he espied under
the shadow of a heap of El^es, a knight in Armor and a Lady at his ^eet, who
were the same that made that moan. The knight of Fame coming near them, they
both espied him, to the Ladies comfort: but the Knight presently took up his
shield, and addressed himself for his defense.

The Knight of Fame well noting the Ladies countenance, remembered that he had
seen her, but he could not remember where, which caused him the more willing
^^ help her: being otherwise of his own virtuous inclination, ready to
succor any distressed Lady: that coming to her, demanded her cause of sorrow:
but she being ready to make him answer, and holding up her hands to crave
his pity, the other Knight setting his sword against her breast, vowing, that
if she spoke one word, he would thrust the same throught her body: which the
knight of Fame seeing, thinking he went about to slay her, with his sword
drawn, rusht violently against him, and overthrew him: but giving him leave to
recover his ^^ete, he said: Traitorous villain, why offerest thou this Lady
such discourtesie, being ashamed she should declare thy treackery: which mauger
thy heart, I will know before we two part? with that he lent him such a blow,
that he made him stagger: the Knight thought himself now in worse case then
ever he had been: but notwithstanding, he res^sted the knight of Fame most
courageously for a space, but he being the most ^allantest knight in the world,
soon brought him in great danger of his life: which when the knight saw and
fel^, he stayed himself, and said. Knight, before the combat continue any
^onger, let me know your name? I will not show thee that favor (quoth the
knight of Fame) but wish thee yield thy self: neither will I show thee that
favor (quoth he) with that he began the combat again, being scarce able to
lift up his sword, by reason of his faintenesse by effusion of blood, intending
to end his life: which the knight of Fame perceiving, clasped him in his
arms, a with violence wroong his sword out of his hands, and by force made him
yield, having no weapon to offend himself nor his adversary.

The Lady seeing her self thus fortunately delivered, coming to the knight of
Fame, desired him to pity her estate, and not to forsake her until she were
come to the Bohemian court. With that, the knight of Fame was exceedingly glad,
saying: Lady, I will not forsake you but see you there in safety, for thither
am I bound. But I pray you (quoth he) let me know your name, for that I have I
am sure seen you about the Forest of Arde? Violetta with that was drawn into
a great admiration what he should be, at last she said: my name is Violetta,
that am ordained to perpetual misery, being indeed by the treachery of a
dislayall knight named Archas, driven to wander thitherwards.

The knight of Fame then immediately remembering her, but being unwilling to
discover himself, questioned no more with her, but only asked her what that
knight was? Sir knight *quoth she* I know him not, nor why he has offered me
this outrage. Which said* the knight of Fame forced him to go with them, and so
they all departed toward the court, where very soon they arrived. Now it
happened, that Parismus at that very instant was in the court, who espying
Violletta accompanied by two knights, the one of them being grievously wounded,
and as it were by his countenance, and manner of forced coming, seeming captive
to the other, and not knowing of any misaduenture that had befallen her,
wondered thereat: and coming to her* not well knowing in what sort to salute
those Knights, being ignorant of the cause of their coming, he demanded where
she had bin? My Lord (quoth she) this knight, meaning the knight of Fame, has
preserved me from the dishonor of this most discourteous knight, intended
against me, as I will declare unto you presently. With that Parismus most
kindly embraced the knight of Fame, departing altogether into the presence,
where was the king and queen, Pollipus, Laurana, and many others* Pollipus
seeing Violetta amongst those strange knights, marvelled thereat, ^ut she
coming before the king, upon her knes desired justice against ^he we ^ided
knight: the king told her that she should have justice. Violetta then said, as
follows. Most mighty king, I beseech you regard my compl^int: reueng the
monstrou^ wrong don me by this most wicked and abominable h^micide, who ha^
offered* monstrous ou^rage: for this afternoon, attended by my damozoll, I went
forth of the court into the grove adjoining to the garden, to recreate my self
in the cooly shade: where I had not long stayed, but this discourteous Villain
surprised me, and caught hold of my damzel, who made great exclamation, fearing
my harm, whom he bound both hand and foot: threatening if she made any noise,
to murder her. Which done, he took me by violence, and halling and pulling me
most rudely and discourteously, would have conveyed me I know not whither,
until this valiant Knight by good fortune, hearing my complaints, redeemed me
from his tyranny. The King hearing her speeches, commanded the knight to
discover himself, but he being exceedingly ashamed, and loath to be known,
refused the same: but at last, by some of the Bohemian Knights was unarmed,
when presently Violetta knew him, wherewith she gave an exceeding start, as if
she had been affcighted at his fight. Parismus and Pollipus likewise knew him,
certifeing the King, that it was Archas, that had before offered the like
villainy to Violetia, which the King well remembered.

Then he said: Cruel tyrant, what excuse can thou invent to shelter this
villainy? what can thou allege in thy defense, but that thou ought to
suffer the most reproachful death that can be invented? but this censure will I
give of thee, not to favor thee, but to deal justly with that Knight, whose
Prisoner thou art, and therefore, as he by right has conquered thee, so we
will that he shall be thy judge.

The Knight of Fame had all this while diligently viewed Lauranaes beauty, her
countenance, and every part of her behavior, that he took great delight in
viewing her, but hearing the kings speech, he unarmed his head: whom Parismus
soon knew, and most lovingly embraced: like wise Pollipus and Violetta knowing
him, saluted him with many courtesies: when presently Parismus declared unto his
father, that it was the famous knight that was called the Knight of Fame.

The King hearing that it was he, of whom he had heard someny honorable
reports, rose from his Kingly seat, and embraced him most lovingly: and every
one in general, seemed to be most exceedingly delighted with his presence.

Laurana beholding his countenance, felt an exceeding throbbing suddenly
possess her heart: withal, such a violent bl^shing flasht in her face, that
she wondered whence such sudden motions should proceed, and was constrained
to turn aside, least any should perceive her changing countenance, and
withdrew herself to a window. This alteration being wrought in her by a
natural instinct, which she was altogether ignorant of.

The knight of Fame not unmindful to satisfy Violettas wrong, by some revenge
against Archas, most humbly thankt the King for honoring him so much, by
giving him authority to give his doom: but (quoth he) I most humbly entreat
your Highness to pardon me, and desire your wisdom, to whom he has been
offensive, to use him as you please: for it were great presumption for me, in
this strange place to censure of him in your Majesty's presence.

Then the king called Archas, commanding him to declare what moved him to
commit that outrage to Violetta: but he assuring himself of no less then
death, would make no answer: wheruppon the King commanding him to be had to
prison, appointed that the next day he should loose his head, which was
accordingly performed: who might peradventure have been pardoned, but that his
own conscience accused him more then those whom he had offended. And so
according to his own folly, which had brought him to commit those wicked acts,
even so he was his own Judge: for that his guilty conscience would not
suffer him to ask pardon. After this judgment given, every man's mind was in
quiet, having sufficiently scanned the circumstance of Violettas misfortune.

The Knight of Fame was royally entertained, and honorably feasted by the
king of Bohemia, but especially Parismus and Laurana, used him with exceeding
kindness, being for that night driven to part from him without any
conference. But Laurana was so exceedingly troubled with his remembrance, that
she could scarce take any rest at all that night, for thinking on him, not
knowing what should move her to such unwonted alteration, that in the morning
when Parismus and she were in some conference about the Knight of Fame, she
said. My Lord, I know not wha^ should move me to think any such thought, but
I am persuaded, that his arrival will bring us either some unexpected joy or
sudden sorrow: for since I first saw him, my heart has never been quiet:
neither can I, though I strive to the contrary, once put his remembrance out
of my mind, which has so fully possessed my fancy, that I could take no rest
this night.

My self (quoth Parismus) have felt the self same Passion, not only now, but
also at my first meeting wi^h him in the Forest of Arde: which makes me
partly of the self same opinion with you, and also desirous to know of whence
he it. In this and such like communication they continued some time ^ill
Pari^mus left her, and went to the Knight of Fame, who was already in company
of Pollipus, whom Parismus most kindly used, and afterward being o^ ^ most
Royal Feast, which was prepared only for his more honorable welcome: after
dinner being requested by Parismus (who was desirous to know of whence he
was) there being the King and Queen, Parismus, Laurana, Pollipus, and
Violetta, and diverse others, ^ee be^onne to declare the whole discourse of his
trauells to them in this sort. I^ I should declare my name and birth (quoth
he) I know not how to begin: for that I my self am ignorant thereof: but so
much as I can remember, I will hide no part from you. I was brought up in a
country in Tartaria, called the Island of Rocks, my Parents for any thing I
know, being poor, or whether they were or no, I know not, but when I was of
some remembrance, either my mother that brought me up, or rather my nurse (for
she would not suffer me to call her mother) departed from her habitation, I
know not with what intent, but by the way a Lion slew her, whom I pursued to
his den: where being come, I could not return back to my nurse, by which
means I stayed in that place many years, until on a time* she appeared unto
me in a dream, warning me to forsake that vnf^^quented place, and go to the
Castle of Rocks, which I presently did, then not knowing what a Castle meant:
where at the first I was roughly han^led, but at last I was kindly used by
Tyresus, who brought me up a long time, with whom I departed to Sea: where by a
mighty tempest, the ship and all that were in the same were cast away, my
self only was cast on the shore in Thrace: where I was succored by the good
Duke Amasenus, in whose Court I was often like to be destroyed, by some of his
Knights that envied me: from whence I departed to the Kings Court, hearing of
a general triumph that was held: the kings Daughter being appointed the
conquerours reward: whom I wanne, and was determined to have married: from
which I was warned of by a vision, which willed me to surrender my ti^le in
Phylena, to Remulus, to whom she was before betro^hed: which I did, and also
that I should travel in search of my Parents, which the vision told me were
of kingly race: and withal, gave me another command, that I should love no
Lady, until I had sound out that Lady that was shown me in the vision: this
did greatly trouble me, when presently came news o^ Tyrides death, son to
Duke Amasenus, who was slain by Brandamor in rescue of Venola, whom he had the
custody of: upon which occasion I traveled first to Libia, and from thence to
the Forest of Arde, thinking Venola had been the same Lady appeared to me in
the vision, where I met with your Highness, and with you departed to the Court
of the king of Libia, after Venola was redeemed, as your self remember, who
was not the Lady I went in search of. Afterward when I had thought to have
departed with you toward this country, Venola by subtlety causing me to
take a sleepie potion, frustrated my desire, which she did to stay me with her
upon a pretense of great love she bare me, which one afterward made me
acquainted withal: which when I heard, being enjoined to place my affections
on another, searing some mischance might arise by her love, and finding out
with what device they had frustrated me of your company, I departed without
knowledge of any from thence: and at last after long travel, arrived in
Notalia, where lying down to rest my self being weary, it happened the Lady
Angelica (the most fairest Lady living) to pass by* whom after I had seen, I
perf^ctly knew to be the Lady that appeared to me in the vision, having after
such good success, that I was entertained by Maximus the King, at the golden
Tower, and there grew into great acquaintance with Marcellus. I had not long
remained there, but the King of Libia (as I suppose, persuaded thereto by
Venolas means) wrote a letter unto Maximus that he would for his sake either
send me to him, or else be revenged on me by my death: alleging that I had
dishonored his daughter* which acculation was most false and untrue. Hereupon
the King without hearing what I could say in mine own defense, immediately
cast me into a den of fearce Lions, who refused to hurt me, where I remained
many days, having no other food but such as was cast to them: from whence
afterward I escaped by the Keepers means, whom I compelled to send for
Marcellus, who rid me out of the Tower, and sent me to an ancient friend of
his named Iabin, a Priest of Saint Anstines Chapel, promising to come to me
the next day, but was disappainted thereof by such means as is not yet come to
my knowledge. Upon a day I went abroad from the Chapel, and by misfortune was
espied by some of the Kings Knights, who certified him, (as I think that I was
alive: whereupon he again most unjustly sought my life,) and sent out
thousands in my search: from whose hands I escaped, intending to find my
Parents, and so traveled hitherwards. This (quoth he) is the brief and true
rehearsal of my travels and bringing up, so far as I know: having nothing
whereby to be otherwise known, but a Jewel which my nurse gave me great charge
to keep, whose mind I have fulfilled, With that, he pulled out of his bosom
the Jewel, which he continually wore about his neck, which Laurana h^uing
diligently viewed, perfectly knew to be the same she had left with Parismenos,
in the Island of Rocks, who^ she assuredly (both by that and many other
probabilities) knew to be her son, that suddenly before them all, she
ca^ght him in her arms and cried. Oh my son Parismenos, thou art my son:
many times kissing and embracing him. Her strange behavior drove them all in
admiration. When suddenly the place where they were began to wax dark,
that they could scarce see one another, and they hard a voice, which they
knew not from whence it should come, which said. Parismus welcome thy son
Parismenos, long time absent from thee: thou need not doubt of it, for none
is so like thee in heroical qualities: which said, the darkness presently
vanished.

By this they all assuredly knew that the Knight of Fame was son to Parismus
and Laurana, who likewise assured himself that he had ^ound his Parents: that
presently he kneeled down, whom Parismus, the King, the Queen, and Laurana,
most lovingly all at once encompassed with their kind ^^bracings, rejoicing
most exceedingly for joy that he was ^ound: being unable by words, welcomes,
embracings, or otherwise, to express their gladness* Parismus rejoicing that
he had so valiant and virtuous a son, the king and Queen glad that in their
old age they saw so virtuous an impe sprung ^oorth of their issue to succeed
in the kingdom. And Laurana with tears of joy expressing her content, in that
she had found her son whom she thought had been destroyed long ago: that no
heart is able to express the joy that possessed their hearts. Pollipus and
Violetta they likewise embraced him, being as glad as any of the rest, of his
safety. This news was soon spread through the whole Court, and from thence,
^lying ^ame soon brought the knowledge thereof to the Citizens, who of their
own accord, rung their bells, made bonfiers and tri^mphs, through the whole
city* where on all sides, was such exceeding reioycings, as is impossible to
be expressed*

Many days afterward, the Knight of Fame who now shall ass^me his right and
proper name Parismenos, continued in the Bohemian Court, honorably
entertained, and highly esteemed of the Bohemian states: who grew into
exceeding love toward him, and was kindly beloved of the King and Queen, but
especially of his parents, who thought themselves most happy and blessed to
have such a son: whose ^ame was spread through most places of all the World,
and that every man's ears were filled with the report of his most hono^rable
deeds.

Now that Parismenos had thus happily attained the knowledge of his parents,
the want whereof had long time filled his mind with care, no other thought but
of Angelicas love could take place in his heart, which (though his cause of
joy otherwise was sufficient) filled his senses with sadness, and quite
extinguished those delights, that they seemed to his troubled mind, rather
tedious the^ comfortable: adding no ease to his care, which were augmented to
an exceeding height, by reason of Maximus cruelty, which he saw was so much
aggrauated against him, that he knew it a thing impossible for him to attain
the least favor at his hands: who likewise kept Angelica guarded so strongly*
and so narrowly pried into all her actions, that it was impossible any way,
either to come to her speech, or to send to her: that with diversity of the
cogitations, his heart was tormented* his countenance darkened, and he spent
his time most commonly in sadness: being seldom drawn to any mirth, which
was generally noted of all men: but especially of Laurana, who could never be
quiet but only ^n his company.

And on a day missing him, she rested not until she had found him out, being
gotten into the most sollitary place in the garden* leaning him self upon his
el^ow: who espying her, raised himself from the ground, blushing at her
presence, to whom she said.

Why how now Parismenos, what sadness is that which possesses your mind, that
makes you estrange your self from company, to delight in sollitarinesse? is
there none so highly in your favor, that they may know the truth thereof? or
is your cause of care such, as none can remedi^? or not counsel you for your
ease? I am sure there are many would not refuse to use their endeavors to
pleasure you, especially my self would both willingly do my best to comfort
you, and know the cause, if it be not too secret.

Par^smeno^ with humble reverence made her this answer: I beseech you do not
think me so undutiful: nor my cause of care so secret, that I would conceal
the same from you: but were it of much more importance. I would willingly
reveal it to satisfy your mind: which I have omitted, as unwilling to
trouble you therewith, and for no other respect.

Then I pray (quoth she) let me know, is it not love? yes most dear mother
(quoth he) it is love, and to that beautiful Lady Angelica, who bears me the
like affection: but so far am I from enjoying her love, as that i^ attainteth
my heart with care to think thereof, which is the cause of my sadness: which
will increase rather then diminish, if I do not shortly travel thither, being
now assured of all other doubts, and having finished my travel in search to
find you out. Therefore, I most humbly beseech you to procure my Lord and
fathers consent to my speedy departure, for without the fruition of her
heavenly sight, my li^e will be but wearisome. Laurana hearing his speeches,
perceived indeed, that his affection was great, and therefore not to be
removed, and well knowing by her own former experience, that love was
incurable, she was the more ready to pity his passions, that she promised to
further him in what she could, being now assured of the cause of his sadness.

CHAP. XXII. How Parismenos after the knowledge of his parents, departed
toward Natolia* How he met with Marcellus: and what afterward befell to him.
WIthin f^we days after, Parismenos returned again toward Natolia but with
much sorrow in the Bohemian court for his departure) spending much time in
travel, until he arrived at S. Austins Chapel* having gotten him other
armor, because he would not be known: and knocking at the Chapel door,
presently old Iabin came out, to whom he discovered himself: who knowing him,
rejoiced exceedingly, at his presence and safety, desiring him ^o come in, for
that he had news of importance to tell him.

Parismenos coming to him for no other intent, but to hear news from
Angelica, willingly went in with him. And ^abin began as follows. Most noble
knight I will declare unto you all that I have ^arned of ^he estate o^
Marcellus, so ^^are as I can. After that you were departed from hence, the
Natolian* having con^inued their deligent search some three day^s, in the end
returned to the Court, fr^s^rated of their desire: whereby Maximus gave no
credence to that report, ^^t soon forgot the same, remaining in great quiet.

Marcel^es by this time had rec^uered his health, lett^^ pass^ no time, came
hither, thinking to have sonn^ you ^eere, but hearing by ^y report of your
departure, ^ee seemed to be quite ou^rcome with gr^^fe, and declared unto me
all that had happened to you in the Golden Tower, which you had declared unto
me before: and with^ll manifested what had happened unto him and Angelica, and
how he was so grievously wounded: then ^a^in declared the same, (...) as
Marcellus had told him, in the very same manner as is before ^^^lared, when
he determined to have conveyed Angelica to S. Ausiens Chapel, the day his
Father was on hunting. And (quoth he) Marcelius having told me this, withal
showed me with what sorrow Angelica endured your absence.

Parismenos having heard his words, which yielded him full assurance of
Marcellus ^riendship, and Angelicas constant love, was therewith exceedingly
comforted, rehearsing to him, how fortunately he had found his Parents.

Iabin then began to use him with more reverence, and more fervently to affect
his company and good, that at Parismenos request, he went toward the Golden
Tower, to see if he could by any means speak with Marcellus, which he
willingly at his reques^ did, and brought news back, that Maximus was
departed with the Queen, Marcellus and Angelica toward the Gittie of Ephesus:
which he learned of such as were gard^ants at the Golden Tower.

Parssmenos hearing that, immediate^y departed thitherwards, and entering the
City, rode presently unto the Court, where ^ee met a Knight, whom he
desired of courtesy to c^rtifie Marcellus that there was a Knight who would
speak with him: which at his request, he presently went and performed: and
finding Marcellus in the kings great hall, he told him there was a s^range
knight at the Court gat^ that was desirous to speak with him.

Marcellus maruelling who it should be, immediately went out unto him, being a
Knight of exceeding virtue, that he would not refuse any courtes^e, and though
he were son unto a mighty King, yet he disdained not to fulfi^l his
request, though he neither knew him, nor the cause of his coming.

Parismenos beholding him, immediately allighted from his steed, and with a
kind behavior said; Most noble and courteous Prince, I desire to have some
few words in private conference with you, from the knight of Fame. Marcellus
hearing him name the knight of Fame, desired him to say on: for there were none
then present, but such as he trusted.

My Lord (quoth Parismenos) because I know not whether I may discover my
self or no with safety, I am the knight of Fame, and now altered in name, but
not in good will to you. Marcellius hearing his words, had much adoo to
refrain from embracing him: but yet for that he would not have any note the
same, he abstained: but said; Most noble knight, nothing could have brought
that joy to my heart, your presence does, being a long ^ime severed from you
by Fortunes unconstant mutabilitie, who alters the estate of things,
according to her variable disposition: trusting you have not misdoubted of my
good will, though I came not to S. Austins Chapel according to my promise:
which I was about to perform, but that my intent was crossed. But seeing you are
thus happily returned, and have as I hope, attained the knowledge of your
parents, in whose search old Iabine told me you were departed, I desire you
repose that assured confidence in my trustiness, that I will labor to procure
your content every way to my uttermost power: your safety and return, will
bring no little joy to my Sister Angelica, which is impossible to give her
knowledge of: for my father has now guarded her more stricktly then ever
before: neither is she here in this Court as the common report goes, but
still remains in the Golden Tower, which I will declare to you hereafter. In
the mean time, because you shall not be descride, I will send my Esquyre with
you unto an ancient Ladies house of good estimation, where you shall be
kindly entertained for my sake, whether I will repair unto you: where you
shall, i^ so please you stay, until I can work some means how to bring you,
that you may speak with my Sister Angelica.

Parismenos hearing his courteous speeches, yielded him most hearty thanks:
and so for that Marcellus was fearful of his Fathers suspicion, without any
more speeches, he sent Parismenos with the Squyre unto the Ladies house, whose
name was Madame Panora: who taking Parismenos by the hand, conducted him in,
and used him most kindly.

After dinner was past, Marcellus came thither to him, thanking Pauora for
entertaining his friend: then he most lovingly embraced Parismenos (who by
reason of his long travel, and exceeding cares, was so much altered, that had
Marcellus met him in the streets, without any former knowledge that it was
he, he would hardy have known him) who with the like behavior greeted him
again: declaring to him his whole trauelles in search of his Parents.
Marcellus hearing that he was Son unto the most noble Princes Parismus and
Laurana, heirs of the two famous Kingdoms of Thessasie and Bohemia, said.
Most noble Knight, how miserable ^^uld Natolia have been esteemed, if it had
been the destruction o^ ^o honorable blood, and what cruelty might have been
imputed to my Father, to have given you the sentence of your death? and how
unfortunate had our blood been, in missing to be affianced to so honorable and
Kingly houses? but notwithstanding all this, my Father too much ouerburdened
with conceit, regards no such honor, but rather dishonors his house and
stock with his fearful suspect, who since your departure from the Maiden
Tower, grew into such furious conceit of Angelica, that every day he was in a
manner her keeper, and in the night he caused her to lodge in his own chamber,
the doors whereof he would socke with his own hands, and keep the keys,
which was procured by the vain surmise of a dream, wherein he dreampt that
Angelica should be stolen from him: this miserable life continued not many
days (which well I may term most miserable, being entangled with so many
cares as I know possess his heart) till at the last he wrought this devise,
thinking under that to ease his cares, and prevent all those mischiefs which
he feared: he gave out speeches many days before he came to the Golden
Tower, that he would depart to this City: and withal, it was reported in
every man's voice, that Angelica should no more be kept in that Tower, but that
she should likewise depart with him, which all the Nobles and Lords of the
land were glad of: the knights and Ladies her attendants rejoiced thereat, and
the Fame (...) was soon spread through the hearing of bordering Nations and
from thence to far countries, my self amongst the rest was exceedingly glad,
especially Angelica most of all rejoiced thereat. Now my Father seeing the joy
that was made thereat, was the more troubled in his senses, that coming to a
Damozell of mean birth, yet of much beauty, who in contenance much resembled
Angelica, he won her by (many protestations of great preferrement, and with
many threats of geat se^er^tie, i^ she would not condescend to follow his
co^nsell) to do whatsoever he commanded her: her did he cause to come into
his own chamber, and secretly (without the priuity of any but the Queen) to
attire herself in Angelicas richest ornaments, appoynting certain Damozells
to attend her, that knew not Angelica: or at least knew her not from Angelica.

As for Angelica, the very same day, when he meant to depart, he^ committed her
to the custody of four Eunuchs: who vowed (...) let any come either to the
sight of her, or speech of her, without be brou^^ my Fathers letter to that
effect, signed with his own hand and s^gnet, remoouing all her former
gardiants, and appointing new that knew nothing, but that Angelica was
departed with the King, from whose knowledge likewise he had given the
Eunuchs especial charge, to keep her being there.

All the Ladies likewise that attended her, came away with him, knowing no
other but that Angelica was in his company, leaving no other to attend her,
but one Damzell, named Anna, which she obtained of my Father, with many instant
entreaties. And having effected every thing according to his fancy, he
departed hitherw^rds: the Damezell so artificially behauing her self, that
neither my self nor any other perceived but that it was Angelica indeed. And
being arrived in this place, he committed this supposed Angelica to such
strickt custody, as before he used, committing her to be kep^ by those
Damozells that indeed thought it had been Angelica, whom he bound by many
promises, not to suffer any to come to her speech. But I longing to have some
conference with my Sister, whose heart I knew was oppressed with many cares
for your absence, sought means to come to her speech, which I was long
without obtaining: but at last by means of one of the Damozells, whom with
many entreaties, I had won, I came to her, and taking her by the hand, I
began to use many speeches to comfort her: and withal, to enter into such
conference, as would have bewrayed all the secrets that ever had passed betwixt
me, Angelica, and your self: but the Damozel bearing a ver^uous mind, and
unwilling (as she afterward told me) to betray my secrets to her priuitie
(which could not proceed but from a marvelous good disposition) suddenly
brake off my speeches, saying.

My Lord, I beseech you be advised to whom you speak, unless you will commit
your secrets to one that you would not otherwise trust, neither will I presume
(being unworthy thereof) to participate your coun^els: for I am not Angelica,
but your poor hamd-maide Dulcia. At which words I was half astonished, and
viewing her indeed, perfectly knew her: which without she had betrayed her
self, I should never have done: withal* my fancy began inwardly to commend
her courtesy, or rather virtue, that refused (though she condiscended to my
fathers will) to betray me, knowing the whole depth of my secrets: and
woondring how mine eyes were blinded, that could before discrie her, I
requested her to tell me the occasion why she supplied Angelicas room, the
truth whereof she declared unto me, in manner as I have now told you:
withal, requesting me upon her knees, not to reveal that which she had
of duty, good will and affection told me: which I promised I would, and
mean faithfully to concelae from all but your self. Now there rests nothing
but how to work means that you may come to Angelica.

Parismenos hearing how stricktly his Lady was guarded, was suddenly stricken
with silent sadness, to think of the impossibilities that hindered his
content, and his mind was so oppressed with care, that he forgot how to study
for his own avail.

Marcellus seeing him fallen into that heau^e dumpe, revived him from the same
with this comfortable speech: My dear friend abandon this habit of care, and
revive your drouping heart with hopeful comfort, for my self will work a
means how you shall have the custody of Angelica, which I will effect very
speedily, if you will stay here but while I can bring the same about.
Parismenos being comforted with his courteous promise, gave him thanks in these
speeches.

Most noble Knight, how may I express sufficient thanks to you, for becoming
so kind and faithful a friend to me unworthy? or which way may I recompense
the least of your good deeds* that have in all abundance tasted of your
honorable bouatie? for which I render you thanks, as all the recompense I am
able to make: vowing if ever you need my help in any thing, never to desist
to hazard my life for your sake. And since you have of your own virtuous
disposition voluntarily (neither drawn by entreaty nor hope of recompense)
promised me your assistance, which only may be the mean to work my
everlasting felicity, I beseech you go forwards therein, that I may thereby
be much more indebted, as well for that, as for infinite other your Princely
courtesies: which though they pass unrewarded, yet they shall never rest
vngr^tified in my du^ifull devotions, which by good right are eternally bound
to requite your good will.

Worthy friend (quoth Marcellus) leave off so to use such thanks to me, that
request nothing at your hands but love and friendeship, which am unable to
merit any such recompense as you kindly yield: but I pray be you merry yet in
my absence, with this kind old Lady, whilst I put my purpose in practice,
which so soon as I have brought to perfection, I will return, and not before:
till when, I take my leave, committing you to your own hearts desire, which I
wish. Which words being ended, with many courteous farewels he depar^ed the
chamber: and coming to Panora, (who before had been his Nurse, and loved him
most dearly) whom he requested in most earnest sort, to use his friend as
kindly as she would use himself, who promised so to do: and likewise performed
it in ever using Parismen^s so kindly, that he could not choose but greatly to
ettoll and commend her courtesy.

Now let my muse return to speak somewhat of Angelica, who after she saw
that she was frustrated of her desire, which was to depart with the King,
according as himself had given out speeches, and not to be any longer
inthralled as she had of long time before been, and now perceiving that her
father had both deceived her in that, taken away all her damzels, changed her
guard, and appointed her to be guarded by such ^ealous s^aues, as would never
scarce day nor night suffer her to be out of their sight, thought her self not
only in as bad case as before, but rather in a thousand times wor^e, being
deprived of many pleasures which she enjoyed: but never esteemed of them, until
now she was restrained, missing the comfortable presence and sweet conference
she was wont to enjoy with Marc^llus, and especially* fearing never to see the
Knight of Fame again, she wholly gave her mind to sorrow, spending all her
time commonly in tears and bewailing her sad estate that had not Anna in some
measure comforted her, she would have overwhelmed her tender heart with those
cares, and have shortened the date of her precious life, thinking every hour a
day, and every day a year, till she were released from that bondage: in which
careful estate she continually remained.

CHAP. XXIII. How the Knight of Fame carried Angelica from the golden Tower, to
labines Chapel.
AS soon as Maximus was come to the Court, he presently got himself to his
chamber, and there began to study how to compass that which he had
undertaken to effect: at last he bethought himself, that if he could devise
any means to get his fathers Signet, he would write a letter unto the keepers
of the Maiden Tower, in the behalf of Parismenos, that they should admit him
as one of the Gardiants which presently he contrived in this sort.

THis trusty knight, on whose fidelity I repose my confidence, I have chosen
and appointed to be one of your fellows, and to that effect I have sent him to
you with this letter, signed by my self: whom I require you to admit without
any denial, and keep this as your warrant to do the same.

Maximus.

When Marcellus had wrote this letter, and immitated therein so near as he
could his fathers hand, which he knew they were not greatly acquainted
withal, he wrought such means that he gate Maximus s^gnet and sealed the
same: which when he had signed the next morning he went to Parismenos and told
him what* he had done: who liked thereof very well, and (quoth he) if I may
once be admitted amongst them, let me alone with the Eunuchs to come to
Angelica, neither will I be denied, since I have this good means: that
presently he armed himself, for that he would not v^e any, not the least which
oftentimes brings things well begun to an untoward end: and taking his
leave of Marcellus and the Lady ^anora, with abundance of hearty thanks, he
departed with a merry heart toward the maiden Tower, hoping now to enjoy the
sweet sight of his beloved, which he never beheld but twice in all the time he
had sought her love. Marcellus he departed back again to the court very
sad, for the absence of Parismenos and Angelica, being likewise much grieved,
that Maximus hi^ father should withhold any of his secrets from him, which did
both disgrace him to such as were strangers, and especially to those Ladies
that were Dulcias attenda^ts, which though he knew well ^^ough, yet that took
away no part of his conceit of unkindness: but most of all he was troubled
with grie^e to b^ restrained from Dulcias company, on whom his thoughts had
continually run, ever since he had bin last with her, for her bew^ie excelled
all the Ladies of the court (Angelica excepted) and of her virtue he had good
conceit, by that which he had found in her good dispositions, when she refused
to thrust her self into the knowledge of his secrets, but rather committed all
that the King had commanded her to his secrecy, which if Maximus should know
of, would be as much as her life were worth. These cogitations so much altered
his countenance, that whereas before he was of a pleasant disposition, ^e now
began to give his mind wholely to melancholy sadness, often shunning the
company of those he was wont to de^ight in, which Maximus noted, especially the
Queen both marvelled and was grieved thereat, and finding him out when he was
in that heavy vain, she earnestly demanded his cause of sadness, to whom he
made this a^nswere. My father, I know not upon what occasion accounte^h me I
think, rather as one that would betray him, then as his son, that he
restrains me Angelicas presence, and keeps his counsels from me: to intrude
my self into his counsels, I will not presume: only my desire is* that I may
but be admitted to the sight of my sister Angelica.

Marcellus (quoth the Queen) I pray thee be contented for a time, for thou
see thy fathers mind, which will impart his secrets to none, who if he
should know that your sadness were for that cause, would be the more
fearful to imparte t^em to you, which can no way pleasure you, but rather
fill your mind with greater ^ares, which now is more happy then it would be
then: for Angelica so long as sh^e is ^n health, what need you be so careful
for her: then good Marcellus rest your self contented, and desire not that
which will rather add more trouble to your head. The Queen having ended these
speeches, departed, and lest Marcellus where sh^e found him.

As Soon as the Queen was gone, h^e ^ega^ again to ponder these things, not
knowing why his head sh^ld be thus troubled: for he kn^w all that he desired,
and yet his mind was troubled therewith, that at last, with more advised
consideration, he weighed every conceit of his thoughts, and found that
neither his Fathers unkindness, Angelica^s absence, nor his fear of disgrace,
was the^ that troubled him, but only a good conceyt of Dulcias kindness,
which caused him to enter into a view of her perfections, which his fancy
began so much to commend her, that he thought her worthy to be beloved: and
withal, thought why he might not love her, which very thoghts ^rew to such
insight into his own fancies, that he perceived that love had already taken
possession in his heart: then he began to consider what displeasure if might
procure him, if he should set his fancy on one so fa^re his inferior, and not
rather seek the love of some Kings daughter, that might add honor to his
title, and not diminish the same: which thought was no sooner begun, but it
ended, being dashed by an other conceyt, that Dulcia was as beautiful as any,
as virtuous as any, as court^^us as any: and therefore as worthy to be beloved
as any: that i^ he should marry with his equal, she might rather marr^e him
for his dignity, and of a haught^e mind to keep her own high dignity
still, then for any true love: and if she were his equal, he should rather be
subi^ct to her will, then she any way obedient to him: that Dulcia would be a
loving, kind, and ^uetifull wife, that she would honor him* rather then
desire to be his equal, and that she would refuse no perrill, danger* nor
hazard^ for his sake: that having spent some time in these cogitations, he
resolved to love Dulcia whatsoever ensued thereon: though he incurred his
Parents displeasure, or any other hazard of his honor whatsoever: and with
resolution, he went immediately unto the place where she was guarded in steed
of Angelica* and by the Damzells means, who before had done him the like
favor, he came to her chamber, where he found Dulcia all alone very sad, to
whom he said* How now Angelica, what are you sad? can I neu^r come, but that
I must always find you in this melancholy dispo^^^ion? what* are you sorry to
be thus pend from a husband?

My Lord (quoth Dulcia) though I am otherwise sad, it does me good to see
you merr^e. You are deceived Dulcia, I am not merry. My Lord (quoth she) if
I should give credit to your words, they show that you are merry, that call
me Angelica, yet know the con^rarie. Oh Dulcia (quoth he) neither does words
nor countenance always bewray the inward thoughts: for this which you take to
be mirth in me, is but a forced habit, which I have taken upon me even
now: but knew you the thought^ of my heart, you would say I were sad.

My Lord (quoth she) I beseech you pardon my boldness, which I presumed,
seeing your pleasant dispos^tion, wherein if I was deceived, I hope you will
not be offended with: for indeed oftentimes the heart meditates of many things
the mind cannot utter. So does mine Dulcia (quoth he) for I wish thee more
good, then I am able ^e utter: and the cause that my heart is sad, is because
I am not able to do ^hee so much good, as my heart does wish and cannot utter.
I most humbly thank you (quoth Dulcia) acknowledging my self far unworthy
such fa^our* and unable to deserve such good, which makes me think you still
continue in that forced habit, which makes you utter those speeches. Indeed
well replied Dulcia (quoth he) but as I suddenly took that habit upon me, it
was gone again before I had uttered the words: therefore you may be assured
now, that my words proceed from a true heart, and not from a forced habit. My
Lord (quoth she again) where there is such often change of disposition, there
can be no constant resolution. Yes (quoth he) that which is of purpose taken
to show mirth* is forced: but the natural disposition still continues firm.
In deed in ^ewe (quoth she) but not in all. Then (quoth he) think me one of
those ^ewe. My Lord (quoth she) I beseech you pardon me if I do not: for it is
given to all by nature, to be more conf^dent then provident. And I answer, I
have received more favor at your hands, in suffering me to be thus familiar
with you, then I am worthy, or ever have deserved: therefore I crave pardon,
hoping that you will bear wish my rudeness.

Dulcia (quoth he) do not ask pardon when you have not misdone, but believe
my words, without any question to proceed from the deapth of my true heart,
which entendeth and wishes you no less good then I have vt^ered: for I have
found such virtue in you, that I am inthralled to that virtue, and desire to be
partaker and possess thy beauty, which has made me your affectionate
friend, and entreat your love, then that which I desire nothing more. My Lord
(replied Dulcia,) my love and dueti^ is such, that I will not refuse any
command you shall impose upon me.

Dulcia (quoth he) it is not such love as is commanded by duty, nor such
friendship as rises from fear, but such kind love as proceeds (betwixt
faithful friends) from the yielding consent of a true heart, and such a love
as has a further respect then that common du^y: for if you knew with what
feruencie I desired your sweet consent to this love, you would pity my
torments.

My Lord (replied she) I beseech your Honor do not seek to en* thrall me in
loves bands, that am free, and am assured your fancy cannot like of one far
unworthy that high favor you speak of, but suffer me rather to continue in
my peaceful estate, that esteem my self far from ever enjoying such
happiness, as to be bel^ued of my superior, being already so far bound
unto you in all humbleness, that you shall not command me any thing that
agrees with modesty, but I will perform the same. Speak you from your heart
(quoth Marcellus?) I do my Lord (quoth she.) Then (sai^ he) I comm^und you to
love me: and if that be too harsh a word, I entreat and desire you, yee^^ me
love for that true love I bear you, being such as is grounded upon virtue, and
without spot or blemish of dishonours stain, entending nothing that may
disagree with your modesty, but to make you my equal, my companion, and my
dearly espoused wife: therefore do but yield to love me, and thou shall
thereby expel many cares from my heart, which otherwise will increase to my
everlasting torment.

Oh my Lord (quoth Dulcia) I beseech you account me one that will ind^uour in
all duty to deserve that honor you entend me, which I s^e so many
impossibilities to hinder, that it quite discourag^th me^ from the least hope
of that felicity. So you will love me, I care not for impossibilities, neither
shall any misery alter my constant resolution* With that he embraced her in
his arms, who gave a silent consent intermingled with tears, proceeding from
her tender heart: with whom Marcellus stayed some time, spending the time in
many friendly conferences, that Dulcia was constrained by his entreaties, and
her own yielding heart, to give her consent: both their intents being grounded
upon no other purpose, but that which is virtuous and chaste.

Par^smenos being departed from Marcellus, soon arrived at the Maiden Tower,
where he alighted, and coming to the gardiants thet kept the gate, he
saluted them with a courteous behavior, and told them, that he was sent by
Maximus their King, to be one of the gardiants, whom at the first they denied
him: then he delivered his Letter, which they having read, accepted him for one
of their fellows, without any doubt or mistrust.

When he had obtained his desire in this, with such prosperous success, he
began to comfort himself with hope of turther good fortune, continuing all
that night amongst the r^st of the gardiants, and not once offering any
behavior which might breed suspicion: but behaved himself most carefully,
both in all his words and deeds, as he had a good reason: for that they were
very ^ircumspect, and almost by reason of the strickt charge the King had given
them, ready to suspect each other. All the next day continued he in that
sort, without any meeting of the Eunuchs: but on the third day he met two
of them tdgether in a place most convenient, and saluted them most kindly, who
maruelling what he should be, for that he was a stranger, began prosently to
be jealous of him: but he perceiving the same, told them, that he had a secret
message unto them from the king: and withal, a letter under his hand and
signet to the gardiants, which he showed them. But to you (quoth he) the King
has sent me with this message, that you shall admit me at all times to
Angelicas presence, whom you have the custody off, though unknown to any but
your selves: which he told me likewise, he gave you a special charge to
conceal from the rest of the gardiants, and has upon the trust he has
reposed in me, given me authority with you to have her custody. The
Eunuchs having heard his message, and withal, the kings privy seal to the
Letter, written in his behalf, could not choose but give credence so the same,
supposing that none was privy to Angelicas being there but the king, that
they made no doubt but that he was sent by him: but would not trust him,
vnt^il they had consulted with the rest of their fellows: to whom they delared
the truth of all he had told them, who in general admitted him to their
society.

Parismenos thought himself most happy to have ^attained this felicity,
where likewise he behaved himself most carefully, telling them that he had a
message of secrecy to declare to her from the King, which they made no doubt
of, nor never denied. When he spied his fittest opportunity, which was, when
Angelica was walking alone in a private garden, being all the liberty she
had, and the Eunuchs were gone to disport themselves, and had put him alone in
trust with the key that conducted to her chamber, he unlocked the door, and
shutting the same again, he came to her chamber, where he durst not be so
bold as enter, before he had knocked. Anna being alone in the chamber, hearing
one knock, came to the door: and espying Parismenos in Armor, with his* sword
girt to his side (which he never left off, being in every point armed but his
head) marvelled what he should be: to whom he said. Fair Damozel, marvel not to
see me in Armor, which shall never offend you, but still be employed in your
defense. I have knocked, presuming no further without license: the cause of my
coming is, to deliver a message unto the Lady Angelica from Marcellus. All
this time, Anna had diligently beheld him: persuading her self, she had seen
him before, that she made him this answer. Sir knight, if you come from
Marcellus you shall be welcome to my Lady: therefore I pray you come in, and I
will conduct you to the place where she is.

Then she brought him down a pair of stayres, into the garden where Angelica
was: who sat at the farther end thereof, in a most heavy and discomfortable
sort, seeming to be quite given over to sorrow, leaning her elbowe upon her
knees, and her head upon her hand, with her back toward them, and hearing
them coming behind her, with a sudden start raised her self from her seat,
wherewith her heart panted within her: and Parismenos humbling himself upon
his knee, said. ^use not divine Lady, to behold the map of sorrow, created to
e^^^^e everlasting misery: the most worthy knight Marcellus has sen^^e
hither, whose favor has caused me to be thus bold, who heartily saluteth
himself to you by me. Angelica all this while diligently beh^^d him, often
changing her countenance, being procured by the diversity of thoughts: for she
supposed it should be the Knight of Fam^, for that ^ee came from Marcellus: but
he was so mightily altered, that she was in doubt thereof.

As Soon as he had ended those few words, she said: Are you not the knight of
Fame? I am the same most dear Lady (quoth he) with that her heart le^pt for
joy, and she took him most lovingly by the hand, desiring him to arise,
saying: I am glad to see you again, which I feared I should never have done.
Then presently procured by joy for his sight, and grief to think of her own
bondage, a s^ood of Crystal tears issued from her eyes: which attainted his
heart with extreme grief, that he stood like a man senseless, and confounded
in his thoughts: and such passions oppressed her heart, that she was scarce able
to uphold her self from falling, which caused the water with violence drawn
from his manly heart, stand in his eyes, which never before by no accident were
assent: and seeing her in that woeful estate, could not choose but fold his
arm with a fearful touch about her slender waste to uphold her, whilst Anna
ran for some comfortable water to revive her withal: but coming to her self
again, she leant her head in his bosom, who put his hand betwixt her precious
temples, to keep it from touching his cold and hard Armor, uttering these
speeches. Oh how unfortunate am I, that by my disquiet have procured you this
disquiet, but before he* could say more, she answered: But were you hence, my
grief would be far greater. It is not your presence has done this, but my
own hearts cares that are still allotted to be my greatest comfort: but think
your self most welcome to me, and your presence more delightful then any
others whatsoever. Most virtuous Lady (quoth he) your kindness is so far
beyond my desert, that I know my self altogether unable to render sufficient
thanks for, which I have been aften made acquainted withal, by the worthy
Marcellus, and now find kindly ratified by your own heavenly voice, which
yield me that undeserved favor as shall bind me in all dutiful bonds of
service to your command. If (quoth she) I should do otherwise then love you,
you might account me discourteous: or if I should deny my words past to
Marcellus (who loves you so well, that he will I know conceal nothing from you)
you might account me untrue: but ^eeing you have well deserved the one* and
are by his means made privy to the other, I cannot now stand upon new terms
of denial, but yield my self in all honorable sort into your custody. Most
sweet Lady (quoth he) if I proone not thankful, heaven ^rant my good deeds may
be reward^d with ill: if I remain not everlastingly true, let comfort hate my
soul, the earth denounce my body, and terror afflict my conscience: if ever I
refuse peril, hazard of life, torment, or other misery for your sake, let al
peril, hazard of life, torment and misery, be my chiefest comfort: if my love
continue not constant, my faith firm, and my thoughts clear of disloyalty,
let those I love hate me: let all men abhor me* and every creature seek my
destruction. Gentle Knight (quoth she) your words I do constantly believe:
therefore be you assured likewise of my resolution, which is to rest my self
wholely upon your virtues: with that they parted so pure a maiden kiss betwixt
them, being the first that ever she had given or he received, that both their
hearts seemed to enterchange the others place, and to part from their loving
breast with a soft breathing sigh, more sweet then if all the united perfumes
in the world had been met betwixt their ros^ate lips. By this time Anna was
returned, having spent her labor in vain, for that Angelica was safe. Then
Parismenos taking her by the arm, led her up into her lodging, which when he
had done, Angelica desired him to declare by what means he had attained that
liberty to come to her. And he said, I am amongst the rest, one of your
keepers: for behold I have the key that alone co^ducteth to your lodging: the
Eunuchs have put me in trust withal, who are now gone about some recreation
they have in hand: then he declared unto her the truth of all, and of Maximus
policy, and how he had caused Dulcia so supply her room at the Court, who
was of every degree taken for her self. Angelica hearing his report, forced a
smile from her careful heart, which she had not done many a day before.
Desiring him likewise to declare his travels after he had escaped out of the
Lions den, which he did in every respect.

When Angelica heard that he was son to Parismus and Laurana, whose Fame
resounded in every place, and that he was sprung of two such kingly houses, her
heart was filled with exceeding joy: which she expressed by giving him many kind
welcomes: uttering these speeches. My dear knight (quoth she) I rejoice to
hear that you have found your princely parents. But yet I would you had kept
the same from my knowledge as yet, because that you might have had trial of my
good will in your unknown estate, in which you were as dear to me, as you
shall be if you were the highest Monarch of the world. But how happy should I
be, if I might in quiet enjoy your presence, which I know not how you will
effect. Dear Lady (quoth he) there rests nothing but your consent: which if
you vouchsafe to grant, then I do not doubt but soon to bring you out of this
place without any hazard of your person Oh sweet Parismenos, the thraldom I
have long endured, makes me desirous of liberty, that am almost tired with
conceit of my fathers credulity, too much addicted to vain report: especially
relying upon your virtuous disposition, and desirous to be ruled and governed
by your wisdom, whom I have chosen for my only delight: I am most willing to
do whatsoever you shall counsel me too, resting in assured confidence, that
you will no way impair my honor, which I respect more then my life: but rest
at my disposition in seeking any other assurance then my promise. I beseech you
(quoth he) let no e^il conceit of me take place in your heart, but be assured,
that so long as I breath, I will not err from your command, in the least
undutiful respect, but rest so fully and wholely obedient to your behests,
that soo^er then I will do or think a thought that shall disagree to your
desire, this breath shall leave my breast, and my vitill spirits give up their
latest gasp. After these speeches ended, and Angelicas mind fully satisfied,
they spent some time in familiar conference, intermingled with many kind
behauiours, to the further conformation of both their loves: till at last,
Paerismenos enforced, in regard of their safeties, departed to his charge,
whither he was come before they were returned: and at their return finding him
there, they made no doubt of him* but took the charge upon them again,
entering into Angelicas chamber, to provide her such things as were necessary*
who because they should not find any alteration, put on her former manner of
sadness, which before proceeded from the depth of care, but now she assumed to
avoid suspicion. Parismenos he went down amongst the rest of the knights that
kept the Castle, keeping company sometimes with them, and sometimes with the
Eunuchs, that neither of them knew of his familiarity with the ^ther, but
both accepted him as one of their company, that he had the garding of the
entrance into the Castle, and also the secret keeping of Angelica, with the
Eunuchs: neither of them both suspecting his intent.

Thus continued he amongst them some three days, in which time he came often
to Angelica, and had conference with her: at last his turn came, that he must
both watch with one of the Eunuchs, and also at the Castle entrance, where
likewise, never but two kept the watch, which fell out according to Pa^ismenos
desire: whose heart was much troubled to effect this business, devising how he
should be rid of his two fellows, the Eunuch and the other, that kept the
eu^rance, being unwilling to be esteemed a murderer, his hands being yet never
guilty of blood: at last his ^sire to get Angelica from th^nce, overcame
that care, and he resolved rather to be their executioner, then be
disappointed of his intent: when the time that he should take his place to
watch, was come, and he and the Eunuch alone, the rest being gone to their
lo^ging, Parismenos being in talk with the Eunuch, suddenly muffled him in
his gown, so close, that none could hear him cry, and thrust his sword
quyte through him, which he did with such expedition, that his fellows never
heard their noise, and taking the keye from him, took him under his arm, and
floong* him into a dark corner of the Tower. When he had done this, he hasted
to his other place of charge: where when he came, he found his fellow
watch*man staying for him, but fast a sl^epe, with the keys of the Castle gate
lying by him: whom Parismenos caught in his arms, and before he could recover
his senses, threw him from the battlements into the lake, where he was drowned:
which done, he went back to Angelicas Chamber, and opening the door, entered
in, and found Angelica in her bed fast asleep, whom was in mind at the first
to have awaked her, but beholding her in so sweet a slumber, the awful regard
he bare to her would not suffer him to be so bold, but still he stood by her a
good space, being destrous to awake her, yet fearful to disturb her quiet
rest: at last, Anna awaked, who continually was her bedfellow. Who seeing
Parismenos in the chamber, at that unseasonable hour, styrring her self to
speak to him, awaked Angelica, who likewise casting her eye suddenly on him,
was somewhat aghast at his being there, but he kne^ling down by her beds
side, said: Pardon me I beseech you this boldness, now is the time that you
may depart, and without any let or molestation, for that my self have alone
the keeping of the entran^e into this Tower.

Angelica hearing his speeches* told him, she would presently be ready: then
Anna suddenly started out of the bed and app^^ elled her self. And
Parismenos arising withdrewe himself. Angelica likewise made such expedition,
that she was ready before Parismenos wished, having attyred her self with
most exceeding rich^ Ornaments. Then thee came to him and said. Now dear
friend, let us go, when you please: then he took he^ by the one ar^e, and
Anna by the other, saying: Be of good comfort, and fear not, for I dare assure
you to pass with quiet. After they were out of the chamber be locked the door
again, and took the key with him: and from thence, led her down to the Tower
gate: and being without, fast locked the same again after them. And being quite
without the compass of the Tower, Angelicaes heart seemed to leap within her
for joy, demanding in most kind sort, whether he would convey her, for
(quoth she) if I should be taken again, and come to Maximus presence, my
^orment and grief would be more then I am able to express. I have quoth he)
a friend not far hence, in whose trust I dare repose any secret, whither I
will conduct you with safety: therefore, I beseech you be of good comfort.
Many a weary step Angelica had, before she came to her iourneyes end:
which at last they attained* When they were come to Saint Austines Chapel,
Parismenos never left knocking until he had awaked Iabin, who maruelling to
hear one knock at that time of the night, so unlooked for, and coming to the
door, demanded before he would open the same, who was there. Parismenos made
answer, good friends Iabin, open the door, hear is none but friends. With
that Iabin knowing his voice, opened the door and let them in, with all haste
lighting a Taper, then he came to Parismenos and embraced him, yet not knowing
Angelica, but supposing it was she, admyring her exceeding bewty, and with
humble reverence he desired her to accept of his poor Cell: where Angelica
being weary, seated her self upon his bed, being most glad that she was
e^caped out of the Maiden Tower, where they spent some time in conference about
their escape: when Parismenos at her request, declared the manner how he rid
himself from those that were appeinted to watch with them. Whose wisdom
Angelica grea^ly admyred. After many of these sweet remembrances past
between them, Angelica and Anna fell both fast a sleep, being weary of
their travel: which Parismenos and Iabin seeing, they departed into the
Chapel to confer about their security: where we will leave them, to
speak of the gardiants.

CHAP. XXIIII. How Maximus had knowledge of Angelicas escape. How Marcellus
with Dulcia fled from the Court at Ephesus. And how Marcellus in Portellus
armor came to S. Austins Chapel, And how Parismus sent Portellus into Bohemia.
IN the morning the Cunuches according to their woonted manner, came to the
place where they thought to have found their fellows, but missing them both,
first maruelling thereat, and afterward conceyuing the woorst, being apt to
suspicion, knocked at Angelicas chamber door, but none made answer: which drove
them into an exceeding perpiexity of fear, then they began altogether to
study what this might mean, and going down they espied their fellow lie dead
before them, whom Parismenos had cast there, that Angelica might not see him:
which ghastly sight affrighted them with deadly fear: that with an exceeding
outcrie they ran down to the Knights that kept the entrance: who maruelling at
their sorrow, inquired the cause thereof: they declared how they found one of
their fellows slain, and the knight that Maximus had lately sent was missing.
He (quoth the knights) has the keeping of the entrance: but notwithstanding,
some of them fearing the woorst, ran thither* where they found neither him,
nor the other knight that was appointed to watch with him, nor the keys of the
Tower gate. With which news, they returned back to the rest of their
fellows, who by this time came all together. At which news, one of them said:
I see no such cause of sorrow. With that one of the Eunuchs said: you know not
what we have lost, we are all undone: we shall be hanged, if Maximus hear
hereof, we have lost Angelica: with that the Knights burst into a laughter. Oh
(quoth the Eunuch) laugh not at that which will bring us all to sorrow, we
have lost Angelica, whose custody we had, though unknown to you: which the
King commanded us to keep from your knowledge, for that he had given out
report, that she was departed with him, whom I fear me, the strange Knight
that lately arrived here, has carried away from us all. The Knights hearing
^i^ words, were exceedingly amazed thereat, which they were assured was true,
by the rest of their fellows. Then they went all together vpp^ to Angelicas
Chamber, and breaking open the doors, they found her not, but well perceived
that she was gone away. Then began the Eunuchs to roar and cry out like
mad men, and the Knights ran up and down like men transformed into amazement:
at last, with much adoo, they opened the gate, finding the draw*bridge letten
down: and some of them having horse within the Tower, posted every way about
the country, making diligent search and inquiry after them, and many of
them met with old Iabin, who answered them that he saw none such, whom they
all credited, for that he was a man of religion, which were of most high
estimation with every one in those Countries, that they esteemed every word
that past their lips, as true Oracles: by which means Parismenos and Angelica
were as safe in his custody as could be devised. Iabin seeing such a number
of knights abroad, returned with that news to his Cell, which drove Angelica
into some fear and disquiet, but Iabin by his comfortable assurances, expell^
the same from her heart, by telling her, that i^ all the world were in search
of them, yet they would never suspect that place. The ^unuches soon got out of
the Tower, and fled for fear of Maximus fury, every man which way he thought
best for his own safety. Que of the knights posted with all speed to the
Court, and coming into Maximus presence, declared the whole circumstance of
this tragical event. Which when Maximus heard, he ^ore his hair, stamped on
the earth, raged and railed most exceedingly, calling all the Nobles and
Knights of his Court together, commanding them in all haste to arm themselves
presently, and be in readiness to go with him, and to stay for him at the Court
gate: then might you see Noblemen making have, some one way, some another way,
some calling for the rest of their Armor, having the one half on, and the
other out of readiness: some in Harness, ready mounted, buckling on their
Helmets, others a^ every point armed, calling for their Steedes, some ready
mounting, half armed, half unarmed: Knights running this way, servants that
way, all sty^ring and making vnwoonte^ haste, and every one in a hurly burly.
By this time came Maximus ready mounted, gyrding his spurs into his Steeds
side for haste: who was ready to make speed without spurring, commanding his
Knights to follow him: who hasted after him, not knowing why they made such
speed, the Ladies woondred at this news, some for fear of their husbands
harm, for they thought some enemies were approached which might endanger their
persons, admyring this strange accident: some be^oning the absence of their
lovers: all in a wonderful extas^e, the Queen she sat weeping for the loss
of her Daughter, which the King had told her of.

Marcellus he only reio^ced, for that he supposed Parismenos had carried from
thence Angel, Maximus with all have arrived at the maiden Tower where he heard
the truth of all, and saw the Eunuch that was sla^^e, and withal was certified
in what manner the strange knight came, and how that he brought with him a
Letter signed with his privy signet. When Maximus heard thi^, he grew
presently into a persuasion that it was the unknown knight had done that
exployt, and carried away Angelica, then he called for the letter which one of
those knights (by ill fortune more careful then the rest, had demanded of
Parismenos, after he had shown the same to the Eunuchs as aforesaid)
delivered unto him, which when Maximus saw, he presently kn^we that it was
Marcellus hand, which caused his eyes to swel with rage, that for that the
night was now come, he rested in the Tower, commanding and desiring his
Nobles and Knights to post throughout all the Country to find Angelica,
commanding two of the chiefest of his Noble men early the next morning to post
to the Court and apprehend Marcellus as ^ (...), for conspiring with a
stranger to betray his life. T^^^ (...) ^^daine was all the Country spread
over with knights* (...) ^lace o^ (...) to harbor them. Only Iabins Cell they
suspected not, which was so ne^re the maiden Tower, and withal a place of
holiness and religion dedicated to Saint Austine, whom they worshippe^: that
of all places none of the^ thought of likelihood, that they should be there: in
which quest they continued very carnest all that night, and the next day.

As Soon as Marcellus saw all the Knights and Nobles departed, and all the
Court in an uproar, now fearing that if Maximus should see the Letter he had
given Parismenos, he would know his hand: when all were in an exceeding
uproar, he came to Dulcia in great have, and told her all that had b^fallen,
telling her, that he must now for a time leave her: for that he knew his father
would upon sight of the Letter be so much incest against him, that it were
mere ^ondnesse in him to stay and abide his fury: with that Dulcias heart
panted with grief, and her eyes melted into ^eares, desiring him most humbly
upon her knees, that he would not leave her behind, whose life would be worse
then death without his presence: for my Lord (quoth she) if you will vouchsafe
me this favor, I will never forsake you for ^eare of any misery, ^erill, or
^orment.

Marcellus took her up with a kind kiss, telling her that he was most
exceedingly glad that she would go with him, being the only thing he most
destred in the world.

Then quoth Dul^ia) tell me what I shall do, and I will do it presently. (Quoth
he) whilst I hold the Ladies in a talk, whose wits are now troubled,
disguise your self, and slip out amongst them, and go to Madam Panoras house,
and there stay for me. Dulcia then presently cast off her uppermost garments
and put on some of the Ladies, such as she next found, and locking fast her
chamber door, went through amongst the thickest of them: who seeing her lock
the door, took her for one of their fellows that had brought Angelica to
bed: and so let her pass without suspicion.

Dulcia was no sooner down stairs, but she hasted with all speed until she
was without the court gate, and from thence came to Panoras house, where she
was let in by Panora, who^ she told, that Marcellus had sent her thither, and
would himself be there presently. Panora for his sake gave her kind
entertainment. Marcellus seeing all things fall out thus prosperously, and
Dulcia past by, which he ^^ted, he left the Ladies, and presently went to his
(...) himself in one of the Getulian knigh^ (...) none of his own, and went to
Panoras house, where h^ ^ound Dulcia, and caught her in his arms with a loving
^mbrace: and being all three together* he declared to Panora all that had
happened, both of himself, Angelica, and Dulcia, and that the Knight which
lodged in her house, was the Knight of Fame. Parismenos withal, requesting her
secrecy and aid, to conceal Dulcia from all knowledge of her being there,
where himself stayed all that night: And the next day spending his time in
much pleasure and kind sort with Dulcia, whom he loved most exceedingly, but
without any blemish or thought of intemperancie.

Early the next morning ^ame the two Nobles from Maximus to arrest Marcellus,
thinking to have found him there, but coming to his chamber, he was not there,
nor in all the Court to be found. Which caused an other tumult for his absence
y^ all had their minds so bus^ed with conceit of meditation why he should be
fled, y^ they were al in a second amazement therewith, though none at al knowing
why he was ^^ed, nor knowing what offense he had committed: the Queen
likewise, made heart sorrow for his mishap. This n^wes being come to the Ladies
that attended Dulcia, in stead of Angelica, who thought to carry the report of
this news to Angelica, but enquiring for the key of her chamber, could not
hear of it: for every one made answer they had it not, then began a
controversy amongst them, enquiring who it was that came out last, but the
truth thereof they could not learn, that they began to suspect each other, and
that she that had the key had lost the same, and would not be known thereof:
that at last they began to knock first softly, and then hard, but none made
answer, which drove them all into an extreme perplexity, and with much ado,
to rid themselves of that fear, they got open the door, where at their coming
they could not find Angelica, but found some of her ornaments cast in the
midst of the flore: that then with wringing their hands, tearing their hair,
and rending their ornaments, they made such an outcrie and exclamation, that
all the Court rung thereof: which caused the Queen, the Nobles, and almost all
the whole court gather to that place, where the Queen being come, and knowing
the cause of their sorrow, sat down amongst them, oppressed with care, and
uttered these speeches. Peace, peace, give over this vain lamentation, for you
know not for whom you mourn, it was not Angelica you had the custody of,
therefore cease your laments, and give me leave to mourn, that have ^ust
cause: who am a party in all these woes, that at once have lost the company
of both my dear children, and al procured by Maximus misdoubt, who left
Angelica in the maiden Tower, who is stolen from thence, and now my soon
Marcellus with Dulcia is likewise fled. Aye me, what sorrow is this? whose
grief may be compared to mine? was ever any so miserable as I am made, that at
one instant have lost my comfort, my children, my joys and delight? with that
such a passion of grief overwhelmed her heart, that her speech abruptly brake
off, and more she would have said but could not, that the ladies took her up,
being fallen into a deadly trance, and conveyed her to her bed.

Thus was the whole Court and City repleate with care, every one uttering
their fancies: the younger for accusing Maximus of cruelty, alleging that he
was cause of those cares: the elder condemning the two y^ung Princes
^^lewdnesse and lightness, that would enter into these actions without the^^
parents consent. And two Noblemen returned again to Maximu^ with these news,
which added new cares to his troubled head, y^ Angelica^ escape did not so
much grieve him, as that Marcellus should both be Authorin her escape, and also
would make so base a choice of Dulcia, with whom, all were assured he was ^ied,
neither did all these so much ve^e him, as that he was disappointed of all
means to revenge these wrongs.

Maximus continued many days in the maiden Tower, calling together all the
knghts of the land, commanding them to make all dilig^nt search, and to
appoint some that should stay in every place of the country, and examine every
passenger, for that his mind gave him, Angelica and Marcellus were within
Getulia: This business was so speedily and so exactly performed, that it was
impossible for them to escape unknown or vndescried.

Marcellus the next night after all the tumults, having by many persuasions and
entreaties won Dulcia to stay with Panora, and with promise of his speedy
return, armed himself in the Armor he had gotten and departed from thence,
with intent to go to Saint Austines Chapel, where he was sure he should
hear of Parismenos, and by the way met with many of the Getulian knights, who
knew him not but by his armor, took him to be a Getulian knight named
Portellus, whose armor Marcellus had put on: this Portellus was a knight of
the kings Court, who not long since was departed into Libia without the
knowledge of any but* Marcellus, who had sent him to view Venolas beauty, and
to learn if he could the original of that accusation was laid against the
knight of Fame, in whose armor Marcellus past without suspicion, being taken
of all for Portellus.

Early the next morning he arrived at S. Austines Chapel, where he would
neither knock nor enter, until ^e was sure there were none to descrie him.
When Iabin first saw him, his heart was tormented with fear, demanding what
he would have. Fear not Iabin (quoth he) I am your friend Marcellus: with that
he entered into the Chapel, whom Iabin would not suffer to go further, until
he had seen his face, which when he beheld, he embraced him most lovingly,
and without speaking a word brought him into his Cell, where was Parismenos,
Angelica, and Anna, who all at once beholding him, and he them, embraced each
other with exceeding joy, being so glad they had met, that Angelica wept for
joy, Parismenos surfetted with delight, and Marce^lus heart was filled with
exceeding content: when these storms of joy were past and somewhat calmed,
Marcellus declared to them all that had happened, and how that Maximus had set
most di^igent spies in every co^ner of the country, and withal, declared the
^ause why he was fled ^he manner, and with whom, his love to Dulcia* how he
had left her with Panora, and how happily he had passed unsuspected in
Portellus Armor, which when they heard, they all applauded, and rejoiced at
his fortunate success* to whom Angelica said with a merry countenance: Dulcia
has lost nothing by assuming my name and habit, but thereby has woonne a
constant knights love, and may hereafter by that means come to be a Queen.
Indeed Marcellus whatsoever others may say, I persuade and assure my self, you
have gotten a virtuous, beatifull, chaste, kind, and loving Ladies love, whose
good parts I have often commended in my secret thoughts, but now am glad that
I have so good opportunity to speak of them in your hearing: what though she
be not of kingly race, her virtues are such as may beseem the best Lady in
the world.

Marcellus was glad to hear Angelica so much commend his beloved Dulcia, that
he said: Indeed Sister I have chosen Dulcia, I love her, and will hereafter
be tr^e to her, for her beauty, virtue, and good parts, do please me so
much, that if I live to enjoy the Getul^an ^rowne, she shall be my Queen:
withal, I am glad you have met your knight, of whose company I am sure you are
not a little glad. With that Angelica blushed, and he said: Nay Sister blush
not, for he has better deserved your love, then Dulcia has mine.

In these and such like communications, they spent the rest of that day,
studying and devising what might be their best course to take in these
troublesome affairs.

After that Marcellus had stayed some time with Parismenos and Angelica in
Saint Austines Chapel, he again departed in Portellus armor toward
Dulcia, where he arrived to her exceeding comfort, without suspicion, wishing
that she had been with Angelica, that he might have enjoyed both her and
their company together.

After Marcellus was departed, Parismenos and Angelica began to study which
way they might escape Maximus cruelty, being both destrous to go into
Bohemia, but they knew not how to pass without being discovered, for that
the King still continued his dilig^nt search: and besides, if that let had not
been, yet the journey was so long and dangerous, that Parismenos was
unwilling to indaunger her person and health thereby, that he was drawn to an
exceeding astonishment what were best to be done: that being unskillful of
themselves what to determine off, they asked old Iabines counsel* w^^
present* lie told them, that if they liked his simple fare* and that ^emely
^^ll. where though they were not daintilie served, yet they were quiet, that
he thought it their best course to stay there still until Maximus were out
of hope to find them, and had given over his search, or at the least until
Marcellus were returned, whose counsel they both allowed and followed.

Maximus still remeained in the Maiden Tower, fretting his heart with vexation
and grief, being put out of all comfort by his Knights that daily returned
without any news, that in the end he was tired with grief, and fared like
one in a desperate estate: but by the counsel of his Nobles, after much
trouble and long search, he returned to the Court where the Queen was, to
comfort her: who at his coming he found very sick, and in very weak estate,
being procured by the grief she had conceived for her childrens loss.
Maximus seeing her in that dangerous estate, began to comfort her with many
persuasions: but she was so impatient and ^o full of grief, that she v^tered
these speeches. Comfort, my Lord, comes now out of season, when our greefes
are past remedy, which you might have sa^ued when time served: it is your
curiosity and too fond suspect, that has bred these mischaunces, you give
too much credit to that ^oule enchauntresse speeches, which your self desire
to prove true, or else you would never take those cruel courses you have done
with your children. Might you not often have married Angelica according to your
desire, to many Honorable and great personages? what i^ she be now married,
can that indaunger your life, unless you will be the wilful actor thereof
your self? but by your severity you have done this, which is now impossible
to be recovered.

Maximus heart at these speeches began to melt with lenity, and his own
conscience began to condemn himself, that now he repents the severity he
had used, and accused himself of folly, to give such credit to the
enchauntresse speeches, that he protested if he had his children again, he
would not restrain them so much of their liberty, but that he would let them
make choice according to their own fancies: and in this heavy estate we will
leave him: devising what means to work by gentleness to call them home
again.

Marcellus all this while continued with Dulcia in Lady Pa^oras house, and now
hearing that Maximus was returned from the ^aide^ Tower, and had given over
search, as hopeles to find either Angelica,


