The tenor of the oath of the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
TAking Almighty God to witness, you shall duly consider of all the Articles
here given you in charge: And (all affection set aside) you shall faithfully
present every offense and defect: and also every such person and persons, as
you shall know, or hear by common fame to have committed any offense, or
omitted any duty, mentioned in any of these Articles: Or which are publicly
defamed, or vehemently suspected of any such offense, default, or negligence:
So God help you, and the holy contents of his Gospel.

ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF, AND ANSWERED UNTO BY The Churchwardens and
Inquirers, in the ordinary Visitation of the right Worsh. M. Archdeacon of
Norwich.
Anno Dom. 1618
1 WHether be there in your parish any receivers of Jesuits, Seminaries, or
Mass Priests, or any other persons reconciled to the Church of Rome: and what
be the names of all Recusants, or half Recusants, that come not to Church to
divine service; or if they do, yet do not receive the holy communion, as by
Law they ought?

2 Whether be there any in your Parish, which do affirm that the form of
Gods worship in the Church of England established by Law, and contained in the
book of Common prayer, is corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful, or contains
any thing in it, that is repugnant to the holy Scriptures?

3 Whether your Church be well and sufficiently repaired, the windows well
glazed, the floares decently paued, seats fit and convenient, the steeple and
bells kept in repair, and all things in your Church and Chapel in comely sort
without dust or any thing that is noisome or unseemly?

4 Whether have you in your Church or Chapel, the Book of common prayer by
the Kings Majesty confirmed, a Bible of the largest volume, two Psalters, the
Book of Homilies allowed by authority, a fine large surplice with sleeves, a
coffer with three locks and three keys, for the safe keeping of the Register
book, and the like chest (with an hole in the upper part thereof) for the
alms of the poor?

5 Whether have you a decent pewe for the Minister to read service in, and a
comely Pulpit, both of them conveniently placed; A fair communion table
covered with silk, or other like stuff in time of divine service, and a fair
linen cloth over it at the administration of the Communion: A fair Communion
cup of silver with a cover, and a fair standing pot or stoop of pewter or
purer metal for the wine to be set upon the said table; A font of stone, and
that only to be used for baptism; And a comely hearse?

6 Whether have you a register book in parchment, of them that be Christened,
married, and buried? And whether every Sabbath day next after such Christening,
marriage, or burial, the Minister (in the presence of the churchwardens) do
therein write the names of the parties, and also the day and year; of such
christening, marriage, and burial had the week before? And whether do the
Minister and Churchwardens subscribe their names to the end of every page
being full?

7 Whether is the said register book laid up again, and kept in a sure chest,
under three locks and three keys? And who do keep the said keys?

8 Whether be the walls of your Church whited, and fair written with chosen
sentences of holy Scripture?

9 Whether have you the book of Canons lastly published by his Highness
authority? And does your Minister use to read the same openly in your Church,
so often as is required by the Canons?

10 Whether be your parishioners conveniently placed in your Church? And
whether do any contend touching their places? And do any servants or youth
prevent the householders of their seats?

11 Whether is your Churchyard well and sufficiently repaired, fenced, and
maintained with walls, rayles, hedges, or pales, as has been in each place
accustomed?

12 Whether have any brawled, quarrelled, stricken, or laid violent hands (one
upon another) in Church or churchyard?

13 Whether have any built or encroached upon any part of the churchyard,
without sufficient authority from the Ordinary?

14 Whether have any annoyed your churchyard, or the fence thereof by putting
in of cattle, by hanging of clothes, or by laying there any dust, dung,
rubbish, filth, or otherwise?

15 Whether your Chancell (as well for glasing, pauing, and seats, as also for
all other reparations) and likewise the building belonging to your parsonage,
and vicaridge, Almesse-house, and church-house, be in good and sufficient
repair: Or ruinated, wasted, and gone?

16 Whether do any refuse or delay to pay their church duties, or leuies rated
toward the repair, or ornaments, or other charges of the Church?

17 Whether have you in your Church, Chapel, or churchyard, any plays, gaming
at bowls, Tennis, or football, or any other playing; Either any feasts,
church-ales, temporal courts, Leetes, Musters, or any other profane usage
there? And by whom?

18 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate do live any way scandalously, and
unbeseeming the holiness and gravity of his calling? And whether his apparel
be grave and comely, beseeming his function and calling?

19 Whether does your Minister say or sing divine service (according to the
prescript form established by his Majesty's authority) distinctly and
reverently, (and that in due time) upon Sundays and holy days, and their
Eues, and in such place of the Church, as is fittest for the people to hear?
And whether does he observe all the orders, rites, and ceremonies prescribed in
the book of Common prayer, as well in reading of holy Scriptures, as in
administration of the Sacraments, without adding or diminishing?

20 Whether is your Parson or Vicar resident upon his benefice? if not, whether
have you a sufficient Curate? and whether is he lawfully admitted to holy
orders, and licensed by the Ordinary under his hand and seal, to serve the
cure in that place? and have ye seen such license?

21 Whether is your Minister diligent to execute his office, by reading of the
holy Scriptures: and (if he be an allowed Preacher, and having no lawful
impediment) do preach once every Sunday: and (being not allowed) do procure
sermons in his cure every month? and when there be no sermons, whether does he
read one of the Homilies appointed by authority?

22 What strangers have preached in your Church this last half year: and by
whom were they authorized as preachers? And whether have they written their
names in your book for that purpose?

23 Whether was your accustomed perambulation observed by your Minister, with
the better sort of your parishoners in rogation week: If not, by whose fault
was it neglected?

24 Whether your minister, before his sermon, lecture, or homily, do pray for
his Majesty, giving him his lawful title and just style; And commend his
highness, her Majesty, the young Prince, and the Kings royal issue, in his
prayers to Almighty God; following that form of prayer prescribed in the 55.
Canon, and do exhort the people to obedience to his Majesty, and other
Magistrates in authority under him?

25 Whether your Minister in time of divine service or ministering the
Sacraments, does wear a decent and comely surplice with sleeves, and upon it
(if he be a graduat) an hood suitable to his degree in the University?

26 Whether does he perform his duty, in visiting the sick, and burying of
the dead, if the sickness be not infectious; As also using no frustratorie
delay to christen any child, according to the form appointed by the book of
Common Prayer?

27 Whether does your Minister upon every Sunday, and holy day, for half an
hour before Euen-song, instruct and examine the children, servants, and youth
of your parish in some part of the Catechism? And whether do Parents,
Masters, and Dames send their youth thereunto? And whether does the Minister
every Sunday give open warning in the Church to that effect?

28 Whether does he commonly upon Sundays, and holy days (after the reading
of the second lesson at morning and evening prayer) admonish the Churchwardens,
to note such as (without just cause) do absent themselves from divine service?

29 Whether have your people observed the Sabbath day in all Christian and
godly conversation? Or be there any which have profaned the same, either by
working or by using any unlawful games, or sports upon that day.

30 Whether all and singular dwellers and soiourners within your parish, do
diligently resort to your parish Church, (with their servants and children) to
morning and evening prayer, upon every Sunday and holy day? And there (with due
attention) do orderly abide during the whole time of common prayer, service,
and sermon, reverently behauing themselves, as well inwardly as also by outward
gesture of their bodies, in keeping their heads uncovered, in kneeling,
standing, and other decent behavior?

31 Whether have any rudely behaved themselves in the church, by walking,
talking, laughing; sleeping, or keeping their hattes on their heads, in time of
divine service?

32 Whether any (without just cause) have departed out of the Church in time of
divine service, sermon, or celebration of baptism?

33 Whether every one in your parish (being above sixteen years of age and
of discretion) have received the holy communion at your parish church, thrice
as the least every year (as they ought to do) and specially at or about
Easter yearly for once, and with such due and humble reverence, as becomes
true Christians?

34 Whether does your Minister give public warning openly in the Church at
morning prayer, the Sunday before every communion, for better preparing of the
communicants thereunto?

35 Whether do the Churchwardens (with the advice of the Minister) provide a
sufficient quantity of fine white bread, and also of wholesome wine for the
number of the Communicants, and that to be brought in a fair pot or stoop of
pewter or purer metal?

36 Whether has your Minister admitted to the holy Communion, any open
notorious evil liver, adulteres, fornicatour, common drunkard, perjured or
malicious person, before they be reconciled by the Ordinary: Or any
Churchwardens which (without regard of their oath) have wilfully omitted to
present notorious defects or offenses: Or has he put back any parishioner
from the communion of malice, or for any light or frivolous occasion? Whether
they which intend to be partakers of the holy Communion, do signify their
names to the Minister (or to the parish clarke) according to the rule in that
behalf in the book of Common prayer?

37 Whether have any deferred the baptizing of their child any longer then
until the next Sabbath or holiday after the birth thereof?

38 Whether any child have died unbaptized within your parish? and by whose
default was that Sacrament not administered?

39 Whether has your Minister admitted any to be a godfather or godmother to
any child at christening, before such person so undertaking, have received the
holy communion? And whether he does use the cross in baptism?

40 Whether have you any woman, which has not decently and orderly come to the
Church with a veil, or other grave attire thereby discerned from the rest of
the company (to give God thanks after childbirth) giving the Minister notice
thereof before?

42 Whether is your parish clarke sufficient for his place, and of honest
conversation? can he write, read, and sing? is he diligent in his office,
dutiful to your Minister, and no drunkard?

43 Whether does he meddle with any thing above his office, as churching of
women, burying of the dead, reading of prayers, or such like?

43 Whether does he keep the Church clean, and the doors safe locked? is any
thing lost by his default: and does he suffer excessive ringing?

44 Whether do any refuse to pay and allow to the clarke and Sexten,
accustomed wages and duties?

45 Whether be the Churdwardens chosen yearly in Easter week according to the
Canon? And whether do they (at the end of their year, or within a month
after) give a true account before the Minister and Parishioners, of such money
and things as they have received?

46 Whether do the Churchwardens or questmen every Sunday and holiday look
unto the seats, and take note of all such as (without just cause) be absent
from divine service?

47 Whether have any Churchwarden lost, sold, or detained any ornaments, bells,
or implements of the Church, or any legacies bequeathed thereunto?

48 Whether have any married within the degrees of affinity or consanguinity,
by the laws of God forbidden?

49 Whether have any persons been married either secretly in any private house,
or openly in the Church, without sufficient license, or bands thrice published
in time of divine service, three several Sundays or holy days, before the
Congregation? who were present at such marriage? and what Minister did marry
them?

50 Whether have any persons been married within your parish, within any of the
times prohibited: and by whom were such persons married, and who was present
at such marriages?

51 Whether be there any couples, which being lawfully married, do live
asunder without lawful divorce: or any divorced which (both being alive) do
marry again?

52 Whether have any contracted Matrimony (upon your knowledge, or by fame)
and do not proceed to the solemnization thereof?

53 Whether have you in your parish, any that teach publikly or privately? is
he licenced by the Ordinary of the place under his hand and seal?

54 Whether does he teach, or is suspected to teach any of his scholars in
Popery, superstition, disobedience, or contempt of the truth, and Christian
religion now established within this Realm, or to contemn orders
Ecclesiastical?

55 Whether have you any, which (to your knowledge, or by common fame) have
committed incest, adultery, or fornication; Either any malicious and
uncharitable persons, bawds, common drunkards, usurers, brawlers, slaunderers,
swearers, cursers, blasphemers, common scolds, ribbalds, perjured persons, or
such like?

56 Whether have any conveyed, received, or harbored any light or lewd woman,
or any unlawfully begotten with child, or vehemently suspected thereof, and
have suffered them to depart before they have performed penance enjoined by the
Ordinary?

57 Whether be there any in your parish which live incontinently, or any woman
unlawfully begotten with child before their marriage? Or which be thereof
vehemently suspected?

58 Whether have any irreverently abused your Minister, or laid violent hands
upon him, or otherwise disgraced his office and calling by word or deed?

59 Whether have any miscalled or railed upon any of the Churchwardens, or
Questmen, for doing of their duties according to their oaths?

60 Whether do you know or hear of any, which (without authority) do
administer the goods of the dead, or conceal any testament, or neglect to pay
legacies bequeathed to the Church, or poor, or to the repair of high ways,
or to other charitable uses?

61 Whether have you any, which to your knowledge or (by common fame) use
witchcraft, sorcery, charms, unlawful prayer of invocation in Latin or
English? Or any that resort to such for counsel or help?

62 Whether have any Innekeepers, alewiues, victualers, or tipplers received,
harbored, or suffered any persons to eat, drink, stay, or play in their
houses, in time of common prayer, sermon, or homily on Sundays or holy days?
And what persons were so received, harbored, or suffered? And have they set
open their shop-windowes, or sold forth any drink or victuals at the like time?
And have any of your parish loytered or been gaming abroad at the same time?

63 Whether have any labored, wrought, or gone to cart on the Sunday or holy
day? And have any artificers or others set open their shop windows, or used
their trade or any manuell occupation upon any of those days? And has any
mill bin set to grind upon the Sabbath day or any holy day?

64 What persons stand excommunicated, and how long have they so stood?

65 Whether do you know or hear by common fame, of any other matter (to be
presented) belonging unto the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, although not in
these Articles contained?

Make your answer severally and distinctly to every Article.

The Minister (who by the Canon has authority to present) shall inform the
Ordinary under his hand, of such notorious faults as the sworne-men leave
vnpresented: And also shall exhibit the names of those, which being of
sufficient years, can not say (or do neglect to learn) the Lords prayer, the
Articles of belief, and the ten Commandments in English.

And although it seem by the Canon, that only two bills shall be exacted in
the year; yet it is lawful for the Minister alone, or for the sworn Officers
to present as often as occasion requires.

FINIS.

