ARTICLES AGREED UPON by the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and
the whole CLERGY, In the Convocation holden at LONDON, in the year 1562. For
the avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the stablishing of Consent
touching true RELIGION.

Reprinted by His Majesty's Commandment: with His Royal Declaration prefixed
thereunto.

DIEV ET MON DROIT



Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1638.

HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION.
BEing by Gods ordinance, according to Our just Title, Defender of the Faith,
and supreme Governor of the Church within these Our Dominions, We hold it most
agreeable to this Our Kingly Office, and Our own Religious zeal, to conserve
and maintain the Church committed to Our charge in the unity of true Religion,
and in the bond of peace: and not to suffer unnecessary Disputations,
altercations, or questions to be raised, which may nourish faction both in the
Church and Commonwealth. We have therefore upon mature deliberation, and with
the advice of so many of Our Bishops as might conveniently be called together,
thought fit to make this Declaration following. That the Articles of the Church
of England (which have been allowed and authorized heretofore, and which Our
Clergy generally have subscribed unto) do contain the true doctrine of the
Church of England, agreeable to Gods word: which We do therefore ratify and
confirm, requiring all Our loving Subjects to continue in the uniform
profession thereof, and prohibiting the least difference from the said Articles,
which to that end We command to be new printed, and this Our declaration to be
published therewith.

That We are supreme Governor of the Church of England: and that if any
difference arise about the external policy, concerning Injunctions, Canons,
or other Constitutions whatsoever thereto belonging the Clergy in their
Convocation is to order and settle them, having first obtained leave under Our
broad Seal so to do: and We approving their said Ordinances and Constitutions,
providing that none be made contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land.

That out of Our Princely care, that the Churchmen may do the work which is
proper unto them; the Bishops and Clergy, from time to time in Convocatio^,
upon their humble desire shall have license under Our broad Seal, to deliberate
of, and to do all such things, as being made plain by them, and assented unto
by Us, shall concern the settled continuance of the doctrine and discipline of
the Church of England now established; from which We will not endure any
varying, or departing in the least degree.

That for the present, though some differences have been ill raised, yet We
take comfort in this, that all Clergymen within Our Realm, have always most
willingly subscribed to the Articles established, which is an argument to Us,
that they all agree in the true usual literal meaning of the said Articles,
and that even in those curious points in which the present differences lie, men
of all sorts take the Articles of the Church of England to be for them, which
is an argument again, that none of them intend any desertion of the Articles
established.

That therefore in these both curious and unhappy differences, which have for
so many hundred years, in different times and places, exercised the Church of
Christ: We will that all further curious search be laid aside, and these
disputes shut up in Gods promises, as they be generally set forth to Us, in the
holy Scriptures; and the general meaning of the Articles of the Church of
England according to them. And that no man hereafter shall either print or
preach, to draw the Article aside anyway, but shall submit to it in the plain
and full meaning thereof: And shall not put his own sense or Comment to be the
meaning of the Article, but shall take it in the literal and Grammatical
sense.

That if any public Reader in either Our Universities, or any Head or Master
of a College, or any other person respectively in either of them, shall affix
any new sense to any Article, or shall publicly read, determine, or hold any
public disputation, or suffer any such to be held either way, in either the
Universities or Colleges respectively; or if any Divine in the Universities
shall preach or print any thing either way, other then is already established
in Convocation with Our Royal assent: he, or they the offenders, shall be
liable to Our displeasure, and the Churches censure in Our Commission
Ecclesiastical, as well as any other: and We will see there shall be due
execution upon them.

ARTICLES OF RELIGION.
1. Of faith in the holy TRINITY.
THere is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or
passions; of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, the Maker and preserver of
all things both visible and invisible. And in unity of this Godhead there be
three persons, of one substance, power, and eternity; the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost.

2. Of the Word or Son of God, which was made very man.
THe Son, which is the Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the
Father, the very and eternal God of one substance with the Father, took man's
nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin of her substance: so that two whole
and perfect natures, that is to say, the Godhead and manhood, were joined
together in one person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God
and very man, who truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to
reconcile his Father to us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for original
guilt, but also for actual sins of men.

3. Of the going down of Christ into Hell.
AS Christ died for us, and was buried: so also is it to be believed, that he
went down into hell.

4. Of the resurrection of Christ.
CHrist did truly rise again from death, and took again his body, with flesh,
bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature, wherewith
he ascended into heaven, and there sits, until he return to judge all men
at the last day.

5. Of the holy Ghost.
THe holy Ghost, proceeding from the father and the Son, is of one Substance,
Majesty and Glory, with the Father and the Son, very and eternal God.

6. Of the sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures for salvation.
HOly Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the faith, or
be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. In the name of the holy
Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church.

Of the names and number of the Canonical Books.
GEnesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Numeri. Deuteronomium. Iosue. Judges. Ruth. The 1.
Book of Samuel. The 2. Book of Samuel. The 1. Book of Kings. The 2. Book of
Kings. The 1. Book of Chron. The 2. Book of Chron. The 1. Book of Esdras. The
2. Book of Esdras. The Book of Hester. The Book of Job. The Psalms. The
Proverbs. Ecclesiast. or Preacher. Cantica, or songs of Solom. 4. Prophets the
greater. 12. Prophets the less.
And the other Books (as Hierome says) the Church does read for example of
life and instruction of manners: but yet does it not apply them to establish
any doctrine; Such are these following.

The 3. Book of Esdras. The 4. Book of Esdras. The Book of Tobias. The Book of
Iudeth. The rest of the Book of Hester. The Book of Wisdom. Jesus the son of
Sirach. Baruch the Prophet. The song of the three children. The Story of
Susanna. Of Bell and the Dragon. The prayer of Manasses. The 1. Book of
Maccabees. The 2. Book of Maccabees.
All the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do
receive and account hem Canonical.

7. Of the Old Testament.
THe Old Testament is not contrary to the New, for both in the Old and new
Testament, everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only
Mediator between God and man, being both God and man. Wherefore they are not to
be heard which feign that the old fathers did look only for transitory
promises. Although the Law given from God by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and
Rites, do not bind Christian men, nor the civil precepts thereof ought of
necessity to be received in any Common wealth: yet notwithstanding, no
Christian man whatsoever, is free from the obedience of the Commandments, which
are called Moral.

8. Of the three Creeds.
THe three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received and believed: for they
may be proved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture.

9. Of original birth or sin.
Original sin stands not in the following of Adam, (as the Pelagians do
vainly talk) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man,
that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very
far gone from original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to
evil, so that the flesh lusts always contrary to the spirit, and therefore
in every person born into this world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation.
And this infection of nature does remain, yea, in them that are regenerated,
whereby the lust of the flesh, called in Greek (...), which some do expound the
wisdom, some sensuality, some the affection, some the desire of the flesh, is
not subject to the law of God. And although there is no condemnation for them
that believe and are baptized, yet the Apostle does confess, that
concupiscence and lust, has of it self the nature of sin.

10. Of free will.
THe condition of man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to faith and
calling upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working with us, when we have that good will.

11. Of the Justification of man.
WE are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works, or deservings.
Wherefore, that we are justified by faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine,
and very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of
Justification.

12. Of good works.
ALbeit that good works, which are the fruits of faith, and follow after
Justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods
Judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring
out necessarily of a true and lively faith, in so much that by them a lively
faith may be as evidently known, as a tree discerned by the fruit.

13. Of works before Justification.
WOrks done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ,
neither do they make men meet to receive grace, or (as the School-Authors say)
deserve grace of congruitie: yea, rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of
sin.

14. Of works of Supererogation.
VOluntary works besides, over and above Gods Commandments, which they call
works of Supererogation, cannot be taught with our arrogancy and impiety. For
by them men do declare that they do not only render unto God as much as they
are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake, then of bounden duty is
required: Whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all that are
commanded to you, say, We are unprofitable servants.

15. Of Christ alone without sin.
CHrist in the truth of our nature, was made like unto us in all things (sin
only except) from which he was clearly void, both in his flesh, and in his
Spirit. He came to be a Lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of himself once
made, should take away the sins of the world: and sin (as Saint John says)
was not in him. But all we the rest (although baptized, and born again in
Christ) yet offend in many things, and if we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us.

16. Of sin after Baptism.
NOt every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism, is sin against
the holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the grant of repentance is not to be
denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism. After we have received the
holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin, and by the
grace of God (we may) arise again, and amend our lives. And therefore they are
to be condemned, which say they can no more sin as long as they live here, to
deny the place of forgiveness to such as truly repent.

17. Of Predestination and Election.
PRedestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the world were laid) he has constantly decreed by his counsel,
secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation,
as vessels made to honor. Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a
benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in
due season: they through grace obey the calling: they be justified freely: they
be made sons of God by adoption: they be made like the Image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ: they walk religiously in good works, and at length
by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting felicity.

As the godly consideration of Predestination and our Election in Christ, is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as
feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of
the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their mind to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
faith of eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their love toward God: So, for curious and carnal persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of Gods predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the
devil does thrust them either into desperation, or into wretchlesnesse of
most unclean living, no less perilous then desperation.

Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises, in such wise as they be generally
set forth to us in holy Scripture: and in our doings, that will of God is to be
followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the Word of God.

18. Of obtaining eternal Salvation only by the Name of Christ.
THey also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, that every man shall
be saved by the law or sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to
frame his life according to that law, and the light of nature. For holy
Scripture does set out unto us only the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must
be saved.

19. Of the Church.
THe visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred: So also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living and manner of ceremonies,
but also in matters of faith.

20. Of the authority of the Church.
THe Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of faith: And yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing that is contrary to Gods Word written, neither may it so expound one
place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to an other. Wherefore although the
Church be a witness and a keeper of holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any
thing against the same, so besides the same ought it not to enforce any thing
to be believed for necessity of salvation.

21. Of the authority of general Councels.
General Councels may not be gathered together without the commandment and
will of Princes. And when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an
assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and Word of God)
they may err, and sometime have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.
Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to salvation, have neither
strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of
holy Scripture.

22. Of purgatory.
THe Romish doctrine concerning Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping and adoration,
as well of Images, as of Relics, and also invocation of Saints, is a fond
thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather
repugnant to the Word of God.

23. Of ministering in the Congregation.
IT is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public
preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be
lawfully called, and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge
lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this work by men, who
have public authority given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send
Ministers into the Lords vineyard.

24. Of speaking in the Congregation, in such a tongue as the people
understands.
IT is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the custom of the
Primitive Church, to have public prayer in the Church, or to minister the
Sacraments in a tongue not understanded of the people.

25. Of the Sacraments.
SAcraments ordained of Christ, be not only badges or tokens of Christian men's
profession: but rather they be certain sure witnesses, and effectual signs of
grace and Gods good will toward us, by the which he does work invisibly in
us, and does not only quicken, but also stengthen and confirm our faith in him.

There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and extreme Unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of
the Gospel, being such as have grown, partly of the corrupt following of the
Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures: but yet have not
like nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they
have not any visible sign or ceremony ordained of God.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them. And in such only, as worthily receive
the same, they have a wholesome effect or operation: But they that receive them
unworthily, purchase to themselves damnation, as S. Paul says.

26. Of the unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the effect of the
Sacraments.
ALthough in the visible Church the evil be ever mingled with the good, and
sometime the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the Word and
Sacraments: yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name, but in
Christ's, and do minister by his commission and authority, we may use their
ministry, both in hearing the Word of God, and in the receiving of the
Sacraments. Neither is the effect of Christ's ordinance taken away by their
wickedness, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such, as by faith, and
rightly do receive the Sacraments ministered unto them, which be effectual,
because of Christ's institution and promise, although they be ministered by evil
men.

Nevertheless, it appertains to the discipline of the Church, that enquiry
bemade of evil Ministers, and that they be accused by those that have knowledge
of their oftences: and finally being found guilty, by just judgment be deposed.

27. Of Baptism.
Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, whereby
Christian men are discerned from others that be not Christened: but it is also a
sign of Regeneration or new birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they that
receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church: the promises of the
forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God, by the holy
Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed: faith is confirmed: and grace increased
by virtue of prayer unto God. The Baptism of young children is in any wise to
be retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the institution of Christ.

28. Of the Lords Supper.
THe Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the love that Christians ought
to have among themselves one to another: but rather it is a Sacrament of our
redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily, and
with faith receive the same, the bread which we break, is a partaking of the
body of Christ: and likewise the Cup of blessing is a partaking of the Blood of
Christ.

Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the
Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by holy Writ: but it is repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many superstitions.

The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an
heavenly and spiritual manner. And the mean whereby the Body of Christ is
received and eaten in the Supper, is Faith.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved,
carried about, lifted up, or worshipped.

29. Of the wicked which eat not the Body of Christ in the use of the Lords
Supper.
THe wicked and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do carnally
and visibly press with their teeth (as S. Augustine says) the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but
rather to their condemnation do eat and drink the sign or Sacrament of so
great a thing.

30. Of both kinds.
THe Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay people. For both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and commandment, ought to be
ministered to all Christian men alike.

31. Of the one oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
THe offering of Christ once made, is that perfect redemption, propitiation,
and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original and
actual, and there is none other satisfaction for sin, but that alone.
Wherefore the sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said, that the
Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain
or guilt, were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceits.

32. Of the marriage of Priests.
BIshops, Priests, and Deacons, are not commanded by Gods Law, either to vow
the estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage: Therefore it is lawful
also for them, as for all other Christian men, to marry at their own
discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness.

33. Of excommunicate persons, how they are to be avoided.
THat person which by open denuntiation of the Church, is rightly cut off from
the unity of the Church, and excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole
multitude of the faithful as an Heathen and Publicane, until he be openly
reconciled by Penance, and received into the Church by a Judge that has
authority thereunto.

34. Of the Traditions of the Church.
IT is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or
utterly like, for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the diversity of Countries, times, and men's manners, so that
nothing be ordained against Gods Word. Whosoever through his private judgment,
willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of
the Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and
approved by common authority, ought to be rebuked openly, (that other may fear
to do the like) as he that offends against the common Order of the Church,
and hurts the authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of
the weak brethren.

Every particular or national Church, has authority to ordain, change, and
abolish Ceremonies or rites of the Church, ordained only by man's authority, so
that all things be done to edifying.

35. Of Homilies.
THe second Book of Homilies, the several titles whereof we have joined under
this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for
these times, as does the former book of Homilies, which were set forth in the
time of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches by
the Ministers diligently and distinctly, that they may be understanded of the
people.

Of the names of the Homilies.
1 OF the right use of the Church. 2 Against peril of Idolatry. 3 Of repairing
and keeping clean of Churches. 4 Of good Works, first of Fasting. 5 Against
gluttony and drunkenness. 6 Against excess of apparel. 7 Of Prayer. 8 Of the
place and time of Prayer. 9 That common Prayers and Sacraments ought to be
ministered in a known tongue. 10 Of the reverent estimation of Gods Word. 11 Of
alms doing. 12 Of the Nativity of Christ. 13 Of the Passion of Christ. 14 Of
the resurrection of Christ. 15 Of the worthy receiving of the Sacrament of the
Body and blood of Christ. 16 Of the gifts of the holy Ghost. 17 For the
Rogation days. 18 Of the state of Matrimony. 19 Of Repentance. 20 Against
idleness. 21 Against Rebellion.
36. Of consecration of Bishops and Ministers.
THe Book of Consecration of Archbishops, and Bishops, and ordering of Priests,
and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and confirmed at
the same time by authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to
such Consecration and ordering: neither has it any thing, that of it self is
superstitious and ungodly. And therefore, whosoever are consecrated or ordered
according to the Rites of that Book, since the second year of the aforementioned
King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter shall be consecrated, or ordered
according to the same Rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and
lawfully consecrated and ordered.

37. Of the civil Magistrates.
THe Queens Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, unto whom the chief government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes does appertain, and is
not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief government, by which
Titles we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended: we
give not to our Princes the ministering, either of Gods word, or of the
Sacraments, the which thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth
our Queen do most plainly testify: but that only prerogative which we see to
have been given always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself,
that is, that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with
the Civil sword the stubborn and evil doers.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and
grievous offenses.

It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
weapons, and serve in the wars.

38. Of Christian men's goods, which are not common.
THe riches and goods of Christians are not common, as touching the right,
title and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding, every man ought of such things as he possesses, liberally to
give alms to the poor, according to his ability.

39. Of a Christian man's oath.
As we confess that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: So we judge that Christian Religion
does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate requires, in
a cause of faith and charity, so it be done according to the Prophets
teaching, in justice, judgment, and truth.

40. The Ratification.
THis Book of Articles before rehearsed, is again approved, and allowed to be
holden and executed within the Realm, by the assent and consent of our
Sovereigne Lady ELIZABETH by the grace of God of England, France and Ireland
Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. Which Articles were deliberately read, and
confirmed again by the subscription of the hand of the Archbishop and Bishops
of the upper House, and by the subscription of the whole Clergy in the nether
House in their Convocation, in the year of our Lord 1571.

THE TABLE.
1 OF Faith in the Trinity. 2 Of Christ the Son of God, 3 Of his going down
into hell. 4 Of his Resurrection. 5 Of the holy Ghost. 6 Of the sufficiency of
the Scripture. 7 Of the old Testament. 8 Of the three Creeds. 9 Of the
original sin. 10 Of free will. 11 Of Justification. 12 Of good Works. 13 Of
works before Justification. 14 Of works of Supererogation. 15 Of Christ alone
without sin. 16 Of sin after Baptism. 17 Of Predestination and Election.
18 Of obtaining salvation by Christ. 19 Of the Church. 20 Of the authority of
the Church. 21 Of the authority of the general Councels. 22 Of Purgatory. 23
Of ministering in the Congregation. 24 Of speaking in the Congregation. 25 Of
the Sacraments. 26 Of the worthiness of Ministers. 27 Of Baptism. 28 Of the
Lords Supper. 29 Of the wicked which eat not the body of Christ. 30 Of both
kinds. 31 Of Christ's one oblation. 32 Of the Marriage of Priests. 33 Of
Excommunicate persons. 34 Of Traditions of the Church. 35 Of Homilies. 36 Of
Consecration of Ministers. 37 Of civil Magistrates. 38 Of Christian men's
goods. 39 Of a Christian man's oath. 40 Of the Ratification.
FINIS.

