THE PRACTICE OF Christian Works.

Written in Spanish by the R. Father FRANCIS BORGIA, sometimes Duke of Gandia,
and the third General of the Society OF JESUS.

Together with a short Rule, How to live well. Englished by a Father of the
same Society.

Whereunto are adjoined certain pious Meditations upon the Beads* ^r^nslated
also out of the Spanish.

seal of Society of Jesus IHS



Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XX.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND AND RELIGIOUS MOTHER, CLARA MARIANA ABBESS OF THE
ENGLISH POOR CLARES IN GRAVELING.
RIGHT REVEREND AND RELIGIOUS MOTHER,
IF I Should make choice of any other, the^ of your Self, to present this Book
of The Practice of Christian Works, unto; I should not only not discharge my
debt of singular affection unto You: but also seem to commit an offense even
against the Authors own desire and intention For since in the language,
wherein he first wrote it, it was dedicated to his Aunt, the worthy Abbess of
the famous monastery of your Order, at Gandia in Spain; it may seem, that
now, first appearing in English, it should, by a pious consequence, be due unto
you, that are Abbess of the only English Monastery, of that Holy Order at this
day remaining in the world.

And when withal, I consider, how far my self am grown indebted, for the
many benefits I have received from your self, and your holy Family; I am out
of hope to satisfy, for the present, the least thereof: and so am forced to
excuse my self, by paying this interest, until I may be better able to
discharge the principal.

In this little Book is contained a method of Meditation, and much matter of
singular piety and devotion, both for practice and speculation; sufficient to
inflame not only your already enkindled Heart: but also many others, who desire,
that the celestial incense of Prayer may burn continually on the altar of
their soul.

I shall not need to say any thing of the Author, whose rare virtues are so
known to the World, as they require none of my praises: since my pen should but
blot the fair paper of his Worth, if I should go about to blazon them.

I have the more willingly commended this Treatise to your Protection; hoping
that your, and the devotions of your holy family, will give it new force; that
now translated into English, it may produce no less copious fruit, then it
has done in the original Spanish, and other languages.

Accept then (Right Reverend and Religious Mother) this poor mite in testimony
of my true affection; which, I trust shall hereafter appear in a more
abundant manner, when my ability shall find a more fortunate subject, whereby
to express, and show my self

Your R. ever humble servant in Christ Jesus. I. W.

THE EPISTLE of the Author.
To the Right Reverend, and Religious Abbess of the Monastery of S. Clare at
Gandia, his dear Aunt, and Lady in Christ.
WHEREAS my desire (Right Reverend Mother) was in some part to give you
satisfaction, for the many troubles and afflictions, which by my sins I have
caused you; I thought I could not do it better, by any other way, then by good
works. But finding the^ wholly wanting in my self, I began to think, how I
might come to attain thereto, by practice, and meditating on the most holy
works of Christ our Savior, hoping by his merits, and examples to be at last
able to do some good therein. And therefore in this Treatise (which I call An
Exercise of Christian works) I have gathered and set down some things which
seem to me, may in part serve for the making you that satisfaction, whereof I
spoke before. These, most respected Mother, I now adresse and present to you,
beseeching you to assist me with your prayers therein, since of my self, I am
in that kind so weak and insufficient, as I dare not adventure to make you
recompense without your own help.

And no less indeed do you owe (if not to me, yet at least) to your Lord and
Master Christ Jesus, who offered himself up to his Heavenly Father, upon the
Cross, for our sins. And seeing (as the Holy Prophet says) God renders to
every one according to his works; we must embrace that counsel of the
Apostle, when he admonishes us, to work, and do good toward all, whilst we
have time: For the night will come (says S. John) when none can work.
Wherefore, as soon as any good work is conceived and approved by the judgment
of Reason, and so admitted and accepted of the Will, as that it be determined
to do what may be most to the glory of God, or profit of our Neighbor; it must
diligently, and without delay be put in practice and execution. For if we
neglect to do good, when we may, and are able; great damage will return unto
us thereby: and better had it been not to have made any purpose thereof at al,
then afterward not to fulfill, or neglect the same.

It is a common saying, that, Hell is full of good desires: howbeit I hold,
that there is not a more soueraign antidote or more present remedy against
evil, then the daily exercise of good works. For if a man have sinned, they
help him greatly toward the giving over, and forsaking of sin: if he be to
make satisfaction, he cannot perform it better then by good works: if he have
a desire of perseverance in doing well, he may not better or more readily
effect it, then by good works. For as the Wiseman says, they that work in me
shall not sin. And we are to take example of the Prophet Isay who says in
like manner, My work is with God: and all our works are to be done in God,
and referred to his glory, for so they will be stable and permanent for ever.
And because our works cannot be pleasing unto God, but by Christ; therefore let
us offer them unto him, accompanied with the works of his only and dearly
beloved Son Jesus, our Savior, that by his merits and grace, they may be
admitted into the sight of God. For Christ did put on our poverty, that he
might cloth us with his riches; and vouchsafed to walk, eat, fast, sleep,
watch, and to do like works for our profit, that we might offer them to his
Father; and by that oblation reap unto our souls no small vtility. And though
every one according to his particular talent given him by God, may profit more
or less by the exercise of Christian Works, without this direction of ours:
yet have we thought it not amiss to set down in the ensuing Treatise some few
things, touching this point, that may at least instruct, and give light to the
ruder sort, in matters of spirit and devotion.

THE TABLE of the Contents.
The Preface. page 1. The first Exercise. page 3. The second Exercise. page 11.
The III. Exercise. VVherin is delivered, how a soul may confound it self by
consideration of those things, that are under earth. page 24. The IIII.
Exercise: wherein is declared, how we ought to confound our selves by the
consideration of those things, that we see upon earth. page 34. The V.
Exercise. Wherein is delivered, how we may be confounded by the Conte^plation
of Celestial things. page 90.
A SHORT RVLE How to live well.
The VI. Exercise, Of the things, that man is to know for the saving of his
soul. Chap. I. page 108. Of the End of man. Cap. II. page 109. Of the means
to come to our End. Chap. III. page 110. Of the manner, how to practice the
aforesaid means. Cap. IIII. page 114.
The former part of this Rule.
The VII. Exercise, What we should do in the Morning. Chap. I. page 116. What
we are to do at Night. Chap. II. page 118. What it is meet for us to do in
the day time. Chap. III. page 120. How we may be present with devotion at
Mass. Chap. IIII. page 123. How to pray well, Chap. V. page 127. Remedies
against distractions. Chap. VI. page 130. How to hear the word of God with
profit. Chap. VII. page 133. How we must read Spiritual Books. Chap. VIII.
page 135. The manner of examining our Conscience. Chap. IX. page 138. How to
make a good Confession Chap. X. page 141. The causes, that ought to induce us
to true repentance for our syns. Chap. XI. page 115. The causes, for which it
is very good, and most expedient to go often to Confession. Chap. XII. page
154. Of the necessity, and vtility of a General Confession. Cap. XIII. page
157. How to communicate with fruit. Chap. XIIII. page 161. The causes, that
ought to induce us to the frequent receiving of this Sacrament. Chap. XV. page
166. Remedies for the avoiding of syns, and resisting of tentations. Chap. XVI.
The manner, how to possess our selves of some solid Virtue. Chap. XVII. page
173.
The second Part of this Rule.
The VIII. Exercise. What we are to do in behalf of God. Cap. I. page 176.
What we are to do in behalf of the Saints: and namely of the B. Virgin. Chap.
II. p^g. page 178. How we are to carry our selves toward our good Angel. Cap.
III. page 180. What our Good Angel does toward us. Chap. IIII. page 182. How
we ought to carry our selves toward our selves Cap. V. page 184. How we must
carry our selves toward our Neighbor. Cap. VI. page 186. How we must carry
our selves toward our Superiors. Cap. VII. page 189. Pious meditations upon
the Bead^ p. 193.
THE PRACTICE OF CHRISTIAN WORKS.
THE PREFACE.
THREE things there be, wherein it is good to exercise the mind, that the
works thereof may deserve to ascend to the sight, and presence of Gods Majesty.
And these be. First, that we confou^d our selus in every thing. Secondly, that
we give God thanks. Thirdly, that we crave and ask something at Gods hands.
And though a man may indeed exercise these three in all things: yet I mean to
accomodate them to such things only, which we have to do daily. And by these
you may easily understand, how to do in other things, and therefore to begin
with your first works in the morning, exercise your self as follows.

THE I. EXERCISE.
Confusion. 1. WHEN you put on your clothes, be you confounded, that you
cloth your self, when as Christ was stripped, and left naked upon the Cross
for your sake.

2. Thanksgiving. Give him thanks, for that he has put on our humanity for
us, whom he knew would be most ungrateful for so sovereign a benefit: and
for that he has clad us with the Garment of grace, which we have so often rent
in sunder.

3. Petition. Ask, and crave of him, that when putting on your clothes, you
cloth the naked, this work of mercy may be pleasing unto him, and beseech him
to grant you the same, by the ignominy of that garment, which Herod commanded
to be put upon his back.

1. Confusion. When you go to Church to hear mass be confounded, for that
your self being imperfect, you go to the Church to praise God, whom the
Angels, that are perfect, do praise continually.

2. Th^^kesgiuing. Give God thanks, that though you have gone out of his house
so often, carried away by sins, yet he still calls you home again, and
stands knocking at your door.

3. Petition. Ask by that charity, wherewith the most Blessed Virgin presented
her Son in the Temple, you may deserve to be presented to God, and to be made
the Temple of the Holy Ghost.

1. When you pray, consider the multitude of your sins, and say with the
Publican: Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

2. Thank God, for that Christ has prayed for you, and has obtained, that
you may be heard, when you pray.

3. Crave, that by the prayer, which he made in the desert for sinners, he will
vouchsafe to grant you those gifts, which he willed us to ask in the Pater
Noster, and you shall say it over once.

1. When you hear Mass, be confounded, for that you have prepared your self
negligently unto it, in presenting your self before God in Mass, and for that
the very continuance and long use of this benefit, which should have profited
you much toward the great esteeming thereof (for it is a sign of Christ's most
high charity) has made you negligent, and so ungrateful.

2. Thank him, for that he makes you an Angel, if you confess him, whom
you adore with a lively faith, since it apertaineth to Angels to be assistant
to God, and to praise him without ceasing.

3. Crave, that by that sacrifice whereof this is a testimony, he may imparte
unto you the merits of his blood: and by the virtue of this sacrifice, grant
you that abundance of tears, whereby to wash away your sins, and cause you to
rise again with Christ.

1. When you sit at the table be confounded for eating of his bread, to whom
you have been so false, unfaithful, and ingrate.

2. Thank him for this, that though you have hitherto been, and still are an
enemy to him, yet he has nourished and intertayned you.

3. Crave of him, that by that love, wherewith he filled great numbers of
people with a few loaves in the desert, he will vouchafe to feed you every day
with the bread of his grace.

1. In business, that concerns our own profit, or our neighbors, we must be
confounded, for that God pleases to take upon him our, and our neighbors
causes, who have been an occasion of hurt to our selves, and to our
neighbors, especially since it is a matter of so great moment to have a care of
our neighbors good and profit, in so much as Christ for that cause came into
the world, that he might take upon him our, and our neighbors cause.

2. We must thank him, for that, whereas he needed not such business at all,
yet the same are as pleasing unto him, as though he stood in need of them.

3. We must crave, that by that charity wherewith he said: I must be in those
t^inges, that be my Fathers, he will grant us to be ever occupied in those
things, that appertain to his honor, and glory.

1. When you suppe, be confounded for your negligences committed that day, and
therefore eat in sorrow, and say with the Prophet: My tears were to me bread
both day and night.

2. Thank him, that for you who were ungrateful for the benefit of dinner, he
has prepared a supper.

3. Crave of him, that by that charity, wherewith he gave himself in his last
supper, he may prepare and dispose us, that we may humbly receive him, and be
ever united unto him with the band of charity.

1. When you pray at your going to bed, be confounded for that when as Christ
did upon his Cross power out prayer with so great both love and sorrow for
you, yet you love him but a little, and sorrow for him less.

2. Thank him for this, that he dies, and that you live.

3. And crave of him, that by that heaviness which himself felt dying, and his
mother also had seeing him to dye, he will please to grant us this, that both
at our own death, we may remember his, and that for his death our death may be
accepted of his eternal father.

1. When at your going to bed you put off your clothes, be confounded, for that
you desire to rest in bed, and without your clothes also; when as Christ did
for you both sleep in his clothes, and had not where to repose and lay down
his head.

2. Give him thanks for that by those things which he suffered for you, he
despoiled you off your concupiscence.

3. Finally crave of him, that by the pain which he felt, when being to be
crucified, he was stripped off his clothes; he may strip us of our evil
habits of mind, and conditions, that naked of earthly things we may embrace
the Cross, and dying upon it, may deserve that nuptial garment, which the
eternal Father has prepared for all those that love him.

THE II. EXERCISE.
AND because it would be long to accommodate the form and manner of this
exercise to all our works, that which has been said may serve to show unto
us, how other things may be addressed according to the same rule. And if any
shall please further to exercise himself in other things, he may use this form
and manner following.

1. When he stands, let him remember Christ standing before Pilate the Judge.

2. When he sits, let him consider Christ sitting, when the wicked mocking
him, said: Hail King of Jews,

3. When he walks, let him think upon Christ passing through Samaria, and
going up to the Mount of Caluary.

4. When he is weary, let him contemplate Christ wearied of his journey, and
sitting upon the Well.

5. When he rides on horsback, let him reflect upon Christ sitting upon an
Ass, and entering into the City of Jerusalem.

6. When he visits the sick let him remember Christ visiting and healing the
sick.

7. When his good works are found fault with, let him call to his remembrance
the Jews accusation, and their murmuring against Christ, for healing on the
Sabbath day.

8. When any one gives him a sharp and churlish answer, let him think on
that answer made unto Christ when it was said: Do thou answer the High
Priest so? And that blow which the wicked minister gave Christ upon his most
sacred face.

9. When he is angry, let him call to remembrance that hunger which our Savior
endured in the desert.

10. When he is a cold, let him remember Christ trembling for cold in the
manger.

11 When he is a thirst of Christ thirsting upon the cross.

12. When he is awaked from sleep, of Christ awaked by his Apostles, when he
was a sleep in the ship.

13. When he is in diverse accidents abandoned o^ friends: o^ Christ forsaken
of his discipls leaving him, and running from him.

14. When he departs from friends: of our Saviors going from his Mother to
his Passion.

15. When his good works are detracted: of the detraction of the Jews, when
they said of our Savior: In the prince of the Devils he casts out Devils.

16. When he suffers contumely, or reproachful words openly: of our Savior
brought forth before the people by Pilate, when he said: Behold the man.

17. When he is falsely accused: of Christ falsely accused in Caiphas his house.

18. When he suffers injury: of Christ most unjustly condemned.

19. When sorrow, pain, or sickness troubles a man: let him remember Christ
scourged at the Pillar, crowned with thorns, and nailed upon the Cross, where
there was not any whole or sound part in him from the sole of the foot to the
crown of his head.

20. Finally when he is at the point of death: let him think upon Christ dying,
and recomme^ding his spirit into the hands of his Father.

And thus may a man in all things offer himself to Christ, whom he remembers
either to have done, or to have suffered the like. And so of these and the like
effects he, who shall out of charity diligently exercise himself in this
manner, may profit himself much.

And because we have hitherto, for the most part, laid down and proposed
examples only of external things without, we have thought good to add some few
also of things internal or within, and that especially, for spiritual
persons, who are not molested with the troubles, and travails of body so much,
as with those of spirit.

1. Wherefore when he sees that the counsel, which out of his charity, he
gives his neighbor, is not accepted of, let him remember, that Christ gave
counsel to many, and yet they contemned it.

2. When he sees God every where offended, and he is grieved and angry
thereat, let him remember, that Christ was once much moved at those, who
bought and sold within the Temple, and thereupon drove them out with a whip.

3. When he sees some spiritual friend of his to give over the way of virtue,
let him consider, what our Savior thought, and felt in himself, when he saw
Judas to abandone, and forsake the way of truth.

4. When he considers, how few Pastors there be in Gods house, who exercise
their function and charge as they ought, let him call to memory, what Christ
thought, when he said: The harvest is indeed great, but the workmen few: and
for that cause how sorely he wept.

5. When he is sorry, and grieved for his own defects: let him consider, that
our Lord saw them before they were, and was sorry for them.

6. When he sees any fallen from the state of perfection: let him call to
remembrance, how sorry our Savior was for S. Peter's fall, who had before
confessed him to be the Son of God, and had seen his Transfiguration upon
the Mount.

7. When he is troubled and pressed with tentations: let him call to mind the
tentations, that our Savior endured in the desert.

8. When he sees the society and company of the good displeasing to the bad:
let him consider, how Christ was afflicted in mind, when the Gerasens, to
whom, moved out of his charity and goodness, he came, desired him to depart
from them.

9. When he is sorry at his neighbors sins: let him remember, how Christ
coming near to Jerusalem wept upon it.

10. When he sees any to have an imperfect faith: let him remember, what
Christ said to his Disciples, who for their incredulity could not cast out a
devil: O incredulous generation, how long shall I bear with you?

11. When the bad scorn and mock the good: let him remember, how it was said
to our Savior upon the Cross: He has saved others, and can he not save
himself?

12. When they dye who have lived ill: let him consider, how our Lord sorrowed
much, seeing that few would profit themselves by the effussion of his blood.

13. When he feels a want of devotion in himself, let him reflect upon our
Savior, when he said: My God, my God, why had thou forsaken me?

14. When any blasphemeth the name of God, let him think that Christ had
forseen it long ago, and was sorry for it.

15. When he sees himself deprived of the familiarity with God, and has an
earnest desire to be most conjoined with him, or when he wishes to be exempted
and delivered from out of the dangers of this life, let him remember, how great
charity of Christ that was, when he prayed to his Father for that very thing,
in th^se words: Father, I pray for them, that all may be one, as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us.

These things (I say) are to be thus thought upon, when any thing happens,
and that our Savior in the like case thought and did the like: and to him we
must always offer and present whatsoever we either do, or suffer. And heerin
every one ought to use much care and diligence, and not to suffer so notable
occasion of profiting his soul offered hereby, to escape him. Else it will be
a note, not only of a foul negligence, but also of notable ingratitude, if we
make so light an esteem of those things that concern our souls good so
much, and may be easily obtained.

Wherefore I am to entreat and exhort thee, o Soul, whatsoever thou be, not to
neglect so great a good, but to consider, how easy a matter it is, that God
exacteth of thee, and how great a thing he desires to give thee. For he asks
of thee but those things, which thou were bound to do, though he required them
not at thy hands: for thou must go, walk, eat, take pains, be sick, and dye
at last. All which and such other things, if thou do, or suffer for thine
own sake, or for the world, besides that they will be laborious and painful,
thou shall reap no fruit at all by them. But if thou do, or suffrest them
for the love of Christ, both thy pain and labor will be eased (for Christ
does recreate them, who take pains for him:) and when all thy

them greater then that of the devils: Who I say, would it not confound, who
has experience of Gods so great patience, and seeing his justice executed in
so rigorous a manner toward the Devils, yet so mercifully affoardeth him
respight and time of penance? And this ought to move every one the more, for
that men are wont to use that diligence in persuading others to leave sin,
which yet we read not any where was done to Lucifer. Neither do men draw others
their like into sin by words and signs alone, as Lucifer did, but also by
importune perswasio^s, entreaties, money, by threats by honor, by life, and by
whatsoever other ways they can: in so much as the malice of men may seem in
this respect to exceed the malice of Lucifer. And this alone ought so far to
depresse and abate our pride, and to put so great a confusion into us, as by it
at least in some part, that punishment might be recompensed which our sins
deserve in hell.

To this is further added, that the wickedness (not to say the madness) of men,
proceeds so far sometimes, as it is wont also to provoke the Devil to tempt
them, and to present them as it were weapons to kill themselves: in so much as
they may seem to do very ill, who are wont to lay all the fault and blame of
their hurt upon the devil, whereof themselves are the cause. And if those, who
have drawn others into a mischief, dare scarcely for very shame stand amongst
them before a Judge of this world, of how great confusion think you must he
needs be full, who considers himself to be presented together with the
Devils before the Tribunal of Christ?

And if a man would seriously bethink himself of these things as he ought, he
might verily (yea and ought to) be as much confounded for his own malice while
he manifestly understands, how sore punishments he has deserved for his
sins, not only in this life, but in that also which shall never have an end.
So doing, all will seem light to him, that he suffers in this life, if he
compare it with that, which he was to suffer and endure in hell, if God should
deal with him according to his deserts. And therefore let him with all
confusion and shame, both acknowledge his own misery, and crave that mercy
which notwithstanding he thinks himself most unworthy of.

And to the end none, who thinks himself free from those evils, of which we
have spoken before, may be persuaded, that there is not any cause, wherefore he
should be much confounded: let every one so think touching that matter with
himself, that there is no cause, why he should esteem less humbly of
himself, but is more bound to be ashamed in himself, for that the only grace
of God does every moment deliver him from so many and so great evils, which if
it were not always present, who is there that would not fall into the pit of
sin, and become worthy of everlasting punishment? And since he has escaped
them through Gods mercy, what thanks then does he not owe to him? And certes,
they have great cause to be confounded, who notwithstanding they do continually
make an experiment of Gods so great mercy toward them, are nevertheless so
ungrateful to him. And they ought to humble themselves so much the more, the
less worthy they acknowledge themselves of Gods grace: and it is their part to
do nothing less in the service of God, then they would do, if they were drawn
and delivered out of Hell.

If every one would but consider this obligation rightly, and understand that
he is able to render God very little for the greatness of his benefits, he would
not be discouraged at all, but would comfort himself with that admonition of
the Prophet, when he says: Let not the humble, confounded, he turned away from
thee: the poor and needy shall praise thy name.

Again, if a man has many things, for which he may confound himself before
the devils, he has no less cause to confound himself before the rest of the
damned, when he understands, that many are condemned to everlasting torments,
but for one sin only. Wherefore what is it meet for him to think of
himself, who knows himself to have committed so many and so grievous
sins? And verily he that apprehends these things at the heart, ought to go
as far beyond them, if he be able, in confounding himself, as he goes beyond
them in sins.

And if you consider them who are in Limbo, and with how great mercy God has
delivered you from many dangers, that are wont to happen; and brought you at
length to the grace of baptism, that you might not fall into that misery:
there is in truth great cause, why you should lament your so great ingratitude,
and wash it away with tears: and so much the more, for that they, who are in
Limbo, never committed any mortal sin: and you, as often as you have
committed it, so often have deserved hell. And if they for a less sin are
thrust down into a deep place or dungeon, with what face dare you live upon
earth, who have so often offended God most grievously? And with what eyes dare
you contemplate the vision of God, whereof they are for a far less fault
deprived? And if you consider these things aright, you will not dare, I know,
to behold them, who are in Limbo, with attentive eyes, while you compare your
own sins with theirs.

But the consideration of them, who are in Purgatory, ought to confound us so
much the more, for that they, though now in a safe place, and delivered out of
so great evils of the world, certain also not to offend God any more, and
gotten into an harbor, be nevertheless in pains: but we are both turmoyled in
storms, and uncertain of our salvation, and what shall become of us at last,
living among most crafty, and most cruel enemies, and continual dangers. And
if any be confounded the less, for that he understands, that they are
punished deservedly for their sins: Let him so think, that some are
peradventure there tormented by occasion of his either example, or bad
counsel, or scandal, or negligence drawn into sin: and that many are
detayned and held there the longer, for want of his help by prayers, and other
suffrages. And let this consideration confound him, whosoever he be, for that
he has been an occasion unto them of their suffering, and pains, and has
given them no help, or little at all toward their ease and releasement: and
let him think, that their own faults, and his, be the cause, that he knows
not, whether they are to be purged with the fire of Purgatory alone.

THE IIII. EXERCISE. Wherein is declared, how we ought to confound our selves
by the consideration of those things, that we see upon Earth.
IF in comparison of those, who are guilty, we be found more guilty, what shall
we I pray you, appear to be before the things, that be not hurtful at al? For
if the consideration of those who have sinned, does greatly abate and quail
our pride, how much more ought the remembrance of those things humble us,
which have never yet in any thing swarued from their Creatours Commandment? The
poor Creatures of the Earth, I mean, which having but a sensitive life, do
exceedingly condemn our disobedience, Ingratitude and negligence. For the
earth, which produces and brings forth fruit, does reprehend us, who are
altogether unfruitful, and barraine. And how much does the water, whiles it
ouerfloweth and watreth the meadows, quenches the thirst, and does those
things, for which God has given it for the use of men, condemn those, who
deny it their Creator, when they omit to give it unto a poor beggar, craving
it in his name.

How does the fire, whiles it makes the flesh sweet, and sauory, censure the
cruelty of those who unmercifully handle the flesh of their neighbor? How much
does the Air, which continually intertayneth our life, vpraid us of our
negligence in the service of God, whom but this one thing alone binds us by
a most strait band to serve God? And how much ought the rocks which were rent,
(though insensible) in the passion of Christ, to confound our hardness, and
inciuility.

Honey is sweet to the taste, but we are most bitter to God. The smell of flowers
is pleasant, but how great is the stench of our sins? The plants grow, and
raise themselves upwards, but man, whiles he pursues base and contemptible
things, does abase himself every day more and more. And how much better for him
were it to imitate even the trees herein, which the more roots they take, and
the deeper they grow in the ground, the more virtue do they draw from them to
the bows: for so a man, if he should take deep root of Humility, would make a
great increase of virtues. And whom would not the services of the brute beasts
move, especially seeing they do it to them, who by their sins have made
themselus like unto beasts? And how much more worthy is he, who handles them
ill, or he, who is handled ill? Or who would not by good right marvel, that
these beasts be obedient to them, who yet are rebellious to the will of God.
The silly sheep cloatheth you with his skin, and with his fleece, and
nourishes you with his flesh, and when as you should use them to the honor of
God, you abuse these and other the benefits of God: and while you seek a
thousand ways to satisfy your concupiscence, you injury both God, and his
creatures.

The beasts carry men upon their backs, and ease them wearied of their labor,
and therein they diligently obey their Creator, who has made them for that
end: but you on the other side do either think upon, or seek after nothing
less, then your own end, whose part it were to allow God some rest, if I may
so say, since you receive so much comfort and ease by his creatures in your
labor and pains. We must not indeed think, that God needs any rest, since
he is the supreme felicity of himself, and of all things else, yet such is his
benignity, as he would be thought to rest in the minds of the just, since as he
says: It is his delight to be with the children of men, though of them he also
does not without cause complain in these words: I have labored sustayning. O
how great a confusion ought this word to work in us, since by our works we
occasion to God this pain, and travail, who ought to have been to him the
cause of quiet, and rest? And therefore it was not said of the brute beasts,
but of men: I repent my self to have made man.

Let this, o dust and ashes, humble thee: let this draw tears from thine eyes,
and this especially, when thou find that a creature by the service done thee
causes thee rest and ease, and yet thou do not thy self the like toward
God. And when thou give thy beast meat, think thus how much more meet it
is, that thou serve them, then they thee, since they have never been
rebellious, or ungrateful to God, as thou have ever been, and still art.

Let the wisdom of Serpents, who are said to put one ear close to the
ground, and stop the other with their tail, that they may not hear the voice
of the enchanter, put you in mind of your imprudence, who have not yet learned
to stop your ears against the tentations of the Devil. Again, let the Ant
upbraid you of your sloth, and carelesnes, that prepares those things in
Summer, that may be for her use in time of winter. And this very thing alon
conde^neth your negligence, who prepare not now to furnish your self with those
merits, whiles you live, which you shall stand most in need of after this life.

And that you may have a more spacious field, and matter to meditate upon,
consider the Bees, the silly worms, and other the like creatures, in which you
shall find many things to be wondered at, and which may stir up in you a
confusion of your self, all which we do purposely omit for the avoiding of
prolixity, and for that it was our meaning only, as it were with our finger to
point at the matter, which every one may think upon, leaving deeper and more
profound circumstances to greater and more excellent wits.

And in the mean time we are to admonish this by the way, that there is in
every creature great matter for our confusion, if as often as any of them shall
come to our mind, or represent it self to our eyes, we persuade our selves,
that as often we have offended God our Creator, we have deserved not only to
be deprived of their use and service, but also they should revenge upon us the
injury, that is done to God. And because we set that they have not yet done it,
but do us still service: how great praises and thanksgiving, together with
all humility, and subjection, owe we to Gods mercy, and how often ought we to
present and offer our alacrity and readynes of service unto him?

Neither let a man be afraid to enter into consideration of some other kinds
of beasts, as whiles he either behouldeth a Sow wallowing her self in the
mire, or when he sees a Dog licking up again, what he had cast up before: let
him think, that himself is much more filthy then they. And that every one may
judge things aright, and as reason would require, it is to be understand, that
nothing of it self is ill, but as far forth as it is ill in the sight of God,
or by Gods judgment. Wherefore since what we have said of the Sow, and the Dog
(as being things unto them natural) is not reputed ill before God, the same
is not to be thought to be ill by us: but this is rather to be considered what
a thing it is to a sinner, or what punishment he deserves, when the sow does
according to nature, whiles she walloweth in the mire: and he does against his
nature, since he neither loves God, nor serves him: and where as he lies
quietly in sin, in how much more filthy mire walloweth he, then does the Sow?
and how much more fowly and shamefully returns he (when he goes back again
to the sin, that he had left before) to his vomit, then does the Dog? And let
that confound him, and so much the more, for that he knows it to be greatly
displeasing to God. And therefore let not the facts of some unreasonable
creatures call any man back from the co^founding of himself, but let every one
be confounded and ashamed for his own misdeeds, who out of his free will was
able, and ought to avoid and shun all evil. And this may serve the turn to
be said of those creatures, that want reason.

IT now follows, that we say somewhat, how the consideration of reasonable
creaturs, that is, of our neighbors, ought to confound us. Of these some are
our Superiors, some our equals, and some inferiors. I will say a few things
touching Superiors, since their authority, and power over you, ought so to
move you to submission, and humility, while they are present, as unless you
carry your self very lowly before them, you may seem to want the judgment of
reason, who consider not, what manner of person, and whose they carry. And let
it confound you, and strike a great fear into you, for that since they are Gods
Ministers, they punish you not, who have offended the divine Majesty.

Wherefore if they command you any thing, if they reprehend you or find fault
with you, if they chastize or mortify you, it ought to seem light, and sweet
unto you, though to others it may seem hard, whether you think what you have
deserved, or whether you remember what you did in former tyms under the power
of the Devil, when I say, you served sin under his standard, and were under
his subjection in matters not to be endured, for as much as he used you for his
executioner and hangman, when he moved you to the committing of murder in
thought word, or deed; when through your examples, or persuasions many falling
into sin, went at length down headlong into hell. And if you consider this so
miserable servitude rightly with your self, all that your Superiors command
you, will seem sweet especially when as they command not to do any thing, but
what appertains to a quiet life and full of fraternall charity: and you will
deem your self unworthy of those superiors, who be themselves the Ministers
of the Prince of peace, and be unto you a great occasion of meriting life
everlasting. And thus much touching Superiors.

THE consideration of your Equals shall confound you thus, if you shall think
your self unworthy to be said to be equal to them, to whom you are not
inferior in dignity, or office: for as much as you must contemplate their
virtues, in which they excel you, and are better then you before God. And that
you may thoroughly be persuaded therein, think with your self thus, that none
in what is naught, is better known to you, then you are to your self: for as
much as you know certainly of your self that you think and desire many
things, and those naughtily, and that the secret sins of others are not so
certain, or well known unto you. And if it be so, that you are certain of
your sins, and that you are not certain of others sins, you have just
cause to think your self worse then others, and consequently inferior unto
them. Wherefore, if you see any sick, when you are hole and in health your
self, be not proud thereof, but rather consider with humility, that our Father
of heaven handles him as his beloved child, and that your self are unworthy
of paternall correction, and of his chastizment of love. Again, if your self
be sick, think that you have deserved it for your sins; and that others, who
enjoy good health, have the benefit of it, as those who stand not in need of
any great satisfaction for their sins.

If you be rich, fear this sentence of Christ himself: How hard a matter it
is for them, who have and possess money, to enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
If your Neighbor be rich, think that God has worthily increased his talent,
for that he is a faithful dispensour of his Masters goods.

If you be poor, ascribe it to Gods just judgment, and to your own
deseruings, who have either wasted the spiritual goods, that God has bestowed
upon you, or have not helped your poor neighbors with your substance when you
were able, and might, or with prayers, or such other like alms. If your
neighbor be poor, think that God has granted him his desire, and has
bestowed a great benefit upon him, since in poverty he is become like unto our
Savior himself. And if you shall carry your self thus in matters, concerning
your Neighbors, and think of them, and of your self as reason shall persuade
you, shall never want matter of confusion.

Neither think, that there will be matter wanting also in Inferiors: for they
though inferior in place and office, are not to be contemned, but are rather
to be made the more reckoning of, for that God lays the greater burdens upon
them, as being stronger, and better able to bear them, while he deals gently
with you, as with one of a weaker body, who cannot (such is your infirmity and
weakness) live as they do, since you have not so much courage, or forces, as you
are able both night and day to suffer much, and many things. And if you think,
with how great alacrity and cheerefullnes of mind most of them go through with
their travails, and pains, and with how little they content the^ selves in
intertayning their life: finally if with their virtue and courage you compare
your own coldness and faintnes of heart, you must needs have great matter of
confusion.

When your servants attend upon you, let this confound you, that when as your
self have abandoned and forsaken Christ, and denied him due respect and
honor, yet they follow you, and honorably attend you. Think moreover, that
they serve you, who are created to enjoy heaven and that, while you are in
sin, and they in Gods grace, you are unworthy your self to serve the^. Let
that example of our Savior confound you, when he washed his disciples feet:
let that be an occasion of humbling you, when he said: I came not to be served
unto, but to serve. Finally let their creation confound you before all, for as
much as they are made to the Image, and likeness of God, and are so dear unto
the eternal Father, as he gave his only Son for them.

And this ought to confound you before the Infidells themselves, when as they
be created to the same Image, and Christ dyed for them all: and you ought to be
more confounded before them, for this, for that they being destitute of the
light of faith, and of those things, wherewith God is wont to comfort his, do
nevertheless endure many and great matters in fastinges, ceremonies, and such
other like things: and you being a Christian, and illuminated with the grace of
the holy Ghost, and assisted and helped with the gift of fortitude, and
supported with the love of God, be so wearyed, and do faint in every the least
thing, as you think not your self able to endure a little penance: and if
you do, you think you do some great matter. And therefore let the Infidells
stir you up to confusion, and think with your self oftentimes this, that if
the virtues had been done in Tire and Sidon, that are done in you, they had
long ago done penance in haire-cloath, and ashes, that is, if the Infidells
had received the light of faith, that you have, how much more thankful would
they have been to God, then you are?

Wherefore be sorry, that you are so unprofitable, and such, as you ought also
to be confounded before the Jews. They did indeed crucify Christ once, but yet
not knowing him: but you have crucified him so often by sinning, whom you
nevertheless knew to sit on the right hand of his Father in glory. And if they
confound you, how much ought every Christian man (think you) confound you? For
if we give honor to the image of an Angel for him whom it represents, in
how great honor is it meet to have him, who carries in himself the image of
Christ living, and is God by participation, as is written: I said, you are
Gods, and all Sons of the Highest.

And to make an end of those things, that concern our neighbors, one thing is
to be observed, which I think greatly helps to the conservation of
confusion: and this is, that the Devil does on all hands, and by all the ways
that he can, opugne this Exercise, and so mightily, as a man needs to use
much diligence, who means not to receive any hurt from him. And therefore it
behooves us to have gotten such an habit, as whenever we have any thing to
do, or deal in with our Neighbors, we have, and carry that respect to every
one, as though they were all either our betters, or masters, and hear them
speak with that attention, as if God himself did speak by them; and our
special care must be, that we beware to prefer our own judgment before
theirs. And herein we are wont to offend for two causes.

The one is, for that none is a competent and fit Judge in his own cause: the
other is, for that sometimes out of flatering our selves, and often out of
ignorance we esteem not of matters, as we ought, and should do: in so much as
thereupon the subtle, and crafty are recommended for wise, and such as scoff
at all things, are reputed prudent and discreet, whereas we are
notwithstanding to deem the contrary of them. Wherefore the securest and
safest way in the privileges both of grace, and of nature, is to fear, least
we be deceived, and also to give the glory to God in all things, that we shall
see in others, and ever to interpret all in the best manner. And if they
should happen to do any thing, that may not seem aright we must not censure
them (since we may not be any others judge but our own) but we must either
excuse the fact, or by turning our mind from that matter consider their good
deeds, and compare our own vices with their virtues, that we may not
ouerslippe, in doing otherwise, any degree of confusion in our selves.

And therefore if we shall see any to sin mortally, let us think, that he
either did it of ignorance, or is already returned into Gods grace by penance
and repentance, and that, that sin will be unto him an occasion of doing
greater penance here, and withal of more perfect glory in heaven. And that
no occasion of confounding our selves may be lost, we are to observe, in
conversation, where greater dangers are wont to be, that if any speak of
meeknes, he call to mind his own passions of anger: if mention be made of
beautiful things, he remember the fowlenes of his own sins: if speech be
had touching the power and might of great personages, he consider how he is
himself nothing, and how he can do nothing, even then also, when he labors
most of all to do some thing: if a man speak of avarice let him reflect upon
his own inordinate desires: if of humility, let him think upon his own pride,
and so in the rest. When mention is made of vices, let him remember his own:
and when talk is had of virtues, let him call to remembrance, how he wants
them. And thus doing he shall ever have store of matter of confusion in
himself, and that in conversation especially, where there is greatest danger of
omitting and forgetting the confou^ding of our selves.

But to come nearer to that confusion, which arises of the consideration of
our own affairs, we are to touch some few things briefly, a more profound
and more exact consideration whereof we leave to the Reader himself.

Wherefore let this confound a Prelate, that where Christ says: I give my life
for my sheep: himself is so negligent in feeding his own sheep, as he knows
them not all.

If he be a Priest, let him confound himself, and consider, when as our
Savior says: Who ministers unto me, let him follow me: what way he has
held himself and what he has done with those hands, wherein he is wont in the
sacrifice of Mass to hold the very body of our Savior.

If he be a preacher, let him be confounded, that he exercises the office and
place of Christ, and yet follows not the examples of him, whom he preaches,
neither does the works agreeable to that which he says, and let him remember
that of the Prophet: The speeches of our Lord be chaste speeches: and let him
consider, if he be not a vessel clean enough, how great confusion he is
worthy of: and let him fear this saying of the same Prophet: God said unto the
sinner, wherefore do thou deliver my justices, and take upon thee to
deliver my testament by thy mouth? And if S. Paul were afraid, least when he
preached to others, himself might become reprobate, what and how great cause
has every Preacher to fear, and greatly to confound himself?

Again, let Schoolemaisters, and such as teach, be confounded, as those that
stand most in need of confounding themselves. For the Apostle says: Knowledge
puffs up. And if any be proud for his knowledge and learning, for that very
cause he ought to be most of all confounded, for as much as in that behalf he
is more wise, and has a better conceit of himself, then he should.

Let the Disciples and Scholars be confounded for their ignorance, who unless
they were, and should be taught, are like to the brute beasts: and also for
that they both little profit in learning themselves, and do as little good to
others by that which they know, when as notwithstanding the more they excel
in wisdom, the more ought they to profit many. Finally, for that the more
learned they are, and more increase in knowledge, the more they add to their
pain, and sorrow.

But the Religious man, ought to be confounded much more before Infidells, and
before the rest of Christians, since to him there is not only given the light of
faith, but also is made participant by a special privilege of a life, deuoid
of all solicitude, and care. Let him be confounded, for that he is chosen out
of many thousands, who if they had been called, would have been much more
grateful, and more pleasing to God. Let him be also confounded, for being so
negligent, and distracted in the Quire, where the Angels assist before God:
let him be confounded for the services done him by the brethren in the Kitchen,
in the infirmary, and else where, who is not worthy either to be served or
assisted by any, or who should serve or assist any other himself. Let the
meat set before him in the Refectory to eat, confound him, which God causes
to be prepared and made ready for him without any his pain, or care at all.
The apparel also that he wears, and all the other provision of the house
prepared for his use, together with those things which men, by whose
travail, and pains, industry, and skill the fields and grounds are plowed
and sown with corn, and through whose care all things, yiedling forth
fruit, are brought to ripeness, and in conclusion return to his profit. And
above all things this should confound him most, for that he is called Gods
servant, to whom nevertheless he oftentims becomes an enemy. Which verily is a
name in which the most B. Virgin did after a sort glory, when she called her
self Gods Handmaid.

Again, let nothing confound a Religious man more, then Gods house, wherein he
dwells as a child of his, when as notwithstanding he is so far from the
perfection of his Father of heaven, and as many steps as he has made therein,
in so many as it were waves is he plunged in the sea, and gulf of confusion.
For if holiness beseems the house of our Lord; how does God endure iniquity in
it? Or why be not the cold, and indeuout thrust out of the house of prayer?
Again, if Gods house be such a place, as the great both King and Prophet David
chooses rather to dwell in it, then any where else, and holds him self for
contemned and outcast in it, for the bliss of heaven, how great ought the
confusion of that man to be, who abides in it against his will? Or if he
stays willingly there, is nevertheless ungrateful to God, for that his so
great a benefit?

Moreover let all the Ceremonies of Religion confound him, when as he either
understands not what they mean, or marketh the^ not, or thinks the^
burdenous, or else cares not for them, as nothing profiting him.

Let him be confounded, when he asks alms for the love of God, since it is a
matter of singular privilege: and let him think, what a matter it is that
God, as one who stands in need, makes himself a debtour for him unto them,
who give him any thing when he beggeth, and has put him in trust with his
treasure. And if he has at any time not spent those things. that are given
him for Gods sake to that use, for which he craved them, let him he confounded
as sacrilegious, who depriueth God of that, which others at his entreaty did
give to God. Let him think, that when he beggeth as a poor beggar, unless he
be poor in mind, and intention he craves under a false title: and if he
asks of curiosity, and against that which Gods will is he should do, he is a
deceauer, and robs the neighbor of his money, after the manner of those who
beg with false and forged Licenses.

Finally let him be confounded, for that when he asks in the name of God, he
does the office of the Angels, who as Gods messengers do ever beg of men; of
some to relieve and help the poor, of others to pardon and forgive the
injuries don to them, and of others to give the honor and glory that they owe
to God. And when he shall receive alms let him be confounded, for that he is
ingrate, and thankles both to God, and to his Neighbor. And by so doing, when
he is to ask any thing he will begin to be confounded, as one, who
understands and knows well how great an obligation it is, whereunto the
alms received binds him, and he will crave only what is necessary, since the
greater his band, and obligation shall be, the more he shall take.

And when he goes in pilgrimage, let him beware, that this thought enter not
into his mind, that he think himself to lead an Apostolical life, but let
him rather think, that it is appointed him for his penance. And if he be of
the number of the recluse, or of such as live in Cloisters, let him think,
that it was our Lords will to remove him, as an unruly and untamed beast, from
the conversation and company of men.

If he be a King, or a Prince let him be confounded, for that he is in that
state, which our B. Savior fled from, when the Jews would have created him a
King. And marvel it is, that any dare take that charge upon him, which Christ
himself refused, unless he peradventure take it for his Cross, and undergo it
for the love of Christ.

Let owners, masters and such as be possessed of Lands, be confounded for
being very diligent in gathering and heaping up rents and revenues, and as
negligent on the other side in punishing public sins. And let them be
afraid for using money and other goods, as their own, and for not remembering
him, at whose hands they have received and had all. Let them be confounded for
making great esteem of themselves, when they relieve the poor with alms,
whiles they think not, that they give what is another, and render unto God
what is his, and that God does them a great good turn, and pleasure in that,
in which they think themselves to do a benefit. And if they ought to confound
themselves even then, when they give alms, how much more are they to do it,
when they spend their money in vain, and wastefull uses.

Again, a Knight must think, that he has taken the sword upon him for the
defense of Gods holy Church, Catholic, and Apostolical, and for the
advancement of Gods honor. And if the desire of his own honor take away the
memory, and remembrance of the other, and he prefer his own honor before
that of God, what is he else then a persecutor of the Church of Christ, and his
Gospel? And therefore let him be confounded as faythles, and false to God,
and let him think, though he be held and deemed for a man of honor amongst
men, that he is yet but a slave of sin, and for that cause by the judgment of
God, and of his Saints in no sort worthy of honor, but one ordained, and
deputed to be punished in Hell for ever.

Let servants be confounded for being so sollicitous in gayning the favor of
their Masters: which diligence if they had used in the service of God, how
much sooner had they found more true favor at his hands, for to serve him then
others?

Let Judges think, with what severity they pronounce sentence against the
guilty, and let them be confounded for not apprehending nor fearing the
judgment of God, of which it is written: Most hard judgment shall be to them,
who rule and command.

Let the Advocates be confounded, that though they patronize, and defend other
men's causes, yet they are very negligent touching their own conscience:
neither let them be proud for that they see others to need their help: for
they stand themselves in need of the help of many also, even in those things,
that appertain to their souls.

Let the Physicians be confounded, when they consider, how they handle their
patients; And if they knew, when themselves should fall sick, with how great
diligence would they seek and procure the recovery of their health? Let them
also think upon the wounds of their souls, and thereat be confounded, for
that when as they be called physicians, yet they are more skillfull in
procuring of their own sickness by sin, then in putting it away.

Let Merchants be confounded for the care, which they use in buying cheap, and
in selling dear, and for those things that they remain ignorant of; and know
not how to buy the kingdom of heaven, which is given Gratis: and yet they buy
Hell, which both costeth them dear, and is possessed with pain.

And to come to the tradesmen of the common wealth, let the Tailors be
confounded and ashamed, who take so much care and study in making other men's
apparel, while themselves are notwithstanding very negligent in conseruing
their own garment of innocence, which they received in Baptism.

Let the Shoomakers be confounded, who though they be able to enter and pierce
most hard leather with their alls, will not for all that suffer Gods
inspirations to enter into their minds.

And whose wit may serve him to speak of the state of Women as it deserves,
in these times especially, in which the vanity of them is grown to so great an
excess.

Wherefore let Virgins be confounded for having thought upon marryage. For
though it be a thing lawful, yet how much better is it for them to be
contented with Christ for their spouse alone: and they would indeed content
themselves with Christ alone, if they should love him with all the love they
are able.

Let the married be confounded for being over diligent, and curious in decking
themselves, and in wasting and spending so much time and money in that respect:
and contrariwise for being most negligent, and careless in putting on Christ.
When they put their chains of gold about their neccks, let them remember, that
Christ's chains were of iron, and were put upon him for his ignominy, and
disgrace. When they put on their bracelets upon their arms, let them think
upon the binding of Christ's hands. When they cloth themselves in their
gorgeous and costly array, let them remember that Christ had a garmen^ most
ignominious put upon his back. (And let not only Women, but men also be
confounde^ who, when as they wear such gay and costly apparel, do no^ ^nswere
Christ's reproaches, as they ought.) And if they would but consider the works of
their hands they would, no doubt pull their rings of their fingers, as from
members that are not worthy the setting forth, since they have done works
unworthy Christian women.

Let widows be confounded, who so grievously lament the death of their
husbands, for that since God has taken away from them all the impediments of
perfect Love toward him, they be so thankles for so great a benefit; in so
much as they may seem to give to understand, that they were better content
with the creature, then with the Creator; and that they in a manner m^ no
reckoning of God by taking the death of their husbands impatiently. For they
complain, that their husbands be taken from them: but indeed God has much
more just cause to complain of them, who sees himself to be contemned by
them. And therefore let them be confounded, and let them hear how our Lord
complains of them in these words: They have forsaken me, the fountain of the
living waters, and have dug themselves decayed cisterns, which are not able
to hold water. And that: What iniquity have they found in me, for that they
have estranged themselves from me?

And this may be enough touching different states, least we may seem to
exceed and go beyond the bounds of our intended breuity: and withal for that
it is an easy matter, of what we have said to make a conjecture of other
things, and to set them down. And if any will diligently consider those
things, that we have remembered before, he may ever have occasion of confounding
himself.

And now to come to our inward powers: be thou, O Man, confounded touching thy
Memory. For since thou know, that thy Creator has given thee this
wonderful power for this, that thou might remember him both ever and
sweetly; yet thou have lodged many base and contemptible things in it, and
therein have so occupied and busied it, as thou have scarce time or leisure to
remember him who gave thee it, in so much as it serves nothing at al less
then it does the Creator. Wherefore be thou confounded and ashamed, for that
thou have abused it to the injury of thy Lord; and for that whereas thou art
often put in mind by the Church, who thou art, by ashes every year put upon
thy head, and by saying of these words: Remember man, that thou art dust, and
to dust thou shall return: and of the Scriptures, one while of thine end, when
it says: Remenber the last things: and another while of those things, that
Christ suffered for thy sake, when it says: Remember my poverty, and my
transgression, the gall, and wormwood: And of other things often at other
times; yet thou seem to remember nothing less then these and the like, and
have just cause to weep, and to say with the Prophet: My soul refuses to be
conforted: I was mindful of God, and, I was delighted: and, to be confounded
the more, for that thou have sometimes recreated thy self in the obliuio^ of
God.

And now to come to the Understanding, how large a scope of confusion does
represent it self in it to thee, which for as much as it understands that it
is created to this end, that it might understand the supreme God, does
notwithstanding often think not only upon vain unprofitable and transitory
things, but also most bad: and is finally occupied in those things, whereunto
it knows it should not attend. Thou have, certes, just cause to weep, and to
lament this ill of thine, with all the confusion, thou can possibly procure,
and stir up in thy self.

And what shall we say of the Will, wherewith, when as thou should love God
above all things, thou have affected those things, which it is a shame to
think of, much more to speak? What (I say) shall I say of thee, o blind Will,
which have preferred the pleasure of thy senses before the goods of heaven?
Which when the sweet charity and love of God might place amongst the
Seraphims, the foul and filthy love of the world has thrown down into hell.
Thy powers, O soul, ought worthily to confound the, in which thou have so
foul an image of God.

Thou may indeed, and ought with, grief to blame them with these words:
Behold Adam is become as it were one of us: and to complain of them in this
manner: Who, O powers, who O imare of God, I say, has married you? who, O
Memory, has spoiled thee of the memory of God? Who, o Understanding, has
deprived thee of thy judgment? Who, O Will, has deceived thee? O how fitly,
O soul, may this be said of thee: H^^ Princes are become as Rams, not having
pastures to feed in? For as Rams, when they find not pastures, thy powers, as
though they had not any pasturing in God, have sought out impoisoned pastures
to feed in, and for that cause their forces fail them, and therefore thou
ought to be exceedingly confounded in thy self.

Let us pass over to the Se^ses. God has indeed given thee eyes, that by
beholding the beauty of his creatures, thou might love him in all and every
thing, and give him thanks for all: but thou contrariwise make havoc and
wast of all things, that thou see, either as one raging and mad with anger,
or desiring with a covetous mind. And therefore when as thine eyes ought to
be ever before Gods (As the eyes of the handmaid in the hands of her mistres)
they do often become Basilisks, which with their sight do kill whatsoever they
look upon.

Wherefore be thou confounded, for having converted the light, that has been
given thee, into darkness: for shutting thine ears against holy inspirations,
and opening them to hear murmurings and detractions: for accursing men with
thy tongue, wherewith thou should have blessed them: for having accustomed thy
self to this, that nothing might be vnspleasant to thy smell, and yet thou
feel not the loathsome stench of syn: And finally for that all seems hard
to thee, if thou were to suffer any thing for Christ, and that again sweet,
which thou endurest for the world. Wherefore lament the evils and miseries of
thy Senses, and let the remembrance thereof draw and wrest from thee humble,
and hearty tears and those full of confusion.

And if all this be not enough let thine Head confound thee, for that it is not
yet pricked with thorns: let the hairs of thy head confound thee that they are
not yet pulled of: let thine hands, and feet confound thee, that they are not
pierced through with nails: finally, let the rest of thy members confound thee
for that they cannot be moved, but by the virtue and power of God, and yet
thou have persecuted Christ with thy feet, wounded him with thy hands and
works, and hurt him with thy tongue.

Finally, if thou consider the matter with an upright judgment, thou art alone
unto thy self a great matter of confusion. For there is not any thing in thee,
whereof, if thou diligently bethink thy self, thou ought not greatly to be
confounded. And if there be many things with in thee, which thou understand
not, even for that alone thou have most great cause of confusion, for that thou
know not thy self thoroughly. For what thy soul is, or what it has in it,
or how it is united to thy body, or how it is to be severed from thy body, if
thou demand of thy self, I know thou can not answer me. And if thou be so
ignorant in things appertayning to thy self, how ignorant, I pray thee, must
thou needs be in matters that concern others? This in the mean time is true,
that both in those things that thou know touching thy self, and in those
that thou know not, there is presented thee great and abundant matter of
confusion.

And if any should in this place object unto me, that there is not found matter
of confusion in good works, but in the bad only; I would stand in denial
thereof, for as much as I am of opinion, that we ought to be confounded in our
good works also, for this; for that we be so weak to good, and again so prone
and ready to ill, as it is more to be wondered, that any good could proceed out
of so corrupted a nature, then a Rose to grow out of a rose-bush. For it is
natural for a rose-bush to bring forth roses; but man's nature alone cannot of
it self produce a good or perfect work, for as much as nothing can be
pleasing to God without his grace. Wherefore he, that meruaileth at a Rose
growing amongst thorns, ought to wonder much more, that any good is done of
himself, and to be so much the more confounded for that he sees, that God, as
in a barraine soil, and such as were worthy to be destroyed with salt, for the
most great sins co^mited against God, works wonderful matters, and
perseuereth and continues to manure and husband it. And therefore we may, and
ought to be confounded, not only of our bad works, but of our good also. For
if we do any good, God has begun, prosecuted, and accomplished the same in us:
and it is our part, as a thing peculiar and proper to us alone, to confound and
humble our selves more and more, who have so often resisted God, and have
through his clemency and mercy escaped that punishment, which we have so many
ways most worthily deserved.

THE V. EXERCISE. Wherein is delivered, how we may be confounded by the
Contemplation of Celestial things.
I Scarce know how to speak of matters of Heaven, who have been so far from
delivering what was fit to be said touching earthly things, in which there is
ministered unto us so great and abundant matter of confusion. There is indeed
even in the only contemplation of the motions of the Heavens, great matter of
confusion, if we compare the disorder of our own actions with so admirable an
order. For what should I say of the Planets, which we know ever both to receive
a virtue from their superiors, and to communicate that again, which they have
received, continually to their inferiors. And of all things it is man alone,
who is an impediment unto himself, that he receives not the benefit of the
influences from above; and when he receives them, he neglects to impart the
same unto others. And whereas all the Heavens and the stars receive light from
the Sun; man alone refuses to cloth himself with the light of justice, and
as it is written, loves darkness, more then light.

And if we contemplate the Angels, how much I pray you, will their purity, and
innocence confound us? how great a confusion ought this to strike into us, that
we neglect their so necessary counsails, given us with so great wisdom and
charity? Words will indeed fail me, in my desire and willingness to express
our confusion, as were requisite, whether we compare our tepidity to the love
of the Seraphims, or our ignorance with the knowledge of the Cherubims.

And if any may peradventure think the Angels over high to compare our dust,
and ashes with them; let us come lower to the Saints, who somtymes consisted of
flesh and blood as we do; neither was humane fraylty unto them, as being men,
an impediment, but that they wrought many great, and wonderful works for the
honor of God. And therefore let the deeds of the men of Heaven, confound the
works of the men on earth: let the constancy and courage of the martyrs in
their torments confound our inconstancy in good purposes, and our infirmity and
faintnes of heart. Let the penance of Confessors, and their austerity of life
confound our pleasures, delicacy, and ease: let the Virgin^ purity, and
especially that of our Savior, and his immaculate Mother, confound our
turpitude. And this above the rest, for that, where we be most obliged to the
most sacred Virgin for the education and bringing up of her son, who was to
be offered for us to the eternal Father upon the Cross; we never can in the
least requite so great a benefit, but are withal ungrateful; in so much as we
should not dare for very shame to crave any mercy at his hands.

But who can be sufficiently confounded in the consideration of Christ, or what
depth of confusion may serve the turn here, when a man considers Christ,
whom he has for his only remedy and refuge, so to have been con^d by himself
as our Savior might worthily say: I am cast from the face of thin eyes. For
thy tepidity sloth and drowsynes has wounded his feet: thy inobedience has
opened his side: thy works have nailed his hands fast: thy tongue has given
him gall to drink: finally, thy pride has crowned him with thorns. And to
speak in one word, there is not any thing in Christ, which when thou see,
ought not worthily to confound thee. And therefore it is written: Let the proud
be confounded, for that they have done iniquity against me.

And what shall we now say of the confusion which the contemplations of the
most sacred Trinity causes. Or how great shall the confusion be before God, if
it was so great before the Devils? With what eyes shall you dare to look upon
the Eternal Father, who have not only not received his only son, by him sent
to recover the inheritance, that you have prodigally wasted and spent, but also
forced him to dye the death of the Cross? What account will you make for the
inheritance, where with you were put in trust? And what will you answer for
those both temporal, and spiritual goods, which you have had and received of
him?

Again, what can you have to say to the Son of God, who suffered all for
you? He may indeed worthily say to men: Let them be confounded, for that, when
as I God came down from heaven into earth for their sake, and vouchsafed to
become man for the saving of their souls, yet they will not leave their filth
of sin. Be thou confounded, O man, since I loved thee first, before thou
louedst me: and seeing I served thee, before thou seruedst me. O hard and iron
hearts of me^, who, though they see me bound to the pillar, scourged and wounded
for love, had yet rather be bound to syn, then to cleave to me, and to prefer
the love of me before that of the world: neither do they understand, how
cruelly and vnmercyfully they are scourged of the Devil, whiles they be
fettered in the bands of syn.

I gave unto man my very bowels, whieh he might embrace, and cleave fast unto,
as to a most firm and stable pillar, and yet he makes no account of me, and
follows those things, that worthily condemn him before me. O ingratitude of
men! o senseles minds of men! the bruit beasts do me service, the trees and
plants praise me, and of al things man alone acknowledges me not, but like a
mad dog, who biteth his master, rises against me, being worthy whom the
earth should open, and swallow down.

Be thou confounded, o man, for whom I became a meek Lamb, and cease thou at
length to be a fierce and raging Lion, I embrace and love thee with charity,
and thou whippest me with the scourge of desire; and when I set thee forthwith
the precious margarites of humility, thou crownest my head with the pricking
thorns of pride. Let men at length understand, that they have received goods,
not to be shut and locked up in chests, but to be given out to the poor. Let
them consider, how heartily and affectuousely I love them, whom I, by them
being cast into prison, will deliver from out of the dungeon of hell: and whom
they cease not to crucify with ingratitude, I by charity will bring back
again into the way of charity.

Be thou confounded, o man, whom when the Angels behold, they then contemn,
and the Devils deceive, and in my sight condemn. Be thou confounded, I say,
and fear my judgments, and unless thou be here confounded, and bewail thy
syns, a great, and bitter confusion attends thee. Whom would it not
confound, for that I God, and Lord of all do, like the hunter, contynually
seek after and pursue men, that they, who cost me so dearly, may not in any
case perish, while they still ever fly from me, as from an enuenomed serpent?
Why do they not fear me, and my judgments? Why do they not chang, and amend
their lives, who know neither the hour, nor day of their death?

And what answer will you make to the holy Ghost? or with what face will you
dare to speak unto him, who have shut the gates of your soul often against
him, and have so impudently and wickedly thrust him out, that you might admit
and receyu^ in the Devil?

Be ye confounded, o wretched men, whom notwithstanding God has created to be
his children, who is in heaven; yet you scarce ever do works worthy your
heavenly Father. There is in him endless meeknes and benignity, and he is ever
ready to remit and pardon sins: but you, full of iniquity, do not only not
forgive the iniuryes done you, but do further iniure those, who have never
deserved any evil at your hands. There is in him surpassing goodness, whereby
he does good even to his enemies, while he ever conserueth them: but you also
do evil to your friends. There is in him everlasting wisdom, and wonderful
providence, wherewith he governs all things: but in you there is an
extraordinary desire to ouerturne and destroy all things, so you may reign,
and be kings alone. And therefore our Lord reprehendeth you by his Prophet in
these words: Will you dwell alone upon the earth?

THE CONCLUSION.
MATTER fails me not, but time, and therefore this may serve the turn for
the prudent Reader, who of a few things may gather many more, and thereof reap
the fruit of Confusion, and of humbling himself, especially if he exercise
himself in them continually, and diligently: which every one ought to do with
the greater care and circumspection, for that therein consists the greatest
part of spiritual profit, for the knowing, and acknowledging of our great
infirmity, and misery.

And they who have attained this, and have begone to build upon such a
foundation before laid, may with safty proceed in building, and go on forward
in that spiritual edifice: and they that build their work in any other manner
then this which we have said, when they have once raised it high, it is wont to
fall to the ground again. For it happens, that the comforts of prayer, which
are wont to help to the furthering, and increasing of virtues, unless they be
supported and conserved by Humility, do degenerate into false, counterfaite,
and deceitful consolations. So the desires of good things be indeed good, but
if we so ascribe them unto our selves, as we acknowledge them not for Gods
benefits, we both greatly deceive our selves, and cannot possibly build any
strong matter upon so weak a foundation.

Wherefore who means to have his works perfect, must both begin them with
confusion, and conserve them by it: neither must he be so hardy as to proceed
in any thing without confusion accompayning the same. And so it will follow,
that he, who never forgets to confound and humble himself, shall never be
forsaken of God: who never despises a contrite and humbled heart, but willingly
conuerseth with the humble and lowly. And this we may say is the wedding
garment, which whosoever shall have upon his back, he shall never be shut out
from the wedding feast.

This is the badge and livery of Gods children: this he must have and wear,
who has a will to follow Christ, because he did wear it himself, when he
said: My bashfulnes is all the day long against me: and the confusion of my face
has covered me over and over. And if confusion did also cover Christ's face
over and over, who was the looking glass of the Angels, and the glory of the
Saints: why should it not cover the face of a sinner over and over? Or who but
he that has it on, dare come into the sight of God, since it is written: Let
them, who detracte me, be clad with shame: and let them be covered over and
over with their confusion, as with a doublet?

Mark further, what our Lord says: Upon whom shall my spirit rest, but upon
the humble, and contrite in heart, and dreading my speeches? And if God confound
the just, the sinner must not think to escape, especially since not only the
just on earth, but also the Saints in heaven are clad with this garment. And no
less maybe understood by the words of the Gospel, when they speak unto
Christ in the day of judgment in these words: when did we see thee an hungered,
and we sed thee? That is, they speak as men astonished, and wondering, that by
so little works they have merited so great rewards.

And the same is sufficiently insinuated by S. Augustine, when he brings them
in saying thus, Lord, why have thou prepared so great and such glory for us?
And if this Humility raises us up into heaven, it is reason that we embrace it
here, and that we commit our selves unto it, as to a sure anchor in a dangerous
tempest: and that we doubt not, but if we rely upon it, we shall get over the
stormy and dangerous sea of this miserable life, and in the end, through Gods
mercy, ariue to the safe port of Heaven. Amen.

A SHORT RVLE How to live well.
THE VI. EXERCISE.
Of the things, that man is to know for the saving of his soul. CHAP. I.
A Christian man, that will lead a good life for the saving of his soul, must
know three things. 1. His end, for which he was made and created. 2. The
means, necessary and profitable for the attayning of his end. 3. The manner,
and way, how practice the same.

Of the End of man. CHAP. II.
THE last end of man is everlasting bliss. For he was created by God to be
forever happy in paradise: And his soul being once separated from the body, so
it be free from stayne of syn, shall be conducted by his good Angel into
heaven, there for all eternity to enjoy the vision of God. And after the worlds
consummation, man shall enjoy his end of beatitude wholly, both in soul and
body, which shall be again resuscitated and conjoined to the soul, to appear
before the sovereign Judge; and of him to receive the reward of life
everlasting. But, alas, many there be, who never shall ariue to this end, for
which they were created, because they put not in practice the means requisite
for the saving of their souls. It is therefore good and needful to know, what
these means be, and how they are to be practiced.

Of the means to come to our End. CHAP. III.
SOME means there be absolutely necessary toward the attayning of our last
end: and some again very profitable for the same respect. The necessary means
be principally three. 1. A man must have faith, and belief in God, and further
believe all that which God has revealed unto us by his Holy Catholic Church,
because it is infallible verity: he must have knowledge of the things, that
concern his salvation which are declared in the Catechism; whereby it
appears, how maynly it imports all to know and understand the principal
points of Christian Doctrine comprehended in the said Catechism.

As touching God he must know, that he is omnipotent, most wise, most good,
most just: that he has ever been, and ever shall be: that he is every where:
that he sees and knows all things: that there is but one God in three
persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, who be al of one and the
same Nature, of the same Omnipotency, Wisdom, Goodness, and Perfection.

Also that the second Person, in Trinity, which is the Son of God, became man
and took man's flesh in the womb of the sacred Virgin Mary, by the operation
of the Holy Ghost, and that he has redeemed us by his most paynefull death.

2. We must hope in God, because he is our supreme and sovereign good.

3. We must love him above all things seeing that for his sovereign bounty and
goodness he is most worthy of our Love. And the love of God is demonstrated and
practiced in observation of his Commandments, and of the Commandments of the
Church, and in abstayning from all syn, and in particular from mortal, because
the same is wholly opposite to him, and diuerteth us absolutely from our end. And
we must love our neighbor, as our selves, for the love of God.

Other means there be, that may also greatly help us toward the more easy, and
more assured attayning of our end. Such be, 1. To exercise some things in the
morning, when we rise, afterward in the rest of the day following, and at
night when we go to bed. 2. To examine our Conscience every day. 3. To frequent
the holy Sacraments of confession and Communion. 4. To hear Mass every day,
or as often as we find the opportunity, but especially on sundays and Holidaies.
5. To frequent vocal, and mental prayer. 6. To be diligent in hearing of
Sermons, and the explication of the Christian doctrine. 7. To be frequent in
reading of spiritual books. 8. To give our selves to the exercise of al virtue
and good works etc.

Of the manner, how to practice the aforesaid means well. CHAP. IIII.
MANY there be, who know right well, what they ought to do for the saving of
their souls, but they have not the knowledge, how to practice the same: and
therefore the principal subject of this short and spiritual Treatise, shall
be to specify the manner of practicing those means well which may conduct us
to our end. And for the easier orders sake, we will divide it into two parts; In
the former whereof shall be declared the manner of the pactising of diverse
spiritual exercises, here after mentioned: And in the latter we will give
instructions, how we ought to demean and carry our selves toward God and his
Saints, toward our neighbors, and toward our selves.

The former part, of the Way to live well. THE VII. EXRCISE.
What we should do in the Morning CHAP. I.
A good Christian as soon as he awaketh in the morning, must bless himself,
making the sign of the holy Cross, that therewith he may defend himself as a
buckler against all his enem^es, and whatsoever evil may befall him the day
following. That done, let him raise his mind up to God, yealding him his first
thought. And being up, he must practice four things 1. He must give God thanks
for all benefits received of him in general, and in particular for preserving
him that night from all evil.

2. He must offer unto God his both body and soul to serve him, and consecrate
unto him all his actions, with an intent and purpose to do them to his greater
honor and glory.

3. He must make a purpose and firm resolution of a better life then he has
lead the days past, and of abstayning from all syns, and in particular from
those, whereunto the finds himself most inclined.

4. He must make petition to God, that he would please to take him into his
protection and safeguard: and crave grace that he may be able to put his good
purposes in practice, and to do all his good works most acceptable to the
divine will.

It will be very good also to the same effect, to implore the aid and
assistance of the most sacred Virgin Mary, of our good Angel, Patron, and
other Saints, for as much as they can do very much with God, and may easily
obtain what we demand. And this done let him say a Pater and Aue.

What we are to do at Night. CHAP. II.
BEFORE we take our rest, it profits very much. 1. To be thankful to God for
his benefits, and namely for those in particular, which we have received that
very day.

2. To make an examen of our conscience in the manner, which we shall set down
afterward.

3. To ask of God, that he will vouchsafe to preserve and keep us that night
from sickness, from sudden death, from evil dreams, disquiet, and from all
offending him. To recommend our selves also to the Blessed Virgin mother of
God, and to our good Angel, and other Saints according to our devotion, and
after to say some prayer, as we did in the morning.

4. Then to take holy water with devotion and compunction of heart, for as much
as by the prayers of the Church it has great effect to purge and wash away
venial syns.

5. Being laid down in bed, to endeavor to fall a sleep with some good
thought or other in our mind.

What it is meet for us to do in the day time; CHAP. III.
IN the day time it is good to exercise four things. 4. To take heed we spend
not the time unprofitably: for there is nothing in this world so precious, as
the time, that God has given us (as S. Bernard says) for four respects: to
wit, to obtain pardon for our transgressions: to do penance, and satisfy the
pain, that is due to our syns: to procure and increase Gods grace; and to merit
eternal glory.

2. When we are to begin any work, that we offer it to God, adressing it to
his honor, and craving his grace to begin it well.

3. Oftentimes to renew the good purposes, we made in the morning, since such
renewing thereof, causes us to stand more upon our guard, and to be more
present to our selves. And if we find, that we have failed in the execution
thereof, to be sorry therefore, and crave new help of God, that we may do better
for the rest of the day to come.

4. Oftentimes also to lift up our minds to God, and consider that he is ever
present with us, beholding and observing all our thoughts, desires, intentions,
words and actions. And this recollection may be practiced every time we hear
the clock strike. And then also it would be good to bless our selves: for so
doing we do three things. 1. We inuoke Gods assistance, in all things which we
intend to do: and the making of the sign of the Cross is a prayer. 2. We
deuote our selves to God, and we offer him our works; for that this sign is an
act of oblation. 3, We arm our selves against the assaults of our capital
enemy: for this sign of the Cross is a kind of exorcisme against the Devil
himself, and whatsoever other evil also.

How we may be present with devotion at Mass. CHAP. IIII.
IT is a thing both most commendable and profitable to hear mass every day:
since the fruits that we reap thereby, be many and great; for as much as by
that oblation the merits of our Saviors passion be applied unto us.

Thereby also we receive the remission of our venial syns, and pardon of part
of the pains, that we have deserved for them.

We obtain many graces and favors, and great strength for the resisting of
tentations, and good success in our affairs and actions, both spiritual and
temporal when it is expedient, and for our good. And more then this we are
oftentimes preserved from dangers, and misshaps, that might have befallen us,
if we had not heard mass that day.

Wherefore for the obtaining of these so excellent fruits, we must seek to put
these four things in practice.

1. We must exercise faith, by considering that in Mass is represented, as in
a Theater, the life and passion of our Savior, believing assuredly the same to
be a true sacrifice, wherein the body and blood of our Blessed Savior is
consecrated, and immolated to God the Father, and that it is the sacrifice,
which Jesus Christ made of himself upon the tree of the Cross: but yet with
this difference, that upon the Cross it was bloody, and in it own form, and
in mass it is unbloody, under the kinds of bread and wine.

2. We must hear Mass with great reverence and devotion both inward and
outward, observing what is said and done both by the words and actions: for in
mass be represented sundry mysteryes of our faith.

3. We must, together with the Priest, offer unto God the holy sacrifice of the
mass for the very same intention which he offered it to the divine majesty. As
namely, 1. For the due honoring of God. 2. For the rendering him thanks. 3. For
the cancelling of our syns. 4. For the obtaining of graces and benefits of God.
And every time that we present unto him this oblation, we merit much, and it is
of singular effect. And we present him also with a thing, most acceptable to
his divine majesty, for as much as he, who is offered and sacrificed to God the
Father, is the person of Jesus Christ his only Son.

We must also communicate spiritually, at what time the priest receives
sacramentally. The manner to do it is this. We must meditate some thing or
other touching the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, before the Priest be to
communicate, and make petition to our Lord, that he would please to grant
spiritual refection unto our soul, and to make it partaker of the wonderful
effects of this holy Sacrament. We must also put on a great desire of uniting
our selves with God by that spiritual communion: and we must stir up the very
same affections, that we would do when we receive it sacramentally, and really.

How to pray well. CHAP. V.
TO pray well, and devoutly* we must practice somthings before we begin to pray
and somthings also in time of prayer.

Before we begin to pray, it is good first to bless our selves: for by so
doing we inuoke Gods help, we offer unto him our prayers, we arm our selves
against distractions, and against the assaults of the enemy. 2. We are to
consider, for whom, and for what cause we have a desire to pray, which must be
both good, and conform to the will of God. 3. We must stir up a desire to pray
both attentively and devoutly. 4. We must crave grace to pray well, and
recommend our selves to our Angel Guardian.

Whiles our prayer continues we must endeavor to pray, 1. With a true faith,
believing in God that he will help us, and that he hears, and understands
our prayers.

2. With hope, trusting that we shall be heard, if we pray as we should.

3. With charity, and being in the grace of God, or at least with true sorrow
and repentance for our syns.

4. With humility and reverence, as being in the presence of God with whom we
treat.

5. With attention, banishing from our mynds all extrauagant and wandering
thoughts. And our attention may be directed to one of these four things:
either to the words of our prayer; or to the sense and meaning signified by the
words; or to him to whom we address our prayers; or to the thing we crave for
our selves, or for another.

6. With fervor, and a devout affection, shaking off all drowsines of mind.

To this fervor and devotion, the consideration of the fruits that redound of
prayer, being accompanied with the qualityes aforesaid, may incite us. And
there be four principal that are drawn from such prayer. For by means of it
we merit, 1. an increase of divine graces, and virtues. 2. we satisfy, and pay
a part of the debt we owe for our syns. 3 we obtain of God that which we ask.
4. we receive spiritual comfort.

Remedies against distractions. CHAP. VI.
BECAUSE distractions much trouble us in time of prayer, and do very often
deprive us of all the fruits aforesaid, it is to good purpose to understand the
remedies for the diuerting thereof, and putting them away.

Therefore, that distraction may have no place in us, the first remedy is, that
we diligently prepare our selves to prayer, according to that we mentioned in
the fifth Chapter before.

The second is, to think in whose presence we are, and with whom we are to
treat.

The third, to restrain our sight from looking one way or other: for the very
least object that we cast our eyes on, does forthwith give us matter and
occasion of some distraction or other.

For the putting away of the distraction that is once entered, and has seized
upon our imagination, we must serve our selves of these remedies.

The first is, that so soon, as we mark our selves to be distracted, we put it
away by thinking either upon God, or upon the signification of the words which
we utter, or upon the things we desire to obtain by our prayer.

The second, that we crave help of God, and of our guardian Angel.

The third, if the distraction has been in some sort voluntary we must crave
humbly pardon of God, and purpose never more to admit any such voluntary
distraction.

If distracting thoughts be importune without any of our fault, and that we
connot easily drive them away; we must not be troubled therefore, since such
distraction is not syn (because it happens unto us against our will) but matter
rather of meriting much before God, for that we have by it an occasion
presented us, of humbling our selves, to consider our weakness and
insufficiency, and matter also of exercising our selves in patience.

How to hear the word of God with profit. CHAP. VII.
IT is expedient for a Christian man to frequent the Sermons that are made, for
the increase of his faith, hope, and charity, and for the rooting out of vices,
and planting of virtues in his soul. And therefore it is not enough to read
good books, for that a living voice has more force and efficacy, then has the
simple reading.

Wherefore if a man will make his profit by hearing the word of God preached,
before the Sermon begin he must crave grace of God, that he may give ear unto
it with profit.

In the Sermon time, he must give ear first with a good and right intention,
and with a great desire to reap fruit for his souls good, and not for
curiosity, or other vain pleasure; because that were to profane an holy thing.

2. He must receive Gods word with great reverence, because God speaks unto
us by the mouth of his servants.

3. With great attention, considering what most of al concerns himself, and
touches him nearest.

After the Sermon, he must first call to mind the principal points he has
heard, reflect upon them, and consider them well, and apply them unto himself.

2. He must stir up in himself a desire, and purpose to put the same in
execution.

3. When any occasion shall present it self, he must put in practice the
admonitions and documents, which he has heard: For our Savior says in S.
Luke Cap. 11. That happy shall they be, who keep the word of God, and not those
who hear it only.

How we must read Spiritual Books. CHAP. VIII.
BECAUSE the reading of good books is a sovereign means for our progress and
profit in the way of spirit, it is needful to know the manner how to read them
with fruit. And therefore we must read them thus.

First with a right intention, and not for any curious, eloquent, or fluent
discourse: nor out of a desire to know: nor only for the understanding of the
propriety and nature of virtue, or of syn; but most of all for exciting us to
good life.

2. In reading, to stir up our selves to the love of God, to the purchasing of
virtue, to an hatred of syn, and eschewing the same, and to conceive a purpose
and desire to practice what we read.

3. The better to excite our selves so to do, we must not read hastly, nor
run lightly over, but leasurely, and with great attention, pawsing oftentimes
for a space, especially when we read some good instruction: ruminating that
which God lays before our eyes. For (as S. Bernard says) by prayer we speak
to God, and by reading God speaks unto us. We must not trouble our selves,
though by this occasion we read not much, since better it is to read a little
with great fruit, then much with little fruit. At the day of acompt, and of
judgment God will not regard the great number of spiritual books we shall have
turned over and read, but with what profit we shall have read them.

4. To endeavor to practice what we shall have read. For to know good, and not
to do it, is a syn, as S. James bears witness, Chap. 4.

The manner of examining our Conscience. CHAP. IX.
IT profits exceedingly to examine the conscience every day at night, thereby
to dispose our selves to receive pardon for our committed syns, and to
reconcile our selves to God before our going to rest. And this exame^
comprehends five points.

1. To give God thanks for his benefits, and in particular for this, that he
has not punished us forthwith after our offending him, as he has punished
many: but has given us time to do penance for the same.

2. To demand grace to examine our conscience duly and as we ought, and to
acknowledge all our transgressions which we have committed all that day, and
knowing them to detest them with a great and inward feeling of mind, and sorrow.

3. To call to mind and search out the syns which we have that day committed by
thought, word, work, and by omission of that which we were bound to do. And for
the well making of this examination, it will be good to consider, if we have
done any thing against the honor and service of God, against justice, or
charity due to our neighbor, or against Gods commandments, or the Churches,
running over all the hours of the day, and the places where we have been, by
examining how we have carried our selves toward such or such a person, in such
and such an affair and busynes, or how we have discharged our selves in our
office.

4. To stir up great sorrow and compunction of heart, for having offended the
divine majesty so often: and that done to make a firm purpose of amendment,
not to fall any more into syn, and to shun the occasions that be inducements of
falling thereinto: and further to make a purpose to go to Confession.

5. With an hearty affection and fervor of spirit to crave of God, that by his
infinite goodness, and by the passion of our Savior, he would please to cancel
our syns: and then to demand grace of amendme^t for the time to come.

How to make a good Confession. CHAP. X.
FOR as much, as for obtaining absolution from our syns, it is not enough to
make any manner of confession, but it is expedient to know, what we are to do
before confession; what to do in Confession; and what again after the same.

1. Before Confession in the first place we must diligently examine our
conscience, after the manner before declared, for the remembering and calling of
our syns to mind, when we are to go to confession.

2. Having laid before the eyes of our mind, the syns we have committed since
our last confession, we must stir up a certain displeasure against our selves,
and sorrow for having so much offended the divine majesty, as we have declared
in the second Chapter.

3. We must conceive a firm purpose of amendment for the time to come, and of
falling no more into syn, and of shuning the occasions, and dangers of syn.

4. He that after examination of his conscience, forgets in confession any
mortal syn: or he, who is not sufficiently penitent for his faults, or has
not a true desire to live better, and to abstain from the vice or syn whereunto
he finds himself inclined, is not well disposed to receive absolution of his
syns and therefore the next time he comes to confession, he must reiterate
such a confession, that was defective in one of the three things aforesaid; and
moreover, declare and manifest to his ghostly Father that, wherein he was
faulty in his former confession; because such a wilful fault is a mortal syn.

Having made choice of a virtuous, prudent and expert ghostly Father, he must
come unto him with a right intention; that is, to be absolved from his syns,
and with a desire to manifest his whole conscience unto him. And further with
great reverence and humility, considering that, as a malefactor, he prese^teth
himself to his Judge, and to him, who is our Lords Vicar on earth. And above
all, he must come with great contrition: for if he go only, because it is
expected, or of custom, he shall still continue in the same imperfections, and
in great danger to be abandoned and forsaken of God.

During his confession being upon his knees, it is very good before he begin,
to make the sign of the Cross, craving help of God to make a good confession:
and then to ask the Priests benediction, saying; Benedic Pater: and then to
say the Confiteor until he come to mea culpa. It will be good also in the
beginning to declare the time, when he was last at confession, and if he has
forgotten or concealed any syn in the confession he made before, and if he
neglected to do the pennaunce, enjoined him by his ghostly Father; and then to
prosecute his confession, and to accuse himself of his syns.

To make this confession good and auaylable, three things must concur, to
wit, Integrity, fidelity, and Obedience. I will declare them. To make an
entiere confession, a man must first manifest al his syns, committed since his
last confession, lawfully made, without concealing wittingly any mortal syn,
not only when he is assured it is such, but also when he doubts of it.

2. He must declare them in particular, and every one in it own kind: in so
much as it shoud not be enough for him to say, I have been luxurious, I have
done injury to my neighbor etc. but that he must specify every particular and
every circumstance, belonging thereto.

3. He must declare how often he has committed every mortal syn, as near as
he may guess. If he cannot ^ell the certain number, or near unto it, he must
tell how long time he has perseuered in such a syn.

4. He must also specify all other necessary circumstances, to the end the
quality of every syn may be thoroughly known to his ghostly Father. For he, that
by occasion of any confusion and shame or such like respect makes not an
entiere confession according to the manner declared, is not absolved before
God: and more then that, he commits a mortal syn, which is called the syn
of sacrilege, because he commits a great irreuerence against the Sacrament,
instituted by our Savior; in so much as he is bound to reiterate such a
confession, and to make a repetion of all the same mortal syns that he then
confessed; and withal to declare in particular the syn of sacrilege, that he
formerly committed therein.

To confess faithfully and sincerely, he must first manifest his syns without
dissimulation, or hypocrisy, without lying, without making them greater then
they be, or extenuating, and making them less then they be, and without
excusing his syn contrary to the truth, and without coloring it by fair
language, or obscure words.

2. He must take heed he confess not his syns conditionally, saying, If I
have stolen etc. I ask pardon: for such a confession avails nothing: but he
must confess absolutely, unless it be doubtful, whether he has committed such
a syn: for he must confess that, which is certain, as certain and that which
is doubtful, as doubtful.

That the confession may be Obedient, the penitent must be ready to do all
that, which his Ghostly Father shall command him with reason, touching the
good of his soul, in so much as he ought to be ready,

1. To accomplish and do the penance enjoined him for his syns.

2. To restore the goods of another, which he has gotten unjustly, or the good
name of his neighbor, which he has spoiled him of, and taken from him by
detraction, as his Ghostly Father shall either advise, or direct him. For the
syn is not pardoned, if what has been taken away, be not restored, as S.
Augustine says.

3. To satisfy and recompense damage and hurt, that he has done to any one.

4. To reconcile himself to his enemy, whom he has wronged, and from his
heart to pardon and forgive him, who has done him any injury.

5. To forbear and shun all occasions and dangers of syn for the time to
come.

6. To practice the remedies against syn in manner as he shall be advised to do.

After confession of his syns, for conclusion it will be good to adioyne these
words: For all these my syns, and others, that I have committed, which I now
remember not, I humbly crave pardon, penance and absolution etc. Ideo precor
etc. This done, he must give attentive ear to ^he good lesson, and instruction
his Ghostly Father shall give him, with an intention and desire to make use
thereof.

After Confession and Absolution, the penitent must go aside, and 1. Give Gods
thanks, for that it has pleased his divine Majesty to pardon him all his syns,
by mean^ of Sacramental absolution; and further to tender him thanks for all
the good, that he has gotten by the remission of his syns.

2. With devotion to perform the penance, that his Ghostly Father enjoined
him, without differing of it, if he may then do it.

3. To renew the good purpose, that he had made before, and to ask grace of
God for well doing thereof.

The causes, that ought to induce us to true repentance for our syns. CHAP. XI.
FOR that without repentance for our syns it is impossible to receive pardon
for them; it is expedient to know the principal motyues, that ought to induce
us, and to stir up a perfect sorrow and compunction for our syns, especially if
the same be mortal. And to this purpose it will be good to consider.

1. That by them we are deprived of many soueraign goods, as of the grace of
God, which far surpasses all the treasures and goods of this world. Again by
them we are deprived of many ve^tues, and gifts of the holy Ghost, without
which we are, and remain, as did Sampson, in the hands of the Philistians,
when he had lost his strength. We are further spoiled of all the meritts, which
we had formerly gotten by our good works, and of the fruit of the^, which we do
in state syn. Finally, we are made incapable and unworthy of eternal felicity,
having lost all the right, that we had thereunto.

2. To consider, that we have incurred many evils: for by syn we are become
the enemies of God, yea the slaves, and very receptacle of the Devil: and to
be short, we merit everlasting damnation.

3. The chiefest motive, that ought to induce us to great sorrow for our syns,
is, for that we have offended the divine majesty by our disobedience,
ingratitude, and contempt of him, and for that by our syn, we have exceedingly
injured him, by loving some transitory good, and some pleasure of the body, or
some creature more then our Creator and sovereign Lord, and by preferring our
own will, and bad desire, before the will and pleasure of God, therein
imitating the Jews, who preferred Barabbas before our Savior.

The causes, for which it is very good, and most expedient to go often to
Confession. CHAP. XII.
HE that loves his own soul, expects not the time of commaundment, or the
absolute necessity of going to confession; but he confesses often, when there
is not any commaundment imposed upon him, that he may gain and reap the most
excellent fruits, that be gathered in frequenting this Holy Sacrament.

For in often confessing, a man, 1. purchases a great peace, repose and quiet
of conscience.

2. He every time obtayneth great provision, store, and increase of virtues.

3. The good works, that were mortified, and made unprofitable by mortal syn,
return to their worth, and become meritorious again.

4. He is made participant of all our Saviors meritts, and of all the good
works of the just, and faithful Christians, whereof he was deprived, by
mortal syn.

5. Every time that he confesses, he rec^iueth great force and strength for
the resisting and encountering of his enemies, and against all their tentations.

6. He satisfies a part of the pain, which after remission of the fault
remains behind, due to be paid, either in this world, or in Purgatory.

And what wise man, who considers all these privileges, that arise of
frequent Confession, will not be greatly incited to go often thereunto, for the
often gayning and reaping of so excellent fruits? If a man were sick in body,
if he had received any mortal and deadly wound, would he expect any long time
to think upon the curing of himself? Or would he not rather with all possible
speed seek a Physician, or Surgeon for his cure, for fear of a temporal
death? And his soul being sick, and daungerously wounded by syn; should he so
far neglect his salvation, as to put it of from day to day, from week to
week, from month to month, from quarter to quarter etc. and so hazard to
incur death for all eternity?

Of the great necessity, and vtility of a General Confession. CHAP. XIII.
I call it a General Confession, when a man confesses all his syns,
especially the mortal, that he has committed in all his life, or those of a
long time before, as far as he can remember, and call to mind, whether he has
confessed them before, or not. This manner of Confession is very profitable,
and sometimes also altogether necessary in matter of mortal syn, when in
confession some condition or other necessary is wanting, either on the part of
the Confessor, or on the part of the penitent. And this may happen in diverse
manners.

1. When one has made his confession to a priest, that had not lawful
auctority to absolve, or for that he was not approved of the Bishop, or for
some other cause.

2. When one has confessed without being penitent and sorrowful for his syns.

3. When he had not a purpose of amendment, and abstayning from some sin: or
when he wanted a will to forgive another who had offended him, or of restoring
that to which he was bound.

4. When some confession made before was not entiere, either for wittingly,
upon a certain bashfulnes, concealing some mortal syn, or for some other
unlawful cause; or for having forgotten to confess some mortal syn, because
he had not examined his conscience before.

5. When before absolution he had a will not to accept of it, or not to fulfill
the penance, enjoined him by his ghostly Father.

Lo the principal causes, for which it often happens, that a general
Confession is necessary; for that the Confession made before with any one of
the foresaid defects was not sufficient to obtayn the remission of our syns.
And all the co^fessions made after that, were unprofitable; in so much as it
behooves him again to confess all the mortal syns, that he had manifested
in that Confession, and all the other, that followed; and to declare the cause
and the fault for which he makes a General Confession.

And though a general confession be not to some necessary, because they never
made default in making their Confession; yet it much profits them for diverse
reasons.

1. For by confessing al their syns together of many months, or years, a man
conceyueth greater sorrow for his syns, and confusion of himself, and
consequently he obtayneth greater grace, and satisfies more of the pain, due
to his syns.

2. He is much incited to the love of God, in considering his great benignity
and mercy, by which he has supported and borne with him so patiently, without
punishing him for so many syns committed by him.

3. By considering the multitude of his syns heaped and put together, he is
moved to do good works for the satisfying thereof.

4. He obtayneth greater assurance, and repose of conscience, and spiritual
joy: for he, who has made a general confession, may probably persuade
himself, that his soul is in good estate.

How to communicate with fruit. CHAP. XIIII.
HE, that desires to receive the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar with fruit,
and spiritual profit, must have.

1. A firm faith, believing undoubtedly, that Jesus Christ is really, and
truly in the holy Sacrament, and that in the Communion he receives the true
body of our Savior, who is true man, the same, who was borne of the most
sacred Virgin Mary, who endured death for us, and is one day to judge both the
living and the dead.

2: He must have Purity of heart, without having his conscience defiled with any
mortal syn, that makes a man utterly unworthy of the participation of this
Sacrament: and also in presuming to come thereunto in such bad state, he should
commit a syn of sacrilege.

3. He must have a right intention, intending to receive the Sacrament for the
attayning of increase of Gods grace; to obtain some particular virtue, whereof
he most stands in need; to arm and strengthen himself the more against the
tentations of his enemies; to unite himself more inwardly with God by that
band of love: For the receiving of this Blessed Sacrament serves us for the
obtaining of all these heavenly graces, and many more the like.

4. He must receive with great devotion. And that he may so do, he must
endeavor to come to the Sacrament. 1. With great humility and reverence,
considering his own unworthiness misery, and necessity, and the supreme Majesty
of him, whom he is to receive into his soul.

2. To consider the causes, for which this holy Sacrament was instituted, and
the great charity of our Savior, wherewith he vouchsafed to communicate
himself to his creatures, and to give himself in food and nutryment to our
souls. To consider also the great fruits, that ar^ received in this holy
banquet: because this spiritual food produces the same effects in our soul,
that does material meat in our bodies, though after a manner much more
excellent.

3. To communicate with a spiritual hunger, and fervent desire to feed, and
fill his soul with this heavenly meat, and with prayers and petitions full of
affection, and of love, to crave grace of God to communicate deuoutely, and to
receive all the fruits of this wholesome refection.

After receiving, he must give thanks to God for pleasing to enter into the
chamber of his soul: there to make his aboade, and to fill it with his grace,
and gifts of the holy Ghost.

2. He must offer himself wholly to his Creator, who has given, and
communicated himself so liberally unto his Creator.

3. By short, and as it were inculatory prayers, he must treat familiarly with
his Spouse, and represent unto him his infirmityes, and necessityes, craving
what he stands most in need of, and beseeching him to vouchsafe to make his
continual abode with him, and to keep him in his grace.

The causes, that ought to induce us to the frequent receiving of this
Sacrament. CHAP. XV.
IF material meat be oftentimes necessary for our sustentation and nuriture
of body; we must not make any doubt, but that the spiritual food, which is
the sacred flesh of our Savior, contained in the holy sacrament of the
Eucharist, is also often as necessary for the entertayning and nourishing of
our soul. And if we regard not only the necessity, but the good also, which
our soul receives by this heavenly food, it is a thing truly very great; for
as much as by the often receiving of this divine meat:

First our soul is easily conserved, and intertayned in Gods grace, for that
being often refreshed with this food, grace is increased more and more in it.

2. Every time of receiving, it gets wonderful strength for the exercising
of good works, for the resisting of the tentations of our enemies, for
preserving it from syn; and for patiently supporting and bearing al aduersityes
of this present life.

3. This food causes a notable chaung of life in the person, that was before
subject to many vices and imperfections.

4. It augmenteth and increases in us faith, hope, charity, devotion, and al
other virtues.

5. It fills and replenisheth the soul with a spiritual joy, and alacrity.

6. It raceth out of our soul venial syns, and weakneth and lesseneth vicious
inclinations, and concupiscence.

7. It unites our soul with Jesus Christ. For he, who eats my flesh (says
our Savior in S. John Cap. 6. ( abides in me, and I in him. If we with
attention would ponder, and consider all these so sovereign fruits, we should
be much excited very often to refresh our soul with this so healthful a meat.

If we give every day to our body to eat, nourishing, entertayning and
strengthening thereof; is it not reason, that our soul, that has also exceeding
great need of nuriture and new strength, should be entertained with this
heavenly food, at least once a month?

Remedies for the avoiding of syns, and resisting of tentations. CHAP. XVI.
MANY there be, who find in themselves a desire to amend their life, and
purpose no more to fall again into syn, which is so displeasing unto God, and
so prejudicial to their souls: but they are not able to resist the
tentations, that assail them; in so much as notwithstanding their good desire,
and good purpose, they fall again and again into their syns. The principal
cause whereof proceeds of this, for that they serve not themselves of the
remedies, that be proper and effectual for the resisting of tentation and syn:
and therefore I will here lay down some few remedies, wherewith we may serve
our turn at all times, and especially when we find our selves inclined to syn.

1. To consider the great privileges, whereof syn spoyleth us, and the great
evils and hurts it causes unto us, which you shall find declared in the XI.
Chapter before.

2. To consider, that we are contynually in the presence of God: that in all
places, and at all times he sees, knows, and observes our thoughts, and
actions, all which he will in the day of judgment lay open, and manifest to the
whole world, and will give sentence against us by them. And if you would
imprint well this consideration in your mind, and apprehend it, as you ought,
it will serve you for a spur to incite, and to put you forward to virtue; and
for a bridle to pull in, and repress your disordered appeties. For how will you
be so hardy to commit that before God, that you would not dare to do before me^?

3. To consider, that by resisting syn, and tentation, we receive a great
increase of grace, and a great joy, and spiritual consolation therewith.

4. To make a firm purpose not to offend God, and in particular not to commit
such, or such a syn: and very often to renew the same purpose.

5. To bless your self with the sign of the Cross, and to crave help from
God, and the intercession of the Saints.

6. To resist the beginnings of bad thoughts, and to repress our passions and
inordinate affections at the very first.

7. To avoid and fly the occasions, that may make us to fall into any syn, as
ydlenes, over much talk, curiosity to see, and hear any thing that profits
not. Also to fly the places, where God is easily offended, the conversation and
company of disordred persons, and over much familiarity with any person. For
he, who will not fly such like occasions, exposes himself to an evident
danger of falling into some syn, or other. And he (says the Wise Man Eccl.
3.) who loves danger, shall pe^ish in it.

8. To frequent the holy Sacraments of Confession, and the Eucharist.

9. To exercise acts of virtue, contrary to the vices, whereunto we are
tempted, or most inclined: as if we be tempted to gluttony, to mortify our
sensuality, and use abstinence: if we be solicited to pride and vain glory,
to exercise some act of humility, inward or outward, by consideration of our
own frailty and misery: and so other virtues.

The manner, how to possess our selves of some solid Virtue. CHAP. XVII.
FOR the more easy obtaining the habit and use of virtues, we must make
election but of one at once, as of Charity, Humility, Patience, or some other,
that we think most necessary for us, and therein employ all our chiefest study
and care for the getting thereof: and after some time take an other Virtue, and
so consequently the rest. The means to get it, is this.

1. To ask it of God incessantly, by fervent and devout prayers.

2. To put on a great and earnest desire to get it. And this desire is
increased very much by meditating and pondering the beauty, and excellency of
the virtue, how pleasing it is to God, and how necessary and profitable for us.

3. To lay before our eyes the examples of the Saints and holy men, in whom
such a virtue has shined, especially the example of our Savior, and of our
Blessed Lady.

4. To practice it often and to exercise our selves in it by inward actions,
proceeding from such a virtue.

5. To avoid the very least faults, that have repugnance with that virtue, and
in general all venial syns, which greatly hinder our profit in virtue.

6. Every day to make a particular examen, how we have carried our selves in
the exercise of such a virtue, and wherein we have failed.

The second Part, of the Way to live well. THE VIII. EXERCISE.
What we are to do in behalf of God. CHAP. I.
IN discharge of our duty toward Gods, we must, First love him above all
things, and not for any other end then for himself, and this for that he is
Goodness it self, and the only author, source and beginning of all good. And
we may know, whether we have the love of God, if we be ready rather to abandone
all the goods of this world, yea and our own life also, then to offend him
mortally in any thing.

2. We must have a great desire and zeal to promote and advance his honor,
and service.

3. We must have a right intention in all things, and address all our actions
to his greater glory, without intermixing any lesse-rectified, or vicious
intention.

4. We must endeavor and seek to please him in all things, and fly all that,
which we know to be displeasing unto him.

5. We must fasten the anchor of our hope wholly in him, and in all our
necessityes make recourse to him for help and succor.

6. We must daily give him thanks for the benefitts, he has bestowed and
continually does bestow upon us.

7. We must oftentimes treat familiarly with him, by thought, and elevation of
mind, and by iaculatory prayers, that is, by short, sudden and effectuous
petitions, which may be done in all places, and at all times.

What we are to do in behalf of the Saints: and namely of the Blessed Virgin.
CHAP. II.
IF we desire to be pleasing to God, we must be devout toward his Saints, who
are his great friends, and especially toward the Blessed Virgin, his glorious
Mother. To do this we must first love and honor her, as most worthy of our
love, and of all regard and reverence; because she is our heavenly mother, full
of mercy, and love, and replenished with all manner of grace, and shines with
rare sanctity, and incomparable virtue.

2. We must daily recommend our selves unto her, humbly entreating her
intercession for us, and her protection of us: wherein she may much steed us,
and easily obtain that, which we deserve not to obtain by our selves: because
she is a most holy Virgin, and most accepted to God, and is the mother of our
Lord, and Queen of heaven.

3. We must often contemplate this beautyfull mirror, and Looking-glass,
without any stayne of syn, shining in all manner of virtues: and we must
endeavor to order our life conformably to hers, and imitate her holy and
virtuous actions: and so doing we shall do her service, that pleases and
contenteth her most of all.

How we are to carry our selves toward our good Angel. CHAP. III.
BECAUSE God (by the testimory of S. Hierome and of other holy Fathers) sends
us our good Angel presently after our coming into the world, to assist, and
attend, serve, protect conduct, and direct us in all our actions, reason
teaches, that we ought, First to carry a singular love toward him, as to a
most particular benefactour of ours. For we are more bound ^o him, then to any
other, n^xt after God, and our Blessed Lady.

2. We must thank him humbly, and affectuously for all the good offices, that
^e daily does us.

3. We must make our often recourse unto him, by craving his help in all
occurrents, and affairs of ours; for he is deputed of God to that end, and
most ready to assist us, out of the zeal and desire he has of our salvation.

4. We must give ear to his good counsayles, motions, and inspirations, that
he puts into our minds.

5. We must daily consider, that we are continually in the presence of our good
Angel and that every where he considers, and obse^^eth our comportment,
demeanor, and carriage. And this consideration will serve us for a bridle
against syn.

What our Good Angel does toward us. CHAP. IIII.
THE office of our Guardian Angel toward every one of us, is; first to make
incessant prayer, and petition for us, and to present unto God our prayers, and
good works.

2. To excite and stir us up to live well, and to withdraw and divert us fron
doing evil.

3. To preserve and keep our bodies from manyfold adverse accidents and
dangers, that might very often befall us, if we were not in his pro^ection and
safeguard.

4. To guard and defend our soul against all treacheries, and tentations of
the malignant spirit. For (if we believe S. Gregory Nyssen, Tertullian,
Cassian, Venerable Bede, and other ancyent Fathers) we have ever about us two
spirits, one whereof is our good Angel, who wholly attends our souls good;
the other a Devil, deputed and appointed by his Prince Lucifer, to employ and
busy himself wholly for the soliciting, and tempting of us to syn, thereby to
procure our utter perdition, and eternal damnation.

How we ought to carry our selves toward our selves. CHAP. V.
EVERY one of us ought to keep an even hand over himself in governing his
body, in eating and drinking, in repose and in sleep, in his demeanor and
carriage, in his functions, offices, trauayles: and especially he must have a
most singular care of his soul, because it is the excellentest, and noblest
part of man, and therefore of the felicity or infelicity of it depends the
good or evil of the body for all Eternity.

Wherefore to tender our soul, as we ought, we must; first desire, procure, and
practice with all diligence and care, what may be most for the profiting and
saving thereof.

2. We must carefully detest, and fly what is domageable unto it, such as is
syn, and all occasion, and danger of offending God.

3; We must bridle and restrain our over much liberty of speaking, and saying,
what is no^ convenient: as also our over much curiosity to see, hear, and
understand that, which concerns us not at al. For this liberty and curiosity
otherwhiles ministers unto us matter of synning.

4. We must mortify, and overcome our passions, vicious motions of choler,
impatience, and pride, and all our inordinate appetites of eating and drinking,
and of seeking our commodities, ease, and pleasure.

5. We must manfully resist our bad customs, and inclinations, and withstand
the vices, whereunto we are subject, and not permit, that we be supplanted by
any tentation, either of the world, flesh, or Devil.

How we must carry our selves toward our Neighbor. CHAP. VI.
TOWARD our Neighbor we must exercise two virtues most of all, namely
Justice and Charity. Justice is exercised first in keeping the right that is
due unto him, and doing that to him, whereunto we are obliged and bound, and
rendering unto him what is his.

2. In doing him no wrong, nor hurt.

We must exercise Charity toward our neighbor, loving him with heart, word,
and work. We love him in har^, first being affectioned toward him, without
rancour of mind, and discontent. And this also we must do toward them, who
carry any enmity toward us; and toward them, who have wronged us, because it
is the commaundment of God, Matthew. 5.

2. Wishing and desiring him all good as to our selves: and not wishing him any
harm, as we would not to our selves.

3. Being glad of his good, and sorry for his hurt, as for our own.

We love him in word: First in speaking well of him.

2. In taking heed we mock him not, nor contristate him, nor say any evil of
him, nor contemn him either in presence, which is contumely; nor in absence,
which is detraction.

3. In being affable and courteous in conversation with him, without using any
rough, or harsh words, or speeches unto him.

We love him by work, and really. First in helping him in that, wherein he
stands in need of us, either by alms, or any other work of Charity, and
mercy, either corporal or spiritual; as by good instructions, counsel,
admonition, comfort, prayers: and finally in doing unto him all that, which we
would have done to us: for we ought to love him, as we love our selves.

2. In taking careful heed we scandalize him not, nor give him any bad
example, but seeking rather to edify him by our good co^portment and behavior.

3. In supporting his faults and infirmityes.

4. In bearing patiently what he has said, or done to us.

5. In truly pardoning him that has offended us, as we desire, that God would
pardon us, when we have offended him.

How we must carry our selves toward our Superiors. CHAP. VII.
CHILDREN toward their parents, servants of both sexes toward their masters,
and mistresses, the Religious, and al subjects toward their Superiors, ought
to carry themselves in an other manner, then toward others, who have not any
superiority over them.

1. We owe unto them a singular love and affection, which consists in wishing
and desiring them good, and in endeavoring to content and please them in all,
that stands with reason, and has relation to God: and in taking diligent
heed not to contristate, or displease them, or to do that which may displease
the^.

2. We must respect and honor them with an inward and outward reverence,
because they hold Gods place, and represent our Lords person. We must also
beware we give them not any uncivil, contemptuous, or arrogant answers: we
must not mock or blame them, nor complain of the^ to others. If any speak evil
of the^, we must seek to excuse them, and maintain their honor and good name.

3. We must obey what they command; and therein three conditions are requisite
for the exercising of true obedience, which consist in the Execution, in the
Will, and in the Understanding.

1. As touching the execution, we must obey with promptitude and readynes,
without delay, entierly, and not by peece-meales.

2. Concerning the Will, we must obey them willingly without any contrariety,
without discontent or murmuring, without giving of any sign of impatience,
without allegatio^ of vain excuses, but merrily and cheerfully without sadness,
or disgust, sincerely and not to the eye, not with fraud and malice, manfully
and courageously, not doing only willingly what is easy to do, and pleasing
unto us; but also that, which is hard, paynefull, and repugnant to sensuality
and self love.

3. Touching the Understanding we must obey simply, and humbly subiecting and
co^forming our Judgment to that of our Superiors, without contradicting in our
heart what they command, as though it were not reasonable, or lawful to be done.

4. We must give then attentive hearing, and with all humility and alacrity of
heart receive their instructions, admonitions, and reprehensions, as though they
came immediately from God: and we must give testimony by signs and words, that
we are pleased therewith: and we must endeavor to make our profit of all.

5. Finally we must help and assist them in their necessiryes.

FINIS.
PIOUS MEDITATIONS UPON THE BEADS:

For detestation of Sin; obtaining of Christian Perfection; and daily Memory
of the Life, and Passion of Christ our Savior.

Translated out of Spanish.

seal of Society of Jesus IHS



M.DC.XX.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Devout Reader.
THE Catholic Church, for the profit of all Nations in their first
conversion, and afterward as occasions require, makes use of the laudable
customs of every one, adjoining to them pious considerations and exercises, to
advance Christian devotion. And because the use of the Beads is both easy and
profitable, and for this respect received commonly in all Countries: in times
past there were added to the Rosary of our Blessed Lady diverse Meditations and
Contemplations. And here (gentle Reader) thou shall see adjoined to her Crown
or Coronary, others, for the detestation of Mortal sin above all things to
be detested; for the obtaining of Christian Perfection, which is the scope of
all our actions; and finally of the principal Mysteries of the Life and
Passion of Jesus Christ our Savior, which we should keep in perpetual
remembrance, both to imitate his virtues, and to be thankful for his benefits.

For seeing we ca^ do nothing else for him, that has done so much for us: at
least, our care and devotion should call once a day to memory, how much we are
owing to his love: and never be weary to think of those afflictions and
torments, which he was not weary to suffer for our sakes. And because variety
in all exercises is a remedy against weariness, and especially in matters of
devotion; we have done here as in Music is both permitted and commended,
where many times they sing diverse ditties under one tune, when it is good.

It will be easy for thee to accomodate these particular considerations to the
number of the Beads, beginning with the first three, and ending with the same;
and intermixing the Pater Nosters, and Prayers according to the numbers here
set down. And at the first it will greatly help thy memory, to have the Book
before thee, and read the points one by one, as thou say the Prayers; till
with custom thou shall have gotten them without book. And whilst thou say
the Aue Maria, thou must have reflection to the point which thou have read: and
so go from one to another, with leisure and attention, till thou have passed
them all over: and doubt not, but with a little patience for the first few
days, thou shall reap afterward a great deal of comfort, devotion, and
benefit to thy soul.

These Considerations or points of Meditation, were conceived, and written in
Spanish in the year 1613. for intertaynment of the way between Madrid and
Barcelona, and there printed: and from thence sent to Don Philip Prince of
Spain, and to his two brethren Charles and Ferdinand for tokens, in respect
that the Author, when be took his last leave, left them saying their beads al
three together: and coming after by some accident into England, and there
translated by a devout person, were sent to be printed in Flanders, and by
chance brought to be viewed, before the printing, by the same person that wrote
them in Spanish six years before; he little thinking then, that they were to
be published in any other language, which he had written for private devotion
of those Princes. But by the success, it seems that God, of his holy
providence, would have some thing written for the instruction of such, as shall
read the^, where the use of the Beads is not known to all. And in this
conformity he added these few lines, with desire that devotion be increased in
the faithful people, and God Almighty glorified, from whom all Grace and
goodness descends, and to whom is due all honor and glory. Amen.

A Coronary or Crown of 63. Aue Mary's: with a Prayer to the ever blessed
Virgin Mary, that by her Intercession we may live and dye without mortal sin.
Syn is an inordinate, and deliberate work, word, or desire, against the
eternal law of God. S. August. lib. 22. contra Faustum. cap. 27.
A Prayer to the B. Virgin.
1. O Mary Mother of Mercy; and example of inocency, who did see thy only
Son dye most lamentably upon the cross, to deliver us from the bondage of
syn; obtayn for me, blessed Virgin, light to know, and hatred to abhor so great
a mischief, as thou thy self did know it, and abhor it. Amen. Pater noster.

1. That I may understand the blessings and gifts of God, whereof it depriueth
me. Aue Maria.

2. To foresee the Evils into which it brings me. Aue Maria.

3. And fear the Punishments, which so great an evil deserves. Aue Maria.

1. O Mary Mother of Mercy etc. Pater Noster.
1. Yt damned the Angels and cast them down from Heaven. Aue Maria.

2. Yt caused eternal fire for their torment. Aue Maria.

3. Yt banished our first parents out of Paradise. Aue Maria.

4. Yt deprived them of innocency and original justice. Aue Ma.

5. Yt disordered, and confounded humane nature. Aue Maria.

6. Yt subjected the same to errors, dolours, and death. Aue Maria.

7. Yt put the earth under perpetual malediction. Aue Maria.

8. Yt filled the world with all kind of miseries. Aue Maria.

9. Yt drowned the same with the waters of the deluge. Aue Ma.

10. And at the last shall consume it with fire from heaven. Aue Maria.

2. O Mary, Mother of Mercy etc. Pater Noster.
1. Yt takes from us the grace of Baptism. Aue Maria.

2. The Inheritance of heaven, and everlasting bliss. Aue Maria.

3. The peace and comfort of a good conscience. Aue Maria.

4. The privileges of the just. Aue Maria.

5. The spiritual Joys of the devout. Aue Maria.

6. The rewards of good works. Aue Maria.

7. The harmony, and concord of virtues. Aue Maria.

8. The gifts of the holy Ghost. Aue Maria.

9. The inward beauty and dignity of the soul. Aue Maria.

10. The means and helps for salvation: yea and God him self. Aue Maria.

3. O Mary, Mother of Mercy etc. Pater Noster,
1. Yt causes the hatred of God Almighty. Aue Maria.

2. A desire in man that he were not, nor could punish him. Aue Maria.

3. The neglect of his holy will and Co^maundments. Aue Maria.

4. The abhorring of his wolsome counsels. Aue Maria.

5. Ingratitude for his mercyes and benefits. Aue Maria.

6. Rebellion against his Divine power. Aue Maria.

7. Treason against his government. Aue Maria.

8. Contempt and Mockery of his service. Aue Maria.

9. Infinite opposition to his infinite goodness. Aue Maria.

10. And finally blindness of heart, and bondage to Satan and hell. Aue Maria.

4. O Mary Mother of Mercy etc. Pater Noster.
1. Yt brings sorrow and remorse of conscience. Aue Maria.

2. Fear and horror of death. Aue Maria.

3. Infection from bad to worse. Aue Maria.

4. A sore without salve. Aue Maria.

5. Misery without mercy, or refuge. Aue Maria.

6. Subjection to all curses and misfortunes. Aue Maria.

7. Yt renounceth God by works. Aue Maria.

8. Yt presumes (against reason) of his mercy. Aue Maria.

9. Yt aduentureth foolishly against his justice. Aue Maria.

10. Yt exchangeth the greatest good, for the greatest evil. Aue Maria.

5. O Mary Mother of Mercy etc. Pater Noster.
1. Yt loses the Suffrages of holy Church. Aue Maria.

2. The participation of the meryts of Christ. Aue Maria.

3. Yt treads under foot his precious blood. Aue Maria.

4. Yt renews his sacred wounds and passion. Aue Maria.

5. Yt crucifieth him again. Aue Maria.

6. Yt prefers the sayings of the world, before the Judgments of heaven. Aue
Maria.

7. Yt leaves Truth for Falsehood. Aue Maria.

8. Yt changes wisdom for Folly. Aue Maria.

9. It sells the eternal for the momentary. Aue Maria.

10. It loses heaven and gayneth hell. Aue Maria.

6. O Mary, Mother of Mercy etc. Pater Noster.
1. He that perseuereth in one syn, deserves that God should permit him to
fall into others. Aue Maria.

2. He deserves also loss of honor and goods. Aue Maria.

3. Of health, and life. Aue Maria.

4. And of all other temporal prosperity. Aue Maria.

5. To have his memory changed into forgetfulness. Aue Maria.

6. His desire, and affections depraved and perverted. Aue Maria.

7. His understanding darkened not able to discern his good, nor to beware of
his evil. Aue Maria.

8. That counsel and succor fail him in his greatest necessityes. Aue Maria.

9. That he be not heard, neither by himself, nor by his Advocates, in life,
nor in death. Aue Maria.

10. That his person, and all his affairs be abhorred of God for ever. Aue
Maria.

7. O Mary, Mother of Mercy etc. Pater Noster.
1. Obtain, that I may understand the blessings, and great gifts of God
whereof it depriueth me. Aue Maria.

2. And foresee the miseries without number, into which it brings me. Aue
Maria.

3. And fear the dreadful punishments which so great an evil deserves. Aue
Maria.

A Prayer to Christ our Savior.
O Eternal Majesty author and fountain of all purity, which so love it in
souls made to thy in own Image, that to cleanse them from syn, thou have
washed them with thy precious blood, never suffer me to loose the beauty of thy
grace: And grant to all sinners that have lost the same, true sorrow and
repentance. Amen. Credo in Deum.

A Coronary, or Crown, with the principal Mysteries of the life, and death of
Jesus Christ our Savior.
A Prayer to the B. Trinity.
O Divine, and individual Trinity, who have manifested thy Justice, and Mercy,
and withal thy infinite Power, wisdom, and Goodness, in the Redemption of
mankind, more then in all the other works which thou have done: teach me the
Sovereign mysteryes and examples of the life and Passion of my Redeemer; that
I may worthily reverence them, and procure to imitate them for thy love. Amen.

1. To the Omnipotency of the Father. Aue Maria.

2. To the infinite wisdom of the Son. Aue Maria.

3. And to the incomprehensible goodness of the Holy Ghost. Aue Maria.

A prayer in honor of the Mother of God, proper to the first Decade.
1. O Eternal Providence who did work this so great and incomprehensible a
wonder, by giving to the Divine word a Mother of the Children of Adam; make me
worthy to serve her with all humility, and purity of heart. Pater Noster.

1. In honor of her immaculate Conception. Aue Maria.

2. To her birth so much desired of mankind. Aue Maria.

3. To her Presentation in the Temple. Aue Maria.

4. How she cooperating carefully with the divine inspirations, increases
continually in virtue and grace. Aue Maria.

5. By consenting with faith and humility to the embassage from heaven, God is
incarnate, and she becomes mother remaining a Virgin. Aue Maria.

6. She goes with diligence up to the mountains, to congratulate with S.
Elizabeth her cosen. Aue Maria.

7. And with her presence and voice S. John exulteth, and his mother receives
the spirit of prophesy. Aue Maria.

8. The Virgin Queen in the house of Zachary imployeth her self in works of
Charity and humility. Aue Maria.

9. S. Joseph wondereth at that which he sees: and remains perplexed, until
the Angel reuealeth to him the Mystery. Aue Maria

10. Such a new and incomparable work required approbation from heaven, and an
Angel for witness, although the conuenience be manifest, that God becoming man
should be born of a Virgin mother. Aue Maria.

A prayer to the infancy of Christ.
2. O Prince of all Eternity, thy Fathers best beloved, whom Legions of Angels
do serve in heaven, seeing thou vouchsafest to come down to earth; reason it
is, that all thy Creatures should go forth to meet thee and serve thee: admit
me, o Lord for one of the meanest servants of thy family. Pater Noster.

1. He that of nothing made, and vpholdeth all that is created, is borne poor
and naked in a stable at Bethleem. Aue Maria.

2. His Angels sing to him, glory, and peace upon earth, to men of good
conscience. Aue Maria.

3. The eighth day he sheadeth his blood; and takes the shape of a sinner. And
his Father honoreth him with the name of Jesus, which signifies a Savior. Aue
Maria.

4. Heaven proclaymeth him King. Herod is troubled. And heathen Princes guided
by a star, come from far contries to do him homage. Aue Maria.

5. His Parents offer him in the Temple. And where Symeon and Anne foretell his
conflicts and victoryes. Aue Maria.

6. With the cruel and lamentable death of the Innocents, his birth is
published to all nations. Aue Maria.

7. Egypt receaueth and imbraceth the King of heaven and earth, whom Jury
persecuteth. Aue Maria.

8. The Angel signifies the death of his Persecutors. And the Child returns
to Nazareth. Aue Maria.

9. He discovers his Divine wisdom to the Doctors in the Temple, and
subiecteth himself with all obedience to his parents. Aue Maria.

10. He lives retired eighteen years in Nazareth; to teach us to live
unknown when it is convenient; and to expect due season for all our works. Aue
Maria.

A Prayer to Christ, as the Guide and Example of our life.
3. O Sovereign Doctor, sith the time is come wherein thou art pleased to
discover thy Eternal secrets unto men: Make me a worthy disciple of thy
heavenly doctrine. Pater Noster.

1. The time being come for him to perform his office, he leaves the comfort
of his Mother, his house, and quietness, to serve the common good. Aue M.

2. He passes alone to the river Jordan: where S. John Baptist discovers
him. And they contend in acts of humility. Aue Ma.

3. The heavens open themselves, and the holy Ghost descends upon him in a
visible form. And the Eternal Father acknoledgeth him for this Son. And
commands us to hear him. Aue Maria.

4. The great Master of penance retyreth himself to the desert, to teach us
the same by his example, and to be begin our works with prayer. And there he
overcomes the infernal Spirit. Aue Maria.

5. After he had vanquished the infernal enemy that tempted him, the Angels
come to adore, and serve him. Aue Maria.

6. He entertayneth the disciples of Saint John. And with his curtesy and
sweetness obliges them to his service. Aue Maria.

7. He shows compassion upon sinners. And fatherly care of his subjects. Aue
Maria.

8. His patience in all corporal wants, and incommodities. Aue Maria.

9. His meeknes in the wrongs and calumniations of his enemies. Aue Maria.

10. His miraculous works for the benefit of man, returning always good for
evil. Aue Maria.

A prayer to Christ, in the sorrows of his Passion.
4. O Loving Master, most faithful and only friend, seeing thou give me
leave to call thee by this Name: give me also leave and courage to accompany
thee as a friend, with loyalty, and love, in all the passages of thy Passion.
Pater Noster.

1. Having fynished the Sacrifices and ceremonies of the old Law, with the
Paschall Lamb, he washes the feet of his disciples, and of Judas the
Traitor. Aue Maria.

2. He leaves us for a memoryall, and pledge of his infinite love, the new and
admirable Sacrament of his precious body and blood. Aue Maria.

3. He ouercometh all humane infirmities with the force of prayer. And
perseuereth in the same sweating blood. Aue Maria.

4. He shows his omnipotency before he permits himself to be taken, that
his enemies might see it was his will to suffer. Aue Maria.

5. That night the Jews treated him unworthily and cruelly in the place of
Judgment: and for reason of State, conspired his death, as they thought to save
their Commonwealth; which they came to loose for this very same syn. Aue Maria.

6. In the morning they accuse him before the heathen President, who admiring
his magnanimity and patience, labors to set him free. Aue Maria.

7. He is despised of Herod, and by him attyred with contempt, because he
answers not to his curiosityes. Aue Maria.

8. They tear his sacred body with most cruel stripes. And deryde the King of
glory, with a Crown of Thorns. Aue Maria.

9. His unbelieving and ungrateful people rebel against him, and demand that
he should be crucified. And a malefactor set at liberty in his place. Aue Ma.

10. The ambitious Judge overcome with fear, and flattery, condemns him to
be crucified, though he know him to be innocent. Aue Maria.

A Prayer to Christ, in the agony of his death.
5. O Author of life, sith thou will dy^, and my sins are cause of thy death;
let me dye with thee, or grant me a lively feeling of thy torments. Pater
Noster.

1. He imbraceth his desired Cross with joy and cheerfulnes of heart: and
carries it upon his shoulderrs to the place of execution Aue Maria.

2. His body being weakened with the loss of much blood, he faints under the
grievous burden. And the torturers ease him least he should dye vncrucified.
Aue Maria.

3. He forbids the devout women to weep for him, but for their own sins
and their childrens. And foretells the ruin of that miserable perfidious
City. Aue Maria.

4. Upon the Mount Caluary they stripping him of his clothes renew his wounds.
And he offers his sacred hands and feet to to be nailed to the Cross. Aue M.

5. They lift up his virginal body naked and nailed. And he suffers this
temporal pain and confusion to deliver us from the eternal. Aue Maria.

6. From the Cross he asks pardon of his Father, for his enemies. Aue Maria.

7. He recommendeth his beloved disciple, and in him al us to his mother. Aue
Maria.

8. He promises pardon and glory to the penitent Thief. And tastes gall, and
vinagre. Aue Ma.

9. The prophesies and figures of his passion being fulfilled; he gives up his
most holy and pure Spirit into the hands of his Father. Aue Maria.

10. Heaven and earth are astonished that God immortal should dye. But dying,
he kills sin and death, loses the chains of Hell, reconcileth the world
to his Father, and restores man to eternal life. Aue Maria.

A prayer to Christ, revived and triumphant.
6. O Glorious Conqueror who art risen from death enriched with spoils, and
have al power in heaven and earth: Let sin dye in me, without which there is
no death. And give me a new life, which may please thee and serve thee for
ever. Pater Noster.

1. He shows himself alive, and glorious unto his Blessed Mother and
disciples. And changes their sorrow into unspeakable joy. Aue Maria.

2. After forty days he ascends with triumph into heaven to take possession
of his Kingdom, and placed our humane nature on the right hand of God his
Father. Aue Maria.

3. His disciples in company of his holy mother retired in prayer, expect from
heaven the Comforter promised. Aue Maria.

4. The time being fullfilled, the holy Ghost descends visibly upon them in
form of fiery tongues. And they publish the divine Christian misteryes of
faith in diverse languages. Aue Maria.

5. The plain, and unpolished words of the Apostles receiving force from this
Spirit, take possession in the hearts of men. And thousands are converted
together. Aue Maria.

6. By the death and prayers of of S. Stephen, Paul of a persecutor becomes an
Apostle. The faith increases with the persecution, and with the same spread
into other Countries. Aue Maria.

7. The Apostles meet in Council, ordeyne the government of the Church, and
divide among themselves the Provinces of the whole world; which is converted,
as we see, to Christ by twelve Fishermen: so great is the force of this holy
Spirit. Aue Maria.

8. S. John remains in Jerusalem with the Mother of God for her comfort. And
their admirable life and example authorizeth the faith. Aue Maria.

9. The Apostles miraculously come together at the death of the B. Virgin. Aue
Maria.

10. And her Soul departs without pain, out of the prison of her body. Aue
Maria.

A Prayer in the exequies of our B. Lady, with the Apostles.
7. O Lord, what happiness had it been to be with thy disciples at those
Funerals, and to have celebrated thy wonderful greatness and praises, for the
benefits received, by this holy Virgin. Pater Noster.

1. Her soul the third day was reunited to her glorious body. And assumpted
into heaven with such solemnity, as no mortal man can comprehend. Aue M.

2. The most humble of all creatures, is exalted above them all. And crowned
Queen of heaven and earth. Aue Maria.

3. Amongst other prerogatives, which the Blessed Virgin enjoys, and wherein
especially she delights, is to be the Advocate of sinners with Christ our
Savior. Aue Maria.

The Conclusion with thanksgiving.
LET Heaven and earth join together with joy, and the Quiers of Angels with
the voices of men, to singe eternal praises unto God in Trinity and unity, for
the mercyes received in this admirable work of our redemption. Amen. Credo in
Deum etc.

A Coronary, or Crown, for the obtaining of Christian Perfection.
The Prayer.
O My Lord Jesus Christ, splendor of the Father, and Eternal wisdom; grant
me true knowledge, continual memory and a cordial desire of the most noble,
and most precious end, whereunto thou have created me; and a right choice of the
means which thou gast given me to obtain it. Amen.

1. My principal end for which I was created, is to love, obey and please
Almighty God. And the secondary or less principal is to save my soul. Aue M.

2. The means for this end are all other creatures, and the knowledge and good
use of them. Aue M.

3. This use consists in adding or diminishing, taking or leaving them, by
weight, number and measure as they may serve this end. The disposition
necessary to use them aright is to be indifferent to all. And in the execution,
that we prefer allwaies the more convenient for this end, before the less,
and the better before the worse. Aue Ma.

1. O my Lord Jesus Christ etc. Pater Noster.
1. Make me understand (o Lord) that for thy only goodness thou louedst me from
all eternity. And having no need of me, thou have created me to thy Image and
likeness in the time most convenient for my good. Aue Ma.

2. And how thou have placed me as a King in his Kingdom, with justice, peace,
and inward joy of my soul. Aue Maria.

3. That thou have made me a companion of the Angels, and capable of all thy
riches, and (above all) of thy grace and friendship. Aue Maria.

4. That I knowing thy infinite goodness by experience, and thy self by
familiar conversation, might delight in thee, and love thee above all things
with pure and disinteressed love. Aue Maria.

5. That I may serve thee for thy self, with all the powers of my body and
soul, because thou deseruest to be served and loved above all. Aue Maria.

6 That in all things, I may procure thy greater glory, and the perfect
accomplishment of thy divine will. Aue Maria.

7. That I may desire and procure by all the ways I can, that thou be known,
loved, and glorified of all men. Aue Maria.

8. That I may rejoice for the good of others, and by charity have part in
their happiness. Aue Maria.

9. And afterward receive reward in thy Kingdom, for that which by thy grace
I shall have deserved. Aue Maria.

10. And finally, by the communication of thy glory become a perfect Image and
portrayture of thy Divine Nature for ever. Aue Maria.

2. O my Lord Jesus Christ etc. Pater Noster.
1. O Lord, let me love this so amiable and sovereign good, which thou have
provided for me above all gold, silver, and precious stones. Aue Maria.

2. And above all other treasures, and riches of the earth. Aue Maria.

3. Above all liberty and ease. Aue Maria.

4. Above all other delights and pleasures. Aue Maria.

5. Above all power and knowledge. Aue Maria.

6. Above all honor and popular applause. Aue Maria.

7. And above al authority and dominion. Aue Maria.

8. Above all love, kindred, and other persons, most loved and esteemed. Aue
Maria.

9. Above all health, and temporal life. Aue Maria.

10. And finally above all that is not God. Aue Maria.

3. O my Lord Jesus Christ etc. Pat^r Noster.
O Lord let me understand the breadth, length, height, and profundity of thy
infinite charity wherewith thou have given me,

1. Thy holy Spirit for my Comforter. Aue Maria.

2. Thy Angels for my Guardians and protectors, Aue Maria.

3. Thy Law for my instruction. Aue Maria.

4. Thy Saints for my example. Aue Maria.

5. Thy Sacraments for the health of my soul. Aue Maria.

6. A Bath of thy most precious blood wherein to wash me. Aue Maria.

7. Thy Blessed body in the Sacrament of the altar wherewith to nourish me. Aue
Maria.

8. Thy punishments for my warning, and thy comforts to give me courage. Aue
Maria.

9. All thy creatures for my service. Aue Maria.

10. And finally reason, faith, thy divine providence and fatherly protection,
for guides of my way in this pilgrimage wherein I live, that through thy mercy I
may obtain this so high and sovereign an end, for which thou have made me.
Aue Maria.

4. O my Lord Jesus Christ etc. Pater Noster.
Teach me (o Lord) the good use of these good means, which with so bountiful
a hand thou have given me: And of thy good creatures which thou have made
subject to my liberty, that they may not hinder, but help me to this end.

1. Give me knowledge how to keep warily my exterior senses. Aue Maria.

2. To use my Memory with discretion. Aue Maria.

3. My Judgment with truth and reason. Aue Maria.

4. My Intention with rectitude. Aue Maria.

5. My Will with purity. Aue M.

6. Thy Sacraments with devotion. Aue Maria.

7. Prosperity with thankfulness. Aue Maria.

8. Adversity with patience. Aue Maria.

9. Things indifferent with all indifferency of mind. Aue Maria.

10. And finally, to behold this world as a book full of certain and manifest
testimonies of thy Judgments, and mercies, and of thy infinite wisdom,
omnipotency and admirable love. Aue Maria.

5. O my Lord Jesus Christ etc. Pater Noster.
1. Grant unto me shame and confusion for my faults and negligences past, as
offenses committed against thy divine majesty. Aue Maria.

2. And a firm Purpose to amend them, and to satisfy for them as I shall be
able. Aue Maria.

3. And Providence to avoid occasions, not to fall into the like hereafter. Aue
Maria.

4. And Fortitude wherewith to overcome all temptations and hinderaunces of thy
service. Aue Maria.

5. Care, and account how I spend the time which passes, and cannot be
recalled. Aue Maria.

6. And sorrow for that which I have lost, forgetting thee and my self. Aue
Maria.

7. Fear to loose thy grace above all losses. Aue Maria.

8. Compassion of those which have lost it, without care to recover it. Aue
Maria.

9. And zeal of souls bought with thy precious blood. Aue M.

10. And finally a cordial desire, that all may be saved, since thou so
desire it, and did dye for all. And a principal care that none come into
danger, and much less perish through my fault. Aue Maria.

6. O my Lord Jesus Christ etc. Pater Noster.
Grant me (o Lord) light from heaven, and wisdom to procure in all my works
the best and most pleasing to thy Divine Majesty,

1. To choose always that which is certain before the doubtful. Aue Maria.

2. That which is truly good, before that which is feigned. Aue.

3. To prefer the Principal, before the Accessory, and less worthy. Aue
Maria.

4. And that which lasts for ever, before that which perishes. Aue Maria.

5. To esteem the universal good before my particular. Aue Maria.

6. Health before delight. Aue.

7. That which is just and honest, before that which is only profitable. Aue
Maria.

8. Virtue before vice. Aue Ma.

9. The Soul before the body. A.

10. And finally Heaven (which must be our Eternal mansion) before the earth,
which only serves for a passage and trial. Because these (as a better and
greater good) participate more of thy goodness, and are more conformable to thy
good pleasure and holy will; which be ever fulfilled, obeyed, and reverenced,
in Heaven, and in Earth. Amen. Aue Maria.

7. O my Lord Jesus Christ etc. Pater Noster.
1. Grant me (o Lord) true knowledge, and continual memory of my principal
end, which is to love, obey, and please thee. Aue M.

2. Also true knowledge and continual memory of the secondary and less
principal; which is to save my Soul. Aue Maria.

3. And a right use, and choice of the means which thou have given me, whereby
to obtain Eternal happiness. Aue Maria.

Credo in Deum.

ADVERTISMENTS FOR THOSE who will say with greater devotion, and spiritual
comfort the foresaid Coronaryes.
1. ALL Acts of Virtue, with custom are made delightefull: and such as make
trial, come to know that it is much more easy to serve God then the Devil;
and more pleasing and confortable to serve God with fervor, then with
negligence: and without all comparison to be a Saint, then a sinner.

2. For in serving of God, the pleasures are not only pure without distaste, but
much greater and more durable then those which the world can affoard to her
Lovers. Besides the spiritual powers are more active and potent, as the
objects are more noble, and fit to cause greater comforts; and therefore
consequently from both these grounds the acts are much more perfect; and so
full of delight that they are able to sweeten the greatest bytternes. As we see
by S. Paul in his greatest tribulations, by the Martyrs in their torments, and
by other Saints and servants of God in all the adversities of this life.

3. Creatures used with the moderation which God commands, and with that
respect which is due unto him, are profitable unto us, and do bring with them
lawful contentment and pleasure. Otherwise they are changed into torment and
gall. This good, profitable, and comfortable use of Gods Creatures will be much
helped and stengthened by the practice of the Coronaries which discover their
vtilities and domages: observing well by way of prayer, the truths which are
adjoined unto them, and waighing the force of every one of them in particular,
and the consequence and connection which they have one with another, to inform
thereby and actuate the understanding, and dispose the will to that which is
convenient. For in prayer, when the soul is more retired from corporal
objects, and nearer to God; many things are clearly seen, which otherwise,
for want of light, may easily be mistaken: and we are better disposed, to hear
what his divine majesty speaks inwardly to us as the Prophet said, Audiam
quid loquatur in me Dominus, qui loquitur pacem in plebem suam.

4. All Creatures, represented to the sight, as they have their aspect; so have
they their tongues and language. And all the truths which we hear, or read in
books, and the good or evil successes which happen to our selves or to
others, are so many words which God Almighty speaks unto us by his Creatures.
And may all be occasion and matter of prayer.

5. For Prayer is nothing else but a sweet conversation with God, author of all
good gifts: like unto that which we have with any other person beloved, and of
respect; to give him accoumpt of all that concerns us, and to ask his
counsel in our doubts, and help in our necessities; or to give him thanks for
the benefits which he bestows upon us.

6. And notwithstanding God Almighty knows all that we can tell him, and is
much more ready to do us good then we are to ask it; yet it is his ordinary
Law, and a thing due to the greatness of his gifts, that we must ask them to
obtayn them, and being obtained it is duty and justice to give him thanks.
Moreover (as a loving Father) he delights that we have often recourse unto
him, and give him particular account of what we do and pretend. And that we
desire and rejoice to live always in his presence.

7. So that (without any other) he which knows to chang the person, and
converse with God after the same manner we converse with men (observing
allwaies the reverence due to so great a Majesty) shall be comforted with
contynuall and profitable prayer, and feel speedily the fruit thereof in his
soul.

8. And because this may be done four several ways; there be also so many
ways of prayer to wit Natural, Doctrinall, Supernatural, and Mixed.

9. Natural Prayer, is so called for the natural manner wherewith it is
effected: hearing and pondering with attention that which God speaks unto us
in his creatures, or in any good book which we read, or otherwise as has been
said. And having pawsed a little and considered thereof, let that which occurreth
be given for answer plainly and devoutly unto God, as if he were visibly
present, or any other person speaking with us, to whom we should give answer.

10. Doctrinall Prayer, imployeth all the powers of the soul and body and their
acts: Memory observing; the Understanding pondering; the Will feeling
spiritually: the Senses working; and the tongue speaking to God of that matter
which is proposed.

11. And conformable to these acts, may be made so many demands upon every one
of the points of these Coronaries: or upon any other matter of meditation or
prayer.

12. As for example, I will meditate upon the first words of the third
Coronary, That God thought of me, and loved me from all eternity. Having
recollected my self in his presence, and formed an imaginary place to help me
against distraction, with other ordinary preparations, I demand first of my
self: What is to be observed in the words above said; and I answer: An
infinite happynes: as if I had found a great treasure, not knowing how much it
is. And to ground my self in this truth, with a desire to understand it
better, go forward to examine it in the point following.

13. Secondly I demand, what is to be weighed and considered in the same? And
I find, An infinite worthynes, and obligation to esteem my soul as God
esteemed it; and to correspond to his love with perpetual thankefulnes, and to
keep it with extraordinary care, seeing he loved it from all eternity. And for
my better instruction I will take for counterpoize in this consideration, the
like particular love of a Prince (if it were possible) to his servant; and how
much the grateful and discreet servant would esteem thereof, and how
thankful he would be for it to his Lord. And comparing it with this whereof we
treat, I shall find an infinite difference. And in this place are to be
weighed also the causes, effects, and circumstances of that which we meditate,
and would comprehend.

14. Thirdly I demand, what must I feel in consequence of that which I have
observed, and waighed. I answer; A profound humility, an enflamed love, inward
grief, and repentance, thankefulnes, praise, joy, and circumspection, because
there is ground for all these affects, and other such like: confirming and
delighting my self in them, with the power of my free will.

15. Fourthly I demand, what am I to do, according to all this? And I
answer: I will treat how to execute fruitfully the good purposes which our
Lord inspireth me, and apply effectual means in particular, to the end, that
what I have purposed may be fulfilled in the best manner, and in the best time
possible etc.

16. Fifthly I demand, what am I to say to our Lord concerning this point: And
I answer; I will offer unto him all my good purposes and desires to be
confirmed by him: and treat with him of the means considered, desiring him to
direct me in them. I will also represent unto him, my miseryes with shame and
sorrow, that I have purposed many other times the like, which I have not
performed. And finally exalting the patience and mercy wherewith he has
suffered my negligence and inconstancy, I will ask him forgiveness from the
bottom of my heart, and what more he shall inspire into me. And this may
suffice for the second manner of prayer.

17. The third which is Supernatural is not subject to rule; because it has
the Holy Ghost for master. And commonly it is granted to such as are very
humble and devout; and have exercised themselves long time in these or like
forms of praying; or it is given in reward of some great tribulation, suffered
for God with patience, or of some other notable and heroical work: And then
is secure of illusion, when it moves to do good works; and specially without
fear when it is accompanied with true humility, for these be signs of the
spirit of Christ.

18. The fourth kind of Prayer is Mixed, which in part is subject to rule, and
in part is not. In the second manner of prayer specified, the order in the acts
and demands there mentioned is not always to be observed. For some (...)
gives so great light and cleernes from the very beginning; and moves the heart
of him that prays in such manner, that the prayer is begone and ended with a
familiar speech with his divine Majesty, or with some affect of admiration, of
thanksgiving, of love, of compassion, or the like.

19. But above all it is to be understood and observed, that Prayer is a
peculier gift of God: as likewise are all the acts and affections of it above
said. For many do see, hear, and read much, and yet observe not any thing to
this purpose. Others do observe superficially, but do not weigh nor ponder
deeply to this end that which they have observed. Some also know to ponder, yea
and how to move others with their words: and yet have little feeling
themselves of that which they say, because it is a particular gift of God to
have feeling and devotion in such spiritual affairs. Others have feeling but
work not accordingly, because they suffer themselves to be overcome with the
difficultyes which our depraved nature represents, and the Devil suggesteth
and nourishes; to the end that the good purposes made be not put in execution.
But to conclude: who lives well, prays well. And although he be brief and
barre^ in words, yet will our Lord that looks into his intention and works
hear him willingly and dispatch him with great liberality, if he be found
loyal and grateful for benefits received. And so much more abundantly, by how
much he is more free and liberal with his divine Majesty.

20. Prayer is the Golden Key, which opens the gates of Royal Palaces, even
to the inermost closets: And at all hours gives free entrance, and access to
the King.

21. And if the natural pleasure which men find in living near unto those,
who in sovereign power resemble God, (and so much the more by how much they
are more like unto him in justice and goodness) be sufficient to overcome all
the incommodityes and labors, which those that serve Kings and Princes do
endure continually in their service: What pleasure is it to serve near unto
God himself, and to be conversant with him, and to have free entrance to his
presence, at all hours, and in all places, by means of Prayer?

22. His conversation is so sweet and his presence so delightful that the
blessed Spirits do, and shall entertayne themselves therewith for all
eternity, without wearynes, or desire to enjoy any other good.

23. Yea, we see here upon earth that Saint Paul and S. Hilarion, and many
such others that gave themselves wholly to prayer and contemplative life, lived
many years in the wilderness and must solitary deserts, with great joy and
contentment, fynding no want of conversation with men, nor of the commodities
and pleasures of Cittyes; being sufficiently e^tertayned with this only
comunication and conversation with God, by means of Prayer.

24. And so we read of Saint Anthony, that after he had spent all the night in
prayer, he complained of the Sun which he had left behind his back
ouernight, and when in the morning it did arise in his face, troubled his
attention, and the quietness of his prayer.

25. Prayer made the same S. Anthony so learned without use of books, that he
astonished the Philosophers of Alexandria that came to see him: because he had
his light from heaven; and the whole university of Gods creatures served him
for a library. And whosoever studieth as he should in this library of S.
Anthony, cannot fail to prove both wise and learned.

26. Prayer guided King David in the government of his subjects; and is an
excellent Counselor of Kings, and of all those that do manage weighty
affairs; not to err in the^ as Iosue erred when he was deceived by the
Gabionites; because he did not consult his resolution with God nor ask him
counsel in prayer before he gave them answer.

27. And (to conclude in one word the profit and dignity of Prayer) it makes
men like unto Angels, who (without losing the sight of their God) work and
accomplish his Co^maundments and they always work aright, and are not subject
to error, because they work always with the knowledge which they receive from
the fountain of light.

28. It is an Angelical life, to live and work in the presence of God: as it
is of brute beasts, to spend the time in forgetfulness of him and without the
use of prayer. The felicity of beasts is to seek only delight in sensual
pleasures, without thanks for benefitts received, or memory of obligatio^s
present, or providence of necessities to come. But man by the dignity of his
nature, is bound to more: because his soul is immortal, and his body shall
rise again from death, and both together enjoy for ever that which they have
provided together for themselves in this life, with God in eternal felicity,
or with the damned spirits in misery and torments that never shall have end,
from which God deliver us for his mercy. Amen.

A PRAYER to our Blessed Lady.
O Most pious Virgin Mary, Mother of God: in most humble manner I beseech thee,
by the great love, thou bear to thy dear Son, my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: That thou would vouchsafe to obtain for me true sorrow for my
sins, a perfect keeping of all my Senses, an humble Resignation of my self,
and the exercise of those virtues wherewith thou did so highly please thy
divine Son. I also most humbly request thee to direct my ways in those
paths which may be most agreeable to the will of thy Sonn^, and profitable for
the salvation of my Soul. Amen, sweet Jesus.

AN ACT OF CONTRITION.
O My Lord Jesus Christ true God and Man, my Creator and Redeemer, thou being
whom thou art, and for that I love thee above all things, it greiueth me from
the bottom of my heart, that I have offended thy divine Majesty. Lo here I
firmly purpose never to sin any more; and to fly all occasions of offending
thee: And to confess and fulfill the pen^ance which shall be enjoined me for the
same. And for love of thee, I do freely pardon all my enemies. And do offer my
life, words, and works in satisfaction for my sins. Wh^ I most humbly
beseech thee, trusting in thy infinite goones and mercy, that by the merits of
thy most precious blood and passion, thou would pardon me, and give me grace
to amend my life, and to persevere therein until death. Amen.

FINIS.

