Articles whereupon it was agreed by the Archbishoppes and Bishops of both
provinces and the whole clergy, in the Convocation holden at London in the
year of our Lord GOD. 1562. according to the computation of the Church of
England, for the avoiding of the diversities of opinions, and for the
stablishyng of consent touching true religion.

Put forth by the Queens authority.



Articles Of faith in the holy Trinity.
THERE is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or
passions, of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, the maker and preserver of
al things both visible and invisible. And in unity of this Godhead there be
three persons, of one substance, power, and eternity, the father, the son,
and the holy ghost.

Of the word or son of God which was made very man.
THE Son, which is the word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the
Father, the very and eternal GOD, of one substance with the father, took man's
nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin, of her substance: so that two whole
and perfect natures, that is to say the Godhead and manhood, were joined
together in one person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very GOD
and very man, who truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to
reconcile his father to us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for original gylt,
but also for all actual sins of men.


AS Christ dyed for us, and was buried: so also it is to be believed that he
went down into hell.


Christ did truly arise again from death, and took again his body, with
flesh, bones, and all things apparteyning to the perfection of man's nature,
wherewith he ascended into heaven, and there sits, until he return to
judge all men at the last day.


THE holy ghost, proceedyng from the father and the son, is of one
substance, majesty, and glory, with the father and the son, very and
eternal God.

Of the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures for salvation.
Holy Scripture conteyneth all things necessary to salvation: so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required
of any man, that it should be believed as an article of the faith, or be
thought requisite necessary to salvation. In the name of holy Scripture, we do
understand those Canonical books of the old and new Testament, of whose
authority was never any doubt in the Church.

Of the names and number of the Canonical Books.
Genesis. Exodus. Leuiticus. Numerie. Deuteronomium. Iosue. Judges. Ruth.
The.1. book of Samuel. The.2. book of Samuel. The.1. book of Kings. The.1.
book of Chroni. The.2. book of Chroni. The.1. book of Esdras. The.2. book
of Esdras. The book of Hester. The book of Job. The Psalms. The Proverbs.
Ecclesia. or preacher. Cantica, or songs of Sa. 4. Prophets the greater.
The.2. book of Kings. 12. Prophets the less.
And the other books (as Hierome says) the Church does read for example of
life and instruction of manners: but yet does it not apply them to establishe
any doctrine. Such are these following.

The third book of Esdras. The fourth book of Esdras The book of Tobias. The
book of Judith. The rest of the book of Hester. The book of VVisdome. Jesus
the son of Sirach. Baruch, the prophet. Song of the.3. children. The story
of Susanna. Of Bell and the Dragon. The prayer of Manasses. The.1. book of
Machab. The.2. book of Macha.
All the books of the new Testament, as they are commonly received, we do
receive and account them for Canonical.


THE old Testament is not contrary to the new, for both in the old and new
Testament everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only
mediator between God and man, being both God and man. Wherefore they are not
to be heard which faigne that the old fathers did look only for
transitory promises. Although the law given from God by Moses, as touching
ceremonies and rites, do not bind Christian men, nor the civil precepts
thereof, ought of necessity to be received in any common wealth: yet
notwithstanding, no Christian man whatsoever, is free from the obedience of the
commandments, which are called moral.

Of the three Credes.
THE three Credes, Nicene Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought throughlye to be received and believed: for
they may be proved by most certain warrauntes of holy scripture.

Of original or birth sin.
Original sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do
vaynely talk) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man,
that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far
gone from original ryghteousnes, and is of his own nature inclined to evil,
so that the flesh lusts always contrary to the spirit, and therefore in
every person borne into this world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation. And
this infection of nature does remain, yea in them that are regenerated,
whereby the lust of the flesh, called in Greek (...), which some do expound
the wisdom, some sensuality, some the affection, some the desire of the
flesh, is not subject to the law of God. And although there is no
condemnation for them that believe and are baptized: yet the Apostle does
confess that concupiscence and lust has of it self the nature of sin.


THE condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that he can not turn
and prepare him self by his own natural strength and good works, to faith
and calling upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant
and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preuentyng us, that
we may have a good will, and workyng with us, when we have that good will.


WE are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ, by faith, and not for our own works or deservings.
Wherefore, that we are justified by faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine,
and very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of
justification.

Of good works.
ALbeit that good works, which are the fruits of faith, and follow after
justification, can not put away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods
judgment: yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do
spring out necessarily of a true and lively faith, in so much that by them, a
lively faith may be as evidently known, as a tree discerned by the fruit.

Of works before justification.
Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his spirit,
are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus
Christ, neither do they make men meet to receive grace, or (as the schole
aucthours say) deserve grace of congruitie: yea rather for that they are not
done as GOD has wylled and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they
have the nature of sin.


Voluntary works besides, over and above Gods commandments, which they
call works of supererogatio^, can not be taught without arrogancy and
impiety. For by them men do declare that they do not only render unto God as
much as they are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake then of
bounden duty is required: Whereas Christ says plainly, When ye have done all that are commanded to you, say, We be unprofitable servants.


Christ in the truth of our nature, was made like unto us in all things
(sin only except) from which he was clearey void, both in his flesh and in
his spirit. He came to be the lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of him
self once made, should take away the sins of the world: and sin, (as S.
John says) was not in him. But al we the rest, (although baptized, and borne
again in Christ) yet offend in many things, and if we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

Of sin after Baptism.
NOT every deadly sin willingly committed after baptism, is sin against
the holy ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore, the grant of repentance is not
to be denied to such as fall into sin after baptism. After we have received
the holy ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin, and by the
grace of God (we may) arise again and amend our lives. And therefore, they are
to be comdemned, which say they can no more sin as long as they live here,
or deny the place of forgiveness to such as truly repent.

Of predestination and election.
PRedestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the world were laid) he has constantly decreed by his council
secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen
in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting
salvation, as vessels made to honor. Wherefore they which be endued with so
excellent a benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his spirit
workyng in due season: they through grace obey the calling: they be justified
freely: they be made sons of God by adoption: they be made like the image of
his only begotten son Jesus Christ: they walk religiously in good works,
and at length by gods mercy, they attain to everlasting felicity.

As the godly consyderation of predestination, and our election in Christ, is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such
as feel in them selves the working of the spirit of Christ, mortifying the
works of the flesh, and their earthlye members, and drawing up their mind to
high and heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establyshe and
confirm their faith of eternal salvation to be enjoyed through Christ, as
because it does fervently kindle their love toward God: So, for curious and
carnal persons, lacking the spirit of Christ, to have continually before
their eyes the sentence of Gods predestination, is a most dangerous downfall,
whereby the devil does thrust them either into desperation, or into
rechelesnesse of most unclean living, no less perilous then desperation.

Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises in such wise, as they be generally
set forth to us in holy scripture: and in our doings, that will of God is to
be followed, which we have expreslye declared unto us in the word of God.

Of obtaynyng eternal salvation, only
THey also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, that every man shall be
saved by the law or sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his life according to that law, and the light of nature. For holy scripture
does set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be saved.

Of the Church.
THe visible Church of Christ, is a congregation of faithful men, in the
which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly
ministered, according to Christ's ordinance in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioche have erred: so also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living and manner of ceremonies,
but also in matters of faith.

Of the authority of the Church.
THE Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of faith: And yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any
thing that is contrary to Gods word written, neither may it so expound one
place of scripture, that it be repugnaunt to another. Wherefore, although the
Church be a witness and a keeper of holy writ: yet, as it ought not to decree
any thing against the same, so besides the same, ought it not to enforce any
thing to be believed for necessity of salvation.


General Counsels may not be gathered together without the commandment and
will of princes. And when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an
assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the spirit and word of God)
they may err, and sometime have erred, even in things parteynyng unto God.
Wherefore, things ordained by them as necessary to salvation, have neither
strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of
holy Scripture.


THE Romish doctrine concerning purgatory, pardons, worshipping and adoration
as well of images, as of relics, and also invocation of Saints, is a fond
thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrantie of Scripture, but rather
repugnaunt to the word of God.

Of ministryng in the congregation.
IT is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public
preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the congregation, before he be
lawfully called and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge
lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this work by men who
have public authority given unto them in the congregation, to call and
send ministers into the Lords vineyarde.

Of speaking in the congregation,
IT is a thing plainly repugnaunt to the word of God, and the custom of the
primitive Church, to have public prayer in the Church, or to minister the
Sacraments in a tongue not understood of the people.

Of the Sacraments.
Sacraments ordained of Christ, be not only badges or tokens of Christian
men's profession: but rather they be certain sure witnesses and effectual
signs of grace and Gods good will toward us, by the which he does work
invisibly in us, and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm
our faith in him.

There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that
is to say, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Those five, commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation,
Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and extreme Unction, are not to be compted for
Sacraments of the gospel, being such as have grown partly of the corrupt
following of the Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the scriptures:
but yet have not like nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords
Supper, for that they have not any visible sign or ceremony ordained of God.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gased upon, or to be carried
about: but that we should duly use them. And in such only, as worthyly receive
the same, they have a wholesome effect or operation: But they that receive them
unworthily, purchase to them selves damnation, as S. Paul says.


ALthough in the visible Church the evil be ever myngled with the good, and
sometime the evil have chief authority in the ministration of the word and
Sacraments: yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name but in
Christ's, and do minister by his commission and authority, we may use their
ministry, both in hearing the word of God, and in the receiving of the
Sacraments. Neither is ye effect of Christ's ordinance taken away by their
wickedness, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such as by faith and
ryghtly do receive the Sacraments ministered unto them, which be effectual,
because of Christ's institution and promise, although they be ministered by
evil men.

Nevertheless, it apparteyneth to the discipline of the Church, that inquiry
be made of evil ministers, and that they be accused by those that have
knowledge of their offenses: and finally, being found gyltie by just
judgment, be deposed.

Of Baptism.
Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, whereby
Christian men are discerned from other that be not christened: but is also a
sign of regeneration or new birth, whereby as by an instrument, they that
receive baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church: the promises of the
forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God, by the holy
ghost, are visibly signed and sealed: faith is confyrmed: and grace increased
by virtue of prayer unto God. The baptism of young children, is in any wise to
be retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the institution of Christ.


THE Supper of the Lord, is not only a sign of the love that Christians ought
to have among them selves one to another: but rather it is a Sacrament of our
redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch that to such as ryghtlie, worthyly, and
with faith receive the same, the bread which we break is a partrakyng of the
body of Christ, and likewise the cup of blessing, is a parttakyng of the
blood of Christ.

Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of bread and wine) in the
Supper of the Lord, can not be proved by holy writ: but is repugnaunt to the
plain words of scripture, overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many superstitions.

The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an
heavenly and spiritual manner: And the mean whereby the body of Christ is
received and eaten in the Supper, is faith.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christ's ordinance reserved,
carried about, lyfted up, or worshipped.

Of the wicked which do not eat the body of Christ in the use of the Lords
Supper.
THE wicked, and such as be void of a liuelye faith, although they do
carnally and visibly press with their teeth (as Saint Augustine says) the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers
of Christ, but rather to their condemnation do eat and drink the sign or
Sacrament of so great a thing.

Of both kinds.
THE cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay people. For both the
parts of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and commandment, ought
to be ministered to all Christian men alike.

Of the one oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
THE offering of Christ once made, is the perfect redemption, propiciation, and
satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original and
actual, and there is none other satisfaction for sin, but that alone.
Wherefore the sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said that the
Priests did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have remission of
pain or gylt, were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceites.


Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are not commanded by Gods law either to vow
the estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage. Therefore it is lawful
also for them, as for all other Christian men, to mary at their own
discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness.


THat person which by open denuntiation of the Church, is ryghtly cut of from
the unity of the Church, and excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole
multitude of the faithful as an Heathen and Publicane, until he be openly
reconciled by penance, and received into the Church by a judge that has
authority thereto.


IT is not necessary that traditions and ceremonies be in all places one, or
utterly like, for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the diversity of Countries, times, and men's manners, so that
nothing be ordained against Gods word. Whosoever through his private
judgment, wyllyngly and purposely does openly break the traditions and
ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnaunt to the word of God, and be
ordained and approved by common authority: ought to be rebuked openly, (that
other may fear to do the like) as he that offends against the Common order
of the Church, and hurts the authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the
consciences of the weak brethren.

Every particular or national Church, has authority to ordain, change,
and abolishe ceremonies or rites of the Church ordained only by man's
authority, so that all things be done to edifiyng.

Of Homilies.
THE second book of Homilies, the several titles whereof we have joined under
this article, does conteyne a godly and wholesome doctrine, and necessary for
these times, as does the former book of Homilies, which were set forth in
the time of Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in
Churches by the Ministers diligently, and distinctly, that they may be
understood of the people.

Of the names of the Homilies.
1 Of the right use of the Church. 2 Against peril of Idolatry. 3 Of
repayring and keeping clean of Churches. 4 Of good works, first of fasting. 5
Against gluttony and drunkenness. 6 Against excess of apparel. 7 Of prayer.
8 Of the place and time of prayer. 9 That common prayers and Sacraments ought
to be ministered in a known tongue. 10 Of the reuerente estimation of Gods
word. 11 Of alms doing. 12 Of the Nativity of Christ. 13 Of the passion of
Christ. 14 Of the resurrection of Christ. 15 Of the worthy receiving of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. 16 Of the gifts of the holy ghost.
17 For the Rogation days. 18 Of the state of Matrimony. 19 Of repentance. 20
Against Idleness. 21 Against rebellion.

THE book of Consecration of Archbyshops, and Bishops, and orderyng of
Priests and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and
confyrmed at the same time by authority of Parliament, does conteyne all
things necessary to such consecration and orderyng: neither has it any
thing, that of it self is superstitious or ungodly. And therefore, whosoever
are consecrate or ordered according to the rites of that book, sense the
second year of the aforenamed king Edward, unto this time, or hereafter
shall be consecrated or ordered according to the same rites, we decree all such
to be ryghtly, orderly, and lawfully consecrated and ordered.

Of the Civil Magistrates.
THe Queens Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and
other her dominions, unto whom the chief government of all estates of this
Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes does
apparteine, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief government, by which
titles we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended: we
give not to our princes the ministering either of Gods word, or of Sacraments,
the which thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen,
does most plainly testify: But that only prerogative which we see to have been given always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God him self,
that is, that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with
the civil sword the stubberne and evil doers.

The Bishop of Rome has no jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and
grievous offenses.

It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to
wear weapons, and serve in the wars.


THE riches and goods of Christians are not common, as touching the right,
title, and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding every man ought of such things as he possesses, liberally to
give alms to the poor, according to his ability.


AS we confess that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men by our
lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: So we judge that Christian religion
does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate requires, in
a cause of faith and charity, so it be done according to the prophets
teaching, in justice, judgment, and truth.

The Ratification.
THIS Book of Articles before rehearsed, is again approved, and allowed to be
holden and executed within the Realm, by the ascent and consent of our
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of GOD, of England, France, and
Irelande Queen, defender of the faith. etc. Which Articles were deliberately
read, and confirmed again by the subscription of the hands of the Archbishop
and Bishops of the upper house, and by the subscription of the whole Clergy
in the nether house in their Convocation, in the year of our Lord GOD.1571.

The Table.
1 Of faith in the Trinity. 2 Of Christ the son of GOD. 3 Of his going
down into hell. 4 Of his Resurrection. 5 Of the holy ghost. 6 Of the
sufficiency of the Scripture. 7 Of the old Testament. 8 Of the three Credes.
9 Of original sin. 10 Of free will. 11 Of Justification. 12 Of good works.
13 Of works before justification. 14 Of works of supererogation. 15 Of
Christ alone without sin. 16 Of sin after Baptism. 17 Of predestination
and election. 18 Of obtaining salvation by Christ. 19 Of the Church. 20 Of
the authority of the Church. 21 Of the authority of general Counsels. 22
Of Purgatory. 23 Of ministering in the congregation. 24 Of speaking in the
congregation. 25 Of the Sacraments. 26 Of the unworthiness of the Ministers.
27 Of Baptism. 28 Of the Lords supper. 29 Of the wicked which eat not the
body of Christ. 30 Of both kinds. 31 Of Christ's one oblation. 32 Of the
marriage of Priests. 33 Of excommunicate persons. 34 Of traditions of the
Church. 35 Of Homilies. 36 Of consecration of Ministers. 37 Of civil
Magistrates. 38 Of christian men's goods. 39 Of a christian man's oath. 40 Of the
ratification.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty, in Anno Domini. 1571.

* Cum priuilegio Regiae maiestatis.

LOVE KEPYTH THE LAW OBEYS THE KING AND IS GOOD TO THE COMMEN WELTHE
PRVDENCIA IVSTICIA PRO LEGE REGE ET GREGE




