Aduertisments partly for due order in the public administration of common
prayers and vsinge the holy Sacraments, and partly for the apparel of all
persons ecclesiastical, by virtue of the Queens majesty's letters commanding
the same, the xxv. day of January, in the seventh year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lady ELYZABETH, by the grace of God, of England, France and
Irelande Queen, defender of the faith etc.





LONDINI.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The Preface.
THe Queens majesty of her godly zeal calling to remembrance how necessary
it is to thauau^ceme^t of gods glory, and to the establishment of Christ's pure
Religion, for all her louinge subjects, especially the state Ecclesiastical,
to be knitte together in one perfect unity of doctrine, and to be conioined
in one uniformity of Rites and Manners in ye ministration of gods holy word, in
open prayer and ministracion of Sacraments, as also to be of one decent
behavior in their outward apparel, to be known partly by their distinct
habits to be of that vocation (who should be reverenced the rather in their
offices as Ministers of the holy things whereto they be called) has by her
letters directed unto the Archebyshop of Canterbury and Metropolitan,
required, enjoined and straightlye charged, yt with assistance and conference
had with other bishops, namely such as be in commission for causes
ecclesiastical, some orders might be taken, whereby all diversities and
varieties among them of the clergy and the people (as breadinge nothing but
contention, offense and breach of common charity, and be against the laws,
good vsuage and ordinances of the Realm) might be reformed and repressed, and
brought to one manner of vniformitye thoroughout ye whole Realm, that the people
may thereby quietly honor and serve almighty God in truth, concord, unity,
peace and quietness, as by her majesty's said letters more at large does
appear. Whervppon by diligent conference and communication in the same, and at
last by assent and consent of the persons before said, these orders and rules
ensuing, have been thought meet and convenient to be used and followed: not
yet prescribing these rules as laws equivalent with the eternal word of God,
and as of necessity to bind the consciences of her subjects in the nature of
them considered in them selves: Or as they should add any efficacy, or more
holiness to the virtue of public prayer and to the Sacraments, but as
temporal orders mere Ecclesiastical, without any vain superstition, and as
rules in some part of discipline concerning decency, distinction, and order for
the time.

Articles for doctrine, and preaching.
First, that al they which shall be admitted to preach, shall be diligently
examined for their co^formytie in unity of doctrine, establisshed by public
authority: and admonisshed to use sobriety and discretion in teachinge the
people, namlye in matters of controversy, and to consider the gravity of their
office, and to foresee with diligence the matters which they will speak, to
utter them to the edification of the audience.

Item, that they set owte in their preaching the reverent estimation of the
holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords supper, excitinge the people to
thoften and devout receiving of the holy communion of the body and blood of
Christ, in such form as is already prescribed in the book of Common prayer,
and as it is further declared in an Homelye concerning the virtue and
efficacy of the said Sacraments.

Item, that they move the people to all obedience, as well in observation of the
orders appointed in the book of Common service, as in the Queens Magesties
injunctions, as also of all other civil duetyes due for subjects to do.

Item, that allycences for preaching, granted out by the archebyshop and
byshopes within the province of Canterbury, bearing date before the first day
of march 1564 be void and of none effect: and nevertheless all such as
shall be thought meet for the office, to be admitted again without difficultye
or charge, paing no more but iiii. pens for the writing, parchement and wax.

Item, if any Preacher or parson, vicar or curate so licensed, shall fortune
to Preach any matter tendinge to dissension, or to the derogation of the
religion and doctrine receiuid, that the hearers denounce the same to the
Ordinaries, or the next bysshope of the same place: but no man openly to
contrary or to impugn ye same speech so disorderly uttered: wherebye may
grow offense and disquiet of the people, but shall be convinced and reproved by
the ordinarye after such agreeable order, as shall be seen to him according to
the gravity of the offense. And that it be presentid within one month after
the words spoken.

Item, that they use not to exact or receive unreasonable rewards or stipendes
of the poor Pastors, coming to their Cures to preach, wherbye they might
be noted as folowers of filthi lucre, rather then use thoffice of preaching of
Charity and good zeal, to the salvation of men's souls.

Item, if the Parson be able, he shall preach in his own person every three
months, or else shall preach by an other, so that his absence be approved by
the Ordinary of ye dioces in respect of sickness, service or study at the
Universities. Nevertheless yet for want of able Preachers and Parsons, to
tolerate them without penaltye, so that they preach in their own persons, or
by a Learned substitute, once in every three months of the year.

Articles for administration of prayer and Sacraments.
FIrst, that the Common prayer be said or song decently and distinctly, in
such place as the Ordinary shall think meet for the largeness and
streightnes of the Church and quire, so that the people may be most edified.

Item, that no Parson or curate, not admitted by the bishop of the dioces to
preach, do expound in his own Cure or other where, any scripture or matter
of doctrine or by the way of exhortacion, but only study to read gravely
and aptlye, without any glosing of the same, or any additions, the homylies
al ready set owte, or other such necessary doctrine as is or shall be
prescribed for the quiet instruction and edification of the people.

Item, that in Cathedral churches and colleges yt holy Communion be
ministered upon the first or second sunday of every monethe at the least. So
that both Deane, prebendaries, preistes and clerks do receive: and al other of
discretion of the fundation, do receive four times in the year at the least.

Item, in the ministration of the holy Communion in cathedral and collegiat
churches, the principal minister shall use a cope, with gospeller and epistoler
agreablye, and at all other prayers to be said at that Communion table, to use
no Copes but surplesses.

Item, that the Deane and Prebendaries wear a surples with a silk hoode in
the quier: and when they preach in the Cathedral or collegiate church, to
wear their hoode.

Item, that every minister saying any public prayers or ministering the
Sacraments or other rites of the church, shall wear a comely surples with
sleues, to be provided at the charges of the parish: and that the Parish
provide a decent table standinge on a frame, for the Communion table.

Item, they shall decently cover with Carpet, silk or other decent coueringe,
and with a fair lynen cloth at the time of the ministration, the communyon
table, and to set the ten Commandments upon the East wall over the said
table.

Item, that all communicates do receive kneeling, and as is appointed by the
laws of the Realm, and the Queen's magestyes Injunctions.

Item, that the font be not removed, nor that the Curate do baptize in parish
Churches in any Basins, nor in any other form then is already prescribed,
without charginge the parent to be present or absent at the Christening of his
child, although the parent may be present or absent, but not to answer as
Godfather for his child.

Item, that no child be admitted to answer as Godfather or godmother, except
the child has received the Communion.

Item, that there be none other holidayes observed besides the Sundays, but
only such as be set out for holidayes, as in the Statute Anno quinto and
sexto Edwardi sexti, and in the new calendar authorysed by the Queens majesty.

Item, that when any Christian body is in passing, that the bell be tolled,
and that the Curate be specially called for to comfort the sick person: and
after the time of his passinge, to ringe no more but one short peale: and one
before the burial, and an other short peale after the burial.

Item, that on Sundaies there be no shoppes open, nor artificers commonly
goinge about their affairs worldly. And that in all Faires and common
markets, fallinge upon the sunday, there be no showing of any wares before the
Service be done.

Item, that in the Rogation days of procession, they singe or say in English
the two Psalms beginning, Benedic anima mea. etc. with the Letanye and
Suffrages there unto, with one Homelye of thanks geuinge to God, already
devised and divided into four parts, without addition of any superstitiouse
ceremonies heretofore used.

Articles for certain orders in ecclesiastical policy.
FIrst, against the day of giving of orders appointed, the Bishop shall
give open monitions to all men, to except against such as they know not to
be worthy, either for life or conversation. And there to give notice that none
shall sewe for orders, but within their own Dioces where they wear borne, or
had their long time of dwellinge, except such, as shall be of degree in the
Vniuersitees.

Item, that young Preistes or Ministers, made or to be made, be so instructed,
that they be able to make apt aunsweres concerning the form of the
Catechism prescribed.

Item, that no Curate or Minister be permitted to serve without examination
and admission of ye Ordinary or his deputy, in writing, having respect to the
greatness of the Cure, and the meetenes of the party: and that the said
Ministers if they remove from one Dioces to an another, be by no means
admitted to serve, without testimonye of the Diocesan from whence they come, in
writing, of their honesty, and ability.

Item, that the Bishop do call home once in the year any Prebendary in his
Church, or beneficed in the Dioces which studieth at the Universities, to
know how he profits in learning: and that he be not suffered to be a
seruinge or a waytinge man dissolutely.

Item, that at the Archedeacons visitation, the Archedeacon shall appoynte the
Curates to certain taxes of the new Testamente, to be conde without book.
And at their next Synod to exact a rehearsal of them.

Item, that the Churchewardens once in ye quarter declare by their Curates in
bills subscribed with their hands to the Ordinarye or to the next officer
under him, who they be which will not readyly pay their penalties for not
coming to Gods divine service accordingly.

Item, that the Ordinaries do use good diligente examination, to foresee all
Simoniacall pactes or couenaunts with the Patrons or presenters, for the spoil
of their glebe, tithes, or mansion houses.

Item, that no persons be suffered to marye within the Leuiticall degrees
mentioned in a Table set forth by the Archebysshoppe of Caunterburye in that
behalf, Anno Domini 1563. and if any such be, to be separated by order of
law.

Articles for outward apparel of persons Ecclesiastical.
First, that all Archebyshoppes and Bishops do use and co^tineue their
accustomed apparel.

Item, that all Deanes of cathedral churches, Masters of Colleges, all
Archedeacons, and other dignities in Cathedral churches: doctors, bachelors of
Diuinitye and Law, having any Ecclesiastical living, shall wear in their
common apparel abroad, a side gown with sleeves straight at the hand,
without any cuttes in the same. And that also without any fallinge cape: and to
wear typpets of sarcenet, as is lawful for them by thact of parliament, Anno
24. Henrici octaui.

Item, that all doctors of Physic, or of any other facultye, having any
living ecclesiastical, or any other that may dispende by the church one
hundred marks, so to be esteemed by the fruits or tenthes of their
promotions: and all Prebendaries, whose promotions be valued at twenty pound or
upward, wear the like apparel.

Item, that they and all ecclesiastical persons, or other having any
ecclesiastical living, do wear the cappe appointed by the Injunctions. And
they to wear no hattes but in their iourneinge.

Item, that they in their iourneinge do wear their clokes with sleeves put
on, and like in fasshion to their gowns, without gards, welts, or cuts.

Item, that in their private howses and Studies, they use their own liberty of
comely apparel.

Item, that all inferior Ecclesiastical persons shall wear long gowns of
the fasshion aforesaid, and cappes as before is prescribed.

Item, that all poor Parsons, vicars and curates do endeavor themselves to
conform their apparel in like sort, so soon and as conuenientlye as their
abilitye will serve to the same. Provided that their abilitye be judged by the
Bishop of the Dioces. And if their abilitye will not suffer to buy them
long gowns of the form before prescribed, that then they shall wear their
short gowns, agreeable to the form before expressed.

Item, that al such persons as have been or be Ecclesiastical, and serve not
the minysterie, or have not accepted or shall refuse to accept the oath of
obedience to the Queens Majesty, do from hencefourth abroad wear none of the
said apparel of the form and fasshion aforesaid, but to go as mere lay
men, till they be reconciled to obedience: and who shall obstinately refuse to
do the same, yt they be presented by the Ordinarye to the Commissioners in
causes Ecclesiastical, and by them to be reformed accordingly.

Protestations to be made, promised and subscribed by them that shall hereafter
be admitted to any office, room or cure in any Church, or other place
Ecclesiastical.
IN primis, I shall not preach or publicly interpret, but only read that
which is appointed by public authority, without special license of the
Bishop under his seal.

I shall read the service appointed, plainly, distinctly and audibly, that all
the people may hear and understand.

I shall keep the Register book according to the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions.

I shall use sobrietye in apparel, and specially in the Church at Common
prayers, according to order appointed.

I shall move the parishioners to quiet and concord, and not give them cause
of offense, and shall help to reconcile them which be at variaunce, to my
vttermoste power.

I shall read daily at the least one chapter of the Old Testament, and an
other of the New with good aduisement, to thincrease of my knowledge.

I do also faithfully promise in my person, to use and exercise my office and
place to the honor of God, to the quiet of ye Qeenes subjects within my charge,
in truth, concord and unity. And also to observe, keep and mentayne such
order and uniformity in all external policye, Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church, as by the laws, good vsuages and orders are already well provided and
established.

I shall not openly intermedle with any artificers occupacions, as couetouslye
to seek a gain thereby, having in Ecclesiastical lyuinge to the sum of
twenty Nobles or above by year.

Agreed upon and subscribed by Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical.
Matthaeus Cantuariensis. Edmundus Londoniensis. Richardus Eliensis. Edmundus
Roffensis.
Robertus VVintoniensis. Nicolaus Lincolniensis. With others.


Imprinted at London by Reginalde Wolf.


