A Sermon preached at Paul's cross the first Sunday after New-yeeres day,
being the third day of January. 1580.

By William Fisher Student of Divinity.



Imprinted at London, for Edward Aggas and Thomas Chare. 1580.

MATH. 9. verse. 11. When the Pharisees saw that, they said unto his disciples:
why eats your Master with Publicans and sinners?

12 When Jesus heard that, he said unto them: The whole need not a Physician,
but they that are sick.

13 But go ye and learn what this is: I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice:
for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.


IT may appear by these words which I have read unto you (Right Honorable
and men and brethren right dearly beloved in the* Lord) that Christ Jesus the
true Messiah and redeemer of mankind no sooner presented him self in the
faithfulness of his office among the lost sheep of the house of Israel, but
by and by he became as a sanctuary to some of them, and as a stumbling stone
and rock to fall upon, to other some. He was the only sanctuary and refuge of
miserable Publicanes and sinners, which had no righteousness to account of, no
good works to trust unto, but being condemned by the law, and oppressed with
the heavy weight of their sins were in a manner confounded with the horror of
their own consciences, and terror of Gods most dreadful judgments, in so much
that if they had not taken sanctuary and found rescue at his hands, which was
wont to say, Come unto me al Matthew. 11.
ye that be heavy laden, etc, Their deadly enemies the Law, Sin, Death, and
hell had devoured their souls like so many raging Lions. No marvel then if
they followed him into the wilderness, if they made him glad to take a boat
and to preach unto them on the shore, if they vntiled houses to have access
unto him, if they left all and came after him, if it did them good to eat and
drink in his company (as the text here witnesses) for he was their blessed
sanctuary. And as he was to them, so assuredly he will be unto you (dearly
beloved) if you flee unto him with like measure of Faith: of what outrage so
ever the enemies be that chase you. For Esaias ca. 8. Speaks generally to all
the faithful: Sanctify the Esaias. 8.
Lord of hosts: let him be your fear: let him be your dread, and he shall
be as a sanctuary. But how should we sanctify the Lord, that he might be
our sanctuary: First with Faith, trusting only and assuredly in him: Secondly
with prayer, calling upon him in all perplexity and extremity: Thirdly with
Patience, waiting meckely for his help: Fourthly with Fear and Trembling,
least you should displease him. Thus sanctify the Lord of hosts, and he never
showed him self so ready or so safe a sanctuary to any Publicane as he will
be to you.

Now as the Messiah was a Sanctuary to save, so contrariwise, he was a
stumbling stone and a rock to fall upon unto other some, as namely to the
proud Pharisees and stately Iusticiaries: for God knows they took many
exceptions against him and were marvelously offended at him. Then they
misliked with his state, which was so beggarly that he had not a house wherein
to put his head. Thirdly they snuft, and snarlde at his doctrine, and let
not to call it seditious. Fourthly, they found fault with his miracles. As when
he cast out Devils, they auouche that it was through Beelzebub the chief of
the Devils, and when he cured the man of the Palsy by forgiving his sin,
they Matthew. 9.
made a muttering, as if it had been blasphemy. But that which did most of all
nettle and sting their malicious hearts, was his eating and drinking, and
keeping company with Publicanes and sinners. This was a marvelous
heartburning unto them, and made them out of measure repine against him: for in
deed there can not be a greater eyesore to the devil him self (whose
instruments they were) then too see Jesus Christ in the company of wretched
Publicanes and sinners: for then he knows there is no room for him, and he
sees that all his former temptations are too no purpose. And this made him to
egg on the Pharisees in this place against our Savior Jesus, the quarrel
being nothing else, but because he did eat and drink etc. and their drifte,
too discredit our Savior Christ in the world, and so consequently too work
the decay of his kingdom. Wherein you may see the fetching policy of Satan.
He knew that the Pharisees had it given in charge by Moses law, to avoid the
company of the wicked above all things: therefore none so meet too set the
matter abroche as they: and he was not deceived therein, for they did it full
cu^ningly, God knows. Mark their subtlety, to bring the Messiah and savior
of the world, in contempe with all the world, and so too supplant him for
ever: they begin with his own Disciples, thinking that if they could
possibly bring it about, that they might mislike with him once, it were no
masterie to prevail with the rest.

And hereupon (dearly beloved) like subtle foxes they came (as the blessed
Evangelist records) unto his Disciples, and moved the matter, saying, Why
eats your Master, etc? But the disciples being but raw in their masters
doings, for that they had not been long with him: and not well knowing how to
answer, so odd a question, our Savior Christ therefore framed them such an
answer as may very well be called the confusion of all malignant hypocrites,
and the sweet comfort of all miserable sinners, and the very pith and marowe
of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ. The whole need not the Physician etc.

And thus you see how orderly these words divide them selves into a question,
and an answer too the same: Now in what manner I am too speak of them, may it
please you to understand.

First in the question I will note unto you the qualities and properties of the
stumbling adversaries of Christ and his Gospel. Secondly in the answer I will
do the best I can by the assistance of Gods holy spirit too show the
benefits and blessed treasures which we enjoy through Christ and his Gospel.
And this that I may the better perform, there are two things which I most
humbly desire you to grant me. The one is your favorable and Christian
patience: for in truth I have not any wanton Eloquence too make you too wonder
at: neither come I in any bravery of words to amase you withal: But only my
drifte and desire is, because it has pleased God to call me hither this first
Sunday of the new year, to give you some spiritual gift, in such wise that
you may be comforted, and God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ glorified.
And therefore it is that I crave an other thing at your hands which is your
assistaunce by hearty and humble Prayer in this my weighty purpose, that I
being enabled and imboldened through God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, may have vtteraunce given me from him to open my mouth truly while I
publishe unto you the secrets of his Gospel. And pray I beseech you not only
for me, but also for the whole Church which Jesus Christ has bought and
purchased to him self with his own blood. That as etc.

The first part of the properties of the adversaries.
When the Pharisees saw that, they said to his Disciples: Why eat, etc. In
this question how short or how simple so ever it seems, there is more mischief
comprised and pact together, then any man would take it at the first hearing:
therefore let us examine and thoroughly sifte it to the bottom. Why eats, etc.
Here I find four things worth the consideration. First that they do
backbite our savior Christ. Secondly, that they discourage his Disciples.
Thirdly, that they justify them selves, and lastly, that they condemn their
poor brethren the Publicanes. Into so many notorious offenses they fell while
they stumbled and took offense at Christ, as may be gathered very aparantly
by this their question, Why eats your master, etc.

The first property of the adversaries.
Why their master, etc. They came not before his face, but crept behind his
back, and there spoke their pleasures of him. And here you may note one of the
qualities and properties of the adversaries of Christ, which is, a great
delight that they have to feed their malicious humors in deprauing Christ and
his word. The swine delight not more to wallowe in the mire, neither the dog
too return too his vomit, neither the lion to tear in pieces his pray, then
these brute beasts, led with sensuality, do in backebiting Christ and his
members. But what delight or pleasure so ever the adversary takes in it, it is
one of the bitterest crosses that follows the profession of the Gospel: even a
malicious deprauing tongue. Cassiodorus.
backbiters may rather be called teeth then tongues? Quia sicut dentes ciborum
parts demunt, ita detractores famam hominum corrodunt.

S. James in the 3. chapter says painly. James 3.
The tongue is fire and a world of wickedness, so is the tongue set among our
members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of
nature, and is set on fire of hell. David, Psalm. 57. complaining Psalm. 57.
of the inhabitants of the Desert of Zeph says. Their tongue is a sharp
sword: and in the 62. psalm bewayleth Psalm. 62.
the destruction of Abimelech and the rest of the Priests, which was wrought
by the privy slander of Achitophel and others, says, They have whet their
tongues like a sword, whereby it may appear y^ the persecution of an il tongue
is a sore persecution, even because it wounds the godly like a sword.

The Catholic Pharisees of Rome say, that their holy Father has and ought to
have two swoordes, by reason that the disciples said to Christ, Behold Lord
here are two swords. Luke, 22. Luke 22.
In deed I am of that opinion, that the Pope has now, and long has had two
swoords: The sword of Tyranny and the sword of Infamy. His sword of Tyranny
wherewith he diuides the ^ead from the shoulders was bequeathed unto him by his
ancesters Caine Esau, Pharao, Herod, Nero, Julian. etc. with this sword he
has had hi^full stroke at the Saints of God here in England, and would even
now let drive at us again, if by Gods good providence we were not to far out
of his reach. The Lord so keep us: The lord for his name sake so keep us.
His other sword of Infamy, wherewith he wounds the godly by deprauing their
good names, came to him by the like descent: For after that Semei, Doeg,
Achitophel and others had played their parts with it against David, the
Scribes and Pharisees had it in their use, and what deep wounds they gave with
it to Christ and his Disciples you can not be ignorant. Now out of their hands
Antichrist at his coming snatch it, and ever since has holden it fast as the
scepter of his kingdom. With this sword even now he lays about him in England
and strikes more desperately at all estates then ever he did: for all our hold
Recusants, al our quonda^ priests, al our harpers upon a change, all our
lookers for a golden day, all our privy whisperers, and subtle surmisers
which we have in England, what else are they but the Popes soldiers, and their
tongs his swords wherewith he strikes most fiersly, though privily, at her
Majesty, at her most honorable Counsel, at her faithful people, yea and at
Christ him self as these Pharisees did. Christ him self I say, they backbite
and blaspheme in two respects, in his word, and in the messengers of the same
word. In his word, when they tell the people in their ears under the color
of friendly counsel, that the word of God is hard and obscure, that it is a
dumb schoolmaister, and a dead letter, that it is a nose of wax and a shipmans
hose, serving too every purpose, and therefore advise them in no case to read
it. Do they not most dispitefully discredit and slander Christ him self? do
they not match these in blasphemy those proud Jews which called the Gospel
in contempt Ouangilion. that is, Reveled sin, or Ougelion, that is, The
revelation of vanity.

Now in the messengers of the same word they backebite Christ whiles they
revile us in their sleues, and call us Heretics, Hypocrites, Apostataes,
Blasphemers, Vowebreakers, Peacebreakers, Filthy lecherers, accursed
helhoundes, etc. which bitter reproaches and reuilinges, when they come too our
ears, would wound us as it were a sword, were it not for the same blessed
shield which Jesus Christ him self has given us: Mat. 5. Blessed are you,
etc. Matt. 5.
Therefore let them spue out their reproaches until their hearts burst in
pieces, and strike at us with their cankred sword of slander until their
tongues cleave to the roof of their mouths, they shall not discourage, but
rather make us the more dutiful. For eue^ as the enemy of Jason Phileus
thought to wound him with his sword, but in deed healed him by opening his
impostume, so they shall find that when they have said the worst they can,
they do but lanche our impostumes of negligence and security, and so make us
the more diligent in our calling, which God grant. And thus much of the first
note.

The second property of the adversaries.
Once again let us look into this question of theirs, and we shall see that
which secondly I noted. I mean how subtely they began to discourage the
disciples. Why eats, etc. As if they had said in flat and plain speeches:
you silly Disciples, do you not perceive and see what a one your Master is,
for whose sake you have left all that you had: he forbeares not too eat and
drink with the wicked, even Publicans and sinners: An honest man I warrant
you, and you have made a fair hand too betake your selves to such a Master.
Mark well I beseech you their profound subtletie. They would feign discourage
the Disciples. And why? To make them forsake their master. And what then? The^
would the people leave him, and so he should be as an abject and as one
forlorn, you have no likelihoode of a more cunning devise at any time, then to
use the Disciple as an instrument to confound the master, and yet you may
note it for an other of the accustomary qualities of the adversaries of the
Gospel. For how had these Pharisees known which had bin Christ, if they had
not made Judas for money too give them a sign? And if you read the 14. of
Acts, you shall find the very self Act. 14.
same practice put in ure by the Jews, which to supplant the Disciples in
their labors, corrupted the minds of certain Gentiles, which had bin their
auditors, and so did much harm. Again since Christ An. 178. in that same
famous persecution which was then in France, as appears in the
Ecclesiastical history, the Eusebius.
persecutors used the like tretchery toward Atalus and Alexander, two noble
professors of the Gospel, for their own servants which had bin Ethnikes were
subverted to avouch openly that their masters lived by man's flesh: that they
offered infants to the devil: that they committed incest, with other such like
blasphemies, more bitter then death it self. And Julian Ruffinus. lib. 1. cap.
32.
the Apostata to pluck up by the roots all that ever Athanasius that good old
father of Alexandria, had planted in the Lords vinyard, called the Christians,
which were his hearers, and heaped kindness upon them, and gave them liberty at
will, because they should shrink from their pastor and profession.

And what think you ot Antichriste that Archenemie of the Gospel: has the
Devil him self a cast beyond him to undermine Jesus Christ: One while he
thundreth and lightneth against us, with Bell, Book, and Candle: and an other
while he smiles and fawnes upon us with his Bulls, Pardons, and Indulgences,
and all to withdraw us from our Lord and master Jesus Christ. So that thus
you see that this subtle devise of these Pharisees is an ordinary practice of
the Adversaries, and does no small harm in the Church of God, and therefore I
thought good too make you acquainted with it, because you may the sooner
eschew it, if at any time it shall be practiced toward you.

The third property of the adversaries.
But return to the Pharisees, Chirdly in their question they justify
themselves: that is, they do bear the Disciples in hand that they are men of
such singular honesty and perfect holiness, that they abhor al Publicanes
and sinners, yea and cannot abide those which keep them company, and all to
bring their purpose the sooner about. A notable point of hypocrisy, under the
visard of honesty and holiness to work mischief and villainy. and a familiar
practice of the adversaries of the Gospel, which has made us great Shepherds
of the word of God, no one thing the like: for whilst they cover their inward
villainy with the fair Cloak of honesty and good meaning, who can escape their
snares? surely very few at al. For albeit that experience has given forth
these rules: That all is not Gold that glisters: That a rusty blade may have a
painted sheath: That none talks more of honest dealing, then a common
Cousoner: That none offers fayrer play, then a false Iugler: that many a one
too have his purpose, will light a candle before the Devil. And albeit that the
scripture has given forth these notes, that hypocrites are like painted
Sepulchers, full of dead men's bones: that they are Wolves in Sheep clothing:
Wells without water: and Clouds without rain, and that the greatest grace
and glory of an Hypocrite is, too seem that he is not, and that Satan can
change, etc. yet such is their cunning in cou^terfaitting, and such are their
conueiaunces in canueising, that they are never almost forseene til it be to
late and past remedy. Wherefore hypocrites may be compared to the tricksie
minion mentioned in the Pro. 5. Her lips (says the wise man) drop as an honey
comb, and her mouth is more soft then oil, but the end of her is as bitter as
wormwood, and sharp as a two edged sword. And surely so it fares with an
hypocrite most commonly: his golden pretense is never lightly with out a bloody
end. Potolome had a golden pretense, when he invited old Simon and his two
sons to a feast but his drift was too dispatch them, and so he did.

Herod had a golden pretense when he willed the wise men too bring him word
where the Child was, that he might come and worship, but his end was to
kill him.

Judas had a golden pretense when he came to his Master Jesus Christ and
saluted him, and embraced him, and kissed him, but his end was to betray him.

These Pharisees had a golden pretense when they curried favor with the
Disciples, and asked them by way of friendship, why eats, etc. but their end
and purpose was to seduce them.

Let al Symons be advised how they come too Ptolomaeus feast: Let all wise men
foresee Herod's devotion: Let all Machab.
masters revoke Judas kiss: Let all disciples take heed of the Pharisees
driftes: and let all good and godly men have an eye too hypocrisy, the beautye
and continuance of the adversaries of the Gospel, which can seem a saint, and
be a Devil, and in toungue profess a good word, but in heart hatch and
harbor a mischief, and so much of the third note.

The fourth property of the adversaries.
The fourth thing which I have noted in this question is, that they did rashely
condemn their poor brethren, calling them Publicanes and sinners, pronouncing
sentence upon them, as it they had been then as they were before. That is,
such catchpoules and cutthrotes as none could be worse: where as they poor
souls were at utter defiance with their former ways, and sought by all means
to become regenerate in Christ Jesus. Here I am to put you in mind of a
fourth quality of the adversaries of the Gospel which is, Rash judgment,
forbidden by our Savior Jesus. Mat. 7. Judge not and ye shall not be judged,
condemn not, etc.

This rash judgment goes hedlong to work and condemns a man without regard
of circumstaunce or perfect understanding of the matter, whereof there is a
notable example, Acts 28. When Paul had gathered a number of sticks, etc.

Backbiting and privy slander is a grievous cross, hear it who shall. The
subtle supplanting of the head by the foot is a Diuilish policy, who ever
does practice it. The counterfaite compasses of Hypocrisy are always
mischievous, how beautiful soever they appear: but yet rash judgment is
worst of all. And therefore bylike the charitable Pharisees of Rome will seem
to be far from this question, and even for S. Charities sake not to judge the
worst one of Decret.
an other. Pope Leo the fourth, made a decree, that if the Pope him self were
seen committing murder, it should be excused as the murders of Sampson: and
if he were seen playing the adulterer, it shall be cloked as the Adultery of
Jacob: and if he were seen doing a robbery, it should be colored as the
robbing of the Egiptians, and all to avoid rash judgment. The same holy
father made an other decree to the same end in the behalf of his clergy:
that if one of the Clergy were seen embracing a woman, it should be said
that he did it to bless her. And besides the charitable decrees, their
Legends setting forth the wonderful charity of S. Frauncis: record that when
he saw two wantons dallying and kissing together, he fell down upon his
knees and held up his hands and praised God that there was some charity to be
seen in the world. Have you heard of the like charity? would you wish more
advised judgment, and yet none living more headless or headlong in judgment:
For if you mark this gear well, you shall perceive that all was because they
would not have the world too judge of them, as they were indeed: For let
them see a mote in our eyes, and they will not let too condemn us for very
firebrandes of Hell.

Our discord about Cappe and Surplesse is but a mote, in comparison of their
great beams about the principal articles of Christian faith: and yet they
condemn us for Schismatickes.

Our Christian liberty too take such meat in worth as comes before us, with
thanks too GOD and without grudge of conscience: what is it to their beastly
licentiousness, too do what they list without remorse of conscience? and yet
they condemn us for Libertines.

Our godly love too provide honestly for Wife and Children, is nothing in
comparyson of their insatiable greediness too scrape together for their
Strumpetes and Bastardes, and yet they do condemn us for covetous Gospellers.

Our brotherly compassion to pardon sometimes small offenses, is but a very
Mite in regard of their monstrous Camel of Blasphemy to pardon always
whatsoever offenses, and yet they condemn us for Anabaptists.

Good GOD then where is their Charity become, whereof they makeso great
boaste? belike they keep it all to themselves: for to us they show nothing
else but Buchery cruelty, and tyranny, behauing them selves like the Soldiers
of that Captain whose badge they bear.

Our infirmities they lay open to the world, as damnable enormityes: their
own Blasphemies and detestable heresies, they cloak and cover with the
backeslydinges of the godly Patriarks. My conclusion is therefore, how
daintily and how nice so ever they seem too make it to judge one another, be
the matter never so evident: yet they are most despytefull in condemning us,
be the crime never so unlikely. And thus in the Pharisees you have here the
qualities and conditions of the adversaries of Christ his Gospel.

But now it may be that some one or other will begin too doubt because of
this the Pharisees question, whither it be lawful to keep company or too enter
into familiarity with the wicked, yea or no. For the resolution whereof this I
say: It is not only lawful, but also behouefull for the good minister of
Christ too keep company and too have familiarity with those wicked ones in
whom there is good hope of amendment. For these are too be brought home as
stray sheep upon their shoulders, and the worste that can come of it is but
the repining of a malicious Pharisee saying, Lo he is a friend too Publicans
and sinners.

But for any man that fears God and professes the Gospel, to join in entire
amity with the adversaries of the same, that is impossible, it is ungodly, it
is dangerous. 1. Cor. 10.
unrighteousness? Or what communion has light with darkness? what concord has
Christ with Belial? Or what part has the believer with the infidel? Or what
agreement 2. Cor. 6.
has the Temple of God with Idols? Once for all. It cannot be that the
adversaries of the gospel, should be friends unfeigned with the true
professors of the same: For so long as their hearts rest on this pin, that a
solemn vow is not to be performed unto a Gospelle^, let us never look but
for patched and botched amity at their hands. And as it is impossible to find
freendship at their hands, so it is ungodly too seek it: Take heed Exodus 33. 3^
too thy self that thou make no compact with the adversaries of the land
whither thou go, lest they be the cause of ruin among you.

And here is the danger to be noted to, least they be the cause etc. Hereby
we may see that ruin and destruction hang over their heads which are in
amity with Gods professed enemies. Iosaphat did but go with Achab for
company, It had almost been his overthrow. And that the Prophet told him at
his coming back. The same account let every one of us make, whenever we
shake hands with Gods enemies. So that thus the case stands: If there be hope
of amendment, then keep company with the wicked: But if their hearts be
indurate, and their necks stiffened, then beware lest they because of ruin. So
far of the first part.

The second part of the benefit of Christ and his Gospel.
When Jesus heard that, etc. Now I come to speak of the answer, and so of the
benefits which we enjoy through Christ and his word. Had our Savior Jesus
framed his answer according to their veins and affections which moved the
Question, neither had their mouths bin so soon stopped, nor our souls so
happily furnished with the blessed riches of salvation: For in this his answer
he does confound all proud minds, and comfortal sorrowful hearts, even as
it were with one breath. For he answers that one question three manner of
ways. First according to their known proverb: The whole need not etc.
Secondly, according to the Scripture: Go learn what etc. Thirdly, according to
his own office and dewly: I am not to call. etc.

Good God how doltishe and how sottishe is man's wisdom when it will seem
too contend with Gods. The first aunsweare shows that they were ignorant of
common sense and reason. The second that they were ignorant of the Scriptures.
The third that they were ignorant of the Messiah his office and dewty: and
every one of them does fully satisfy the question and show us besides what
benefits we have through Christ our Savior as you shall understand.

The first Answer.
The whole need not etc: First he says, The whole need not etc. As if he
had said, I am like unto a Phisitio^, you are like unto whole men: These
Publicans are like unto sick men. Now you know by common sense and reason,
that the whole need not the Physician, but the sick, therefore I eat with
them and not with you. In which saying we have to note the comparison, and to
consider how fitly they are made. First he compares him self unto a
Physician: secondly, the Pharisees unto whole and sound men: Thirdly the
Publicanes unto sick persons.

The first Comparison.
Christ is like a Physician. Two things are especially requisite in every
good Physician: First that he be able to cure his patient: next that he be
willing: otherwise he is no perfect Physician.

That Christ Jesus can heal our desperate diseases of sin: What better proof
is there then the notable cures which he has already done. Read no more but
the Chapter wherehence these words are taken, and you shall find that he
cured Matthew a sinful Publicane: He cured the Rulers daughter: He cured the
woman of her bloody issue of twelve years continuance: He cured two blind
men: He cured the dumb man which was possessed with a Devil: In so much that
the blessed Evangelist concluds the chapter with this testimony: Jesus went
about all Cities and towns, teaching in their Sinagogues and preaching the
Gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the
people. Yea, and his coming is so great that it surpasses the skill of all
other Physicians what so ever. For whom (he only excepted) can take away the
principal cause of all diseases, I mean Sin? Did not he heal the Palsy
man by forgiving his sin. It is a common rule among Physicians: Cessante
causa cesset and effectus. Sin is the original and fountain of all diseases
in man: therefore he that was able to remove that, cannot choose but have power
over all the effects thereof.

It is a world to see, how fair the Pope would be thought to be a cunnyng
Physician, and of ability to cure the disease of sin: He made our Churches
his Apoticary shoppes, wherein he sold all manner of Drugges, Salt, Cream, and
Oil for one purpose: Mass and Dirige for an other: Tapers and Torches for an
other: Bulls and Pardons for an other: Relics and Shrines for an other: and
yet all would not serve to purge the least sin that is: Therefore more
Antichrist he to pretend it. No, no, it is the blood of Christ which purges
all sin, and cures all manner of wickedness. Who was ever so diseased through
mischievous thoughts as Paul, which breathed out threatninges and slaughters
against the Disciples of Christ, and yet the blood of Jesus Christ healed him?
Who was ever so diseased in word, as Peter which denied his Master with an
oath, and yet Christ healed him? Who was ever so diseased in villainous deeds,
as the thief upon the Cross, which was hanged for his robberyes, and yet
Christ healed him? And all this is too teach us that whether we be sick in
thought, word or deed, he is a Physician able to heal us. And what a shield
is this against the terrible assaults of Desperation. Shall the murder of
Caine force men to say, My sin is greater then that it can be forgiven: Or
shall the treachery of Judas, swallowe up all hope of salvation in me: Or shall
my sin seem so incurable to me, that Christ cannot heal it, no I am
bold: I cannot be so sick, but he can make me whole.

Come unto me, and promise us saying, I will refresh you? And did he not
weep over Jerusalem, and all because he came willingly to visit her, and she
would not know the time of her visitation. But see and behold a plain
testimony of his goodwill to heal sinners.

Oh Compassion without Comparison! What Pharisee would ever have done that
for his patient, which Christ Jesus has most willingly done for us. They are
willing too finger our money, and they can make us believe well: But they will
not lance their least finger if one drop of blood would save our lives. But
Christ Jesus takes nothing of us, and yet he has suffered his own heart
blood too be launched, that it might gushe out to heal us. Can you tell
me of a Pharisee that was so willing too cure his Patient, that he refused not
too be beaten and buffeted whilst he made the medicine. And the Prophet Esaias
in the 53. Chapter tells Esaias. 53.
you that Christ Jesus was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our
iniquities.

They tell you that the things which they minister unto you, are dear and
costely: Noe, Noe, dearly beloved, that is a dear Salve too the Physician
which costs him his life, with many a heavy groan, with many a deep sigh*
with many a bloody tear, and many a bitter pangue besides.

And here you have a mighty Bulwark against the roaring storms of your
ghostely enemies, The Law, Sin, Death, and Hell. For what if they draw
together and conspyre against thy soul, and prove unto thee by record of
thine own Conscience, that thy sins are in color as red as Scarlet, or in
number as the sands of the Sea, or in weight as the mass of the whole Earth,
and therefore bear thee in hand that thy disease is so rotten and festered in
thy bones, that Christ Jesus thy Physician will not once seem too meddle or
have any thing to do with thee, nor seek any means too cure thy malady or
send remedy to any such as thou art? What hope, what comfort have thou the^?
Even this, that he that was willing too purchase a medicine to heal sin with
the loss of his life, will at all times be willing to minister the same to
the glory of his name. Therefore, oh my soul, be of good comfort, and cheer
thy self in the Lord, for if thou may but touch the hemme of his vesture by
faith, thou shall be whole. And this dearly beloved, is one of the benefits
and blessed Tryumphes which we enjoy through Christ and his Gospel. That he is
our Physician, which is both willing and able too heal all our diseases of
sin, be they never so grievous, which indeed is a benefit without
comparison: The Lord make us thankful for it, and open our eyes that we may
see it clearly in the cloudy days of desperation.

The second comparison.
The whole need not, etc. The second comparison here to be noted, is that
the Pharisees be lykened to whole men: which kind of comparison we must so
much the more diligently mark how much the more straungely it is made. For he
calls them whole, not because they were so indeed, but in derision, because
they were so persuaded of them selves: smoothing up their foul faults with
self love and self lyking.

In the like sense Elias called the abominable Idol Baal God, not that he was
so, but because his Priests did so account of him. Likewise Paul calls
Satan the God of this world, not that he either made, or redeemed, or ruled
the world, but because worldlings serve him more duly then the living God.

After the same manner our Savior in the third answer calls the Pharisees
righteous, even because they were so bewitched with the works of their own
hands, that they made no accounte of the righteousness of God. There cannot be
a more especial token of reprobation, then when the Lord falls to laughing
and scorning his enemies, as you shall find in perusing the 2. Psalm.

A man that had seen these Pharisees outwardly, would have thought that our
Savior had been in good earnest when he co^pareth them to whole or sound men.
For none had more regard of Moses law then they, they would not abrogate one
ceremony there commanded. None fasted more then they, twice in the week was
the least. None prayed more then they: in every street they went babbling and
mumbling their prayers. None gave alms more then they: they sou^ded trumpets
to have the greater resort of ye pore. None paid tithes better then they: they
left nether Mint ne Cu^min vntiched: yea if you looked in their hands you
should see scrowles wherein the law was written. If you looked in their
forheads you might see the law written. If you looked upon their door posts,
ye might see the Law written. If you looked in their garments, you might find
thorns and needles, too make them remember the the Law written, They had
always in their mouths, Templum Domini, Templum Domini. You could no sooner
ask them of their Proginie, but they would be ready to answer Pater noster
Abraham. And when any inquired of their inheritance, they would tell him. Nos
haeredes terrae promissionis. What a wonderful matter was this? were not these
men whole and sound? Indeed to the outward appeera^ce they were: but what
they were inwardly those manifold woes which our savior Christ pronounced
against the^. Mat. 22. may at large testify. And now you may see that it is
one thing for a man to be whole in the sight of God, and an other thing in the
sight of the world. He is whole in the sight of god which believes that Jesus
Christ is able and willing to heal his disease of sin: But he is whole in the
sight of the world, which thinks that the works of his own hands do make him
sound. And this is such a kind of health, as I pray God never any good
christian have: set the Pope never so great store by it, assuredly it is far
worse then any sickness in the world: If the rules of Physic be true: That
there is no disease like too that, when a man thinks him self whole, and yet
is heart sick.

I might here stand in comparison between the Pope and the Pharisees, and
show you that they both are alike whole sound, but it is no matter of such
importance as I have to speak: therefore to the third comparison.

The third comparison.
The sick need. etc, The third comparison is, of the Publicanes and sinners
unto sick men, which have need of the Physician. These Publicanes had been as
very cut^hrotes and Catchpoules as ever lived: But as he goes far that never
returns, so they at the length, hearing our savior preach repentance and
remission of remission of sin, had remorse of conscience, in so much that their
disease had cleaued fast unto their bones, had they not heard of a Physician,
which was both willing and ready to help them. The panges of sin pricking
the conscience, are even as the fittes of sickness gryping the heart: causing
many a deep sigh and many a pitious groan. David being in the agony of
sin, bemones him self after this manner: Have mercy upon me, O Lord for
I am weak: O Lord heal Psalm. 6.
me for my bones are vexed. My soul is also soretroubled, but Lord how long
will thou delay? And Paul was no sooner griped at the heart with the
remembrance of his sin: but he cried mainly out saying, O miserable man.
etc Yea and all the godly, considering how many ways God has blessed them,
and how unthankfully they have behaved themselves: considering again their
daily trespasses and offenses, and how long the Lord has looked for their
amendment, and how often he called them to repentance: by and by they fall
sick, and groan so rufully that you would lament too hear them. O my tender
Father whom I have displeased: O my sweet redeemer Christ Jesus whom I have
crucified again: O my sovereign comfort, the holy Ghost whom I have
grieved: O the time that I have misspent: O the grace that I have despised: O
the creatures of God that I have abused: Woe worth my vncleaue thoughts: Woe
worth my idle words: Woe worth my damnable works: O how bitter is the curse
of the law? How heavy is the burden of my sin? How horrible is y^ sight
of death. How intolerable are the pains of hell. Ah my soul begins to faint,
therefore help me to a phisitio^, or else I perish, I dye. Do you not think
deerly beloved, that a Phisitio^ should not be welcome, and well entreated
among such sick souls as these? yes, never heart so thristed after the Rivers
of waters, as they long after Jesus Christ. Such men have need of the
Physician, and therefore they will seek unto him, as these Publicanes did, yea
and because of their necessity, they will honor him likewise in calling him to
their houses, and biding him to their feasts: they are so desirous of health
and salvation. In whom we have a notable president how to behave our selves
in our sickness of sin. First that we must seek our Physician. Secondly, we
must honor him the best we can. This president is but meanly followed in most
places in England, God knows? For so far forth as Christ will feed their
bellyes, they will follow him through thick and thin: And they are so far
from honoring him, at their feasts, that they will not stick too say, they
cannot be merry at their meat, when a Preacher is at their Table. But there is
good cause, the City of London should become an other Thessalonica, in seeking
and honoring our Physician Christ Jesus. There is so much Preaching, and so
diligent hearing, that needs there must be some following. If London have
stopped her ears, and shut her doors against Christ and his messengers,
there were just cause why she should tremble and quake in the guiltiness of
her own conscience: But if she have played the sick Publicane in seeking and
honoring Christ her Physician, let her not faint, but in the testimony of a
good conscience pluck up her heart, in these dreadful times and days of
peril: For the Lord will be found of those that seek him, and he will not
forsake those that fear him. If Sodom, or Gomorrha, or Samaria, or Jerusalem,
or Antwerpe could have pleaded for themselves no more but that they sought the
Lord, and honored his Christ, even as sick men do their Physician, I am sure
their confusion had been farther from them, then the East is from the west.

Therefore, London, seek thou thy Physician Christ Jesus, believe in him, pray
to him, serve him in singleness of heart, as thou ought to do, and he will
not deliver his power into captivity, nor his beauty, I mean his Gospel,
into the enemies hand.

The second part of the Answer.
Go learn what that is, I will have mercy. etc. A good Lawyar perceiving the
subtletie of his adversary, will speak to the case, and be earnest in the
matter: And commonly a skillful Chirurgian, seeing the rotten flesh begin to
fester and corrupt the sound, will launch it too the quick. Much after the same
manner does our Savior Christ show him self in his second answer, Go
learn what etc. As if he should say in sharp and round speech. Do you make
your selves so perfect in the Scripture, and yet do you find fault with him
which shows mercy to the miserable and comfortles, Go learn, go learn of
the Prophet who in the person of God him self says, I will have mercy. etc.
Then shall you see that I do nothing against the will of God I warrant you. I
will have mercy and not sacrifice, etc. When the Lord makes choice of mercy
rather then sacrifice, we have to understand that his will is, that we should
be pitiful one tending an others distress, and not bleare his eyes with an
outward show of godliness. Now for your better instruction in the will of God,
it shall be expedient that I speak severally. First of Mercy, then of
Sacrifice.

I will have mercy, etc. It should be of no small force to make us show
mercy and compassion one toward another, When the Lord says, I will have
mercy. etc. For if we be servant, we must do the will of our master. And
if we be children, we must obey the will of our father. But alas it fares with
us as often times with young Children: the more the father does cocker and
dandle them, the less they care for him: and if he say unto them, I will have
this or that done, none so ready too bid him command and do it him self,
as his own Children. So it falls out with us: God our heavenly Father has
blessed us, and blessed us again, and yet when he says: I will have you to be
merciful and pitiful to your needy brethren, like stubburne children, we sit
still and stop our ears as if we heard not. There is no one thing so much
called upon and commended unto us in Scripture as mercy, and yet on our parts
there is no one thing so little regarded. He that is merciful (says the Prou.
11.
wiseman) rewards his own soul. And Micheas shows Israel what it was that
Mich. 6.
the Lord required at their hands indeed, bid them first do justly, and next
love mercy, etc. In the fifte of Matt. Blessed Matthew. 5.
are the merciful for they shall etc. In the 6 of Luke. Be ye therefore
merciful Luke. 6.
as your heavenly father is merciful. S. James also in his 2. Chapter says in
James. 2.
plain words, that there shall be judgment without Mercy too him that will
show no mercy. And all this is to stir us up and to pluck us forewarde
too show mercy and compassion one toward an other. And surely happy is that
Christian whose faith is exercised in mercy: For as the wiseman says. Prou.
20.
Mercy and truth preserve the king, etc. His throne shall be established with
mercy. So al estates may be sure that mercy is one of the strongest Pillars of
their health and safety. And therefore I beseech you right honorable and
dearly beloved, have due regard of your health and welfare, which partly
consists in mercy. For this your noble city of Land is builded and situate
upon four Golden pillars, Justice, Concord, Sobriety, and Mercy: the
Foundation being Jesus Christ. And so long as these stand and flourish in
London, she is safe and sure, by the grace of God: But if they should by any
means decay, then great and woeful should be your downfall. Therefore it
stands you upon so much the more heedefully to look about you, and to prevent
the worst: For you have not so many pillars to uphold your welfare and
safety, but there be as many ways too undermine them, if that they be not the
better forseene.

First Jesus, which vpholdeth right and suppresseth wrong without respect of
persons may be undermined and overthrown through bribery: For hold you the
sword, right honorable, never so upright in your hands, yet if your
substitutes, who^e you put in trust, have their hands full of brybes, they must
needs wincke at scant measures, and justify the bag of deceitful waigh^es,
and allow of the wine which is mixed with water and so bleare your eyes with
omnia ben^: and so shall Justice be undermined and fall too the ground.
Therefore it behooves your Honor to be the more circumspect in appointing your
Substitutes, and too have an eye too their dealing under you, for fear of the
worst.

Secondly, Concord which is the bond and sinews of every well ordered City
may be undermined by the root of bitter discentio^, which makes the members
of the self same body too jar an^ snarle one with an other, and is commonly
found by Pickthanks and talebearers, which carry speeches and reports from
party to party, of whatsoever they hear or see, and all to feed the humors
of such cancred natures as delight in debate. Therefore such Merchants are
worthy of severe punishment, and to be thrust out of the City as privy
conspiratours against the health and welfare of the same. As for them which
delight in discord, ruptures, breaches, and sallinges out for every trifle,
they are evil worthy to enjoy the freedom of Citizens, yea, the name of a
Citizen does not become any such: And if I may call them Citizens, they are the
worstmembers of the City. For as she which would have the Child whom she
falsely claimed, to be divided, was thereby known to be an unnatural mother:
And as they who would have the vnse^nied C^ate of Jesus Christ divided, were
counted beryer thieves, then they that ca^^ lottes for it: even so if you cut
out all the w^ste members of the city and set them together, t^ose which
delight in de^^sions and dissension, rather then in unity and Concord will
easily appear in your sight, to be the worst of all. Try whom you will.

Thirdly Sobri^t^e which is the beauty and comeliness of you all, may be
undermined and overthrown many ways: But especially through excess of dye^,
and excess of apparel. For ^uen these Epicures and Bellygods which eat them
selves a sleep, and sleep them selves an hung^ed: And those aleknights which
drink out all the wit out of their heads, and all the money out of their
purses, have vowed themselves conspirators to banish all Sobriety. Again
those proud puppies, which think all too little they tal^^ap and rende to hang
upon them: which make no accounte what their behavior he, so their attire be
fresh and gallant which have no other way to purchase credit, but only by
weating outragi^us apparel: which strec^h their Arms farther then their
slee^es will reach, and all to ru^^le it out: which are in their change for to
day, and to morrow, and the next day: which are in their fashions, The
Ga^kdine, the U^n^^can, the French, the Spanish* the Dutch, etc. These I say
have likewise sworn too confound the beautiful Pills of S^brietie.

Therefore right Honorable and you all good Citizens of London, have an eye to
them, and what ly^^ im^^st, prevent them, either by reformation, correction, or
expulsion out of the City.

Fourthly and lastly Mercy: the golden Pillar of Mercy, which is the exercise
of the rich, the life of the poor, and the preservation of you all: may be
undermined and overthrown so many ways, that I fear me it is down already,
and that I shall warn you too late i^ foresee that that is past.

For every hard heart, every Churlishe Nigarde, every pinchyng Myser, every
greedy Usurer, is a mortal enemy to the goodly Pillar of mercy: but especially
and principally the Usurer, for he has such long Nails, and so sharp teeth,
that he will scratch and gnaw it down, rather then it should stand. And if a
man control him for it, and bid leave for shame, and tell him that in the
end it shall be too the ruin and destruction of the Ci^tie, he shall find
that he has an Iron sinewe in his neck, and a browe of Brass.

For will he not reply and say that such as he is do good service in the City,
are very profitable members, and might ill be spared. And yet if you take him
and look in his mouth, you shall see his teeth all gore blood with eating and
devouring his needy debtors. Then let a man take one of them aside, and show
him Luke. 6.
the words of our Savior Christ. Luke. 6 If you lend to them of whom you
hope too receive again, what thank have you? For even sinners lend too
sinners in hope too receive the like: Wherefore love your enemies, do good,
and lend, looking for nothing again, and your reward shall be great, etc. And
what shall be his answer: Tush, Tush, Scripture is scripture; but for all the
Scripture, a man must live by his own, and I tell you my money is my Plough.
Is it not a world too see that Usurers would be like Plowmen: and yet nothing
so unlike: for the paineful Plowman gets his living by the sweat of his own
brows: but the Usurer lives by the sweat and sweet of other men's labors.
Therefore they are such Plowemen as the Prophet David speaks of, Psalm. 129.
and their needy brethren may Psalm. 129.
complain of them, as he did of their predecessors saying: The Plowers plowed
upon my back, and made long furrows: And if they be such Plowmen, they shall
be as withered grass on the house tops, as appears in the end of the
Psalm.

But be it so, thy money is thy plough, and thou thy self do hold thy
plough, and covetousness does draw thy Plough, and the Devil does drive thy
Plough, and so thou plowest the furrows of thine own confusion, and do so
we the seeds of thine own destruction, and without speedy repentance, shall
reap the fruits of thine own damnation. And all because S^^^pture is
Scripture, and thy money is thy Plough. For Whososoeuer Prou. 22.
ploweth Iniquity shall reap mischief. Prou. 22. And thus much of Mercy
which the Lord wills.

And not Sacrifice. The second point to be noted. This general inhibition of
Sacrifice, is not so to be understood, as if the Lord would have all manner
of Sacrifice utterly abolished: but it is spoken by way of correction, because
he could not abide this Sacrifice which smelt of Hypocrisy. It is expedient,
therefore that there be a disstinctio^ made, what sacrifice the lord will have
and what sacrifice he will not have.

Sacrifices mentioned in Scripture are of three sundry sorts. The Sacrifice of
the Jews: The Sacrifice of Christ: The Sacrifice of Christians. Now these
words are to be understood of the Sacrifice of the Jews, which at the first
were appointed by God him self to very good purpose: for after that man
through disobedience had defaced the lively Image of God in him, he could not
approach the sight of GOD by any means, but needs he must appear more
fulsome then vile s^inck^^g Carrion. Wherefore it pleased the Lord in his
mercy to work the means of his reconciliation, which was by Sacrifice. And
this Sacrifice thus ordained was to be offered up as a witness of man's sin,
and as a figure of the precious sacrifice of Jesus Christ, which one day
should be offered upon the Altar of the Cross, for the full satisfaction of
all sin.

Now if any Sacrifice were offered otherwise then thus: That is, to acknowledge
sin, and to foreshewe an other Sacrifice to come, which was the Lamb of God
Jesus Christ, it was abominable to the Lord and he would not have any such
too come in his presence.

And verily this it was which made him abhor their Sacrifice: for many times
they offered sacrifice upon custom and for fashions sake, neither respecting
the true sacrifice Christ, nor respecting their sin, but rather committing
the more sin, and using Sacrifice as a Cloak to cover the same: Therefore the
Lord told them he would have Mercy, and not such Hypocrisy under the
color of Sacrifice.

He might use the like inhibition at this day against a number of gospellers.
For many false Brethren abuse the gospel and make it a common Cloak for their
Usurie, Adultery, and Cruelty. To them the Lord might say, I will have Mercy
and not the Gospel: Noe not the Gospel so professed as they profess it.

The second kind of Sacrifice mentioned in Scripture, is the Sacrifice of
Christ, which the Lord will have: For howsoever he tolerated the blood of
Gotes, and the blood of Calves, for the time, yet he coul^e not be pleased
with any other, but with this only. As for all other Sacrifices^, they were but
Shadows, this was the body: They were but husks, this was the Kernel: They
were but Chafe, this was the Wheat: They were but Leaves, this was the
fruit: They were but signs, this was the thing signified, and the truth it
self.

For Christ Jesus being the brightness of the fathers glory, and the
ingraued form of his person, humbled himself upon the Cross, and offered his
body to affliction, and his soul to anguish, and all too purge our sins,
whereby he has wrought our atonement with God, and taken away the curse of
the Law, and destroyed the works of the Devil, and tryumphed over hell it
self.

O blessed Sacrifice, No savor but this could perfume our stinking souls. No
sacrifice but this could pacify the wrath of God. And here dearly beloved
we may see an other benefit, which we have and enjoy in Christ, who has
given him self a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God, that he might
purge our sins. The Lord make us thankful for this benefit, and faithfully
to take hold of it in all the assaults of Satan.

The third kind of Sacrifice, is the Sacrifice of Christians which S. Peter
calls an especial sacrifice, acceptable to God for Christ's sake, and this
kind of Sacrifice is manifold as may be gathered in Scripture. The Sacrifice
of a sorrowful heart. The Sacrifice of God, Psalm. 51.
is a troubled spirit: and a broken and contrite heart O God, shall thou not
despise. This sacrifice Christians ought to offer up as often as they call to
mind their wicked and sinful ways. Secondly we have the Sacrifice of
Righteousness, which is newness of life, and true godliness. This sacrifice
Christians are willed to offer by the prophet David: Psalm. 4.
Offer to god the sacrifice of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord,
that is, walk in the light as Children of the light, have no fellowship with
the unfaithful works of darkness: Resist the flesh and live in the spirit:
this is to offer sacrifice of Righteousness. Thirdly we find in Scripture the
sacrifice of Praise and thanksgiving, which is called the Calves of Christian
lips: Offer to God praise Psalm. 50.
and pay thy vows unto the most high. That is, show thy self mindful of Gods
benefits by thanksgiving. Fourthly, we have the sacrifice of alms, whereof the
Apostle speaks, To do good and to Heb. 13.
distribute forget not: for with such sacrifice God is pleased. And this
sacrifise is to be offered of much plente^usly, and of little diligently, and
it shall be accepted according too that a man has and not according to that he
has not. Lastly we have the Sacrifice of obedience, or reasonable service of
God, which Saint Paul commends. I beseech you therefore Romans 12.
brethren by the mercies of God, that you give your bodies a living Sacrifice,
holy and acceptable too God, which is your reasonable service of God. This
Sacrifice we are to offer as often as we celebrate the Lords Supper. For as
the carnal Sacrifices of the Jews, were too foreshewe the blessed Sacrifice
of Christ to come: So must this lively Sacrifice of our souls and bodies be
offered up too testify that it is already come: that his body is already
broken, and his blood already shed for the remission of sins.

Heerevppon it is that the Schoolmen say, that the Lords Supper is a
Sacrament and a Sacrifice. It is a Sacrament in that we receive the bread and
Wine in remembrance that Christ his body was given, and his blood shedd for
the remission of sin. It is a Sacrifice, in that we do offer up our
selves, that is, our souls and bodies, too show our thankfulness for so
great a benefit.

These are the Sacrifices which christians are of duty to offer unto God, who
will have them, and accept them for Jesus Christ's sake. And in respect of
these Sacrifices, Christianity is a Royal priesthood, and Christians are
Royal Priests: Their hearts are royal Aultars: Their faith is Royal
Incence: And their fervent love toward God and man, is a Royal fire to make
them have a sweet savor before God.

The Sacrifice of the Mass.
But what shall we say of the Sacrifice of the Mass? Is not that holy
sacrifice to be numbered among those which the Lord will have? When the Church
of Room, and all her Catholic children make so great accounte of it, which is
of force to releace the tormented souls in purgatory: and to chase away Devils
from the possessed in Earth: which whosoever ever hears, as long as he hears,
it he shall never wax old: which preserves young children in their mothers
wombes, and delivers both old and young from al imminent perils and dangers.

No, I auouche and protest that the Lord will not have it, strugle the
Catholics never so mightily, shuffle they never so cunningly, for the
magnifying of their Idol: The Lord will not have it. It is a world to see how
eue^ of late they began to set up their crests, and to clapp their wings, as if
they would crow the Pope day again into England: and all because they imagine
that their golden day begins to spring, wherein the mass shall shine again.
Yea they begin to look upon us, as if the Devil should look over Lincoln: and
do account it half heresy to speak to any man that is a known Gospeller:
They pass by us humming and mumming: and whether they wish out heads in their
dishes, or their swords in our bellyes we cannot tell yea or not: But let them
know that their sacrifice of the Mass is too full of Idolatry, abomination
and blasphemy for the Lord to hear it. And do they think that her majesty,
the Lords anointed, will hear it? God be thanked by the space of one and
twenty years, she has bin a nursing and a natural mother to the gospel,
and now will she become a stepmother, and fancy the Mass? No, it has caused
too many conspiracies and rebellions against her most noble person, for her
majesty ever to brook it: even in policy.

And whereunto serve the Prayers of Gods children her faithful subjects, but
even to beseech God to continue her majesty's godly proceedings: that she may
be so far from backsliding, as to grow from grace to grace, and from faith
to faith that as she has planted and nourished the Gospel, so she may not be
ashamed of the Gospel, which is salvation to every one that believes. She had
never more faithful subjects, and I dare undertake she never had more fervent
Prayers, for her prosperity in government and constancy in Gods word. And
as vile sinners as they note us to be, we doubt not but God will hear our
Prayers in his good time.

And this I say to the confusion of all bloodthristie Massemungers, that it was
never seen yet, but what rekoning so ever the wicked made, the contrary
followed.

Pharao thought him self sure of his pray upon the Israelites, when he had
them at the brinke of the red sea, but the Sea swallowed him up host and all.

What accounte made Achitophel of promotion and preferment, when he conspired
against his master David? but when he saw it would not be, did he not hang
him self?

Those wicked Judges which falsely accused that chaste matron Susanna, little
thought that they should have been stoned to death them selves.

Haman made a pair of Gallows, and there was no way but poor Mardocheus must
be trusted up, but you know who had the first bansel.

Therefore let our adversaries know, that they cannot so lay their snares for
us, but they may be taken therein them selves: They cannot so dig their
Pittes for us, but they may fall therein them selves: The Rods they make
accounte shall beat our tails, may scourge their own: And their Golden day,
their Dommes day. And this the Lord can do for his Church, yea this he will
do, if we pray unto him, and repose our selves upon him: Therefore whiles
our Adversaries harp and hope upon our destruction, let them quake and
tremble for fear of their own: For the Lord is nigh unto all those that call
upon him. As for the sacrifice of the wicked, he will not have it come in his
presence. And thus far of Sacrifice.

The third answer.
I came not to call, etc. As if he should say, Why should you mistyke because
I eat with Publicanes and Sinners? I tell you truly I came not too call such
holy men as you are, but miserable sinners as they be to repentance. An
excellent saying* and able too renew and quicken any sinful soul, how
long soever it has been dead in the grave of Sin. All the world is not
able to show the like Mithridate and souerain preservative against the bitter
curse of the law. Hell it self does repine at this saying, and murmr that
ever man should have so great an advantage against her. And I am verily
persuaded that if the devil had forecast that such an answer should be given to
the Pharisees, he would rather have carried them headlong into the sea, and have
drowned the^ as he did the heard of swine, then they should once have moved
the question. For why? does it not most lively show and set forth unto us the
benefit of al benefits, I mean our calling in christ which Paul terms a
holy calling, for that it was not for our merits, but of gods 2. Tim. 1.
tender love. There cannot be a greater encourageme^t to a Christian man to
animate him in doing good works, the^ to consider that Christ came to call him:
and therefore the Apostle tells the^ that they are called in Jesus Christ,
that is, adopted in Christ. Romans 1.
What a singular prerogative this benefit has above al other, as S. Paul To.
8. We Romans 8.
know (says Paul) that al things work together for the best unto the^ that
love God, even to them that are called of his purpose. And what a mighty
proof does he bring to assure and warrant the faithful, that it is true which
he has spoken to their comfort: For those which he fore knew, he also
predestinate to be made like to the Image of his son, that he might be the
first borne among many. Moreover whom he predestinate, them also he called, and
whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified, them also he
glorified.

Therefore he that will become strong and invincible against adversity, let him
be mindful of his calling in Jesus Christ.

This sovereign benefit of our calling in Jesus Christ will appear in your
sight to be the greater and more worthy benefit, if you mark well the
circumstance wherewith our savior Christ does set it forth. I come not to call,
etc. In which words we are to note the circumstances.

First the means of our calling, which is Christ coming. I come not, etc.

Secondly the parties which are called that is, sinners: I come not to call the
righteous, but sinners. Thirdly the end and purpose whereunto he calls: To
repantance.

The first circumstance.
The more often I call to mind the miserable plight of man through sin and
disobedience, the less able do I find my self to show and see forth unto
you the infinite goodness of God, our heavenly Father, in appointing so worthy
a mean to call us out of the bottomless pit of destruction, as his own only
son: who notwithstanding he was of the very substance, and God eternal with
him: yet by the power of the holy Ghost was made man, to the end that both
natures joined together in one, he might in the flesh take away the
filthiness of the flesh, and fulfill Gods law, which man had so often
broken, and bear the wrath and heavy indignation of his Father against sin,
whose coming was promised at the first by God himself: hoped for by all the
faithful Patriarchs: Figured and foreshewed under the sacrifice of gods law:
often foretold and prophesied by all the Prophets: and at the length performed
unto our fathers and us, upon whom the ends of the world are come, and all to
call us to repentance and so to bring us to everlasting life. And this has he
himself often beaten into our heads, if we had the grace to consider of it.
This is the will of John. 6.
him that sent me, that every man which sees the son, and believes in him,
should have everlasting life. Again, So John. 3.
God loved the world. etc. Also, I came to seek and to save that which was
lost. Mat. 15.
And I am not sent, etc. Now whether Christ by his coming does call us to
repentance, yea or no, search diligently and you shall easily find.

His birth in such base and vile manner without harbor, without necessary
furniture, without reverence or regard, without form or shape (as Esaias
says) and not without hatred and danger of spightfull Herod, does it not
touch or move our haughty stomachs? does it not pull down our Peacockes
tails? does it not make us sorry and ashamed that our sins should make God
to thrust his only and beloved son out of his bosom to such beggarly state
of reproach and misery.

Then look you upon his life, which as it began in such perfect humility, so
it continued in true fasting, daily prayer, often watching, wreping, sighing,
patience righteousness, innoce^cie, and holiness: which because it is a lively
pattern for all christians to follow, does likewise call us to repentance and
amendment of life. Lastly his death conspired by his own disciple, pursued by
his own nation, purposed by his own father, and purchased by our sins,
without any desert of his own: does it not strike our hearts, and wound our
consciences with remorse? Those bloody tears: those piteous groans, those
cruel scourgings, those reproachful buffetings, those bitter tauntings and
raylings which he put up in all patience as the due rewards for our sins: shall
they not make us morn and lament, when they made the veil of the temple to
rent in sunder: the gates to open the dead bodies to arise: the earth to quake
and tremble, and the sun to wax dark? If an earthly prince should punish
every rebellion, treason, conspiracy, contempt, offense and default, which his
subjects make, upon his beloved son: would they not in pity be ashamed, and
sorry too? Our heavenly father punished the sins of the whole world upon
Jesus Christ his only begotten son, hanging him upon the cross. Oh then,
where is our sorrow? why are we not ashamed to heap sin upon sin? and to
nail him to the cross again? Thus is Christ's coming the means of our
calling, wherein are included other more special means, as ye shall hear in the
next circumstance.

The second circumstance.
Moreover in these words we are given to understand: who they are which
Christ came purposely to call. I come not to call the righteus, but sinners, etc
Yea and this circumstance may stir us up to magnify the benefit of our
calling as much as any. For here we see plainly that he renounceth al those
which think better of themselves then sinners: as these Pharisees who dreamed
that their own righteousness was sufficient to fulfill the law without Christ.
But what is the matter that he does so flatly deny that he came to call the
righteous? It is well worth the noting. For whom does he call righteous, but
those which trust only in their own righteousness and make no account of the
righteousness of Christ. Now these he does renounce. First because it was the
determinate will and purpose of his father which sent him, that whosoever will
make himself righteous, and is his own Christ, and his own Jesus, shall lie
still in blindness, and sleep in his own confusion. An other cause may be, that
for so much as he came purposely to seek and to save that which was lost: and
the righteous imagine that they neu^r went astray: therefore he lets them be as
they are. An other reason may yet be taken of the setting forth his fathers
glory: for that there shall be more joy in heaven over one sinner that repents,
then over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance. And no doubt
if he had offered to call them, he had but lost his labor: For had he said to
them, as he did to Matthewe, Come and follow me: they would have answered by and
by, We follow Abraham our father: we follow Moses our Prophet: we follow the
law of God: we have ceremonies: we have traditions: we have prescriptions:
we have our inventions to follow: we look for another manner of Messiah to
follow then such a beggarly outcast as thou art: Therefore go where thou will,
we will not follow thee.

Wherefore dearly beloved, beware how you stand upon your own righteousness,
because of a few good works: surely you have no more portion in Christ then
the veriest Pharisie that ever was: For if our Savior Jesus will be found
faithful in his Messiaship, he must renounce you and say: I came not to call
the righteous: Not the righteous? whom then? sinners? sinners. Behold dearly
beloved, if you think to reap the benefits of Christ's coming, you must
humble your selves, and become sinners: But how, or in what manner does he call
sinners? The calling of Christ is of two sorts: the one is common wherewith we
are in deed stirred up after a sort, but not effectually bound and brought to
the purpose, for that they are not pleased with the means: as Gods word, the
Sacraments, Sermons, etc: and this is common to the reprobate and righteous, as
well as to ye elect and sinners. Now the other is a convenient and a mighty
calling, whereby the minds of sinners are touched and thoroughly charged: For in
this very manner he does call sinners to repentance.

First he sounds in their ears by the voice of his Law the great danger
of death and dampnation wherein they stand because they have so wilfully
transgressed his commandments: and this striks them in such horror of their
sins and fear of his vengeance, that they would be glad to be reconciled to
God the father, lest he should pour upon them their deserved punishment. Then
he sends them the sweet comfort of the gospel, which shows them, that Jesus
Christ is become their mediator and advocate: and if they believe in him, they
shall be safe and sure: whereupon he gives the^ faith, and plants it so fast in
the^, that nothing can draw them from Christ. And lest this faith should be
Idle and frutlesse, he sends them the holy ghost: the spirit of adoption to
work in their hearts according to their calling. And thus you see how Jesus
Christ calls sinners to repentance. If you should question farther with me
and enquire of the time when he calls sinners: That is counsel to us. For
there is no time excepted: there is no time to be in this world. Therefore let
no man despair: For he cannot be called so late into the Lords vineyard, but
he shall have his penny well and truly paid him. Lastly if you yet question
further with me, and enquire the cause why he calls sinners and not
righteous: I must either hold my peace, or else with Paul exclaim, saying: O
the deepnes of the riches both of the wisdom Romans 11.
and knowledge of God. How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past
finding out? Who has known the mind of the lord? or who was his counsailor?
etc. For dearly beloved, be it known unto you, and heaven and earth shall bear
me witness that the Lord in his doings is neither unjust, nor unmerciful: No, he
is most just and most merciful. Is not he most just which has punished with
extreme rigor the offenses of al those sinners whom he calls, upon his own
dear son Jesus Christ: yea and will no: vou^safe to receive them into his glory,
until he has perfectly justified and sanctified the^ in Christ? and is he
not most merciful, who has elected and called those which had neither work
nor meat, but only a lively faith in the blood of Christ which he himself had
given them? Therefore let al sinners rejoice in the Lord again and again, for
Christ came to call them, etc.

The third circumstance.
Lastly we see here to what end and purpose we are called in Christ to
repentance. To call sinners to repentance, is to work two things in them: that
is, to make the^ know their own misery, and too give them faith whereby they
may see their great felicity in Jesus Christ.

Repentance is termed Vinum Angelorum, August ad. Romanos.
the wine of Angels, for that the tears of a sinner more rejoice the Angels in
Heaven, then any Wine does the heart of man. To repent, as says Augustine, is
to be sorry for sins committed, and not to commit the like again. In deed
Repentance has the rod of sorrow in one hand, wherewith she scourges her self
when she calls to mind her former sins: But in the other she has the
Ancour of Faith, wherewith she takes sure hold fast in the rock Jesus Christ:
otherwise her own tears would drown her in the Seas of desperation.

Repentance in this place includes Justification, and is indeed the true and
direct means to Justification: For when the sinner is called to an inward
sorrow for his sins, once Jesus Christ for his comfort gives him faith, which
faith brings to him by a heavenly violence all the merits of Christ, and
applies them to the sinful soul. And this it is deerly beloved, which makes
repentance of that prerogative, that At what time soever a sinner repents,
the Lord will put al his wickedness out of his remembrance, and that there
shall be more joy in heaven, etc. O Lord Jesus Christ make us partakers of this
privilege, and call us to repentance that we die not in our sins. It is hie
time, it is hie time I say, dearly beloved, for England to pray for the
privilege of repentance and pardon in Jesus christ. For let England make the
best of her self she can devise, she is but like a speckled leopard, which has
five black spots, for one whit. And to speak generally and truly, what
wickedness is there from which England may wash her hands and say: I am not
defiled with any such.

The glorious gospel of Jesus Christ, which should be our shield in all
extremities, we tread it under our feet, as a vile thing. Prayer which should
be our sword of defense always, lies rusting in the scaberde of security.
The old sin of Damascus is renewed in England. She threshed Gilead with iron
flayles: we thresh the poor with the silver flayles of Usury, which is al one.

The wickedness of Israel is now twice done and committed in England. She sold
the R. for old shoes, we sell justice for rewards which is all one.

In Israel a man and his father would go in unto one woman: which is, the
father defloureth a maid, and to make her amends marieth her to his own son,
which is all one. Yea even the abominations of Sodom are multiplied in our
days. Pride, Fulness of Bread, Idleness and Contempt of the poor: For the
which the plague of Sodom hanges over our heads, and would out of hand
consume us, were it not for those ten righteous ones, which God be thanked we
have among us, for whose sakes the mercy of God entreats his justice to
spare the whole Realm. Therefore it is high time I say once again for us to
pray for the privilege of Repentance: That so we may weep bitterly with
Peter: and wash our saviors feet with the unfeigned tears of Repentance with
Mary Magdaline.

Wherefore we beseech thee, O heavenly father, be merciful unto us, and
boutsafe us thy dear son Jesus Christ too call us from the danger of thy
displeasure, and the uncleanness of our sins, unto unfeigned repentance, that
so in sorrow of heart and liveliness of faith, we may receive the spirit of
Adoption: whereby we cry Abba Father. And that the same spirit may certify our
spirit, that we are the sons of God, albeit called, justified, and glorified
in Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior in whom grant us the fruition of thy
glorious pleasure, with Angels and Archangels in thine everlasting kingdom:
where thou raign^st in all Majesty, with Jesus Christ sitting at thy right
hand, and the holy ghost the spirit of grace. To whom three persons and one
God be all glory and honor, now and for ever, Amen.

IMPRINTED at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
Edward Aggas, and Thomas Charde, 1580.


